A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church OF St. PETER in
YORK, On Thursday the Fourteenth of February, 1688/9. BEING The Day appointed
by the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled at Westminster, for a Public
Thanksgiving to Almighty GOD, for having made His Highness the PRINCE of
ORANGE, the Glorious Instrument of the Great Deliverance Of this Kingdom from
Popery and Arbitrary Power. By GEORGE HALLEY, M. A. Succentor of the Vicar's
Choral of the Cathedral; and Rector of St. Cuthbert's in York.

Published at the Request of the Auditors.

London, Printed for R. C. and are to be Sold by Rich. Lambert, and Francis
Hildyard Booksellers in York, 1689.

A SERMON PREACHED In the CATHEDRAL CHURCH of St. Peter in York, etc.
Psalm 107. Verse 2. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed
from the hand of the enemy.

Or as it is in the other Translation:

Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed and delivered from the hand
of the enemy.


THis Psalm does in the most Lively and Glorious Colors, paint forth and adorn
the admirable Kindness, and Transcendent Love of Almighty God; does visibly
represent to humane Eye, the various and surprising Scenes of Divine
Providence; does clearly evince and prove, That God who sits in Heaven, does
so far humble himself, as to behold the Things upon Earth; that all the
Vicissitudes and Changes, all the great Revolutions and variety of Events in
this World, are from the Hand of God; that all humane Affairs and Transactions
are under his Providential Conduct, and Wise Disposal: And therefore it is,
that the Psalmist gives us so many Illustrious Examples, such manifest
Testimonies of Providence, as are able to convince any considerate Person, that
the World is not governed by Fate, or giddy Chance, but by infinite Wisdom and
infinite Goodness; that God presides over his Creatures; that his Providence is
deeply concerned, and vigorously engaged in all the Changes and Chances of this
Mortal Life: Thus from the Third to the Seventh Verse, we have a signal
Instance of an Overruling, Omnipotent Providence, where we find the Children
of Israel wandering in the Wilderness, in a Solitary Way, deprived of the
necessary Supports and Comforts of this Life; yet, upon their devout Addresses
to Heaven in Prayer, found present Relief and Deliverance from their Pressures;
God, by his Gracious Providence, led them forth by the Right Way, and safely
conducted them to a City of Habitation. Thus from the Tenth to the Fourteenth
Verse, we find how God is pleased to discipline and exercise others with
Providential Afflictions, with Bonds and Imprisonments, because of their
Wickedness and Impiety; yet as soon as ever such sharp Discipline, such severe
Chastisement has produced its desired Effect, that is, brought them to a State
of Meekness and Humility, Repentance and Reformation; as soon as they thus
endeavor to make this Atonement, God's Mercy then gets the Ascendant of his
Justice, and he becomes propitious and favorable to them; brings them out of
Darkness, and the Shadow of Death, and breaks their Bonds asunder.

Thus from the Twenty third to the Thirtieth Verse, we read, that such as go
down to the Sea in Ships, and do Business in great Waters, such have more than
ordinary Experiments of the Providence of the Sovereign Mercy and Power of God;
sometimes they are Mounted into the Air, and then again go down into the Depths
of the Vast Ocean, are at their Wits end, in the greatest Amazement and
Consternation; but when they cry or pray unto the Lord, the Violent Storm then
is turned into a perfect Calm, and by gentle Gales, they are safely wafted to
the Port they designed to sail to.

Now, What does the Lord require at the Hands of such as have the Characters of
Divine Providence, so singularly and eminently engraven upon them; for whom he
has wrought such Signal and Wonderful Deliverances?

Nothing but the Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving; that is, a grateful Sense,
and public Acknowledgment of his immense Favors; such a Sense, as darts a
powerful Influence upon their Life and Conversation; such a Sense, as obliges
them to look up unto him as the Heroic Captain of their Salvation, to ascribe
the Honor due unto his Name, to praise him for his Goodness, from whom they
received their Protection, their Safety and Preservation: O give Thanks unto
the Lord; for he is good or gracious, and his Mercy endures for ever; let the
Redeemed of the Lord say so: Or let them give Thanks whom the Lord has
redeemed, and delivered from the Hand of the Enemy.

In the Words are these Two Observables: I. A Duty enjoined, together with the
Object of it, and that is, to give Thanks unto the Lord. II. The Reason or
Enforcement to the Practice and Observation of this Duty; and that is, the
Consideration of a Redemption or Deliverance from the Hand of an Enemy: Let
them give Thanks whom, etc.


But First, of the First Observable, A Duty enjoined, together with the Object
of it, and that is, to give Thanks unto the Lord.

To give thanks, in this place, is, according to the Version of the LXX, (...),
a Word, which according to the Sense of the Ancient Interpreters, properly
imports Confession; and in this Sense I find it used by St. James, 5.16. (...),
Confess your Faults; and indeed, before we offer up unto God, any Eucharistical
Sacrifice, it is necessary for us to Confess and beg Pardon of our Sins, which
hinder God's acceptance of our Services; for if we regard Iniquity with our
Hearts, the Lord will not hear us, Psalm, 66.18. And here, by the by, we may
admire the Beautiful Succession of Times and Seasons. Yesterday was
Ash Wednesday, a day of Sackcloth and Ashes, a day of Sorrow and Humiliation
for Sin; to day, a day of Thanksgiving and Joyfulness.

But, as Heinsius observes, according to the Modern Interpretation, the Word
(...) does likewise import to praise, or give Thanks unto the Lord; and in this
Sense I find it, Mark 10.21. (...); Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and said, I thank
thee, O Father.

To give Thanks unto the Lord, is a Duty frequently inculcated and pressed upon
us in Holy Scripture; thus Phil. 4.6. In every thing by Prayer and
Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known unto God; thus Col. 2.7.
Abounding therein with Thanksgiving; and Chap. 4.2. Continue in Prayer, and
watch in the same with Thanksgiving; thus 1 Timothy 4.4. Every Creature of God is
good, if it be received with Thanksgiving; thus Rev. 7.12. Blessing, and Glory,
and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, be unto GOD for ever and ever. Amen.

But Secondly:

We have not only Precepts for, but rare and illustrious Examples in Holy
Scripture, for the Practice and Observation of the Duty of Thanksgiving:

Not to Multiply too many Instances;

Where do we find a more Noble Pattern of Gratitude, than the Royal Prophet,
King David? He thought no place unfit, no time unseasonable for the Practice of
this Duty; he continually revolved in his Thoughts, and imprinted upon his
Memory, the Mercy and Loving Kindness of the Lord; it was his pious Resolution
to meditate or muse upon all his Works, Psalm. 77.11.12. thus Psalm. 103.2.
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits, which he
expresses, Verse 4. Who saves thy life from Destruction, and crowns thee
with Mercy and loving Kindness.

But Thirdly:

Who can look upon God as his Creator, and not at the same time think himself
under an indispensable and eternal Obligation to praise and give him thanks?
Have we not the strongest Obligations to thank and praise him, who is the
Author of our Frame and Constitution? Who is the Preserver of our Being? Who
sustains our Life by the continual Influence of his Love? Upon him we have a
constant and a necessary Dependence; to him we owe the Common Protection of
Life, the Mercies of Health and Liberty, and the reasonable Expectation of
Happiness hereafter: Can we then be so unnatural, so inhumane, so disingenuous,
as not to praise and give him thanks? It is he that has made us, says the
Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 100.2. and not we our selves; we are his People, and the
Sheep of his Pasture, upon this Foundation he superstructs our Duty in the next
Verse; O go your Way into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with
praise, be thankful unto him and speak good of his Name!

We are his Creatures! A Word of the greatest Emphasis; a Word, that demands
and extorts from us all imaginable Thankfulness, all possible Praise and
Adoration; being Creatures, shows us God's absolute Sovereignty and Dominion
over us; we depend upon him, as a Ray depends upon the Sun. When the Sun goes
off the Horizon, the Rays perish and vanish away: Thus if God should withdraw
his Influx from us, we should instantly lapse and return into our primitive
Nothing. But,

Fourthly; That we may be persuaded to offer up unto the Lord the Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving, let us consider, that by such Sacrifices we not only
glorify the Lord, but our selves; we thereby pursue our own Eternal Welfare
and Felicity; for God is so infinitely happy in Himself, so perfect and
beautiful, so transcendantly glorious, that we can give no Addition, no Luster
to his Divine Majesty, by the greatest Praise, and most Solemn Thanksgiving;
No! God enjoins us to this duty of praise and thanksgiving, not for his, but
our own Interest and Advantage. He would have us contemplate his Glory and
Perfection, bless and praise him for no other end and purpose, but that thereby
we may be excited to transcribe into our Nature his Adorable Perfections, and
thus fit and qualify our selves for Heaven, and the Joys of Eternity.

These are Ties, these are Obligations strong enough of themselves to enforce
upon us the Constant Practice of the Duty of Thanksgiving.

But these are not all;

There is yet behind one Argument more; an Argument of no little Weight and
Importance; an Argument, which, if any thing can, must rouse and awake us to
the Duty of Thanksgiving; must persuade us to entertain a grateful Affection, a
deep Sense of the Mercy and Loving Kindness of the Lord; and that is, the rare
Accident of Divine Providence, our Miraculous Deliverance, for which we are
this day met to praise the Lord: And which is the Second Observable in the
Words of my TEXT; Namely,

The Reason or Enforcement to the practice and observation of the Duty of
Thanksgiving; and that is, the Consideration of a Redemption or Deliverance
from the Hand of an Enemy: Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed and
delivered from the Hand of the Enemy.

And here I might Discourse of the Universal Redemption of Mankind by Christ,
who paid the greatest Price, who purchased our Liberty and Enlargment with his
dear and precious Blood; who delivered us from our Spiritual Enemies; from the
Principalities, and Rulers of the Darkness of this World; from Spiritual
Wickedness in High Places, by recovering lapsed Man to his former Capacity of
Bliss and Happiness, by an Expedient as full of Wonder as Mercy, of which we
can never express too grateful a Resentment.

But I shall only speak of a Temporal Redemption, or Deliverance; for to such a
Deliverance the Text directly points; Let them give thanks whom the Lord has
redeemed and delivered from the hand of the Enemy; E manu tribulantis, de manu
angustiae, de potentia angustiatoris; Out of the hand of the Oppressor, out of
our Distress, out of the Power of such as vexed and afflicted us. This is that
for which we are now to celebrate the Divine Goodness, to magnify him who has
demonstrated his Providence in so wonderfully relieving us in the time of
Danger and Distress; Let us give thanks whom the Lord has delivered from the
hand of the Enemy; that is, from the detestable Superstitions and Corruptions
of Popery, from the intolerable Yoke of the Romish Church.

A Church, which is our implacable Adversary; a Church, which is become our
Enemy for telling the Truth, because we worship God after the way which they
call Heresy; a Church, which mortally hates us for recovering the Christian
Religion to it is ancient Brightness and primitive Splendour; for professing that
Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints; Is not this to hate us without a
Cause? Because we have accurately filed Religion, polished and freed it from
the Rust it had contracted, and set upon it its former Luster; because we have
fully discovered their horrible Cheats, and grand Impostures, by which they get
their Wealth: The Romanists for these reasons industriously endeavor to take
away both our Place and Nation, to destroy not only our Holy and Excellent
Religion, but our Incomparable Government, and to bring our independent Freedom
into a Subjection to their Foreign and Antichristian Yoke.

How many Efforts have been made? How many Arrows have been shot at this
Glorious Nation, out of their Quiver of malice and revenge? but all of them
missed the Mark; it was God that covered this Nation with the Wings of his
Providence, that Defended it from the Arrows that flew by Day, and from the
Pestilence that walked in Darkness.

It was in Eighty eight, when the Spanish invincible Navy came, like Great and
Formidable Castles, floating to our Coasts, with Sails swelled with fury, and
puffed up with hopes of Victory; but the Lord fought for us by Fire and Winds,
by Rocks and Tempests; how did the Lord then display his Wonders for us in the
deep? How wonderfully did he then deliver us from the hand of the Enemy? Oh
that men would therefore Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
Wonders he has done for the Children of Men!

It was in the Reign of King James the first of Blessed Memory, that the
Execrable Gunpowder Plot, that damnable Contrivance, was formed under
Jesuitical Wings; but when it was grown to Maturity, and ready to be Hatched,
GOD Crushed this Hellish Project by a timely Discovery, and Delivered the
Nation from the Hand of the Enemy.

It was in Eighty eight too, that we as well as our Forefathers, were redeemed
and delivered from the hand of the enemy, from Popery and Arbitrary Power.

Great were the hopes that the Papists had of introducing and settling their
Religion; A Prince of their own Religion upon the Throne: A Zealous and an
Industrious Prince too for propagating the Principles of his Religion: This
gave them a Charming Prospect of Success; this made them leave no Stone
unturned; this made them, Jehu like, drive on with all imaginable Fury and
Violence; this Emboldned them to put that galling and fretting Yoke upon our
Necks, which neither we nor our forefathers were able to bear: Unhappy and
Unfortunate Prince! How is the Mighty fallen! I am Distressed for him. Who can
reflect upon his misfortunes without pity and perturbation of Mind? How would
his Throne a' been Established in Righteousness, had but the wicked been taken
away from before him? Had but his base Flatterers, and false Prophets been
removed from his Court and Councils, the Hearts of his People would never a'
been Alienated from him: Never Prince came to the Crown with more unanimous and
cheerful Acclamations; he was looked upon as a Prince of no less Heroical
Virtues, than Noble Extraction: He then declared that the Laws of England were
sufficient to make him as Great a Monarch as his Heart could wish, and
therefore promised his Endeavors to Preserve the Government both in Church and
State as by Law Established.

In all Probability he might have been the Greatest, the most Triumphant
Monarch that ever swayed the English Scepter, had not his Passion of Glory
yielded to his Bigottry and Zeal for his Religion; had he not put the Reins of
Government into the Hands of a Fiery Jesuit; who, Phaeton like, presently set
the Nation on a flame, put him upon such Illegal Practices as proved
destructive of the Nation's Happiness and Tranquillity, and plunged him into
the most calamitous and deplorable Circumstances.

We have now seen by woeful Experience what the Prophetic Parliaments at
Westminster and Oxford, in the Year 80. Prognosticated: We are now, I hope,
highly sensible that they were composed of Persons of greater Understanding and
Integrity than the World at that time was pleased to represent them; it is now
plain that the clear prospect they had of the Kingdoms Interest conducted all
their Consultations; it now appears that the Bill of Exclusion was carried on
through a true Zeal for the Nations Safety and Happiness, for the Protection and
Security of the Peoples Liberty and Property, and for the Preservation of, what
ought to be dearer to us than our Lives, the Protestant Religion: But their
weighty reasons could make no Impression, their Designs were all blasted; and
we may attribute it to the good and secret Hand of Providence that they were
so; for probably, if they had taken effect, the Nation would have been involved
in Blood and Confusion, because of its unbelief, That ever Popery could have
produced Arbitrary Power, that ever Popery could have destroyed the Protestant
Religion and unhinged the Government: For though in History we have Recorded
many pregnant Instances, many ample Testimonies of Popish Perfidiousness and
Impiety; yet no Instance, no Testimony so convincing and impressive as
Experience; Popery was never so generally understood as it is at this day; we
now see the truth and certainty of this Maxim.

That it is impossible for the Protestant Religion to flourish under, or the
present Constitution of the English Government to be preserved by any Person
whom Rome has stamped her Proselyte.

Alas! What signify all the plausible pretenses, all the fair promises and
assurances where Popery has got the ascendant? What security can there be to
the Protestant Religion and Liberty, where there is a subjection to the Pope?
Where Jesuitical Counsels influence and command? Alas! There is no Faith to be
kept with Heretics. This is the Decree of the Roman Councils, this is the
standing Rule, this is the unalterable resolution of the Roman Church, this is
the Doctrine which she has constantly practiced, and the sad effects of it
such have sensibly felt as have justly opposed her usurped Sovereignty and
Dominion; witness the Parisian Massacre, a villainy that had its Authority and
Approbation from Rome; never did that polluted City rejoice so much in Memory
of Christ's Birth, or St. Peter's, as at the joyful news of that more than
Herodian Butchery; how did she sound the praises of the bloody Actors and
Contrivers of that shameful Tragedy?

Not to expatiate upon the Irish-Massacre.

Witness too, the late Persecution in France and Piedmont: O Barbarous and more
than Scythian or Thracian Cruelty! Those our poor Brethren had Edicts,
Promises, and Oaths sealed with the Holy Sacrament; but alas! as soon as ever
an opportunity presented it self, they found that Popery can absolve from the
strictest Oaths, can tear in pieces the most Religious Seal, and cancel the
strongest Obligation.

We have Instances enough at home, which plainly show that Popish Engagements
and Promises, are lighter than the very Breach that utters them: Did not Queen
Mary promise the Norfolk and Suffolk Inhabitants, and called her God to Witness
too, That she would content her self with the Private exercise of her own
Devotion, and Preserve the then Protestant Government, uninjur'd? and yet as
soon as ever her Sovereign Power was securely Established, the Masque then fell
off, Fire and Faggot then Illuminated the Peoples understanding; nay, those
very men, who raised her to the Throne, felt the most signal marks of her
vengeance; they made Claim indeed of her former Promises, but were thought
insolent, and accounted as criminals for so doing; they found that no Merits or
Service could secure any from the Cruelties of that Religion; for, her Princely
gratitude for their Crowning her with a Diadem, Crowned them with Martyrdom.

We our selves too, had promises of the like Nature, and thought we deserved
them; but alas! they proved as Quicksands, not the least glimpse of Safety to
be reposed in them, not the least hopes to be built upon them: Had we not
Assurances; and yet at the same time the greatest Invasion of Rights and
Privileges? Instead of Governing according to Law, such a Dispensing Power set
a foot as laid all the Laws asleep, as would presently have laid in Ashes, too,
the beautiful Fabric of our excellent Religion, and incomparable Government;
Promises! it is the nature of the Popish Religion, first to deceive and then
destroy; it is a Religion that Transubstantiates the very Nature of him who
embraces it; it is a Religion that acts in disguise and masquerade, changes
frequently its colors, and puts out a false Flag to conceal the Pyrate; no! it
is better to trust in the Lord than to put any confidence in man; it is better
to trust in the Lord th^n to put any confidence in Princes.

What great Reason then have we to magnify Divine Providence? What an
obligation do we all lie under, to pay all imaginable respect, all possible
gratitude to the Lord who has Redeemed us from Popery and Slavery, from a
Remorseless, Bloody, and Treacherous Religion? Let us give thanks whom the Lord
has so wonderfully delivered from the hand of the enemy.

We have the best Religion, the best constituted Government in the whole world;
a Religion which mere flesh and blood never revealed; a Religion, that is
retrenched from all False Doctrine and Superstitious Practices; a rational
Religion; a reasonable Service, against which our Roman adversaries have no
exception, But that it preferrs the written Word before uncertain Traditions;
and the all-sufficient blood of Jesus Christ, before the impure and imperfect
works of Mortal Men.

A Government too incomparable for its constitution; the legislative Power is
so lodged, that nothing can be Enacted without the King and Parliament; thus as
the inferior Orbs do, by their transverse and opposite motions, stay and
moderate the rapid force of the primum mobile or first Sphere, so Parliaments
by their Fabian Counsels, do temper and moderate the quick motion of Sovereign
Power: All our Laws and Decrees, by which we are governed, are first of our own
choice, and then confirmed by the King; neither the morning, nor the evening
Star in the Heavens, is more beautiful than the frame and complexion of our
Government; we have Laws that are sufficiently able to make us a Nation of
Righteousness, if they be but actuated by men of impartial Justice and
Integrity.

Now! Was this our excellent Religion in danger of being overflown with the
filthy streams of Popery and Superstition? Was this our incomparable Government
brought by Arbitrary Power to the very brink of Destruction? And has God
preserved both our Religion and Government? Have we now a blessed and a
comfortable Hope of seeing our Religion and Government flourish? Of having our
Judges restored, as at the first; and our Counselors, as at the beginning?
Isai. 1.26. How ought we then to magnify the Divine Goodness? How prudently and
religiously have our Senators acted, in appointing this day of solemn
thanksgiving, to pour forth our Praises to him, who has so strangely redeemed,
so miraculously delivered us from the hand of the enemy?

A Redemption, that bears the most legible Characters of Divine Providence!
That God should send us over a Deliverer at a season, when sailing was
dangerous; at a time, when the Waves of the Sea rage horribly and swell, when
the Winds are most tempestuous, that most of our Nobility and Gentry, that a
standing-Army too (in which the Papists seemed to repose the greatest
Confidence, because Numbers of their own Religion were mixed with it, because
several Regiments therein were under the command and conduct of Popish
Officers) should concur to our deliverance, and that there should be no
effusion of Blood; this was Digitus Dei, the Finger of God, and we cannot
reflect upon it without Astonishment and Admiration.

A sudden and a seasonable deliverance: A deliverance which argues the vigilant
Eye of Providence, and the powerful Hand of God; the deep waters of the proud
had gone even over our Soul; we escaped even as a Bird out of the snare of the
Fowler; the snare is suddenly broken and we are delivered; our enemies were
stopped in their Career their undermining Projects and base Designs were
prevented by a sudden and an unexpected change of the Scene, by a most strange
and astonishing revolution.

Thus the Lord on a sudden dashed in pieces the black contrivances of wicked
Haman, when he had procured a Royal Decree, and fixed a time for the quenching
of his thirst with Torrents of Jewish Blood; thus the Lord discomfited the
Egyptian Host, dispirited their Horses, and affrighted Pharaoh with Thunder and
Lightning; made the Sea to swallow him and his Army, when he was upon the
heel's of the Children of Israel; thus when Sennacherib had encamped against
Jerusalem with a formidable Army, and had made all necessary preparations for a
storm, the Lord sent an Angel, who raised the siege by the destruction of one
hundred and eighty five thousand, 2. Kin. 19.35. and indeed, in several other
places of Holy Scripture we find this to be the frequent practice, the usual
method of Divine Providence.

It is true, God can blast a project, God can defeat an hellish Design upon its
first formation, in its very Embryo; but, to Illustrate his Providence, he
generally suffers it to come to some ripeness and maturity, to the very birth,
and then deprives it of Strength to bring forth; permits the Projecters to
mount up to the top of confidence, and then tumbles them down; stays till his
innocent People are placed upon the very precipice, and then with his own right
hand and his outstretched Arm does he catch hold of them, and saves them from
the designed destruction; when men are thus snatched, as it were, from the jaws
of Danger, when both Church and State is, as it were pulled out of the fire,
they cannot but see that the Lord has done it; unless they wilfully shut their
Eyes against the light, they cannot but perceive that it is his Work; this
cannot but enforce them to magnify the Lord, and praise his Divine Goodness.

And such a sudden and an unexpected deliverance was ours; the Enemy cried,
Come and let us root them out that they may be no more a People, and that their
name may be no more in remembrance; our heart was disquieted within us, and the
fear of death was fallen upon us, and an horrible dread overwhelmed us. Why?
Because Treason walked barefaced in our Streets at broad noonday with the
greatest effrontery and impudence; because unrighteousness was in the City;
because a false and superstitious Religion wrestled with our own, and
endeavored to lay her honor in the dust; nay! it was not only an open and a
declared Enemy that struggled with her, but even some who called themselves her
Children, who came to the house of God, and pretended to her Doctrine and
Worship, and yet, (intolerable hypocrisy!) endeavored as much as in them lay,
to throw down her Walls and destroy her Fences, to overthrow all her hedges,
and break down her strong holds, to take away such necessary, such good and
wholesome Laws, as were her greatest visible Security and Protection.

If such low-priz'd Souls; such mercenary Creatures; (whose God was Mammon, who
studied nothing but their own advancement to honor, and promotion to
profitable employments, to build their nests on high, though it were upon the
ruins of their Mother,) I say if those temporizing Persons, had once broken
down the hedge of our Religion, her Grapes then would soon a' been plucked off,
the wild Boars would soon a' rooted her up; the Romish Priests, and fiery
Jesuits, would soon have been possessed of our Garden of Eden, and sowed it
with the seeds of Popery and Superstition.

Thus when our Church had Enemies without, and (which is more dangerous)
within, when no small Tempest lay upon her, when all hopes of her being saved
were taken away, it pleased the Lord to visit her, to arise and have mercy upon
Zion, to redeem her from the hand of the Enemy, to still the proud and
insulting Waves, to make the storm to cease, and to bring her to the haven
where she would be: Oh that we may therefore praise the Lord for his goodness!

Secondly, Has his Providence watched over us with a careful Eye? Has he in
the time of trouble and imminent danger raised us up a Prince; a Prince of the
greatest Courage and Conduct, the Terror as well as the Envy of France and
Rome, a Prince equal to His Ancestors in all Noble and Virtuous Qualities,
enriched with Wisdom and the greatest Integrity; a Prince of a Martial and
Noble Temper, who will really venture his Life in Defense of this Nation, and
in the preserving of it in all its just Rights and Liberties; a Prince who will
be a Courageous Defender of our Faith, as well as of our Laws; who is resolved
to encourage and protect us and our excellent Religion?

But here, Behold a Miracle indeed! Stand and admire the Divine Providence; God
has not only Blessed us with a Prince who will be a Nursing Father, but also
with a Princess who will be a Nursing Mother of our Church; our Church was
never more Blessed before; a Princess of our own Nation, as well as Religion; a
Princess of exemplary Piety, and unparalleled Goodness.

Now, I say, has the Lord given us such Blessings? What then shall we render
unto him for all his Benefits? What return shall we make for this his
transcendant Love, and admirable kindness?

Nothing but thanks for his unspeakable Gifts, nothing but an heart possessed
with a grateful Sense and Affection, nothing but the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving: O then sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name; praise him
in his name; yea and rejoice before him.

But this is not all:

We must praise the Lord our God, not only with our Lips, but in our Lives; We
must not express our Joy for our stupendous deliverance, by Rioting and
Drunkenness, and such like extravagancies, but by walking in all Holiness and
Purity of Conversation; let me beg of you, always to remember the Holy Apostle
St. Paul's humble and passionate request, which is the first sentence in the
Form of Prayer for the day, and the first verse in the second Lesson: I beseech
you Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service.

This is the only way to endear us to the God of Heaven, and to entitle us to
his Almighty Favor and kind Protection.

We seem indeed to be the peculiar care of Heaven, to be the only Blessed
Children of the Lord; yet if we live not as becomes a reformed and a redeemed
People, if we live not as highly sensible of God's reiterated mercies, (which
sense we must demonstrate by a life conformable to his Divine Laws) then,
though our Sky at the present is beautified with an Evening Redness, which
speaks the Clouds thin, and the Air pure; though our Firmament now looks bright
and serene; yet God, if provoked by our ingratitude and impiety, can, in the
twinkling of an Eye, change it from an Evening to a Morning Redness; can in a
moment make the Firmament lowering, by condensing the Clouds, and veiling the
Sky with darkness; will certainly bring us into worse circumstances than
before, and pour upon us fiercer instances of his anger and heavy displeasure.

But Lastly:

One word of Exhortation, and I a' done.

As we are obliged to render unto God Almighty our most Solemn Thanks for the
comprehensive Mercy we this Day Celebrate, in the deliverance of this Nation
from Popery and Arbitrary Power; so let the serious consideration thereof
oblige us to hold the Faith in Unity of Spirit, and in the bond of Peace; to be
like minded, to have the same love, to have no divisions amongst us, to be
perfectly joined together, in the same mind and in the same judgment, to live
together in Brotherly love and Christian charity. Charity! the Essential mark
of a true Church; Charity! which out-shines all other Christian Virtues, and
Theological Graces; it is the Characteristick of our Holy and Incomparable
Religion, it is a Grace so singularly eminent and ornamental, so necessary a
Virtue, that without it all our doings are nothing worth, without it whosoever
lives is counted dead before God; without it no Beatifick Vision, no Joys of
Immortality: Charity is represented by St. Paul as a Virtue of the greatest
Beauty and Comeliness, he has engraven upon it the most illustrious Character,
as you may read, 1 Cor. 13. where we find that it is a permanent and durable
Virtue; all other Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost only display their Glory
in this sublunary World, but this Grace, this Virtue, Charity, shall retain
it is native splendour and dazzling brightness, will be useful and necessary to us
after our translation from hence to the Mansions of Eternity; and therefore the
Holy Apostle gives it the Honor of Precedence, the highest Encomium, ver. 13.
And now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these three; but the greatest of these is
Charity.

We have considerable Enemies both at home and abroad, who, as they envy, so no
Question will set all Engines at work, will strenuously endeavor to disturb
our Repose, and ruffle our Happiness and Tranquillity. Now, nothing can be more
pleasing or grateful to them, nothing can give them a better Prospect of
Success than Difference and Discord amongst our selves; for where such things
are, there is nothing but Confusion and every evil Work, nothing but Misery and
Distraction: Emnity and Strife is the Rock they have all along endeavored to
run us upon; and indeed, nothing can more effectually split our Religion and
Government: A Nation divided, a Kingdom without Peace and Unity in it self,
cannot stand; This is the Voice of Truth it self, If a Kingdom be divided
against it self, that Kingdom cannot stand, Mark 3.24. It is not for nothing
too, that the Royal Psalmist cries out, Behold, how good and joyful a thing it
is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity.

The Papists are very sensible that nothing consolidates or fortifies a Nation
more than Unity; and therefore it has been their constant Practice to foment
Divisions, to enkindle Jealousies, to set us at Variance one with another: But
remember, Sirs, we are Brethren.

Now, as we are not ignorant of their Devices, so let us strive to live
together in mutual Love and Charity: For if we keep Innocence, and preserve
Unity, we shall not only disappoint our Enemies Expectation, and become
invincible, but we shall also oblige Heaven to be our Succor and Defense; GOD
will then continue His Mercy and Favor toward us, the Lord of Hosts will
secure and protect us, will always deliver us from the hand of the enemy.

Now to God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed,
as is most due, blessing and glory and wisdom, with thanksgiving, both now and
for evermore: Amen.
FINIS.
Books Written by the same Author.
DOctor Scott's Christian Life, Part I. from its beginning to its consummation
in Glory. Together with the several means and instruments of Christianity
conducing thereunto; with directions for Private Devotions, and Forms of
Prayer, fitted to the several states of Christians. The Fourth Edition.

-- 's Christian Life, Part II. Wherein the Fundamental Principles of Christian
Duty are Assigned, Explained and proved, Vol. I. The Second Edition.

-- 's Christian Life, Part II. Wherein that Fundamental Principle of Christian
Duty, the Doctrine of our Savior's Mediation is explained and proved, Vol. II.
The Second Edition.

-- 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, December. 16. 1683. on Prove. xxiv. 21.

-- 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, July 26. 1685. on 2 Samuel xviii. 28.

-- 's Sermon at the Chelmsford Assizes, Aug. 31. 1685. on Romans xiii. 1.

-- 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Sept. 2. 1686. on John v. 14.

-- 's Sermon at Sir John Buckworth's Funeral, Dec. 29. 1687. on Eccles. xi. 8.


