THE Loyal Indigent OFFICER. BEING A Brief Description of the Truly Loyal
Commissioned Officers, which has faithfully served his late Majesty, of ever
Blessed Memory, and his Majesty that now is.

WITH A Discovery how to be known from the number of the pretended Commissioned
Officers, which formerly has appeared, and has participated of his Majesty's
Gracious Gifts, and Favors, and not contented, secretly contrived for more.

Written by Charles Hammond. One of the Truly Loyal Indigent Officers.

Presented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

London, Printed by E.C. for the truly Loyal Party

TO THE High and Mighty Monarch, Charles the II. King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Dread Sovereign,
TRue Loyalty has imboldned me to present this Subject to your Majesty, not
out of any Sinester Ends of mine own, but in the behalf of the truly Loyal
Commissioned Officers; them that can declare and prove themselves so: and the
Causes of all their Wants, Sufferings, and Indigencies, since your happy
Restoration: We must confess your Majesty and Parliament has been bountiful
unto us: But the Sinester self ends and Covetousness, of some that has had the
Managing of your Gracious Favors, has left us still Indigent Officers; and
has enricht themselves by our Ruins. All that we humbly beg of your Majesty,
is for the King of Kings sake, and for your Blessed Fathers sake, one of the
best of Kings; that you would be so gragiously pleased, as to afford that small
time as to peruse this Book, or Refer it to some that may give your Majesty an
Account of it. Here is nothing but Truth in it, though it be decked in a mean
Habit of poor Language, being more Soldier then Scholar.

Thirty five Years we have served and suffered for your Royal Father, of ever
Blessed Memory, and your Sacred Majesty, above half the Age of most of us.
Twenty Years before your happy Restoration, we spent our Youths, our Bloods,
and what Estates we had, in Imprisonment, and Bondage, in the time of
Rebellion, and after the Murder and Marthirdom (...) your Blessed Father; and
now almost fifteen Years since your happy Restoration (in Indigency and much
want many of us) we hope your Majesty after so long a time, will something
provide for us, that we may not want Food and Raiment in our Old Age We have
been forced to make Fasting days, whilst those has made Feasting days; which
has Converted your Majesty's Bounties and Favors to their one use, that was
ordered to be justly and honestly deal withal by them, for the Relief of some
of us. Some of these having received double favors from your Majesty, and not
satisfied, are always contriving for more: We hope your Majesty has some left
for us at last who can prove our Loyalty, Service and Deserts, equal with some
of theirs if not out Balance them, and out Sufferings much more. We have no
^^dy under God to make our necessities and grievances known to, but our
Gracious Majesty. It was formerly a Proverb, That a Friend in court, was better
then a Penny in Purse; But now no Penny in Purse, ^^w Friends in Court: We may
wan^er with our good Service and desert ^here we will, we shall scarce find
^mployment or Preferment, for an In^igent Officer; unless he can bring Angels
with him to open their mouths, and make them speak Cheerfully: Pray pardon me
gracious Sovereign, out of the abundance of the Heart ^he Mouth speaks) If I
have been ^oo bold in my Expressions, I hope your Majesty will think it more my
Igno^ance, then Presumption.

May it please your Majesty, I have ^ere in this small Treatise, drawn out ^he
truly Loyal Commissioned Officers; what they have been, what they now are, and
how to be known; which truly qualified, are not many now to be provided for. I
have cleared the Aspersions laid upon them to your Majesty. Likewise the causes
of their Indigency formerly, and lately, by the pretended Loyal Officers: Which
I hope your Majesty will take it into your Princely Consideration, to provide
some subsistence, that we may live and end our days with some Comfort and
Content after our Troubles, and so long Sufferings, that we may pray for your
Majesty's long Life, Happy Reign, and prosperity in this Life, and a Crown of
Glory in the World to come: which shall be the Prayers of your ever Loyal
Subject and Soldier; to the utmost of my Strength and Power; as I am in Duty
bound,

Charles Hammond.

MAy it please your Majesty there is a List ready to present, when our Majesty
pleases to Command it, of most of the truly Loyal Commissioned Officers, that
are here about the Cities of London and Westminster, and not provided for:
Which Officers will make themselves out truly qualified, according as this Book
expresses: and desire to be tried by an inspection or Examined by whom your
Majesty shall appoint: That it may be clearly made known they are such as
deserves your Majesty's Favors from those that are secretly contriving to
purchase some Benefits or Rewards from your Majesty; and acted by some that are
no such men, nor never had the Commands as they go by: Which we hope your
Majesty will be so Graciously pleased, That when God shall put it in your
Majesty's Breast to provide for us, as we hope he speedily will; that all such
may be provided for, that are as they pretend to be; which at the most, cannot
be two hundred, less it may be, when truly examined, as they desire to be;
which as then can be no Complaints, neither by the Loyal Commissioned Officers,
nor the pretended Officers having been clearly made out what they have been,
the great necessity of many of the Loyal Party, has imboldned us to Press your
gracious Majesty so much as we have done, which we are bound to pray the Lord
will Bless and Prosper you in all your Councels, and Actions.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
I Know not into whose hands this small Book may come into by chance, I shall
be censured hardly by some for speaking the truth, (I vallue it not) I fear God
and honor the King, before whom I am commanded to speak the truth: I must
confess all Truths at all times ought not to be spoke; I have more (if
commanded by Authority) to utter, till then I wave it: If I have offended his
Majesty (to whom I have dedicated these Papers) by my blunt or too bold
Expressions here, I humbly beg his Pardon, which my Loyalty and faithful
service I hope shall procure; being never guilty of presumptuous Actions to
displease his Majesty; I may procure Enemies I confess, but none that truly
fears God and honors the King: such whose unjust self ended and Covetous
Actions has Robbed the Spittle (as I may say) and having enough themselves,
snatcheth the Bread from those mouths it was given to, that their Tables may be
furnished the better, though some are ready to starve the whilst: Such as these
may be my Enemies for declaring the truth; if thou art one of these that Reads
this Book or a Friend, to any such, tell them I am too old to fear, and and to
great a Sufferer to flatter. But if these Papers, or my self lights into the
hands of any such Magistrates (under his Majesty) as Jethro propounded to Moses
(to Govern the People) Men fearing God and hating Govetousness: I hope I shall
deserve no frowns from them, if I have no favors. Can you afford but so much
time or patience to read these two Sheets of Paper, censure of it or me what
you please, I Write it not for self ends, benefit, nor Honor; I wish I had but
as much Skill to handle my Pen as a Scholar, as I have as a Soldier (according
to the Command I had) I nor others should not be so much slighted by Gown men,
as we are now by some Sword men, (being Old) Age is looked upon in a Pulpit or
in the Courts of Judicature, according to their Learning and deserts. How Old
Soldiers are lo^kt upon now according to their deserts, I leave it to the
Young Soldiers to judge: All that we have to comfort our selves now (many of
us) is a good Conscience, and that we have served our King Loyally and
faithfully, and hope for a Reward; if not here, we hope hereafter.

All that I have to say to the more, Reader, I wish thee as well as thou
wishest the Prosperity of his Majesty, and the Peace of the Kingdom, and all
his Loyal Subjects, that serves him faithfully and honestly. So far I remain
thine to the utmost of my Power,

Charles Hammond.

THE TRULY LOYAL Indigent OFFICER.
AN honorable Title; It was given us by Act of Parliament, not by any way of
derision, but out of pity; considering our Condition. They little thought we
should retain our Indigency so long. The Gift his Majesty and Parliament gave
us, 60000 l. Men of understanding did judge it to be a Princely and Noble Gift:
besides his Majesty was graciously pleased to add to it the Office Money, which
by most Men's Judgments (that had understanding in the Offices) if honestly Taxt
and Gathered, would amount to as much more at least. Sixscore thousand pound!
(a Sum of Money) had it been rightly distributed according to the intention of
the Act of Parliament, (that was) to the Truly Loyal Indigent Officers, It
would a raised them considerable Sums to Employed them, or purchased Places, as
those that were our Enemies have done. But the Report of this Money to be
given, so Alarmed the Counterfit Officers, that they conceited, and created
themselves Officers, Grooms, Serving-men, and Pedees to Colonels, and
Field-Officers, made nothing of getting Certificates to Certify them
Leiutenants, Cornets, Ensigns, Serjants, Corporalls, Sentenells, and private
Troopers to make themselves Ensigns, Cornets, and Quarter Masters: then there
was your Paper Officers (as I may call them) that could come up and lie at
little Charges here in London; one Aturney would serve to lie here for the
Letters of Aturney of two or three Shires of such Officers: they would venture
their Names and Certificates with them at half Snips, or as much in the Pound
according as they could agree for: most of them knowing it was all clear gains,
if they got any. In conmming up to Clam it themselves, They knew here were them
that would know their faces, if ever they showed them with credit in his
Majesty's Army: but they thought they were not Act proof if they came within
shot of the Truly Loyal Officers; therefore they would Pickeer at a distance a
far off, and their Aturnyes to stand the danger. I will not say but some of
them may be Right, and the owners truly qualified: but I believe not the third
part according to the Act of Parliament, for after the Act came out there was
them that made a good living by Creating, and persuading many to be Captains
and Officers both in City and Country; it is too tedious to Relate the Cheats
that was in that List of Officers: to my knowledge (that was in the Western
Army, and in one Regiment from the first to the last) a Drum put in for
Lieutenant, a Captain (when examined) did not know his Lieutenat Colonel.
Eleven Ensigns to the Regiment that I belonged too, and near but Ten Colors
flying at first: Two Quartermasters to that Regiment of Foot, and no such Men
known by the Colonel, nor my self, (that continued to the last in it) and many
Officers we never knew, dead men that were comsum'd in their Graves long before
this Act came out; their Names appeared here by Conjurations of some or other
to Cheat Real Indigent Officers. These Letters of Aturney-Marchants gained well
enough to keep themselves from Indigency, some they never paid, and thought it
no deceit to deceive the deceivers, the honestes of them (if there were any)
took such Fees of their Clyants, they will scarce be trusted with any business
of Consequence by any honest Party since, it is the belief of many honest
Gentlemen that the unlawful Letters of Aturney that were paid, made paid, and
unpaid, has juggled away as much money as would satisfy most of the Indigent
Officers that are left: there was another sort of pretended Officers put in for
a share of this Money! that never had Men, nor Commissions neither, many of
them; It was an easy matter toward the latter end of the Wars to gain a
Commission to Raise a Regiment, his Majesty trusting them on their own words
(with little knowledge of them, may be, upon their great promises) these
Colonels presently made their Captains, and other Officers, and so Rides up and
down the Country to Raise Men and Horses upon the Countries Charge, living upon
Free-quarters, and gathering Contribution; never giving accoumpt to Field Army,
nor Garrison, nor never troubling them, till forced by the Enemy to make their
Retreat, and so sleep in a whole skin; these making more Enemies (rather then
helping to destroy them) by their Plundering, and Cowardly Actions, which
turned the hearts of many that wished his Majesty, and Armies well at first:
These, and such like, made up this Number of 5400. and odd Commissioned
Officers; Enough for Three Camp-Royals of Horse and Foot (besides those that
had Estates, Employments, and Commands (that did not put in) which was a shame
to our English Nation, to have a Kingdom Conquered, and such a Pious Prince
Murdered before his own Palace (for want of an Army) the number of Officers
sufficient enough to Conduct a hundred thousand Foot, and Forty thousand Horse;
such an Army of Politic Genera's, Courageous Commanders, and well Disciplined
and Resolved Soldiers, need not have feared to a Marched to the Walls of
Constantinople, and make an honorable Retreat, if not Conquered the Great Turk
(had we not lost the hearts of the truly Ancient Britains) but what should I
talk of so many Officers, when there were not by the Judgment of those that
knew this List, not fifteen hundred that were truly qualified, according to the
Act of Parliament; yet all these Officers past Muster in the List and Book, and
past inspection for all that ever could be justly proved against them. Thus
have I made it appear, what a number of Money has been paid, and made paid
most of it, to an unknown number of men, so according as it was ordered, this
60000 l pound, and that Office Money that was paid, would amount to but 40 days
pay to them that did receive it, and two Years before we could get it; so as it
was given for a help for some subsistence for us, it made us more Indigent than
we were; for it cast many of us in Prison, Running more in Debt then the Money
would pay.

What here I have declared, I know there is many Gentlemen are sensible of the
truth of it. His Majesty likewise was Graciously pleased, after this to grant a
Patten for six Years, to those Commissioned Officers that were here about the
City, that had no Employments, nor Subsistence of a Livelihood, till his
Majesty could make a more ample and lasting Provision for them; as is more
fully expressed in the Letter Patten, there was Trustees Chosen (thirteen, I must
confess) by some of us, but we could very well a spared half of them, for they
have shuffled and Cut so with the party (which is two hundred and odd) that
they have gained but a very little by their dealing: There is no body can tell
their gains, (nor they cannot say themselves, they are loosers) in a matter of
fourteen or fifteen Months after the setting up of the Lotteryes, there was
account given (I know not whether it was upon Oath, for I heard of none they
took, but the Oath of secrecy amongst themselves; which one of their own party
Confessed, when he was asked how the business went by one of us) they having the
managing and Letting of all Lotteryes, for that time, the Plate Lottery at
Charing Cross, where his Majesty and the Royal Family was pleased to honor it;
not only with their Persons, but likewise with their Purses: There was
plentiful throwing into that Lottery, according to the drawing out. And
likewise, they had the benefit of many Plate Lotteryes, in diverse places that
Year; and the letting and setting of the other Lotteryes that brought in
handsome Sums of Money; besides the Royal Oak Lottery, which was more
considerable then all the rest: Now after your necessary and unnecessary
Charges was deducted, it was brought to Eleven days Pay a piece to the party;
which was but a very small sum, as I shall make it appear at last, there was a
greater Sum of Money left for you thirteen, then for all the rest of the Party
besides: Each one of you allowed your selves more than you allowed a whole
Regiment of Officers, (Quarter Masters excepted) you would let none of them
come in for a share; intending to quarter us your selves with a quarter part of
the Royal Oak, and judged it enough for us by your Bench of thirteen, your
Chairman Judge, and a full Jury (if you all sat) to take his part: But now so
much of the time being gone, and so little profit appeared, The party began to
murmr, then to show your good intentions you had for the benefit of the
party, you were contented the City and Country should be divided in Lots
amongst us, who had the drawing of them I know not: but the City of London must
be your share, (with some others that you chose) which was more responsable
then all the Countries could be; for all the rest of the Party not bearing the
Charges of any that should go to manage them, according as you had and did
manage it; and had it not been for the Royal Oak (which you did strive to keep
all for your selves too) most of the Party had had nothing of all the Lotteries
ever since; at last you did allow us the fourth part of that; but we must
believe your honest words, (I hope you did not misreckon your selves) we cannot
judge it to be an even account, it comes so just to two days and a quarter a
piece each Officer, twice a Year paid; them that keeps those Lotteries for you,
keeps a very good Correspondency; they know we are so poor, a little gain will
please us, so they bring us in not loosers: Ten days pay and three Quarters we
have had since, who you have been pleased to pay, which does amout to a
Laborers hire formerly a penny a day one Officer with another, it will not pay
for their Lodging, let them shift for Meat, Drink, and Cloths, how they can.
Now (our Trustees) thinking we were not content with this small Sallery we had
from them (as well they might) nor they satisfied for the pains and care they
took for us, shuffled a third part of us off, that are left alive: the pattern
being nere out, having Friends and Money to boot, has got the Royal Oak for
themselves (which they thought the fourth part was enough for all of us before)
and left the rest of the Lotteryes to some other Officers which his Majesty
has been pleased to give them to. I wish them happiness in the enjoyment of
them, and may prove to their expectations; but our Trustees are sure of the
Wheat, whatsoever the rest proves. I am sure there is none of them can say, they
are Indigent Officers now, whatsoever some of them could before they were
chosen Trustees.

But the number that chose them were not many more then their selves, and if to
choose again, would scarce give their Votes for half of you now, in a smaller
business of trust. I am so Charitable to think if some of the Trustees had sat
at the Helm in your steed, that did, they would a steered a better course of
Conscience, than you that sat twice a Week, and your Wills a Law, having the
Purse in your hand. Out of Conscience I tell you this, for dealing so
unconscienceably by me and others, granting Power, and Authority, and receiving
Rent, promising to vindicate men, and make them stand Trials, to their utter
Ruin, and will not be at a penny charge; yet allowing your selves such
Salleryes and Interest, it is a shame here to relate, (which will be proved) by
the Plate Lotteries, which two of you took upon you to Manage, in the behalf of
a party; where their Lot fell in the Country: One of these persons has Iumpt
(since his name was in the Printed Book, amongst the 5000. Indigent Officers)
from a Cornet to a Captain, and never headed Troop nor Company since,
whatsoever he did before; nor I believe will never be Chronicled for his Acts
of Piety, Charity, or Valor.

To carry on his Designs as the party knows by experinnce; since he has had
the handling of the business, it is his Policy to trust none of the Party with
any business of our own, where he has had the managing of it, neither in the
Plate Lotteries, or Royal Oak, but give good Salleries to others, which would a
been a good Relief for some of us; that I believe was as able and as honest as
any were implo'd, and would a given a good Satisfacton of your integrety to
those that were mistrustful of you; but you thought they were not fit for your
Secrecy, and therefore not fit for your Service: But some of you (say we) are a
discontented People, and never Satisfied what is done for us: Let all men that
has any Conscience, or Christian Reason in them, Judge, after I have as near
as I can, cast up how much you have been pleased to allow us, since you have
been our Stewards; whether we have not had more Reason to complain than give
you thanks for your pains and care you have taken for us this six Years: The
first payment we had a 11 days pay from you, out of all the Lotteries, and 10
days and 3 quarters pay since out of the Royal Oak; which makes not 22 days pay
in all, cast up for the time, it amounts to about six pence a day, between a
Colonel of Horse, and a Colonel of Foot; other FieldOfficers, on with another,
not Twopence a day: A Captain of Horse and Foot, Three halfpence a day, three
pence between them. Leiutenant Ensigns, and Cornets, about a halfpenny a day,
one Officer with another, not twopence a day to maintain them. I would have
you reason with them, how they have spent and consumed it, and not benefitted
themselves by it as you have done, but murmr at your actions: The Servants
that you have employed for the managing of our business, that you were
entrusted for, has made their Saleryes many days better then a Regiment of
Officers pay, has been a day (and good keeping by you besides) I hope you have
gained this six Years sufficient enough by us; what we have gained by you, I
have made it appear, I hope when it is known how we have been dealt withal,
since his Majesty's Restoration, as this Book relates part, we cannot be
blamed formaking our Grievances so much known, and have had so little done for
us yet, and long of such as have had the managing of our business.

I hope you will give an Account what Moneys you have left in your Treasury, of
those that are dead since, and either pay it to the Widows, Children, or to
them that Relieved them (when you would not) Unless they would Administer, and
so it may be undo themselves, for that little you would do for them. If you
have not the Curses of the Widows and Fatherless, I am afraid you have the
Prayers of very few; if you have done for us as you would be done to your
selves you have done like Loyal Subjects, and good Christians; and I wish your
prosperity according, the same I wish to my self: Give loosers leave to speak
the Truth, and not all neither, till occasion serves. If I have drawn you out
here with my Pen, it is not to the Life, for I have shadowed you; and it is
well known to some of you your selves and to others; for the present I shall
leave you, as you have left us: If we be thrown out of your Favors, which I am
apt to believe you had never none for us (unless it were for your own ends) We
hope we shall not be thrown out of his Majesty's favor, nor none that truly
loves those that faithfully served him; as I shall make it appear who they are,
and how to be known, from those that takes the Names and Titles, of Loyal
Commissioned Officers.

There is your Truly Loyal Commissioned Officer and your Truly Loyal Indigent
Officer. Two Titles, but one Subject; different in habits, but all one in
Hearts: Some it may be has some Livelihood, Credit, Subsistence, some Friends,
in hopes of something to be done for them. Others may have Employments during
pleasure (not Life) subject to be turned out, because of their Age; but others
again as I know has neither, so indigent, and their wants so great, they are
ashamed to make it known; Men fit, deserving Men to be trusted in honest
Employments, and as able to perform, which I believe his Majesty knows not off:
And there are them that knows those things, but being provided for themselves,
grows forgetful of their Fellow Sufferers: The pretended Loyal Commission
Officers, has been the cause of those things, and the Aspertions that has
been laid upon us besides: The Truly Loyal Commissioned Officer, is he that can
make himself out so, according to the Title and Command he had formerly: Having
a Real Command of Men answerable, and able to perform the Duty of a Soldier;
according to that Command; that served his Prince for Loyalty, not Lucre; that
feared neither the Complaints of the Soldiers, nor the Countries to rise
against him, for abusing, or wronging of them, that served and suffered till
the last, without deserting; that never was a shame to his King, nor the cause
he undertook by his deboist living or behavior, that strived as much to serve
God, as he did to honor and serve his King. These are brave Principles (you
will say) to be found in Commanders, and Soldiers: Such as never wished his
Majesty nor his Armies well: say, there were very few then, and appears as few
now, but it is well known to them that were in the Armies of either side that
there were many such in all parts of his Majesty's Armies; there is many lies
now in the Earth, whose Memories will never dye on Earth: Some dyed in the
Field of Honor; others Murdered for their Loyalty. I will name none, but let
Truth and Equity Judge; and then their Actions in all parts where they were
known, will sound their Fame to those that are now living, and strives to
imitate them, which is no disgrace to a Soldier to be Religious as well as
Valorous; some of those men (I mean) though not declared here, had been brought
up in other parts beyond the Sea; before they had occasion to show their Valor
and knowledge here in his Majesty's Service, and were not ashamed to own they
were Commanded, before they came to Command, and knew what belonged to a
Soldier from a Sentinel, to a General, and of good Birth; which if now living,
would not despise Age and Poverty, in Old deserving Soldiers, (and Officers
formerly) as some do; and looked upon as such pitiful fellows, that deserves
more disgrace or shame to be thrown upon them, for their Loyalty and good
Service, then either Charity or Equity, to be done for them; as for Example,
Two that are now in good Offices (which I shall not name) and are employed
about business that lies in dispute, concerning the Loyal Indigent Officers;
one of them was pleased to say, What a stir there was about a Company of Idle
Fellows; let them go to Work for 3 pence a day: The other spoke more inveterate
words, which (I shall wave relating here) I know not what they have been, nor
what their parents were (though now got in good Employments) such words they
spoke, savours more of the Seed of Rebellion than Loyalty; and like to have
good proceedings from such Agents, if they could bear sway: How such men ought
to be honored with preferment, I leave it to all honorable Gentlemen, that
belongs to the Courts of England to Judge of it; they have neither Law nor
Gospel of their side to defend themselves, to belch out that hatred they have
in their hearts against Soldiers, and Gentlemen that had Estates, and could a
lived well without Working, (being never bred to it) before Rebellion got the
upperhand. Solomon the wisest King that ever was, 2 Chronicles. 8.9.
held such as were Men of War to be more Honorable then to be employed in
Servile Work, such as he Employed Strangers in, and the People of the Land.

When the Soldier asked John Baptist what they should do, he did not abhor them
but admonisht them: Do violence to no Man, neither Accuse any falsey, Luke 3.14.
and be content with your Wages. As allowing the Calling, but reforming the
Abusers.

Blame me not to Declare to the World how much True Loyalty is looked upon in
Indigency? Not only by them that were our Enemies? but likewise those that has
professed themselves our Friends, and such as has served his Majesty faithfully
(it may be too) only got the start of us; being preferred, or provided for; have
they but good Clothes and Money in their pockets, they will either shun ye, or
look on one side, and take no notice of you, or give you a Complement, with
your servant Sir, scorn you for your Clothes sake, fearing you should disgrace
them, or put them to charge with your company; being puffed in heart, as much as
in habit; forgetting what you were, having forgot themselves, not minding what
shifts they nor we have been Put too in the time of Rebellion, leaving our own
Country, and Habitations; taking any honest Courses to live in Remote Places,
where they knew not what we had bin, rather then desert the Cause we Fought
for, or make shipwreck of our Conscience and Loyalty, either to Serve or adheer
to our Enemies. There were some to my knowledge, might a had Preferment, and
the same Commands under them, when they were in Prison, at the latter end of
the Wars, if they would a took up Arms under them. The Skill of a Pilot is
best known in a Tempest: the worth of a Soldier in the day of Battle; Queen
Eli.
and the true Principles of a Christian, in the times of Persecution. It was
the words of Her that was a Cherisher of such, and knew the worths of them.
Such as has endured the brunts of all these in their Youths, and prime Age,
ought not to be disdained now they are Old.

Jesus the Son of Sirach in Ecclesiasticus, the 26. Chap. the 28 ver. he says,
There was two things that grieved his Heart, To see a Man of War suffer
Poverty; and Men of Understanding not set by. Though it be in the Apocraphy, it
is not to be despised by any that has any Christian Charity in them: I hope
this Book will light into the hands of some that are such as the Son of Sirach
was; that will grieve that our poverty has lasted so long and will be
Instruments to move his Majesty in our behalfs; that some speedy course may be
thought on, for those that are left alive, that we may not be made a scoff on
by such as are our Enemies in their hearts to us for our Loyalty, and deride us
to our Faces, as much as they durst for our Indigency; the Aspertions that has
been laid upon our Party, I believe has been the causes that we have been so
long not provided for; Saying we are a Discontented People, and will not be
satified for what is done for us; Delighting in Swearing, and Drinking:
Domineering what they have bin, and what Command they had, (when proved to the
contrary.) I must confess it is this sort of Idle, Vapouring,
Counterfeit-Officers, has made us all fare alike; and it is those that makes
such a number, his Majesty knows not who to provide for.

This raises the discontent that is amongst us: takes upon them the Titles of
Colonels, that c^nnot prove they had a real Command of a Troop or Company; and
if put to the Trial, know not how to Decipline either. It is as strange to hear
of a Leiutenant Colonel now amongst us, as it was to hear of a Leiutenant
beyond Sea, that went over after the Wars was done here, (some Majors)
Captains indeed good store: That Title is so common, that if you can get but a
good Suit of Clothes, and Money in your Pocket, you shall Raise a Company,
shall adopt you Captain in the first Tavern you come to; and Seal your
Commission with a hundred Damnme's: And in a Week or Fortnight Ranting with
you, conceit your self you are a Real Captain indeed; when an Indigent Captain
is ashamed to own himself what he has been in his Deplorable Garb and
Countenance. He that was a Real Officer, will take it as a Jeer to be Coxt with
Titles of higher Honor then what he has been. I know some (and others besides
my self) that owns themselves to be Colonels, Majors, and Captains, that if
come to the Test, cannot prove themselves any such men formerly, if they prove
themselves any thing at all: Yet some of these has took upon them to inspect
others, and would not be inspected themselves by those that knew them. These
may say we are discontented People, if we be with them we can show very good
Reasons for it. I must confess these are those that has been the cause that
such Odiams has been cast upon us, by their Deboistness, Swearing,
Domineering, and Drinking: Some that has vapour'd more with their words, then
ever they did with their Swords formerly in the Army: Telling what Fights they
have been in, and what Acts they have done (when none to contradict them)
binding it with horrid Oaths.

Some hold themselves no Soldiers, till they can Gracelesly, (as a Grace to
them) thunder out Bloody Oaths; Common Swearing makes one apt to forswear
himself, which is a fearful sin, not left unrevenged of God; in great persons
the abuse of Gods Name by horrible Swearing, Zach. 5.3.
and Damned Oaths, the Lord tells us, A Curse remains upon them, and threatens
to Cut them off: It Is a horrid Sin, (too much used) some out of Passion, and
some out of Custom, makes nothing of it in their Drinking: Which Sin had made
us odious in the sight of God and Man. It Is that which has been cast upon the
Kings Party formerly, though hated by many Officers, and as strictly reprooved
and punished by them in their Soldiers. Well may a Soldier plead Privilege
to it, when he sees his Officers makes a Custom of it: How can Parents Correct
their Children for those sins which they may say, they learned of them. I wish
it were not so much used amongst the Loyal Party as it is: They say, Oppression
will make a Wise Man mad; we have had Oppression enough by our Enemies, and
abused sufficiently, by our pretended Friends. I count it not wisdom to abuse
God in Swearing, and Cursing of them, in thinking to Revenge our self thereby:
For matter of Deboystness, and Drinking, which is laid upon the Party. For my
part I know there has been them that has walked from Morning till Night, and
could scarce meet with a Breakfast, or Mornings Draught; though they have met
with them that could a Relieved them with both, (some of our Trustees) nor lend
them a shilling if they had asked them, though they know how to pay themselves,
unless you would sell your Lot or Part to them; then they would find Money: as
wants has made many done of late, having neither Employments, Trades, nor
Credit; having wearied all our Friends, and Relations, with promises, hoping we
shall have some ways provided for us, to satisfy them, and Relieve us: There
are many of us I believe if they had it, would not see one another want. Many
times we meet and are glad we can make our selves merry with Melancholy and
hopes together, more than our Purses are able to do in Drink! We that had
little or nothing left, when his Majesty was returned, cannot have that plenty
now, as to waste it in superfluities of Meat and Drink: We have made hard
shifts for Food and Raiment, and been content with little Drink: But it is none
but a never contented Party that says we are a discontented Party, and would
have nothing done for none but themselves, unless they have a part in it, that
will cast Aspertions upon those they thinks will declare the Truth against
them; thinking that by that favor they have got, to throw all out of favor
but themselves; and those that can flatter with them for fear, or self ends. I
hope those that can appear before his Majesty, or whom he shall appoint, and
make themselves clearly out, That they have been Truly Loyal Commissioned
Officers, and such as they declare themselves to be in the List, Faithful
Subjects to his Majesty, from the first to the last; and no such persons of
Carriage nor Behavior, as some are pleased to Render them: But such, as when
Examined, shall be found as deserving Men (according to their Commands they
had) as those that has been pleased to Report us such persons, because of our
Poverty, and nothing done for us; then it will be found it is more their
Malice, and Covetousness, than any Religion, or fear of God they have in them;
as shall appear between their Actions and ours, e're long, when the Truth is
made known to those that may have the hearing of it: which is the cause I have
Write this Book. First, To acknowledge what his Majesty's Care and Love has
been for us, in providing as we thought, a subsistence for us, if it had been
managed according to the intentions of the Act of Parliament, for the
performing of it. Secondly, To make it appear we are no such discontented
persons, but content, If not abused. Thirdly, How much has been done for us,
and how little it has come to; and long of those that has been entrusted in
the Managing of it. And Lastly, If his Majesty be Graciously pleased to do any
thing for us, we desire to make it known we are such Men as we Report our
selves to be, Truly Loyal Commissioned Officers, having had Real Commands
according to our Titles; very Indigent many of us, and not provided for; which
we shall leave it to God and his Majesty, to look upon us according to our
Loyalty, and Sufferings: Knowing none will be offended, that Truly Fears GOD,
and Honors the KING.

FINIS.

