MELAMPRONOEA: OR A DISCOURSE OF THE POLITY AND Kingdom of Darkness.

TOGETHER With a Solution of the chiefest Objections brought against the Being
of WITCHES.

By Henry Hallywell, Master of Arts, and sometime Fellow of Christ's College in
Cambridge.

Ephesians. VI. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against Spiritual wickedness in high places.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby. at the Bishops Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir James Morton, OF SLAVGHAM, IN THE County of
Sussex, Knight.
SIR,
TO prefix your Name to the present Treatise I could give many Reasons that
induced me, did I not know that you are more delighted in doing Worthy Things
than to have the Praise of your Actions re-echoed and repeated from others. And
since my choice and affection has thus far led me, I am the less solicitous of
the various Censures that a Discourse of this nature may probably meet withal:
For even the clearest Reason does often lose its force when it meets with
strong and inveterate Prejudices. However I have done my endeavor to make
things appear plain and easy, and the better to comply with an Inquisitive and
Philosophical Age, have made use of such Principles as the best and choicest
Philosophy could afford me; which as it is not in the least derogatory to my
Profession, so was highly necessary to make good one great end of the Christian
Religion, in delivering us from the Power of the Dark Kingdom, whose very
Existence some smatterers in Philosophy have the Confidence to deny. Whether I
please others or not I am not much concerned, having the satisfaction of
pleasing my self, in taking the opportunity of a grateful Acknowledgment of
your many favors toward me, who am,

SIR, Your most Faithful and Affectionate Servant, Henry Hallywell.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE ensuing Treatise being a Discourse of the Dark side of Providence, or of
that Rebellious Polity that proudly opposes it self against the Kingdom of
Light; I am obliged to give some Account as well of the Work it self as Design
in writing it. As for the Design of it, it is no other than what is good and
laudable, namely to show our Skeptical and staggering Religionists that there
is a very Potent and Adverse party of Incorporeal Agents, that entering into a
Rebellious Confederacy against God, and being cast out of the Mansions of
Light, have formed themselves a Kingdom in the Aereal Regions, and not content
with this Power and Dominion among themselves, have studiously endeavored ever
since the Creation to deprave and corrupt Mankind, and to enlarge their own
Empire by the Accession of frail man, whose weakness they abuse and triumph
over, and strive by all means to keep him fast within their clutches, that if
at least they must be miserable, they may make others so and have companions in
their Torments.

Now concerning the Work it self, I must confess I have framed it in a lax and
diffuse manner, not endeavoring to prove the Existence of Spirits either good
or bad, but supposing them both in Being already, and likewise taking many
other things for granted which are already either made good by diverse Learned
Authors, or may evidently be deduced from the principles of true and sound
Philosophy: As likewise purposely omitting many otherwise material proofs of
some heads in this Discourse, being willing to bring the Hypothesis into as
small a compass as may be. Nor have I been wanting to confirm my Discourse in
the most material parts of it by the Testimony of the Sacred Scriptures, and
sometimes added the Suffrage of some of the Ancient Fathers, in such
speculations as otherwise perhaps would have seemed over nice and curious. And
lastly (which in a Discourse of this nature could not well be pretermitted) I
have briefly resolved the Question of Witchcraft, and showed the possibility of
such detestable Confederacies with wicked Spirits, and answered the strongest
and most considerable Objections I could meet withal against it. That which at
the present seems to me to be most liable to Exception is, the Introduction of
the Spirit of Nature, which by Corporealists is looked upon at the same rate
with an Occult Quality, and brought in rather as an Asylum of Ignorance than a
Philosophical Truth. To which I have this to reply, That the ground and reason
of using that Hypothesis arose partly because I saw it maintainable by rational
and solid Arguments, and partly through a natural propensity of my own whereby
I am prone to think, that whatever boasts may be made by the followers of
Democritus and Epicurus, who have dismembered and disjoined the Ancient
Atomologie from the Doctrine of Spirits or the Metaphysical part of it, there
is not one considerable Phenomenon in the Cartesian Philosophy that can be
solved by the mere and solitary principles of Matter and Motion. For a
conclusion of the whole, I have drawn such Inferences as may most effectually
persuade men from Sin and Vice, by which they infallibly entertain Communion
and Society with the Dark Kingdom, and to assert themselves under a higher and
more propitious Providence, by the sincere practice of true and unfeigned Piety
and Religion. Farewell.

H. H.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1.
CHAP. I.
That the Lapse and Revolt of the Angels from the Blessed life of God, consists
mainly in debasing their higher and nobler Faculties, by enslaving and
subjugating them to their Inferior and more Material Powers. page 5.
CHAP. II.
That these Lapsed Angels have formed themselves into a Polity or Kingdom of
Darkness. page 14.
CHAP. III.
That these wicked Spirits being supposed Rational Creatures, must needs be
studious in diffusing their own sinful Nature upon all capable subjects, and
thereby of enlarging the bounds of their usurped Dominions. page 26.
CHAP. IV.
That the great end of our Saviors coming into the World was to rescue men
from the Tyranny, Slavery and Oppression of the Dark Kingdom. page 33.
CHAP. V.
That though men by the Gospel are freed from that Slavery under the Prince of
Darkness, that yet he strives to countermine the Kingdom of Light; and when men
will so far reject and despise the Admonitions and Assistances that God affords
them, he may justly suffer them to be acted and guided by evil Spirits. page
40.
CHAP. VI.
That nothing hinders, but having full Possession of the Minds of men, these
evil Spirits may likewise enslave their Bodies. page 46.
CHAP. VII.
Of Witchcraft. page 49.
OBJECTION I.
That these Witches are supposed to be present at their Nocturnal Conventicles
and Diabolical meetings, when their Bodies are at home, which is Impossible.
page 66.
OBJECTION II.
That these Airy Spirits are too remote, and of a Nature too sublime to have
any Communication with Mortals. page 76.
OBJECTION III.
That it supposes Witches by the help of evil Spirits may do real Miracles.
page 81.
OBJECTION IV.
That it gives evil Spirits and Witches too great and exorbitant a power over
mankind, in that it supposes that these wicked Demons may afflict the Bodies
of others with diverse diseases and torments, that they may raise Thunders,
Storms and Tempests, killing Cattle and spoiling the Fruits of the Earth, and
many such like pernicious and destructive things, and all this at the desire
and request of a Magician or Witch. page 88.
OBJECTION V.
That it is very Ridiculous to imagine, that Devils (though never so foul and
unclean) should delight in sucking the Blood of these Accursed Hags. page 99.
CHAP. VIII.
Inferences drawn from the foregoing Discourse. page 103.
The Introduction.
IT was observed long ago by Epictetus, that there were some Persons that would
deny the plainest and most evident Truths, and this state and condition he
terms an (...) or (...), Arrian. l. 1. c. 5.
a Petrification or Mortification of the Mind, which when it happens to men of
a blameless and sober conversation, is nothing but the confusion of their
Intellectuals, which are so miserably distracted, that they are not able to
apprehend the force and strength of the plainest demonstration: But there are
others that are bedeaded and stupefied as to their Morals, and then they lose
that natural shame that belongs to a man, affirming or denying with the
greatest confidence that which an Innate shame and reverence of the
inscriptions of our own Minds will not suffer others to assert or contradict;
and this is really no better than an (...) (as the Philosopher calls it) a mere
Brutishness or Bestiality. Under one of these heads I must needs comprehend all
those who boggle and startle so much at the Notion of an Incorporeal Being. For
my own part I cannot but think that great Wit Descartes delivered a most
certain Truth, when he said, that the Notion or Conception of the Soul is much
more plain and evident than that of the Body. But when men are either so
monstrously confounded in their Intellects, so as not to be wrought upon or
convinced by the force and strength of Argument and Reason, or wholly given
over to the gratification of their Lusts and Passions, I do not much wonder
that they should have such dull Hallucinations about the clearest things, or
that they should entertain such cross and untoward Opinions, and so disagreeing
with all those that ever had a sober and right use of their Reasons and
Understandings.

This Age has produced too many over-confident Exploders of Immaterial
Substances; and he that shall talk of the Existence of Devils and evil Spirits,
their Possessions of the Bodies of men, of Ghosts and Apparitions, and the
feats and practices of Witches, shall be confuted with a loud laughter or a
supercilious look, as if these things were only the delusions of a distempered
Imagination, and owed all their Being and Reality to the dreams and fancies of
melancholic persons. Or if the matters of fact be too notorious to be
gainsaid, then these Corporealists will not stick to affirm with a late Author,
that they believe, there are many thousands of Spirits, made of an Incorporeal
matter, too fine to be perceived by the Senses of men; and that these Spirits
may play mad pranks amongst us. A thing much more worthy of laughter and the
character of folly, and all one as if a man should go about to persuade that
the little Motes or Atoms that fridge and play in the Beams of the Sun shining
through a Crany, should by a common consent unite themselves into a living
heap, and speak and act either ludicrously or mischievously with the standers
by. This is really nothing else but a disease of the Mind, and I have
endeavored in this small Treatise so far to discourse of the Existence of the
Dark Kingdom, and the mysteries thereof, and have laid down such Arguments, as
being well weighed and considered, may be subservient to the releasing and
setting free such heavy and dull Constitutions from the distemper they labor
under.

A DISCOURSE OF THE POLITY AND Kingdom of Darkness.
CHAP. 1.
That the Lapse and Revolt of the Angels from the Blessed life of God, consists
mainly in debasing their higher and nobler Faculties, by enslaving and
subjugating them to their Inferior and more material Powers.

HE that will speak of the Angels like a Philosopher, looks upon their Souls
like those of men, to be of an Heterogeneous nature, including within the
latitude and comprehension of their Essences an Intellectual and Plastical
life. The Perceptive part is indeed the flower of the Soul, discriminating all
Impressions made in the common Sensorium by the various objects of Sense, and
being Life and Activity in a very high degree contains in it the principles and
seeds of all manner of Wisdom and Knowledge: But the Plastic part or Formative
Power is wholly employed in the modification of matter, conserving the vital
motions, and faithfully transmitting the Impressions of External Objects upon
the Instruments of Sense to the seat of Perception. And that this holds good in
Angels, their vital union with matter sufficiently demonstrates. For although
we should fancy the Vehicles or Bodies of Angels to lie in a lax and diffuse
manner without any particular Organization or Characteristical (...) yet it is
most probable that the seat of Perception is restrained to some particular
place in that heap of living Air. Wherefore God creating no Power or Faculty in
vain, but that at some time or other it should be called forth into Act, did
graciously allow to these embodied Spirits their Perige's or Conversion to the
Placid Motions of their Congenit Bodies in due measures and proportions, as
well as their Apoge's or Recessions from matter. Which innocent delight was in
a sort necessary to their condition and the circumstances of their Natures. For
the most Intellectual and resined operations of their Minds depending somewhat
upon the motions of the Matter of their Vehicles, it is impossible they should
always attend with an equal Intensenefs and Vigor upon those high and remote
speculations, without any the least lassitude or dullness; partly because
profound Contemplations do very much exhaust and debilitate the Spirits or
Ethereal matter, which is the most immediate Instrument of Sense and
Cogitation, both in the Souls of men and Angels; and partly from the necessary
imperfection of their Natures, which are made with respect and regard to the
Plastic as well as Perceptive powers of life, which require an abatement and
relaxation of the superior Faculties, as well for the supply and recruit of
their Vehicles, as to be a pleasant repast, after which the Intellectual life
becomes more ardent, sublime and vigorous in the exercise of all its most
perfect operations.

Wherefore this being the state of things, the Defection and Eclipse of those
once bright and glorious morning Stars, must be attributed to the luxuriant
growth of the Plastic life, which taking deeper root by a fond carelessness and
indulgency, diffuses every way such poisonous and noxious Ferments as choke the
Emanations of a Divine life, till at last they become wholly dead to that
better principle, whose actings and inspirations so long as they heeded, they
remained perfectly happy. The experiment is every where obvious in the world,
and we see men by letting themselves loose to all manner of wretchedness and
debauchery, through the potent and enormous lasciviency of the bodily life,
quite lose the relish and grateful sense of true Goodness and Nobility; and the
edge and acuteness of their Criteria is so far taken off, that they have no
right discrimination between Virtue and Vice, Good and Evil. And though it be
true, that the Angels by sinking into the brutish life, have not bereaved
themselves of their Reason and natural Sagacity (since that That is a kind of
middle principle, and always follows the prevailing part, indifferently either
purveying for the satisfaction of a petulant Lust or slavish Passion, or else
acting under the conduct and guidance of a more Celestial Nature) yet have they
totally extinguished that noble Faculty, the flower and summity of the Souls of
men and Angels; which a learned person calls Boniformem animae facultatem,
Enchir. Ethic. c. 2.
i. e. that power in them which feels the pleasure of Righteousness and Virtue,
and has a natural relish and gust of true and essential goodness; and being
once united and conjoined with so beautiful an object, diffuses an ineffable
joy and pleasure through all the capacities of the Soul. Nor do we by this make
God the cause and Author of sin: for though it be true that the Animal
faculties in Angels and men, together with their respective objects, be a part
of God's Creation, yet their sin proceeded from themselves, through an undue
and disharmonious connection of those principles, and consists in the abuse of
his Fatherly indulgence by a wilful immoderation and excess.

Nor will this seem strange to any that will but consider what S. Peter and S.
Jude speak of the fallen Angels; to give some light to which places, I shall
set them down in the Original, 2 Pet. 2.4. (...) For if God spared not the
Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains
of darkness to be reserved into Judgment. And S. Jude after the same manner:
(...) (...). And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation; he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. v. 6.

In which we have a plain Indication both of the sin and punishment of these
lapsed Angels: Their sin in these words, [(...)] which our Translation renders
[ kept not their first estate] but the vulgar Latin [ Principatum suum non
servaverunt] that is, kept not their Principality, Rule or Dominion, which
Interpretation (says Beza) is not to be rejected. So that the most genuine and
natural signification of the words refers to that Government or Dominion which
the superior Faculties ought to have over the inferior. For as in men, so
likewise in the Angels, there is a double nature, the one Intellectual, and the
other Animal: The former of these Simplicius calls (...), the Schoolmaster, In
Epiclet.c. 10.
or that part which is to govern and rule; the other is (...), the boy that is
to be kept under discipline and strict government within us. The irrational or
Animal power (he says) is intent only (...), upon that which is sweet and
pleasant; but the Rational and Intellectual respects chiefly (...), that which
is best and most profitable. When therefore the Angels suffered their Despotick
and Lordly Powers to be enslaved and subjected to their Animal or Brutish
Faculties; when instead of keeping close to the (...), that which is simply and
absolutely the best, they pursued without bounds or measures the (...), the
luscious pleasures resulting from Body or Matter, then did they truly
relinquish (...), that Principality which God had given them, and insensibly
deserted (...), their Celestial bodies: for so S. Paul uses the word (...), 2
Cor. 5.2. where those Spiritual Bodies which we hope for at the Resurrection
are called, (...), our house that is from Heaven, which is all one with S.
Iude's (...), the proper house, building or habitation of Angels, viz. their
Heavenly Bodies.

And upon this foul revolt and Apostasy of theirs from their Primeval Glory,
followed their punishment, which was their dejection and detrusion into the
Caliginous Regions of the Air. For (...) signifies nothing else but to cast
down, and (...) is that which is lowest, whether in Earth or Air, as may be
seen in Homer's description of (...), Iliad. (...). The (...) and (...), chains
of darkness, are nothing but the Fetters of this thick and clammy Air within
the Atmosphere of the Earth, into which by the just judgment of God these
rebellious Spirits are precipitated. For the Air is of it self a Terrestrial,
stubborn and dark Element. To this purpose is that of Plutarch, in his Book de
Homerica Poesi, where he says, that Hades is the Air, adding, (...). And this
their confinement is very consentaneously expressed by chains and bands, being
fotter'd here by the irrevocable Decrees of Heaven, and are no more able to
ascend out of the noxious Fumes of this lower World, than we can fly in the
spacious Tracts of Ether; for those Eternal Laws which God has placed in the
Universe are the (...), as Homer speaks of Tartarus, those iron gates and
brazen walls, that prohibit all ascent to higher and better Regions.

CHAP. II. That these lapsed Angels have formed themselves into a Polity or
Kingdom of Darkness.
OUR Savior in the Gospel makes mention of the Kingdom of Satan, which
supposes a Polity, Society or Corporation among those wicked Spirits. And this
Kingdom or Government of theirs took its beginning and rise from their lapse
and revolt from God at the Creation of the World; when it is most probable that
some mighty Leader or Chieftain among the Orders of Angels inspired the breasts
of Myriads with pernicious and rebellious counsels against God, attempting to
frame and erect a Principality of his own in opposition to the Sovereignty and
Dominion of the Almighty; and being cast out of the Mansions of Light and
Happiness, with all his wicked adherents, for this their bold and audacious
attempt of invading Heaven it self, he has notwithstanding kept so much of his
ancient Grandeur, as to be the Head and Prince of all those whom he drew into
that Traitorous confederacy. Nor is Reason wanting in her suffrage here: For

1. They being all embodied Spirits, that is, vitally united to Matter, they
must of necessity be capable both of pain and pleasure, the sense of which is
more or less acute and vigorous according to either the Tenuity or Grossness of
their Bodies, and by consequence they are liable and obnoxious to harm and
injury from those of their own Society; which, considering the mischievousness
of their natures and dispositions (each ones particular Lusts being the grand
rule and measure of his Actions) would certainly breed an infinite Ataxy and
confusion amongst them, and at last the ruin and destruction of their Kingdom,
if not prevented by some external restraint and discipline. Wherefore they
being all so deeply lapsed into the Animal life, whose very foundation is
self-love and preservation of the irregular Exertions of their sensual
Appetites, their Reason which, though perfectly subservient to their brutish
Faculties, yet, is no whit abated or diminished by their degeneracy, would not
fail of moulding them into a Body Politic, and enacting by their general
consent and approbation for the maintenance and security of their usurped
Dominions, all such Laws and necessary Provisions as might both secure
themselves from outrages and villainies committed upon one another; and the more
advantageously and successfully drive on the general trade of wickedness
throughout the whole kingdom of Hell and Darkness.

2. But besides this, there is another cogent reason and inducement to believe
there is an Order and Government among the dark Fiends, in that they are not
all of the same rank and quality, but may probably have as many divisions among
them as there are diversities of Animals upon Earth, though they all agree in
the common Angelick nature; which if so, that thirst and desire of Rule and
Authority which is so largly spread and diffused through their natures and
capacities, and so great a branch of the sensual life to which they are wholly
addicted, will undoubtedly stir up the more powerful and politic among them,
to take the reins of Government and Authority into their hands, and prescribe
Laws to the rest, such as may both establish and preserve the Empire and
Kingdom of Darkness from domestic and intestine broils and dissentions, and
uphold it when assaulted by foreign Invasions.

And there seems to be an admirable consent between what Reason suggests and
the Holy Scriptures, in which mention is made of the Prince of Devils, who is
likewise called the Prince of the aerie Powers or Spirits: And to quicken us up
to a studious watchfulness and diligence against the latent frauds and
machinations of those Infernal hunters; we are assured that our contest is
against Principalities and Powers, and against the Aerial wicked Spirits under
their (...) or Prince. And the learned Dr. Hammond in his Notes upon that place
of S. Paul, supposes the Apostle by those several expressions to denote several
sorts of Devils, either in respect of their Mansions, (...), says Ignatius ad
Ephesians. Aerial or Earthly Spirits; or else of the inclinations which they
suggest: The Earthly Devils suggesting grosser carnal appetites, filthiness of
the flesh, etc. the Aerial pride, vainglory, malice, etc. the filthiness of the
Spirit.

And Drusius upon Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12. cites two Jewish Authors, who speak
after this manner, Debet homo scire and intelligere, a terra usque ad
firmamentum omnium plena esse turmis and praefectis, etc. i.e. A man is to know
and understand, that all from the Earth to the firmament is full (and no place
empty) of troops of Spirits, with their Chieftains and such as are Praepositi;
all which have their residence and fly up and down in the Air; some of them
incite to peace, others to war, some to goodness and life, others to wickedness
and death.

And that there are great diversities among the evil Demons, some being more
Aerie and Spiritual, transacting the affairs of the kingdom of Hell by
subordinate Instruments, and others more gross and feculent, employed in the
basest and most slavish actions; some sportful and ludicrous, others savage and
cruel; the Sacred Writings give us likewise some further intimation of. In Mar.
ix. 25. we read that our Savior cast out a dumb and deaf Spirit, which
certainly denotes a distinct kind of Devil, it being not so probable that he
was called so from the effects wrought in the possessed; for when the Disciples
asked our Blessed Lord the reason why they could not cast out that Devil, whose
dispossession they had attempted, he seems to tell them that it was a peculiar
kind of Devil, that could only be ejected by Prayer and Fasting. Others sport
themselves in rattling among their chains and fetters, and whirling round storms
and tempests in their Aerie Regions and Dominions, to the destruction of Men
and Beasts and the Fruits of the Earth, as they did with Job. And the Psalmist
affirms the evil Angels to be the executioners of the sadder sentences of God
the Judge of the world, Psalm. 78.49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his
anger, wrath and indignation and trouble, by sending evil Angels among them;
where the Septuagint read it (...) (...). And these are the grim Sergeants and
inexorable Officers, who carry the Souls of wicked men to their places of
punishment; which therefore Origin calls (...), Lib. 8. contr. Celsum.
the public Executioners; and the Author of the golden Verses, (...),
subterranean Demons. Now this diversity of Devils must needs cast them into a
Political Government.

3. Nor is it to be thought but they would retain the same Order and Government
in this their dark Empire, in which they were instated while they continued
faithful subjects of the kingdom of Light. Now it is most certain, that there
are different degrees of Dignity and Order among the good Angels; and S. Paul
gives us an account of some of them, Col. i. 16. For by him were all things
created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers --

And here it will not be amiss to give the Reader a short discourse of S.
Jerome, as a Commentary upon these words of S. Paul, produced by Zanchy (if he
have not miscited him) in his Treatise of Angels. Nunc quaerendum est, ubi
Apostolus haec quatuor nomina, etc. i. e. Now let us search where the Apostle
found these four names written [Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers]
and whence he had them. For it is not just to think that he who was so well
read in the Scriptures, should speak any thing that was not contained in those
sacred Volumes. I suppose therefore that he either brought to light some secret
Tradition of the Jews, or at least that he (understanding the Law to be
Spiritual) put a more sublime sense upon those things which were written, as it
were, according to the History and Letter. And that which is related of Kings
and Princes, of Generals, Tribunes and Centurions in the Book of Numbers, and
of the Kings, he knew was an Image or Emblem of other Kings and Princes;
namely, that in the Heavenly Hosts there are Principalities, Powers, Dominions
and Thrones, and other names of Offices; which we can neither name, nor I
suppose Paul himself while in this earthly Body would enumerate. Now if there
be Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and Powers, they must of necessity
have Subjects, and those that fear and serve them, and such as may be protected
by their strength. Which distributions of Offices, are not only at present, but
shall be in the world to come, that through several advancements and Honors,
and Ascensions and Descensions, Beings may proportionably arise or decline, and
may be under sometimes one Dominion, Principality or Power, and sometimes
another. We mortals that are quickly to be dissolved into dust and ashes, if by
the consent of men we should be made Kings, we have presently as many
diversities and multitudes of attendants, as may more easily be conceived than
spoken; and shall we think that God the Lord of Lords and King of Kings is
contented only with one single kind of Ministry? Thus far the Father in a
Platonical strain.

Mr. Mede somewhere speaks of an ancient Tradition among the Jews, that there
are seven principal Angels which minister before the Throne of God, and are
therefore called Archangels; some of them we read of, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael
and (2 Esdr. 4.36.) Ieremiel Which seven principal Spirits are mentioned in
Zech. 4.10. where they are described to be the eyes of the Lord which run to
and fro through the whole Earth. See Revel. 1.4.
And perhaps Daniel instituted the seven chief Princes of Persia, that the
Persian Court might resemble that of Heaven; for it is very probable (says that
learned Author) that Daniel had a great influence in moulding the Persian
Government. See Ezra 7.14.
A notable place to this purpose, and which may indeed serve as a Commentary
upon the forementioned Text in the Prophecy of Zechary, is that which Apuleius
relates of the Persian Court: In lib. de Mundo.
Sed inter eos Aures Regiae, and Imperatoris Oculi quidam homines vocabantur.
Per quae officiorum genera Rex ille ab hominibus Deus esse credebatur; cum
omnia quaecunque ibi gererentur, ille Otacustarum relatione dicebat. i.e. But
among them there were certain men which were called the eyes and ears of the
Prince: By which distribution of offices that King was thought by his subjects
to be a God, for as much as all things that were done within his Empire he had
knowledge of from the relation of the Otacustae. The same Tradition of the
Government of the World by seven chief Spirits under God the great Monarch, is
yet retained by the Persians inhabiting the borders of India. Varen. Descript.
Regni Iapon.
The sum of all amounts to this, That since there is a subordinacy among the
good Angels, and that they are not all of the same Power and Authority, it
follows that even among the bad there was the like difference in their Order
and Quality before their lapse, and that there can be no reason given why this
distinction should not hold good amongst them now as well as before.

CHAP. III. That these wicked Spirits being supposed Rational Creatures, must
needs be studious in diffusing their own sinful Nature upon all capable
subjects, and thereby of enlarging the bounds of their usurped Dominions.
THE grand Prince of the Infernal Kingdom having so far successfully advanced
his rebellious design in the seduction of infinite numbers of Spirits, of whom
in the Ethereal Regions under God he might probably be the great Hierarchal
head, and finding himself cast down from those happy Mansions, together with
all his wicked Associates, must needs cast an envious eye upon the Kingdom of
Light, and those bright Legions, who yet stood firm in their native innocence.
And it cannot be thought but that those principles of Pride and Malice, and an
immoderate thirst after Rule and Revenge being so fully awakened in him, would
likewise edge him with a keen desire of making further attempts upon the
Kingdom of Light, and waging (...), an eternal war with all those powers he saw
adverse and cross to his designs.

No sooner was Man created, and as the beloved offspring of God placed in
Paradise, but that crooked Serpent winds in himself, and by his subtle wiles
and gilded flatteries, despoils him of his beautiful Robe of Innocence, and
throws his Honor to the ground. Of which Sacred story the Pagans had gotten
some knowledge, as appears from what Pherecydes writes, That the great Demon
who wasted the Earth was a Serpent, and hence calls him (...) and (...), of a
Serpentine kind and generation, setting mankind as it were in battle array
against God. And what mischief he all along designed, and still carries on
against the race and posterity of Adam, the Histories of former Ages, and the
present state of the World will easily inform us. So mightily did this grand
deceiver, who abode not himself in the Truth, disseminate and diffuse his own
wicked nature amongst men, that God the good and gracious maker of all things,
designed to destroy the works of his own hands, and by an universal deluge wash
away that poison wherewith this old Serpent had infected the Earth. But
notwithstanding this the Tyrant kept still his hold, and with the increase of
the world, increased likewise his own strength and dominion, making whole
Nations to become his Vassals, and do him service. For what else can we think,
when we read of whole Countries overspread with wickedness and vice, barbarity
and lust being adopted into their Laws, and practiced in their most solemn
Religions?

Lib. 2. de Abst.
Porphyry tells us, that these airy Goblins delight in nothing more, nor
contend more eagerly than to be accounted Gods, and their Prince, that he may
usurp the place of the most high God. And this assertion of his is sufficiently
made good, in that they constantly commanded Sacrifices to be offered to them
throughout the whole Pagan world. Nor did their boundless Pride think this a
sufficient insultation over the calamitous state of mankind, unless they
offered up likewise to them their own blood. Thus we read in Histories of
Children, young Virgins and Men offered up in Sacrifice to these bloodthirsty
Deities: Nay, even the more civilized Romans admitted the shedding of humane
blood to Jupiter Latialis, which barbarous custom continued to the time of
Justin Martyr and Tatian. I need not insist longer upon this, since the Sacred
writings acquaint us, that God's own people were sometimes so miserably
depraved and Paganized, as to sacrifice their Sons and Daughters unto Devils.
Psalm. 106.37.


Nor is the uncleanness and filthiness practiced among the Pagans in their
Religious Worship less notorious. Insomuch that those very Festival days which
were consecrated to the honor of the Gods, were celebrated with such
spectacles, that grave Cato was ashamed to be present at them. It would be too
tedious to recite the many obscenities acted in the Pagan Worship, and recorded
in their own Authors; I shall therefore-content my self with what S. Austin
observes, C.D.l. 2. c. 5.
from the filthiness used in the Sacrifices offered to Cybele the mother of the
Gods, where he supposes that Scipio, if his Mother were a Goddess,and he were
asked whether he would have such silthy spectacles as were used in the Worship
of Cybele, to be part likewise of his mothers honor, he would certainly avow
that he had rather have his Mother lie dead and senseless, than to live a
Goddess, to hear and allow such Ribaldry: and that the worst man would be
ashamed to have a Mother like that Mother of the Gods.

But you will say, to what purpose is all this? Surely only to show the
intolerable Pride and Insolence of the Dark Kingdom, and what delight they
take, not only in the gratification of their own Lusts and Passions, but in
rendering mankind the unhappy and miserable subjects of their contempt and
scorn. And he that doubts whether their envy at the practice of true goodness,
or their hatred of us be so great as is supposed; let him but consider what
Grotius speaks concerning them; De Verit. Rel. l. 4. Sect. 3.
That they procured all the mischief they could to the worshippers of the one
most high God, by provoking both Magistrates and People to inflict punishments
upon them. For when it was lawful for Poets to sing of the Murders and
Adulteries committed by their Gods, and for the Epicures to take away all
Divine Providence, and any other Religion (though never so different in Rites)
was allowed, as the Egyptian, the Phrygian, the Grecian, the Thuscan, and the
Sacred Rites of Rome; even then generally the Jews alone were made ridiculous,
as appears by Satyrs and Epigrams written upon them; and sometimes also
suffered banishment. And as for Christians, they were afflicted with most cruel
punishments: No other cause whereof can be given than that both these Sects did
worship one God, whose honor was impeached by the multitude of such Gods as
the Heathen adored; who did not so much vye one with another, as with him.
Which is evidently confirmed by that expression of our Savior Christ in his
Epistle to the Smyrnian Church, Behold, Rev. 2.10.
The Devil shall cast some of you into prison -- i.e. the Pagans incensed and
stirred up by the old Serpent the Devil. 1 Pet. 5.8.
And S. Peter describes him, not only by (...), one that brings as it were an
Indictment or accusation against Men before God, but sets out the terribleness
and destructiveness of his Nature, by that of a roaring Lion, walking about
seeking whom he may devour.

CHAP. IV. That the great end of our Savior's coming into the World was to
rescue men from the Tyranny, Slavery and Oppression of the Dark Kingdom.
THat the Apostate Prince of the Aerie Legions had miserably enslaved the World
is already demonstrated; nor is it at all inconsistent with the Righteous
Economy of Providence, to suffer those to fall under his Dominion, whose
treacherous counsels and inspirations they so willingly hearkened to in their
more happy state of life. For what more warrantable piece of justice can there
be, than that men should taste the fruits of their own doings? And since by
choice and affection they listed themselves under the Government of the Devil,
that now they should suffer his barbarous Tyranny and Domination, whether with
or against their wills? And I remember that Origin somewhere tells Celsus, that
it is no more incongruous for God to let the Devil Rule over whole Nations for
some time, than to suffer a Tyrant to preside over them: as some of the Roman
Emperors were. But though this grand Usurper thought himself secure in thus
Lording and Domineering over the greatest part of the World at his pleasure,
yet in the fullness of time a conspicuous and most remarkable Providence
appeared for the rescue of mankind, and the meek Lamb of God came down to break
in pieces the Kingdom of Darkness, to dismantle all the strong holds, to reduce
revolted Man to his former Fealty and Allegiance, and to take into his hands
the Government of the whole world. That (as the Apostle speaks) to the Scepter
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, Phil. 2.10.
and things in Earth, and things under the Earth. And that this was the design
of the Incarnation of our Lord and Savior, S. John assures us; For this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, 1 Job. 3.8.
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. For such an effectual Engine is
the Gospel, where it is believed and entertained in the simplicity of it, to
wind off men from their adherence to the Prince of Darkness, and to dethrone
him from his unlimited power in the world, that upon the Preaching of the
Seventy Disciples, whom our Lord sent forth, he tells them at their return,
that the success they had, was a Praeludium of the utter subversion of the
Kingdom of Satan, which should at last as perfectly vanish and disappear, Luke
10.18
as lightning that leaves no print or footsteps of it self in the spacious
Tracts of Heaven. And the event showed the truth of things: For after many
cruel oppositions made by the Dark Principality, Christianity so far prevailed
as to become the Religion of the Roman Empire, and the great Dragon, that old
Serpent called the Devil and Satan, Rev. 12.8, 9.
was cast out with his Angels, neither was there place found any more in
Heaven. i.e. Paganism, or that whole Religious worship whereby the Devil had
for so many Ages abused and enthralled mankind was abolished and destroyed, the
Emperors becoming Christians.

Lib. 2. de Verit. Relig.
To this purpose Grotius discourses admirably, where he proves that the
Miracles of our Savior proceeded not from any evil Spirit, because that the
Doctrine of Christ was quite opposite and contrary to bad Spirits. For it
prohibits the worshipping of evil Angels, and disswades men from all
uncleanness of affections and manners, wherein such Spirits are much delighted.
And this is also plain, for that wheresoever the doctrine of the Gospel was
received and established, there followed the downfall of the worship of Demons
and of Magical Arts: and one God was worshipped with a detestation of Demons;
whose Power and Authority Porphyry acknowledges was broken by the coming of
Christ.

In a word, our most Holy Jesus in all things opposed and walked exactly
contrary to the Powers of Darkness, chastising by his humility the pride of
that great Lucifer, confronting by his innocence and purity the iniquity and
uncleanness of the Black Society, and withdrawing abused mortals from the
madness of Polytheism and Idolatry, and converting their hearts to the worship
of the One only true God, who made Heaven and Earth. So that by the coming of
Christ and the propagation of his most holy Doctrine throughout the world, men
are brought from bondage and slavery to true liberty and freedom, from
tyrannical and cruel Taskmasters, to the obedience of a mild and gentle Prince,
and from the lowest dregs of misery to the height of happiness and felicity.

This only true Religion (says S. Austin) is of power to discover that the
Gods of the Gentiles are most unclean Spirits, C.D. l. 7. c. 33.
desiring upon the occasion of some departed Souls, or under the shapes of some
earthly Creatures, to be accounted Gods, and in their proud impurity taking
pleasure in Obscenities as in Divine Honors, maligning the conversion of men's
Souls unto the true God. From whose beastly and abominable Tyranny a man then
gets free, when he lays his belief upon Him, who by his rare example of
humility declared from what height, and for what pride those wicked Fiends had
their fall.

Perhaps it may not be unpleasant now to the Reader to refresh his mind with
part of a Hymn written by Synesius, in honor of Jesus, and thus Paraphrased
upon by a learned person.

O lovely Child, with Glory great arrayed!
Sweet offspring of the Solymeian maid!
Thee would I sing, and thy renowned Acts;
For thou did rid the boundless flowery Tracts
Of thy dear Fathers Garden from the spoils
Of the false Serpent, and his treacherous toils.
When thou had once descended to this Earth
A stranger wight amongst us of humane Birth;
After some stay new voyage thou did take,
Crossing cold Lethe and the Stygian Lake,
Arriv'st at the low fields of Tartara,
There where innumerable flocks do stray
Of captive Souls, whom pale-faced Death does feed,
Forced under his stiff Rod and churlish Reed.
Straight at thy sight how did that surly sire
Old Orcus quake, and greedy Dog retire
From's usual watch! whilst thou from slavish chain
Whole swarms of Souls to freedom do regain.
Then 'ginst thou with thy Immortal Quire to praise
Thy Father, and his strength to Heaven to raise.
Ascending thus with joy as thou do fare
Through the thin sky, the Legions of the Air
Accursed Fiends, do tremble at thy sight,
And Starry troops wax pale at thy pure Light.
CHAP. V. That though men by the Gospel are freed from that slavery under the
Prince of Darkness, that yet he strives to countermine the Kingdom of Light;
and when men will so far reject and despise the admonitions and assistances
that God affords them, he may justly suffer them to be acted and guided by evil
Spirits.
THough this mighty Antagonist of Heaven be in a great measure dispossessed and
cast out of his Usurped Dominions, by that Illustrious Heroes sitting upon the
white Horse (as the Son of God is represented, Revel. 19.) and his victorious
Armies, yet is his proud and haughty stomach no whit quelled, but rather
exasperated with a settled and confirmed revenge; and therefore reassembling his
dispersed Troops, and reuniting his broken and shattered Forces, he resolves to
regain that by policy which he could no longer maintain and keep by open
strength. Wherefore casting and revolving in his mind many deep and direful
Machinations, he finds nothing offering greater plausibilities of success, than
to turn those Engines that so sorely battered his strongest holds, against the
possessors of them, and to make the Gospel which was intended for the utter
ruin and extirpation of his Kingdom, to be subservient to the erecting and
raising him a new Empire over mankind. And now the great Prince of Darkness
walks in Masquerade, and puts on the beautiful Robes of an Angel of Light, and
appears amongst the Sons of God, and raises up the depths of the accursed
policies of Hell, to make fruitless and of none effect the grand intent and
purpose of our Lord and Savior in the propagation of the Gospel. And this he
endeavors by instigating and stirring up men of bad principles and worse
lives, to disseminate Heresies, and raise Schisms and divisions among
Christians; laboring to extinguish that mutual love and charity which our Lord
made the badge and character of his Disciples, and by degrees to bring on a
general depravation and corruption in manners. These are some of the (...), the
subtle machinations, the thoughts and counsels of the heart of Satan.

And with what successfulness he has managed these artisices, let the
Histories of the Christian Church in all Ages, even to this very day bear
witness. For no sooner were the storms of persecution a little allayed, and the
Sun of peace and tranquillity shone with gentle beams upon the professors of
the Gospel, but this Arch-enemy and deceiver was busy in sowing Tares, which
too soon became fruitful, and grew up to a plentiful crop of Iniquity and
licentious disorder. It is a sad face of things that Eusebius describes,
Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 1.
speaking of the times immediately preceding Dioclesian the last persecutor;
When the lives of Christians degenerated, through too much liberty, into
softness and sloth, and Christians hated and reproached one another, and with
those weapons of the tongue invaded and fought with one another; when Bishops
set upon Bishops, and people raised seditions against people; when hypocrisy
and shows of piety filled all places, then by little and little the judgments
of God, as they are wont, began to visit us; and when we used no means to
appease God, but multiplied sin upon sin, as if God did not respect or consider
our sins, and so there was nothing left among Christians but contentions,
emulations, hatred, enmity, ambition, tyranny, -- then, etc.

And the succeeding times were no whit better, till at length the Man of sin
arose, by whom the Infernal King wrought an effectual depravation of the
Christian Church, and revived the lively Image of Pagan Superstition and
Idolatry. And though Reformed Christendom have cast off that yoke of
Superstition and Idolatry, yet they labor under Intestine Dissentions, and
crumble into to Schisms and Factions, and (which is to be lamented, even with
tears of blood) provoke and exasperate, nay and frequently persecute one
another through a bitter and intemperate zeal, for those things which all
parties agree are no way essential to the Salvation of a Christian. Here one
crying out zealously for Paul, there another for Apollos, and yonder a third
for Cephas, and in the mean time condemning all others that will not follow
their cry as Reprobates, persons only sit, like unprofitable burdens, to be
sent out of this World, to try their fortunes in the next; as if there were no
other way to Heaven, but by joining with this or that particular Sect and
Society of men. Now what are all these evils but various devices and stratagems
of the Dark Kingdom to undermine the Gospel, and to defeat our Lord (if it were
possible) of the success of all the pains he took in the Redemption of the
World? How prosperously does the Cause of Darkness thrive, when men shall damn
one another for opinions, and bite and devour one another for trifles? When
they shall profess Christianity, and yet live like Heathens?

Now when God looks down from Heaven and beholds all those Sacred methods and
ways of recovering men out of the hands of the Devil undervalued and despised;
when he sees men wilfully shut their eyes against those bright rays of Truth
that encircle them, then in a just judgment he suffers them to fall under the
power of Satan, and to be led away (as the Apostle speaks) with strong
delusions, 2 These. 2, 11.
to the occecation and blinding their very Reasons and Judgments. And this
insensate condition can never arrive to its full maturity and perfection,
without the potent Energy and Activity of the Devil.

CHAP. VI. That nothing hinders, but having full Possession of the Minds of
Men, these Evil Spirits may likewise enslave their Bodies.
FOR the Possession of the Mind by such strong falsehoods as shall lead to all
Impurity of life and actions, may be as real a work of the Devil (though not so
visible) as his inacting their Bodies. And if it might as well conduce to the
interest and advantage of his Kingdom to make such visible discoveries of
himself, by acting in the Bodies of men; there is no question but such
Possessions would be infinitely more frequent than they are. For the frame and
temper of the Mind being the peculiar object of Divine Providence, it is
certain that a man may lapse so far into wickedness and vice, as to forfeit
this Care, and to turn himself out of her Protection, and then he comes into
the dominion of, and becomes a prey to the invisible Harpyes. And though these
bodily vexations and infestations by evil Demons may sometimes befall others,
yet they are more infrequent, and permitted by Providence for ends and purposes
not readily discoverable by us. But when they are exercised upon deplorably
wicked and profligate persons, those Demons seize upon and use but what is
their own. Now that there have been such real Possessions of men by Devils has
been so fully attested by unprejudiced persons in all Ages, that he cannot
escape the suspicion of having imbibed some Atheistical principles that shall
have the confidence to deny them.

But because there are many so staggering, fluctuating and uncertain in their
Religion, that they can hardly be persuaded to believe the existence of such
Spirits, or the association and confederation of men with these foul and
unclean Demons, and that the Scriptures speak of Wizards, Witches and
Magicians, by which we understand persons that combine with, and are
confederate with impure Spirits, I shall endeavor to take off this grand
Objection against those Sacred Writings, by showing the possibility of the
thing, that there have been in all Ages of the World such as have practiced and
entered into Familiarity with wicked Demons, and that the Scriptures are not
therefore to be derided and exposed by profane Wits when they speak of these
things, as matters of Fact and Reality, since true and genuine Philosophy
asserts the same, and the wisest and most learned persons among the Heathens
believed it, and that the Arguments and Objections against it are weak and
frivolous, and betray the ignorance and unskilfulness of their Authors.

CHAP. VII. Of Witchcraft.
THE Devil is not contented to abuse mankind at a distance, as it were, by all
those ways and arts and illusions in offering temptations from without, and
thereby seducing them from their obedience to God; but in all Ages those impure
Spirits have made use of capable subjects, with whom they have entered into a
nearer union and stricter confederation; being first initiated into those
hellish mysteries by some External solemnities, by which they surrender
themselves to the will and power of those Aerie tyrants, and by seeming for a
time to command, render themselves Vassals to the mockery, cruelty, and
unbridled lusts and passions of those malicious Goblins for ever. And such
persons are properly called Magicians, Wizards and Witches.

Nevertheless it must here be acknowledged, that there have been (and doubtless
are) a kind of Necromancers or Magicians, who are not like the common sort, not
only grossly sunk and debauched in their lives, but also knowingly do homage to
evil Spirits as such, for the gratification of their Lusts;) but more refined
Ones, who call themselves Theurgists, such as being in some measure freed from
the grosser Vices, and thinking to have to do only with good Spirits; yet being
proud and vainglorious, and affecting wonders, and to transcend the generality
of mankind, are by a Divine Nemesis, justly exposed to the illusions of the
Devil or evil Spirits, cunningly insinuating here, and aptly accommodating
themselves to them. Now such as these may have the assistance of wicked Spirits
(though they know them not to be so) in the performance of many strange and
wonderful things, without any such solemn compacts as those fouler and grosser
Sorcerers enter into. And though Porphyry and some others did distinguish these
two sorts, so as to condemn indeed the grosser, which they called Magic or
Goety, but allowed the other which they termed Theurgie, as laudable and
honorable, and as an art by which they received Angels, and had communication
with the Gods: Yet S. Austin assures us they are both damnable, C.Dl. 10. c. 9.
and bound to the observation of false and silthy Devils instead of Angels:
which he further proves by relating a memorable story out of Porphyry, of a
certain Chaldean who (good man) complained that all his endeavor to purge his
Soul by these Theurgick consecrations was frustrate, by reason a great Artist
envying him this happiness, adjured the powers he was to deal with by holy
Invocations, and bound them from granting him any of his requests. Of this sort
were probably Zoroaster, Apollonius Tyanaeus, Apuleius, and some others of
later times.

For a more distinct and orderly procedure in this Chapter, I shall consider
these three things.

1. First, the account which the Scriptures give of Magic or Witchcraft. In
the Law of Moses a severe punishment no less than Death it self is ordained for
Necromancers, Wizards and Witches, and such as have commerce with familiar
Spirits, Levit. 20.27. And the people of Israel are expressly forbid to consult
with any such, Levit. 19.31. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.

Now it seems very dilute and insipid to direct the intention of these Laws
only against Juglers, Miraclemongers or Impostors, as if it were impossible in
the nature of the thing that there should be any confederation of men with evil
Spirits, and that all those strange effects performed by Necromantick Arts, and
truly supposed to be brought to pass by the assistance of those (...),
malicious and deceitful Demons, with whom the Magicians are confederate, are
only Prestigious delusions and tricks, as it were, of Ledger du maine.

For first, the reason of the Law it self shows it to be of a higher and
greater importance, Deuteronomy. 18.12. For all that do these things are an
abomination to the Lord: and because of these abominations the Lord thy God
does drive them out from before thee. And surely nothing can be a greater and
more heinous wickedness, than for a man to forsake the guidance of an Almighty
Providence, and have recourse upon all occasions to those wandering Goblins, who
intend nothing less than the destruction of all those that have to do with them.

And that which adds a further confirmation of the greatness and Majesty of
this Law is, what the Jews themselves saw before their departure out of Egypt,
that is, the opposition made against Moses by the Magicians of Pharaoh; whose
miracles were not Juggles and Impostures done by sleight of hand, but real
things produced and effected by the assistance of evil Spirits. For had they
been otherwise, they might still have gone on, and not cried out, This is the
finger of God, when a power transcending theirs restrained and overruled them.
And indeed whoever considers aright the frame of the Polity and Kingdom of
Darkness, how far those evil Demons have degenerated from all Goodness and
Righteousness, and how studious they are to promote and disseminate a Spirit
and Nature of Wretchedness and Vice, and withal how deadly and implacable foes
of mankind, and how ready at all turns to wait upon either the fond curiosity
or more deliberate and designed purposes of those that will be tampering with
them, will not easily allow the concernment of these Laws to be so low and
trifling as to look only at Juglers, Cheats and Impostors. But there having
been such among the Pagans who surrounded the Jews, as really practiced
Sorcery, and entered into familiarity with wicked Spirits, it is certain that
such are here likewise meant by Moses. And therefore

In the second place, the words themselves do properly bear that sense: For
Mecaseph denotes alike Magicians and Inchanters, and both these are called in
Scripture Melahesim, which word is from Lahas susurravit, because those persons
did by whispering or muttering converse with or desire the assistance of
Demons.

The other word Ob will best be explained by (...), the Spirit of Python, or by
the (...), belly-speakers, i. e. those out of whose bellies (as the Oracles out
of Caves) the Devil spoke. Ofthese Photius gives an account in his Epistles:
(...), The wicked and unclean Spirit, that inhabits a man's belly as a Serpent
his hole in the Earth, and being unclean is fit to dwell in that place which is
the receptacle of Ordure, they appositely call Engastrimuthus. And of this kind
of Devil (says he) which loves to dwell in the Ordure both of men and women,
(...) i. e. It is a great deceiver of people, and Author of destruction to all
that give ear to it. These the Hebrew calls (...) from (...), See Doctor
Hammond upon Acts 16.16.
the belly; and the reason is rendered by Galen, because they speak without
opening their mouth, and so seem to speak out of the belly.

2. The second particular to be insisted upon is this, That nothing hinders in
the reason of the thing it self, but that there may be real confederations and
contracts betwixt wicked and wretched Persons and evil Spirits. To this purpose
we must know that the Devil has all along endeavored to Ape and Imitate the
actions of God Almighty, and to deprave the Institutions he appointed in his
Worship to perverse and wicked ends. Thus because Sacrifices were offered to
the True God, the ArchFiend commands likewise the same to be done to him: And
as God sometimes by fire from Heaven declared his acceptance of the Sacrifices
performed to him; so this likewise has been counterfeited by the Devil, as in
the Sacrifice offered up to Jupiter by the Rhodians; And at Hierocaesarea, and
Hypaepae (says Pausanias) wood laid upon the Altar, is commonly set on fire,
Cited by Mountague. Diatr. against Seldom.
without putting fire to it, only at the mumbling of some few words by a
Priest. Moreover Solinus reports the same of the Vulcanian Hill in Sicily,
where when the Sacrifice is prepared, ab ipso Numine fit accendium, the green
wood fires of it self, and the Deity by consuming the Sacrifice by fire gives a
testimony of his acceptance of the Oblation. And upon some Mountain in Africa
(if I misremember not) the Cacodaemon offers himself to those who for certain
days have duly prepared themselves, splendida circumfusum nube, environed with
a bright cloud, an imitation doubtless of the Divine Presence manifested by a
cloud upon the Tabernacle of the Jews, or that which overshadowed the Disciples
at the Transfiguration of our Savior.

Now as the Sacrifices offered up to the true God of Israel were Federal Rites,
and those that did partake of them did thereby enter into a Covenant with God
to become his servants, and obey his Laws; so the Aerie Principality has
Mimically observed the same thing, and those that offered Sacrifices to Demons
were supposed by partaking of those Sacrifices to enter into a stricter league
and familiarity with those evil Spirits. And as all Covenants between God and
Men have been performed by certain sensible Rites and Ceremonies (the nature of
man in these Earthly Bodies requiring that it should be so) in like manner have
all the mutual compacts and stipulations between wicked men and Devils been
transacted by some sensible ways and signs or other. If therefore in all
confederations between men and superior and invisible Powers there have been
some External and visible Ceremonies, whereby these Consociations have been
ratified and confirmed, why should we startle so much at the intimacy and
familiarity of an impure and foul Spirit with a Wizard or Witch? Nay though
there should intervene to complete the Hellish Contract some such External Rite
as the drawing of blood from those wretched persons by the wicked Demon? For
the drinking of blood has sometimes been made use of by Conspirators and other
wicked persons as the strongest Sacrament and Tie of a mutual Confederacy that
could be imagined: Thus Plutarch in the life of Valerius Publicola relates,
that the Conspirators against Brutus and his fellow Consul bound themselves one
to another by a great and horrible Oath, drinking the Blood of a man, and
shaking hands in his Bowels whom they would Sacrifice. And that the Gnostics
and Nicolaitans made use of the like Ceremonies is recorded by Eusebius,
Epiphanius, and others; whose impious Transactions gave occasion to the
Heathens to object Thyestean Banquets against the Christians. Of the
Cataphryges S. Austin in his Catalogue of Heresies tells, that they are said to
have very abominable Sacraments; for they celebrated their Eucharist with the
Blood of an Infant of a year old, which they forced out of his body by pricking
and making small wounds, mixing it with flour, and so making bread of it. And
what reason have we to think that there may not some such damnable solemnity be
used in the compacts between Magicians and these silthy Demons? The result of
all then is this; If there have been Confederations and Compacts between men
and Devils transacted and performed by sensible signs, then there may still be
an Agreement or Confederacy between an evil Spirit and a Witch.

3. Thirdly, we are to take notice, That there are diverse Degrees of these
lapsed Spirits, and that they suit themselves according to the tempers and
constitutions of the persons they deal withal. This I have in part already
discovered, but shall now prosecute it a little further: wherefore though the
whole Army of these wicked Spirits that rebelled against God (how numerous
soever) be cast down from the Ethereal Regions, and confined within the
Atmosphere of the Earth, partly by a Divine Decree, and partly urged by the
Fatal necessity of their degenerate natures, yet their propensions and
inclinations are not all alike, but are as various and different as those of
mankind. Psellus from Marcus the Eremite (a skilful Daemonist) relates six
kinds of Demons; the first Fiery, (...).
called Lelurion, i. e. Nocturnal Fire, and these wander in the top of the
Aerie Region, yet far beneath the Moon: The second are Aerie, whose Mansions
are these lower Regions nearer to us: The third are Terrestrial, dwelling upon
the Earth, and perilous foes to mankind: The fourth are Aquatick or watery,
keeping their haunts about Rivers, Lakes and Springs, drowning men often,
raising storms at Sea and sinking Ships: The fifth sort are Subterranean,
living in Caverns and Hollows of the Earth, often hurting and killing
Well-diggers and Miners for Metals, causing Earthquakes and Eruptions of Flames
and Pestilent Winds: The last and worst sort are those light-hating Ghosts or
night-walkers, the dark and most inscrutable kind, and striking all things they
meet with cold Passions. And all these Demons (says he) hate both Gods and
Men, but some worse than others.

But whether there be just so many kinds is not at all material, certain it is,
that among that degenerate crew their Humors and Passions are various and
different, and so are fitted for the undertaking different Employments,
according as the great Divan or superior Council of Darkness shall order and
allot them. And these Demons take care to suit themselves to the tempers of
those they have familiarity withal; and the Devils with whom Apollonius
conversed might be far different from those fouler and grosser Fiends that
attend a wicked Sorceress, daily sucking her blood, and nestling in her
loathsome rags.

To carry on this a little higher; A deep Contemplator that considers the frame
of the World, and the several Beings contained therein, together with their
mutual relations, affections and dependences upon one another, shall find that
there is a certain Sympathy running through the Universe, whereby Superior
things act upon Inferior; and this is continued through the whole material
Creation by that Plastic nature that pervades the whole, and being life and
activity, and consequently incorporeal, acts fatally and Magically, that is,
without any express consciousness of what it does. From hence arises a kind of
union that combines and makes a continuation between all things in Nature,
which the Platonists signified, when they said the whole World was (...), the
great Magician or Inchanter, and this they called Natural Magic, that is, the
Concords and Discords, or Sympathies and Antipathies of Nature, as may be seen
in several instances. Now as in Nature there is such a Conspiration, so
likewise in Moral Agents, whereby things are carried by a certain Assimilation,
according to the temper and disposition of the mind: Thus wicked men do by a
kind of harmony or agreeableness of Nature invite and draw wicked Spirits to
their Association; and this Magnetism is raised and Invigorated by a deep
grounded exorbitancy of the Passions and Affections; so that a person deeply
immersed in Envy and Malice, and edged with a sharp desire of Revenge, does as
naturally call and solicit an evil Demon, as the cries and shrieks of dying
Beasts will gather the rest of the same Species to their assistance.

Nor is there any greater difficulty in conceiving that an impure Spirit may
thus be solicited into a confederacy with a Witch (being otherwise sufficiently
prompted to such villainy by their own wicked natures) than that an evil Demon
should be called down by certain Charms and Previous Consecrations to inhabit
an Image. For this latter S. Austin cites a passage out of Hermes Trismegist;
C. D. l. 8. c. 24.
Wherefore our Fathers erring exceedingly in Incredulity concerning the
Deities, and never penetrating into the depth of Divine Religion, they invented
an Art to make Gods, whereunto they joined a Virtue out of some part of the
Worlds Nature, like to the other: and conjoyning these two, because they could
make no Souls, they framed certain Images, whereinto they called either Angels
or Devils, and so by these mysteries gave these Idols power to hurt or help
them.

Having thus far showed that there have been in all Ages such persons as we
call Witches or Magicians, not only from the account which the Holy Scriptures
give of them, but from the Nature and Reason of the thing it self, and by
rational evidence made good the possibility of a Confederation between Men and
wicked Demons; there remains no more now but to answer those Objections, and
refute the Arguments, in which some so mightily triumph, that they think
nothing is more plain than that Witchcraft is a mere Fiction and Imposture, and
a ridiculous piece of nonsense, which it is greatly to be feared is thus far
improved to cast a contempt upon the Sacred Scriptures, and to explode the
Being of Spirits as Creatures rather existing in men's Brains and Imaginations,
than any where else in the Universe, and by degrees to make Religion a mere
cheat and delusion.

OBJECTION I. That these Witches are supposed to be present at their Nocturnal
Conventicles and Diabolical meetings, when their Bodies are at home; which is
impossible.
Answ. THis Objection proceeds either from ignorance, or misunderstanding the
nature and powers of the Soul, whose union with the Body is not by Cogitation
and Will (for then there might be an actual separation whenever men pleased)
but fixed in some lower Power, which chains and links the Soul to the Body,
even against her will in acute and sharp Diseases: And this union is upon
certain terms and conditions, which so long as they continue unbroken and
inviolate, the Soul is confined to her Earthly mansion and habitation; but when
these laws and conditions shall be infringed either by external violence or the
prevalency of a Disease, or some other enormous and extreme disorder and
perturbation in the Body, then she dislodges, not by explicit Will and Counsel,
but by Necessity and Constraint, because the Body is no longer tenantable or
capable of her reception; and then ensues that which we properly call Death, De
Passion. Par. 1. Ar. 6.
which (as that acute Philosopher Descartes rightly concludes) never happens
through any defect or fault of the Soul, but only because some of the principal
parts of the Body are depraved and corrupted: And the difference (he says)
between the Body of a living Man, and that of a dead one, is much what the same
as between a Watch or any other Automaton (that is, any kind of Machine that
moves of it self) wound up, having of it self the corporeal principle of those
Motions for which it was instituted, with all things requisite for its action;
and the same Watch or other Engine when it is broken, and the principle of its
Motion ceases to act.

From hence it will appear, that there is no impossibility in the thing, nor
any such inextricable difficulty in conceiving how the Soul may actually
separate from the Body for some time without ensuing Death. For the further
clearing of which there are these two things required; 1. To show how the
necessary Functions of life may be conserved and kept up while the Soul is
separate from the Body. 2. To consider what those things are which may cause a
Temporaneous disunion and disjunction of the Soul from the Body.

First then it will not seem at all strange that the principal Functions of
life should be performed for some time without the presence of the Soul to them
who will admit of the principles of the Cartesian Philosophy, which supposes
that the Soul contributes nothing to any of those Motions in the Body, which
depond not upon actual Will and Cogitation. And if withal we suppose Brutes to
be but Machines or Automata, it will be very clear that all those Motions which
we call Vital in the Body may be performed without the actual presence of the
Soul.

But if this seem harsh and irrational to them, who imagine bare Mechanism to
be an incompetent cause for the production of such effects; and that the
Systole and Diastole of the Heart which later Anatomists have found to be a
Muscular Constriction and Relaxation, and the Circulation of the Blood through
all parts of the Body, must proceed, not from a Mechanical but Vital principle:
They may be pleased to consider that in Nature there is a certain Vis Plastica
(or rather Nature it self is it) a Plastic Power, or Inconscious, Incorporeal
life, which passing through the Universe, governs all the Motions of Matter
every where, according to such laws fatally impressed upon it, and reconciles the
enmities and contrarieties of particular things, bringing them into one general
Harmony in the whole, and strikes the first and Rudimental lineaments in the
formation of the Bodies of Animals; and lastly, may be particular Souls or
Spirits be so far rapt and drawn into consent, as to work strange effects, not
only upon their own, but upon separate and distant Bodies: Now by this
Hylarchical principle or Plastic nature, so many of the vital motions of the
Body may be kept in play as shall render it as fit and convenient for the
Inhabitation of the Soul at its return, as it was when she dislodged and
separated from it.

In answer to the second particular it may be said, that it is possible the
Soul may be rapt from this Terrestrial Body, and carried to remote and distant
places, from whence she may make a Postliminiar return, by either of these two
ways: 1. From a vehement affection or deep imagination piercing into the very
lowest of her Powers. 2. By the assistance and activity of a more potent Spirit.

While a House is standing whole and entire, the occupier of it may go out and
in and still keep the possession; but when it is either thrown down and broken
by an external violence, or falls to pieces through the rottenness and
consumption of its parts, he must lie in the streets, if he cannot get another
dwelling: Such is the condition of the Soul in respect of the Body, whose
principal parts in which consist the safety of the whole being corrupted, she
hastes away, never to return till it be rebuilt; But while they remain firm and
safe, she may be carried out by strong and powerful affections, and re-enter
and dwell there as before. Nor is any Desire or Velleity whereby many will say
they would fain go out of their Bodies to some distant place, though without
any more potent affection than to try the experiment, enough to cause a
separation, but it must be so strong and vehement, and so far imprint it self
upon the imagination, as to reach that Plastic Faculty by which the Soul is
connected to the Body, and these cords being loosened and untied, she may
without any difficulty pass into the open Air.

And he that considers the strange and wonderful effects of Imagination even
upon these our Earthly Tenements, will have no reason to doubt but the same
Power may extend to a Temporary disjunction of the Soul from the Body. Common
experience shows how the Pica or longing of a pregnant Woman will by a keen
Fancy stamp and impress the character of the thing so passionately desired upon
the Child in her womb. I will not take upon me to maintain the truth of all
those strange effects attributed to the strength of Imagination by Fienus,
Cornel. Agrip. de Occult. Phil. l. 1. c. 64. Del-Rio Disquisit. Magic. Gader.
Doctr. Ari. and Plat.
Cornelius Agrippa and others; though I must confess so much is said by them as
to matter of Fact, as may satisfy a free and unprejudicated mind, that the
power of Imagination even upon these gross and unwieldy Bodies is much greater
and more notable than is by many supposed.

But if any one shall so far distrust the truth of such stories as to rank them
among Legendary Fables, let him consider what other could be Jacobs intent in
that device of his in placing pilled and straked Rods before the flocks at the
watring-places, but only to heighten and invigorate the Imaginative Faculty of
the Ews at the time of Conception.

Now that this has actually happened, namely that the Soul has been carried
from the Body, and after some time returned again, the relations of
disinterested persons would induce us to believe. And it is very probable that
upon a due search into the Causes and Natures of things, it may not seem
incredible what Cardan relates of himself, that he could when he pleased fall
into this (...), Disjunction or Abreption of his Soul from his Body. A thing
which is credibly reported of the Lappians, who lying as it were in a Trance
for some hours, will give a perfect account of affairs at three hundred miles
distance, and by some evident token give assurance of their being in such
places. To which if we should add the story of Phaereus Pamphylius recorded by
Plato; of Hermotimus Clazomenius by Pliny, and of Soleus by Plutarch, it will
at least assure us, that grave and wise Persons, did not think such an (...) as
is here contended for to be altogether a thing so monstrous and incredible.

The other way whereby a Soul may be withdrawn from the Body and brought back
again, is by the efficiency and activity of a more powerful Spirit. And
hitherto some learned men refer that of Ezekiel. 37.1. The hand of the Lord was
upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the
midst of the valley -- And though S. Paul deliver it doubtfully, as not knowing
whether he was in the body, or out of the body when he was rapt into the third
Heaven, yet so much at least may be gathered from the Apostles words, that in
his judgment such an (...) or Disjunction of the Soul from the Body without
ensuing Death was possible. To this head may likewise be referred the
detestable and nefarious Conventions of Witches with wicked Spirits; those
officious Demons loosening the Continuity or Vinculum between Soul and Body,
by which means they pass freely and securely to the general Rendezvous. But
here I would not so be understood as if I thought that Witches did never bodily
assist at the performance of their Hellish Rites, but only that sometimes they
may be present at them, when their Bodies are at home; perhaps among other
reasons, that they may act with more safety and security, and the better
preserve their necks from the halter. And though these discoveries are in a
great measure owing to the confessions of Witches, yet when these confessions
are voluntary and unconstrained by any Racks or Torments, and proceed from
persons of perfect health of Body, and no way disturbed in their Rational
Faculties, it is too open and pitiful a sham to ascribe them to the effects of
Dotage and Melancholy; since upon the same grounds it may be affirmed, that the
soberest actions of our lives are but dreams; and all Histories past, and
present relations of matters of Fact (especially if they refer never so little
to the Being of Spirits) may be concluded by an Atheistical Foppe to be no
other than melancholic delusions.

OBJECTION II. That these Airy Spirits are too remote, and of a Nature too
sublime to have any Communication with Mortals.
TO this it is replied, 1. That those who are at the furthest distance from us
never exceed or go beyond the Regions of the Air, being fettered and chained
within the Atmosphere of the Earth by that Divine Nemesis that casts them
thither; and here the grand Prince of Darkness has seated his Throne, and from
hence casting his envious eyes upon Earth, like a Vultur, descends wherever he
spies his prey. Nor will the sublimity of their Nature be a sufficient security
to frail Mortals from their revenge and malice, since lust and ambition balk no
employments, but will undertake the most fordid offices to compass their
desired Ends. And that stately Apostate who once disdained not to insinuate and
couch himself in the winding Spires of a hateful Serpent, the better to allure
and deceive the innocent credulity of Eve, we have no reason to think that to
gratify his revenge and lust, he will abhor the society of a Witch.

2. It is affirmed that there have been persons bodily acted and possessed by
evil Spirits: which is not only attested by the many relations of the (...),
Daemoniacks, that is, men possessed with Devils, or infested by them, recorded
in the holy Scriptures in our Saviors time, but confirmed by later Writers of
unexceptionable credit and veracity, that it were a perfect piece of impudence
to go about to deny and outface them. And I do not doubt but a curious
Observator may find some fresh instances even in our own Times; But this
hankering after the bare Mechanical causes of things, and not acknowledging any
higher principle than Matter and Motion in the Universe, the very dregs of
Atheism, has cast so much dust into some men's eyes, that those effects which
really proceed from the Activity and Energy of Incorporeal Beings, are by them
ascribed to Frenzy and madness, or some other Bodily disease. Though it be true
which is asserted by a very learned Author of our own, that the Jews in our
Savior's time, as they did not suppose all Madmen to be Daemoniacks, so
neither all Daemoniacks Madmen; we reading of Devils cast out from others
besides Madmen; and of a Woman which had a Spirit of infirmity only, and was
bowed together, and could not lift up her self, which is said by our Savior
Christ to have been bound by Satan.

To which purpose this learned person gives a notable instance of a Demoniacal
possession out of Fernelius, a very experienced Physician, who was an
eyewitness thereof: A young man of a Noble Family, who was strangely convulsed
in his Body, having sometimes one member, and sometimes another, violently
agitated, insomuch that four several persons were scarcely able to hold him;
and this at first without any distemper in his head, or crazedness in his
brain. To whom Fernelius, with other skilful Physicians being called, applied
all manner of remedies; Blisters, Purgations, Cupping-glasses, Fomentations,
Unctions, Plasters and strengthening Medicines; but all in vain. The reason
whereof is thus given by the same Fernelius, Quoniam omnes long aberamus, etc.
i.e. Because we were all far from the knowledge of the Truth. For in the third
Month it was first plainly discovered to us, that it was a certain Demon, who
was the Author of all this mischief. He manifesting himself by his speech, and
by unusual words both in Greek and Latin (though the Patient were altogether
ignorant of the Greek Tongue) and by his revealing many of the secrets of those
who stood by, especially of the Physicians, whom also he derided for tormenting
the Patient in that manner with their frustraneous Remedies.

By which it is apparent, that neither the fancied remoteness and distance, nor
yet the sublimity of their natures is any bar to these wicked Spirits from
having Communication with us Mortals, and that this Objection is vainly urged
against the Being of Witches.

3. But to give it all the strength that may be, it is further answered, that
it is not necessary to suppose the Grandees of the Airy Principality to trade
with Witches, but that the Souls of extremely wicked persons after their
release from the Body may do those feats. For whether we suppose that such as
in this life have incorporated themselves into the Dark Society by all manner
of villainous and flagitious actions, are, when loosened by Death from their
Terrestrial Bodies, the Vassals and Slaves of those crafty Demons, whose
cursed inspirations and counsels they so eagerly followed, and so by them are
employed in these abominable offices; Or whether the proclivity of their own
Natures to all enormous wickedness, may not induce them to attempt Familiarity
and Society with Sorcerers and Witches, especially since those radicated and
confirmed habits of Vice contracted in this life are rather heightened and
increased than any way diminished or abated by the releasement from the flesh,
and consequently it may be accounted by them a pleasant sport and pastime to
tempt and inveigle such desolate and forlorn Mortals: Either of these ways are
sufficient to beget a probability, that those Familiars of Witches to whom they
have linked themselves, may be no other than humane Souls deeply sunk and
drowned in wickedness.

OBJECTION III. That it supposes Witches by the help of evil Spirits may do
real Miracles.
Answ. THat the Poets of old have ascribed strange and incredible things to the
power of Magic and Sorcery is plain: Aeneid. 4.
Virgil introduces Dido speaking thus to her Sister Anna: Hinc mihi Massylae
Gentis monstrata Sacerdos,
Haec se carminibus promittit solvere Mentes,
Sistere aquam fluviis, and flumina vertere retro,
Nocturnosque ciet manes, mugire videbis
Sub pedibus terram, and descendere montibus ornos.
And the Witch in Ovid boasts that she can perform as much; Metam. 1.7.
Cum volui, ripis ipsis mirantibus, amnes
In fontes rediere suos, concussaque sisto,
Stantia concutio cantu freta, nubila pello,
Nubilaque induco, ventos abigoque vocoque,
Vipereas rumpo verbis and carmine fauces,
Vivaque saxa, sua convulsaque robora terra,
Et silvas moveo, jubeoque tremiscere montes,
Et mugire solum, manesque exire sepulchris.
But notwithstanding the extravagant fancies of Poets, C.D. l. 8. c. 18.
S. Austin a grave and learned writer gives so much credit to that of Virgil
[Eclog. 8.] Atque satas alio vidi traducere messes,
of the transportation of whole fields of Corn by the power of Witchcraft, that
from the Authority of Tully (he says) it was recorded in the twelve Tables of
Rome's ancient Laws, and a punishment proclaimed for all such as used it. And
Apuleius when accused of Magic before Claudius Maximus Prefect of Africa,
Apolog.
seriously urges the Laws of the twelve Tables against Witchcraft in his
defense, and says that Magic was there forbid, propter incredundas frugum
illecebras, by reason of the incredible bewitching of Corn. And whereas a late
Author brings in Seneca reproving the credulous simplicity of elder Times in
the framing those Laws, in these words of his; Et apud nos in lege Duodecim
Tabularum cavetur, ne quis alienas fruges excantasset; rudis adhuc Antiquitas
credebat, and attrahi imbres cantibus and repelli, Not. Quaest. l. 4.
quorum nihil posse fieri tam palam est, ut ejus rei causa nullius Philosophi
Schola intranda sit. It is certain that the opinion of Seneca signifies little
in this case, he being no better than a Cosmo-plastick Atheist, i.e. he made a
certain Plastic or Spermatick nature, devoid of all Animality or conscious
Intellectuality, to be the highest Principle in the Universe. And though Pliny
were alike Atheistical, L. 18.
yet he relates as matter of Fact, that Vectius Marcellus, Nero's Harbinger,
had an Olive-yard in the Marucine fields, that removed quite over the highway,
and that whole Farms went out of their places, and seated themselves elsewhere.

Now though I am as far from giving credit to Poetical fictions as any, and do
as little believe that a Magician can cause the Moon to descend from Heaven, as
that Mahomet once brought her into his sleeve, or that the charms of a
Sorceress can make the world torpid and benumbed, stop the motion of the Earth,
bring a paleness over the Stars, or turn Day into Night; yet I see no reason
that should move me to think that a Magician or Sorcerer by the assistance of
wicked Demons cannot work a real Miracle, but that all those supernatural
effects which they are at any time the causes of should be mere Juggles and
Impostures. For certainly the Miracles wrought by the Egyptian Sorcerers were
as really such as to the truth of them, as those wrought by Moses; here only
lies the difference, that Moses his Rod devoured theirs: and the Miracles
produced by him were greater, and of a higher nature, as well as more numerous
than theirs, which was a sufficient evidence, that they proceeded from God, and
were not done by the Powers of Darkness: And the Magicians themselves confessed
as much; for when they saw their power transcended, they freely acknowledged
the Presence of God in the Miracles of Moses.

And if it be alleged here, that by this means there will be no way left to
discriminate between Divine and Demoniacal Miracles, and that we are as much
obliged to believe the Miracles of that Archimago, Apollonius Tyanaeus, as
those of our Savior and his Apostles, it may be replied, that

L. 2.
That pious and learned Father Origin in his Book against Celsus gives us a
double Test to try and examine Miracles by:

1. From the life and manners of the person that performs them; As if he be of
an innocent and virtuous life and conversation, and that his behavior and
deportment do not contradict any of the plain principles of Morality, which are
legibly engraven in the breasts of all mankind.

2. From the effects of the Miracles themselves; whether they be for the good
and advantage of men, and tend to the suppression of Iniquity and Vice, and
begetting a true faith in God. Therefore the Father arguing against the
fabulous Miracles of Aristeus, L. 3.
he tells Celsus that he cannot produce any profit or good that ever came to
mankind by those supposed Miracles. Whereas the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles were not only for the good and advantage of particular persons, but of
the whole world; God thereby recommending an Heavenly Doctrine which should
heal the disordered and distempered minds of men, and correct and amend their
manners, restoring decayed Righteousness, and bringing them from the Tyrannous
Kingdom of Satan to the meek and holy Government of his Son Jesus.

Which gives us not only security enough from being imposed upon by the false
Miracles of Magicians, that are wrought for corrupt ends and designs, but
likewise sets us in a mean between Atheistical Incredulity that believes
nothing, and the over-fond Credulity of others, that give credit to every thing
that is reported of Necromantick Sorcerers. Following herein the singular
modesty of Plutarch, who speaking of miraculous things related by many, In Vit.
Camilli.
concludes, that for such matters it is dangerous to give too much credit to
them* as also to discredit them too much.

OBJECTION IV. That it gives evil Spirits and Witches too great and exorbitant
a power over mankind, in that it supposes that these wicked Demons may afflict
the Bodies of others with diverse diseases and torments, that they may raise
Thunders, Storms and Tempests, killing Cattle and spoiling the Fruits of the
Earth, and many such like pernicious and destructive things, and all this at
the desire and request of a Magician or Witch.
Answ. THis Objection to weak and impotent minds may seem to carry a great
force with it, but to a Judgment devoid of Prepossession and Prejudice, it will
appear but like an ill planted Ordnance that makes indeed a great noise, but
never hits the Fort its murtherous load aimed at; as will be very manifest by
these several and distinct replies.

1. That there is a superior Providence that keeps evil Spirits within certain
bounds and limits, till men by such wicked practices tamper with them, and call
them to a nearer familiarity and society. For notwithstanding this
Daemonarches, the Head and Prince of Devils, seem to have the Aerial Regions
assigned to him as his Kingdom (whence he is called the Prince of the Power of
the Air) yet is not this Power infinite and unlimited, but restrained and
curbed by the Kingdom of Light, that is, by those Holy Angels who never
revolted from the Government of Heaven, and whom God has made to preside over
those Apostate Legions. Now though the malice of these accursed Spirits be
infinite, and their thirst and desire to deface and spoil the fair and
irreprehensible beauty of the works of Gods hands unlimited; yet are they
perpetually under the inspection of higher and nobler Beings, who carefully
preserve those severe Laws and restraints Divine Providence has put upon them,
at which though their untamed hearts swell with disdain and rage, yet can they
not fly from. And so much was confessed by the Oracle of Apollo, that the
Demons who with an unwearied diligence range over Earth and Sea, -- (...) are
subdued and conquered by a Divine scourge. But when men either through a fond
curiosity, or to gratify their wicked Lusts and Passions, shall hanker after a
more intimate Familiarity, and begin to tamper with these Demons, they
willingly and readily offer themselves, for no other end but to beguile and
ensnare, and at last ruin and destroy those who deserting Divine Providence
had their recourse to them.

2. That this Providence secures mankind from general outrages and devastations
by evil Spirits. So that it is not in the power of the Kingdom of Darkness to
depopulate the Earth, by offering violence to the inhabitants of it; nor can
they deluge the world, thereby to destroy Man and Beast; they cannot alter the
fixed and established Laws of the Universe, nor invert the seasons of the year.
For there is a chain of Government that runs down from God the Supreme Monarch,
whose bright and piercing eyes look through all that he has made, to the lowest
degree of the Creation; and there are Presidential Angels of Empires and
Kingdoms, and such as under them have the Tutelage of private Families, and
lastly every man's particular Guardian Genius: Nor is the inanimate or material
world left to blind Chance or Fortune, but there are likewise mighty and potent
Spirits to whom is committed the guidance and care of the fluctuating and
uncertain motions of it, and by their ministry Fire and Vapor, Storms and
Tempests, Snow and Hail, Heat and Cold are all kept within such bounds and
limits, as are most serviceable to the ends of Providence; They take care of
the variety of seasons, and superintend the Tillage and Fruits of the Earth;
Contr. Celsum. l. 8. p. 398.
upon which account Origin calls them (...), invisible Husbandmen. So that all
affairs and things being under the inspection and government of these
Incorporeal Beings, the power of the Dark Kingdom, and its Agents is under a
strict confinement and restraint, and they cannot bring a general mischief upon
the world without a special permission of a superior Providence.

3. That the exploits of wicked Spirits upon particular persons may be
permitted for diverse good causes and reasons. As 1. To humble them for some
sin; as in the case of those grievous and notorious sinners in the Apostolical
time, who were delivered up to Satan, it is said, they were vexed and tormented
by bodily pains and diseases inflicted by those evil Spirits, and that to bring
them to a sincere repentance and reformation of their Errors. But without any
such judicial proceeding, this envious Explorator or searcher for faults, when
in his walk or ranging to and fro upon the Earth, he meets with a Christian
professor, or pious person fallen into sin, then he is said, (...), (as in the
case of S. Peter, Luke 22. 31.) to require him of God, demands to have him
delivered up to him (for every sin gives the Devil a more or less right and
claim) as to a Lictor or Executioner, (...), to sift and shake him terribly,
sometimes by real possessions or otherwise bodily infestations, and the crafty
Spirit may at the same time gratify the impotent revenge of an accursed Hag.
To this purpose it is observable what Doctor Hammond recites out of the
Jerusalem Targum on Genesis 2.14. Annot. in 1 Cor. 5.5.
supposed to be said to the Serpent by God, Cum silii mulieris praecepta legis
deserverint, nec mandata observaverint, tu ( i.e. the Serpent) firmus cris, and
percutiens eos in calcaneo eorum aegritudine afficies; When the children of the
woman shall for sake the commandments of the law, thou shall be strong, and
shall strike them on the heel, and inflict sickness upon them. 2. To try their
faith and patience, as in the case of Job, upon whom the envious Tempter laid
fore afflictions to battle (if he could) his faith in the Divine Goodness. And
Lactantius notes, L. 2. c. 15.
that these impure Demons insinuant se corporibus hominum and occulte in
visceribus operti, valetudinem vitiant, morbos citant, somniis animos terrent,
mentes furoribus quatiunt, ut homines his malis cogant ad eorum auxilia
decurrere, i. e. insinuate themselves into the bodies of men, and lying hid in
their bowels, annoy their health, raise diseases, terrify their minds with
dreams, and shake them with madness, that they may compel them by these
mischiefs to fly to them for help. But Origin says expressly, Contr. Cells. l.
8. p. 398.
that there are (...), certain Demons which may be called the public Lictors
or Officers, which have at certain times a power committed to them to inflict
Famines, Droughts and Pestilences, either for the conversion of men from sin
and vice, or for the trial of their Faith, Patience and Constancy.

And how consistent it is with Divine Providence, and agreeable with the wisdom
and goodness of God to suffer these fallacious Spirits to vex and disquiet
mankind, is elegantly pursued by the forecited Lactantius, De Opisic. Dei, c,
20.
viz. That this diversity contains the Grand secret of the world. For this is
it that makes Virtue, which without this would be so far from being, that it
would not so much as appear; forasmuch as Virtue cannot be, unless there be
some Rival in the overcoming of whom it may exert and show its strength. For as
victory cannot be gained without a fight, neither can Virtue consist without an
Enemy. Since then God has given Virtue to man, he has likewise on the contrary
appointed him an Enemy, lest Virtue languishing in idleness should lose its
Nature. Whose very Reason lies in this, That it may be confirmed and
strengthened by being shaken and enfeebled; nor can it any other way arrive to
the highest pitch, unless being always tossed by a detruding hand, it found its
safety in a constant course of contending. For God would not have man attain
Immortal Blessedness by easiness and softness. He therefore being about to give
Virtue, gave an Enemy first, who should instill Lusts and Vices into the minds
of men; who should be the Author of errors, and the contriver of all mischiefs;
that where as God calls man to Life, he on the contrary should hale and lead
them unto Death. He it is that allures or deceives them that endeavor after
the Truth; or if he cannot effect it by deceitful stratagems, he assumes
greater courage, and attempts to weaken the vigor and activity of the highest
proficients; and thus by execrable and nefarious means he torments and kills;
and yet as he overthrows many, so is he by many overthrown, and when he is
foiled departs and goes away.

4. That it is possible for the Soul to arise to such a height, and become so
Divine, that no Witchcraft or evil Demons can have any power upon the Body.

When the Bodily life is too far invigorated and awakened, and draws the
Intellect the flower and summity of the Soul into a Conspiration with it, then
are we subject and obnoxious to Magical assaults. For Magic or Sorcery being
founded only in this lower or Mundane Spirit, he that makes it his business to
be freed and released from all its Blandishments and flattering Devocations,
and endeavors wholly to withdraw himself from the love of Corporeity and too
near a Sympathy with the frail flesh, he by it enkindles such a Divine
principle, as lifts him up above the fate of this Inferior world, and adorns
his mind with such an awful Majesty, that beats back all Enchantments, and
makes the Infernal Fiends tremble at his presence, hating those vigorous beams
of light which are so contrary and repugnant to their dark Natures. And in this
is clearly fulfilled what the Aramitick Sorcerer spoke, that there is no
Enchantment or Divination against Israel, that is, such who are established in
a Principle above the world, and in whose Souls the All-powerful life of God is
firmly radicated and fixed, who are indeed the true and perfect Israel: (...)
i. e. for neither Astral Spirit nor Angelcan prevail against one Ray of the
Deity, as Aesculapius writes to King Ammon. And how far successful in this very
case this holy Contention of conquering the Bodily life, and setting free the
mind from the bondage and toils of the flesh may be, is evident in Plotinus, De
Vit. Plot.
whose Soul (as Porphyry relates) was come to that high and noble Temper, that
he did not only keep off Magical assaults from himself, but retorted them upon
his Enemy Olympius, which Olympius himself, who practiced against him, did
confess to be from the exalted power of his Soul. So true is that which
Lactantius cites from Hermes, L. 2. c. 16.
that those who have the true knowledge of God, are not only safe from the
assaults of the Devil, but from Fate it self, (...), etc. The only safe custody
is Godliness; for neither evil Demon nor Fate can take hold of a pious man;
for God extricates and delivers the holy Person from all evil.

OBJECTION V. That it is very ridiculous to imagine, that Devils (though never
so foul and unclean) should delight in sucking the Blood of these accursed Hags.
Answ. HOW ridiculous soever this may seem to an Objector, that perhaps would
willingly turn all things related of Spirits, whether good or bad, into
Ridicule; yet as the frequent and constant Confessions of these despicable
Creatures have made it unquestionable matter of Fact, so those who have
searched more narrowly into the nature and extraordinary degeneracy of these
course and foul Spirits, suppose they have reason to believe that a Daemon's
sucking the Blood of a Witch is no such strange and unaccountable Phenomenon.
And perhaps if the sacred Scriptures had not so fully assured us, that the
Devils whom our Savior cast out, entered immediately into the herd of Swine, it
would have been deemed a thing alike monstrous and incredible; Psell. (...).
which Marcus the Monk in answer to this very instance, tells his Thrax, that
these Demons enter into Brute Animals, not out of any spleen or hatred they
bear to them, (...), but because they are wonderfully desirous of Animal
warmth. For the confederate Spirit, whether of a Nature Humane or Diabolical,
must necessarily have a Body proportionable to the grossness and courseness of
its Powers and Faculties, which being so mightily debauched through the
excessive prevalency and exorbitancy of the sensual life, cannot act in any
other Vehicle but what is drawn from the clammy and caliginous parts of the
Air; which Bodies in this agree with ours, in that they have their (...),
Effluvia, and exhale and wear away by a continual deflux of Particles, and
therefore require some Nutriment to supply the place of the fugacious Atoms,
which is done by sucking the Blood and Spirits of these forlorn wretches.

And that this was the Opinion of the wisest and best Philosophers among the
Greeks, that evil Demons were extremely delighted with the Blood and Nidours
of Sacrifices, as being a refreshment and nourishment to their Vaporous Bodies,
appears from what Celsus writes; Xp(...), Orig. l 8.
etc. We ought to give credit to wise men, who affirm, that most of these lower
and circumterraneous Demons, are delighted with Geniture, Blood and Nidour,
and such like things, and much gratified therewith. And Origin agrees with him
fully in this point, and tells us, that the Devils were not only delighted with
the Idolatry of the Pagans in their Sacrifices, but also (...), L. 7. P. 334
etc. that their very Bodies were nourished by the Vapors and Fumes arising
from them, and that these evil Demons therefore did, as it were, deliciate and
Epicurize in them. To this purpose the same Father makes mention of a certain
Pythagorean, Ibid.
who wrote of the Mysterious and Recondite sense of Homer, That Chryses words
to Apollo, and his Immission of a Pestilence upon the Grecians teach us, (...),
etc. that Homer did believe there were certain evil Demons, who took pleasure
in Fumes and Nidours of Sacrifices, and that they were ready as a reward to
gratify the Sacrificants with the destruction of any person, if they so
desired it. Which by the way may give some satisfaction to those importunate
Inquirers, why the Possessions and Vexations of men by evil Demons should be
wrought upon the desire of a Witch? viz. to gratify her revenge as a reward
for the pleasure the wicked Fiend reaped from such vile and damnable Commerce
with her Body.

Nor was this a singular Fancy of Origin, for Athenagoras, a Christian
Philosopher writes the very same, (...), etc. i. e. The Demons assist at the
Sacrifices, being allured and brought down by the blood which they greedily
take in. And again, (...) -- the material Demons do strangely gluttonize upon
the Nidours and Blood of Sacrifices. Which they suck in not with their mouths,
but as Marcus in Psellus, who had formerly been initiated in the Diabolical
Mysteries, (...), as spunges and testaceous Fishes. And no doubt but those
impure Devils may take as much pleasure in sucking the warm Blood of Men or
Beasts, as a cheerful and healthy constitution in drawing in the refreshing
gales of pure and sincere Air.

CHAP. VIII. Inferences drawn from the foregoing Treatise.
HAving now dispatched the most material Objections against the opinion of
Witchcraft, I now come to the last part of my design, which is to draw some
Practical Conclusions from this whole Discourse in reference to the conduct of
men's lives and manners; And

First, since we have so clear a discovery of the Powers of Darkness, whose
united and combined Forces are so potent and terrible in opposing the growth of
sincere Piety and Religion, we should be strong in God, and courageously resist
them, being steadfast in the Faith.

Divine Providence having placed us in this lower World, where we are
surrounded with Enemies, designs not by this, our ruin and undoing, but that
our contest should end in Victory, and our warfare crowned at last with
Immortal Glory and Felicity. Wherefore though our Enemies are tall and mighty
Giants, and from the reason of their Natures have many advantages over frail
Flesh and Blood; yet such is the Constitution of things, and such the Arms we
are furnished withal for the Combat, that as David through a great Faith and
Confidence in the Divine Assistance, prevailed over the mighty Champion of the
Philistines with a Sling and a Stone; so by a firm Trust reposed in the same
Aid, we may overthrow and become Victorious over all the Infernal Powers that
desie the Armies of the God of Israel.

Here therefore lies the Field of Gallantry and Honor, here are the Olympia of
the Soul, wherein she strives and wrestles, not with Flesh and Blood, but with
the strong and subtle Forces of Hell and Darkness, not for a Garland of
Flowers, but for Wreaths of Immarcessible Glory. Take heart then O Man, and
like an invincible Champion of the Holy Jesus, fight the good fight of Faith;
Be true and sincere to thy best Hopes and Interests, by a perfect Eradication
of all thy Exorbitant lusts and corruptions, and by a strong Faith and profound
Humility form the living Image of God within thee. Then shall thy Soul with joy
and triumph be lifted up above the perplexed Fate of this Inferior World, and
be able to repress and extinguish the Incantations and Allurements of the
Mundane Spirit through the might and power of a Divine Principle. Nor shall the
subtle Plots and Machinations of the Powers of Darkness, and the Conspiracies
of Hell be able to defeat those watchful Armies of Light with which thou art
guarded. Act generously and becoming not only the nature of a man, but a
faithful Disciple of the Son of God; and behold those numerous Troops of
Angels, which (though invisible to our weak and bodily eyes) perpetually
surround and encompass the servants of the living God. The Blessed Jesus, who
in the days of his flesh by his Sovereign Command ejected Legions of Infernal
Spirits out of their usurped Holds in the Bodies of men, and by his glorious
Resurrection cast down the Prince of Darkness from his unjust Empire and
Dominion in the World, maintains the same Righteous Cause still, and carries on
a successful War against those Apostate Spirits, in which whosoever will
persevere with courage and resolution, shall at the last reap the joyous Fruits
of his Victory and Patience, and receive from the hands of the glorious King of
Righteousness a Beautiful and Immortal Crown of life and blessedness.

Secondly, We learn not to speak evil of Angels. For he who is now the Head and
Prince of the Dark Kingdom, is supposed by most Divines to have been once the
highest in Dignity and Power of the whole Angelick Order; and though reflecting
upon his State and Grandeur, and finding himself the chiefest of the works of
Gods hands, in the haughty pride of his heart he aspired to an equality with
God, and was thereby cast down into these Aereal Regions, yet is he still a
very formidable and tremendous Power, not to be blasphemed or spoke evil of,
but to be resisted by all those ways and means which God in his holy Word has
propounded to us. It is S. Austin his opinion, C.D. l. 11. c. 15.
that what is spoken of the King of Babylon, by the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 14.
may prefigure or allude to this mighty Prince of the Dark Legions: How art
thou fallen from Heaven O Lucifer son of the morning! For thou have said in
thineheart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars
of God: I will sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation, in the sides of the
North; I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds; I will be like the most
High. And hitherto he refers the description of the Prince of Tyrus by Ezekiel,
Chap. 28
Thou have been in Eden the Garden of God; every precious stone was thy
covering, the Sardius, Topaz, and the Diamond, the Beryl, the Onyx and the
Jasper, the Sapphire, the Emerald, and the Carbuncle and Gold: the workmanship
of thy Tabrets, and of thy Pipes was prepared in thee, in the day that thou
wast created. Thou art the anointed Cherub that covers, and I have set thee
so; thou wast upon the Holy Mountain of God; thou have walked up and down in
the midst of the stones of fire. Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day
that thou wast created, till Iniquity was found in thee. And if this so high
and majestic a description in its first and primary sense belong to that
mighty Angel of Darkness, he is not foolishly and idly to be scoffed at or
blasphemed, but according to the sober advice of the Author of the Golden
Verses, (...),
i. e. to be feared as a very powerful and implacable Enemy of mankind, by
doing good and justifiable actions, and by persevering in a course of Virtue,
which only through the assistance of Divine Goodness, can deliver us from his
Rage and Malice.

There is a place of Scripture, which though not much taken notice of by later
Divines, yet is very full to this purpose, 2 Pet. 2.10, 11. (...), tremble not
when they rail at Glories, or as our Translation renders it, they are not
afraid to speak evil of Dignities; whereas Angels which are greater in power
and might, bring not a railing Accusation [or a contumelious Indictment, (...)]
against them before the Lord. Parallel to which is that of S. Jude ver. 8, 9.
-- speak evil of Dignities [or rail at Glories] yet Michael the Archangel when
contending with the Devil, he disputed about the Body of Moses, durst not bring
against him a railing Accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

That by [ dignities] here are understood Angels is clear, 1. From the manner
of expression, calling them (...), Glories; a word frequently used in the Old
Testament, to express the appearance of Angels: The only difficulty will be why
evil Angels should be called (...), Glories: To which it may be said, that the
Devil may properly be looked upon as a (...)* or Dignity, though his Glory be
pale and wan, and those once bright and orient colors faded and darkened in his
Robes: and the Scriptures represent him as a Prince though it be of Devils. 2.
Of other Dominions their Contempt was set down before both in S. Peter and S.
Jude, by the phrase (...) and (...), setting at naught, making nothing of and
despising, scornfully behaving themselves toward their Superiors, and so need
not be repeated again in these words. 3. That it is to be understood of a
contumelious or contemptuous behavior toward Angels, is evident from the
instance the Apostle brings of the contention between Michael and the Devil,
who though now his Superior, yet durst not carry himself insolently,
contemptuously or reproachfully against him. All this is sufficient to let us
understand, that these mighty Principalities are not to be reproached or railed
at, but to be left to the just and righteous rebukes of Heaven in our contests
and conflicts with them.

Thirdly, We are fully assured, that he who has God propitious to him, need
not fear the malice of evil Spirits. When the servant of the Prophet Elisha was
in a great fear and consternation of mind by reason of the Armies of the
Syrians that had surrounded his Masters dwelling, he no sooner saw those
invisible Chariots and Horses of fire, but his fear abated, and his Spirits
returned: And if we had but a firm Faith in the Divine Goodness, and made it
our business to propitiate God and assert our selves under a benign and
favorable Providence by the holiness of our lives, we need not fear the
numerous Armies and Troops of Syrians, those evil Demons that assemble and
unite themselves for our Ruin and Destruction. For he that loves God has
presently the Invisible Guards of Heaven to pitch their Tents about him.

Lib. 3.
For, (as Arnobius excellently discourses against the Pagans) the first and only
God is a sufficient Object of Divine veneration; that God (I say) who is the
Father and Lord, the Maker and Governor of all things; and in worshipping him,
we worship all that is to be worshipped, and adore all that is fit to be
adored, and pay our obsequious Venerations to all that require them of us. For
since we hold us fast to the Head of Divinity it self, from whom all the
Divinity of the most exalted Beings is derived, it were a vain thing to
disperse our worship upon many and single persons, especially when we are in
great measure ignorant both of their natures and names, and can have no clear
knowledge of their numbers. But as in Earthly Kingdoms, when we pay our worship
and service to the King himself, there is no need of offering the same by name
to all who are attendants in the Royal Family; for as much as whatever Honor
belongs to them, is tacitly acknowledged to be comprehended in that done to the
King: after the same manner the holy Angels being a Royal Progeny, and deriving
their Beings from the first and principal Head of all things, although they
receive no worship from us by name, yet know well enough that they are honored
likewise in common with their King. So that when by a strong Faith and the
Holiness of our lives we have made God our Friend, the Heavenly Hosts are at
the same time reconciled to us, and we are acknowledged by them as members of
their society, and they lend us their kind and friendly assistance in
countermining the designs of the Dark Kingdom against us. Neither is there any
Christian that is ever left to his own naked and solitary Effort in this War
with the powers of Hell, but is attended and succored with a mighty strength,
even the Bright Armies and Legions of Heavens Almighty King. This, this is the
Power that will at last prevail and subdue all things to it self, and the whole
Kingdom of Darkness with all its rebellious Associates shall be plunged into an
Everlasting pit of Horror and Confusion.

Fourthly, It concerns us carefully to avoid and mortify those more refined
and Intellectual Vices, such as Pride, Malice, Faction, etc. which link and
conjoyn men fast to the Dark Kingdom. For though these sublimated Iniquities,
and spiritual Wickednesses are not so much nor frequently taken notice of as
the grosser pollutions of the Body, yet are they no less dangerous than the
other, as being near a kin to the Diabolical nature. Hell it self is as well a
state of Life and Being as a Place; and when the Soul is overrun with hatred
and envy, with deep anxiety and cruel despite, she is then really drawn into a
living Hell, and the Devils nature perfectly formed in her. There is a certain
Magical Sympathy running through this Inferior World, which powerfully attracts
every thing like it self, and strives to assimilate and convert it into its own
nature; thus every pitiful Vice seeks the enlargement of it self by a
contagious Affriction of all capable Subjects; and the Dark or Worldly Spirit
is diffused far and wide, and pulls and draws by hidden strings all those
Beings that are predisposed to a Cognation and Afsinity with it; and thus are
men's Souls often sucked in by this Infernal and Powerful Nature before ever
they think they are in any danger. Awake then O man from this drowzy and deadly
state, and prepare and purge thy heart from all such poisonous and hellish
Passions; Let that universal Goodness which has distilled its fruitful nature
upon all the capacities of things, enlarge and widen thy Soul for a due
reception of a Sacred Influence from above; that the holy life of God may
revive within thee, which being of a Heavenly Birth and Extraction, will
infallibly carry up the Mind and Spirit to its own Fountain and Original.

Fifthly, A true survey of the Dark Kingdom and the Powerfulness thereof,
cannot but beget in the hearts of all sincere Christians a great cheerfulness
and firm trust in God's Providence. There are some that think God is best
served with a demure look and melancholic countenance, as if the heart and
life of Devotion lay in being dull and mopish, and as it were ever despairing
of good; whereas this is only an artificial and mechanical thing, or at best a
Religion that men have framed and patched together out of their own distempered
Constitutions. The Jews say that the Spirit of Prophecy will not rest upon a
Melancholic man; and the Sacred Writings inform us, that David's Harp did
sometimes dispossess Saul of his dull and Melancholic Devil, intimating surely
to us, that God takes the greatest pleasure in a composed and serene Mind, that
goes on in a cheerful dependence upon that Almighty Providence that encircles
all things both in Heaven and Earth.

There are some Tempers and Constitutions of Bodies more adapted and disposed
to the Temptations and Assaults of the Devil than others, and consequently have
more need of a due care and inspection over them. Thus though the most lucid
Discoveries in Arts and Sciences owe a great deal to a moderate Tincture of
Melancholy (whence Aristotle observes, that such Persons have in some measure
been Divinely affected in the Prediction of Future Events) yet when this Humor
shall become ungovernable, and exceed the bounds of Reason, clouding all the
Intellectual powers of the Soul, in this Dark and horrid Confusion there is no
doubt but evil and degenerate Spirits may insinuate themselves, and taking the
advantage of this Distemper, may produce such effects as no natural account can
be given for. But I would not be mistaken; for it is not for a light and
fantastic Spirit that I plead, since the devoutest Christian in the highest
and most enravishing cheerfulness and joy of his Mind, is then most composed,
grave and serious. I would only promote the Exhortation of S. Paul, that men
should rejoice in the Lord always, notwithstanding all the discouragements
thrown in their way by the Powers of Darkness: For this Divine joy and serenity
of Mind is the state of Angels, and an Emblem of Heaven, whose bright and clear
Mansions are never overspread by any black and dismal Clouds, but a perpetual
and youthful Spring, an inexhausted source of pure Joy and Pleasure abides
there for ever.

FINIS.

