AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. CAWDRY'S Triplex Diatribe Concerning Superstition,
Will Worship, AND Christmas Festival.

By H. Hammond D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane,
and for Richard Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1655.

A Preface to the READER.
1. THat Mr. Cawdrey has taken great pains to show me the infirm parts of
three little Tracts of Superstition, Will Worship and Festivals, I am now
obliged to take notice, and to design the vacancy of a few days to clear those
brief discourses from all the misprisions and exceptions, to which some
contrary hypotheses of his (how true shall in due place be examined) more then
the want of evidence in the Tracts themselves may have rendered them liable.

2. What on the two former heads I wrote many years since, I confess, I
expected not to see arraigned at this time, being designed as part of an (...)
or (...), which might help to repair the breach, at least mollify the
Paroxysme, by removing two of the five specious charges, under which the
blameless ceremonies, and customary practices, and observances of the Church of
England were by dissenters oppugned and rendered odious. And what was then said,
as I could not discern wherein it came short of Evidence of conviction (if I
had, I should certainly either have cleared or suppressed them) so it was never
my fortune in nine years space to hear from any, that it lay under an ill
character, but on the contrary, that it had in some measure performed what it
undertook, freed our Church from those two accusations, and demonstrated them,
as applied to us, to be perfect calumnies. And I have but one Petition to the
Read^^ at his entrance on these debates, that he will calmly review those two
Treatises, with three more designed to the same end, and upon his strictest
survey advertise me, wherein I have failed in my undertaking.

3. But it is come to pass, what Arrian long since taught me to expect, that
as when general discourses come to be applied to particular cases, (...), then
Arr. Epict. l. 1. c. 22.
the contention begins, so when the grounds, more universally laid for the
justifying our Church, were in a tract concerning Festivals, and especially the
day of the Nativity of Christ, brought home to the clearing that celebration
from either of those two (as from all other) charges, then Mr. Cawdry's
hypotheses, in which, I suppose, his way of managing his opinion of the
morality of the Sabbath had engaged him, found themselves to be concerned, then
the commemoration of the birth of Christ, though but by one anniversary (being
not easily reconcilable with the grounds which he had laid for the Christians
one weekly Sabbath in the 4th Commandment of the Decalogue) was solemnly to be
indicted and, as in a Chancerie bill, all imaginable evil to be affixed on it,
and the customary riot of festivities being not sufficient to render it odious,
the more formidable charges of Will Worship and Superstition must be revived,
and by the necessity of this consequence, to salve his (...) and (...), all
that I had said on either of those two subjects, though never so clear, must
now be called to a severe examen, and so store of new tasks provided for me.

4. And me thinks it is possible that old * Elias Lev. Thish. p. 49.
Nahum's word may not here be unreasonable (...) even this also for good, To
which purpose I am willing to remember what Alexander Aphrodisaeus told the
Emperors Severus and Antoninus, in his Preface to the Tract of Fatalitie and
Free will, that whosoever would point him out any doubt or difficulty, that
remained in that matter, after the reading of his treatise, he would account it
a great favor and honor to him, rendering this reason for it, because it was
not easy (...) in one Tract, to do two things exactly, both dilucidely to
expound the matters of which he principally wrote, and all those other things
also, which were useful to the explicating thereof.

5. And the same I desire may introduce my address to this Diatribist, and the
tasks by him set before me, The subjects which he has chosen to consider with
me being such, as well deserve some care from each of us, that we neither
deceive others, nor our selves in them, I mean, perfectly practical, concerning
a peculiar Christian duty incumbent on us, in that of Festivals, and again a
more universal duty, that of obedience to our immediate Superiors, and to the
universal Church of Christ, from which we must not depart or be affrighted,
upon pretense of Superstition etc. and yet ought warily to secure our obedience
from that and the like guilts, when there is any real danger of them. And
beside these, there is somewhat of a more sublime consideration (on occasion of
that of Will Worship) the freewill offerings which will very well become a
Christian to bring to Christ, rewardable in a high degree, though they are not
under any express precept, such are all the highest charities, and devotions,
and most heroical Christian practices, which shall all not only be degraded
but defamed, if every thing be concluded to be criminous, which is not
necessary, if all uncommanded practice be unlawful.

6. Now this Diatribist having undertaken to examine what I then wrote, and
done it with so little partiality to me, that I have no reason to suspect he
has left any minute difficulty unmentioned, I shall hope that the descending
to a particular survey of all his objections will probably prevent any future
mistake in these matters, and upon this score, as St Augustine thought it
necessary for those heathens which deisied all their benefactors, to build one
altar and pay some homage to their enemies, because they deserved to be numbered
among their benefactors, so have I not grudged the tribute of my pains, at
least that of a ready, though laborious obedience to this call of the
Diatribist, but apprehended this opportunity of removing all doubts, which can
recur and require solution; entertaining my self with some slender hope that
the Reader may reap some small benefit thereby in order to christian practice;
the one thing which I desire to propose, as the end of all my meditations, and
never to be drawn by the importunity of those which differ from me in opinion,
into any contention or engagement, which has not this aim visible before it,
the seasonable checking and reformation of some vices, (such sure are those
which here I desire to prevent and remove) or the confirmation and increase of
virtue, to the glory of God, and the multiplying of fruit to our account.

7. That this has been the only aim of all hitherto published by me, even of
those discourses which are most polemical, I am so fully satisfied in my self,
that I doubt not to approve it to any, that can make question of it, where
difference of opinion does not either by close consequence, or more
immediately, lead into vicious practice, I shall never willingly contend with
any man, or make reply to the contentious: But in Doctrines which have
immediate influence upon practice, it is obligation of charity to endeavor the
disabusing of all, and not to permit or suffer any such fruitful, and noxious
error upon my neighbor.

8. Under which head because I cannot but place the rejecting of Children from
Baptism, and find some objections, offered by Mr. Tombs, to what I have
written on that subject, I have therefore drawn a short defense of that
Apostolical practice, and vindicated my former discourse from his answers, and
exceptions, which being offered to the Reader, as soon as the Printer will
permit, I shall not doubt of his leave to shut up the Palaestra at this time,
having sufficiently cloyed him with these Spectacles.

9. And it is my wish for him that he may continue to have the ease (at least)
of a Spectator, that it may be his lot, though for some months it has not
been mine, (...), to live peaceably and quietly with all men, a felicity of
which we are all to be ambitious, (...), and a grace that we are all, not in
prayer only, 1 Thessalonians 4. 11.
but by real indevours to contend for, and to hold it fast, until it be
violently wrested from us.

10. As it is, I have with patience fortified my self for the present
undertaking, and to make it also as supportable as may be to others, abstained
from transcribing the entire several Sections of his Diatribae, and only
repeated as much as exacts answer from me, not omitting (as far as my wit would
serve me) any the least particular, which can be thought to have energy against
any of those things, that are asserted by me in those Tracts, save only when
the same things once answered have again, whether in words or sense, been
repeated by him.

THE Contents of the several CHAPTERS and Sections contained herein.
CHAPTER. I. OF Mr. C. his Title Pages. page. 1
Sect. 1. Philosophy Col. 2. 8. Fables and endless Genealogies, 1 Timothy 1. 4.
Tit. 3. 9. The propriety of that Text Col. 2. to Mr. C. his discourse. 1 Sect.
2. Mat. 15. 8, 9. Gal. 4. 9, 10. Deum sic colere quomodo scipsum colendum
praecepit. Christmas no irrational custom. 3
CHAP. II. Of Mr. C. his Preface. p. 4
Sect. 1. His discourse of the causes of my mistakes. Comparing of Superstition
and Will Worship to Heresy. Accounting Superstition our virtue. 4 Sect. 2. Of
being too Religious; of the intension or degree. The Messalians, Neglect of
Charity, of particular callings, Eccl. 7. 16. Of multitude of Ceremonies. Too
many Ceremonies no argument of too much, but of too little Religion. 6 Sect. 3.
Mr. C. his distinctions of being too religious, multiplied unnecessarily.
Frequency of duty, if secured from other neglects, no excess, nor criminous.
Prayer a branch of Natural worship, (...). Excess in trust, etc. as well as in
Prayer. The Species of worship, and the circumstances thereof. The wide
difference between these. Times of Prayer not limited by Scripture: Set days of
worship, Gestures, Prostration. Mr. C. his 3. proofs examined, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
considering Apoc. 22. 19. A view of Aquinas's doctrine in this matter. 8 Sect.
4. Excess of Religion. Super statutum. Addition to the Rule. Doctrines. (...),
Act. 17. 22. Act. 25. 29. Six concessions. Superstitiosus. Worshipping of
Angels. Superstitum cultus. Slavish fear. Religion in Epicurus. Fear of
punishment in sons; in wicked men. The necessity thereof. Dogmatizing. Placing
more virtue in things then belongs to them. 20 Sect. 5. The innocence of
Will Worship. Analogy with voluntary oblationsunder the law. Seeming
Contradiction. The authority of Chrysostom and Theophylact. The 2d.
Commandment. Reducing all sins to the Decalogue. Addition to the rule, Worship
of Angels. Other sins beside that of Dogmatizing. 32 Sect. 6. The Lawfulness of
instituting the Christmas Festival. Of Church Laws. 38
CHAP. III. Of Superstition peculiarly. And first of his Prolegomenon on that
Subject. p. 41
Sect. 1. Answer to. 1. The method used to find the meaning of the word. 41
Sect. 2. Answer to. 2. Amesius's definition. The matter of the 4 first
Commandments. The affirmative part of the 2d. Commandment. The Diatribist's
misadventure about Duty in the midst. No prohibition of either holy days in the
4th Commandment. Jeroboams act, 1 Kin. 12. 32. The Rubenites altar, Josh. 22.
Naaman's altar. Christmas Festival parallel to it. The excesses in each
Commandment. 42 Sect. 3. The species of Superstition, Idolatry belongs to the
2d. Commandment. Superstition to the first. It differs from Wilworship. The
meaning of Illegitimate worship in Aquinas. His opinion of Ecclesiastical
rites. Barbarous ceremonies of Baals worship belong not to the 2d. Commandment.
Holy days before Popery. Two ancient Testimonies for them. The Jews
scrupulosity in not resisting on the Sabbath day. 49 Sect. 4. The Diatribist's
method and caution in setting down the species of Superstition. 53
CHAP. IV. Of the particular exceptions of the Diatribist to the Tract of
Superstition p. 55
Sect. 1. Confidence of innocence no argument of guilt. 55 Sect. 2. The nature
of the word. Excess of fear among the Epicureans. Superstitio from Super and
sto, not statuo. Aquinas misreported. 56 Sect. 3. (...) among the heathens for
Religion, so in Hesychius and Phavorinus. 58 Sect. 4. False worship is not
Will Worship. Imposition of hands. 59 Sect. 5. (...). Act. 17. 22. (The
Athenians the most devout of all the Greeks.) 60 Sect. 6. (...) Act. 25.
Festus's scorn falls on the Jews, not on Paul. (...) his own, not theirs. (...)
and accusation. Jesus put under the notion of a (...) by Festus. (...) taken
for a demon. (...). The Diatribists objections answered. Superstition for
Religion simply. 62 Sect. 7. The method of search for the original notion of
the word. Mr. Cawdries collections from the heathens. Among them Superstition
all one with Religion. Plutarch of the Sabbatick rest. Sacrificing children to
Moloch, was not to the true God, Jer. 32. 35. Lev. 20. 2. nor a bare
uncommanded worship. The glosses of the Etymologist and Phavorinus. 66 Sect. 8.
Superstition always ill, but not always excess. Probations from the use of
words among heathens. The Quaere of Divorce vindicated. Superstitions not
reprocht in the Romans by Polybius. Ignorance not presently Superstition.
(...), Act. 17. The Israelites worshipping the Calfe. (...). Superstitiosus
noting excess. 70 Sect. 9. The Diatribist's concession of the innocence of
unprescribed ceremonies, and so of all that is demanded. His censure of himself
and Chamier. Authority in a Church to institute Ceremonies. Abstaining from
ceremonies, because commanded by men or abused by Papists. 77 Sect. 10.
Strictures on some particulars in the remaining Sections. What excess Divines
mean by Superstition. What S. Augustine. Obligation to performance, without
being parts of worship. Observers of order more Religious, more acceptable then
others. The reason why Jewish ceremonies are interdicted. The Church of England
sparing in ceremonies Ceremonies not foreshewing Christ lawful to be retained
by Christians. The abstinence from blood, long continued in the Church. The
Saturday Sabbath. Negative wholesomness not sufficient to recommmend
ceremonies. All folly in worship is not Superstition. The opinion of the
ancient Church worth considering. No duties appointed for the circumstances
sake. Time or place instituted by God is a circumstance, as well as when by
man. Apostolical Divine. 82 Sect. 11. A Vindication of the Tract of
Superstition from uncharitableness. 88
CHAP. V. Of Will Worship. p. 92
Sect. 1. The state of the Question. Will Worship distinguished from the
circumstances of it. The matter of man's will of three sorts. The 6. several
possible notions of Will Worship. The application of them to the matter in hand.
The vanity of the Diatribists distinction. The scope of the 2d Commandment. 92
Sect. 2. The method of explicating difficulties in the new Test: (...) in a
good sense: and when in a bad, no prejudice to (...). 99 Sect. 3. His entrance
on the view of Col. 2. answered. The difference betwixt Commands of Magistrates
and imposition of dogmatizers. What it is which is said to have (...). 101 Sect.
4. The Magistrates power acknowledged. Inventing new ways of worship. David's
appointing the Levites to wait from 20. years old, an act of a King, not of a
Prophet. David's last words. 104 Sect. 5. Col. 2. 22. (...). Placing worship.
Christian liberty. Marriage. The Glosses put on the commands of men. 107 Sect.
6. The Diatribist's way to make the Doctors words witness against him. (...)
etc. Placing worship, an equivocal phrase. 112 Sect. 7. Of Petitio Principii.
Of (...) being capable of two rendrings. The danger from mistake on the
Diatribists side. My interpretation not singular. His no way probable. (...) a
particle of extenuation, no (...). No show of wisdom in respect of the folly
that is in it. The Will Worship parallel to the humility. The prime argument for
my interpretation. (...) for piety, vindicated from the contrary proofs. (...),
Worship of Angels. No agreement betwixt Col. 2. 18. and 23. or betwixt 23 and 1
Cor. 2. 4. (...). 114 Sect. 8. The abstinences how taught by the Gnostics.
Their pretenses for them, no realities. Abstinences may be free will offerings,
and selfdenyals. Such may Fasting duly qualified. Such may virginal Chastity.
Paul's judgment of it. Chrysostom of things (...). Abstinences positive acts.
And yet, if negative, may be acceptable. These abstinences not commanded. 122
Sect. 9. Compliance with Papists. The Diatribists inconstancy. 125 Sect. 10. A
reply to his answer of my two first reasons for the good sense. Humility and
Will Worship associated, either both real or both pretended. Popish laniations
why culpable. (...) 1 Timothy 4. (...). Fasting a (...) far from hurtful or
abominable, wherein the profit of it consists. The true sense of 1 Timothy 4. 8.
wherein the illness of it consists. (...) and (...). Abstinence because of
abuses. For Religion. Marcionites. Durand. A show of Piety in Will Worship. All
show of good in respect of somewhat that is good. The Diatribists fallacious
instances and questions. 127 Sect. 11. The Greek Fathers acception of (...). An
argument of goodness that it is pretended by hypocrites. Religion in a good
sense. Wilworship not worse then false worship, not abominable. All devised
worship is not Idolatry, does not pretend to more wisdom then Gods. The Latin
Fathers cited by Mr. C. The vulgar Translator, and the followers thereof. (...)
by the vulgar rendered decernitis. The authority of Bellarmine and Daille for
the goodsense. The testimonies out of Ambrose, Theodoret, Salmeron, Estius,
Augustine, Thomas, examined. 139 Sect. 12. The fifth reason vindicated. (...).
Hesychius corrected twice. (...) adverbially. (...). Hesychius's Glossary
concordant to the Scripture use. (...), Ephesians. 5. 4. 149 Sect. 13. Mr. C. His
distinction of voluntary. Spontaneous. A work of love. The Testimony of
Socrates. Worship true or false. Nothing unlawful which is not forbidden.
Voluntariness no way forbidden. The second Commandment. 153 Sect. 14. The first
occasion of mistaking (...) for ill. The vulgar translator and Mr. Calvin. The
Diatribists three exceptions to this showed to be of no force. Will Worship
distant from Superstition. (...) only in a good sense among Christians. Three
mistakes of the Diatribist. All uncommanded is not forbidden. 155 Sect. 15. The
second occasion of taking (...) in an ill sense vindicated. The design of the
Treatise of Will Worship, only for ceremonies, not for new kinds of worship.
Whether all ceremonies be forbidden, which are not commanded. The various
reading of Philostorgius. Sitting at the Gospel forbidden. Chrysostomes
Testimony. (...) not (...) for Ecclesiastical Canon. (...) Will Worship. 159
Sect. 16. The third occasion of the mistake cleared. Worship of Angels
forbidden, not only not commanded. The reviving Judaical worship not called
Will Worship, Col. 2. 23. Maimonides's words wrested to a distant sense by the
Diatribist. Original of Angel-worship. Vain worships. Clemens confounding of
Col. 2. 18. with 23. Worship of Angels etc. a forbidden Will Worship. The
imposing of virginity and abstinences, as from God, the only crime, found
fault with by S. Paul and the ancient Catholics. Alcibiabes his using, and
remission of austerity. The like of Spiridion and Marcianus. Cyrill of meats. 1 Timothy 5. 23. explicated. 163 Sect. 17. The last occasion of the ill sense. (...)
in Epiphanius. Of the Pharisees appellation. (...). Dogmatizing and
discriminating. Epiphanius's words cleared. Wherein their hypocrisy consisted.
(...), 1 Mac. 2. 42. Asidei (...) turned into (...), the fault. 169
CHAP. VI. Of Free Will offerings. p. 173
Sect. 1. The use of them in this question. The Diatribists discourse of them.
His (...). The Leviticalness of spontaneous offerings asserted by him, in order
to denying them among Christians. Arguments against this conceit. Allowance of
days as well as of worship among the Jews. Allowance acknowledged by the
Diatribist to be as good as commands. 173 Sect. 2. A first instance of
uncommanded Pieties, David's intention to build the Temple. Vindicated from the
three answers of the Diatribist. 181 Sect. 3. A 2d instance and that under the
New Testament. Paul's taking no hire from the Corinthians; This, no action of
common life, nor yet a due debt. (...) for using, 1 Cor. 7. 31. 1 Cor 9. 17.
explained. The authority of Augustine, Chrysostom and Theophylact. 184 Sect 4.
The third of Paul's going up to Jerusalem: this under no precept. No refusing
to suffer, no retarding of the Gospel. The example of Christ and S. Paul at
other times, the testimony of Origin, and confession of the Diatribist. 188
Sect. 5. The fourth of more liberal alms giving. Sadduces and Asidaei,
Righteousness, Mercy. Paul's advice without command. 2 Cor. 8. 2. The
Diatribists answer satisfied. Alms the Christians sacrifice in the offertory.
Allowance no command. A latitude of degrees in the middle rule. The Apostles
direction of giving as God has prospered. Of the circumstances of giving. 191
Sect. 6. The fifth instance vindicated. Circumstances of Prayer acknowledged
free. Difference between placing worship in gestures, etc. and pleasing God by
them. So in Festivals. 197 Sect. 7. Of the difference betwixt a precept and a
grace. The proportionable return to grace is in a latitude. The highest no
excess. A possibility for grace to be given in vain. 198 Sect. 8. My answer to
a first bead of objections vindicated. Prudence lost by man's own sin
recoverable by grace. The punishments of Adams sin are not our faults.
Perfection of innocence capable of degrees. So perfection of the Judaical law,
and of the Christian, So mercifulness to ability. (...) 2 Cor. 8. 3. Merciful
as God is Merciful belongs not to the degree. Gods righteousness punishes not
where there is no law. Intuition of reward in Christian performances, no
Popery. Proofs of this from Scripture, from the nature of Hope, Faith,
Gratitude. Not always prudent to undertake the highest. Martyrdom no conceited
Popish perfection, yet under no precept to all. S. Hieroms words examined. Two
notions of the word Perfection. Some perfection possible in this life, and yet
capable of growth. The law, as it signifies the condition of the first
Covenant, is not now in force with believers. Of Christ's perfecting the law.
Every man is not bound to do what is best. 1 Cor. 7. 3. 8. (...) of moral good.
The saying of Gregory explicated. 202 Sect. 9. My answer to a second sort of
objection, vindicated. Loving God with all the heart. Adam's love in innocence
capable of degrees. Perfect love that casts out fear, to be had in this life.
Christ more intense in prayer at one time then another, an argument that all is
not sin that is less then the highest. 221 Sect. 10. My answer to the last
objection, of Supererogation. A place in S. Cyprian vindicated from the
Romanists reading. Imputare. An act of mercy in God that our works are
rewarded. Supererogation wherein it consists. The Diatribists etymology of the
word disproved. Erogare, Erogatio. The Diatribists ways of Supererogating.
Pride, Glorying. More reward for eminent uncommanded excellencies superadded to
duty. The Diatribists charity, and confession of us. His censure of the Bishops
unjust. 223.
CHAP. VII. Of Christmas and other Festivals. p. 231
Sect. 1. The observance which is due to the Custom of a Church. The
Testimonies of Ambrose and Augustine, and Isidore. 231 Sect. 2. Heathen
adherents a proof of the first Antiquity. 233 Sect. 3. Of Crescens coming into
France, and Simon Zelotes into England. The difference of keeping Easter in the
West and East. Testimonies for our conversion in the Apostles times, Before
King Lucius. The Diatribists suggestion disproved. Britain not converted from
Rome. 235 Sect. 4. The keeping of Easter in the Apostles times. Polycrates's
Epistle to Victor. The Asiatick way from Philip and John. From Philip derived
to Britanny. (...). The testmony of Socrates against Festivals, examined. 241
Sect. 5. Midwinter-day. The Winter Solstice. Julius's Calendar. 246 Sect. 6.
Festivals not Romish. The primitive Churches pure from the heresies that
solicited them; The Romish corruptions not fetched from them. 247 Sect. 7. The
grounds why this Feast may not be abolisht among us. The Diatribists mistake of
the question. 249 Sect. 8. The Reformation in this Kingdom. No imperfection in
it in point of Festivals. The States joining in it no disadvantage to the
Church. 252 Sect. 9. The Lutheran Churches accord in this. Morneys wish. The
Helvetian confession. Rivets custom of preaching on the day. 254 Sect. 10.
Ejecting festivals. Separation from the purest times, even those of the
Apostles. Our Churches departure from Rome unjustly paralleld with the
departure of sons from our Church. 255 Sect. 11. The profaneness objected to
the Festival. Casting out the Creeds. 257 Sect. 12. The Diatribists change of
my words, his causlesse praise of himself, and censure of others. 259 Sect. 13.
His 2d change of my words. Gedeons golden Ephod not appliable to Feasts. 260
Sect. 14. Strictures on his 16th. Our Festivals unfitly compared with the
Romish. How observation of Festivals may be a duty of the 5 Commandment. The
fourth Commandment no way contrary to Christian Festivals. Venial sins. All
mistakes not sins. Chemnitius not producible against me. 261 Sect. 15. Of
riot. Christian joys no way contrary to our Festivals. Riot as separable from
Christmas as the Lords day. Heathen customs cannot be objected. Gods
judgments vainly urged for arguments. The charge of want of hospitality on
those that retain festivities. The hospitality at Christmas a pledge of it all
the year after. Reformation of excess without abolition of the Festival.
Attempt to reform, previous to abolition. The Agapae no example for abolishing
Festivals. Cures for diseases, excisions only for desperate spreading evils. No
cards on Christmas day, as much strictness on Christmas, not more sacredness
then on the Lords day. No design of making the Lords day no institution of the
Apostles. Neither Superstition nor hypocrisy in abstaining from cards on
Christmas day. 265 Sect. 16. Christmas, if of the same original with Easter,
certainly Apostolical. However, of the practice of the Primitive Church. All
rendering of motives no (...). 275 Sect. 17. The encaenia, a religious feast
instituted by the Jews, and approved by Christ, vindicated from all his
exceptions. Marriage feasts. Religious feasts cannot be unlawful, if civil be
lawful. The feast of Purim a religious feast. 277 Sect. 18. How the comparison
holds between the Lords day and Christmas day. Institution, usage Apostolical
for Festivals. No law in Scripture for the Lords day. 283 Sect. 19. Aerius's
heresy that Festivals are unlawful. S. Augustine's testimony added to
Epiphanius's. The Diatribists inconstancy. The testimony of the Church of
Smyrna, an evidence of keeping the days of the Apostles martyrdom. The
Testimony from the martyrdom of Ignatius according with it. Testimonies for
the antiquity of Festivals. 286 Sect. 20. Strictures on. 35. The author of the
Constitutions a competent testifier when in accord with others. Justinus's
edict for Festivals reconcilable with the Apostolical usage of them. The 20000
slain by Diocletian on Christmas day. Objections against the 25. of December
answered. The controversy in Chrysostom about the day, not the Feast. (...).
His words full for the Apostolicalness of both. 289 Sect. 21. The Diatribists
answer to my conclusion. Strictures on some passages in it. 292
AN ACCOUNT OF THE 3ex DIATRIBE CONCERNING Superstition, Will Worship, and
Christmas Festival.
CHAP. I. Of Mr C. his Title Pages.
Sect. 1. Philosophy Col. 2. 8. Fables and endless Genealogies, 1 Timothy 1. 4.
Tit. 3. 9. The propriety of that Text Col. 2. to Mr. C. his discourse.
Title page will deserve a cursory view, especially the place of Scripture,
wherewith he has chosen to adorn it, Col. 2. 4. 8. by which the Reader is
directed to look on his threefold exercitation (as he is pleased to call it)
with Dr. H. as an especial antidote against that Philosophy, etc. of which S.
Paul forewarns men to take heed in those two verses.

C. had to express such unkindness to, and jealousy of Philosophy, (certainly
not the same that S. Paul then had among his Colossians) but only remind the
Reader what is Annot. on Col. 2. a. and 1 Timothy 1. 2.
elsewhere showed more largely, that the Philosophy there branded by the
Apostle, was that which the Gnostics divinity was too full of, taken out of
Pythagoras and the Greek Poets, Antiphanes, Hesiod and Philistion, and
especially Orpheus his Theology or Genealogies of the Gods, and so
promiscuously styled by the Apostles (...), Philosophy and vain deceit, in
this admonition to the Colossians, and (...) fables and endless genealogies
(how out of Night and Silence comes forth Chaos etc.) in his directions to
Timothy 1 Timothy 1. 4. and (...), foolish questions and genealogies, in his
Epistles to Titus c. 3. 9.

three discourses concerning Superstition, Will Worship, Christmas Festival,
must be discerned by his answer to all, or any of these few questions, 1.
Whether any Gnostick principle of Theology has been discovered in any of
those three Tracts which he has undertaken to chastise. 2. Whether it be a
piece of Apostatical or heretical pravity, a branch of heathenisme or
Gnosticisme, to maintain the celebration of Christ's Nativity to have nothing
criminous in it, either under the head of Superstition or Will Worship. 3.
Whether all institutions of the Church, though in themselves never so
blameless, are yet to be looked on, as (...) acts of dispoiling Christians, and
little less then Sacrileges, and whether they are all comprehended under that
style of Traditions of men, and rudiments of the world, in opposition to (...),
after Christ, of which the Apostle so carefully warnes the Colossians. Lastly,
whether all probable, or concludent, nay even demonstrative discourse, be to be
warded and averted, as deceipts and beguilings, because capable of that title
of (...), which the Apostle there uses, whether we render them literally
probabilities of speech, or with our translation, enticing words?

C. has accommodated any satisfactory answer to these few questions (all, or
at least some one of them) he may then be qualified to attempt justifying the
charitableness of his title page, and the propriety of his select Scripture,
but till then, he may give his Reader leave to question one of them.

Sect. 2. Mat. 15. 8, 9. Gal. 4. 9, 10. Deum sic colere quomodo seipsum
colendum praecepit. Christmas no irrational custom.
exceptions to the title pages of his two other exercitations, and in like
manner, 1. to demand, how commodiously the words of Christ, Mat. 15. 8, 9.
condemning their worship as vain, which teach for doctrines the commandments of
men, are affixt to the second Diatribe concerning Will Worship, when he cannot
but know, that that Text is particularly handled in the first leaf of the
treatise of Will Worship, and demonstrated neither to belong to humane laws in
general, nor to any institutions of the Christian Church, but only to the
dogmatizing of Pharisaical heretics, and particularly their urging some
inventions of their own, as commanded, and under obligation by divine precept,
now when the very Judaical commanded rites were so suddenly to be laid aside,
nailed to the cross, solemnly cancelled and abolisht by Christ.

constancy to himself; that before the Diatribe of Christmas, and other (sure
Christian) festivals, he has thought meet to prefix that text Gal. 4. 9, 10.
of observing days, months, times, years, so peculiarly restrained by all
circumstances to the Judaical Sabbaths, New Moons, Anniversaries, and Jubiles,
but no more appliable to the prejudice of the yearly feast of Christ's birth,
then to the weekly of his Resurrection.

associate his two Latin sentences, the one out of S. Austine of worshipping
God as he has commanded; the other out of S. Cyprian, of the vanity of
irrational customs, and remind him that we design no other worship of God upon
Christmas day, but such as we are sure he has commanded at all times, that of
prayer and thanksgiving etc. and that the incarnation of Christ was a competent
reason to found a custom of commemorating it after this manner, we shall find
a perfect harmony and consent in all his discords, and that is all I shall
return to his frontispices, designed to infuse prejudices into the Reader, to
blast beforehand, what he meant to answer.

CHAP. II. Of M. C. his Preface.
Sect. 1. His discourse of the causes of my mistakes. Comparing of Superstition
and Will Worship to Heresy. Accounting Superstition our virtue.
entering, and yet there is a Preface still behind, which expects to be taken
notice of, as being a very friendly recapitulation of the grounds of my great
mistakes, the unhappy causes of those my miscarriages, which he has discovered
in the ensuing Exercitations.

Diatribe so instructed, or improved, as to discern one real misadventure in
those discourses, find it impossible for me to be edified by this his charity;
I must be showed my disease, before Hippocrates himself can point me out the
causes of it, and therefore my briefest return to his preface, is but to
beseech him to reserve his discourse of causes, till the effects shall be so
visible, as to call for it; and if this be not a sufficient reply to all of it,
What is behind, will easily be referred to this one head, the injustices and
mistakes of the author of it, which I shall but briefly recite to him.

First, that he has thought fit to compare Superstition and Will Worship, as
they are the subjects of my discourses, with Heresy; whereas, 1. Superstition,
in the proper notation of the word, which first I speak of, and vindicate our
Church, whether in the ceremonies, or observances, from all appearance of guilt
of it, is the worshipping of Demons or deified men, and that sure is worse then
heresy in every Christians account, and so inconveniently compared, so as to
be equalled with it. And 2, whatever our Church has admitted, is cleared to
have nothing of Superstition in it in any other secundary notion or acception
of the word; or if it had, yet as long as it is no more but uncommanded Rites
or Festivals, which by the Diatribist himself are thus styled, those sure, in
any reason, will not be capable of this comparison, or accusation of being so
bad as heresy; and 3. will worship in the one place where it is used in
Scripture, has no manner of ill, but good character set upon it, being joined
(...) with humility, which I hope is not yet condemned to be quite so criminal
and abominable to God, as pride and heresy is acknowledged to be; however in
this Preface, before my interpretation of Col. 2. 23. has been endeavored to
be confuted, this so eminent criminousness thereof was not with more reason,
then charity supposed by him.

2. That he has affirmed, in a parenthesis, of some men that superstition is
evidently one of these) their virtues rather then crimes; which again if
applied to me, or I think to any Protestant living, is very unkind and
unprovoked, having no ground in any part of my Discourse.

3. That Will Worship has been by him elsewhere demonstrated criminal as
Heresy, which in what notion soever he has expressed himself to understand the
word, is with no truth assumed by him, as far as refers to these Diatribae; and
if it be elsewhere attempted, 1. He should have referred us thither, if but to
vindicate his own veracity, or else have recited the heads of such
demonstrative arguments in this place; or in the second Diatribe; and yet
neither of these are done by him.

Sect. 2. Of being too Religious; of the intension or degree. The Messalians.
Neglect of Charity, of particular callings, Eccl. 7. 16. Of multitude of
Ceremonies. Too many Ceremonies no argument of too much, but of too little
Religion.
fourth mistake is, that he has recited it as one cause of my miscarriages in
this business that I affirm that a man cannot be too religious, and that I
attest this both of the intension or degree, and of the extension or number of
Ceremonies taken into the worship of God] Whereas that which I affirm, is
evidently this. 1. That in respect of the degree, there is no such thing as
nimiety or excess in Religion; no possibility of being Religious in too high a
degree, Sect. 33. and this is not denied by Mr. C. nor can be by any pious man;
who knows that all his faults are omissions and defects, but never excesses of
piety or religion. 2. The Messalians, or the neglect of the duties of charity
and the particular calling, incident to the intense practice of holy duties,
were foreseen and prevented there; the Messalians fault was not their excessive
practice, but their laying that obligation on themselves and others; the same
that Tertullian and the Montanists were guilty of, in respect of other
austerities, and so 'twas their dogmatizing, in their imposition of heavy
burdens, wherein their heresy (not their superstition) consisted: And the
others crime is his idleness, and walking (...) disorderly, a crime censured by
the Apostle, 2 These. 3. 11. (yet far enough from Superstition again) and in
like manner his want of charity, and so not nimiety, but unseasonableness of
piety, contrary to the express words of Christ, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice.

objection be offered from the words of the Preacher, Eccl. 7. 16. (which yet
this Diatribist has not thought fit to offer) Be not righteous overmuch, why
should thou destroy thy self? I suppose the answer is obvious, that those
words are the intimation of the wordlings objection, who takes that for excess
of duty which brings any damage or worldly destruction upon him, and is
answered in the next verse with this solid Aphorism of eternal verity, Be not
thou overmuch wicked; why should thou die before thy time? The fears, and
from thence the prudential, but often times very impious practices of the
worldling are far the more probable path to the most hasty ruins.

untruth, nor miscarriage, nor cause of either in my discourse.

extension or number of rites and ceremonies taken into the worship, that there
cannot be too many of them, is as far from being my assertion, as that which is
most contrary. For upon that head my conclusion is, that as some rites or
circumstances of time and place and gesture are absolutely necessary to
Religion, and the significativeness of them is no manner of prejudice to the
use or institution of them, so if the Disputers will yield but this, that even
when they are significative, the use of Ceremonies may be allowed among
Christians, I shall then in stead of pleading for the multitude of such, give
my vote to the confirming the old Rule, that they be paucae and salubres, few
and wholesome; and particularly few for five reasons, set down in the following
words, Sect. 39. and sure that is contrary enough to his reporting of my
opinion, that there cannot be too many of them, and so that which was no part
of my belief, could be no cause of any miscarriage of mine in that business.

few (and so that there may be too many) Ceremonies in a Church, is no way the
yielding a possibility that a man may be too religious; but on the contrary
when the too many Ceremonies either cause, or occasion, or are accompanied with
inward neglects, there is not too much but too little Religion, too much
formality, but too little devotion, too much outward Pharisaical washing, but
too little inward Christian fervor, as there may be (...) and (...), words too
many, but too little praying (I may add too many offers of proof, but too
little reason) and remind the Diatribist that this was expressly said before in
the end Mat. 6.
of Sect. 39. by the token of the insectile animals, whose want of blood caused
their multitude of legs, I shall then sure have given him ground of conviction,
that there were more then one calumny in his assignation of the causes,
particularly in this of the first cause of my miscarriages.

Sect. 3. Mr. C. his distinctions of being too religious, multiplied
unnecessarily. Frequency of duty, if secured from other neglects, no excess,
nor criminous. Prayer a branch of Natural worship, (...). Excess in trust, etc.
as well as in Prayer. The Species of worship, and the circumstances thereof.
The wide difference between these. Times of Prayer not limited by Scripture:
Set days of worship, Gestures, Prostration. Mr. C. his 3. proofs examined,
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. considered. Apoc. 22. 19. A view of Aquinas 's doctrine in this
matter.
distinctions, by which he is willing to clear his way, that a man may be said
to be too Religious, either because he gives more to God then he deserves, but
so he cannot be too Religious; or, because he gives more then God requires by
the Rule of worship. 2. That in regard of worship commanded, especially natural
worship, a man cannot be too religious in reference to the intention (I suppose
it should be intension) of the devotion, is in love, fear, trust in God (adding
in a cautious parenthesis, that in instituted worship a man may be too
religious, as if he pray or fast to the wasting his health or neglect of his
calling:) but in uncommanded worship, the least addition to the Rule of worship
is too much, and such a man may be said to be too religious.] I cannot imagine
how he has by either or both of these attained his end, but rather perplexed,
then cleared the way for the Reader, which was perfectly straight, and
abundantly explicate, before he took upon him to be the harbinger..

members of both his distinctions are directly the same, and so I am sure there
was too much of his distinctions, tautologie I suppose is such a nimiety, and
such sure is this [A man that gives more then God requires by the rule of
worship is too religious] and [in uncommanded worship the least addition to the
rule of worship is too much, and such a man may be said to be too religious.]

Secondly, for his Parenthesis, it was perfectly prevented in the tract of
Superstition 33. and so was a 2d. nimiety, being added without all necessity or
use, it being there acknowledged that in a frequent or intense practice of holy
duties there might be some incident fault, viz. neglect of duties of charity or
particular callings; and wasting of health through fasting immoderately, bears
analogy with these.

forewarned, that the fault herein was not the excess of Religion, but omission
of other necessary duties, and that demonstrated by this, because if that
frequency, whether of prayer or fasting, wherein is the supposed excess, be
either in another man, or in that man (whose excess is accused) at another
time, separated and secured from those neglects, or omissions of those other
duties, the very same frequency and intention were his virtue not his crime,
which therefore still prejudges this from being an instance of the thing in
hand, that a man may be too religious.

Thirdly, his difference, in this respect of nimiety, betwixt natural and
instituted worship, is perfectly vain and useless to his design, even as he
himself has explicated it, placing love, fear, trust in God under the first
head, and prayer and fasting under the other.

prayer is as properly a branch of natural worship, as love, or fear, or trust
can be imagined to be, being, 1. inseparable from trust, 2. a necessary and
natural means of acknowledging Gods fullness and our wants, 3. containing under
it thanksgiving, praising God, which is the prime way of honoring God (He that
praises me honoreth me, says David) and sure that honoring of God, a most
peculiar branch of natural worship, dictated by the nature of a creature, and
taught by all naturalists that acknowledged any God, ((...), in the Pythagorean
verses, honor the Gods, and (...) God in Phocylides) and both the petitory and
the Eucharistical comprehended under the (...), worshipping the Gods, in
Plutarch, which Xenophon tells us (...) is the primeval law acknowledged (...).
among all men, and Hierocles, having defined Piety to be the (...), the
captain of all virtues, (...), as having respect to the divine cause, he adds
that the precept concerning that in the golden verses, had justly the
precedence and deference before all laws, to give the Gods that honor which is
due unto them, and all things else according to that order (...). p. 10.
(...), which the creative law (that sure is the Christians law of Nature)
together with their being, had afforded them. But perhaps such evidences as
these are the Philosophy against which the Reader was to be forewarned in the
title page, and therefore,

Secondly, I must add, to demonstrate the uselesness of his distinction in
this place, that it is as possible to exceed in trust, in fear, nay even in
love, as it is in prayer; Thus he that so trusts in God, as not to fear; he
that trusts him with the end, so as to neglect the means, parallel to him that
prays and neglects his calling; he that trusts and relies and hopes, but does
not purify, (performs not the Evangelical condition) every one of these is, in
proportion with M. C. his instances of prayer and fasting, an exceeder in
trust, we are wont to express it by presuming.

2. He that so fears, as not to love, that fears where no fear is, that walks
accurately (...) as a fool, he will be as properly an exceeder in fear.

3. He that so loves God again, either as not to fear God, or as not to love
his brother also; he that has a zeal to God, but not according to knowledge,
he is in like manner an exceeder in love. And yet all this while none of these
are religious too much, but too little, though they exceed the bounds of one
part of duty, they are defective in another, and it is this defect, not that
other exceeding, that is criminous, These things ought they to have done, but
not to leave the other undone; and these omissions are their crimes, and as
truly so in the natural as in the instituted worship, though if the instituted
worship in any branch be preferred before any branch of natural duty, or be
more intensely and frequently practiced, to the neglecting thereof, this may be
a greater fault then if one part of natural worship be intended to the
detriment of another either superior or equal to it, as if Sacrifice (which I
acknowledge an instituted worship) be intended or pressed to the omission of
necessary charities, ceremonies to the slacking of the inward fervor, or the
like.

So that still all that this Diatribist's subdivided distinctions have done for
us (beside discovering his own mistakes) is only this, to propose one sort of
things, wherein in his opinion, a man may be too religious, viz. in giving God
more then he requires by the rule of worship, or, as again he expresses it, by
the least addition to the rule of worship, which, says he, is too much, and
such a man may be too religious. And this being the only product of his
distinction, is, as I intimated, so far from clearing, that it is the
perplexing and intrieating the business, which was formerly clear enough, the
leading the Reader not out but into Meanders, an intanglement of the clue, a
Sphinx instead of an Oedipus.

difficult, so involved, of so uncertain and dubious signification as this
which now he calls [giving God more then he requires by the rule of worship]
and explains by [uncommanded worship, and, the least addition to the rule of
worship.]

clear again what he has clouded, by asking him but this one question, Does he
mean in these words [more] and [Addition] any new species or sort of worship,
neither prescribed by the law of Nature, nor instituted by any positive law of
God? or does he design only some circumstance only, or ceremony, which being
not of the intrinsic nature or essence of worship, but only accidental to it,
is not particularly commanded or prescribed by the word of God, the rule of
worship? such are the time, the place, the gestures, and such outward, but some
of them inseparable attendants of worship.

obscurity and mistakes, and therefore to be as explicit as may be; Prayer is a
species of worship; praying on the Lords day, on Christmas day, observing
constant hours of prayer, thrice, seven, ten times every day, is each of them a
circumstance adherent to Prayer; some time is necessary and inseparable from
Prayer, but every of these times forementioned are not so, he that prays but
thrice does not pray seven or ten times a day, So again the place of prayer may
give it a different denomination, either of public or private; the manner may
render it more or less solemn, the gestures more or less reverent or
irreverent, the increase, letting down of ardor, devout or formal, and there
are many sorts, and degrees of each of these, but these do not constitute new
or several sorts of worship, but all are accidents of one and the same special
of worship, viz. of Prayer.

species or sorts of worship, then I never doubted to affirm with him, that all
uncommanded worship is an excess, if he please, (an error, I should rather say)
a setting up that for worship of God, which is not worship, nay perhaps quite
contrary to worship; and this sure was never justified by me explicitly, or
implicitly, in conclusions, or in grounds and principles of thus concluding,
and so still this has not been useful to me to discover any mistake of mine.

misadventure of mine, that it will devolve all absurdity upon the Diatribist.

rule of worship, i. e. the Scripture, any where prescribed the times, the
places, the gestures, and all the circumstances of the worship of God, and that
both positively and exclusively, so that he that prays oftener then the
Scripture expressly commands, or on any day not assigned to that purpose by
Scripture, sins in so doing, adds to the rule, gives more then God requires,
does too much, is too religious, is criminous and abominable to God in so
doing? every of these must be the affirmations of this Diatribist, if this 2d.
meaning be his, and the like he is obliged to say again of him that prays in
any place, in any manner, in any gesture, which the word of Scripture, the rule
of worship has not commanded.

Book is perfectly cast away, a mere (...) or beating the air, without me or
any man else to be his adversary, I shall at the present suppose it so, and
show him, as deictically as he can wish, the absurdities of it.

times of prayer, I demand, What has the rule of worship, the Scripture
prescribed? has it prescribed morning and evening Prayer, and that both
positively, and exclusively to any more? If so, then by the standard of this
Diatribist's doctrine, David's or Daniels praying three times a day, adding the
noon day season to the other two, must be criminous and abominable: or if he
shall pitch upon any other number of times, as prescribed by the Rule, then I
shall add an unite more to that number and demand, whether that addition will
add abomination to his performances? If he says it will, though I might press
that affirmation with absurdities enough, yet I shall spare it, and only
demand the proof from the Scripture for this assertion, and when he gives it me
forfeit all my pretensions to the understanding that sacred book; but if he
cannot produce any such Scripture, then is my Censor the guilty person, the
very dogmatizer, that teaches for Doctrines or Commandments of God, his own
Dictates, which I must suppose to be the traditions of a man, and the doing so,
I cannot resist to be a nimiety, but not of religion, that I yet discern.

set days to be consecrated to the worship of God, for fasting or for prayer, I
demand how many every week or every year has the Rule of worship prescribed?
Or what rule of worship shall be appealed to? the Law of Moses, or the Gospel
of Christ? His answer to this question will involve him in intricacies enough:
If the Law of Moses be the rule, then he knows all the New Moons and feasts of
the Jews, and Sabbatick years and Jubilees must return upon him: If the Gospel
of Christ, which has certainly abolisht all these, and, as he supposes, set
up the Lord's Day, instead of them all, then 1. I demand in what words of the
New Testament the weekly observation of this is commanded? and 2. in what words
the observing all others but that, particularly the Feast of Easter, the annual
commemorative of the Resurrection, is interdicted, and whether the weekly
remembrance of so great a mercy, being so acceptable to God, it be reasonable
to think the annual, abominable before him? And the same question soon extends
it self to the day of Christ's Incarnation, Passion, Ascension, etc. and if of
each of these he shall define and pronounce them unlawful, without testimony
and verdict from the Rule of worship the Scripture, then he is the Dogmatizer,
that has added to the Rule, more interdicts then are there to be met with, and
so still he is the man guilty of the nimiety.

gestures in the worship of God, I demand, What is the gesture of prayer,
prescribed by the Rule? Is it standing, sitting, or kneeling, any, or all of
these, or any fourth superadded to these? If the Rule have prescribed none,
then according to his doctrine again, any of these must be criminous additions
to the Rule, abominable, etc. If the rule have prescribed some one, then all
others, beside that one, must fall under the same severity, that that one, had
done, if it had not been prescribed: and if all three are under several
precepts, and so the whole Rule obeyed by retaining these three, then still I
shall mention a fourth, that of prostration, whether will the old penitents, in
the porch, or on the pavement, every man in his closet and recesse, and still
the question returns, whether this be criminous, and by what part of the rule
of worship it appears to be so?

Necdum finitus the enumeration of the Diatribists inextricable difficulties is
not yet at an end, but infinitely multipliable by every act of Religious Fast,
and of Almsgiving, the two other sorts of Gods worship (as Aquinas (owned here
by the Diatribist) has defined from the sixth of Matthew) the proportions or
degrees of each of which are yet no where defined in the Scripture. But I
suppose it cannot now be necessary, that I farther confirm what is so evident
already.

duties of the first to the second Table, and demand whether any thing that is
done (out of the service of God) for which there is no command, be a criminous
excess? Certainly the Analogy will hold, God having given the Rule for justice
and charity, as well as worship, and then whatsoever of any kind is not under
precept, must by this argument be under interdict, and so there will be nothing
left indifferent in the world: A conclusion that some men which have held Mr.
C. his hypothesis have rationally enlarged to, finding it necessary, and
unavoidably deduced from thence: But I discern not yet, that Mr. C. has thus
improved his principle, though sure whenever it is for his turn, it is thus
improvable.

C. has added three proofs to his affirmation, and how unreconcileable soever
with common notions that is, yet those must deserve to be heeded; And his first
proof is this, If a man or Church may add to the Rules of Religion, then be or
they may be too Religious: But Ergo.

prove, was this, that in uncommanded worship the least addition to the rule of
worship is too much, and such a man may be said to be too religious: And this,
says he, I prove, 1. If a man or Church may add to the rule of religion, etc.
Of this 1. I desire to be told, whether it be not a mere idem per idem, a
proving a thing by it self, and whether that be not contrary to all rules of
syllogizing, where the medium of probation is never to enter the conclusion, as
here most evidently it does.

form, it is not needful that I say any thing to the matter of this proof, it
being the very thing that I have spoken to all this while, and by that
distinction, of the sorts and circumstances of worship, I have competently
showed, that it has no force against me; that indeed he that introduces any
new part of divine worship, is a presumptuous assumer, does more then he
should, because that which he should not do, and so that the Major is false,
instead of clear; he that thus adds, and imposes on God and his word, is not
hereby too religious, but too bold, and was never pleaded for in the least, by
my treatise of Superstition.

inconsequence of this Major will more appear, by considering the proof of the
Assumption, which he annexes, The assumption, says he, is proved by Deuteronomy. 4.
2. where all additions to the word are prohibited.

prostrates himself in prayer, add to the word of God? then sure he that walks
in the garden, does so too, much more he that makes any such deductions from
Scripture, as this Diatribist here does, (for not only the analogy enforces
this, but it is also to be remembered, that the laws which had here been given
by Moses, were all sorts of duties of common life, toward our selves, and our
brethren, as well as of worship toward God, and so this Text must exclude all
other uncommanded actions, as well as worships) The words in Deuteronomy are
these, Ye shall not add to the word that I command you, neither shall ye
diminish from it, (...) ad custodiendum, and in the same sense the Targum (...)
to observe, or that ye may observe that ye may keep the commandments of the
Lord your God which I command you. The meaning is most evident that they were
to perform uniform obedience to God, not to make any change in Gods commands,
either to pretend more liberties, or fewer obligations, or again more
obligations and fewer liberties, to be delivered them by God, then those which
he had then delivered by Moses, but to set themselves humbly to the performance
of his precepts, and accordingly the Septuagint renders (...) to keep] (...) ye
shall keep, the Latin, custodite keep, and the Syriack, sed observate, but
keep the commandments, by that opposition showing that to be the meaning of not
adding or diminishing, viz. paying an obedience to Gods commands. And the same
sense in the like words we have again Apoc. 22. 18, 19. to shut up the great
prophecy in the New Testament; And then, I pray, is he that offends against
either of these two texts, too Religious? Is it not more true on the contrary,
that he is a false Prophet, and a sacrilegious person, that pretends the word
of the Lord for that which God has not spoken to him? But this crime I hope
every man is not guilty of, that bows or kneeles or prostrates himself in
prayer, by such outward gestures both signifying, and inflaming the inward
fervor of the heart, but not inserting any precept of doing thus, either into
the book of Deuteronomy, or the Apocalypse. And this may suffice for his first
proof.

saying of the great School man, that Religion is a moral virtue (or very like
it) and stands between two extremes, Ergo, a man may be too much religious, as
well as too little.

First, I answer to the antecedent, that if it be remembered what the two
extremes are, between which religion, in Aquinas, stands, the consequent will
never be inferred from it. The extremes are on one side Superstition, on the
other irreligion, superstition is again, says he, of two sorts, either 1. the
worshipping of a creature (of false Gods, or more Gods then one, as in
Tertullian adv. Marc. l. 1. c. 5. speaking of the worshipping of two Gods,
Vererer, says he, ne abundantia officii superstitio potius quam religio
crederetur, I should fear such abundance of officiousness would be rather
believed superstition then religion; and S. Augustine, and out of him 2^ 2^.
qu. 92. art. 1.
Aquinas, tangis primam chordam qua colitur unus Deus, and cecidit bestia
superstitionis, the beast of superstition is destroyed by the first string of
the Decachord, the first commandment of the Decalogue, prescribing the worship
of one God.) or 2. cum Deo illegitimus cultus tribuitur, giving undue worship
to God, and neither of these notions of superstition will be at all useful to
the Diatribist to prove his conclusion.

former of these he should conclude that a man may be too religious, it is plain
that this must be his meaning, that a man may be a Polytheist, a worshipper of
false Gods, but I hope, in this sense, he that observes the ceremonies of the
Church of England, he that commemorates the birth of Christ on the 25 of Deber,
will not be said to be too religious.

cultus illegitimus, or indebitus, undue worship of the true God (which alone
can possibly be deemed for the Diatribist's purpose) my answer shall be more
particular, by viewing and weighing the words in Aquinas which are here
referred to: though the place be not set down by the Diatribist, I suppose it
must be 2d1 2d2 either quest. 81. Art. 1. or else qu. 92. Art. 1. in conclus.
which indeed has these words, Religio est virtus moralis, omnis autem virtus
moralis in medio consist it, Religion is a moral virtue, and every moral virtue
consists in the middle, citing it (with a sicut supra dictum est) from the
former place qu. 81. Art. 5. Now the sum of that Article is this, that Resp.
ad. 3.
Religion is neither a Theological nor an Intellectual, but a moral virtue, as
being a branch of justice, in giving to God that which belongs to him, and that
the due medium, wherein this, as all moral virtue consists, is to be taken, not
as the middle point between two passions, the Vid 1. 2. q. 64. Art. 2.
medium rei (as ordinarily moral virtue is the moderating of passions, reducing
them to a mediocrity, or temper, or equilibration betwixt the excess and
defect) but according to some equality, in respect of God, Ibid.
medium rationis, interpreting what he means by that, viz. equality, not
absolutely, because we cannot give God so much as belongs to him, but secundum
quandam considerationem humanae facultatis and divinae acceptationis (by
considering what man is able to do, and what God will accept; As for
superfluity in such things as these, which belong to the worship of God, there
can be none, says he, secundum circumstantiam quanti, as to the circumstance
of quantity. I cannot do too much in the worship of God, I cannot offend that
way but, as l. 2. q. 64. Art. 4 in corp.
elsewhere he says of this, and the like, tanto est melius, quanto magis
acceditur ad summum, it is so much the better, by how much it comes nearer the
highest. All the superfluity possible is as to the other circumstances, and he
names but three, 1. cui non debet, by exhibiting divine worship to him to whom
it ought not to be exhibited, 2. quando non debet, by giving it at a time when
it ought not, (when having formerly been acceptable to God, it is now outdated)
3. in respect of other circumstances, prout non debet, in a manner wherein it
ought not.

incompetent this testimony from Aquinas is, to prove the conclusion proposed
by the Diatribist, that every thing in the worship of God which is not
commanded by God, is too much. For sure every thing that is not commanded, is
not presently forbidden, nor consequently offends against the prout debet, as
it ought, the due manner, time, or other circumstances of it. If there be any
difficulty in that phrase [prout debet, as it ought] and it be conceived to
signify so as is particularly commanded by God, and e contra, that what ever
is done, being not particularly commanded by God, is prout non debet, as it
ought not, this is certainly a mistake, and very distant from Aquinas's sense,
who means by cultus debitus, due worship, any acts of worship, 2d^ 2d^ q. 81.
Art. 5. in aorp.
qui ad Dei reverentiam fiunt, which are done to the honor of God, with
considering whether they be under precept or not, and consequently with him
cultus indebitus, undue worship, is such as is done to the dishonor, at least
not to the honor of God, as when of Idolatry he says, that it Q. 92. art. 2.
corp.
exhibits divine reverence, indebite, unduly to the creature.

other text qu. 92. art. 1. Superstition is by him defined to be a vice opposed
to religion in the excess, whereby a man gives worship to him to whom he ought
not, or not in a manner that he ought, meaning as he explains himself, not that
of quantity, but in respect of other circumstances, when either it is fastened
on a wrong object, divine worship to that which is not God, (which sure is
against, not only without the command of God) or done in a wrong manner, i. e.
when any thing is done in the divine worship, In resp. ad tertium.
quod fieri non debet, which ought not to be done, and he Art. 2. in resp. ad
tertium.
instances, si quis temporibus gratiae vellet colere Deum secundum veteris
legis ritum, If any man under Christianity would worship God after the rites of
the old law, which sure are not only not commanded but forbidden under Christ,
and so are a proper instance of the quando non debet the undue circumstance of
time, mentioned particularly in the former place, and convinces that which I
assigned to be the meaning of it. I need add no more in this place concerning
the testimony of Aquinas. Other mentions of his opinion in this matter, will
hereafter occur, and then I shall have occasion to speak more to them.

proof is from the Doctors own concession, who, says he, grants there may be a
nimiety or excess of religion, and adds words in such a style as are
absolutely nonsense, even when the [not] (which I suppose the insertion of the
Printer) is blotted out, thus there may be a nimiety in adding, and so is an
exceeder in the fear and service of God.

answer, 1. that the Dr. no where uses that phrase, a nimiety or excess of
religion, the words [of religion] are inserted by the citer and honestly put in
different letters, to note them to be his own.

excess of fear, but not of religion (see the beginning of. 46. of the Tr. of
superstit.) and though I after say, that he that thinks himself bound or
obliges others, as from God, when God neither commands nor forbids, and so
adds to the commands of God, and fears where there is no reason to fear, is an
exceeder in the fear and service of God, yet neither is that excess of
religion, nor indeed excess of fear or of service of God, but the meaning is
apparently this, that in fearing God, and serving God he is guilty of some
other excess, not an excess of fear of God, but fearing somewhat else, which he
phansies to come from God, when it does not, this fear of that something else,
is an excessive fear more then religion suggests to him, and yet the
unhappiness of it is, this interposeth it self in religion.

This will be more evident by an example, suppose a man to fancy that by Gods
law he ought to kill his Father, and fears Gods wrath if he does not, this man's
fear is excessive, but his religion is not, he is an exceeder in the service of
God, if he do that in Gods service, which is no part of it, but quite contrary
to it, but does not meanwhile serve God too much, but too little, does not
exceed but fall short, and so is far from being too religious.

There was certainly great need of Arguments, when this was thought sit to be
produced to me, who sure knew my own meaning when I thus spoke, and was likely
enough to be able to give this account of it. As it is, I have done with his
first discovery of causes of my miscarriages, and shall now hasten to the
second.

Sect. 4. Excess of Religion. Super statutum. Addition to the Rule. Doctrines.
(...), Act. 17. 22. Act. 25. 29. Six concessions. Superstitiosus. Worshipping
of Angels. Superstitum cultus. Slavish fear. Religion in Epicurus. Fear of
punishment in sons; in wicked men. The necessity thereof. Dogmatizing. Placing
more virtue in things then belongs to them.
THe second cause of the Doctors miscarriages, says he, is his misprision,
That excess in Religion is not well called Superstition, or that Superstition
is not excess of Religion. Sect. 27 etc.

memory not suggesting unto me, that I was at all guilty of this misprision,
thus unlimitedly charged on me, I therefore read over that 27. and the two
following Sections, to discern what it was that had given him occasion to
affirm this, and there I find no such thing. The subject of Section 27. being
the improperness of their expressions, who resolve Superstition, simply and
abstractly taken, in all Authors, to signify evil; of Sect. 28. a second
inconsequence, that the use of Ceremonies not prescribed by Christ, should
first be called Superstition, then condemned for deserving that title; of the
29. a third inconsequent, that men should abstain from some indifferent
Ceremonies, as Superstitious, and not expect to be counted superstitious for
obliging themselves to do the contrary. But sure none of these, nor all
together, do at all yield any ground for that conclusion, which he has here
misreported from them, and that one would think, were a competent answer to
this second discovery of causes.

is meant by excess of religion, it is not possible for me to affirm or deny, to
acknowledge or disclaim universally, what I am said to affirm. To deal plainly
then, and without all ambiguity, If by excess of Religion he understand the
doing of any thing in the worship of God, which Gods word does not command
(which is the only thing which is of controversy betwixt us, as has already
been manifested) then I stick not to deny that this is Superstition, or that
superstition in any authentic notion, or in the origination of the word
whether Greek or Latin, does import or comporhend this, and if he shall fly
to any other sort of excess, and contend that to be it of which he speaks, this
will be then the fallacy or lying hid in ambiguities, which I took care to
deprive him of in the last Section.

excess in religion he means, by the proof which he first offers to confirm his
affirmative. For, for this he brings three proofs, and the first is this,
because it is an addition to the rule of worship, and so an excess, as super
statutum.

formal or legal proof of the proposition for which it was designed (and
besides, it must be observed, in passing, that the medium here used, is no
fitter for the proving of this then of the last proposition; for it is the same
to both, and so indeed it is equally proper for both, or for what else he
please) yet thus much is clear from it, that by excess in Religion he means
addition to the Rule, and that we formerly discerned to signify with him the
doing any thing uncommanded in the service of God, and to that we have replied
abundantly in the last Section.

confirmation of his proof, one thing not said before, that all such addition
to the Rule must be superstition forsooth, because it is super statutum, above
what is commanded, supposing, it seems, that that is the notation of the word
superstition. And then I desire the Diatribist's leave, that it may for once be
my turn to make discoveries of causes, to propose to him, at least for
consideration, whether this may not be his (...) fundamental procreative
mistake, the having inconsiderately in his youth swallowed this etymology of
the word superstition (I am unwilling to fancy the Diatribist to be the
inventer of it) as if it were so called from supra statutum, above what is
commanded.

conjecture, I shall profess to be at an end of my search of causes; But if it
be, I desire him to allow me the favor once to disabuse him, by exacting this
justice from him to himself, to consider whether any Laws of derivation,
composition or analogy can permit him seriously to believe that [statutum] is
ingredient in compounding Superstition, or that it can be by any Rules deduced
from any word in the Latin tongue, but superstes, superstitis, and the rather
because (...), which is resolved to be the parallel Greek to the Latin
superstition, and is visibly so, if it be allowed to be deduced from
superstitum cultus, has nothing to do with super statutum, but is in plain
words a worshipping of Demons.

Treatise of Superstition, to satisfy any Scholar, that knows in the least,
what belongs to the use or the nature of words, and so much, it seems, that Mr.
C. confesses that the original of the word was Heathenish, to signify
superstitum cultus, and only adds ((...), in civility or fidelity to his cause)
that though this be true, yet it is well applied by Divines to those additions
made to the Rule of worship. But I pray what is this but to grant the premises,
and deny the conclusion? It Is certain and by him acknowledged, that the original
of the word is another thing not super statutum, what then can he tolerably
mean by [tis well applied by Divines]? can Divines do well to apply superstitio
to super statutum, when that is no way the nature of the word? Or can any proof
be brought from hence to conclude superstition an excess, or addition to the
rule, because it is super statutum, when there is no affinity between super
statutum and superstition? what is or can be unreasonable, if this be not?

[That which the Old Testament calls addition to the word, the New calls
doctrines, traditions of men, wilworship, superstition.] In which few words as
there be many infirm parts, 1. That additions to the word are in the N. T.
called Doctrines I suppose he means teaching somewhat else for doctrines, Mat.
15 9. assuming them to be such when they are not: So again, Mar. 7. 7. where
yet the word Doctrines signifies the Scripture or Doctrine of God, and so the
teaching their own traditions for doctrines, is adding them to the Scripture,
Doctrines there simply signifying not that addition, but that to which the
addition is made) and 2. that they are called will worship (the contrary of
which is proved in the Treatise of will worship, and here to suppose it, is a
begging of the question) so sure this is a third, that additions to the rule of
worship, are any where in the New T. called superstition, I desire he will show
me one such place, for my Concordance will not afford it me.

twice there used: First, Act. 17. 22. by St. Paul of the Athenians, whom he
perceived to be (...) more superstitious then others: But these sure never
meddled with, and so added not to the true rule of worship, any otherwise then
as all that abandon it, add to it, live by some other false rule, and mind
not that; and if they are, for so doing, to be styled adders to the rule of
Worship, adulterers are so in like manner, and so by that measure or standard,
every sin in the world is superstition.

Act. 25. 29. where Festus speaks of Paul's (...), own superstition, but sure
meant not to accuse him of adding to his or the Jews rule of worship, but
understood his own Religion, and nothing else by that phrase. And so still
(...), here are as many misadventures amasst together, as could well be crowded
into so few words.

defect in Religion is called profaneness, so the excess is called
superstition, as standing in opposition to it. Alas, it seems there is great
need of proofs, for this again, as the former, was the very medium to prove the
first proposition, and so either the first, and this second proposition of his
are all one (and then why was it cut in two, by Lucians beetle?) or else these
proofs are very excellent instruments, fitted for all turns indifferently.
However it is, I shall not need provide new answers to it, but remand it to the
former Section, where it was considered to the utmost it could pretend: Only if
he please, I shall put it in form for him, thus. The worship of the many false
Gods or Demons is an excess opposed to Religion, or worship of the one true God
of heaven and earth, in Aquinas's opinion, and so also is the worshipping the
true God after an undue or unlawful manner, ergo, the using any Ceremony (in
the worship of the true God) which the Scripture has not commanded, is
superstition, and superstition is that: As if he should say, superstition is
that, because it is somewhat else, as extremely distant from that, as that
which is not God is from God, or as unlawful (for so is superstition) is from
lawful, for such is that which is not prohibited.

third proof he now adds of his affirmation, and that after the manner observed
in his former argument from the Doctors own concessions, and no less then five,
nay the fourth number being twice repeated, no less then six of them: And if I
have so liberally granted it, I wonder how it came to be my charge, and that as
the cause of my miscarriages, that I denied it.

fancy first, and next accuse me of denying a thing grosso modo, and to prove
me to have erred in thus denying, produce six several senses, wherein I have
granted it, whereas there is in the whole indictment but one pretended, wherein
I had denied it. In all reason those six concessions might have reconciled the
Diatribist to me, and persuaded him that I was of his mind, rather then one
single appearance of dissenting have thus provoked him.

Doctors Concessions, such as they are, are evidently reconcilable with all
that he has proposed, in that Tract of Superstition, and the descending to a
particular view of them, as they are marshalled up by the Diatribist, will take
away all doubt in this matter.

First, says he, he grants that superstitions may denote such an excess, Sect.
31. Here I demand what Mr. C. means by such an excess? that indeed is thus far
answered already, that he means an excess of Religion: But what excess in
Religion? The super statutum, every addition to the rule of worship, i. e.
every uncommanded circumstance, or Ceremony in the worship of God? Thus he must
mean, if he be constant to himself, and if the Doctors Concessions yield him
any appearance of proof for his affirmative. But to see the luck of it, this
first citation from the Doctor is so far from yielding him any such testimony,
that it is indeed the quite contrary; for that which the Doctor there observes
Sect. 31. is this, that the word superstitiosus may indeed denote such excess
from the force of the termination osus, but this no more then the word
religiosus also denotes, in the opinion of Agellius out of Nigidius Figulus,
and consequently, that 1. Superstitio and Religio were all one in that same
Author's opinion: and 2. that it is the animadversion of Agellius upon that
Author, that all such excesses are not culpable, or taken in ill, but good
senses. And then was not this a dangerous concession, fit to be called out in
judgment against me, then which nothing could be more direct to the asserting
mine, and refuting the Diatribists hypothesis?

superstitiosus were not sufficient, to secure my pretensions, which in that
place were only this, that superstition among all Authors signified not any
criminous excess. I might farther add, that even when the word superstitiosus;
is but a bare denominative from superstitio, and yet is used in an ill sense,
as when we Christians say a superstitious person, the account is clear, that
superstition there signifies Heathen-worship, or somewhat proportionable to it
Superstitiosum est quicquid ab hominibus institutum est ad facienda and colenda
idola pertinens. August: de doctr. Christ: l. 2. c. 20.
worshipping of others beside the one true God; and by analogy with that
notion of the substantive, the adjective fitly denotes him that acts like one
of those false worshippers, or agrees with them in some eminent thing, which is
a branch of their false worship, as he that makes observations of dreams, and
ominous days, or occurrences, is said commonly to be superstitious herein, i.
e. to imitate the Auguries of the Heathen, and many the like.

concession, that the worship of Angels is an excess or addition to the object
of worship, and by him styled that crime of superstition] a man would wonder to
see produced by the Diatribist against me. It Is certain I make the worship of
Angels superstition, worshipping those fellow creatures, which a Christian
ought not to worship; But is this an excess of religion, or not rather of
impiety? worshipping of the creature (...) besides or over and above the
creator. It Is true, this is an addition to the object of worship, as death is an
addition to life, i. e. destruction to the oneness of that, which ought alone
to be worshipped, and admits no rival (ye cannot serve God and Mammon, nor
worship the one God, if ye impart and lavish out that incommunicable privilege
to any other) and so adultery is an addition to the object of marital love and
fidelity: But then what is this to the prejudice of uncommanded ceremonies? the
using of which super statutum, the Diatribist is to demonstrate to be
superstition, for about that only, he knows, the controversy is betwixt us.

concession is just parallel to this, and in part the same, superstitum cultus,
says he, the worship of the Worthies by heathens, or of Saints and Angels by
Papists, is called superstition Sect. 3. most properly, why? but that it adds
to the rule of worship.] I must not repeat what was so lately said, though the
Diatribist will. It Is evident I affirm all these to be superstition, but the
using of an uncommanded rite is none of these, what heathen worthy, Saint, or
Angel is worshipped or idolized by my prostrating my self in the worship of the
true God, by my bowing at the name of Jesus etc. As for the reason why the
worship of heathen Worthies and Saints, and Angels by analogy, is called
superstition, it is strange again what care of interest can do. The reason, one
would think, was visible enough to the Diatribist, in the very naming of
superstitum cultus, these Worthies and Saints are superstites, supposed to live
after death (sure that is the notion of superstes) and so the worshipping of
such is superstition, and as the Angels, so the souls of the Worthies that thus
survive the bodies (and in the heathens theology are removed (...), to the
fortunate Islands, in the Christians, to heaven or paradise, or Abraham's
bosom) are solemnly styled (...), and so the worshipping of them is (...), and
that is superstition. Is not this reason enough for the justifying the
propriety of the use of a word, that it perfectly accords with the origination
of it both in Greek and Latin? and then what need of his capriccio, [why? but
that it adds to the rule of worship] Certainly so does sacrilege (even when
it robbes God] add to the rule of worship, in this sense, doing something
which the rule commands not, no nor permits, and yet that is not superstition.

concession produced is yet more strange. A slavish fear says he, of God, is
granted to be superstition, because fear of God being worship commanded in the
first commandment, slavish fear is an excess of that] and he has adventured to
cite the sections, wherein it is granted by me.. 24. 25. of the treatise of
superstition. Herein the Reader will easily satisfy himself by his own eyes;
In a word, those sections say no syllable of slavish fear, or any such matter
(and yet the Printer has not mistaken his figures) all that they say, is this,
that superstitio sometimes signifies in authors any part of Divine worship,
which in obedience to his God, or for fear of vengeance from him, any
worshipper does perform, a thing which every sect likes in themselves, but
dislikes in others of a distant worship, and so either honors or defames with
the title as of superstition, so of Religion also. Then, that it also signifies
a trembling fear of Gods punishments due for sin, such as the Epicureans,
that denied all providence, were willing to scoff out of the world. And of
this notion of superstition, and equally of religion among the Epicureans, and
Cicero that took it from them, I had spoken there at large, from. 14. to. 20.
to which I must remit the Reader, and only add what there I omitted, that all
that is there observed would probably receive much light, if we could retrieve
one book of Plutarch, which is lost, and instead of which I can now only give
him the title of it, (...) of superstition to Epicurus, differing (it seems,
both by the addition of (...), and consequently in the subject of it) from that
which is now extant of Plutarchs (...), which has no considerable aspect on
Epicurus, or his followers and Philosophy, either to defend or accuse it. Of
this see the learned Gassend in his life of Epicurus.

change my words in an unprofitable citation (when if it had been slavish fear
in his notion of it, of which I spoke, yet that had been far enough from the
using of uncommanded ceremonies or instituting of Festivals) and instead of
[that divine worship which any performs in obedience to his God, or for fear
of punishment from him, and which Epicurus desired to scoff out of the world]
to substitute slavish fear of God, or an excess of that fear of God which is
prescribed as worship in the first commandment?] Can it enter into any
Christians heart to think or say, that Epicurus was in the right in that part
of his Theology, and consequently that it was an excess of fear which Epicurus
desired to exterminate? This is to say, that all religion, belief of hell,
infinite punishments apportioned to sinners in another world, are excess of
fear, and (under the title of slavish) criminous, and to be cast out. This
certainly was Epicurus's meaning, and the verses in Lucretius demonstrate it,
where he thus argues,

-- Nam si nullum finem esse putarent
Aerumnarum homines, nulla ratione valerent
Religionibus atque minis obsistere vatum.
If men should believe endless punishments, they could never resist the
religions, and threatenings of the Priests. And who would have expected the
Diatribist a favourer of this sect, as he must be, if this fear of God, which
Epicurus called Religion or Superstition, be by him looked on as an excess of
that worship of the first commandment? for that was Epicurus's very notion of
it, placing his own opinion in the midst; and as on one side, downright
Atheism, denying any God at all, so on the other, belief of a providence, of
rewards and punishments; which as the mother of fear or perturbation, and
interrupter of the (...) quiet of life (his great aim) and very Quid enim
interest utrum Deos neges an infames?
injurious to the Gods, he rejected as another extreme, under the title of
Superstitio error in sanus, amandos timet, quos colit violat. Seneca Epistol.
124.
Superstition. But of this sure I have spoken abundantly, and did not foresee
that Mr. C. was to be admonisht of this worst principle in all Epicurus his
philosophy.

divinity concerning slavish fear, and because mention of this slavish fear as
of a criminous excess, and a branch of superstition recurres very frequently in
these Diatribae, I shall not resist the invitation of saying somewhat in this
place, once for all, of slavish fear: By that I suppose he understands fear of
punishment, as by filial fear, a reverential obedience, proceeding wholly from
love, without any thing of fear in it. Concerning this distinction I shall
first demand, whether it have any thing of propriety in it, i. e. whether
sons may not lawfully and reasonably fear punishment from their parents, in
case they shall deserve it, even the greatest punishment, exheredation, and
casting out of the family, upon their continuing disobedient and refractary to
their fathers commands, and whether this very fear be not so useful to
restrain the excesses of youth, and keep them within that obedience, that no
parent will ever think fit that the child shall know or think that his
disobedience, whatsoever the degree of it may be, shall not be thus punished,
and lastly, whether it be not duty in the child thus to fear, and
proportionably whether this be not applicable to every child of God,
especially being exhorted to it, Heb. 4. 1. Let us fear lest a promise being
made of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it
(adding thereto Heb. 12. 28, 29.) and this distinction being founded in the
likeness between a child of God, and a child of an humane parent: If this be
so, then there can be no fitness or propriety in the distinction thus
explicated, nor can the fear of punishment be discriminatively called slavish,
nor with justice defined an excess of fear.

Secondly, The slavish fear I shall suppose in the Diatribists notion to be
such as is in a wicked man, and then it must be either the fear of divine
vengeance for sin committed formerly, or for sin at the time of committing it,
or for sin before he commit it; and I demand how any of these three fears can
by a Christian duly be called an excess, or with any propriety superstition?
For ought not the wicked man to fear punishment for his sins past, when God
affirms solemnly there is no peace, no peace to such? be not the judgments of
God gone out against that man, and if that Lion roar, shall not he fear, if
vengeance be denounced from God against him, is it a season for him to cast off
fear? or if he does, is not this carnal security? and is not the contrary
apprehension (i. e. fear) necessary to reduce him? in a word, are not the
terrors of the Gospel part of the Gospel, and on purpose designed to bring such
a man to repentance, and can he be said to believe the Gospel, which believes
not that part of it, or will they be motives of Reformation to him, if he do
not apply them to himself, in respect of his present state? and can he so apply
them, who does not fear the execution of them?

committing any wilful sin, ought he not to look upon it, as that against
which the wrath of God is denounced, and can he do so, and believe God, and not
fear that wrath may fall on him, and that as long as he remains under the power
of such sin, he remains under the wrath of God? Are all the evil abodes of an
accusing conscience in a vicious person, excess, nay is not the contrary the
highest pitch both of presumption and danger, the very root bearing gall and
wormwood, to bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of my heart, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

before the commission of sin, when he enters into temptation, is not the fear
of hell an useful restraint to him, is it not both his duty and his bridle, is
there, or can there be any excess in that? should he fear, or should he not
fear? If he should not, then what can keep him from running into all excess of
riot? shall love of God, or virtue? but the wicked man, as wicked, is supposed
to have none of that in his heart: But if he should, if it be his duty to fear,
and to fear hell, in case he shall thus go on, then still how can it be an
excess?

Diatribist reason to change his mind concerning slavish fear, and no longer
to think it an excess of Religion, nor, as such, capable of the title of
Superstition.

fear, is a defect, not excess, a want of love, not any unproportionable
measure of fear, God is made up of goodness, as well as justice, and the Gospel
compounded of promises as well as threats and the love of Christ ought to
constrein us, as well as the terrors of the Lord to persuade, and he that has
a quick sense of one, and none of the other, he is not an exceeder in fear, but
deficient in love, and so still the mention of slavish fear in this place, and
frequently in the first exercitation, is very unapplicable to the purpose, for
which it is brought, as an instance of an excess of religion, or superstition.

repeated, and so must be remembered from hence.

Concession of the Drs. is observed to be this, that to affirm God to command,
when he does not, is granted to be superstition, under the notion of nimiety or
excess, because that man adds to the commands of Christ. 46.] To this I
answer, that for them who are resolved to have superstition taken in the sense
of nimiety, and in that sense to be opposed to religion, as an extreme to the
mediocrity, I did assign this of imposing commandments on God (and so
obligations on our selves, and others) which he never gave, as an excess of
fear, a being afraid of God, when we need not, and so proportionable to one
notion of (...), arising from the consideration of the word (...) (which may
signify perhaps a trembling, and so cowardly fear, (...)) in that composition,
And if hereby I have gratified the Diatribist, and yielded the Dogmatizer a
Superstitious person, I wonder why this might not have been taken notice of in
my behalf, and so saved him the pains of affixing this position on me, that
excess in religion is not well called Superstition, which it is visible, and by
himself now confessed, that in this sense, I affirm it to be; see that 46.. of
Superstition.

Drs. hypothesis is still secure, for this no way belongs to the bare using in
the private man, or the Magistrates prescribing Ceremonies in the worship of
God, neither of them doing it upon pretense of Divine precept.

concession, vouched by him, that to place more virtue in things, then God or
nature has put in them, is granted to be an excess, because it adds to the
promises of Christ, and called Superstition by me,. 45.] For this is another
particular, which I allow to be an excess, and when it is not mere folly fit to
be comprehended under the style of Superstition, for this farther reason
besides those which I there mentioned, because such beliefs as these are mostly
borrowed from the heathen (...), and are remainders of their practices, as St.
Augustine Ep: 73. speaks of the ligatures, Execranda superstitio ligaturarum,
in quibus inaures, etc. non ad placendum hominibus, sed ad serviendum
daemonibus adhibentur, the accursed superstition of ligatures, among which are
the earrings etc. used not for the pleasing of men, but to serve devils. This
testimony the Reader may subjoyn, if he please, to the Supellex already
prepared for him in this kind. 26. of superst: and discern how far I have been
from denying, what I am accused here to deny, and yet as far from yielding him
any foundation of concluding, that the Ceremonies or Festivals of our Church
are in the least degree guilty of Superstition.

second discovery of causes of my (phansied, not real) mistakes.

Sect. 5. The innocence of Will Worship. Analogy with voluntary oblations
under the law. Seeming Contradiction. The authority of Chrysostom and
Theophylact. The 2d. Commandment. Reducing all sins to the Decalogue.
Addition to the rule, Worship of Angels. Other sins beside that of
Dogmatizing.
discovery of causes belongs peculiarly to that of Will Worship, thus,

The third, says he, is, that (...) or Will Worship, is nothing but voluntary
worship, as innocent as the freewill offerings etc.] which proposition of mine
I must suppose made up of these two parts, 1 that Will Worship is nothing else
but voluntary worship; 2 that being so, it is innocent, and as innocent as
freewill offerings: And in which part of these, one or both, the mistake lies,
I am not told, but both together indistinctly are proposed, as my 3d.
fundamental miscarriage.

remarke, that it should be possible to be looked upon by this Diatribist, as a
paradox, or mistake, or miscarriage in any man, and such as is meet to be
noted, as the most fruitful mother of many more, that (...) or Will Worship
should be affirmed to be nothing else but voluntary worship. Where I have no
farther appeal to make, then either to the ears of all men of common
understanding, or to the Glossaries and Interpreters of words. For is there any
the nicest difference imaginable betwixt Will Worship and voluntary worship,
save that in the latter [voluntary] is of a latter origination, from voluntas,
voluntarius; but [will] though perhaps from the Latin originally is yet more
anciently infranchised among us of England, I shall make short work of this, if
it be taken for any part of the mistake, by desiring one favor from Mr. C.
viz. that he will translate either the Greek (...), or the English,
Will Worship, into Latin for me; will it not surely be voluntarius cultus, and
is not that being turned again into English, voluntary Worship? What can be
more evident then this?

But it may be hoped that this was not my mistake, but what follows, viz. that
this voluntary worship is as innocent as the freewill offering. But it is not
possible, that should be the mistake neither, for freewill offerings under the
Law were certainly one species of voluntary worship, and so known by the title
of (...), voluntary, and therefore those being innocent, it is certain that all
the other fellow species of voluntary worship, bearing proportion with these
and having no circumstance to defame them, which the other had not, must needs
be innocent also.

New Testament, Col. 2. has already been largely vindicated in the Tract of
Will Worship, which the Reader is requested to resort to, and the Annotation on
Col. 2. where many more evidences are added to it, which make it superfluous to
add yet more in this place; Only I must secure it from the Diatribist's (...)
or objections: And the first is by way of velitation, that it seems a
contradiction in adjecto, that voluntary worship and uncommanded should be
innocent.

appearances; That may seem to Mr. C. which does not to other men, and Ammonius
tells me this is very ordinarily observable in this very matter, (...), many
propositions (...). f. 89.
seem indeed to be contradictory, but yet are not such. But I shall ask, Is it
what it seems, or is it not? If it be not, why was this mentioned by one, who
can distinguish betwixt true and false, color and varnish, reality and
appearance? If it be, I desire to be instructed, what Logician has so defined
contradiction as will any way accord to this expression.

definition or description of contradiction in adjecto that ever I heard of,
is, when that which is added is contradictory to that which was first set, and
contradictions we know are affirmations and negations of the same thing in the
same respect, either formally which the interpreters of Aristotle call (...)
diagonial, (...), fighting one with another in direct form of contradiction,
(...), the enunciation [every man] to the negation [not every man] or
interpretatively, i. e. by certain consequence or implication, as if I should
say, Socrates is not a man, here were a contradiction in adjecto, because in
the subject of the proposition, he that had the appellation of Socrates, was
supposed to be a man, and yet in the praedicate, that is denied of him. But
certainly here is no such thing, either formally, or by implication, in this
proposition, Voluntary, or uncommanded worship is innocent;] Of forbidden
worship this were true, for innocence to be attributed to that, were
contradiction in adjecto, but there is a wide difference betwixt forbidden and
voluntary, as wide as between unlawful and lawful, all being lawful, which
is not forbidden, else there were not universal truth in the Apostles maxim,
that sin is a transgression of the Law.

Theophylact says of many men (...) that they exceed or transcend many of the
commandments; I demand, Do they offend and sin, and are nocent in so doing, or
did that holy man think they did? It Is evident he did not; for he, after his
manner, borrows from, and transcribes In Romans 8.
Chrysostom, and in stead of (...) many, he reads (...) the spiritual; They,
says he, do many things with desire and appetite, and manifest it (...), in
that they do even exceed the commands; It appears therefore that to these two
holy and learned men, it seemed not, what to Mr. C. it seems, that there is
contradiction in adjecto, in affirming voluntary and uncommanded worship to be
innocent. A multitude of the like testimonies are put together in the Annotat.
on Col. 2. which may be sufficient to justify me from singularity, that I
discern not the phansied seeming contradiction.

affirmation again of the Diatribist will not want its proofs; four, that
pretend to that title, are here annexed.

It Is expressly against the 2d. commandment which forbids all worship not
expressly commanded by God. I must not complain of my eyes, or other faculties,
because they are the best that God has given me; but I may wish for such
supplies as Mr. C. has met with, for else I am sure I shall never see the
least glimpse of that which he mentions so expressly out of the 2d.
Commandment. What is expressly against the 2d. Commandment, should, me thinks,
oppose some express words in it, and then it must follow that there are such
express words there, which forbid all worship not commanded by God, and this
not only as by worship are meant the sorts and species of worship, but the
very accessaries and ceremonies of worship, and all the expressions and
emanations of the inward fullness of the religious heart. But my Optic Glass
will not afford me any such prospect in the 2d. Commandment: All sorts of
graven images, and such like, I have there a fair view of, and an express
severe interdict of worshipping them, but for all kinds and all circumstances of
worship which are not commanded, kneeling, prostrating the body to the
invisible true God, the times and degrees of ardency of worship, the
abstinencies, self-denyals atendant on it, sure there is nothing said
expressly there, either to command or forbid them, and for any general
comprehensive phrase, that can rationally contein a prohibition of all which is
not commanded, I can say no more, but that the first verse of Genesis or any
other in the Bible, has as much of this to my eye, as the 2d. Commandment.

discovering of causes of mistakes, and therefore I must be excused again, upon
the score of the example before me, if I once more attempt to shoot my shaft,
and by this first argument pass my conjecture of the cause of the prefacers
mistake in this matter. It is the solemn practice of some Casuists, to reduce
all sins in the world to some or other of the Commandments of the Decalogue;
wherein I am not sure that they have aimed aright, for separate gluttony and
drunkenness (as sure they may be separated, and yet continue to be sins) from
some accidental consequences of them, as wasting of health, which may assign
either of them to the 6t. Commandment, and the like, and you will hardly tell
whither to reduce the intemperate use of the creature; And so for that sort of
lying or false speaking which is no way hurtful, or designed to be hurtful to
the neighbor, and many the like instances might be given. But on this I insist
not with any concernment, but leave it to prudent consideration, what necessity
there is, that all laws natural and positive divine should be reduced to one or
more of these 10. Commandments. This is not that which I meant to say, but
farther to offer it to consideration, whether it be not visible, that those
Casuists which have erred in judging the unlawfullness of some things, have not
easily been induced to reduce them to some or other of the Commandments, as
offenses against the affirmative or negative part, and if not against the words
or sense, yet against the Analogy of it.

consequent, that he that has been possessed of the unlawfullness of ceremonies
and worship uncommanded, and has not so far considered, as to rectify his
judgment in that matter (by weighing this one thing, that whatsoever is not
forbidden is lawful, not, whatsoever is not commanded is unlawful) must
whenever he shall write cases of conscience, or comment on the Decalogue,
reduce this to some interdict under one of the ten heads, and all the other
nine renouncing it, force it in by some appearance of analogy, to the 2d.
Commandment; And then it falls out, that so many men, disaffected to the
Government and Ceremonies of the Church of England, have written on the
Commandments, that it can be no more matter of wonder, that uncommanded worship
should be crowded in to the 2d. Commandment (and there long ago imbibed by the
Diatribist, and never questioned since) then that Mr. Brightman should find the
Church of England of this age, among the seven Cities of Asia in St John's time,
or that Mr. Parker should make the using the cross in Baptism, a breach of
every one of the ten Commandments, and branch a book in folio, into the
Atheism, as I remember, I am sure, the Idolatry, the etc. till at last, the
concupiscence of the Cross.

Diatribist whether he can heartily believe that the use of that ceremony was
really guilty of all those several transgressions of the Law of God, and if he
shall (...), beseech him to examine over again his own affirmation here, 1.
Whether any one man has said so fully what here he has, that voluntary and
uncommanded worship is expressly against the 2d. Commandment (they that only
reduce it thither, fall short of him) 2. Whether they that have thought fit to
refer it thither by reduction, have produced any cogent or satisfactory reason
for so doing, and the next time he affirms this from them, annex the reason,
such as may justify a most rigid conclusion to the consciences of all others
who may be concerned in it, either in order to their own practice, or the
judging of others. And I shall not farther exagitate this his first proof.

The 2d proof is the same we have had twice already, for the asserting the two
former affirmations, voluntary worship is an addition to the rule of worship,
and eo nomine Superstition and that is sinful.] But I have already showed,
that all additions to that rule are not Superstition, and that all that is by
any called Superstition, is not eo nomine sinful, and so I am safe from that
proof also.

repetition, put in form of question [Why is the worship of Angels and Saints
criminal? but because it was invented and added by the will of man?] This
question was answered long since, that the worship of all creatures is
criminal; because the command is positive and exclusive, that God, and none but
the one God is to be worshipped, and though the doing what is not commanded, is
not a sin, yet the doing what is forbidden must needs be sinful, and such is
the worshipping of Angels etc.

worship Angels) do not urge it as a commandment of God] was sure very
unnecessarily inserted, For I never doubted but there are other sins besides
dogmatizing, and can now promptly suggest to him competent store of instances;
sure the murderer is a sinner, though he teach it for a doctrine from heaven,
that it is lawful to kill his brother, etc. And then why should not the
worshipper of Angels against express precept (Thou shall have no other Gods
before me, Thou shall not bow down nor worship) be a transgresser of that
Commandment, though he oblige not, as from God, any other man to do the like?

ab incommodo, If wilworship, says he, be innocent, I cannot see how all that
rabble of Superstitious worship at Rome can be condemned, for they are not held
out as Commandments of God, but traditions of men] The answer last given to the
appendage of the 3d proof is sufficient to this also. Other faults there may be
in worship, beside holding it out as the Commandment of God. It may for the
object of worship take in somewhat beside God, or for the ceremonies it may
multiply them unprofitably, ridiculously, or it may be, pretend more virtue in
them, then really belongs to them, and many the like. But these I mention,
because if it be true, what is here suggested, that the worship at Rome, is
really superstitious, and that there is a rabble of that worship there, as is
supposed in the question, the answer is already given by the very proposal of
it, and has without any violence to my hypothesis, which undertook not to
justify all, or any other Churches in their worship, but only that of
England, which is known to be free, where Rome, I add, where the Greek Church
in as high a degree as Rome, is guilty. And this may serve for the 3d grand
discovery of causes.

Sect. 6. The Lawfulness of instituting the Christmas Festival. Of Church Laws.
mistake assigned by the Diatribist, is, that the Dr. takes for granted, That a
Church or particular person has power to institute and observe worship not
commanded by God, which remains upon him to prove before he can vindicate his
Festival (as he and others maintain it) from the double crime of Superstition
and Will Worship.

differ from the third (as in reason it ought, else why should it be added to
it?) then the mistake is not only, or so much that I affirm, as that I take
for granted, when I ought to prove, that a Church or particular person has
power to institute and observe worship not commanded by God. Now I shall at
once prove my affirmation, and apply it to my Festival as he calls it, and show
that I have already proved it, and so not taken it for granted, as is here
suggested.

probation, whatsoever is in it self perfectly free or lawful by the Law of
God, and that liberty no way retrenched, that a Church or particular person
has power to institute and observe, But the Christmas Festival or annual
commemoration of Christ's birth, is in it self perfectly free or lawful by the
Law of God, and that liberty no way retrenched, Ergo.

major I suppose there can be no doubt, if there be, these three considerations
will clear it. 1. Because whatsoever is perfectly free and lawful, that the
Church or the Christian has power to do, unless that liberty be some way
retrenched to him; 2. What every particular Christian may freely do, that he
may still do, when it is by the Church prescribed or instituted, else that act
of the Church prescribing shall render that which it prescribes unlawful, being
perfectly lawful before that prescription (and if upon the most Anarchical
principles, that should be supposed to have any reason it, then still that
liberty is some way retrenched, the contrary to which is supposed in the major
proposition.) 3. Because the Church, meaning by that word the Universal Church
of God, whether of the Apostles times, including them, chief pastors thereof,
or of the purer times succeeding, together with the Governors of each Church
succeeding the Apostles, has the power of Stewards, noted by the Keys
entrusted to it by Christ, and consequently may dispose, order, institute for
her members, in those things which she shall judge to tend to the honor of God,
and to edification, though it be not immediately commanded (so it be not any
way prohibited) by God.

minor that the Christmas Festival is thus free and lawful, does also appear
by the no prohibition of God's in force against it, by the lawfulness of
praising God, and commemorating the gift of Christ on any day (one or more) in
the year, and consequently on the 25 of December, by the analogy of other
Festivals among the people of God in all ages, and by the answer to all
objections, to the contrary, and the evidence of the matter, that this liberty
has no way yet been retrencht by God, that gave it. And all this severally
cleared in the former discourses, and the chief of them again vindicated here,
by answer to the Diatribists pretended discovery of my mistakes.

more evidences, the reason will be soon discerned, by taking notice of the one
proof which he here subjoyns to this his last ground, in these words. [Which I
prove by this one argument, If all additions to the word in matter of worship
be criminous and sinful, as prohibited by God, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and elsewhere, then
no man or Church can without sin add any worship to that commanded by God; But
the first is true, Ergo.] Where it seems the whole matter is devolved to that
one issue, whether the text Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and the 2d Commandment (for there is
not any other [elsewhere] any other text by the Diatribist produced to that
purpose) be sufficient to prejudge the using or instituting any ceremony or
Festival, which is not commanded by God; And I hope this suppletory to those
former discourses, which has considered those two texts, has sufficiently
convinced that; And so there is no more now needful to be added to this matter.

Diatribist through every branch of his discovery of causes, and showed, I hope
competently, on which side the mistakes ly, and if there be no more
miscarriages in those three tracts of Superstition, Will Worship, and Festivals,
then this Preface, assigned to that work, has discovered to me, I shall have
no need farther to importune the reader with a Superfluous vindication, unless
upon this score only, that it is possible that the Diatribist may not have
summed up his bill aright, that there may still remain some particular mistakes
discoverable by the view of the particulars, which are here omitted in the foot
of the account, and then I must not take advantage of false reckoning. And upon
this slender account I must now still attend his motions, and shall do it, in
confidence, that what has been here, in answer to his Preface, said so
largely, will not be exacted of me again at every turn, by way of Repetition.
On which ground it is evident, that I am to make no return to the remainder,
which is the recapitulating of this Preface.

CHAP. III. Of Superstition peculiarly. And first of his Prolegomenon on that
Subject.
Sect. 1. Answer to. 1. The method used to find the meaning of the word.
first Diatribe, that of Superstition,. 1. I may lightly touch and pass over
the dislike of my method in writing of Will Worship before Superstition,
together with the reason, that being more general, this a species under it; for
though it be certain, that I am not of his mind, that the former is a species
of the latter, and so that I cannot admit of his reason of change, or that his
is, as he says, a more just methodical order of tractation, yet I shall not
engage in a dispute of their precedence, but only reply to the latter part of
his first. which directs the manner of inquiring, what Superstition is, not by
searching into the monuments of heathen Authors Latin or Greek from the names
or senses by them given, as by the judgment of Divines etc.

answer to this I shall need no farther reply then to remind him, that as there
is no better way to understand the full importance of words, then to examine
them in their origination, and their usage among the best Authors, Masters of
words, not only profane but sacred, so sure this is the very method I have
taken, for (...) (and Superstition) viewing it in the ancient heathens, in the
parts first, then in the composition, and so also in the sacred Scripture
(which I hope is no heathen Author) as often as it is found there, in Lactantius
and St. Augustine, which sure knew what true Religion meant, whatsoever he is
pleased to suggest of my way and Authors, and are as competent judges of
Superstition, as his later Divines, that have reduced the use of all
ceremonies, not commanded by God, to the 2d Commandment (and to Deuteronomy. 4. 2.)
under the title of Superstition.

Sect. 2. Answer to. 2. Amesius's definition. The matter of the 4. first
Commandments. The Affirmative part of the 2d Commandment. The Diatribist's
misadventure about Duty in the midst. No prohibition of either holy days in the
4th Commandment. Jeroboams act, 1 Kin. 12. 32. The Rubenites altar, Josh. 22.
Naaman's altar. Christmas Festival parallel to it. The excesses in each
Commandment.
Ames: how Superstition may be fitly defined by Aquinas, a vice contrary to
Religion in the excess, viz. in order to the acts or external means of worship
superadded by the wisdom or will of man, when a man tenders worship either to
whom it is not due, or not in that manner which he ought] he knows this, in the
obvious sense of the words, such as from Aquinas was lately cited, is perfectly
agreeable to my affirmations who make the worship of all but God, and the
worship of God in any forbidden or abolisht manner, to be species of
Superstition. But if by the aequivocal phrase [not in the manner which he
ought] he mean [in whatsoever other manner, or rite, or circumstance which God
has not expressly prescribed, any appendant of worship instituted or
appointed by man] (and not only any worship, as he cites out of Amesius, p.
4.) there is no truth in his definition, nor agreeableness to Aquinas's sense,
as has appeared formerly: It Is sure, Aquinas, which is cited in the margent,
has not owned any such interpretation of [non prout debet] to belong to all
uncommanded rites. If Amesius have (which I have not commodity to examine)
then he was one of the Casuists which I forementioned, as the derivers of this
prejudice into the Diatribist, and if Vrsine, Dr. Fulke, Mr. Perkins are
rightly cited in his margent, and their words extended no farther then they
designed them, then perhaps we have the full catalogue of them, and the
Diatribist is now of age, to consider whether they have proved, or only
dictated in this matter.

Diatribist toward the evincing of it, they are no way qualified for such a
structure. For when to the 4. Commandments of the first Table, he assigns these
4. things as the subject matter of them, a right object of worship, God alone,
of the first; a right matter, commanded worship, of the second; a right manner,
with all reverence, of the third; a right time, his own appointed day, of the
fourth; and thence concludes all excess in any of these Superstition, there is
scarce any one minute part of sound doctrine in all this.

first, which has most of truth, yet this failing there is, that the right
object of worship is not the principal matter of that Commandment, but the
worship it self, all the parts of that, having him for our God, treating him,
addressing to him, as such, and of this there is no criminous excess, which can
be styled Superstition, the Superstition forbidden in that commandment, is not
any extreme or excess of worshipping the true God, but the taking in other
rivals to that worship, which belongs to the true God incommunicably, and so is
the matter of the negative part of that precept, not the nimiety of the
affirmative.

second, there is not a word to determine the matter of it to commanded
worship, as has been evidenced beyond all question. The Subject of the 2d
Commandment is the prohibition of Idol-worship; And bending the knee to the
true God and none else, observing of Christmas etc. are remote enough from
that guilt.

Savior Mat. 6. had given us the sum of it, Thou shall not forswear thy
self, but perform unto the Lord thy oaths, the negative and affirmative parts
of it, and then with what propriety can that be said to denote the right manner
of the worship, with all due reverence? Or if it should be extensible so far,
then sure all ceremonies that may express that reverence, though not elsewhere
prescribed, will be here commanded, and then sure not forbidden in the 2d
Commandment.

Lastly, for the right time, God's own appointed day (the Sabbath, I suppose,
he means) though that be appointed in the 4th Commandment, yet sure not so as
to prohibit all others, we know there was a yearly Sabbatick fast (the great
day of expiation) so called Isa. 58. 13. and many other feasts beside that of
the weekly rest in the 4th Commandment, some of Gods own institution, others,
as the feast of dedication of the Altar, in memory of the purging by Judas
Maccabaeus, instituted by the Jews themselves, and never mentioned in the
Canon of the old Testament; and so the fasts of the fifth and seventh month,
Zac. 7. 5. And under the new Testament, the first day of the week, that
certainly was not the last, which the Decalogue prescribed, and why the
Apostles, that instituted that, proportionably to the weekly Sabbath, should
not (either they, or their successors) institute other days, festival or
fasting, proportionable to the like among the Jews, sure there is no manner of
prohibition in the 4th Commandment, which commanding one day to be hallowed,
and allowing the rest for their ordinary labor, does not yet interdict all
others, or bind his own, or his peoples, and all Christians hands from
prescribing or setting a part any other.

conclusion, as he says, answerably erected on them, that Superstition may
extend to the whole first Table, or that every excess which he will fancy
reducible to any of these, shall straightway commence Superstition?

observation he commends to us fundamental to this discovery, but such as I
think never slipped from any man before him. His words are these, The
Commandments of God, having every of them a negative and affirmative part
(expressed or understood) the duties of Religion do stand in the midst, as
virtues between two extremes. Here I shall not question the corner stone of
this foundation, else I might demand, what is the affirmative part of the 2d
Commandment, or how can it be evidenced that there is any, or indeed any more
then a prohibition of idol-worship appendant to the no other Gods in the first
Commandment, which still is but a negative, or an interdict, or if an
affirmative be to be understood, must it not be bowing down to the true God,
and so that will not prejudge, but justify all outward decent gestures of
adoration, assist, not oppugn our pretentions?

inquiry, and supposing with him that every of the Commandments, has its
negative and affirmative part, I only demand how he could think that the
duties of Religion stand in the midst? what I pray is the antecedent to which
[in the midst] relates? there is no other in the period, but [an affirmative
and negative part of each Commandment] But do the duties of Religion stand in
the midst of the affirmative and the negative part of each Commandment, as
virtues between two extremes? Then sure the affirmative part of the command is
one extreme, and the negative is the other, then what is commanded in the
affirmative part, to that which is under precept, is an extreme, and so a vice,
as far removed from virtue, as that which is forbidden in the negative, the
worship of one God, a vice, as well as the worshipping of many; paying to God
our oaths, a vice, as well as perjurie; perfect chastity, a vice, as well as
the most prostitute adultery, and so in the rest of them: what could have been
said more unluckily then this?

Diatribist did not mean thus, and therefore would attempt to affixe some other
possible meaning to his words, as thus (without any retrospect toward the
former part of the period) that the duties of Religion stand in the midst
between two extremes, as virtues stand in the midst between two extremes. But
then to what purpose was the meant on of the two parts, affirmative and
negative, of the Commandments, premised? for this I am still to seek, and
therefore must misdoubt my (...), that it is not so fit for the malady as I
could have wished, and yet I have no better to succeed it.

observation, nor made this Superstructure in his exemplification thereof; the
grosseness of it would not permit that. But then to what purpose was his
observation? sure but to amuse the reader and say somewhat demurely, which
should pretend to be a ground of his beloved conclusions, that all additions to
the rule of worship are excess against the 2d Commandment, additions of
ridiculous ceremonies or gestures an excess against the 3d, men's instituting
other holy days and times, an excess against the 4th. And truly what else he
please, with as much appearance of truth, or solidity of argument, as these are
inferred from either the letter of those Commandments, or from the solemn
observation concerning the affirmative, and negative parts of them, and the
duties of Religion in the midst.

worshipping of Idols is forbidden in the 2d Commandment, but how come all
uncommanded rites to be Idols? All perjury (and (by Christ's (...)) voluntary
swearing at all) is forbidden in the 3d Commandment; but how come rites and
ceremonies and gestures, though never so ridiculous, to be either oaths or
perjuries, or to bear any analogy with, or by that means to be reducible to
them? In the 4th Commandment the not observing Gods designed Sabbath, was a
defect; but what words of that Commandment conclude against instituting other
holy days and times, as an excess, and that criminous, not admittable among
Christians.

[six days shall thou labour] but sure that is not the meaning of them, but the
explication is to be fetched from the other part of the period [and do all that
thou have to do] i. e. all thy labor, and all that thou have to do, shall be
finished, as God's was, in six days, and no other day must be so set apart, as
to take off from the seventh days rest or Sabbath: but for such celebrations
as are reconcilable with that, there is no word nor appearance to the
prejudging of them.

unlawfulness of this last is confirmed by the sinfulness of Jeroboams act, 1
Kin. 12. 32. He ordained a feast like unto the feast that was in Judaea. But
the Diatribist cannot but know what it was that made that criminous in
Jeroboam, his appointing this feast to be kept with sacrifices at Bethel,
which, beside the sacrificing to calves which he had set up, was also quite
contrary to the express word of God, which had commanded that all sacrifice
should be offered, and consequently feasts kept at Jerusalem, and no where
else, see Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6. 11. 13, 14. 26, 27. and Josh. 22. 16. 19. 29. and
Joh. 4. 20. This sure was the sin of Jeroboam, to set up calves in Dan and
Bethel, to keep the people from going up to Jerusalem, 1 Kin. 12. 28. 30. to
make a house of high places, and Priests which which were not of the sons of
Levi, v. 31. and so in like manner a feast like unto the feast which is in
Judah; and upon that feast day to offer sacrifice upon that Altar, which he had
made in Bethel, v. 33. All contrary to that command of making Jerusalem the
only place of sacrifice and public solemn worship to all Israel.

feast by Jeroboam been separated from that appendant sin, of sacrificing
elsewhere then God had commanded, and drawing away the people from the worship
of Jerusalem, which was so strictly under precept, I shall desire to know, why
that might not have been as blameless as the Rubenites erecting an Altar by
Jordan, Jos. 22. which though it were looked on by their other brethren as an
horrible thing, whilst it appeared to be a violation of that Law, v. 12. and
16, 17. yet when it was truly represented to them by Remonstrance, that this
Altar was not built to divert them from Jerusalem, or to offer sacrifice on, v.
23. but only for a memorial to their children, that they belonged to the Lord
God of Israel, v. 24. 27, 28. and a means to keep up Religion in their
childrens hearts, v. 25, 26. then it was justified in the sight of all Israel,
the thing pleased the people, and they blessed God etc. v. 33.

Christian festival, instituted in like manner as a memorial, not to draw off
any man's heart from any part of God's prescribed worship, be as innocent as
this? And so our jealous brethren, the Diatribist and those of his persuasion,
that came out to dispute against us, imitate them, and lay down that design,
and go back to their houses in peace?

Jerusalem being the place of worship, prescribed by express precept to all the
Jews, but not so to all other pious people of the world, though even to them
also, to all people, it was a house of prayer, if they would make use of it
(and accordingly we read of heathens that came to Jerusalem to worship) yet
this precept, which, as such, lay on the Jews, being not obligatory to the
Gentile proselytes, we know, Naaman built him an Altar in his own country, and
there offered unto the God of heaven, and was so far approved in this, that the
Prophet himself allows him the mules loads of earth to be carried out of Judaea
to the erecting of it, And I am persuaded the analogy will hold exactly, as to
the matter in hand, to a Christian festival instituted by the Church of Christ
which was never bound up to any prescript number of days for the worship of
Christ, whatsoever can be deemed of the Jews, who, though required to do all
according to the pattern in the Mount, had yet the liberty of instituting a day
for God's service, as is evident by the (...).

Diatribist can phansy in the conclusion of his 2d. of the possibility [that
there may be Superstition in or against all the Commandments of the first Table
in the excessive part, and that it were easy to observe, that many (Divines
especially) do call the excesses of any Commandment by the name of
Superstition] yet I hope the observing of a few blameless, decent, useful
ceremonies, instituting a Christian festival for the commemorating the birth of
Christ (descensum venerabilis Dei ad humanae conservationis rerum mortalium
gratiam, the descent of a venerable God for the saving of mankind, could a
Chalcidius in Plat. Tim. p 219.
Philosopher say upon the observation of the star at his birth) will not
actually prove to be any of those excesses. And then I shall not need enquire
what those Reverend Divines are, who have been so liberal of the odious title
of Superstition, as to impose it (very discreetly and charitably) upon the
excesses of any Commandment.

Commandment of the Ten, there are such excesses, I shall suppose chastity the
duty of the 7th Commandment, and allowing fornication, adultery and sodomie to
make up the extreme on one side, either in the excess, or in the defect, shall
give the Diatribist leave to choose which it shall be, and supposing it must be
the defect, (the want not the abundance of chastity) I shall desire to know
what is the excess or other extreme, and whether that be by the forenamed
Divines, placed under the head of Superstition, or indeed whether somewhat
otherwise criminous; Thus it must be, if the excesses of any Commandment be so
to be called, and if in every Commandment, not only in those of the first
table which had been dilated on before there be such excesses (and however the
analogy holds for these of the 2d table as well as for them) of these he has
often told us, that the duty is in the midst of the two extremes, how duly, will
be discerned by answer to this question, and others, which will be soon ready,
when he pleases to call for them, of the same kind.

Sect. 3. The species of Superstition, Idolatry belongs to the 2d Commandment.
Superstition to the first. It differs from Will Worship. The meaning of
Illegitimate worship in Aquinas. His opinion of Ecclesiastical rites. Barbarous
ceremonies of Baals worship belong not to the 2d Commandment. Holy days before
Popery. Two ancient Testimonies for them. The Jews scrupulosity in not
resisting on the Sabbath day.
Aquinas in saying he makes but three kinds of Superstition, Idolatry,
Illegitimate worship and Divination, whereas it is most evident to any that
will turn to the place in Aquinas, 21 22 qu: 92. art: 1. and art: 2. in corp:
that he adds a fourth, Superstitio quarundam observationum, citing out of St
Augustine the Ligatures and such like; And I cannot guess to what purpose this
was misreported thus.

Secondly, where he says of Divines that they refer Idolatry to the first
Commandment, the Divines he means must needs be those that put the first and
second commandment into one (such I suppose was Aquinas, and I had well hoped
the Diatribist had not been of that persuasion) for else these words [Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.] being supposed to make a
distinct and 2d Commandment, no Divine can be so irrational, as to deny
Idolatry properly so called to belong to, and to be prohibited in that. And if
it were true, what the Diatribist adds, that Divination is the worst kind of
Idolatry, sure that must be forbidden under the 2d Commandment also; But in
this I suppose Aquinas was in the right, that made it a species of
Superstition, not of Idolatry, and so it must more fitly belong to the first
Commandment, and so must Illegitimate worship, being an offense against the due
manner of Gods worship. But these are niceties that we are but little concerned
in.

Thirdly, this quarrel to his own Dr. Amesius for restraining Superstition to
one Commandment, which he will have ly common to all the four, is certainly
causeless; For the worship of many Gods (together with Divination etc.) and the
undue worship of the true God, do certainly belong to one Commandment, viz. the
first, which by commanding to have no other Gods but that one true God,
excludes the (...) or demon worship, and by commanding the worship of that one,
forbids all undue manners of worship. That he understood by the word
Superstition no more but the tendering undue worship to God, was indeed an
error in Amesius, sufficiently prevented, and disproved, by Aquinas, and by the
nature of the Greek and Latin words, and so likewise that he confined it to
the 2d Commandment, when in all reason it belonged to the first; But that being
acknowledged his error, this other of not extending it to many Commandments is
no way imputable to him.

Fourthly, when of that species of Superstition, which he defines by the vice
of undue worship tendered to God, he affirms that it is more properly
Will Worship, this is but an unproved and improbable affirmation, quite contrary
to Aquinas and his own Authors (as far as I can discern) Amesius himself, and a
confounding of things very distant.

Fifthly, when of Aquinas's illegitimate worship he gives his own gloss, that he
means that which is not commanded by God, but instituted and appointed by men]
this is great injury to that School-man; What he means by that phrase will be
best learnt from 2^ 2 qu. 93.
Aquinas himself, who sets it down distinctly by distributing it into two
parts; For thus that 93d question De illegitimo Dei cultu, Of the illegitimate
worship of God, begins, Et superfluitate and pravitate vitiatur divinus cultus
etc. The worship of God is vitiated both by superfluity, and by pravity; by
superfluity, if to the worshipping of God ought be assumed, which neither by
Divine nor Ecclesiastical appointment belongs to the glory of God nor to the
subjecting either of the body or soul to the Creator; by pravity, if the
external ceremony contain any thing of falsity in it, which may fall out,
says he, two ways, either by the disagreement between the ceremony and the
thing denoted by it, or by the public ministers using any ceremony contrary
to the custom of the Church. Thus far are the words of Aquinas: and what could
have been more destructive to the Diatribists pretensions then this description
and branching of illegitimate worship, if either here or before, when Aquinas
was cited, this sense of his, thus expressed, had been considered?

Aquinas again in this matter, I shall desire him to remember from that
School-man these 4. things, his undoubted affirmations, by way of Axioma, 1.
That illegitimate, is vitiated worship, and so more then uncommanded, certainly
that which is prohibited, (and this according to the propriety of the word
illegitimum, which signifies not without, but against Law. Legitimum, says In
Tim: p. 243.
Chalcidius, est id quod legem sequitur, legitime is that which follows the
Law, or as (...).
Plutarch defines (...), and (...), the command of Law or that which is
determined or commanded by Law, adding, that those good things which yet are
not under precept, are not to be called (...) legitime; And so in Leo sermon: 1.
de jejun: 7. men's: legitima are opposed to voluntaria, as commanded to
spontaneous. Now what is Law, says p. 248.
Chalcidius, nisi jussum sciscens honesta, prohibens contraria, but a command
requiring honest things, and prohibiting the contrary? And consequently
illegitimum being the direct contrary to legitimum, will signify, in the
contrary sense to that which is commanded, that which is prohibited by Law.)
2dly. That the superfluity of it consists not in being superadded to God's
commands only, but to the Churches appointment, and so that which is ordained
by the Church, though not by God, comes not under that style of superfluous or
illegitimate upon that score. 3dly. That what tends to the glory of God, or to
the subjecting of the body as well as the soul to the Creator of both, is
neither superfluous nor illegitimate, so it be ordained by the Church. Lastly,
that the Ministers public using any ceremony contrary to the custom of the
Church (such is his sitting at the Sacrament, and the like) is a pravity, and
that is worse then a superfluity in the worship of God. I suppose this may now
be sufficient to arm the Reader against the fallacies, to which the frequent
citations out of Aquinas might subject him.

Sixthly, That it is not to me imaginable how or why the barbarous ceremonies of
Baals Priests, etc. should be an excess against the 3d Commandment, or a taking
Gods name in vain, which we know is by Christ rendered for swearing ones self,
and when they that cried nothing but O Baal hear us, from morning till night,
never used the name of God at all (for sure Baal and God are not Synonyma's)
and so cannot be affirmed in vain to use it or take it.

Seventhly, That dedicating holy days to Saints (though Christ, whose Festival
we treat of, be more then such) is neither fitly paralleld by the Diatribist
with Jeroboam's feast day at Bethel (as we competently evinced in the last
Sect.) nor appropriated by him to Papists, when we know such days were
dedicated to the memory of Martyrs, long before the name or errors of Papists
were come into the world.

Festiv: p. 438.
formerly given from the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, written on occasion
of the Martyrdom of Polycarpe, St. John's Auditor, where having described the
passages of his suffering, they conclude with their wish and hope, that God
will now permit them to meet together with exultation and joy, to celebrate
(...), Smyrn. Eccles. Epist. p. 28.
tho birthday or natalitia (so was styled) of his Martyrdom, adding the two
great ends of such observations, (...), for the commemorating of such Champions
constancy, and the exercise, and fitting of others for the future. The
circumstances of that Epistle make it clear, that such celebrations and
dedications of days were then of use before Polycarp's death, and that they now
expected that this of his should be added to that number, and that so it was, I
shall now add a 2d undoubted proof or testimony of Primitive Antiquity,
antienter then that of Polycarp, in the Martyrdom of Ignatius, written by them
which were present at it, who setting down the day and time of his Coronation,
say, they do it so precisely, Martyrium Ignat. p. 8.
ut secundum tempus Martyrii coagregati communicemus athletae, that assembling
together on the Anniversarie of his Martyrdom, they may communicate with his
Martyrdom, commemorate his sufferings and bless God for him, etc.

authorities may, I hope, be of some credit with him, who can found arguments
on passages in Aquinas and Amesius, and if Apostles, as equitably as Martyrs,
may thus be commemorated, the Church of England I hope (whatever become of the
Papists) may be vindicated from all Superstition, or excess against the 4th
Commandment.

Jews scrupulosity in observing their Sabbath, so that they would not stand up
to defend themselves in that day, is none of the excesses we are guilty of, and
that this being by the Diatribist styled excess of Religion, and that against
the 4th Commandment, and justly called Superstition, there is no need of making
any more species of that excess, or forcing in all dedication of holy days,
into that place I shall not need look any more narrowly to spy out greater
store of infirmities in that 3d Sect.

Sect. 4. The Diatribist's method and caution in setting down the species of
Superstition.
former methods were imperfect and unsufficient (even before they were
confuted) to erect such a modelled notion of Superstition as would serve the
Diatribists aims, he must now in his 4th Sect. become humble, in stead of
Magisterial, implore the courteous Readers pardon, if he be not so logically
accurate, to set down (what he is resolved is not easy to discover) all the
kinds and ways whereby this sin of Superstition is committed in particular.

modesty is designed, will be easily guest, viz. to leave the word Superstition
in the clouds, to involve, in stead of explaining it, that it may continue
useful to him, as a mormo, whenever he has a mind to affright men out of
their obedience to the Church, to which purpose it could not be so commodious,
if it were once defined or limited to one or any set number of more
Commandments. And though in the 10. following Sections he reckon up pretty
store of species of it, yet he must here beforehand make sure of a reserve,
protest his liberty to add more, whenever he shall have need of them [we
shall, says he, labor to express some of them, as we find them held out by
Divines and others] where it seems Divines, such as Amesius, Vrsine, Mr.
Perkins etc. have not held out enough, but he must have a supply from others,
which are not Divines, (and it would be an odd question to be answered, who
those others are, when the monuments of heathen authors, Latin and Greck have
been so severely disclaimed in his. 1. and then none but the judgment of
Divines thought sit to be appealed to in this matter) and. 14. when he has
completed a large catalogue, he concludes with [Lastly to add no more]
intimating that there are still more to be added; of which he will serve
himself, when he sees good.

Sections, I shall resolvedly pass over, though there be many things very fit
to be noted in them, partly because he promises they shall soon recurre again,
and partly because they belong to the other tracts, that of Will Worship and
Festivals, where sure we shall meet with them, and partly because they have
been spoken to already, and besides, some of them are the enumerating of those
very species of Superstition which I have set down in that treatise, as such.
And therefore so much (after his Preface) for his Prolegomena.

CHAP. IV. Of the Particular exceptions of the Diatribist to the Tract of
Superstition.
Sect. 1. Confidence of innocence no argument of guilt.
summoned and called into the lists by this Diatribist. 15. and the several
Sections of the Treatise of Superstition must be brought to a strict
examination, and I hope they will not be unable to bear it.

disliked, but only that I will not acknowledge my self or our Church guilty,
before the trial, and to that purpose I am told [commonly those that are most
Superstitious are most confident of their innocence and piety, and no marvel
if they understand Superstition as the Dr. does.]

prudent Aphorism is not simply convertible, viz. That they which are most
confident of their innocence and piety, are most Superstitious (for if it be, I
must not be so unkind to wish, or so uncharitable to believe of the Diatribist,
that he has a good conscience, nor any longer rely on that Apostle that has
taught me Gods method of judging of us, by the verdict of our own accusing or
excusing conscience) and so long it is possible that I may be free from that
guilt, though I am never so confident. Mean while I that allow the Diatribist
one species, that of Negative Superstition for his portion, have his leave to
conclude from hence, that this is the reason why he is so confident of his
innocence.

Superstition in that Treatise, if I cannot justify it to be as good as Mr. C.
his superstatutum, I shall very much accuse my self, and in the interim be
comforted with his confession, that if I have not erred in the notion of
Superstition, of which he is no competent judge, being a party, then both I and
our Church (for the Romish I shall not be so sollicitous) are far enough from
this crime.

Sect. 2. The nature of the word. Excess of fear among the Epicureans,
Superstitio from Super and sto, not statuo. Aquinas misreported.
Latin Superstitio, Superstitum cultus, and having yielded it to be so defined
by the heathens, yet he cannot think that I will say, that that this is the
only Superstition to be found in the world, because I acknowledge an excessive
fear of the Deity to have been another kind of it among the Heathens, and other
kinds also among Christians, adding that some there are, and they no mean ones,
that derive it from Super and sto or statuo, as supra statutum, worship
instituted by men above the statute Law of God, but he rather rests in the
definition of the Schools, that it is a vice contrary to Religion in the
excess which may extend to the other commandments, whereas this limits it to
the 2d.

Sect. was not designed to give any complete definition of Superstition, but to
search how much was to be concluded from the Latin word, as in the following
Sections how much more from the Greek, and then to make use of all other proper
means, the use of the word in Scripture and Fathers, to collect the full
importance of it; and consequently, if what I vouched out of the Latin
origination be true, there is no more to be expected of my 2d. 2dly. That I no
where grant an excessive fear of the Deity to have been another kind of
Superstition, among the heathens, but only that some heathens, especially the
Epicureans which denied all providence and judgment to come, and scoft at all
fear of punishment for sin, affixt to this the name as of Superstition, so of
Religion also, whereupon I thought it reasonable that we should not (not that
we should) take our notion of Superstition from them, which yet it seems the
Diatribist is content to do, and so with the famishing prodigal to herd himself
among the Epicureans.

Diatribist, and then I find in these few words a competent number of
infirmities. 1. That mentioning their Etymology of Superstition, who will have
it super statutum, he makes them derive it indifferently from (super and) sto
or statuo, as if those two were Synonyma, whereas certainly [to stand] is
competently distant from [to make laws or statutes] and if it be derived from
the one, it is not from the other.

sto, he does not discern that this is my way of derivation, for sure superstes
is from super and sto, and so he confirms my origination of the word, whilst
he thinks he confuteth it, absolves very frankly, whom he sat down on purpose
to condemn.

etymon from super statutum to which so often he had expressed kindness, was again
on an undirect aim, that he might get more advantage to his hypothesis by that
means, not moved with the absurdity of the derivation, but merely that he might
have more liberty to range in, by serving himself on a notion of Superstition
qualified to extend it to all the Commandments of the first table, which how
those (no mean ones) whom for his own ends he has now deserted, will take at
his hands, I leave him to consider.

derivation from super and sto, or statuo, he has substituted no other, and so
left a rivulet without a spring, a compound derivative without an original, a
monster in art, as well as nature.

Schooleman's definition, he extends it much farther then he knows that
Schooleman extended it, This he formerly confessed. 3. naming this Learned
Schooleman as the first, who came short in assigning the species of
Superstition, and here he more then confesses it, extending Superstition to
all the four Commandments of the first table, when he knows Aquinas made it a
breach peculiar to the first of them.

Sect. 3. (...) among the heathens for Religion, so in Hesychyus and Phavorinus.
question of the 17th, Sect. concerning (...), what kind of fear or dread of a
Deity was among the heathens noted by it, I have answered already, even that
which the Epicureans would have driven out of the world, as making the Gods
cruel, tyrannical etc. and accordingly in Cicero, Superstitione liberare, to
free men from Superstition, and in Lucretius, Religionibus, from all Religion
and obligation of duty, is explained by metum omnem Deorum pulsum esse, to have
all fear of the Gods banished from us.

minute difference observable, it is this, that it is such a fear of the Deity
as wicked men are in reason to have, (and that sure, though a great trembling,
was yet no excess, no more then was very equitably the portion of such) so
says l. 2. p. 779.
Diodorus Siculus of Bomilcar (...), they that are about to undertake any
notable wicked actions, are generally afraid of the Gods or Demons, and so
still that will yield our Diatribist no aid toward the support of any of his
hypotheses, sure the instituting of our Christmas Festival, was no act of such
a just dread of vengeance for sin, nor effect whether immediately or remotely
produced by it.

affirmation that the former part of the word (...) does not signify worship,
but fear, and not that fear which is often put for the whole worship of God, but
slavish fear etc. this is a clear mistake; It Is true indeed it does signify
sometimes a trembling fear (such as I said was the wicked man's portion and due
lot, and so not an excess, or unproportionable to his state) as when Plutarch
says of him, he wishes there were no Gods, but it does not always signify
thus, but simply (...) the fear of Gods and demons, and accordingly as
Phavorinus in the Epicurean notion of it renders it (...), a cowardly fear
toward God, (...), or an irrational fear of the Gods, so Hesychius renders it
(...) fearing God, or Religion in universum, and the same Phavorinus explains
(...) by (...) Superstitious, by devout or pious, and adds, (...) as Saint
Paul uses the word Act. 17. 22.

Sect. 4. False worship is not Will Worship. Imposition of hands.
approbation of my conclusion, that (...) refers to the Poetical Gods, Angels,
or dead men, or indeed any thing but the only true God, must not be resisted
by me; I am glad I have once gratified him.

rather idolatry against the first Commandment, which is Polytheisme, then any
kind of Superstition, which is the giving of false, i. e. uncommanded worship
to the true God against the 2d Commandment, this is but a heap of
incongruities; for 1. Idolatry, as has been evidenced, is a sin against the 2d
Commandment, though Polytheisme be against the first.

Superstition be the giving of false worship to the true God, as well as
worship to false Gods, Demons and Superstites, the souls of men departed (or
a dread, which is not a worship, to the true) yet this false worship is unfitly
explicated by uncommanded worship, For certainly all such is not false, as out
of Aquinas was cleared, especially if the word Worship be extended, as this
Diatribist extends it, to rites and observances, as well as to the substantial
parts of worship; such were imposition of hands in benediction among the Jews,
continued also for many uses among Christians, yet never prescribed or
commanded by God; and many the like elsewhere mentioned.

Commandment, which also being spent upon the worship of Idols (all for the
interdicting of that) cannot be properly said to consider the worship of the
true God, (unless it be the external part, that of bowing down etc. in the
affirmative branch of it) which had been the subject of the first Commandment;
and to that in all reason all false worship of the true God must be reduced,
and not to the second.

Sect. 5. (...) Act. 17. 22. (The Athenians the most devout of all the Greeks.)
dilemma. 19. concerning the use of the word (...) more Superstitious, of the
Athenians, Act. 17. 22. [If says he, they were so called because they worshipped
more Gods, then they were Polytheists, If because they were devout or pious,
rather impious in worshipping the true God ignorantly in a false manner, then
their sin was against the 2d Commandment] though true, in some sense, is yet
nothing gainful to his design, which can thrive by no other means but by
getting (...) or Superstition to denote all uncommanded rites in the worship of
the true God.

Acts but only their worshipping a multitude of Gods, more then any other
nation did, and the (...) or unknown God, for one, and so their being more
pious in their course, then other their heathen country men were, or indeed
then the Romans, or any else.

truth, has sufficiently been evidenced in the Tr: of Superstition,. 11. and I
now add three testimonies more, to that heap, one out of Josephus, l. 2.
Contra Ap: (...), All men affirm the Athenians to be the most pious of the
Greeks. A 2d out of Sophocles, Oedip:

(...)
(...),
If any know how to worship the Gods with honors (sacrifices and offerings to
their Temples) Athens excels them all; The third even now intimated out of
Phavorinus, but here more fully to be expressed, who having explicated (...)
superstitious by (...) pious, subjoyns this testimony of the Acts, (...), as
S. Paul says, I see that you are more Superstitious, the very place which we
have now before us, brought by that learned Grammarian as an instance, that the
word is there taken in a good, not ill sense, yet not of any uncommanded
worship of the true God, but a pious, though Ethnic devotion toward the
multitude of their false, superadded to the one true God, which though in a
Christian scale or judgment it cannot be approved, because it is Polytheisme,
yet in comparison with other heathens (which was S. Paul's business in that
place) it was truly by him looked on as a greater measure of devotion, then the
rest of the heathen world were guilty of, and that is all that was meant by
that phrase, and so it is not at all useful to the end, to which the Diatribist
would have inclined it.

Sect. 6. (...) Act. 25. Festus's scorn falls on the Jews, not on Paul. (...)
his own, not theirs. (...) an accusation. Jesus put under the notion of a (...)
by Festus. (...) taken for a demon. (...). The Diatribists objections
answered. Superstition for Religion simply.
Superst. concerning the place Act. 25. 19. (...) etc. which I had rendered,
questions or accusations concerning his own Religion or Superstition or
Worship, and (to explain what was meant by the word (...)) of one Jesus that
was dead, whom Paul said to be alive, putting him under the notion of a dead
Heroes, and so meaning the worship of him by (...).

Diatribist excepts in 3. particulars. 1. It is like, says he, Festus spoke in
scorn, not of Paul's only, but of the whole Jewish Religion, as, says he, the
words may import, and are translated by ours. 2. That what I said of putting
Jesus under the notion of a dead Heroes or (...), is a strein of Criticisme,
compounding things which are in the Text distinct, for Festus says (says he)
they had many questions both concerning their own Superstition, and also
concerning one Jesus, etc. adding (to confirm this) that he was accused of
questions of their Law, c. 23. 29. and of sedition, seducement, profanation of
the Temple, 24. 5, 6. 3dly. That Paul affirmed Jesus to be alive, not in part,
as the Demons were supposed, but in the whole man, as raised from the dead.

first; For the scorn, it no way appears to be meant by Festus against S. Paul
or his Religion, for Festus is at this time speaking in favor of Paul, and
slighteth the Jews accusations of him, as matters of no considerable moment,
and so, if there be any thing of sarcasme in the speech, it falls on the Jews,
not on him, and so cannot set any ill character on the (...), in case that be
S. Paul's, and not theirs.

Diatribist's fancy, that the scorn should fall not on Paul's only, but on
the whole Jewish Religion, that cannot hold, for when he speaks of the Jews
charge against Paul, he cannot speak of that wherein Paul and they agreed, but
wherein they differed, and that must either be their way, which Paul opposed,
or Paul's way, which they now accused him of.

Greek, for the (...) may either be rendered his own or their own; Yet that it
must be interpreted his, I offer this reason to persuade, (whereas the
Diatribist pretends to none for the contrary, but only that so the words may
import, and that our English has so translated) The Jews accusation or charge
against S. Paul is plainly mentioned in this place; That is the meaning of
(...), they had questions or laid charges against him; the word (...) sometimes
signifies a charge, complaint, indictment, so c. 18. 15. (...), but if the
accusation or charge be of a word; Thus Satan, who is so called, as (...) an
adversary in foro, (...) an accuser, is said (...) to seek. 1 Pet. 5. 8. (and
Luke 22. 31. (...) to require) i. e. to accuse and charge men, that so they may
be delivered up to him as an executioner, to winnow, in one place, and to
devour, in the other. So to question a man among us vulgarly signifies to
accuse him, and that so it, signifies here, appears by v. 18. (...), the
accusers brought no accusation of the things which I supposed, (...), but some
questions, that must be accusations again, (...) v. 7. etc.

of which he was charged, which is the matter of the accusation, or that
wherein the offense consisted, was his, not their Superstition, for how could
their own Superstition be the matter of their charge against him?

Festus putting Jesus under the notion of a dead Heroes, though it be of that
nature that I shall not, because I need not, make it a matter of controversy
with any, yet I had this consideration to incline me to it, the immediate
subjoyning of one Jesus whom Paul (...) contended to live, to be superstes, as
of their Demons, Festus and those of his persuasions ordinarily affirmed. To
which purpose I remembered what the Athenians surmised, when Paul preached to
them Jesus and the Resurrection, Act. 17. 18. He seems, say they, (...), to be
a proclaimer of strange or new Demons, where St Chrysostom judges it so
manifest that those Graecians thought Jesus to be a Demon, that he adds,
(...), they took also Anastasis (Resurrection) for some Goddess, as being
accustomed to worship females also. And then why Festus, an heathen likewise,
and which understood none but heathen Theology, should not thus mean in words
of so near an importance that will bear it so fitly, I can yet see no reason to
doubt.

one proof offered to the contrary, the Diatribist has strained more, then I
have in my Criticisme, for 1. When he thus reads the text, they had many
questions, that so he might make it necessary to distinguish the question
concerning his Superstition from that of Jesus, he has inserted the word many,
there being neither in the Greek nor in our English any such word, but only
(...) some or certain accusations. 2dly. When (on the same design) he again
reads [both concerning their Superstition, and also] there is no such word, nor
any thing, either in the Greek or our English, answerable either to [both] or
to [also] but only thus, (...) -- concerning his own Superstition or demon
worship, and one Jesus, which was, or had been dead, so (...) signifies, whom
Paul affirmed to live; and 3dly. When he adds that he was accused of questions
of their Law, c. 23. and of sedition etc. c. 24. this proves nothing, which the
Diatribist would have, for though the Jews had thus accused him, yet he had
answered for himself in the latter part of c. 24. and cleared himself perfectly
from those two charges, from the first, v. 12. and from the second, v. 18. and
so again, c. 25. 8. and so still it remains that in Festus's judgment (to
which Paul appeals for the knowledge of it, telling him that he knew he was
guiltless from having done any wrong to the Jews, v. 10.) Paul was not guilty,
nor stood charged of any thing, but only of his own Religion, and one Jesus,
i. e. I suppose by way of explication (as [(...) and] is frequently exegetical)
of believing and proclaiming Jesus and the Resurrection, c. 24. 15. which last
also being common to him with the Jews, as there he contests, could not by
them duly be charged upon him, and so the whole charge, and that which is the
characteristick, distinctive note of his Religion, is his contending that Jesus
was alive, who had dyed, which how agreeable it is to Festus's notion of a
Demon, I shall not need farther to declare.

Jesus to be alive, both soul and body, does to a heathen ear as much define
him to be a Demon, as if he said nothing of his body: However all that Festus
here says is, that (...), he affirmed him to live now after he had been dead,
and if to that we add, that Paul preached his ascension to heaven, what could
a heathen, according to his persuasions conclude from thence, but that he had
attained his (...), which was all that they required to his being a Demon. And
so much for these objections.

Diatribist, that the Superstition spoken of was not S. Paul's, but the Jews,
this could no way incommodate me, or hinder my pretensions, in order to the
main, for then, say I, it shall signify the Jews Religion simply, without any
character of ill or good laid on it, as in l. 3. c. 8.
Quintilian, Primus Judaicae Superstitionis author, the first author of the
Jewish Superstition or Religion, and in Leg. Qui ad Temp. D. Decurion.
Vlpian that Severus and Antoninus permitted those to be capable of dignities,
qui Judaicam Superstitionem sequuntur, who follow the Jewish Superstition or
Religion, and many the like.

Sect. 7. The method of search for the original notion of the word. Mr.
Cawdries collections from the heathens. Among them Superstition all one with
Religion. Plutarch of the Sabbatick rest. Sacrificing children to Moloch, was
not to the true God, Jer. 32. 35. Lev. 20. 2. nor a bare uncommanded worship.
The glosses of the Etymologist and Phavorinus.
Authors from. 14 to. 27. All which Sections, though entirely designed to the
discovering the true notion of the word, by that norma loquendi, the best rule
to judge of words, the use of it among writers of all sorts, are shortly
censured as [a great deal of reading and learning to little purpose, except to
cloud the business, to lead men away in a mist from the true and proper sense
of the word among Christians.]

dark, are apt to mistake light for mists, and the Apostle has given the
reason, (...) they are reproved by the light. It Is certain the Christians took
the word whether Greek or Latin, from the heathens, which were before them,
and accordingly to judge of the propriety of the use of it, I thought my self
obliged to search to the original, i. e. to the use of it among the heathens,
and finding the Scripture use of it exactly agreeable to their acception of it,
from whom the Scripture had it, and so likewise the Christian Glossaries, that
of Hesychius, Suidas, Phavorinus, the Etymologist and others, I thought this
had been to some other purpose then only to cloud the business, And because I
continue still in the same opinion, I refer the judicious Reader for three
eminent testimonies more to the same purpose (out of Diod. Siculus of Imilco,
out of Heraclitns, (...), out of an edict of Tiberius set down by Josephus) to
the Annotations on Act. 17. By which, and those already produced in the
Sections, here thought fit to be despised by the Diatribist, it is most evident
that Religion and Superstition were by them who were guilty of demon worship,
or when used of them by others, taken, as exactly Synonyma, words importing the
same thing.

Diatribist conceives himself out of these very Sections to have gained
somewhat to object, It seems, says he, the heathens did often take the word in
an ill sense, and branded Religions which they did not like by that name.
Plutarch taxes the Jews for their Superstition in two things remarkable. 1.
That when invaded, they would not rise from their seats on the Sabbath day,
which was excess against the 4th. Commandment, and gross Superstition. 2. Their
killing and sacrificing their children to Moloch, which being an horrid
Superstition, was (as the former) intended as a worship to the true God, and
yet was interpreted no better then sacrificing to devils, Psalm. 106. 37. which
though in other respects it was against the first Commandment gross Idolatry,
so in making it a worship of the true God (when he commanded it not, neither
came it into his heart, as somewhere he says) it was a kind of Superstition
against the 2d Commandment; concluding in a word, that the Etymologist speaks
fully his sense, the word among the heathen is taken for a good thing, but
among Christians for impiety.

objecting is, will now soon be discerned, 1. By remembering in the general,
that at the beginning of the. the testimonies brought by me in those Sections,
were judged to be to little purpose but to cloud the business and lead men away
in a mist, and yet now he can express kindness to some of the testimonies, as
thinking they may be useful to his pretensions, which assures me all the other
might have been capable of the like favor and friendly reception from him, if
they could any way have been persuaded to do him service.

heathens taking the word in an ill sense, the answer is most obvious, so they
did Religion too, and indifferently either, when either they that spoke were
Epicureans, enemies to all Religion, or when the Religions they spoke of were
disliked by them, and so sure that proves nothing for the Diatribist.

answer also to what is observed from Plutarch, for he speaks of the religions
which he disliked, the Jewish was one of them, and particularly their
observation of Sabbatick rests to the ruining their City, which he thought
their Religion had bound them to, and never dreamt that they had mistaken their
Religion, or that their 4th Commandment allowed them greater liberty.

Plutarch mentions the killing and sacrificing of children, he took that also
for a part of some men's Religion, and thought he had reason to be dissatisfied
with it, and to make it an instance of the Quantum Religio potuit, how much
evil Religion did in the world, still making no distinction betwixt Religion
and Superstition. But here by the way the Diatribist has a little mistaken, in
thinking that this bloody worship in sacrificing their children to Moloch was
as the former (i. e. as that of the strict Judaical rest in time of invasion)
intended as a worship to the true God.

Moloch was no true God, but a false, the abomination of the children of Ammon,
1 Kin. 11. 7. and 2 Kin. 23. 13. thought by learned men to be a deified King of
the Egyptians, and so a demon, placed among the stars, the same that others
make the planet Mars (see Kircheri Prodromus Coptic. 1. 5.) and that sacrifice
was the giving their seed to Moloch that false God, Lev. 20. 2, 3, 4. or the
making their sons and daughters pass through the fire to Moloch, Jer. 32. 45.
and so no way intended to the true God.

interpreted no better then sacrificing to devils, Psalm. 106. 37. it is strange
he should not see or acknowledge that it was a downright sacrificing to Moloch,
a Demon, and not as to the true God, but then he could have had no pretense to
make it an act of uncommanded worship, and so such a kind of Superstition as is
chargeable on our Christmas Festival; and then he had lost all the advantage
which this instance was to bring in to him.

benefit by that text of Scripture, He commanded it not, neither came it into
his heart, as he somewhere sayes] But why did he not tell us where God says
this? If his memory had failed, his Concordance would soon have helped him to
set down the place. But it was not for his turn it should be examined. The
place is Jer. 32. 35. and again Jer. 7. 31. and truly, belongs to these
sacrifices to Moloch, but then God's not commanding etc. signifies not only
uncommanded worship, but by the figure (...), ordinary in the Scripture,
worship directly forbidden, under threat of excision, Lev. 20. 2. Whosoever he
be that gives any of his seed to Moloch, he shall surely be put to death, the
people of the land shall stone him with stones, and I will set my face against
him, and cut him off from among his people. v. 3. And if the people of the land
do any way hide their eyes from the man, when he gives of his seed to Moloch,
and kill him not, then will I set my face against that man and family, and will
cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, v. 4. and accordingly we see
it in the Execution, Jer. 7. 31, 32. The valley of Tophet where they burnt
their sons and daughters in the fire, shall be called the valley of slaughter,
for they shall bury in Tophet till there be no place.

feast or sacrifice to the true God, which was not commanded or prescribed by
God, they that kept the Encaenia were not thus judged, and therefore this was
very little to the Diatribist's advantage, as now appears by examining the
place; it is pity Mr. C. would not consider it.

Etymologist, which he says are fully his sense, it is again a mistake, they are
directly the contrary, (...) etc. It must be known that the word Superstition
is among the Graecians (or Gentiles) taken (...) for a good thing, but among us
Christians (...) for impiety. i. e. evidently the heathens and the Christians
use it for the same thing, the worship of demons, but that the Gentiles
commend and account good, who use it, but we Christians justly deem it the
greatest impiety.

Phavorinus a Christian also. (...), Superstition is the worshipping all
things, even those which' are not to be worshipped, and that (...) signifies
(...), one that is dubious concerning faith (as the Israelites betwixt God and
Baal,) or as Tertullian says, if there were conceived more Gods then one,
cultura ejus in anceps deduceretur, he should not know whom to worship, whether
one only or both, (adv: Marc, l. 1. c. 5.) or he also that fears (or worships)
demons, as the Assyrians in Samaria that feared the Lord and served their own
Gods. And so still this is as contrary to the Diatribists pretensions as might
be. And so much for that Section.

Sect. 8. Superstition always ill, but not always excess. Probations from the
use of words among heathens. The Quaere of Divorce vindicated. Superstitions
not reprocht in the Romans by Polybius. Ignorance not presently Superstition.
(...), Act. 17. The Israelites worshipping the Calfe. (...). Superstitiosus
noting excess.
brief Sections, I suppose it is because he has no least objection to make
against them (being not else very sparing in this kind) and yet in them is
contained my enumeration of all the notions, wherein the word Superstition is
or can be taken in the ancient heathens, Scriptures, and Christian glossaries,
and the premises on which the subsequent conclusions are founded, and cannot be
denied while the premises are granted, and the whole matter made clear, that
none of the notions of the word is applicable to the benefit of the
Diatribist's pretensions.

Superstition simply and absolutely taken should be resolved in all Authors to
signify somewhat that is ill, particularly false worship, this, says he, is
not the question, but whether in Scripture and orthodox Divines it do not
always signify something evil, particularly excessive and false worship. To
this the answer is easy, that I am far from doubting that Superstition is an
ill thing, and therefore never meant to make that the question, This appears of
me, because I every where acknowledge the word, Greek and Latin, to signify
the worship of demons or false Gods, only I could not but observe in the
first place that the heathens who are known to worship such demons, and not to
think that a fault in themselves, did mean no new ill by that word (whether
excess or other the like) either more or worse then they ordinarily meant by
Religion, this being indeed their Religion to worship many Gods.

excess of Religion, and by their taking it in a good sense, as Synonymous with
Religion, it appears that this of excess was not esteemed the due notion of it.

Superstition might not defame every thing as an excess in Religion, and
criminous, to which it was affixt, unless it might otherwise appear that there
was really any such evil in it, and this I said (...) (to show the absurdness
of their concluding, who taking the word Superstition for a word of an
universal ill savor, as signifying excess of Religion, first affixe it to
innocent ceremonies and institutions, to which it no way belongs, and then
infer them nocent, as being Superstitions, without proving any charge of
malignity against them) and as preparative to the discovery of the following
mistakes, rather then that I ever imagined Superstition truly so called to
have no ill in it.

question, and on condition he will never apply the word Superstition any
otherwise, then the Scripture and ancient Christian writers apply it (i. e. to
demon worship, or to undue worship of the true God, in the notion of indebitus
or illegitimus cultus in Aquinas, not to each such Super statutum as he will
call an excess, the using of each uncommanded ceremony and the like) I shall
acknowledge the word always to signify that, among all good writers, heathen
or Christian, which we Christians justly deem evil, and that was clearly the
Etymologist's meaning, as we showed in the last Sect. and against that there is
no color of argument offered in all this long Sect.

vulgar translation (which he sets as the only instance of Popish
Commentators) render (...) by Superstitio? what if the Papists pretend it not
to be taken in a good sense (whom I suppose far enough from yielding themselves
to be Superstitious) does that prove that Festus meant any excess by that word,
or indeed any more then Religion?

observation, that in all my large discourse I bring only heathens to show the
meaning of the word, and not one Divine, Greek or Latin Father, etc. who take
it in a good sense] this is neither true in the affirmation, for I bring the
Scripture and the Christian glossaries to testify all that I pretend to, nor
yet in the application, for I do not pretend the word to signify that which a
Christian counts good, but among the heathen the worship of many Gods, which
none but heathens can think to have no ill in it, and consequently I pretend it
only of them, and of those that set down the use of words among them, and of
S. Paul when he is not a finding that fault in them, Act. 17. 22. and so still
this is sufficient to prove that the word originally signifies not any excess
of Religion or any other evil, abstracted from that of the Demon worship etc.
which was all that I had in design to conclude.

heathen Authors, sure I have done nothing which I ever blamed in any man else,
as the Diatrihist's margent accuses me, citing the Quaere of Divorce,. 58.
where I thought it unreasonable that all the ancient Christian writers should
not be as competent to give us the signification of (...) as Demosthenes and
Philo (and yet made no scruple to acquiesce in the notion, which either
Demosthenes or Philo gave us,. 57.)

difference between the heathen writers and others, Scripture and ancient
Christians, concerning the meaning of the word Superstition, all yielding it
(...) to signify the worship of many Gods (whereas there that other person
whom I opposed, professed a contrariety, and then preferred the one before the
other) To which yet it is necessarily consequent, that in another inquiry,
whether Superstition were among Authors taken in a good sense, some difference
should be observed between Authors heathen and Christian, because it is certain
the heathen worship is by us Christians most justly looked on as an ill thing,
being the worship of creatures, but by the heathens thought well of, as the
Diatribist here confesses, practiced and commended, and so not looked on any
otherwise then Religion it self, (...), in the Etymologist, used for a good
thing; consequently, the thing which I contest, is not this, that the worship
of demons is or ever was true or lawful, but that beside this, supposed by
Christians but denied by heathens, to be evil (adding the like of illegitimate
worship) there is nothing else which has been looked on as simply bad in
Superstition, particularly not the excess, as that signifies unprescribed
uncommanded worship, which is the only matter of the present contest with such
as the Diatribist.

perplex and disturb the matter when he says the question is, whether it does
not always in Scripture and Orthodox Divines signify excessive and false
worship, for he must set the question, as elsewhere he does, of excessive, as
that signifies no more then uncommanded worship, without the addition of being
false, it being evident that I defend not false worship of any kind to be good,
but that ceremonies or institutions not commanded by God may yet be perfectly
lawful and blameless, and that that is the only question between us.

text of the Act. c. 25. 19. I have answered already, and evidenced that Festus
meant nothing ill by Superstition; and the Drs. words cited from Sect. 24. of
the ordinary practice of every Sect to dislike the distant worship of others,
and defame it under the title of Religion, does no way prejudge this; because
it is certain Festus was no way factious for the Jews against Paul's Religion;
No more does the marginal citation from. 22. where I have said that
Superstition was made matter of reproach to the Romans; where 1. It was not
Superstition simply, but the (...), not coming short of excess, of which that
was said that it was (...), reproached by others, and yet as much commended by
the Author Polybius in that place, and 2. That the old rule in Logic will
always hold, there is no syllogizing from particulars, nor can this ever be
formed into a regular syllogism or valid probation, some there were that
reproacht the Romans Superstition, therefore Festus reproacht Paul's Act. 25.
19. or spoke of it by way of defamation.

Sect. belongs to the place Act. 17. 23. of which I had said, 1. That the
Apostle speaking of those whom he calls (...), more Superstitious then other
men, tells them that they did (...) worship the true God though ignorantly, 2.
That he styles them more religious then other men, merely in relation to their
worshipping the unknown (which was the true) God, which others worshipped not,
and so meant no more by that phrase then that they were more religious then
other men, no way appearing to accuse them of that as of their fault, but
preparing thereby to declare to them that true God whom they worshipped
ignorantly.

objected, 1. That their worshipping the true God ignorantly with their own
devised worship, was a Superstition justly to be condemned, It being gross
Idolatry and sinful Superstition in the Israelites to worship the true God in
the golden Calfe.]

ignorance of the true God was justly to be condemned, according to that of
Minutius Felix, Non minoris est sceleris Deum ignorare quam laedere, it is as
great wickedness to be ignorant of God as to hurt him, or that of Trismegistus
(as I remember) (...), Ignorance of God is a species of madness, and in another
of the ancients style, (...) a kind of drunkenness of the soul; But that being
granted, 1. This ignorance was not the thing that denominated them
Superstitious, but their worshipping many Gods, 2. Their worshipping the true
God, though they knew him not, was no new species of Superstition, wherein they
exceeded others, 3. Their worshipping him with their own devised worship was
not it which is meant by their worshipping him ignorantly, the words in the
original are (...), literally whom ye not knowing, or being ignorant of him,
worship, i. e. worship him whilst ye know him not, which no way refers to the
manner of their worship, as devised by themselves, but only to their ignorance
of the God whom they thus worshipped, which therefore the Apostle applies himself
to cure, and accordingly it follows, him declare I unto you.

worshipping him as dwelling in Temples made with hands, i. e. in little
Chaplets or Shrines or Images etc. v. 24. is not their Superstition but
Idol-worship, and is very much more then the uncommanded ceremonies will amount
to, and so cannot be a proper instance of their own devised worship, in the
Diatribists notion of the phrase for all uncommanded worship; and sure the
Israelites woshipping the true God in a golden Calf, is as little pertinent to
that business, for if it be true, that they worshipped none but the true God,
then was that only Idolatry against the 2d Commandment, not Superstition or
demon worship against the first, or if they worshipped the Gods of the
Egyptians, or any one of them, Apis in that figure, then what was that to the
worshipping of the true God in an ignorant, or by themselves devised manner?

more religious then other men, in relation to their worshipping the unknown
God, which others worshipped not, is my gloss, begges the question, is against
the text it self, I perceive that in all things ye are too Superstitious, both
in their worshipping many false Gods, and in their ignorant worship of the
true, and in their vicious rites of worship, adding that this sense the Dr.
himself gave. 11. I consider and behold you in all things (or in all that I see
of you) as men more Superstitious then others.

mistaken, and therefore shall first answer to that, then to the former parts
of the objection. The Greek is (...), literally, in all things, or in all
respects, I look upon you as more Superstitious, i. e. (I take it, and I
thought I had sufficiently expressed it before) considering all the altars and
inscriptions, i. e. the names of your deities, which I see or behold, I
conclude that you are more Superstitious or religious, worship more Gods or
demons, then other men.

reason of his speech rendered in the next, (...) etc. for passing through and
contemplating your wor^ps, i. e. the Gods which you worship, I found also an
altar on which was inscribed To the unknown God. The sum of which is, that in
the survey of their altars, which contained the names of their Gods, he found
one altar remarkably more, then is usual among other people, that to the
unknown God, the true God of heaven, which others in their (...) or worship of
many Gods did not worship, which being the proof or reason (expressed by the
(...) for) of the former speech, must needs give me authority to interpret it
in proportion thereto, that considering all that he had seen of them,
peculiarly that altar to the unknown God, he concluded them more Superstitious,
i. e. worshippers of more Gods then other folks.

Athenians truly were so esteemed appears evidently by what was said in the
Tr: of Superstition 11. and has here formerly been added to that head, and
therefore that will very fitly be the notion of the word, not too
Superstitious, but literally more Superstitious then others, especially if it
be remembered that the bare addition of the worship of the true God (however
unknown to them) to their other (...) or worship of many Gods, cannot be a new
fault in them, distinct from the other, or a superaddition to the guilts of
other men.

Paul's speech of (...) (however rendered) belongs both to their worshipping so
many false Gods, and to their ignorant worship of the true, and to their
vicious rites of worship, when it clearly belongs but to one, their worshipping
the unknown God, which others worshipped not. 2. How far my words. 11. were
mistaken or perverted by him, 3. How far my interpretation has been from
opposing the text it self, being the clear importance of the text considered
with S. Paul's reason, as the key by which to enter into the true meaning of it;
and lastly how far this is from any begging the question, when I proved so
largely whatsoever I said, and when no answer is here offered to those proofs,
and yet, if there were any need, here have been added farther convincing
confirmations of the same thing, if yet they may deserve to be taken notice of.

Superstitiosus in the positive signifies excess more then in the comparative,
are not very intelligible, which they would surely have been, to me at least,
if they had rightly reported my sense.

Superstitiosus by force of the termination osus, may signify an excess, and
that so Religiosus may also; but what is that to the use of the word, whether
in the positive or the comparative, when it is the bare rendering of the Greek
(...), as here it is, which no way signifies thus?

Sect. 9. The Diatribist's concession of the innocence of unprescribed
ceremonies, and so of all that is demanded. His censure of himself and Chamier.
Authority in a Church to institute Ceremonies. Abstaining from ceremonies,
because commanded by men or abused by Papists.
THe next or 23d,. is very brief, but yet seems to me to be very considerable,
and that in such a degree that it might well make an end of this debate betwixt
the Diatribist and me, for having exactly set down a 2d. inconsequence (by me
noted and concluded to be such, from the opening of the Greek and Latin words)
viz. that the use of ceremonies or rites in the worship of God, if not
distinctly prescribed by the example or precept of Christ, should be called
Superstition, and for that condemned] he answers no more but this. [I believe
this is a mistake, none that I know make such a consequence, but rather thus,
that what rite or ceremony soever is made a part of worship, without such
example or precept of Scripture, is Superstitious and therefore condemned.

Diatribist that he knows some who condemn uncommanded rites as Superstitious,
because Superstatutum, such as kneeling at the Eucharist, using the cross in
baptism, bowing at the name of Jesus, but taking him at his word, I beseech
him to tell me, why then he undertook the confutation of the Tr. of
Superstition, which, he must know, contended no more then this, being designed
to this only end, the averting that envy and calumny, that was then
frequently but unjustly cast upon our Church, upon the account of ceremonies,
and which was since in the Tract of Festivals, no farther applied, then as that
analogy would justly bear, which was betwixt uncommanded rites and uncommanded
days of worship, betwixt unprescribed gestures, and times, both which are known
to be but circumstances and accessories, no essential parts or branches of
worship.

ignorant of; As it is, it is the yielding me the whole cause, and I have no
more to contend for, but only peace, and what by perfect analogy from one
circumstance of worship to another, will irrefragably be concluded from that
which is here granted by him.

pieced, should ever fall out again; Nay we are likely, if words may be
believed, to be yet more firmly knit together and consolidated, for 24. in
answer to the 3d. inconsequence noted by me [that men on pretense and in the
name of piety should abstain from some observances (indifferent) as
Superstitious, either because commanded by lawful authority or abused by
Papists] he speaks clearly that it is a worse mistake, and that he believes I
cannot give an instance of one understanding Christian, that ever did abstain
from observances indifferent, because commanded by lawful authority, but
rather that they were thought not indifferent, but obtruded on them as parts of
worship, and so likewise for the other, that they have been used by Papists, is
not all, but that by them they have been abused and counted parts of worship,
and may easily return to be so accounted by others.

silence I incur the guilt of scandal of having wronged others, and of writing
all that has been written on this Theme, without any adversary to provoke me
to it. First then, I profess to be able to give instance of many, that were
baptized into our common faith, and so were Christians (how deeply
understanding I pretend not to judge) who have abstained from the use of
ceremonies merely upon this score, because commanded by their Civil and
Ecclesiastical Superiors, the King and Bishops, by Canon Ecclesiastical; This,
said they, was laying more burdens on them then God had laid, and so usurping
on their Christian liberty. And in stead of naming those men, without their
consent, for that must now be the vilifying them, the involving them under the
Diatribists censure, that they are not understanding Christians, I shall name
one on whom he may pass what judgment he shall please, having full power to do
it, this very Diatribist himself, p. 31. where 1. He has these words, If men
may be Judges what are fit for number and wholesomeness, every after comer will
think himself as wise as he that went before, till they have loaded the
Christian above the Jew. 2. That the learned Chamier has well observed, that
there may be many mischiefs in a few ceremonies, if the authority to institute
them be in the Church or any man or men.

former of these speeches is pretty home to the point in hand, for if the
objection to the number or wholesomness of ceremonies be this, that men are
judges of them, as they always are when men command them, then sure it is the
power of the lawful magistrate (for he is a man or men) to command, which is
the ground of the quarrel, and they that quarrel thus, and abstain from
indifferent ceremonies upon this score, must abstain because commanded by
lawful authority. As for example, I suppose bowing when Jesus is named in the
public worship (or when Christ, or when the Holy Ghost) to be in it self
lawful or indifferent, because no where forbidden by God, I suppose farther,
that being so, this and a few other such ceremonies may very safely be used by
a Christian, though they were not commanded; I now demand, may a few, namely,
three or four such ceremonies be lawfully prescribed or commanded by the
Supreme power in any Church to all under that authority? And may all under that
authority safely observe such ceremonies so commanded? If they may, then men
may be judges what ceremonies are fit both for number and wholesomeness, which
is contrary to the direct words of the Diatribist, in the former part of this
speech, If they may not, then it seems what was before lawful and indifferent
is now since it was commanded, and by no other change, become unlawful, which
was the inconsequence I pointed at, and it seems mistook not in thinking
somebody (it now seems this Diatribist) to be the very person guilty of it.

latter speech is as punctual to it as could be well imagined (and if the
Diatribist have cited duly, Chamier and he are both of this opinion) For it
being certain that nothing can be commanded by lawful authority, unless the
authority of instituting it be either in the Church or man or men, it must
necessarily follow upon the asserting of the many mischiefs in a few
ceremonies, if the authority to institute them be in the Church or man or men,
that there must be many mischiefs in their being commanded by lawful
authority, and then no understanding Christian can think it fit for him by
observing such commands to be accessory to or guilty of the introducing those
mischiefs, and so must abstain on that one account of the Churches exercising
such an authority, which was the very thing I deemed, and noted to be so
inconsequent.

Diatribist in this place, when he charges me of mistake, being these [that
they that abstain from indifferent observances, do it because they were thought
not indifferent, but obtruded on them as parts of worship] are either a
calumny against the Governors of our Church, or else they assert what he
disclaimes so solemnly.

Governors of the Church thought the ceremonies simply necessary and not
indifferent, antecedently to the command of the Church, i. e. necessary by the
Divine Law, though the Church had never commanded them? If that be his meaning
(as seems most probable by what follows [obtruded on them as parts of worship]
for all parts of worship are necessary by divine Law, though never commanded by
man) then this is a direct calumny against the Governors of the Church, who
never thought all ceremonies to be prescribed by God's Law, and therefore
prescribed them by Canon Ecclesiastical, which argues that they esteemed them
not as Divine but Humane Laws, never obtruded them as parts of worship, but as
ceremonies for uniformity and decency, and as useful toward assisting,
inciting, and expressing of piety outwardly.

indifferent, they became necessary and not indifferent by the intervening of
the Churches command, and so were obtruded on men as parts of worship (as that
may possibly signify with him parts of obedience or duty to God by virtue of
his command to obey our Superiors) and if this were the thing disliked in the
ceremonies prescribed by the Church, then again it is evident that their being
commanded by lawful authority, is the only objection to them and ground of
abstaining from them, in the judgment of his Diatribist, at the very point of
time, when he so solemnly disclaimes it.

abstained from because they have been used by Papists, This, says he, is
because they have been by them abused and counted parts of worship. But truly I
cannot with truth thus affirm of the Papists, that any of the ceremonies which
we use from them, were ever by them accounted parts of worship, but only as
useful wholesome ceremonies appointed by the Church.

difference between parts of worship and circumstances of time, place, gesture,
accessaries, of worship, I have spoken at large, c. 2.. 3. And though
hereafter. 28. this difference be fully consented to by the Diatribist in these
words [some rites and ceremonies of worship are rather called circumstances of
worship, time, place, gesture, which are common adjuncts of Religious and Civil
affairs, then properly Religious, much less to be accounted parts of worship]
yet by what has here been said by him, it appears that all his skill lies in
managing that one fallacy, putting all ceremonies and institutions of the
Church under that one ambiguous phrase uncommanded worship, persuading himself
or others that we introduce new parts of worship, and so do contrary to God's
command, who has set down the rule of worship, i. e. prescribed all the parts
and species of worship, whereas he cannot but know that all that we say in
asserting whether of ceremonies or Festivals, is no more but this, that each of
these, not as parts of worship, but as decent attendants of it, though not
instituted by God, have yet been lawfully and orderly appointed and observed by
the Church of God in general, and are to us become matter of obligation, by
that means, and as prescribed by the Governors of our particular Church, to
which our obedience is due, and so that there is no degree of Superstition in
us in doing that which is thus required of us, nor in those that require it in
laying this obligation upon us.

animadversions on the three inconsequences, from which if he would really and
in earnest clear himself, these debates were certainly concluded.

Sect. 10. Strictures on some particulars in the remaining Sections. What
excess Divines mean by Superstition. What St Augustine. Obligation to
performance, without being parts of worship. Observers of order more Religious
more acceptable then others. The reason why Jewish ceremonies are interdicted.
The Church of England sparing in ceremonies. Ceremonies not foreshewing Christ
lawful to be retained by Christians. The abstinence from blood, long continued
in the Church. The Saturday Sabbath. Negative wholesomness not sufficient to
recommend ceremonies. All folly in worship is not Superstition. The opinion of
the ancient Church worth considering. No duties appointed for the circumstances
sake. Time or place instituted by God is a circumstance, as well as when by
man. Apostolical Divine.
revolving the same things again that have hitherto been spoken to, or the
hiding himself in those obscurities which have now been explained, sometimes
granting all that I assert, sometimes denying it in ambiguous phrases, as that
all excess in worship not prescribed is a nimiety and culpable. 25. that rites
be they never so few, if introduced as parts of worship, are Superstitious v.
28. and the like, And the Reader must not be condemned to the penance, of
having all that has been said on these heads, repeated again, and therefore I
am both in justice and charity obliged to omit particular replies (...) to the
remaining Sections, yet shall read them over as carefully as I can, and observe
whatever I discern may be thought pertinent to his cause, which has not
hitherto been spoken to.

all Divines generally condemn it, I answer, they condemn Superstition, but
mean not by it every excess in worship not prescribed, as that phrase
comprehends all ceremonies and festivals not commanded by God; and those
Divines that condemn this under the name of Superstition, are the men of whom
only my words are to be understood, that they are so few and so modern, and of
so small authority, that they were scarce worth producing, no ancient writer
having ever condemned all ceremonies and festivals, which are not commanded by
God, under the title of Superstition; and that 2^. 2. qu^^ art. 1.
Aquinas's words are no way appliable to it, has been already showed.

Augustines place produced by me. 33. from whence he collects that an
institution of worship by men may be Superstitious, I answer, that that Father
speaks there of those qui instituerunt Deorum simulachra, who instituted images
of Gods, which the Diatribist could not but see, if he had pleased, and of such
institutions I grant that they not only may be, but are Superstitious, but our
ceremonies and Festivals are no Deorum Simulachra, images of the Gods, and so
sure not liable to his censure.

usages in themselves lawful and allowable, that if they were taught or
practiced as necessary, or as making the observers more Religious then others,
or more acceptable to God, then they would be parts of worship] (and then I
must suppose by his tenure of doctrine, Superstitious) I answer, 1. That
decency, or uniformity, or obedience to Superiors may be a competent ground to
turn lawful ceremonies into necessary, and on those grounds joined together, I
may kneel and teach kneeling at the taking of the Eucharist to be necessary,
viz. not by any necessity of divine precept terminated immediately in this
gesture, but by such necessity as Humane Laws, by force of the fifth
Commandment, and (...), obey those that are placed over you, lay upon me, and
this is far from making this kneeling a part of worship, when we know it is but
a gesture, and circumstance of it. 2. That they which pray reverently and
decently, observe uniformity, obey the lawful commands of the Church, are in
so doing more Religious and more acceptable to God then others, who caeteris
paribus, do it not, pray irreverently, act undecently, observe not uniformity,
disobey the lawful commands of their Ecclesiastical Superiors, or then they
which perform the same things upon their own choices. So says Leo de jejun: 7.
men's: Sermon: 3. Divinarum namque reverentia Sanctionum inter quaelibit
spontaneae observantiae studia habet semper privilegium suum, ut sacratius sit
quod publica lege celebratur, quam quod privata institutione dependitur. The
reverence of the Divine, i. e. Ecclesiastical sanctions have always this
privilege among spontaneous observances, that whatsoever is performed by
public law, is more sacred, then what is done upon private institution. This I
hope I shall not need farther to prove, and if not, then sure the teaching this
or acting on these grounds, will not make my allowable action criminous or
Superstitious.

sole reason why old Jewish ceremonies are interdicted us Christians, is,
because the observing those which foreshewed Christ, and teaching the necessity
of them, would be the denying Christ to be come, paralleling this with an
answer of Bellarmine's and rendering an account from Chamier, that there was
another reason of their abrogation, because they did load the conscience with a
yoke of a multitude of ceremonies, and that this is common to those, and to the
traditions of men] I answer, 1. That it is one thing for Jewish ceremonies to
be interdicted Christians, another for them not to be imposed, the weight of
the yoke was the reason why they were not to be imposed, and to that the
Diatribists reasons in the conclusion of. 31. do all belong; but my speech was
evidenly of their being interdicted, and that meant not only of the multitude
of them, but of every or each of them, and the sole reason of that, was this
which I assigned, for if the weight of the multitude were at all considered in
that, then any one of them, which sure was not a multitude, would have been
lawful, by name circumcision, or sacrificing, or the like, against which yet
the Christian interdict lies, as well as against the whole number.

application of this instance to ceremonies (not prescribed by God in a
Christian Church) there is great difference betwixt the Church of which
Bellarmine was an advocate, and that which I undertook to defend. In the Church
of Rome there is a great multitude of ceremonies and festivals, which may be
capable of the title of weight and yoke, but the Church of England is far more
sparing, and I had fully consented to the rule of paucae and salubres, few and
salubrious, and was now disputing for the lawfulness of some ceremonies,
uncommanded by God, not for the expedience of near so many, as other Christians
both of the Western and Eastern Churches have received into their Canons, and
proportionable to that was any one, or never so few old Jewish ceremonies, for
the abrogation of which I was therefore obliged to give such an account, as was
not founded in the multitude of them, and consequently could not take either
Chamier's or the Diatribist's advise, to render any other then what I rendered,
as I thought, from such like plain words of the Apostle, We have an altar, of
which they have not power to eat, that serve the tabernacle, Heb. 13.

Diatribist asks a subtle question, whether if a Christian had observed some
Jewish ceremony, which did not foreshew Christ to come, but significant only of
something past (though they had not taught it necessary) the Apostle would not
have blamed them for that as superstitious; and so for any new rites and
ceremonies? To which I answer considently, and to the latter first, that he
would not, and the very asking or questioning it in that form, as if it could
not be denied but the Apostle would have blamed them, is the known fallacy of
begging the question: For the whole matter of controversy betwixt me and the
Diatribist is this, whether every devised rite or ceremony not commanded by
God, be superstitious?

former part of the question I answer as confidently, and ask him first, what
he thinks of the abstinence from things strangled, and all eating of blood, was
not that a Jewish ceremony? and was not that observed by Christians Act. 15.
and did the Apostles blame it as superstitious? Certainly they did not. Nay,
did not this observance continue among Christians for many ages? Ne animalium
quidem sanguinem in epulis habemus, suffocatis and morticinis abstinemus, we
have not the blood of any living creatures in our feasts, we abstain from
things strangled, and that die of themselves: says Tertullian, Apol. c. 9. And
Lucian tells us how his Peregrinus was rejected by the Christians, (...), for
eating some of their forbidden meats, which sure belongs to this matter; and in
Eusebius's history l. 5. c. 1. Biblis thus vindicates the Christians from the
accusation of eating of children, because, says she, (...), we count it not
lawful to eat the blood of unreasonable creatures. If this be not perfectly
home to his question, I shall then proceed, and allege for my instance the
known practice of the Christian Church of the Apostles and purest time, who as
they celebrated the weekly Lords day, on the first of the week, in
commemoration of Christ's resurrection, so they continued the observation of the
Saturday Sabbath on the last day of the week, in remembrance of the Creation of
the World. The custom appears in Tertullian de Monogam: and was continued to
the time of the Laodicean Council, which orders that not only the Law, as Act.
15. 21. but the Gospel also should be read that day. And the words of Balsamon
are clear, (...), the Sabbaths were by the holy Fathers almost quite equalled
to the Lords days: and a great deal more to the same purpose, as is elsewhere
showed in the Exposition of the fourth Commandment.

if ceremonies be but harmless, or negatively wholesome, there cannot be too
much of them, This is a plain changing of sense into that which is most
contrary to it; For my words are plain, without his gloss, that if they be
positively wholesome or tending to edification (not contenting my self with
negatively wholesome or harmless, or with any thing less then positive
wholsomnesse) then there will be little reason to accuse them of excess, then
they will rather help devotion then incumber it, the fear of which was the main
objection against the multitude of them.

prove all folly and vanity in the worship of God, to be superstition, by
demanding what Superstition is, but folly and vanity?] this is a mere
paralogisme, (never reducible into a Logical mood and figure) by supposing
things to be convertible which are not, as if I should prove a particular
substance (for example, the soul of man) to be a body, because every body, is a
substance, The answer would be easy, by saying, every body is a substance, but
every substance is not a body, so in like manner, every superstition is folly,
and vanity, but every folly and vanity, even in the worship of God, is not
superstition, This was a little too gross a Sophisme to impose it self upon
the Diatribist, and he now sees a small measure of subtility was sufficient to
enable me for the discovering of it.

kind of excess, of placing more virtue in some things then belongs to them,
he demands what I mean by [or in the estimation of the purer ages of the
Church] and whether the purer ages of the Church after the Apostles had power
to put virtue into things which they had not either naturally or by the rule of
Gods word? I answer that I never thought of any such thing, that my meaning is
plain enough, if he would please to see it, in the end of. 45. viz. that the
thing, there mentioned, the sign of the Cross and the parva Evangelia, and
the like, had not either naturally or by the rule of Gods word, or in the
estimation of the purer ages of the Church, that force or virtue in them, which
in the latter impurer ages they were thought to have: and I wonder what
difficulty there was in understanding, or fault in affirming this, which has
no more dangerous intimation, then that the opinion or estimation of the purest
ages of the Church, i. e. the first and nearest to the Apostles times, were, in
any such controversy as this, very fit to be considered in their due place, i.
e. next after the Apostles themselves.

holiness, or separation to holy from common uses, he promises to speak
somewhat considerable, and under that head tells us that there is this
difference between times and places separated by God, and those which are
separated by men, that the former require holy duties to till them up, i. e.
that the duties are appointed for the time or places sake, but the latter are
to wait upon holy duties, the time or place are appointed for the duties sake]
I must still challenge his promise, whereby he is yet our debtor of somewhat
considerable. For certainly prayer and fasting and sacrifices among the Jews,
all duties appointed by God (as in stead of the last the offertorie or alms
among Christians) were not appointed for time or places sake; holy days and
holy places, the weekly Sabbath, and the annual day of Expiation, and the
tabernacle and Temple at Jerusalem, were never the end for which prayer, etc
were instituted, nor is it imaginable how they should, when each of those
duties, visibly prayer and sacrifice, were appointed and practiced before there
was any such thing, as Tabernacle or Temple instituted by God.

time or place, when instituted by God himself, is as truly a circumstance of
worship as when instituted by man, and duty is equally the substance: and it
can with no probability be affirmed that the substance is appointed for the
circumstances sake, or (as he is pleased to speak) to till up the
circumstances, any otherwise then he would say substances were created to till
up accidents, the body for the colors sake.

charge at the end of. 39. that I make difference betwixt Apostolical and
divine institutions, and therein vary from my resolution of the first Quaere,.
22. It is soon dispatched by acknowledging I do not think that the Apostles were
God, and thereupon for perspicuity sake I made these several heads of
institutions, some by Christ, some by the Apostles, inspired, and
commissionated by Christ, the former I called Divine, the second Apostolical,
as that is not personally and immediately divine, yet not at all doubting, or
giving any cause of doubt, whether the latter were not of divine original and
obligation also, wherein sure I spoke after the example and manner of men, and
that in order to distinctnesse and perspicuity, not foreseeing such cavils as
this, when I thus spoke.

Will Worship in the end of this Exercitation, must be reserved to the next
Exercitation, which is the place designed for it, and for the Diatribist to
take it here for granted, as he does, that my voluntary oblation is an eminent
Species of Superstition, against which, punishment is denounced in the second
Commandment: when he knows that whole Tract of Will Worship undertakes to
demonstrate the contrary, what is this but a mere begging of the Question, and
that a prime sort of fallacious arguing, the solemn refuge of those which are
destitute of all other?

Sect. 11. A Vindication of the Tract of Superstition from uncharitableness.
Stricture, there remains now no more on this first head of discourse, but to
vindicate and approve my charity to the Diatribist, as I have hitherto done my
doctrine against him. And as this is by his conclusion imposed on me as my
task, so I doubt not but to find it an easy one, if he will weigh my actions in
the same balance which he uses for his own, nay I wish he could as easily
clear himself, who has thus judged me.

conclusion of that first Exercitation, And now the Dr. may be pleased to
review, and if he will recall his bitter false uncharitable conclusion. 57. 58.
unbeseeming both his piety and gravity. For now it will appear that the charge
of Superstition on some men is no Mormo, nor yet unjust, but what is avowed by
himself and party to be their opinion and practice, and what is proved to be
really Superstitious according to the true notion of the word Superstition
among Reformed Orthodox Divines.

obedience to his admonition, and in a solemn dread of having said any thing
bitterly, falsely, and uncharitably, and without any manner of incitation
against the Diatribist, who uses this language (which if it be not found to
have perfect truth in it, must be acknowledged to be very uncharitable, I need
not add, bitter toward me) I have warily and suspiciously reviewed those
Sections, and I shall desire the indifferent Reader to do so too, and to tell
me what syllable or minutest part of them there is, which can any way deserve
from any dispassionate person, the title either of false in any degree, or of
uncharitable or bitter in relation to any man then or now living.

premise, that the severest Satyr against a vice, and not a person, which
carries perfect truth and justice in it, that represents a damnable sin in the
uglyest colors, and no otherwise reflects upon the person of any man, then as
his own conscience shall be thus awakened with a sight of his own guilt, is so
far from either uncharitable or bitter, (unless in the notion wherein the
wholesomest Physic or most necessary Surgery must undergo the same censure)
that it is the greatest and most obliging Christian act of mercy, and kindness,
and sovereign charity, that piety and gravity can suggest to any. And unless it
asperse (by affixing such vices to) particular persons, especially those who
are not guilty of them (as here the Diatribist has in plain words affixt that
foul sin of Superstition on the Dr. personally, and enlarged it to his party,
which he knows must involve all the obedient sons of the Church of England,
for the Dr. cannot with any tolerable charity be said or thought to be of any
other party) there is no ground of charge of the least asperity in this.

Sections can no wise fall under this censure, the sum of them being no more
but this, that if the crime of Superstition were fastened on none but those on
whom the Scripture directs to fasten it, all that have opposed our Church in
point of rites and ceremonies, and branded the innocent as guilty of no less
crime then Superstition, must be obliged to return to peace and charity, and
persuasions of kindness toward us, whereas the contrary humor of those who
oppose and malign our Church, daily inflames and advances into that diabolical
sin of calumniating, and accusing the most innocent observances of those, whom
they have undertaken to oppose, and never considers or looks on those many
grosser crimes, spiritual pride, uncharitableness, faction, nay sacrilege and
profaness it self, with so much expression of aversion or dislike, as on the
usage of a few and wholesome ceremonies.

paraphrase it, the sense of those two Sections, and all the asperity that is
there discoverable, is but this, that enemies and calumniators have learnt two
of the Devils attributes, (...) or (...), and (...) or (...), and as long as
this has palpable truth in it, and when I applied it not (so much as in my
thoughts) either to this Diatribist, whose name I think I had never heard of,
nor to any other particular person, and as long as it was visible that there
was such enmity abroad in this nation, which thus fortified it self by
calumniating others, and it being certain that it was perfect duty of charity,
to endeavor the deterring and preserving brethren and fellow Christians from
such guilts and dangers, and that the pointing at other sins that much more
justly deserved censure, might be useful to that end, by way of but necessary
diversion, I can with perfect peace of mind review those Sections, not
discerning any man, or virtue, moral or Christian, any branch of either part of
my duty, against which I have offended; And I now desire the Diatribist, if he
be not fully of my persuasion, that he descend to the particularity, and tell
me the man in the world to whom I was in those Sections uncharitable or bitter,
and first to whom uncharitable, and then for the falseness, that has by all
this reply to this Diatribe, been, I hope, sufficiently contested.

vindication of my self, I can very well abstain from making use of the
advantage, which is here visibly given me, of more then recriminating; I am so
well satisfied with my own innocence, that I cannot be farther gratified with
the contemplation of others guilts.

first exercitation, having I hope competently secured the observance of the
rites and ceremonies of our Church from being the introducing of any new
worship, or criminous excess against any of the Commandments of the first
table, and consequently from the charge of Superstition in any justifiable
notion, or Etymology, or acception of the word, not taking that of Super
Statutum to be such.

CHAP. V. Of Will Worship.
Sect. 1. The state of the Question. Will Worship distinguished from the
circumstances of it. The matter of man's will of three sorts. The 6. several
possible notions of Will Worship. The application of them to the matter in
hand. The vanity of the Diatribists distinction The scope of the 2d Commandment.
Diatribe of Will Worship, the first complaint is, that the Dr. had not (as it
became him) distinguished the words (...) in Greek, or Will Worship in English,
before he began his defense of them] and to repair this unbecoming defect on
the Doctors part, the Diatribist is pleased to do it for him, by assigning it a
double notion, 1. For voluntary, spontaneous or willing worship, i. e.
willingness or freeness in worship commanded by God,) and then they were to
blame, says he, that put an ill notion upon them, or 2. For worship devised
by the wit and appointed by the will of man, as contradistinguished to the will
and wisdom of God, and then it was not so much the ill fortune as the just
punishment of them to pass under an ill notion etc. For the scope of the 2d
Commandment in the affirmative part being this, God must be worshipped with his
own prescribed worship, and in the negative, to forbid all devised worship of
God by the wit or will of man, the very name of will (of man) put to worship of
God, as opposed to the will of God, the only rule of worship, is as a brand in
the forehead of it, to characterize it as condemnable in all.

This his first. I have thus fully set down, as the foundation of his discourse
on this subject, and very fit for my direction how to proceed in the reply to
it; For if I shall now punctually obey his admonition, and having, in his
opinion, formerly failed of my duty, speedily endeavor to repair it, 1. by
distinguishing the Greek and English word (though by giving it the exact limits
in that one place, where it is used in Scripture, I had hoped well that I had
formerly performed all that was necessary in this kind) and telling him clearly
in what sense I take it, defending it to be no way reprovable; and 2. by
showing the unfitness of his distinction here premised, and the
fallaciousnesse of the reason, or proof annexed to it, me thinks this should
set me on a good way toward the end of this second Stage, and so do that which
is most desirable to the Reader and my self, confer much to our expedition in
this journey.

worship, whether the theological virtue, or some act thereof, together with
the gradual intension and extension, the degrees and also the frequency or
number of those acts, on one side, and the external ceremonies or circumstances
of it, on the other side, which are not parts but accidents of worship; As in
any other habit, that of justice particularly, may be exemplified, It may
beside the virtue of justice, signify 1. some act of that virtue, or 2. the
degree thereof, and frequent repetition (more or less) of the acts of it, but
for the circumstance of time or place attending on any act of it, they will
never be called justice with any propriety.

Secondly, For [will,] the other ingredient in the composition of the word,
meaning thereby the will or choice of man it may be of four sorts,
distinguishable by the matter which is willed or chosen, 1. when the thing thus
willed by man is forbidden by God, or 2. when it is commanded and under
obligation, as far as the force of affirmative precepts extends (of which the
rule is true, that obligant semper, sed non ad semper, they oblige us always,
but yet do not oblige us to be always exercising some act of the virtues so
commanded) and so when it is done, it is done in perfect concord with, and
agreeableness to the precept, but yet for that time, or in that degree, it lay
not under particular precept, but might without disobedience or sin, have been
omitted. 3. When the thing willed, is left free and indifferent, neither
commanded nor forbidden by God. 4. When although it be not indifferent, much
less forbidden, but good in an high degree, yet it is not under particular
precept, and so may be omitted without sin, and when it is done, it is highly
rewardable by God. I shall give an example of each of these branches also; Of
the first, when a man himself commits, or teaches others to commit adultery,
adultery being forbidden by God, and so his action or teaching, an act of his
will opposed to the will of God. Of the second when I give to the poor, yearly,
or weekly, such a proportion out of my estate, which I am able to give (and so
offend against no office of justice in giving) and yet am not obliged to give
by any precept of Gods which lays it as a duty upon me. An instance of which,
is set down at large in the Tract of Will Worship. 32. which together with other
exemplifications of the point in hand, very necessary to clear my sense, and
yet in no reason here to be repeated, I must desire the Reader to fetch from
that place. 30. and so forward. Of the third, when I walk or sit still, laugh
or weep, the law of God leaving it perfectly free for me to do, or omit, either
of these as I shall choose. Of the last all writers, Jewish, Heathen, and
Christian, give us frequent examples. Maimonides among the Jews p. 381.
More Nevoch. par. 3. c. 17. mentions it as the common saying of the Jewish
Doctors, that Reward is by God given to him that does any thing uncommanded.
Among the Heathens one for all, Plutarch who instances in acts (...). Plut.
lib. (...).
of fortitude, freeing the city from Tyrants doing any great thing, which
(says he) are not (...), or (...), required or commanded by Law. For (says
he) (...) etc. if the Law command such things, then all must be counted (...)
disobedient and breakers of Laws, which deserve not reward in war, which let
the Tyrants live an hour, or which do not some of those other things which are
accounted excellent and by consequence all such must be punished as offenders.
So Nazianzen of the Christian Law, (...). Of our Law some things lay necessity
on them to whom they are given (i. e. says the Scholiast, (...), (on us
Christians) and danger to them who observe them not. Others impose no
necessity, but are left to choice, bring honor and reward to the observers, but
no kind of danger to them that perform them not, adding that as he that does
not deserve punishment, does not presently deserve praise, so neither does he
that does not deserve praise presently incur punishment: So among the Latins,
Tertullian speaking both of continence and of abstinence, in his book de cultu
Foemin. (long before he was under any suspicion of Montanism) c. 9. Multi
propter regnum Dei fortem and utique permissam voluptatem sponte ponentes. Many
there were which for the Kingdom of God voluntarily and of their own accord
parted with that great and lawful pleasure of women. And again, Quidam ipsam
Dei creaturam sibi interdicunt, abstinentes vino, animalibus exulantes, quorum
fructus nulli periculo aut solicitudini adjacent, sed humiliatem animae suae in
victus quoque castigatione Deo immolant. Some interdict themselves the creature
of God, abstein from wine, and living creatures, the using of which is
perfectly free and safe, and so by chastising of the body, sacrifices to God
the humility of the soul. So S. Hierome ad Demetriad. speaking of Christ's words
of selling and giving to the poor, Non cogo (says he in Christ's name) non
impero, sed propono palmam, praemia ostendo, Tuum est eligere, si volueris in
agone and certamine coronari. Christ does not command it or compel to do it,
but proposes rewards, and thou if thou will be crowned must make the choice.
And ad Pammachium, Non tibi imponitur necessitas, ut voluntas praemium
consequatur, No necessity is imposed on thee, that thy will may obtain reward.
And advers: Helvidium, Of Virginity, Virgo majoris est meriti, dum id
contemnit, quod si fecerit, non delinquit. A Virgin is of greater worth, while
she contemns that, which if she do, she offends not. And advers: Jovinian: Ideo
plus amat Virgins Christus, quia sponte faciunt quod sibi non fuerat
imperatum, Therefore Christ loves them more, because they of their own accord
do that which was not commanded them. So Chrysostom formerly produced on Rom:
8. (...). The Spiritual do what they do with appetite and desire, and
demonstrate it in that they also exceed commands. So Cassian Chrysostoms
scholar, Coll. 22. c. 30. Perfecti sub gratia evangelii constituti, voluntaria
legem devotione transcendunt etc. They which are perfect now under the grace of
the Gospel do transcend the law by voluntary devotion. And c. 29 he speaks of
worldly men, qui nihil Deo voluntary offerunt, who have no free-will-offering
for God. And so Gregory Moral: in Job: Quidam praecepta legis perfectione
virtutum transcendunt, Some men transcend the precepts of the law by perfection
of virtues.

apparatus to the present matter, the stating of the question in hand, the word
(...) Will Worship as terminated in the one God, the object of worship, cannot
be imagined to denote any more then some one of these six things, 1. the
performing any sort of worship to God, which is forbidden by him, which yet is
not truly but equivocally called worship, as when the Pharisees persecuting the
Apostles, was by them styled the doing God service, and the like. 2. The using
any ceremony in the worship of God, which either is particularly forbidden by
God, or bears analogy with those which are certainly forbidden, as among
Christians sacrificing of beasts, etc. 3. Burthening the worship of God with
many whether ridiculous or unprofitable ceremonies, which though they are no
where forbidden severally by God, yet by their multitude become an hindrance to
devotion, or a yoke too heavy for Christians. 4. Using or instituting one or
more ceremonies, no way forbidden, and yet no where commanded by God, but yet
such as the institution or using any of them, is founded in some pious or
prudential consideration, whether of decency, as when any gesture of bodily
reverence or humility is used or appointed, or for edification, as when feasts
not prescribed by God, are set apart by the Church, and so by men, for the
commemoration of any eminent mercy of God, for the proposing some exemplary
virtues to others etc. and withal that care is taken, that they are no way
offensive by the number of them. 5. Offering to the service of God any thing of
which God has any way revealed that he will accept of, and reward, if it be
duly performed, though he do not by any law exact it from every man, as
dedicating himself to the ministry, doing it without any hire or payment here,
vowing vows of building Hospitals, Churches etc: and most eminently martyrdom,
when it may possibly, and without sin be avoided by slight etc. but yet the man
thinks it may much tend to Gods honor in the good of souls, if he thus seal and
publicly testify his obedience to Christ's commands by his blood, and
accordingly chooses to do so. Lastly, when either for the degree or frequency
of repetition of any known act of worship, a man does more then he is by Gods
law strictly required to do, prays oftener every day, fasts oftener (supposing he
no way hurt himself, or omit the performance of any other duty, by such
frequency in either of these) gives a more liberal proportion out of his estate
to pious and charitable uses, then any precept of Christ obliges him to do,
and the like.

cheerful and so voluntary performance of any act of commanded worship, I take
not this in at all, supposing that in the commands of God, not only the action,
but the cheerfulness of the performance is in like manner commanded by God,
and so necessary, not voluntary, as that referres to the will of man,
distinguished from the command of God.

two first of these, it is by me most readily acknowledged, that they are
criminous, and of these I plead not the cause in the least, either here, or in
the tract of Will Worship, nor do I apprehend that either of these are truly
and properly capable of that title of will worship, or called by it, in that
one place of Scripture, Col: 2.

third sort also I acknowledge my dislike, but yet again think it not
applicable to the notion of the word in the Apostle, but rather to that by
Epiphanius used of the Pharisee, (...) exuberance, or superfluity of
Will Worship, where still the fault is the multitude and unprofitablenesse of
these ceremonies, not simply the use of any one, and so of each of them, the
superfluity, and not the uncommandednesse of them.

fourth sort, though I must affirm that it has nothing culpable in it, but
rather commendable, as referrable to the Apostle's command of decency etc. yet
because it is not worship it self, but an extrinsecal attendant of it, I need
not allow that the title of Will Worship neither, nor apply to it the Apostles
usage of the word Col. 2. but refer it to those circumstances of worship, for
which or against which no command or prohibition of the word has interposed,
of which I often spoke in the head of Superstition, and vindicated it from that
title.

fifth is that I formerly spoke, and compared it with the voluntary oblations
under the Law, and of that there is all reason to interpret the word in the
Apostle, and that in a notion of good and commendable (no way of vicious) if it
be truly such as it pretends to be, and if it be not really such, it may yet
have an appearance of that, and so far an appearance of Piety or Wisdom.

sixth, or last, I have affirmed of it and I hope made it clear, that it is
first lawful, then commendable, and rewardable by God, above a lower degree, or
less frequent exercise of the same sort of worship, and yet is not under
particular precept, as appears by this, that at that time, and in the same
circumstances, when it is thus laudable to give so much more, the giving
somewhat less is not a sin, as is manifested in the tract of Wilworship.

Diatribist's directions, distinguished the words, and set the whole question
before him as discernibly as he could wish, and therein laid grounds for that
just defense of a blameless word, which was at large pleaded in the tract of
Will Worship. And then I need add no more to show the impropriety and vanity of
his own distinction or double sense of Will Worship, 1. for spontaneous
freeness in worship commanded by God, or 2. for worship devised by the wit and
appointed by the will of man, as contradistinguisht to the will and wisdom of
God. For as to the former branch of the distinction, as it is restrained to
worship commanded by God, so it can be no Species of that Will Worship, which
respects the will and choice of man, without any necessity particularly imposed
by God, and accordingly I have excluded it out of my Scheme, not out of any
unkindnesse to it but because it necessarily belongs to another head, the
cheerfulness and the worship being both supposed to be commanded by God, and
so incapable of this distant title of Will Worship. So that at the best
imaginable, he has branched Will Worship into but one part, and that was not
the way of distinguishing that term.

member, it is so set that it has many improprieties in it, and in brief is
that great fallacy to which Aristotle refers most others, fallacia plurium
interrogationum (and I remember the Maim: Hal: Kelc-hammikdusch c. ult.
Jews have a rule of their Vrim and Thummim (...) they ask not of two things at
once) confounding and putting together things that are most disparate, as has
already appeared by the several Species here set down, which were to be
distributed into their several classes, some contradistinguisht indeed to the
will and wisdom of God, but none of those defended by me, other only not
particularly commanded by him, or imposed sub periculo animae, but very
consonant and agreeable both to Gods will and wisdom, and so still (...), I
have very little to thank him for in his distinction.

sum and scope of the second Commandment, with the name of S. Augustine and
the Doctor in the margent, it already appears how little force it has against
my pretensions, it being evident that the words there cited both for the
affirmative and negative part of the Commandment, belong to essential parts of
Gods worship, those only being prescribed and particularly appointed by God,
not to each circumstance thereof, whether of time, or place, or gesture, which
among us it is certain are not particularly prescribed by God, and yet we can so
far judge of his will, by many indications of it, that he no way reproves or
dislikes our voluntary observing, or the churches appointing of such, and to
these only he knows this controversy here belongs, as applied to the
Ceremonies or Festivals of our Church.

Sect. 2. The method of of explicating difficulties in the new Test: (...) in a
good sense: and when in a bad, no prejudice to (...).
care how often or how seldom the Greek word is used in other Authors, or the
translators of the old Testament, when the thing signified, devised or imposed
worship by the will of man, ^ so decryed in Scripture; I shall to his
fastidious despising my method proposed, return my reason of reteining it, and
to his reason, a brief demonstration of the vanity of it.

first, the reason of my method in that, as in other discourses, was the great
affinity and consent betwixt the Greek of the Old and New Testament, the
writers being of the same nation, Jews by birth, which had acquired some skill
in the Greek Language, and yet not so much exactness therein, as wholly to
assume the dialect or character of speech observed by native or Learned Greeks,
or to divest themselves of the idiomes of their own language.

ground I suppose it most consequent, that for the explaining all verbal
difficulties in the New Testament, resort should first be had to the Greek
Translators of the Canonical Books, or the writers of the Apocryphal of the
old, and then in the second place to other good Authors, from whom any light
can be fetched, and when these fail in their expected aids, then to make use of
other supplies, analogy of phrases or matter, with what we find in the Old
Testament, circumstances of the context, and the like.

Diatribist despise this method of search, it were but necessary charity in
him, to discover the faults of it and direct us to a better, which having not
here done, he leaves us to surmise, that it was not his judgment, but his care
to serve his own hypothesis, which infused these dislikes into him, for
otherwise, the result of my way of search being only this, that the word (...)
being but once used in the whole Bible, Col. 2. 23. the notion of it in that
one place, must in all reason be resolved to be that which properly belongs to
that place, especially if it proves to be such as agrees exactly with the (...)
or freewill offerings in the Old Testament, I see not what infirmity it was
which could render it up to his despising.

removes and evacuates all force of his reason of dislike, it being evident by
that one example of freewill offerings, but much more so by other evidences,
both there and here added, that there may be many acts of worship, many
circumstances of worship, yea and many heights of Christian heroical virtue,
which may bear proportion with worship, that are not under obligation, from any
particular command of Gods, and so remain to be acts of the will or choice of
man, which are perfectly lawful, acceptable, yea some highly rewardable by
God, and so far from the guilt which Mr. C. affixes, of high indignity or
affront to the divine Majesty.

that they are but twice apiece used in the Book of Wisdom, and always in an
ill notion, which says he, is but little to the credit of the compound (...)]
might sure have been spared, it being as certain and visible to him, that the
same word is used by St James, c. 1. 27. in as good a sense as could be wished,
with the epithets of (...) pure and undefiled before God, added to it, and v.
26. for the profession of Christianity, though for want of actions, bridling
the tongue, and the like, that becomes (...) vain; And as plain, that the word
is in it self equally applicable to the true as to the false, indifferently to
any religion, to St Paul's religion among the Jews, Act. 26. 5. the strictest
sect of our religion, to the worship of Angels, Col. 2. 18. and so to the
worship of Idols in the Book of Wisdom, which yet can no more tend to the
disadvantage of the compound (...), when that is not terminated on any
prohibited object, then the use of the Latin cultus sometimes for the worship
of false Gods, can prejudge voluntarius cultus, voluntary worship, when either
the object is not specified, or the mention of the one true God is added to it.
It being confessed and supposed by both parties in this contest, that the simple
(...) or worship it self is not culpable, save only when the other part of the
composition, the (...), i. e. the interposition of the will (or as he will
style it, the devise or appointment) of man, has an influence upon it.

Sect. 3. His entrance on the view of Col. 2. answered. The difference betwixt
Commands of Magistrates and imposition of dogmatizers. What it is which is said
to have (...).
Col. 2. where only the word Will Worship is to be found; and in setting down
his grounds of interpreting it, 1. He cites Beza and BP. Davenant, whose words
are presently answered, by adverting to the distinction formerly given between
the essentials and circumstantials, the parts and the ceremonies of worship.

mistake in me, in that I observe from v. 22. that St Paul speaks not of
commands but doctrines, not of the prohibition of the Magistrate, but of false
teachers imposing them as the commands of God; Whereas, says he, the Apostle
speaks expressly of these impositions, that they were after the Commandments
and doctrines of men, v. 8. after the traditions of men to worship God by the
observation of them.] Of which words of his, if there be any shadow of force in
them by way of exception against me, the meaning must be, that the Apostle
there speaks of the commands or prohibitions of Magistrates in things of
themselves perfectly indifferent, and censures those commands under the style
of Will Worship.

truth in it, for 1. The matter of the commands is no lawful matter, but either
the worship of Angels (and that is criminous, as the worshipping of a creature)
or the reducing of antiquated rites of Judaisme, which ought not to be reduced,
being once cancelled and nailed to the cross of Christ. 2. The commands were
not commands of Magistrates, but of men which had no authority to prescribe any
thing, especially so contrary to the doctrine which the Apostles had planted
among them, the Christian liberty from the Judaical yoke. 3. The manner of
imposing them was quite distant from that of the Magistrates giving laws
Ecclesiastical or Civil, those are by way of Canon, as of things indifferent,
in order to decency, and the like, without ever pretending them to be in
themselves necessary, as commanded by God; these are imposed as from God when
they are not so and that is the known sin of dogmatizing, to which I formerly
applied the place; And the word (...) commands, signifies no more then so,
being joined with, and explicated by (...) doctrines, i. e. such things as
false teachers require all men to do in obedience to God, or as if they were
now commanded by him, when some of them, as abstinencies, etc. having once been
required by God, are now abolisht by Christ, and the other, the worship of
Angels, though it pretend not ever to have been commanded, but only to be
acceptable to God, is clearly forbidden by him.

mistake in the Diatribist, who observes them to be commands (meaning, as he
must, if he censureth or opposes me, commands of Magistrates) and not only
doctrines of false teachers, when indeed commands and doctrines are all one,
both joined together to signify these dogmatizers, pretending the things which
they taught to be in force by Divine command, by virtue of the Law given to
Moses, and not only such as would be accepted by God, as of the worship of
Angels I suppose was pretended by those false teachers.

seducers spoken of in that Chapter were the Gnostick heretics, who made up
their Theology of Judaical and heathenish additions to the Christian truth;
from the Jews they had many abstinences, such as were now abolisht by Christ,
and those they imposed as commands of God, when they were not; and from the
heathens the doctrine of the Aeones or Angels, as creators of this inferior
world, and so such as might, with Gods good liking, be worshipped by us.

Lastly, Those commands of theirs are not censured by the Apostle, as acts of
Will Worship, or blamed, or put under any ill character for being such, any
more then for being acts of humility, which is (...) joined with Will Worship
in that place v. 22. but as intrenchments on that liberty purchased for them by
the death of Christ v. 20. which had cancelled these Judaical ordinances to all
that were dead with him, i. e. to Christians, and had turned all Demon worship
out of their hearts, but had no way bound up the hands of his Apostles or their
successors the Governors of the Church, from instituting ceremonies or
festivals among Christians.

Diatribist adds of Will Worship, that it had a show of wisdom but no more,
it is but a begging the question, or if it pretend to be concluded from that
text, it is without all ground so pretended, for if I shall grant (...) to
signify only a show, no reality of wisdom, yet it is not of Will Worship
that that is affirmed, any more them of humility (and I hope humility which is
an acknowledged Christian virtue, has more then a show of wisdom in it) but
of the retrenchments of their Christian liberty, their (...) v. 20. subjection
to the doctrines and impositions of false teachers, which had (...), some
either show or reality of wisdom (...) (...) in Will Worship and humility,
which they could not have, if either or both those, when really belonging to
any, had no more then a show of wisdom in them. But of this I have said enough
in the Tract of Will Worship,. 12.

Sect. 4. The Magistrates power acknowledged. Inventing new ways of worship.
David's appointing the Levites to wait from 20. years old, an act of a King,
not of a Prophet. David's last words.
vindicated, is acknowledged by Mr. C. for says he, the Apostle has here no
reflection on the Magistrates making Laws in indifferent things (and if so, why
was it judged a mistake in the Doctor, when he said, the Apostle does not speak
of commands, but doctrines, i. e. not of the prohibition of the Magistrate etc.
Certainly if the Doctor were then mistaken, the Diatribist is now, who
confesses the same thing, which so lately he had reproved) All his quarrel is
to the Magistrates inventing a new way of worshipping God, and then I am sure
he has no real quarrel to me, after all this pompous show of writing
exercitations against me, for I never was advocate for those who invented new
ways of worshipping God, and if, as he says, the Papists lie under that guilt,
I have taken no fee from them, amunder no obligation to plead for them, they
are of age, let them answer for themselves.

counsel for those false teachers, who any way impose antiquated worship on
God's people, such are sacrificing, sabbatizing, circumcision, and the like,
and so all this while the Diatribist fights with the air, and confesses as
much as his adversary desires of him, and then all that I have to complain of,
is the ad quid perditio haec? To what purpose was all this waste of words and
paper? I wish there were no more yet behind.

instance of mine, that of David who appointed Levites to serve from the age of
20. years, whereas God by Moses had appointed it but from 25. years old etc.
And I wonder what can be replied to this my instance, to hinder it from
concluding the lawfulness of making humane Laws, in such circumstances of Gods
worship, and those different from the Laws of God. Why, 1. says he, it is
impertinent, for he brings it as an instance of the Magistrates power in a
thing indifferent, whereas this was in a matter of religion, and more then so,
in a matter formerly commanded by God.

first answer under form of a first, I was in reason to expect a second to
supply the defects, but the Reader will easily discern with me that there is no
such, and therefore this first must bear all the weight. And to it I reply, 1.
From his own confession, that it was in a matter of Religion and more then of
Religion, then by the argument a majori, he must needs have power in the less,
i. e. in a thing indifferent, and then sure my instance from David was more
then home to my purpose (i. e. pertinent) it proved more then I pretended from
it, and if the Diatribists arguments would do so too, I assure him, I should be
convinced by them, I will never object to them that they have abundantly proved
his position, but such acts of Supererogation he may well condemn (and will
not probably be guilty of) who writes Diatribae against all actions that
exceed, as well as those that come short of the Commandment.

instance of David being this, that this action of David's was against a former
command of Gods, an altering of Gods appointment, and no way to be salved but
by David's being a Prophet, inspired by God or directed by some other Prophet,
and not imitable by any Magistrate now] What is it again but a remarkable
instance what (...) can do?

David was a Prophet, inspired by God in things belonging to that office, and
yet as true that he was a wise and prudent King, and that he made this
alteration upon prudential considerations set down in that place, 1 Chronicles. 23.
25. and 28. etc. viz. because the burdens being not now so heavy, as formerly
when they were to carry the Tabernacle, and all the instruments thereof,
consequently the full strength of years was not so necessary to the undergoing
them, and besides, by this means there might be more Levites to serve in the
Tabernacle, then formerly there had been.

nature, in such a mere circumstance of the worship or service of God, and that
so far from a contrariety to God's command (for he that lays it upon the
Levites from 20. years old, no way opposes him that had imposed it only from
25. and he that commanded it from 25. no way excluded those of 20. from being
added to the service) David might not have power, as a King, or why any other
Magistrate might not do the like, command what God had not before commanded, in
a thing so perfectly indifferent as was the age of the Levites, wherein to
begin and end officiating.

David made this change by the Spirit or inspiration of God, as a Prophet,
first from 1 Chronicles. 28. 19. All this the Lord made me to understand in writing
by his good hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern, ascribing it to
the Spirit of God, v. 12, 13. Secondly, by comparing, 1 Chronicles. 23. 27. with 2 Samuel 23. 2, 3. where, as by the last words of David the Levites were numbered
from 20. years old, in the former place, so in the latter place it was said of
the last words of David, the Spirit of the Lord spoke by me etc. These are but
a heap of mistakes. For as the former place belongs only to the pattern of the
Temple which Solomon was to build, described there particularly in the severals
of it, from v. 11. and that pattern affirmed v. 12. to be had from the Spirit
of the Lord, and so the [all this] confined to that pattern, and with no
equity, or ground in the text, to be farther enlarged, or applied to David's
numbering the Levites from 20. years old, so the last words of David, 1 Chronicles.
23. 27. are clearly David's last Will and Testament, but the last words, 2 Samuel
23. 1. are the last words of prophecy that he delivered, it being evident that
he spoke many other words after that, as appears in the Chapter, and the Book
following, 1 Kin. and of his prophesies it is, and not of his other words, that
it there follows, the Spirit of the Lord spoke by me.

Sect. 5. Col: 2. 22. (...). Placing worship. Christian liberty. Marriage. The
Glosses put on the commands of men.
examination of what I have said for the interpreting of [(...)] Col: 2. 22.
This phrase I have thus rendered and paraphrased, These commands of abstinencies
(Touch not, taste not, handle not, v. 21.) are all to destruction, or
destructive, by the abuse of them, i. e. by imposing them on Christians, as
commands of God, now when they are abolisht by Christ, and for this I thought I
had produced sufficient authority, to vindicate the interpretation from the
censure of singularity, the plain words of S. Angustine, and S. Ambrose, or
whosoever it is that wrote the Comments which bear his name, Sunt in interitum
etc. they are to destruction and eternal perdition to them that believe them
necessary to salvation, and sunt omnia in interitum and corruptionem per
abusionem, etc. they are all to destruction and corruption by abuse, etc.

commodiousnesse of the interpretation, or the authority of those ancient
Fathers, or giving any answer to what is said to recommend this interpretation,
he is pleased to take a much easier way, to ask some questions, and offer some
exceptions, First he asks, why I refuse our translation of those words?

question I answer, by rendering my reasons, 1. because I think this other
preferrable, and I doubt not but when the Diatribist finds it useful, he will
do the like in this or any other controversy; 2dly because [(...)] cannot by
any propriety of speech, or analogy of the like phrase, signify [are to
perish] but either in an active sense [are to corruption] as that in false
teachers may denote corrupting or seducing of others to their herefie, and
particularly to those abominable sins, which by detesting of marriage the
Gnostics brought in, expressed often in these Epistles by the word (...)
corruption, or else in a neutral sense, ad interitum to destruction. 3dly
Because though (...) may possibly signify use, as well as abuse, yet it is as
easily replied, that it signifies abuse as well, nay more properly and
frequently then use; In the Bible it is an (...), never used either in the
verb, or in the substantive, but in this place; but in other authors it is
vulgarly used in opposition to (...) use, (...), in Plutarch of Alcibiades, the
Lacedaemonians rather abused then used him, and in Apophtheg: that great men
have good and ill friends, (...), they use some and abuse others, and many the
like. 4thly Because the Notion which the Diatribist from the civil Lawyers, out
of Estius gives of the Latin abusus, is that of consuming use, whereas it is
both improbable that S. Paul should take it from the civil Law, (much more
probable that he should take it in the sense, in which we find abusio
sometimes among Divines for (...) abstinence or not using at all: So Prosper de
vit: contempl: l. 2. c. 22. veraciter abstinentes escarum non naturas sed
concupiscentias damnent, ac voluptates suas desiderati cibi vel potus abusione
mortificent, which sense also the words here would bear well enough, and be a
more punctual character of the Gnostics abstinence from marriage, by which
they brought in all abominable villainies) and if he did, it would as fitly
comply with mine as with his notion of it, for thus it signifies abolition or
wearing out, (...), usu attero and obsolefacio, and to that agrees Phavorinus,
rendering (...) by (...), and Suidas by (...), destroying, and then this would
be the rendering these impositions of [Touch not, etc.] which were once in force
under the Jewish state, but now abolisht under Christ, are thereby to
destruction, or to ruin of souls, as when the Apostle tells them in one place
of these ceremonies, that they are (...) Heb: 8. 13. nigh to vanishing away, to
abolition, and upon that account in another place, that if they look upon them
as things still in force among Christians, Christ shall profit them nothing:
But this I do not really think to be the notion of (...), because those that
render it [using] generally apply it to the meats, which are consumed by eating
(and by the way, Oecumenius, that understood it in this sense, read it not
(...) but (...), a word which denotes casting out of excrements) which yet most
evidently belongs to the (...) doctrines of abstinence, not to meats, and
indeed the antecedent (to which (...), all which referres) is, Touch not, taste
not, handle not, which denotes other abstinencies, beside that of meats,
particularly that of marriage, which these Gnostics prohibited, and taught to
be abominable, and that is not capable of this notion of (...), by using, for
sure marriage does not perish by using. And the like may be said of unclean
things, the leper, the dead, that Judaizers would not touch, which yet did not
perish, were not consumed by using.

Diatribist leave it indifferently betwixt meats add ordinances of abstaining
(which are contrary enough) yet the notion of using is no way applicable to the
latter; for what the Diatribist sets for the interpretation of it [now being
out-dated they perish with the using, without any spiritual advantage] is sure
very short, it being evident by other places of Scripture, that the imposing
these out-dated observances, is not only not advantageous, but moreover
hurtful, those being as the Fathers generally resolve, not only mortua, dead,
and so profitlesse, but also mortifera, deadly, destructive; and sure that is
the meaning of [(...) to perishing, or destruction] whether it denote damnation
it self, or those horrible or unnatural sins, and the seduction of the
Gnostics which certainly induce it.

abstinencies were imposed and taught by the false teachers as divine obliging
precepts, whereas, says he, there is little or nothing in the text to import
that. What will with him, when produced against his sense and interests, be
accounted great, I know not; but that there is something in the text, to
incline it this way, will soon be evident, 1. by the word (...) v. 20. That
(...) and (...), doctrines, signify those things which are taught as from God,
Mat. 15. 9. has been formerly showed, and is evidens from the form of speech,
in vain do they worship me, (...) teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men, where the commands of men are taught, not as such, but as doctrines of
God; From hence the active (...) to dogmatize, ordinarily denotes teaching
those things to be divine precepts, and so obliging conscience, which are not,
and accordingly the passive (...) must needs denote the having such weights
thus imposed upon them being subject to ordinances (or doctrines) as we rightly
render it.

the elements of the world, whether of the Jewish or Gentile service, both
nailed to his cross by Christ, cancelled in his death, but such as were
incumbent on the (...), those that lived in the world, being under those
elements, or initial ordinances, though Christians were not. 3. These are
specified what they were, Touch not, taste not, handle not, abstinences from
meats, and from marriage; that of meats evidently a precept of Gods to the
Jews, and the Gnostics divinity being in part compounded of Judaism, there is
no reason to doubt but they taught these abstinencies, as the Jews taught
them, i. e. as divine obliging precepts, and joined abstinence from marriage to
that of meats, in the same form, i. e. as under precept also.

Diatribist adds to confirm his objection, viz: that in the next verse they
are called the commandments and doctrines of men] it has no force in it, for
so really they were, and not of God, but yet were by the false teachers imposed
under a more honorable gloss, as commands not of men, but of God, and therein
their false teaching consisted, And it is strange the Diatribist could say of
such false doctrines, that they could not be pretended, much less imposed as a
divine command] It Is as if he should say, False teachers could not teach false,
hypocrites and deceivers could not pretend the authority of Scripture for their
errors, the Devil could not put on the appearance of an Angel of light.

traditions were not pleaded to be the commandments of God, but expressly
called the commandments of men, Mat. 15. 9. when it is evident that those
commandments of men were by the Pharisees taught as (...) doctrines and so
commandments of God, though by Christ affirmed in truth to be opposite to Gods
real commands, v. 3. 6. it being very ordinary with heretics, and hypocrites,
to pretend that to be the will and command of God, which is most extremely
contrary to it. And in that the Pharisees sin and hypocrisy consisted.

Fourthly, he would ask me another question, whether the placing the worship of
God in the observation of those ordinances, though not taught or imposed as
God's commands, were not an abuse of them, and (...); And I answer, 1. By
asking what he means by the worship of God, if such as man may justly prescribe
or practice, either ceremonies perfectly lawful, but not prescribed by God, or
more then so, that which is sure to be accepted by him, though yet it be not
under divine precept, then it is certain 'twere no abuse; but if he mean the
commanded worship of God, then his question implies a contradiction, for
whatsoever this worship of God is placed in, that is taught, as command of God,
for else it were not Gods prescribed worship, which yet it is supposed to be.
2. That these abstinencies being of such a nature, that Christ removed all
ordinances requiring them, and purposely designed that they should be left free
to men, no humane authority could lawfully impose them, no man can forbid
marriage to Christians, and so any such command were an abuse of authority if
given by lawful superiors; (or if given by others, an act of intrusion and
usurpation, for who made them judges or dividers of tasks to their brethren?)

ceremonies and circumstances of the worship of God, times, gestures, etc. for
Christ never expressed any absolute dislike to all such, nor can the imposing of
such, with prudence in respect of choice, and moderation in respect of number,
be by any analogic reducible to those abstinencies of which the Apostle there
speaks. Nay even for those, particularly abstinence from marriage, it is certain
that it may be lawfully practiced by him that can bear it, and that all the
error is in imposing it on others, contrary to that liberty which Christ has
for weighty reasons allowed, and required to continue allowable and honorable
among Christians.

Lastly, He argues from the following words, v. 23. where the Apostle says,
they have a show of wisdom, in Will Worship, not as the commands of God, and
thence he concludes their abuse to be, not that they imposed them as divine
commands, but as parts of divine worship; But I answer, that that verse is not
the setting down the abuse, or the defining wherein it consists, but at the
utmost, a description of the fair glosses, those abstinencies and false
worships were capable of, viz. a double show or appearance of piety, one in
Will Worship, offering to God a free will offering, for such is every
uncommanded, if lawful abstinence, but such was not this, and therefore 'twas
but a show of piety; and another in humility, worshipping Angels as the
ministers of God, humility indeed a most Christian virtue, but this no
justifiable humility, (To which also a third is subjoyned, that of self-denial
or austerity, of the same kind with the former) and so still 'twas but a show,
no reality of wisdom or piety, which consisted in this.

Sect. 6. The Diatribist's way to make the Doctors words witness against him.
(...) etc. Placing worship, an equivocal phrase.
Diatribist is so fixtly resolved on his way, that the criminousness and danger
of these abstinencies, shall consist in their being devised or willed by men,
and not in the Gnostick dogmatizing or teaching them to be commanded by God,
that in his 6t. the Doctor himself shall (again, according to his method taken
up in his preface) be brought in to testify for him; To which purpose these
words are cited from him, that the danger consists in imposing on men humane
ordinances or doctrines, and then says he, stay there a while, viz. that he
may from those words, taken alone, conclude, that then they did not impose them
as commands of God.

obligation lies either on the Reader or me, to make a pause, upon his command,
in the very middle of a period, when the words which are behind make these that
are cited utterly incapable of the sense which he puts upon them; For thus the
words lay in the period before he had the dismembring of them, [which words
point out that wherein the danger does consist, viz. imposing on men humane
ordinances or doctrines, i. e. those things, which though they are not
commanded by God, are yet by men affirmed and pretended and taught (though, as
we say, magisterially and without proof) to be so commanded.

contrary to the Diatribists conclusion, then these, which he thought fit to
solicit to bear witness on his side, and to that end cut them in the midst,
and then, after the manner of the serpent, that fed upon it self, suborned and
instructed one end to devour and eat up the other.

Doctors gloss of his own former words, and says, they will now prove his own,
i. e. singular. And truly if they should prove singular, i. e. if no man in
the world should be found to have ever said the like, but the Doctor, they
would yet be sufficient for the turn to which they were designed, to explicate
the Doctors own meaning, and to secure the beginning of his period, from being
brought in judgment against him, and so might have saved the Diatribist the
pains of this. For sure no man was so fit to explain his own words, or to give
his full sense in them, as he whose words they were, foreseeing that possible,
which now has happened, that otherwise they might be mistaken.

gloss a singular one, but that which the Apostles word will own as a natural
and perspicuous paraphrase, (...) (reading the middle as in a parenthesis,
specifying what (...) he means, and the specious glosses which they put upon
them) why do you permit such abstinencies prescribed and taught you really by
men, and not by God, to be imposed on you as doctrines commanded by God, just
as when the Pharisees taught their own traditions, as the doctrines of God.
That this is the very literal importance of (...), to be subjected, or to pay
obedience as to a (...) or command of Gods, has already been showed, And if
that be granted, there can be no farther doubt of the whole expression, nor
consequently of the propriety of my gloss or paraphrase on it.

placing worship in those abstinencies, that equivocal phrase was very lately
examined, and must not again return to exercise us. If they placed worship in
them, in this sense, that they did or taught them as parts of God's commanded
worship, it is the very thing wherein I placed the danger; If they delivered them
as their own doctrines, and not as the doctrines of God, they did not then
place any part of God's commanded worship in them; If they taught them as such
things, which, though not commanded by God, would yet be acceptable to him,
still, after they were abolisht by Christ, then they taught that which had no
truth in it, for such kinds of abstinencies are not now valued by God, but more
real acts of self-denial set up in their stead, mortifying of lusts, and the
like, which those false teachers were far from being guilty of. As for
ceremonies of decency and order, and Festivals, really designed to ends of
piety and edification; they are neither of them parallel, nor bear any analogy
with these which are here censured.

Sect. 7. Of Petitio Principii. Of (...) being capable of two rendrings. The
danger from mistake on the Diatribists side. My interpretation not singular.
His no way probable. (...) a particle of extenuation, no (...). No show of
wisdom in respect of the folly that is in it. The Will Worship parallel to the
humility. The prime argument for my interpretation. (...) for piety, vindicated
from the contrary proofs. (...). Worship of Angels. No agreement betwixt Col.
2. 18. and 23. or betwixt 23. and 1. Cor. 2. 4. (...).
opposers of the ceremonies of our Church, against whom that tract was
prepared, founded their conclusion on these two premises, 1. That Will Worship
was a sin. 2. That the using of ceremonies not commanded by God, was
Will Worship. And therefore to our vindication it was sufficient, if upon
survey of that one place of Scripture where that word was used, it should be
found capable of such an interpretation, which should affix no ill, but
contrariwise a good character on it; For herein the task lies on the opponent
to prove his affirmative, that Will Worship is criminous, (and not on me to
demonstrate the negative) and that he can never do from this text, if in this
text by a commodious interpretation, it be capable of a good sense.

begging the question, when I deny the word to be taken in an ill sense, Of
which Elench I cannot be guilty, unless it were incumbent on me to prove and
demonstrate the negative, his affirmative being sufficiently avoided, by my
showing that the contrary is possible, and not improbable, which therefore was
all that was here required of me, and I hope is competently performed.

rendrings, and either of these will free Will Worship from the necessity of an
ill sense, then again this is sufficient for my turn, for then still he has
not unanswerably asserted his conclusion: This I say, to give an account, why I
set down two possible rendrings of (...), either rationem sapientiae vel
pietatis, reality of wisdom or piety, or else only Speciem sapientiae, a show,
or bare appearance of wisdom; For of this it is certain that (...) signifies
ratio as well as Species, and much more ordinarily the former, and in case it
should here signify the former, then it is unavoidably evident, that
Will Worship must be taken in a good, not ill sense; Mean while as I pretend
not that both those rendrings are true, for if it be only a show of wisdom,
then it is no reality, so I profess to yield so much to the authority of the
ancient interpreters, as to pitch upon the latter only that of (...), a show of
wisdom, not the truth, and even then, as has been showed, the Will Worship
there, is capable of a good notion, for how can those abstinencies or doctrines
have so much as a show of wisdom in Will Worship and humility, if Will Worship
has nothing of wise or good, but only of wickedness (and that we know is
folly) in it?

fallaciousnesse of all that is brought against me in this or the ensuing
Sections; For as to the interpretation of the verse, which he proposes and
preferres before mine, but without any convincing proof of the truth of it,
this is on his part a begging the question, which even now was charged on me,
with much less reason, and when he says mine may prove a mistake, it is
sufficient to reply, and so may his, and the danger far greater from the
mistake on his side, then or mine, For if mine should be such, yet will it not
follow that the Ceremonies and Festivals of our Church are such criminous
Will Worship, the using of these bearing no analogy with the dogmatizing of the
Gnostics, or their reviving the abolisht Iudaical abstinencies among
Christians, whereas if his interpretation should prove false, and mine true,
his whole fabric must utterly be demolisht, and his major and minor having
both failed, the one affirming Will Worship to be criminous, the other our
using ceremonies and Festivals to be Will Worship, his conclusion is not
likely, I hope, to hold out long after, unless it shall pretend to that
miracle which is fancied of Callimachus (and denominated him an (...) an
immortal warrier, and (...) the statue of Mars) who is supposed to stand and
fight after he was dead; And then it is time to retreat from this combatant, with
the Epigrammatist;

(...). mine, resolving it singular without any precedent, ancient, or modern,
Protestant, or Papist, First, This has no truth in it, as will anon
sufficiently appear, At the present, I shall only reminde him, that within two
years after the Treatise of Will Worship was printed, came out Grotius's
posthumous notes on the Epistles, and those are clear for this interpretation,
and so though they could not be my precedent then, will now secure me from
singularity.

Secondly, The Diatribist's interpretation is so far from being demonstratively
true, that it has arrived to no degree of probability: It is this, that v. 23.
contains a reason of the danger and destructivenesse of those abstinencies,
viz: because they were no other, nor better then Will Worship with a fair
pretense of wisdom, because the worship of God was lately placed in them, and
they carry a great pretension of humility and self-denial in abstaining from
things pleasing to the body.

verse contains a reason of the destructivenesse of those abstinences? It Is not
so much as introduced with a (...), for, or any other form of proof, but (...),
which things indeed have a show, etc. which is a form of extenuation (as the
Diatribist acknowledges in this. speaking of (...)) and then cannot reasonably
be a proof of the destructivenesse of them, but the conceding somewhat,
speciously at least, in favor of them, that they have indeed a show of wisdom
in them.

verse, which can bear, or give any pretense to that paraphrase, that these
abstinences are destructive because no better then Will Worship? The words in
the Diatribists own rendering are no more but this, which things indeed have a
show of wisdom in Will Worship and humility; But can this bear or induce this
conclusion in any mood or figure, Therefore they are destructive because no
better then Will Worship?

fairer and more reasonable, which I concluded, they have some show of wisdom
in Will Worship, therefore Will Worship, if it be truly such, has some reality
of wisdom in it? for else that which has but a show of wisdom in it, cannot
have that show in respect of Will Worship; Adultery being it self folly, it is
absurd to say of any man, or doctrine, that it has a show of wisdom in
adultery, or in respect of the adultery that is in it, for that were to affirm
it to have a show of wisdom in no other respect but that it is foolish.

show of wisdom which they had, so it was but a show of Will Worship, or
voluntary offering to God, and so a show of not a true humility; but still that
does but the more confirm (not confute) my conclusion, that Will Worship truly
so called, and humility, that real virtue, are branches of Christian wisdom, or
else, the having but a show of them, would not give them so much as the show of
wisdom.

paraphrase is [they are no other nor better then Will-worship] how can that be
coherent which follows in the second place, that they carry a great pretension
of humility and self-denial? when those two are regularly joined with
Will Worship [(...), in Will Worship and humility, and not sparing the body]
Certainly as the humility is, such must the Will Worship be, if the humility be
only in pretension, then so must the Will worship be also, in pretension, not
in truth, and then still the fault or defect will be in the bare pretending,
not in the Will Worship, as it is not in the humility or self-denial, by the
Diatribists own confession, but in the false pretending them. How much then is
it more reasonable to do what I did, viz: to allot to Will Worship and
humility, and self-denial, to all three, the same state, whatsoever it be,
whether of virtue, if they be really what they pretend, or of hypocrisy, if
they be bare images or appearances of them? And on this I insist, as on the
main ground of enforcing mine, and invalidating his interpretation that
Will Worship, humility, and selfdenial being here placed together in the same
classis or series, they cannot be so separated, as that one shall be a vice,
when the other two are acknowledged virtues in a Christian, one really what it
pretends, and the other only feignedly, or in pretense, without any reality in
them. When the Diatribist shall answer this argument, he may then tell others
of mistaking, but till then, the mistake may much more probably be on his side.

Thirdly, What the Diatribist adds of (...) wisdom, which I took in the
ordinary notion of piety, is sure more strange in him, then what he censures in
me; in the Proverbs and elsewhere he acknowledges it must signify piety, but
here it must not, but literally wisdom, to which purpose he cites Bishop
Davenant, who expresses it to denote some excellent doctrine rather brought
from heaven, then found out by men; But if that be the meaning of it, then
sure, as such, those false teachers taught it i. e. as coming from heaven, and
that is as a doctrine of God, and that was even now denied, when I affirmed it:
2dly How can those abstinencies have a show of coming down from heaven in
Will Worship, and yet Will Worship signify worship devised by the wit and will
of man? It Is as if he should say, they pretend to come from God, in that they
come only from men; whereas in the notion of wisdom for piety, the words run
very currently and intelligibly, they pretend to have piety in them, viz: such
as is discernible in Will Worship or free-will-offerings, in humility, in
self-denial etc: Well, that (...) signifies piety in this place, I appeal to S.
Chrysostom, (...), says he, by way of Paraphrase of (...) he appears to be
(though really he be not) pious, religious; And Theophylact in the same words.

contrary, they are of no validity.

first is from the context v. 8. where the Apostle calls it philosophy; But
first, v. 8. has no contexture with v. 23. 2dly. (...) is not (...), the
philosophy there spoken of, the joining of the (...) or Angels with God, the
Gnostick Theology of the (...), out of the Platonic and Poetic Theology of
the heathens, had not so much as a show of any excellent doctrine brought from
heaven, as the Diatribist even now from Bishop Davenant expressed (...) to
signify, at least not such as of which S. Paul could affirm that it had any
image or show of such.

have a show of wisdom in Will Worship and self-denial, are the (...) of
abstinences from meats and marriages, and those abstracted from the error of
dogmatizing, have indeed a show of piety in those two respects, that he which
abstains voluntarily shall seem to practice a special piece of self-denial, and
to offer to God a freewill offering of abstinence from meats and marriage.

worshipping of Angels, which I suppose a corollary of the philosophy, v. 8.
that also has a show of piety in humility, in worshipping the officers and
ministers of God, as not daring to approach immediately to God himself; But
then this, as it rather confirms the notion of wisdom for piety, then
confutes it, so it cannot have any such influence on the other branch of
abstinences, as to qualify them to have any show of divine doctrine in
Will Worship and humility, especially if Will Worship continue to signify, as
the Diatribist will have it, worship devised by the wit and will of man, for
then, as was said, they must have a show of coming from heaven, in this very
respect, that they come not from heaven, but from the wit and will of men.

second proof is, because v. 18. the worshipper of Angels is said to be puffed up
in his fleshly mind, i. e. in a carnal conceit of his own wisdom, in finding
out that way of worship, and to that purpose Irenaeus is cited not as an
approver of this interpretation of (...) (for in the place cited he speaks not
a word to that matter, not so much as reflects upon that text) but to ^
Sapientiam rnusquisqne eoum di cit, quam a semet ipso adinvcnit. Ir. l. 3. c. 2.
testify, that the fictions of men are by them counted wisdom.

doctrines of abstinences, which we know are the immediate antecedent, and the
principal thing here spoken of. 2dly. That what is said of the worshippers of
Angels, that they are vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds, is there set as an
aggravation of their crime, and as the cause of their assuming to know what
they understand not, whereas this of having a show of wisdom, being introduced
with the (...), which was by the Diatribist confessed to be an extenuating
particle, cannot be designed to aggravate their sin, nor consequently to be
parallel to that of v. 8. And so indeed to have a show of wisdom in some
respects, differs very much from being vainly puffed in their fleshly mind, the
one placing that show in somewhat that is really good, though falsely pretended
to, the other placing it in their own carnal minds which have nothing good in
them. As for the place in Irenaeus directed to in the margent, it speaks quite
of another matter, mentioning neither of these verses, 18. or 23. and so cannot
be vouched for an authority to prove that they are parallel one to the other.

What he adds, that it may very well be parallel to that place, 1 Cor. 2. 4,
5, 6. will be soon dispatched by any reader that shall compare the places, for
he will certainly find that there is no kind of agreeableness betwixt them, the
one speaking of the arguments, miracles etc. by which the truth of the Gospel
was conferred to men, and not by Topics of humane persuasion, the other of the
show of wisdom which the Gnostics doctrines of abstinence had in them, which
sure are things competently removed from any possibility of corresponding one
with the other.

assert those abstinences as a worship of God, to have somewhat of real wisdom
or piety in them, is a plain begging the question now betwixt us] To this I
have premised the answer in the beginning of this. showing how far I am from a
possibility of begging the question, whilst I do but answer to the argument
drawn from this text, and show that it may well (I need not prove that it needs
must) have some other importance then that in which alone their argument
against Will Worship is founded. But then 2dly. I shall freely gratify the
Diatribist, and having mentioned that of (...) for some reality of wisdom or
piety, only as possible, I shall gladly yield, that it does not so signify
here, but rather some show of wisdom or piety, and then I hope I do not beg
but grant, give him the utmost in this, which he desires, not crave any favor
from one, who will no more willingly afford it.

denying Will Worship to be here condemned, but not proving it, is a little
strange, when he knows I solemnly propose the reasons of my contrary assertion.
11. etc. which being certainly as yet not answered, or so much as taken notice
of in this place, I wonder I should be again so soon accused of petitio
principii, begging the quaestion without proof.

presumption in mentioning, (for I did no more) the (...) for (...), I desire
his pardon, for truly I did not expect it should be so fastidiously cast off
(the use of it being as fit for his rendering, (...) some show, as for mine,
(...) quandam rationem) or that the bare taking notice of it as possible, not
presuming it as certain, or offering it so much as my conjecture, should so
seriously have provoked him; As it is, the advantages are so slender which I
aimed at by it, that I shall very contentedly lay it aside, and no farther
solicit his patience for it, though it is sure enough that many more
considerable changes have by sober men been proposed in explicating that Book.

quidem, indeed, for which I am charged that I leave it out (though if I did,
what greater fault have I committed, then St Hierome had done, who, says the
Diatribist, thinks the particle (...) is redundant? yet) I guess not upon what
grounds it should be affirmed, when it is visible in the beginning of. 7. that
I keep it in, and by what has now been said, that it is mine, not his interest
to keep it in; All the appearance he can have for thus affirming is, that in
proposing that reading of (...) in two words, I set it down thus, (...) -- but
as there I leave out (...), so I leave out (...) and all the rest of the verse,
and only set down so many words as are sufficient to express what I mean by
dividing (...) into two words, without any thought (if I may be believed) of
leaving out (...) or seeking any advantage by so doing, or of ought else then
what I now declare to have been designed by me.

adversative, which he next considers, I profess not to divine his meaning,
there being no such particle in the verse, as far as any of my copies or my
eyes can direct me.

Sect. 8. The abstinences how taught by the Gnostics. Their pretenses for
them, no realities. Abstinences may be freewill offerings, and self-denyals.
Such may Fasting duly qualified. Such may virginal Chastity. Paul's judgment
of it. Chrysostom of things (...). Abstinences positive acts. And yet, if
negative, may be acceptable. These abstinences not commanded.
reply, which has not been cleared sufficiently already; Only in the end of
the 9th he says there is a great mistake in comprehending these abstinences
under freewill offerings; for, says he, both the freewill offerings were
something positive, and these abstinences were negative, rather not offering
then offering, touch not, taste not etc. and all these abstinences were
commanded by special Laws, but freewill offerings, the Doctor says, were not
required of them by obligation of particular Law.

mistake, I must give some account, thus, The abstinences here spoken of I
suppose to be of two sorts, from meats, and from marriage, both which were now
perfectly lawful to be freely used sine discrimine, by Christians; Those
therefore that taught them to lie now under interdict, were dogmatizers and
false teachers; This therefore was a great fault in them, contrary to the clear
Christian doctrine of liberty from Judaical observances, (of which sort were
those abstinences from meats) and of the honourableness of marriage among all,
when the Gnostick detesters of marriage, making it damnable, and the abstinence
necessary to salvation (and so in the words of the Apostolic Canon, abstained
and taught that abstinence (...), not as an exercise, but out of detestation of
marriage) brought in all the (...) dishonorable, vile affections, and practices
in stead of it.

double error being noted and censured by the Apostle, he yet shows the
pretenses, whereby it was recommended by the false teachers, to those seducible
persons corrupted by them, viz: that these abstinencies were acts of voluntary
worship and self-denial, and so could not fail to be acceptable to God. That
they were truly such, I never imagined, but that they pretended to be such, had
some show at least of piety in these two respects, pretending on one side to
voluntary worship, on the other to self-denial, but then had really no more of
these, then of the piety which they pretended to have; If they had the least
degree of piety in them (reading (...), and rendering it quandam rationem
somewhat of wisdom or piety) then that was in this respect, that there was
somewhat of voluntary oblation and self-denial in them; If they had not the
least reality, but only a show, (and (...) some show agrees as commodiously to
that) then still that show was in these two respects, that they had also a show
of Will Worship or voluntary oblation, and of self-denial. And so still I am
free enough from any necessity of acknowledging his charge of comprehending
abstinencies under freewill-offerings, when I only affirm that they were
recommended by false teachers under those specious colors.

ex abundanti, and to gratify the Diatribist, by throwing a (...) before him,
I shall not doubt to affirm, that such the abstinencies may be, and so they may
be recommended by the Orthodox Church (which is far enough from these foul
Gnostics) that they may very safely and fitly be comprehended under the head
either of freewill-offerings or Self-denials. Of the latter there can be no
doubt, for fasting and virginal chastity are certainly acts of Self-denial,
denying our selves the enjoyment of those satisfactions, which might most
lawfully be enjoyed: And if to this of Self-denial be farther added the
designing of this to the honor or service of God, fasting in order to Christian
ends, either as an outward effect and expression of Godly sorrow, or as an
instrument of bringing the body into subjection, fitting my self for more
leisure and ardor in prayer, acting revenge upon my self for the intemperancies
of the former life, and, as to the very Self-denial, looking on it as that
which will be acceptable to God, though not (to every possible act) commanded,
sub periculo animae, and as such dedicating it to God, this sure will be a
(...) or voluntary freewill-offerings, and so properly comprehended under that
head.

virginal chastity, which is no where commanded by Christ or his Apostles to
any, but yet recommended to them which are able to bear it, he that can receive
it, let him receive it, and the advantages of it, under the title of (...)
profitable, 1 Cor: 7. 35. set out by S. Paul in order to the advancing of some
Christian ends, purity of body and Spirit, caring for, or minding more intently
the things of the Lord, being without solicitude, in times of distress, when
the cares of the world may very much incumber all, and probably ensnare many;
Upon which grounds the Apostle, that out of his fatherly care would have them
aspire to the greatest perfection, and so wishes them this (...), does also
profess it his judgment, that he that thus abstains from marriage does
better, even when he that marries does well, and consequently proposes this
whole matter not as (...) any command of Christ's, for he professes to have no
such, but as his opinion or judgment v. 25. and 40. which what is it but the
very notion of freewill-offering, such as of which S. Chrysostom says, (...),
Tom. 3. p. 382.
it is an act of my own will, in opposition to the (...), a precept, or
command, precedent, or (...), Those things which are done above the precept,
have in this respect great reward, but those which are in the rank of precept,
not so much.

Diatribist, certainly they will be of no force against this evidence; for why
may not virginity, or fasting deserve to be accounted positive things? is it
not as truly a positive action to conquer as to satisfy, to subdue as to glut
my appetite? and if self-denials be negative things, and yet acceptable to
Christ, what prejudice will it be to these abstinencies, though they should be
deemed negative also? Are not all the obediences that are performed to negative
precepts, compliances with those negations, and so negative also, as not
killing, not committing adultery etc. And shall not the same be said of all
abstinences? If Adam had not tasted the forbidden fruit, this had been but
negagive, yet an act of obedience to God, and that preferred by God before all
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, prescribed, or voluntary, And then what
diminution could it be to an abstinence, or prejudice to its being a
freewill-offering, that it is a negative act? So wide is this kind of arguing
from proving any thing.

abstinencies were commanded by special laws, when he knows that abstinence
from marriage was never commanded by any law of Moses, or Christ, and that that
other from meats was now left free by Christ, those special laws under Moses
given to the Jews being now cassate and cancelled by Christ. This sure is
enough to his present velitations, what he has of reserve for a weightier
impression, shall then be warded when I see it approach, and therefore so much
for these two Sections.

Sect. 9. Compliance with Papists. The Diatribists inconstancy.
Will Worship Col: 2. in a good creditable sense, begins with a general, but
that posing, confounding note, that taking the word in a good sense, the Doctor
complies too much with the Papists (most of them taking it in an ill) who use
to take off the force of the Protestants objection from this place against
their Will Worship, by answering, that it is taken here in a good sense, for
voluntary religion or worship] To which I confess my self unable to give any
answer, as not guessing wherein the objection lies, whether in my complying, or
not complying with the Papists.

taking it in a good sense I comply with the Papists, and yet there are other
words as expressly pronouncing, that most of the Papists take it in an ill
sense: The only expedient to me imaginable to reconcile these contradictions
(which yet I have no pretense of imputing to the Printer, or to any but the
Author) is this, that though most of the Papists take it in an ill sense yet
some though smaller number of them take it in a good, and so defend their many
traditions of worship (as he calls them) and answer the Protestants objections
(the Diatribists and his partners) from that text, Col: 2. and then that I
differ from those Protestants, and comply with those Papists.

interpretation of that word or text from any Popish writer, but from the
weighing the text it self, and the characters I found in it (the same that Hugo
Grotius has discerned also, as was said) and accordingly set those down for
the reasons of my interpretation; so if I shall truly be found to have complied
with any Papist herein, yet 1. I shall never startle at the interpretation,
upon that account, many Papists having given the true senses of many places of
Scripture; and 2. I shall with much more justice be able to retort this
argument on the Diatribist if I may believe himself, the sense which he has
given, viz: the ill sense, being owned by most of the Papists, as he here
himself confesses. And then sure he that is acknowledged to comply with most of
the Papists, and not he which is but accused to comply with some few of them,
must needs be most guilty of that crime, whatsoever it is fancied to be, which
consists in such compliance.

interpretation of this verse, that he believes it is singular without any
precedent, either Diatr. p. 44.
ancient or modern, Protestant or Papist, and then I have little reason to
believe his bare general suggestion against his own belief, that the Doctor
herein complies with the Papists, especially when out of Chamier, he here adds
that that learned and acute man, Panstrat: l. 3. c. 6.. 5. professes he never
saw the good sense in any interpreter of the place.

general note is not likely to tend much to our prejudice, I proceed then to
his more particular answer to my reasons.

Sect. 10. A reply to his answer of my two first reasons for the good sense.
Humility and Will Worship associated, either both real or both pretended.
Popish laniations why culpable. (...) 1 Timothy 4. (...). Fasting a (...) far from
hurtful or abominable, wherein the profit of it consists. The true sense of 1 Timothy 4. 8. wherein the illness of it consists. (...) and (...). Abstinence
because of abuses. For Religion. Marcionites. Durand. A show of Piety in
Will Worship. All show of good in respect of somewhat that is good. The
Diatribists fallacious instances and questions.
ANd my first reason being taken from the joining of Will Worship with humility,
one undoubted Christian virtue, and not sparing, or, as Calvin, mortifying of
the body, To the former his answer is, that by my favor humility here is not
the true and laudable Christian virtue, but a mere counterfeit, a pretended
humility fit for a pretended Will Worship.

well, for still Will Worship and humility are associated, the pretended
Will Worship, he says, with the pretended humility, and consequently that as
the fault is not in the humility, but in the pretending of it, when it is not
true, the falsenesse and counterfeitnesse of it, and that an evidence that the
humility, if it were truly such, were a Christian virtue, because the fault is
in the feignednesse of it; so by the analogy of reason, it must hold of
Will Worship, that when that is truly such, it is a Christian virtue, and that
the only fault is, that it is not what it pretends to be, and so that is still
a valid argument for the good sense of the word, Will Worship, though not of
the disguise and false appearance of it, the bare show even of divine worship
it self being acknowledged to have nothing of good in it, which yet certainly
the reality of it has.

Self-denial, it is, says he, not only a counterfeit, but an impious mistaken
mortification, viz: when it is made a worship of God, and he instances in the
Romish ridiculous Penances, Pilgrimages, etc. and asks what it is that makes them
impious mistaken mortification, not their being held forth as commands of God,
for that they deny, it must be then, says he, because they make them worships
of God, voluntary worship] Here again the former reply is in force, if it be
the counterfeitnesse and impiety of the mortification that defames it, then
still the self-denial and mortification, truly so called, is a Christian
virtue, and then that will conclude the Will Worship to be so too, if it be
truly what it pretends to be.

question founded on it, it answers it self, for as it is not their holding it
forth as the command of God, so neither is it their making it the worship of
God, that renders it culpable, but the ridiculousness of it which he mentions,
the unfitness or inordinableness to that end, to which it is designed; such
laniations of our own bodies being on that account, and by their affinity to
the bloody sacrifices under the Law, deprived of all appearance of being
acceptable to God, and so for all other sorts, which are not either regular
effects of Godly sorrow, or designed as expedients to make it (...) a lasting
and durable repentance (as (...) revenge, 2 Cor. 7. 11. is defined to be) For
whatsoever is truly so, I must not be so injurious to it, as to doubt of the
acceptance with God, or to censure it either as impious or ridiculous.

reason for the taking Will Worship in a good sense, was this, because these
abstinences are said to have (...), whether that be some small reality, or else
a bareshew of wisdom in respect of the Will Worship discernible in them,
neither of which they could be said to have, if Will Worship had past with St
Paul for foolish or impious, for how can a thing be said to have so much as a
show of piety in respect to any sin, as lust, or rage, discernible in it? To
this his answer is long and perplexed, 1. By rejecting that notion of (...) for
any degree of real wisdom; And to this I that did not really adhere to that,
will not be so far concerned in it, as to make any reply or at all to endeavor
to defend it, or to add of it farther then this, that the bare possibility
that it might so signify, supersedes all demonstrativeness of proof from this
text, for the criminousness of Will Worship.

Apostles words of bodily exercise, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and of that affirms when it
is said to be (...) profitable for a little, the meaning is, it is profitable for
nothing, nay hurtful and abominable.

groundless interpretation of (...) profitable for a little, i. e. for nothing,
and even less then so, hurtful and abominable. It is, as if when Agrippa tells
Paul (...), a little way thou perswadest me to be a Christian, he should
interpret it, that Agrippa was not at all persuaded by him toward Christianity,
but on the other side was more confirmed in his Gentilisme.

bodily exercise in that text be by some of the ancients understood of bodily
labor, yet they which do so, render (...) so, as to signify somewhat, (...),
it profits the body a little and for a while, says St Chrysostom and
Theophylact, (and so we know it does) and S. Hierome in like manner, ad breve
tempus in carnali proficiunt sanitate, they are for a short time profitable in
respect of bodily health, and so likewise those others of the Ancients, Ambrose
etc. who understand it of fasting, (so does Leo also Sermon: de jejun: 7. mensis,
sometimes in that phrase of corporum labor, the labor of bodies, Sermon: 2.
sometimes of exercitatio continentiae, quam sibi quisque proprio arbitrio
indicit, the exercise of abstinence which every one by his own choice lays on
himself, Sermon: 3.) conceive (...) to denote some degree of profit, utilitatem
cujusdam portionis, says Leo, though not so great as belongs to that which is
understood by piety in the next words.

Rabbis that which is in some degree profitable, but within certain bounds,
and so also among the Greeks, as when Plato says of Socrates, (...), Socrates
is a little to be considered, but truth a great deal, and proportionably here
the comparison lies, bodily exercise is profitable for a little, but godliness
is profitable for all things.

censure, that by consequence to this interpretation, he fastens on bodily
exercise, in this notion, taking it for abstinences from meats and marriage,
without relation to that of the Dogmatizers teaching and requiring that
abstinence as from things forbidden by God, i. e. (in effect) on bare voluntary
fasting and celibacie (when they are only used (...), for exercise, (...) not
with detestation of marriage or meats, as the ancient Canons have it) viz. that
they are hurtful and abominable [I need say no more, but that it is an
ungrounded and unwary affirmation, no way to be justified or excused unless
still he relieve himself at the dead lift with the supposition, that they are
made the worship of God.]

abstinence from marriage, in his notion of worship (for even they that make
that a thing acceptable to God, and a state of perfection, do not count it a
worship, unless in a general sense, as every virtuous act performed to God,
may be styled worship, and so this, being not under precept, but commended, a
Will Worship) so being applied to abstinence from meats, it can be of no very
good consequence.

Fasting has long been numbered among the sorts of Christian sacrifice, and is
so set down by 2a 2ae qu. 85. art. 3.
Aquinas from that of St Paul of offering up our bodies a sacrifice to God,
Romans 12. which, says he, is done by fasting, continence, martyrtome; Leo calls
it continentiae libamen, the sacrifice of abstinence. And Ad Celantiam Ep. 14.
Tom. 1. p. 31.
St Hierome speaking of it, uses this style, quicquid supra justitiam effertur
Deo, making it an offering to God, though not under precept, and before him De
cultu soem. c. 9.
Tertullian, speaking of abstinence, Humilitatem animae Deo immolant, they
sacrifice to God the humility of the soul. And li: de Resur: Carn: c. 8.
Sacrificia Deo grata, conflictationes dico animae, jejunia, and feras and
aridas escas, Fasting a sacrifice acceptable to God. And yet higher, it is the
express saying of St Luke concerning Anne, that she did (...) serve God in
fastings and prayers, Luke 2. 37. And agreeable to this it is, that our Savior
mentions it together with prayer and almesgiving, Mat. 6. and promises it a
reward, v. 18.

species of worship, and the solemn Christian sacrifices, so styled by the
holy writers, there is no question; and then why, or how should Fasting which
is the third, if it be qualified as it ought, be degraded from the honor, and
for no other crime, but only for being taught to be what really it is, i. e. an
acceptable worship of God, become hurtful and abominable?

Diatribist of hearing Sermons, in case it should be taught, or assume to be a
part of God's worship? would it presently be cast out as hurtful and
abominable? And yet sure bare hearing of Sermons is not any acknowledged branch
of worship.

difference there is, betwixt this of Fasting and those other two of Prayer and
Almesgiving, to which Christ annexeth it; Fasting receives the chief of its
virtue and estimation, not from the act it self, which is but a selfdenial, but
either as an effect of piety, as flowing from godly sorrow, and so joined with
Affictio corporis peccatorum indulgentiam deprecatur: Hierom: in Isa: 58. Tom:
4. p. 191. F.
prayer for pardon, or as an (...). Chrysostom: (...). Tom: 6. p. 476. l. 17.
help or expedient toward piety, whether by subduing of carnal desires, by Eo
affligunt carnem suam, quo animae frangant superbiam. Hieron: ad celantiam Ep:
14. Tom: 1 p. 39. 8.
humbling the soul etc. or by fitting and gaining us leisure and ability for
Eodem tempore vac^mus orationi, ne interior homo noster Draconis vescatur
carnibus. Hieron: m Isa: 58. (...), Chrysostom: (...): 15. Tom: 6. p. 573. l. 16.
prayer, and for Frange panem esurienti, partem pams quam si non jejunares
com^sturus eras. Jesumum tuum non sit lucrum marsupii, sed satu^^tas animae.
Hieron: Ib: Tom: 4. p. 191. G. Quod vestris usibus religiosa parcitate
subtrabitis, in alimoniam pauperum, and in cibos debilium transferatis. Leo de
Jejun: 7. men's: Sermon: 4.
almesgiving; and if it be the bare abstinence from meat abstracted from all of
these, it is (...), Chrysostom: (...). To. 6. p. 476. l. 25.
no such eminent or acceptable worship of God, Haec enim virtus adjumentum est,
non perfectio sanctitatis, this virtue is an help, not the perfection of
sanctity, says Hier: Tom: 1. Ep. 14. p. 39. A.
S. Hierom, ad Celantiam; But then still such a help it is, and that to more
ends then one; For speaking of Chastity, he adds, non huic tantummodo, sed
omnibus omninovirtutibus abstinentia opitulatur, fasting is helpful not to that
only, but generally to all virtues, And so S. Chrysostom (...), fasting is a
medicine, but that useless, if it be not used as it should be.

useful and profitable for somewhat, then of hurtful and abominable; As it is
an instrument of good a help, or medicine, so sure it is profitable (...), in
some lower degree, in order to those uses; And what if by our faults, (...),
says * Chrysostom, because of the unskilfulnesse of those that use it, it
become (...) useless, yet sure this is no defamation or prejudice to it; The
most generous medicaments may thus be rendered useless and inoperative, yet are
in themselves very apt to work cures, and so prayer it self may become utterly
unprofitable, by the like miscarriage of ours, And more especially hearing the
word, which is very proper for excellent uses, for instruction, admonition etc.
does yet in the event very frequently prove unprofitable, and yet this is no
prejudice to the institution.

exact importance of the phrase may be collected, as bodily exercise is not
opposed to, but compared with godliness, and [profitable (...), for a little]
to [(...) for all things, having the promise of this life, etc.] viz. that such
exercises as these, fasting particularly, is a very good instrument in a pious
man's handling, profitable and advantageous in its degree, in order to
mortification etc. to testify our sorrow and repentance to assist in the
deprecating of Gods wrath, to qualify us for relieving of others, for ardent
intense prayer, etc. but yet must not be magnified above its proportion, being
compared with universal piety, which is profitable to all things, and has the
promise of this life and of another. This falls very low in that high
comparison, it is but (...), profitable for a little, whether in extent of
matter, profitable for fewer things then piety, which is profitable for all
things; or in extent of time, as (...) sometimes is rendered, (...) profitable
for this time of life wherein all those benefits are to be reapt, to which
fasting is profitable, humiliation, mortification etc. but especially in the
former notion of this extent, profitable for some few things, in comparison.
And so much ex abundanti for the vindicating that text of the profitablenesse
of bodily exercise.

Doctor seems to place the illness of these bodily exercises in this, when
they are taught as necessary, to the defaming of meat and marriage; But -- I
answer,

illness, I thought I had done it on very good authority, that of the ancient
Canons, particularly of the 51 Apostolical, (...) etc. If any Bishop or Clerk
abstain from marriage, flesh, wine, not for exercise, (abstinence or
continence) but for detestation, he forgets that God created all things very
good, male and female etc. and blasphemously calumiates the creation, and
therefore must either reform or be deposed. It Is visible here wherein that fault
consists, not in the abstinence, but looking on meats and marriage as unlawful
things, which they could not be, but as they are supposed to be forbidden by
God, And Zonaras's comment on it is very natural, (...), Abstinence for the
virtues sake is to be allowed and commended. (...), but abominating those and
rejecting them as hurtful to the soul, this is it which is criminous and
censurable. And Balsamon adds, that as they shall be censured which abstain
from them (...), because they are causes of ill to those that abuse them,
instancing in Bogomilus which did so; so he that abstains (...) for religion or
piety, (...) shall not be censured. As cautious a prevention of this
Diatribists doctrine, and as seasonable an advertisement to him, as could have
been imagined.

testimonies I might farther add that of Tertullian, who affirms that among
the followers of Marcion and Tatianus (though not, says he, of Montanus) were
sound men qui perpotuam abstinentiam praecipiunt ad destruenda and dejicienda
opera creatoris, who commanded perpetual abstinence to the destroying and
casting down the works of the Creator, de jejun: c. 15. And the like
intimations of the opinion of heretics we meet frequently in the Fathers, who
give their cautions against this, Non re i^iendis generibus ciborum quasi
pollutis. August: de mor: Eccl: Cath: l. 1. c. 33. and escarum non naturas sed
concupiscentias damnent. Prosper de vit: contempl. l. 2. c. 22. And many the
like. And among the Papists no meaner person then Durand speaks much to this
sense, that those old heretics did, (though the generality of the Papists seem
not to approve or follow him) God, says he, cursed the earth, and from thence
it is that in fasting it is unlawful to eat any flesh that is upon the earth,
beasts and birds, etc. Rat. divin. Off. l. 6. c. 7. But this by the way.

show of piety, he cannot but wonder at my question [How abstinences can have
so much as a show of piety in Will Worship, if Will Worship pass confestly for
foolish and impious?] bidding me ask all inpreters, who render the words, a
show of wisdom in superstition or affected religion, how this can be.

ask them, I must have some assurance from this Diatribist, that all
interpreters do so render it, for otherwise my question will be lost in the
air, and never bring me home any answer; But of this I am well enough advised,
that all interpreters do not thus render it, I shall instance, as even now I
did, in the learned Grotius, as valuable, I believe, as any that will be
brought for the Diatribist's interpretation, and besides, any one asserter of
mine interpretation (and certainly Grotius is one) confutes his assertion of
all interpreters.

Diatribist takes for all, does also take notice of, and render some answer to
my question, what shall I gain by asking them? And if they do answer it, why
would not the Diatribist be so kind as to recite it from them? But this I am
sure he has not done, by asking me again, Cannot a thing have ash^w of wisdom
or piety, which is confessedly foolish or impious, and if so, may it not be so
in respect of the Will Worship in it?

answer, that if I take the question in the terms wherein it is proposed, it is
no way of answering my question, but the diverting to a very distant matter,
For when he asks, may it not be so in respect of the Will Worship in it? the
plain importance of his words is, may it not be foolish or impious in respect
of the Will Worship that is in it? not, may it not have a show of wisdom or
piety in respect of the Will Worship? for it is visible that [be so] referres
to [is foolish] and not to [have a shew] And then there is a fair fallacy put
upon the Reader, the terms of my question, and of the text, quite changed, and
others substituted in stead of them, and then I confess that supposing
Will Worship as ill, as the Diatribist would have it, a thing may be foolish or
impious in respect of Will Worship.

question be fairly set, cannot a thing that is foolish and impious have a
show of wisdom in respect of Will Worship? And then as I shall answer, it may:
so I must add, that then that Will Worship must be taken in a good sense, for
else that foolish thing could not have a show of wisdom or piety in
Will Worship. If a fool have any show of wisdom in him, it must be sure not in
respect of his folly, but of some particular or other, which is by him that
speaks accounted wisdom, and that he must have in him either in reality or in
appearance, or else how can he have any show of wisdom? If Satan have the show
or appearance of an Angel of light, it must be in respect to something which he
does, or pretends to do, which is Angelical.

instances with which he prosecutes this, it must be a strange shortness of
discourse, if he can think they evince his conclusion; He exemplifies in the
Baalitical lancing, and the Popish penances, and supposing the former impious,
and the latter not only ridiculous but heathenish, yet these, says he, had a
show of piety. But what if they had, was it ever denied or questioned by me,
but that impious persons or actions might have a show of piety? for sure I
always knew there were hypocrites in the world, but my question he knows was,
how any thing can have a show of piety in respect of that very thing which is
impious? This was the only question that belonged to the affair betwixt us,
and certainly the Diatribist's instances are very remote from that, for the
Baalites show of piety consisted not in their bloody lancing of themselves, nor
the Papists in their as bloody penances, but either in the reality or
appearance of that detestation of sin, and that zeal, which make them submit
themselves to so much smart.

[But (says the Doctor) can any thing be represented to me as having so much
as a show of piety, in respect of lust or rage discernible in it?] to tell the
Reader that this comparison is ill laid. For if this be well laid, then sure
his setting of the question is foully out of the way. But why is it ill laid?
is it not directly a way of trial, whether will worship be set by the Apostle
in an ill notion? For if it be, then somewhat else which is acknowledgedly ill
(and (...) and (...) rage and lust, the two principles of sensuality, were the
fittest I could think on of this sort, to instance in) being put in the stead
of it, the Apostles words would still continue to have truth and congruity in
them, viz. that such a thing has a show of piety in it, in respect of lust or
rage. This it seems was too gross for him to swallow, and therefore (and upon
no other reason, but because it made the truth most palpable) the comparison,
says he, was ill laid.

strange, if we consider his reason of excepting against this comparison, For
rage, says he, and lust are for kind confessedly wicked things. (And truly
that was the reason why I instanced in them, to show that a thing cannot have a
show of good in respect of that which is confestly bad, which I could not have
showed in those instances, if they might have been good as well as bad) but
worship, says he, may be true or false. I shall then only ask, whether
Will Worship may so too? for that, he knows, is the word we contend about.

not, but is always false, then still it is directly parallel to lust and rage,
in this, wherein the comparison was made, those always ill, and this also: But
if Will Worship may be true, as well as false, then as I acknowledge a thing
may have a show of piety in respect of Will Worship, meaning the good or true
Will Worship, and supposing S. Paul so to have meant, and not any false or
impious will worship, so by this one concession of the Diatribist after all
this contention and scrupulosity and niceness, the whole question is yielded
me, for it seems Will Worship may be true as well as false, and so good as well
as bad, and here not confestly false or bad, quod erat demonstrandum.

impious and false worship may have a show of wisdom and piety to natural men,
is evidently impertinent to our debate or question, which consists only in
this, whether that which has a bare show of piety or wisdom, can have it in
respect of that which is confestly impious and foolish; and therefore when he
has full scope, to put it a little more home to me, as he says, and yet can
do no more but ask, Whether zeal may not have a show of true zeal, and yet be
nothing but rage and madness? it is still to as little purpose, equally beside
the question; And so when he asks, Whether the Devil transforming himself into
an Angel of light, must have something really of light or piety in him, or else
cannot have so much as a show of piety? It Is evident he may, without having any
reality of piety in him, and yet it is as evident, that if he have that show of
piety, in respect of humility or charity, or any thing else, that humility or
charity, or whatsoever else, must be of the number of those things that are
accounted good and pious, for otherwise his having the appearance or bare show
of them would not conclude him to have the appearance of piety. The matter is
evident enough, if he will please to open his eyes, I cannot have a show of
piety in Will Worship unless Will Worship be a branch of piety, and so by
proportion a show of Will Worship a show of piety.

answer is yet more observable (and according to his directions, I shall note
it once for all) that the words are not, which things have a show of wisdom
and Will Worship etc. for then, says he, as wisdom was good and taken in a
good sense, so might the rest be taken, and the fault be, that they had only
an appearance, not the truth or power; but the words are, they have a show of
wisdom in Will Worship etc. and if they were faulty because they had only a
show of wisdom, they will be more faulty that they had but a show of piety, or
worship, or humility. All which I shall very easily grant, and as in the latter
part I shall fully comply with him, that those doctrines of abstinences, Col.
2. were faulty, because though they had a show of Will Worship and humility,
yet they had not the reality of those virtues in them, so from the former part
of his words I have all reason of analogy to conclude, that Will Worship is
taken in a good sense, by its being evidently joined with humility and
self-denial, for those sure are good things also, as well as wisdom, and that
all the fault was, that the doctrines of abstinences had only the appearance
of those virtues not the truth or power of them. How inevitably this conclusion
is founded on these very premises given me by the Diatribist, is so evident,
that I hope I shall not need farther to enlarge to show it. By the same reason
that Will Worship must have been concluded good, if it had been joined with
wisdom, in this form [a show of wisdom and of Will-worship] it must
certainly follow that Will Worship is good, because it is joined with humility
in this form, [in Will Worship and humility] humility being as confestly good,
as wisdom is supposed to be, and the fault of the abstinential doctrines still
equal, that they had only the appearance, not reality of all these.

reserved for the close of the conclusion, The words (...) etc. says he, do no
more enforce us to take it in a good sense then when we say, Judas made a show
of love to Christ in his traitorous kiss, and the Papists devotion in bowing to
stocks and images. But I desire that he set the words of his example so, as may
be exactly parallel to the words Col. 2. 23. (the least change may have an
influence on the matter) and then it must be thus, 1. Judas had (not made) a
show of love to Christ in his traitorous kiss, and the Papists have a show of
devotion in bowing to stocks and images. And 2. in stead of triterous must be
placed some word, which shall no more vary the kiss, then the addition of Will
varyes the worship, (for that the uncommandedness of worship makes it
traitorous, or so much as ill, must not be supposed here, where it is the only
question.)

premised this, I now answer to the example as it is by him set, that as the
words in the Apostle were certainly true, so these words, as they are now ill
set, are as undoubtedly false; for consider the kiss, with that so distinctive
contrary adjunct, as a traitorous kiss, (which addition as it is necessary to
make it ill, so it deprives it of all appearance of love) and then Judas had no
show of love to Christ in this, viz. in his traitorous kiss. If indeed he had
said, Judas had a show of love to Christ in kissing him, or saluting him
friendly, then it had been true, and then the conclusion had been evident that
a kiss or friendly salute is an act or indication of love, an hearty kiss of an
hearty love, and a feigned kiss of a feigned love; or if the addition of
traitorous kiss, had made no greater a change, then the addition of will or
uncommandedness to worship, then again it had been true; But supposing the kiss
to be a traitorous kiss, viz. a kiss given as a (...) or watchword, whom (and
when) the Soldiers should apprehend, then sure he had no show of love to
Christ in that kiss. And so in like manner, if the proposition had been, The
Papists have a show of devotion in bowing, it had been true because adoration
or bowing is a species or indication of devotion, but because Idolatry is
neither of these, and bowing to stocks and images is Idolatry, there can
therefore be no truth in that proposition, set, as by the Diatribist it is set,
and supposed to be delivered by any Orthodox pen (for such sure was the
Apostle's to his Colossians) but the direct contradictory will be true and
clear to all that count bowing to stocks and images a sin, For to them the
Papists have no show of devotion in bowing to stocks or images, no show of
piety, but only of impiety in Idolatry.

argument for the good sense of the word, from all the evasions and (...) (and
truly there have been good store of them, and I believe this Section his
masterpiece of dexterity, and therefore I have so punctually and (...) insisted
on it) from all the subtle refuges of this Diatribist.

Sect. 11. The Greek Fathers acception of (...). An argument of goodness that
it is pretended by hypocrates. Religion in a good sense. Will Worship not worse
then false worship, not abominable. All devised worship is not Idolatry, does
not pretend to more wisdom then Gods. The Latin Fathers cited by Mr. C. The
vulgar Translator, and the followers thereof. (...) by the vulgar rendered
decernitis. The authority of Bellarmine and Daille for the good sense. The
testimonies out of Ambrose, Theodoret, Salmeron, Estius, Augustine, Thomas,
examined.
third reason being taken from the Greek fathers understanding of the place,
who though they interpret (...) only of appearance, yet paraphrase Will Worship
by words of good savor, (...) pious, religious etc. The Diatribist begins with
a triumph and ovation, First, says he, this is well that the Greek Fathers
agree with us in exposition of the first words, a show (not, as he, somewhat
real) of wisdom, nay they expressly oppose against it power and truth, and can
that which has neither power nor truth in the worship of God, be taken in a
good sense? And do not the Fathers imply as much, Chrysostom: (...), etc. (...),
he seems to be religious, but is not so, Oecumenius (...), pretending religion
in worship. And is there any goodness in hypocrisy?

reprehended but cherished in the Diatribist, that he is so very much rejoiced
to hear the news, that the Greek Fathers and he are of a mind, in any the
least particular, I hope it will encourage and engage him to a more familiar
conversation with them, and then I am persuaded no body will have reason to
repent of it.

complain of at the present, is first that their interpreting (...) a show,
should be deemed an agreement with him, more then with me, who he knows have
produced them, and never expressed any dislike to that interpretation. All the
difference between us being but this, that the Greek (...) being capable of two
rendrings, rationem and speciem, I that desired to proceed on sure grounds,
proposed them both, and, which soever should be adhered to, showed the
necessity of (...) being taken in a good sense. It Is true indeed, if (...)
should be there taken for ratio, the argument for the good sense would proceed
most irresistibly, But supposing it with the Fathers to signify species, a
bare show or appearance, yet the argument holds very firmly thus also, the
Gnostick doctrines cannot have so much as a show of piety in Will Worship,
unless Will Worship real be piety real, and the appearance of Will Worship a
foundation of an appearance of piety. And this being the sense of the Fathers,
which rendered (...) a bare show, this sure was fit to be confronted to the
Diatribist's pretensions, as a third argument.

strange way of answer to this argument, to ask, as he here does, Can that
which has neither power nor truth in the worship of God, be taken in a good
sense? I reply, by demanding what it is, of which the Fathers say, that it has
neither power nor truth? Sure the doctrines of abstinence, and not the
Will Worship; And yet his answer proceeds as if they supposed it of the
Will Worship, and without that, has no appearance of force in it. And is not
this a strange perverting of plain words? Chrysostom says, the false teacher
seems to be pious, but is not, and Oecumenius, that he simulates piety, and
from hence Mr. C. concludes that Will Worship is not taken in a good sense. But
I pray is not piety taken in a good sense, even when the hypocrite simulates
piety? Nay, would he pretend to it if it were not good? Does a hypocrite
pretend to that which is acknowledgedly ill? This were sure to appear what he
is, and that is contrary to his being an hypocrite. The product is plain,
Will Worship is rendered by piety, not by appearance of piety, and unless piety
it self can be taken there in an ill sense, Will Worship must be taken in a
good sense, Certainly I need add no more ('it is pity I should be required to
say so much) of this matter.

interpreter of Clemens, who renders (...), in religione, from whence I thought
I might conclude it that man's sense, that Will Worship signifies religion, and
so that it was not taken in an ill sense, he is pleased to ask, [Why, Is not
religion it self of various senses? The simple word signifies false religion,
as well as true; but the composition makes it worse, and alters the sense,
because it adds the work of man's will to worship, which is abominable to God]

question will soon appear; For 1. What if both religio and (...) be of various
senses, and signify false religion as well as true, heathen, or Judaical, as
well as Christian? Is there any appearance of reason to determine it to the
former, in this place, or in that interpreters acception of it? If there be,
then there is an account of the words being taken in an ill sense, without any
influence of the (...), man's will upon it; if there be not (as he is obliged to
affirm there is not, saying p. 69 that the Apostle brands them as destructive,
because they are but Will Worship, not because they are outdated or Judaical,
much less then, because they are any more dangerous sort of false worship,
such as was used among the heathens) then what matters it, what in other places
it signify, whenever the adjuncts or context so determine it, unless it do
(or can be pretended to do) so here?

that ((...) signifying false religion as well as true) the composition makes
it worse; worse then what? then false religion? This is fairly to resolve that
the use of any thing uncommanded in the service of the true God, is worse then
false religion indefinitely, i. e. then Idolatry or Superstition; and the
reason annexed is of the same temper, [adding the work of man's will is
abominable to God.]

foundation of charge of Idolatry, or whatever is most abominable on this poor
Church of ours, for the bare using of any most innnocent ceremony. But this all
the while incumbent on the Diatribist to prove, and as it will not be granted
for asking, so it is not so nearly approaching toward truth, as to want any
farther answer, then the reciting of it, I cannot yet be so uncharitable to Mr.
C. as to imagine it his serious opinion that kneeling in prayer or thanksgiving
to God, on purpose to express our lowly reverence to him, or bowing at the
name of Jesus, in token that we believe him to be the eternal God, in
opposition to the ancient or modern Arians and Socinians, is abominable to God,
and worse then false religion.

following question confirms this to be his opinion [Do not all Idolaters
pretend wisdom in their inventions, citing in the margent Psalm: 106. 39. went a
whoring with their own inventions] yet it is not to be believed, that he can in
earnest thence conclude, Therefore all inventions of men are Idolatry, and
worse then Idolatry; If he can, it is sufficient to reply, that though all
Idolatry be invented and devised worship, yet all inventions of men are not
Idolatry, though every beast be a living creature, yet every living creature is
not a beast; And so that though Idolatrous Will Worship be abominable to God,
yet all Will Worship is not Idolatrous.

Does not, says he, this pretense (of wisdom) make it more odious to God, as
taking upon them to be wiser then he, and more devout then he requires?] But it
may suffice once for all, that he that uses an uncommanded ceremony in the
service of God, does not take upon him to be wiser then God, but walking
regularly in obedience to the divine rule, wheresoever there is any
particularly given, acts according to reason and the more universal rules of
Decency, etc. where God has not particularly prescribed any thing. And so
again in acts of uncommanded devotion; doing that voluntarily out of love to
God which God requires not sub periculo animae, and so which is not extorted by
fear, either of offending or suffering, this is again no elevating our own
wisdom above Gods, but our making use of those advantages and those liberties
which God in his wisdom chose to afford us, that there might be somewhat for
us freely to exercise his graces upon, and so for him as freely to reward in
us. And of this there is no fear, that it shall ever be counted any irregular
acting, and having God's promise to be rewarded, it is safe from being odious
or abominable before him.

good sense of the word as far as in my 3d. Reason I pretended from the Greek
Fathers concurrence with me.

Latins and later interpreters, to which the Diatribist now calls me, and asks
me why I did not tell him, how they rendered the word? To this I answer, that as
I have not commodity to examine all those interpreters in this matter, so I did
not think my self obliged to do it, having never pretended that the notion
which I give is universally received by all Expositors, I acknowledge, that all
men have not rendered the word in a good sense, particularly that the vulgar
Latin reads it Superstitio (though in what acception of that word I know not,
most probably in an ill sense) but sure this with no more truth or analogy for
so interpreting, then is for their interpreting the Passive (...) by
decernitis, v. 20. which is no less then to change subjection into command,
undergoing a yoke, into imposing of it, one contrary into another.

ill sense should be transfused into those Expositors which follow and never
depart from that Latin translation, neither examining the original word, nor
the context, to reform that translation by it. This was the task which I then
undertook, and having found the context to incline it to a good sense, and the
Greek word to bear it very well, and the Greek Fathers to concur with me in
their notion of it, I thought I might lawfully question the authority of the
vulgar Latin, and those who had been lead by it, (and so we know are the
Papists, and from them others also, who do not take notice who it is that leads
them) and attempt that here which I saw ordinarily practiced by all other sorts
of men, the Learned Papists themselves (and, I doubt not, by this Diatribist,
when he conceives himself to have reason for it) i. e. depart from their words
and conduct, as in other so in this particular.

concurrence as will secure it from any censure of singularity. Beside the
Greek Fathers forementioned, the p. 69.
Diatribist tells me I have Bellarmine's consent (adding some other Papists
also) and I hope his authority alone were considerable enough, if there were
not also some others, to weigh in the balance with Salmeron and Estius, which
are all the modern Expositors here cited by him.

Protestants, to Hugo Grotius, already cited, I now add Monsieur Daille in his
late tract de Jejuniis, written ex instituto against Bellarmine, and yet in
this place of St Paul l. 1. c. 7.
contested between them, he expressly acknowledges with Bellarmine the very
thing that I concluded, viz. that those false teachers had a threefold color
of wisdom, 1. In Will Worship, 2. In humility, 3. In austerity to the body,
for which three things they admire these their doctrines of men; defining (...)
cultum sponte and voluntary assumtum nulla cogente Dei lege, a worship
undertaken voluntarily and of their own accord without any law of God
constraining them, and again that by the whole discourse of the Apostle it
appears that they commended and set off their doctrines of abstinence by this,
that voluntarily ex quadam zeli and sanctificationis abundantia susciperentur,
they were voluntarily undertaken out of an abundance of zeal and holiness. And
so in his opinion if abundance of zeal and holiness were taken in a good sense,
Will Worship must be resolved to be so taken.

learned man, who will not be deemed partial to me against the Diatribist, may
now deserve to be considered by him, as soon as the contrary of any modern
Expositor produced, or, I believe, producible by him.

ancient Latin Fathers, whom he has already produced, they are but three,
Ambrose, Hierom, and the vulgar Latin, and those three may be reduced also,
and in fine will amount to little more then the one single vulgar Translator.
This is generally supposed to be St Hierome (and if it be not, it is certainly
somebody whom St Hierome followed, St Hieromes short notes on the Epistles
being affixt to that translation) and so St Hieromes name is no addition to
that, only served the Diatribists turn, as in a false muster, to bear two
names to appear twice, and fill two spaces in his catalogue.

Father now remaining, St Ambrose, if those Comments be his, which go under his
name, they will bring no great prejudice to our pretensions, for by
paraphrasing [(...)] by simulatione religionis, all that can be concluded is,
that those doctrines of abstinence had not any reality, but only a false guise
of religion in them, and so it follows there, Hinc se sapientiae rationem
habere putant, quia traditioni humanae nomen religionis applicant, and religio
appellatur cum sit sacrilegium, Hence they think themselves to have some
appearance of wisdom, because they apply the name of religion to humane
tradition, and it is called religion, when it is sacrilege; And this I may
casily grant, and consequently that the Will Worship here, and so likewise the
humility, were not either of them truly such, and so offended in this, that
they were not what they pretended to be, and would not have been criminous, if
they had been really such; which still devolves all the fault on the doctrines
and on the hypocrisy, not on the Will Worship, or Religion, whose name would
never have been pretended to by hypocrites, if it had not been good. See. 7. of
this chapter n. 10.

Theodoret which is acknowledged to be a Greek Father, came to be ranked among
the Latins, and a Latin interpretation of (...) cited out of him; However I
never pretended, that all either Greek or Latin, or particularly that he
concurred with me in this sense, and therefore am not obliged to give any
farther account of his interpretation, Only this I am sure of, that it is not
the uncommandedness of the worships, that he finds fault with, but 1. Their
teaching those for Gods commands, which are their own; (That is the meaning of
(...), their introducing their own ordinances, (...), their unseasonable
Judaical doctrine) and 2dly. Their bare show of piety and humility, without the
truth of either ((...)) whereas by by his conclusion, it is most evident, that
the abstinences without the doctrines would not have been deemed by him
reproveable, and so not the bare uncommandedness of the worship, for thus we
have it in the close, (...), For abstinences ought to be by counsel, not as
from detestable, but as from the most delectable things. Which is the very
thing, which all this while we have endeavored to conclude from that place.

Latin Fathers, he hastens to later interpreters, and those are two, Salmeron
and Estius, and those two are one again, the one taking from the other as the
manner is, without any considerable difference. But to give his Testimonies
their full weight, we will view them distinctly.

Salmeron begins with observing, that whereas the Vulgar Latin reads, in
Superstitione and humilitate, and non ad parcendum corpori, the Greek has
only three, words, (...), which three, says he, sunt tres colores ostendentes
rationem and specimen sapientiae, are three colors showing a specimen (which
by the way is more then speciem, or bare show, some real evidence) of that
wisdom (to which those doctrines of abstinences pretended) And the first of
these, says he, signifies cultum spontaneum, sive voluntariam religionem, a
spontaneous worship, or voluntary religion pro arbitrio cujusvis abstinendi a
cibis, of absteining from meats as every man shall think fit, and afterward,
illa voce alludit ad voluntarias oblationes legis quae nedaboth dicuntur, Deuteronomy.
16. and Amos 5. By this word he alludes to the voluntary oblations of the Law,
which are called (...) And then I shall desire the Diatribist to consider, how
fitly Salmeron was called out to give testimony against me, (he, and one more,
in the name of all later interpreters) when it is evident from these words,
that he says the very same thing, which all this while I contend for, if I
could have thought fit to have defended my self from singularity, by his
Testimony.

allude to v. 18. volens in humilitate and religione, and so goes along with
Estius, and others in that mistake, which I had taken notice of in them, and
that might have easily led him into farther mistake, if the evidence of the
truth, or some other better guide had not rectified him; But as it is, I have
no reason to complain of him, as to the word (...) which is now before us.

signifying, says he, the virtue of humility, is here used for a feigned
humility, which is contrary to the Gospel, because by it the Judaizers
Evangelio legem admiscebant, mixed the law with the Gospel, And as this is also
perfectly concordant to my notions, so to this it is, that he brings the
testimonies of Augustine and Thomas, and not for the notion of (...), as the
Diatribist cites them out of Estius.

animadversions, I shall view those testimonies also. The one thing which
Salmeron cites from both of them, is this that omnis ritus colendi Deum qui a
Deo non est, nec a Spiritu sancto per Ecclesiam traditus, sed voluntate hominum
inventus, superstitiosus est, every rite of worshipping God, that is not
delivered from God, nor from the holy Ghost by the Church, but is invented by
the will of man, is superstitious. Where it seems, that which is delivered by
the Church, being by him supposed to be from the holy Ghost, does in no degree
fall under this censure, And then the Diatribist has free leave to make his
best advantage of this citation.

Estius his main endeavor in the interpretation of the verse, is to evince
that (...) signifies speciem in genere, sive veram sive falsam, a species in
general, whether true or false, which is very little for the Diatribists
advantage, for granting it to signify species, if that should prove a true
one, then that is perfectly destructive to his interests, for such a species of
wisdom nothing could have in Will Worship, if Will Worship were supposed to be
impious and foolish; And if it should prove a false species, and so a bare show
of wisdom, yet is that very reconcilable with the good notion of Will Worship
as has often been showed.

follows in him, is, says he, secundum Augustinum and Thomam, according to
Augustine and Thomas, that these abstinences have rationem sapientiae non
verae, sed ejus quae sita est in superstitione and humilitate, quae falsa est
sapientia, not true wisdom, but that which is placed in superstition and
humility, which is false wisdom. But where Augustine or Thomas give him
authority to pretend their accord with him, he cites not. In all reason this
defect must be supplied by Salmeron, who cited in the margent, August: lib. de
vera rel: and lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. c. 25. and Thomas 2a. 2ae qu. 93. art.
1.

Augustines book de vera relig. it is, to which he referres, we have no
direction, and so are left to guess, that it is cap. 55. Non sit nobis religio
in phantasmatibus nostris, Melius est enim qualecumque verum quam omne quicquid
pro arbitrio fingi potest, Let not our religion be placed in our fantasmes, for
any thing which is true is better then whatsoever can be feigned at our own
pleasure. And as to the truth of this position I give full consent, that all
fictitious false worship is to be avoided, not only (as he contents himself to
say) unfit to compare with true, so I no where undertake to be advocate for any
false or fictitious, or fantastic religion. The commemorating the birth of
Christ on the 25th of December, I hope, is not such, nor any Ceremony admitted
into use in our Church.

de doctr. Christ. c. 55. stands thus; Having at the 20th Chapter defined
Superstitiosum superstitious, to be whatsoever was instituted by men, for the
making or worshipping of Idols, and that either belonging to the worshipping
any Creature, or part of a Creature as God, or to consulting or making any
pacts with Devils etc. and having fallen on the several sorts of divinations c.
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. he begins his 25th chapter quibus ampu^atis atque eradicatis ab
animo Christiano, deinceps videndae sunt institutiones hominum non
superstitiosae, i. e. non cum daemonibus, sed cum ipsis hominibus institutae,
the former being lopt off, and eradicated from a Christians mind, let us
farther view such institutions of men as are not superstitious, i. e. are not
made with Devils but with men themselves, And having added somewhat of such
vain institutions (which sure no way concern the matter now in hand) he comes
to those which are useful to humane society, and resolves that such are not to
be avoided by a Christian, imo etiam, quantum satis est, intuenda, memoriaeque
retinenda, but in a competent manner to be observed and retained, and this how
little it belongs to the present purpose, to the proving (...) to be here used
in an ill sense, is already so apparent, that I need add no word more to the
clearing of it.

Aquinas 2a. 2ae. qu. 93. art. 1. It is the very same, which long ago, we
considered in the former part of this Tract, chapter 3.. 3. n. 5. and to the view
of it, there presented, I refer the reader, finding nothing more in that whole
place art. 1. which was not there punctually considered, unless it be a
citation out of the Gloss Col. 2. quod superstitio est, quando traditioni
humanae religionis nomen applicatur, that it is superstition when the name of
religion is applied to the tradition of men, which words have nothing in them,
which I am not ready to acknowledge, being sufficiently assured, that
dogmatizing is a sin, and consequently that so good a name as religion ought
not to be pretended for, or applied to it.

answer to my fourth reason, has, I think, nothing of moment in it, but what
has often been spoken to already, unless it be that he says, he has not
observed any such difficulty or obscurity in that text Col: 2. 20. etc. but
dares say, the Doctors exposition makes the greatest obscurity that ever he met
with: But of this there is no disputing, I must not expect that he shall
acknowledge my interpretation to be clear, when he dislikes it, or discern the
involutions or difficulties of that other which he has espoused, when, if he
did, he were obliged to forsake it.

Sect. 12. The fifth reason vindicated. (...). Hesychius corrected twice. (...)
adverbially. (...). (...). (...). Hesychius's Glossary concordant to th
Scripture use. (...), Ephesians. 5. 4.
fifth reason taken from Hesychius's rendering it by (...) voluntary piety or
worship, and the notion which he had of (...) in composition, to signify that
which a man did (...) voluntarily, and (...) of his own accord, agreeably to
which the (...) freewill-offerings are rendered by the Septuagint (...)
voluntary performances, his answer is brief, that this is no advantage to my
cause, for the words may both signify well-devised worship in an ill sense.
And though in humane authors the derivatives and compounds of this word
express the Freewillingnesse of the person, yet that will not help the Doctor
who does not understand (...) in respect to the willingness of the person in a
commanded worship of God, but voluntary worship, i. e. worship not commanded by
God, but offered to him by the free will of man.

worship is forbidden or false, then being ill, the voluntarinesse of it can
infuse no goodness into it, as when it is of it self good, the
uncommandednesse cannot make it ill.

weight (only I thought (...) had not been so likely to hear ill with
gainsayers, as this other which I saw was fallen under great prejudice with
some) but rather that which followed of the other compounds of (...) which
signify no more but doing somewhat voluntarily, or of their own accord,
without any necessity to do it.

worship not commanded by God, the authority of Hesychius and the other Greek
Glossaries which concur with, or follow him, is clear and home to confirm that
to be the meaning of it.

parallel directly betwixt Will Worship and voluntary oblations, or
performances of things not commanded, then add 1. from Hesychius again, that
(...) signifies (...), voluntary, proceeding from his own will, and that sure
is distant enough from the will or command of another. The words in Hesychius
are certainly false printed (as much of that book is) (...). It must
questionless thus be mended, either (...), or else in stead of (...) we must
read (...) adverbially, for so Suidas fetches that word out of approved
authors; and which way soever it is, the sense is the same, that (...)
signifies one that does any thing from his own, not another will or command,
whereas the word to signify (...) voluntary in performing commands, is by him
set (...), not (...), for so those two words must be read together (and not
severed, as they now are in the vulgar copy) (...), as immediately after,
(...).

former certainly signifies the freeness of the matter, not of the person, one
that is willingly deaf or disobedient, (...), which sure cannot be phansied a
doing that freely or willingly which is commanded, for no man is commanded to
be disobedient, and in like manner the latter is rendered by Suidas, (...), he
that is made such by himself, and not commanded by the city, adding (...),
setting (...) directly in opposition to (...), voluntary, to commanded by
another, and Phavorinus repeats the very same words, only with the change of
the Gender (...), adding also (as seldom he omits to do) what Hesychyus had
said, (...). The same may appear again by (...), he that chooses ill
voluntarily, i. e. he which of his own accord chooses the evil, both in
Phavorinus and Suidas, where sure that which he chooses voluntarily, is not
first commanded by God, being supposed to be evil. And so still these
compositions from (...) signify all of them in perfect accord with my notion
of Will Worship, i. e. a performance voluntarily taken up, without any command
of God.

Diatribist, who takes it here in an ill sense, and places the ill in this,
that it is an uncommanded worship, should yet here dispute against this
signification of (...), for voluntary worship, uncommanded by God, and fancy
that I pretend no more but the free-willingness of the person in a commanded
worship of God.

though the word in other authors be taken for voluntary worship, and be but
once used in Scripture, yet the Spirit of God uses words in a sense clearly
different from other authors, instancing in (...), (...), Ephesians. 5. 4. taken for
a vice, which in Aristotle is taken for a virtue,] will soon receive answer,
For 1. Hesychius being the author now peculiarly under consideration, and his
Glosses having a special propriety to the explicating of words in Scripture,
what is said by him, is not so much the sense of other authors, as of the
Scripture itself, and so cannot reasonably be thought distant from it.

words are taken in the Scripture in a sense different from other authors, this
is not applicable to all words of Scripture, some are used in ordinary vulgar
senses, and by much the greater part of words there, and from thence to
conclude of (...), that it is taken in a different sense, is to conclude and
syllogize from particulars, which is against all Laws of Logic.

Scripture is affirmed to be used in such a different sense, that must be
concluded either by the circumstances of the text, which so enforce it, or else
by comparing it with other places of Scripture, where that sense is necessary;
as when (...) is concluded to be a vice, Ephesians. 5. 4. it is manifest by the context
it must do so, for to it is immediately annexed, (...), which are (not only not
convenient, but, as that phrase denotes) very inconvenient, nay as the
companions of it there, (...) enforce, filthy, noisome, unsavory, so as folly
often signifies uncleanness, and so this is a visible reason also, why the word
is taken in an ill sense, when Aristotle, meaning only cleanly, not beastly
jesting, takes it in a good sense: But of (...) this no way appears in this one
place where it is used, but on the contrary, the society in which it is found,
humility and self-denial or austerity determine it to be the good sense, as
certainly, as the company of (...) determine that to an ill. And so much for
my 5t Reason.

Sect. 13. Mr. C. his distinction of voluntary. Spontaneous. A work of love.
The Testimony of Socrates. Worship true or false. Nothing unlawful which is
not forbidden. Voluntaryness no way forbidden. The second Commandment.
last reason [because things done in the service of God are not therefore ill
because spontaneous, but on the contrary, that when out of a pious affection a
man shall do any thing else beside what God has commanded by any particular
precept, this action of his is so much more commendable and acceptable to God,]
he thinks it sufficient to distinguish of voluntary either as it denotes the
manner or the efficient cause of worship; in the first respect that is
voluntary, says he, which yet is necessary, viz. commanded by God, in the
second, that only which is done by the will of man contradistinguisht to the
will of God.

distinction is very far from answering my reason. For of the second, it is, he
knows, that I understand the word, and that I might prevent all want of this
or the like distinction, I speak most plainly, using the word Spontaneous, not
voluntary, on purpose to denote that which was done by man's will on his own
accord, without any command of Gods; for so sure Spontaneous signifies (however
the Diatribist here confounds it with voluntary, and so involves, in stead of
extricating, mixes, when he went to distinguish) that which is sua sponte from
a man's own incitation, not from any external impellent, whether command or
punishment attending it, for this indeed being done thus freely, is perfectly a
work of love, and that renders it so extremely greatefull, and rewardable by
God. I shall give you the description of it in the words of Hist. Eccl. l. 5.
c. 22.
Socrates speaking of Ecclesiastical rites; (...), Seeing no man can show any
written command for this, it is manifest that the Apostles left this to every
man's judgment and will, that every man might do good, neither by fear nor of
necessity.

in worship devised by man the will bears all the blame, and then the more
voluntary; the more abominable] I answer, that worship is either false or true,
bad or good, Heathen or Christian, His rule is perfectly true in unlawful
wicked worship, all the blame thereof lies on the will of man, but it can have
no place, where the worship is lawful, for then no blame is due at all, but
the more free it is, it is so much the more commendable. Now it is of lawful and
Christian worship that we here speak, as he knows well enough, or else it were
not imaginable we could take it in a good sense, and of this he must needs
understand us also; or else he could not make all the blame of it in man's will
or devising, as he does.

worship in itself, and materially lawful, i. e. whilst it is abstracted from
the consideration of Gods commanding it, or not, should by not being commanded
by God, become unlawful, this is to confound things most distant, forbidding
and not forbidding; For the Law and Will of God being the rule, in agreement
with, or opposition to which, lawful and unlawful consists, it is as
impossible that any thing should be unlawful in respect of Gods Law, which is
not forbidden by it, as that any thing should be lawful which is forbidden.

affirming (but offering no proof) that the voluntariness of an action is the
(...) or irregularity of it, first, this is a begging the question; 2. It Is set
in such terms, that it has not the least appearance of truth in it, for how
can the voluntariness be the (...) or irregularity, unless the Law forbid
voluntariness, which certainly it no way does, as was formerly evidenced from
hence, because there is no universal negative command in Scripture,
prohibiting all acts and degrees of acts, beside what are in particular
commanded.

one instance, which here he thinks fit to mention, that of the 2d Commandment,
which, says he, forbids all things, i. e. all worship and all degrees of that
worship, besides what are particularly commanded. Which though it be as far
from all appearance of truth as any thing affirmable by any (for what word is
there in that Commandment, which can sound that way? Certainly none, unless
every ceremony devised by man and every degree whether of charity or devotion,
which is not particularly under precept, be presently metamorphosed into a
graven image) has not yet any the least proof to back it, and so still is the
meanest begging of the main question imaginable. And so having more largely
spoken of this before, this is sufficient also to be said here in the
vindication of my last reason.

Sect. 14. The first occasion of mistaking (...) for ill. The vulgar translator
and Mr. Calvin. The Diatribists three exceptions to this showed to be of no
force. Will Worship distant from Superstition. (...) only in a good sense among
Christians. Three mistakes of the Diatribist. All uncommanded is not forbidden.
mistake and abuse of (...) imputable. The first of which I assigned to be the
vulgar translations rendering it Superstitio, that being most probably S.
Hieroms, and his words being found agreeable to it in some places, and from
thence Mr. Calvin has affirmed it, Superstitio Graecis dicitur (...).

first occasion of the mistake, will be evident enough to any, who considers
how ordinary it is for the Romanists on one side without farther inquiry or
consideration to follow the vulgar translation, and for the reformed on the
other to follow the steps of Mr. Calvin, and not always to examine his grounds
of affirming, which certainly were very far from solid in this matter, it
being evident to all that know any thing of words, that (...) is the Greek for
Superstition, and not (...), nay that (...) being but once used in Scripture,
and not found in any author, but such as may be resolved to have used it from
thence, Mr. Calvin's words, that Superstitio is called by the Greeks (...),
cannot probably signify any more then that the Greek word in that one place is
by the vulgar translator rendered Superstitio. And then this is an evidence of
that which there I affirmed, that the occasion of taking (...) in in an ill
sense (which I must be allowed to deem a mistake) is the vulgar translators
rendering it Superstitio.

Greek words (...) etc. First that a man may say as much for (...) it self as
the Doctor says for (...), and bring the Doctor for his voucher who says that
(...) sometimes is taken in a good sense.

Doctor never says that (...) is taken in a good sense among Christians, who
sure never allowed the worship of Demons, but only among heathens, who do
allow it. 2. That if it were sometimes taken in good sense, yet that were not
sufficient to conclude that it were all one with (...), all good things are not
the same, no nor all ill, and therefore in whatsoever sense the words are
taken, whether both in good or both in ill, the one in good, the other in ill
sense, yet still the nature and importance of the words is distant, and so
ought not to have been confounded either by the vulgar translator or by Mr.
Calvin, and being so unduly confounded, the Diatribist cannot from thence raise
any more solid argument for the ill sense of the one, then I can (which I
pretend not to do) for the good sense of the other.

as the Doctor knows, is taken also sometimes in an ill sense, as well as a
good, why then, says he, may they not both equally signify superstition?
especially when applied to false or men-devised worship. I answer, that (...)
when spoken of Christians is never taken in an ill sense, unless by virtue of
some Epithet joined with it, which it self is ill, as (...) in S. James, vain
religion, and then also it is the vanity which has the ill sense, not the
religion. And again that vain or ill religion, is not superstition neither, but
an unagreeablenesse of the Professors practice to his religion. Now he knows it
is of Christians that now we speak, and so there could be no place for this
exception, nor for any thing to be founded in it, nor plea from hence that
either the simple or the compound should be rendered superstition; As for the
men devised worship that that should be synonymous with false, that is the old
artifice of begging the question, in stead of saying ought for the gaining of
it.

last exception is, that Superstition or Will Worship is more general then
(...), that is but one species of superstition, if taken (as the word imports)
for Daemonum cultus. But all false worship is superstition, and the rather
because it is spontaneous, voluntary, i. e. Will-devised worship.] Here is a
fair proportion of mistakes, without any tender of proof for any, no less then
three in these so few words.

First, he begins with a presumption that Superstition and Will Worship are all
one, and that he knows is now the one thing denied by him, with whom he is
disputing, and he cannot be ignorant, how illogical an argument that is, we
have often minded him of that fallacy.

Secondly, he affirms that either of these is more general then (...), whereas
1. Superstitio being superstitum cultus, is directly all one with (...) which
is daemonum cultus, the Superstites and (...) being the same in several
languages, and the other notion of Superstition (that in Aquinas for prohibited
or illegitime worship) that is but a branch of the former, arising by analogy
with it, and is not any opposite Species to it; and for Will Worship, if that
be more general then (...), that very thing will prove it 1. not to be all one
with (...), a substance, which is the more general, is not all one with a body,
which is a Species of substance; The truth is that the generical Will Worship,
as that comprehends all worship uncommanded by God, has several Species under
it, Jewish out-dated, and so now uncommanded worship, heathenish forbidden, and
so uncommanded worship, and finally Christian acceptable, yet not commanded
acts, or circumstances, or degrees of worship; And as the genus is not all one
with any one Species, so Will Worship in general is not any one of these, but
all of them together. And 2. It implies the word to be capable of a good as
well as of an ill sense, and so indeed it is, being taken in a latitude,
Will Worship, or as he will style it, men devised or Will devised worship, may
be of two sorts, (as the generical word Worship, may) either true, or false,
heathen or Christian, and as the one is ill, so the other is certainly good.

Will Worship in this text, which is not the generical, as that is common to
good and bad, but that which is in the Diatribists understanding a wicked and
false, and in mine a good and a Christian Will Worship, and which soever of the
two it is, it is certainly not both, and so still but a Species of the
generical Will Worship, and so not the genus it self.

all false worship is superstitious, and the rather because it is spontaneous,
this is a strange involution again; For the whole truth of that proposition
[All false worship is Superstition] consisting in this, that all worship of
false gods, or forbidden worship of the true God, is wont to be comprised under
that name, the former according to the literal sense of the word Superstitum
cultus, the latter as reducible, or by analogy agreeable to that, it is very
unreasonable to superstruct upon this, that that false worship is the rather
superstitious because it is spontaneous, It being certain, that if it offend
not some other way then by being spontaneous, i. e. if it be not in respect of
the matter of it, false worship and so forbidden, it is not superstition at
all, and if it be false worship, in it self forbidden, then sure it is more
then spontaneous, for so must all be that is actually forbidden. So that there
is not the least degree of appearance of truth in that last affirmation.

false worship is more then spontaneous (the uncommandednesse of it is
precedent and inferior in order of nature, to its being forbidden, and its
being forbidden is an addition to its not being commanded) the falseness
consists in its being devised by man's will, not simply, but in opposition to
Gods, i. e. when it is forbidden, and it would not otherwise be false worship, if
it were not forbidden either directly or by analogy with somewhat which is
directly forbidden, and what is forbidden is more then not commanded, and so
more then spontaneous, and so the ill of it cannot be increased by being
spontaneous, and so it is not the rather superstition (or any other kind of
evil) for being spontaneous.

worship which is supposed not to be forbidden, is consequently thereto, to be
resolved not to be false, and if it be not false, it cannot be Superstition
(for such only is false worship) and if so, then again the voluntariness or
Spontaneity of it cannot make it more false or more Superstition, then before
it was, because it was neither false nor Superstition before, and the bare
uncommandedness cannot render it either, Gods not commanding implying his
permission, and so a liberty allowed by God, and that is so far from being all
one with prohibited, that it is in effect the very contradictory to it, this
being permitted by God, whereas all that is prohibited is not permitted. And so
here is a competent number of infirmities in very few words.

one behind, the great impertinency of this, and of the two former answers to
the point in hand, the occasions, to which it is imputable that Will Worship
came to be taken among many in an ill sense, which without question (at least
without any word of exception from this Diatribists three branches of this
18th.) is the vulgars rendering (...) Superstitio, and Mr. Calvin's following
the vulgar.

Sect. 15. The second occasion of taking (...) in an ill sense vindicated. The
design of the Treatise of Will Worship, only for ceremonies, not for new kinds
of worship. Whether all ceremonies be forbidden, which are not commanded. The
various reading of Philostorgius. Sitting at the Gospel forbidden.
Chrysostomes Testimony. (...) for Ecclesiastical Canon. pilpeoppunza
Will Worship.
second cause of mistaking this word I had set down at large,. 19. to be the
reflection on the Judaical (...), where, in the building of, and officiating in
the Temple, all was to be done according to the pattern in the mount, from
which some may have made a shift to conclude, that so it must be in the
Christian Church, no rite, no circumstance, no degree of worship to be used
there but what has Christ's example or precept to authorize it. To this he
replies, 1. That I much mistake the question, for it is not about a rite or
circumstance or degree of worship commanded, but of the worship it self, and
herein Christians are equal with the Jews, we must not vary from the
prescription on the mount in the 2d Commandment to constitute any part of
worship, but what we have the authority of Christ for in the New Testament,
adding the ground, for this, both the 2d Commandment, and this text Col. 2. to
justify that assertion.

brief reply, 1. That this is not, in any word, to the point now in hand, the
occasion of taking Will Worship in an ill sense, and it is evident that though
all were true which here is said, that I mistook the question, and that no part
of worship may lawfully be set up among Christians without the example or
precept of Christ, yet this of the Jewish obligation to do all according to the
pattern in the mount, may be occasion to give men prejudices to all that is not
under particular command, or according to pattern of Christ's, and his Apostles,
which was all I assumed in that Section.

not mistake the question, nor can I mistake it (who had the setting it my
self) unless I first set it one way, and then handle it another, And this
certainly I do not. For the very design of that Treatise was to inquire,
whether the observation of ceremonies used and prescribed in our Church of
England were criminous, only upon this account, because they were not
commanded by God; And in this I was then sure that I had adversaries enough, who
concluded it so, upon this one way of probation, because all Will Worship was
criminous, and the use and imposition of all uncommanded ceremonies were
Will Worship.

Diatribist be not in the number of those adversaries, then has he done
himself and me and the reader very great injury, in disputing against that
conclusion which he does not oppose, then has he most prodigally misspent and
lavisht out all his pains, in consuting (or exercising himself upon) this
tract, of which this was the only design, not to plead for any new kind or
parts of worship, but to justify the use of uncommanded ceremonies and
circumstances, and such are days of worship, and to show that being unforbidden
as well as uncommanded, they were therefore lawful and free to be used by
Christian people or prescribed by Christian Magistrates. And if he has nothing
to resist in this, then why should he delight in this impertinent severity,
arreign and triumph over a poor innocent Tract, that never thought to provoke
any, which allowed the use and observance of uncommanded rites, and days of
worship, never attempted in the least to bring any new part or kind of worship
into the Church? Upon this, and other visible reasons, it will sure be needless
here to examine again his two grounds, which we have formerly been so often
acquainted with, the 2d Commandment and Col. 2. 23. It was no small infirmity
of discourse in this place to mention them.

in worship that is condemned which is not commanded] But 1. What is that again
to the point in hand, that particular occasion of taking Will Worship in an ill
sense? 2. I shall demand, is that proposition universally true, so as to extend
to every ceremony in worship? If it be, then it seems, I mistook not the
question (as very lately I was told) nor my adversary neither) this Diatribist
being directly contrary to me herein, if he thus affirm, that in the worship
of God every ceremony is forbidden which is not commanded.

Photius's (...) out of Philostorgius, which I proposed and explained, he
acknowledges he has little to say, yet somewhat he is willing to note for his
own advantage, viz. that I seem to make it a fault to sit at the reading of the
Gospel, which the Ecclesiastical Canons did not command, and yet make it no
fault to add a Will Worship of a man's own which (...) the divine law does
forbid.

answer, that the Diatribist ought in all reason to have marked, what there I
set visible before his eyes, and then he could not possibly have mentioned
this. For it is evident in that place, 1. That I had taken notice of the reading
of the Manuscript in the Oxford Public Library, which has (...), in stead of
(...) in Gotofred's Printed Copy, and 2. That as this latter reading imported
it a fault to do that which the Canons commanded not (for which very cause I
examined, and then saw reason to reject that reading) so the former and right
reading, to which only I adhered, implied no more then this, that it was a
fault to act contrary to Canon, to do many things (...), which the
Ecclesiastical Canon did not admit or permit, or which was not in use with the
Church of God, but the contrary, viz. that of standing up at the Gospel.

Edit. Savil. Tom. 6. p. 975.
Chrysostom (or whosoever was the Author of the Oration (...)) will be
sufficient, (...) (so it must be read, as appears, p. 974. l. 20. where we find
(...), not (...), as it is now Printed) (...), When the Deacon is about to open
the Gospel (that Chariot drawn with four horses) we all look very earnestly
upon him and are still, and when he begins to read (and so to run his race in
that Chariot) presently we stand up and use this acclamation, Glory be to thee,
O Lord.

Diatribist never expected that his Exercitations should be examined by any, or
but compared with the plain words of the Treatise to which they related, when
he thought fit to observe this.

divine Law, which he must needs discern to have been there cleared by me to
signify not the Law or word of God, but the Canons or unwritten customs of
the Church, as there appeared by Nicephorus reciting that place of
Philostorgius, and reading (...), in stead of (...), and by many other
evidences from Epiphanius and Athanasius and Pseudo-Clement, and Nicephori
Constantinop: (...), superadded to the former store, in the Annotation on Col.
2. published since that Treatise. To all which I now add Leo, who having
mentioned Divinarum Reverentia Sanctionum, the reverence of divine sanctions,
soon explains his meaning first by quod publica lege * Ser. 3. de jejun. 7.
men's.
celebratur, then by quod universa Ecclesia suscipit, that which was observed
by public Law, that which the universal Church received.

Anglican Councels, Can. 60. Sub Edgaro, where pilpoppunza is translated ficta
ad libitum adorationes, but should be rendered fontis adoratio, not Will Worship
but Well-worship, for which I refer the Reader to the former place in the
Annotations.

Sect. 16.
The third occasion of the mistake cleared. Worship of Angels forbidden, not
only not commanded. The reviving Judaical worship not called Will Worship, Col.
2. 23. Maimonides's words wrested to a distant sense by the Diatribist.
Original of Angel-worship. Vain worships. Clemens confounding of Col. 2. 18.
with 23. Worship of Angels etc. a forbidden Will Worship. The imposing of
virginity and abstinences, as from God, the only crime, found fault with by S.
Paul and the ancient Catholics. Alcibiabes his using, and remission of
austerity. The like of Spiridion and Marcianus. Cyrill of meats. 1 Timothy 5. 23.
explicated.

occasion of the mistaken ill notion of (...) I had taken notice of to be the
confounding of two verses very distant, the 18th and 23d of that 2d Chap. to
the Colos. the voluntary humility and worshipping of the Angels in the one, and
the show of wisdom in Will Worship and humility in the other. To which end I at
large cleared the difference between those two phrases. To this he replies,
that the distance pretended between them is so little, that they may easily be
reconciled, that respecting a new devised worship only, and this the reviving
an old out-dated worship.

answer, 1. that the worship v. 18. being expressly the worship of Angels,
that sure is much more then Will Worship in the Diatribists notion hitherto
expressed of it, and therefore it is strange he should now labor to persuade us
they are all one, or easily reconciled. Will Worship, as he has hitherto
defined it, is bare uncommanded, will-devised, or men-devised worship, and that
he has still pronounced unlawful upon that one account, because not commanded.
But can he think the worship of Angels to be such? Is not that distinctly
forbidden in the first Commandment? Certainly it is; And if it be, has it no
other guilt by being so forbidden, above that which is only not commanded? 2
The Will Worship v. 23. is not truly affirmed to be the reviving old out-dated
worship, For 1. the abstinences from marriage there spoken of, as well as those
from meats, had never been commanded among the Jews. 2. It Is not there affirmed
of one or other abstinence, that it was Will Worship, Only those doctrines of
abstinences of both sorts are said to have a show of wisdom in respect of the
Will Worship discernible in them, and so likewise they are said to have in
respect of the self-denial, and the worship of Angels in respect of the
humility, that either is, or is pretended in them. And yet I hope it will not
be said that humility or self-denial is the reviving of Judaisme.

advantage he resolves to get by that. and having no other means to acquire it,
he will have it out of some words which I had cited out of Maimonides, the
words are these, that the greatest part of Idolatry came into the world,
existimando hanc varietatem esse Dei voluntatem, by the opinion that God was
honored by the worship of his Angels or officers, and that it was his will to
have men exercised in this variety of worship. From hence the Diatribist
subsumes, that the error that brought the greatest part of idolatry into the
world was, that men conceived and taught that vain worships and superstitions
were the will and pleasure of God.

vain worships? does he mean bare will-devised, uncommanded worships, which
have in his opinion no other crime in them, but their uncommandednesse? If so,
then has he much misapplied Maimonides's words, as must be visible to him,
those clearly belonging to the worship of Angels (and others beside the one
God) which all men are strictly forbidden to worship. And then what a confusion
of things most distant, what an injustice is this?

vain he designed false forbidden worships, such as are by him fitly joined
with superstition, and such as the worship of Angels was, then indeed he
knows, or must in charity believe, that it is as much mine interest and
inclination, as his, to fasten an ill character upon them, and to believe as
much of the danger and criminousnesse of affirming them acceptable to God, as
Maimonides could teach, or the Diatribist wish me to believe. I shall not fail
therefore, I hope, to obey his admonition, if it be really such, and be
abundantly cautious neither to justify nor imitate, what I so much dislike and
abhor in them that are guilty of it.

Clemens Alexandrinus confounding those two the 18. and 23. verses, was by me
produced and willingly confessed, and made an evidence of the point there in
hand, that some have (though without all reason) confounded them, and it is not
imaginable how this which so evidently proved what I brought it to prove
(evidencing the occasion of the mistake) should be so speedily mentioned to the
disproving of it, or be farther argumentative against me, then I had before
acknowledged by producing it: For sure the Diatribist cannot pretend that
Clemens his reading was the true, (...), if he can, all our copies of the New
Testament will abundantly confute him. And then it is no very good indication
of the truth of his cause, which is fain to catch hold on such supports as
this, which is acknowledged a mistake in him, from whom it is produced, and so
in all reason will cause mistake to any that borrowes it from him.

Diatribist inlarges in two long Sections more to enervate what I had said to
show the difference betwixt those two verses, And I need make no farther reply
to them, then to refer the reader to the two parts of the observation (. 22.
and 23. of the Tract of Will Worship) to which his answers are applied, the
second of them clearly answering all that he has objected to the first (if he
would but have had patience to have looked so much forward) and as clearly
preventing what he has said to the second.

worship of Angels being not only not commanded but forbidden by God, the
voluntary worshipping of them is acknowledged by me to be a fault, but that
resulting from the unlawfulness of the matter, which is under interdict in the
first Commandment of the Decalogue, not from the voluntariness or
uncommandednesse of it. And the same I shall not doubt to yield of the
abstinences from meats and marriages; Christ has given perfect liberty for the
using of both, and they that dogmatize and impose either or both those
abstinences on Christians as from God, are false teachers, and so that is their
fault in imposing, and the like in those who (...) subject themselves to those
ordinances; And yet for all this a spontaneous abstaining from meats, at some
time, (...), for exercise, not for detestation (in a religious fast, not out of
opinion of the unlawfulness of meats) being in it self perfectly lawful, and
so likewise celibacy or virginity in him that can receive it, there is no
pretense from the uncommandedness of either, or both of these, that they should
be deemed culpable, or made parallel to that other sort of uncommanded worship,
where the matter is under interdict, the worship of Angels or imposing of
Iudaical abstinences.

Paul's doctrine in several places, and the arguings of the Catholics against
the Montanists. S. Paul, who resolves marriage to be honorable among all, and so
brands them for heretics who forbid to mary, does yet not only allow but
recommend virginity; and so for meats, he professes all to be lawful to all,
and that no question is to be made for conscience sake, and accordingly
censures the Gnostics that they commanded to abstain from meats, and yet the
same Apostle was himself frequent in fastings, and certainly had not the least
dislike to those performances.

Catholics or orthodox Christians of the Primitive Church, which objected it as
a fault to the Montanists, that they imposed fasting, and made it necessary (as
may appear by the character of Montanus given by Apollonius in Eccl. hist. l 5.
6. 18.
Eusebius, that he was (...) one that required and exacted fastings as by the
law of the Paraclete, for so he styled himself, and the same is evident by
Tertullian in his Tract, De jejuniis, when being turned Montanist he pleads
their cause against the Orthodox under the name of Psychici) and which
anathematized the Marcionites and Encratites etc: for deeming meats unlawful,
do yet every where commend and press the use of fasting, as has formerly been
showed in part, and as it is known to all that have but looked into their
writings.

Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 3.
Epistle of the Christians of Lions and Vienna to the Asiaticks concerning
Alcibiades, is remarkable, he had lived, say they, (...) very austerely, using
nothing but bread and water, and when he was by the persecutors cast in prison,
he attempted to continue this strict diet, but Attalus, who was in prison, and
had once been carried out into the amphitheatre, advised him to leave it,
(...), say they, having received a Revelation, that he should not do well not
to use the creatures of God, adding that he would by that means, (...), leave
an example of scandal, of snare, of stumbling to others, whereupon say they, he
eat freely and gave God thanks. Here it seems his former course of austerity
and severest abstinence was no way disliked (and had long been practiced by
that Holy Martyr) only at this time it was thought not to be so fit to be
continued, whether in respect of the combat which he was now to undergo, ((...)
a combat in the amphitheatre, and if he macerated himself too much he might not
be so fit for so weighty and difficult an undertaking, and others also if they
should follow his example might weaken themselves overmuch, and so be ensnared
by that means) or in some other respect, wherein his abstinence might by the
example be hurtful to others. And upon these considerations he intermitted it;
an example both of the practice of the severest abstinences, and of the free
use of meats according to the doctrine of Christian liberty.

Sozomen. l. 1. c. 11.
Spiridion, one of the Bishops that sat in the Council of Nice, who though with
his family he observed Lent most severely, yet on occasion of a weary guest
made no doubt to break his customary rules, and his guest being more scrupulous
then he, (...), saying he was a Christian, Spiridion replied, (...), he was the
rather not to scruple, because he was a Christian, the Scripture it self
affirming that all things are pure to the pure. And the same we have in the
passage of Marcianus to Avitus, in Tom. 3. p. 791.
The doret, giving his reason for the breaking his ascetick Laws of fasting,
that charity was more honorable then fasting, (...), the former being a work
of Gods prescribing, the latter of our own freedom.

Cyrill of Jerusalem Cat. 4. may conclude this matter. (...) etc. Many offend
in this matter concerning meats, some eat indifferently all kind of meats,
that which is offered to Idols etc. others abstain, and condemn all that eat,
and so the soul is diversely polluted in this matter of meats, by not knowing
the profitable causes of eating and not eating, when we fast we abstain from
flesh and wine, not hating them as abominations, but expecting our reward, that
contemning sensible delights we may enjoy the spiritual and intellectual Table,
and that now sowing in tears we may reap in joy in the world to come. Despise
not therefore those that eat, and partake, because of the weakness of their
bodies, neither find fault with ((...) the Barocian MS. reads not (...)) those
that use a little wine for their stomach, and frequent infirmities, neither
condemn them as sinners (the Barocian MS. adding to the Printed Copies, (...))
nor hate flesh as strange (or unfit for a Christian) for of such the Apostle
took especial notice, saying, they forbid to marry and abstain from meats, from
such keep thy self, and abstain not from meats as detestable things, if thou
do thou have no reward, but supposing them good, omit to make use of them
(...) ((...) the Barocian Copy reads) (...), because of the intellectual
better things which are set before thee, or which thou hopest to receive.

fasting and abstinences being freely and spontaneously used, and not as
necessary, or the contrary unlawful, but perfectly spontaneous and uncommanded
abstinences, are yet so far from being sinful (if they be not joined with
condemning of others which eat) that they are highly rewardable by God.
Nothing could be said more dilucidly and fully to this whole matter.

Cyrills will by the way give us a fuller understanding of that exhortation of
S. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Drink no longer water, but use a little
wine etc.] then formerly I had taken notice of in the Annotation on that place,
in relation to the words precedent there, Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither
partake of other men's sins, keep thy self pure, drink no longer water etc.
Thus, those that by the Gnostics infusions and false doctrines, c. 4. 1, 2, 3.
have been seduced into error and by that means fallen under thy censures, are
not to be over favorably used, nor too speedily absolved, and then (on that
occasion, as in a parenthesis) be sure thou fall not thy self into their
snares, those errors, or faults consequent thereto, which thou art to censure
in others; And these errors being specially two, the commanding to abstain,
from marriage and from meats, for the former of them, be sure, that as thou
abstainest from marriage, so thou preserve thy self perfectly pure from all the
Gnostick pollutions consequent to their doctrines of hating marriage, (that is
the meaning of (...)) and for the latter, though thou usest austerities and
fastings, which may be useful to virginal Chastity, yet do not this to the
hurting of thy body, but in consideration of thy infirm habit of body, thy
frequent indispositions, give thy self the use of lawful liberties, take wine
sometimes in a moderate proportion, and keep not thy self so strictly to
water-drinking, as persons of austerity use to do.

uncommanded performances (such sure were virginity or fasting) had no ill
character fastened on them by those same Orthodox Fathers, who yet would not
endure to have them imposed on Christians, as from God, but brand all such, as
attempt it, for false teachers.

Sect. 17. The last occasion of the ill sense. (...) in Epiphanius. Of the
Pharisees appellation. (...). Dogmatizing and discriminating. Epiphanius's
words cleared. Wherein their hypocrisy consisted. (...), 1 Mac. 2. 42. Asidei
(...) turned into (...), the fault.
last occasion of the ill sense of (...), which I took notice of, was
Epiphanius's mention of (...), as the denotation of the Pharisees name, in
respect of the voluntary performances wherein they pretended to exceed other
Jews. And I leave the Reader to view in that place,. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. what I
thought fit to note on that word, which when he has done, I shall have some
confidence, that he will need no farther reply of mine to demonstrate the
invalidity of all this Diatribist's exceptions against those Sections.

superfluity of either noxious, or ridiculous, or but (for number) many and so
burthenous ceremonies, is not pleaded for by me, and that is answer to his 24th.

blameable in the Pharisees was not their bare using of some lawful,
indifferent, or else good, and commendable things, not commanded by God, but
their teaching such for doctrines, and laying them as burdens on others, and
what was consequent to this, their discriminating themselves proudly and
fastidiously from other men, upon this account, and that prevents his 25t.

Pharisees, but affirm them generally to have been ill men and hypocrites;
Only I say that when they imposed that name of Pharisee upon themselves, sure
they meant not to reproach themselves by so doing, and that Epiphanius says
they thus imposed it on pupose to denote their (...), by that meaning some
performances of theirs, wherein they conceived themselves to exceed all others,
which again was the preventing of all that he adds. 26. And lest there should
remain any doubt of this (the Diatribist setting it quite another way, and
affirming that Epiphanius calls the heresy of the Pharisees by that name, as
offending both in Will-worships of their own devising, and also in the
abundance and superfluity of them) I shall set down here the words punctually
as they are found in Epiphanius, and leave the Reader to judge on whose side
the truthlyes in this particular. (...), l. 1. Haer. 16.
says he, (...), They were called Pharisees for being separated from others,
because of the abundant Will Worship whether prescribed or customary (so (...)
frequently signifies) among them, for Phares in Hebrew is interpreted
Separation.

ground for the Diatribists gloss, either that Epiphanius calls the heresy of
the Pharisees by that name, when he only sets it down as the interpretation of
that name of Pharisees, long before Epiphanius, imposed on them; or that this
name was given them as a character of their offending both in Will-worships and
in the superfluity of them? Certainly neither of these has the least
appearance of foundation in Epiphanius, I wonder the Diatribist could think fit
to cite them from him.

hypocrisy were the Pharisees chief crime, and withal the fuel to their pride
and despising of others, yet their doing some things which were not commanded
was no part of this their hypocrisy, but on the contrary, either their saying
but not doing, or their doing the lightest and neglecting the weightiest
duties, or their preferring their own traditions before the commanded duties,
and making the observance of the one (as in Corban) their commutation and
excuse for neglecting the other, and this indeed was far more likely to
inflame their pride and despising of others then the real Christian necessary
performances would have been; the lightest things ascending highest, and
appearing most visibly, whilst the weightier sink down and lie hid.

prejudice to those real performances of more strictness then the law exacts,
fasting twice in the week, and the like, supposing, as we here suppose, that
they are not used to the supplanting of necessary duties (but go along very
friendly with the practice of them) and offend in no other respect, but that
they are uncommanded performances. And this avoids all his artifices in. 27.

Mac. 2. 42. signifies more then a well mindedness to the law, meaning by that
the precepts of God, most evidently a spontaneous performing of some things
which the law required not. Let the place be there viewed, and these two things
will be evident, 1. That that phrase (...) is set to denote the Asidaei by way
of periphrasis; Now of them it is certain that they were so called from (...)
which we ordinarily render mercy, but signifies says in Psalm. 36.
Kimchi (...) excellence of goodness, Rabbini in Prove 22. 28.
others (...) abundance of goodness, and in Maimonides, excessum and supremum
gradum in one place, the excess and highest degree of any performance
especially c in P^^ke Ave.
of charity or beneficence, and in More Nevoch. Part. 3
another, benignitatem erga aliquem cui nihil plane debes, vel erga eum qui
beneficio dignus est, at non tanto, benignity to him to whom you either ow
nothing, or not so much as you afford him, by which it is manifest that the
name Asidaei denotes not only willing but spontaneous agents, which keep not
themselves within the line of the law, as to do nothing which is not commanded
but have their (...) voluntary performances to offer to God, above that which
the (...) the line of law, as the Rabbi Ismael in Beracoth. c. 1.
Rabbines style it, exacts of them, and so are properly styled (...) volunteers
in or to the law, as that is opposed to pressed or hired soldiers of it.

second thing is, that the men that are there particularly mentioned in that
place of the Maccabees, are those that listed themselves voluntarily under
Mattathias to defend the law by arms, which was no where required of all men
that were Jews, but was the act of the Zelots, at that time, and so again an
(...) a spontaneous and uncommanded performance, above or beside the law; and
such as these were far from being blamed, being every where commended in
those men. And the Diatribist will never be able in the least degree to make
good against Scaliger (what he undertakes. 28.) that our Savior condemned them.

Fault was when the (...) was turned into (...), when what they undertook and
acted laudably, whilst spontaneously, they at length imposed on others, as
necessary, and for that it is, that (beside their hypocrisy of several kinds)
the Pharisees are justly censured in this matter, and not for the
uncommandednesse of their actions, and this with the former, are a full answer
to. 28.

CHAP. VI. Of Free Will offerings.
Sect. 1. The use of them in this question. The Diatribists discourse of them.
His (...). The Leviticalness of spontaneous offerings asserted by him, in order
to denying them among Christians. Arguments against this conceit. Allowance of
days as well as of worship among the Jews. Allowance acknowledged by the
Diatribist to be as good as commands.
not commanded, are not yet unlawful or prohibited in the service of God, and
consequently that all uncommanded ceremonies and circumstances (and under that
head, Festivals i. e. Times) of worship are not prohibited to a Christian, I
thought it necessary in that Tract of Will Worship to reflect on the (...) or
free-will-offerings of the Jews, which being spontaneously, and without any
obligation of divine law presented to God, were so far from being detested or
disliked, that they were accepted and rewarded by him.

Treatise, conceiving the (...) once mentioned in the New Testament, Col. 2.
and taken in the notion of spontaneous performances, to be directly parallel to
those (...) voluntary or uncommanded oblations among the Jews, and from thence
concluding, as I thought, irrefragably, that the uncommandednesse of a few
decent rites, or useful seasons set apart for the worship of God, could not
upon that one account, their being uncommanded, become presently unlawful and
criminous, when even under the (...) they were allowed and accepted. And if in
any other respect there were difference betwixt the things thus compared, yet I
was sure there was none in that, wherein I compared them, both agreeing
evidently in this, that they were equally not commanded or prescribed by God,
and so though the observation of rites or ceremonies or festivals arrived not
to that excellency of being parts, but only circumstances of worship, yet they
would by those precedents be secured from being abominable or criminous in the
sight of God upon that one account of uncommandednesse, for if such they were,
then the (...) would be so too, and being supposed to be uncommanded, either
stand together, or both fall under the same condemnation.

fault with me for not setting down or showing wherein the formality of a
free will offering consisted, he is pleased to spend some leaves on this task.

supply of his, there being evidently no more required to the formality of a
free will offering, but that 1. it were not particularly commanded by any law
of Gods, and so were spontaneous (not necessary) to offer, or not to offer; 2.
that it were offered to (and graciously accepted by) God, as being of those
kinds which are known to be allowed by him; and both these being evidently set
down by me in that Treatise. 29. I have little to thank him for in his
discourse on this subject, finding the greatest part of it to concern the
prescribed, commanded sacrifices, and the willingness first, and secondly some
lower degree of freeness observable in them, both which are certainly nothing
to our purpose, who speak only of those oblations which were not commanded and
might freely not have been offered (to which none but the last member of his
distinction appertains, libertas exercitii) and yet were graciously accepted by
God when they were offered, which one sort of oblations (meddling not with any
other that were any way commanded) make it visible, that even under the (...),
that government of the Jews where God presided immediately and gave laws
precisely for the very manner of his worship, some things were yet left to men's
free-power and choice, if they offered, they should be accepted, if they did
not offer, they sinned not, which is the perfect image and clear interpretation
of that (...) or Will Worship, for which that Treatise undertook to plead, that
it was not criminous in a Christian.

freewill offerings, defined by him, p. 91. just as I now, and then defined
them, there is but one thing only which he observes by way of praecognoscendum
to his answer to that Treatise, and I must here take a particular view of it,
because I suppose it that, on which all his contrary hypothesis must be
founded; It is this, that the formality of a freewill offering, as
contradistinguished to the offerings commanded by the Law, consisting in this,
that it was left free for a man to offer or not to offer, beyond what was
positively required by the Law, here, says he, the Leviticalness or
Ceremoniality seems to ly, whereby (he pronounces that) they are now
abolished. And afterward often to the same purpose, that they were parts of the
worship of God in those times is true, p. 92. intimating that those times
differed from these times in this respect; and this inference, says he, has
too much of the (...) show of wisdom, but neither substance, power, nor truth
in it. It was so in the Old Testament, therefore it may be so in the New, p.
93. and Divines resolve that the worship of God then, was far different from
the worship of the Gospel, and conclude the contrary. It rather follows, that
they are not parts of worship now, because that Levitical worship was
abolished. p. 94. And this is his principal engine of battery to demolish all
that I had said from that parallel between those freewill offerings and the
(...) in the New Testament.

examine and consider this reserve of his, for if it shall fail him, it is
evident he has no other refuge to retire to.

resolved between us, that the kind of the worship (that by bloody sacrifices
etc. among the Jews) was indeed Levitical, no longer to continue then the
Jewish priesthood of the Tribe of Levi continued, and so is long since
abolished by Christ, and accordingly I never meant (and I hope he cannot think
I meant) to conclude that the same kinds of freewill offerings which were
acceptable then, that of slaying a Bullock or a Ram etc. do now continue
acceptable among Christians.

question must be of the spontaneousness of the oblations, whether that being
confestly lawful and acceptable under the Law, it be now unlawful under
Christ, or in plain terms, whether Gods acceptance of uncommanded oblations,
when the matter of them is confessed to be such as is acceptable to him, be to be
deemed Levitical, and such as being peculiar to the Mosaical oeconomie, is not
now to be looked for, being abolished under Christ?

question thus plainly set, his affirmation is too far from the the least show
of probability, and so utterly distitute of all proofs, either from reason or
Scripture, as far as he has here discovered himself (and so but a begging of
the question in him that thus affirms) that there is no need of my pains in
disproving it; Yet shall I offer a few considerations to this purpose, and the
first such as may be of force adhominem, to this Diatribist.

three special proofs, which he has brought in his Preface and in his
Diatribe, to infer the sinfulness of Will Worship, viz. the 2d Commandment, the
sum of which is, as he often says, Gods prescribed worship, and all devised
worship, an excess and so sin against it; The words of Deuteronomy. 4. 2. where all
additions to the word are prohibited; And (to the particular of Festivals) the
4th Commandment, against which, says he, it is an offense in the excess to
observe any other holy day, but that one of the Weekly Sabbath. Now of these
three it is plain, that they are all taken out of the words of the Judaical
Law, and consequently if they were fitly urged to Christians, then must it
needs follow, 1. That they were thus of force against all uncommanded services
in the Old Testament: and 2. That by way of analogy they still hold under the
New Testament, which if they do, then is this the direct contradictory to both
the Diatribist's present pretensions, to his allowing unprescribed uncommanded
worship under the Old Testament, for how can that be when his proofs against
uncommanded worship are all fetched from the Old Testament, to the abolishing in
the New Testament what was allowed in the Old, for if so, how can the analogy
hold betwixt the Old and the New, in which his three proofs were founded, as to
the application of them to Christians?

hypothesis, proving so irreconcilable with his present pretension, I shall
still give him his choice which part of his method he will adhere to, the
former or the latter; The former he cannot (the force of those places in the
Mosaical Law) for it is manifest by the free will offerings, and now confessed by
the Diatribists, that uncommanded worships were allowed; and so lawful among
the Jews; And the latter he cannot, having formerly supposed in his arguing,
that the analogy holds in this matter between the two Testaments.

Syllogism the premises whereof shall be both fetched out of the Diatribist,
the Minor from his very words, the Major from that on which his arguments are
founded, thus, Whatsoever was lawful under the Old Testament, is lawful under
the New; But freewill or uncommanded offerings were lawful under the Old
Testament; (and then having given me me my premises, twill be great unkindness
to deny my conclusion) therefore, uncommanded offerings are lawful under the
New Testament; Quod erat demonstrandum.

argument against his affirmation shall be, the consideration of the liberty,
and advantages which result to Christians from the abolition of the Mosaical
Law. That liberty must consist, in the taking off, not in the imposing of
weights and interdicts, whereas, by this Diatribists affirmation, there shall
by this abolition of what was Levitical. i. e. by this libert, y come in a
multitude of unprofitable burdens, which never lay upon the Jews; Whenever I
shall do any thing in the service of God, which I am not particularly commanded
to do, I am presently ensnared, guilty of an abominable sin, whereas a Jew
might, by his confession, bring a thousand free will offerings, and in each of
them be accepted. This sure must be directly against one main part of the
design of Christ's coming, and therefore is not to be admitted in the 2d place.

Apostle affirmed, that they were (...), positive ordinances, and (...), Ephesians,
2. 15. A Law of Commandments in ordinances, which Christ did by his death (...)
cancel and nail to the Cross, and indeed nothing else is capable of abolition
or cancelling, But this of the free will offerings, among the Jews is not any
Law or Commandments or Ordinances, but rather a negation of all those, (for
such is a bare allowance to be deemed) and therefore sure this, as to the
voluntariness of them, was none of the things which were abolished by Christ.

Diatribist, that the Leviticalness or Ceremoniality of the offerings seems to
ly here, viz. in the uncommandedness or freedom to offer or not to offer
(wherein he truly says, that the formality of a freewill offering consists, as
that is contradistinguished to the commanded offerings) then sure the
Leviticalness etc. would not extend to the commandedness of the other
offerings, and consequently the commanded offerings under the Law would not be
Levitical, Which as it is palpably false, and contrary to plain Scripture, Heb.
9. 1. 20. and elsewhere frequently, so it will farther conclude also, that the
commanded offerings are still in force, for by the Leviticalness and
Ceremoniality, says he, it was, that those other are supposed to be now
abolished.

conclusion I thus argue, Whatsoever was lawful before the Mosaical Law to
mankind, and remained lawful under the Mosaical Law, and is not now prohibited
by Christ or his Apostles under the Gospel, that certainly is now perfectly
lawful and free to Christians; But such are freewill offerings, Ergo. Of the
Major I suppose there will be no doubt; And the Minor consisting of three
branches, is manifest in the first of them, among many others by Abel's
oblation, which the Fathers generally observe not to have been by way of
precept from God, and it is affirmed by the ancient Author of the (...), the
Pseudo-Clement, c. 22. (I say not how truly) that before the Jews idolatries
and high provocations, sacrifices themselves were not imposed on, or commanded
the Jews, but only left to their free power, (...) If thou will do it, but
upon their provocations imposed, (...), that being constrained and comprest by
this yoke, they might be kept from idolatry. In the 2d branch, it is granted by
the Diatribist; And for the 3d, it must ly upon him to show any prohibition of
Christ's or his Apostles, which forbids to do any the least thing in the service
of God, which is not particularly commanded: Now this he has not yet attempted
to do (no not here, where it was most seasonable and necessary to do it, the
whole weight of his cause being divolved upon it) and though it be not
incumbent on me to prove a negative, yet having all Christ's prohibitions before
my eyes in the New Testament, where this would be discernible, if there were
any such, and being sure that I cannot discern the least glimpse of any such,
and withal remembering upon what grounds the Diatribist affirms it, viz. upon
the Leviticalnesse and ceremoniality of these free will offerings, which has
already been competently disproved, and how suspicious and cautious he was in
affirming that, that the Leviticalness seems to ly there, not daring to affirm
any more, then that so it seemed, (and that I must suppose only to himself, no
concurrence of any other man's judgment appearing with him) I doubt not but
that I may with sobriety assume, that there will never be produced by him any
such prohibition, and then there can be no way of superseding the conclusion,
that uncommanded performances in the service of God are still lawful.

perfect, being only a negative probation, I must (to add yet more force to
it) refer the Reader to the many positive instances, in the New Testament, of
such free will performances, as contra-distinguisht to those which are under
precept, set down in that Treatise of Will Worship,. 30, 31, 32. etc. and much
more largely in the Annotation on Col: 2. And then this will absolutely
supersede all that he has thought fit to observe here proemial to the instance
of the Iudaical free will offerings, or to reply to my three observations of
them.

Gods promulgate allowance of those free will offerings among the Jews,
without which he conceives it had been unlawful to the Jews to offer them, 1.
that allowance being no command, is an irrefragable proof that acts of
uncommanded worship may be allowed and accepted by God: and 2dly. it must be
some positive prohibition which is required to make any thing unlawful, the
want of a declared allowance will not do it; and 3ly. there are many evidences
under the New Testament of the like allowances for those things, which are not
under precept, yea, and sometimes of more then allowance, of Gods accepting and
rewarding of them.

desires to have it observed, those voluntary oblations were a part of Gods
worship, then, though I am not obliged to make good the parallel so far, as
that every rite and festival shall be a part of Gods worship also, yet
certainly I may conclude 1. that (...), Will Worship is such, and that is the
whole matter of our present debate; 2dly that the voluntary (I mean uncommanded
spontaneous) use of these rites etc. is now as lawful, as it would have been,
if they had been parts of worship, both by force of the argument, a majori ad
minus, (parts of worship are much more considerable, and more specially taken
care for by God then rites and other such circumstances, the reasons of which
may be temporary and uncertain, upon some new or accidental emergents, whilst
the reasons of performing, or instituting parts of Worship are most constant
and certain) and also because among the same Jews, as we have uncommanded
offerings, so we have uncommanded days of worship, both festival, the feast of
Purim, and of the Dedication of the altar, and fasting, that of the fourth and
fifth, and seventh and tenth month, in Zachary, and all these allowed by God
among them, at least approved, when used without any precedaneous special
allowance.

Diatribist, when he thinks it for his turn, says expressly) that a special
allowance of God was as good, and equivalent to a command, then, 1. So Gods
approbation will be also; and 2dly I see not how he can avoid the inference,
that then, it seems, these other festivals and fasts stood by as good an
authority as did the weekly Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, or the great
yearly Sabbath, the day of Expiation. But this by the way, what influence it
will have in this whole scheme of Phenomena, I leave him to consider.

Sect. 2. A first instance of uncommanded Pieties, David's intention to build
the Temple. Vindicated from the three answers of the Diatribist.
prelusory skirmishes, to adapt answers to the several instances, which I had
given of performances uncommanded, and yet accepted by God, and the first is
that of David, whose intention to build God a Temple, exceeding Gods command, 2 Samuel 7. 5. 7. was yet very acceptable to God, 1 King. 1. 18. and so appears to
be by Nathans message to him, in that place of Samuel. To this he has returned
three branches of answer, I shall take a brief view of them.

this is one of Bellarmines arguments for their religious vows, and is fully
answered by Chamier, 1. that it was in time of the law, when free will
offerings were allowed, but the times of the Gospel give no such allowance] is
already answered in the last Section, where the Leviticalnesse and so abolition
of that allowance of free will offerings was competently examined and confuted.
Yet ex abundanti I here add, that the allowance that was expressed in the law
belonging to sacrifices, did not expressly pertain to the building of Temples,
and if still by the analogy or parity of reason it may be extended to such
other things, which were not expressed in the allowance, and yet which were not
merely ceremonial, viz. to David's intention of building God an house, when God
had never expressed any such command or desire, I desire to hear some
satisfactory reason, why the parity of reason may not in like manner extend the
same allowance to uncommanded acts of piety under Christ, in case no such
allowance should appear to be expressed in the Gospel.

first answer therefore having so little of solidity in it, it was meet that it
should be introduced with a prooeme, which might cast a prejudice upon the
Argument, viz. that it was one of Bellarmines for religious vows, and fully
answered by Chamier. But 1. every Argument is not invalid which Bellarmine has
once used, I do not believe him so ill a manager, that a sharp weapon taken
into his hands would presently be blunted. 2dly. Belllarmines using it to
another purpose, that of religious vows, supposing it fully answered, as to
that, can have no influence on my using it to prove the lawfulness of
spontaneous performances of piety; It might not come home to such vows, and
yet might and does come home to resolutions or intentions.

Chamier and Bellarmine, if it concern only the business of such religious
vows, of building a Temple before Gods pleasure be known concerning it and the
like, then this Diatribist has not done well to enlarge Chamiers words to this
other so distant matter, and to vouch his authority both here and formerly, for
the abolition of free will offerings under the Gospel. It cannot be a good
cause, which needs such aides as this.

answer is, that God does not absolutely deny that he had commanded, but says
he had not commanded it to David, or any before him, not because he would not
have it done, but because not yet, and therefore foretells that Solomon should
do it. To this I answer 1. that here is very nice distinguishing betwixt
absolutely denying that he had commanded, and saying, he had not commanded. Can
conscience ever be satisfied of the sinfulness of voluntary oblations, or the
charitableness of judging a Church superstitious for using uncommanded rites,
upon such answers as these?

intricacy, and take a sunder this subtle fabric, I demand, did God ever
command David, or any governor before him to build him a Temple, or did he not?
If he shall say, he did; Then is that expressly repugnant to the plain words
of Nathan 2 Samuel 7. 5. Thus says the Lord, shall thou build me an house to
dwell in? the question implies, that he shall not, and v. 7. Spoke I a word
with any of the tribes of Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of
Cedar? and so forward to the same purpose; But if he shall acknowledge that God
never did thus command David or any before him to build him a Temple, then it
is clear, his intention to build was a free will offering, under no command of
Gods, and yet that intention accepted and commended by God, which was all I
undertook to conclude in this instance.

God says this not because he would not have it done, but because not yet etc.
is evidently nothing to his advantage, for still it is confessed God would not
have it done by David, which was all I contended, and then David's designing to
do it, was without command, and so a freewill offering; As for the prediction,
that Solomon should do it, 1. That is no intimation in the least of any command
to David; and 2. It followed David's resolution of doing it, and was God's
answer to David, v. 13. on occasion of his resolving to build God a Temple, v.
1, 2. and so that is only a farther evidence, that what David resolved to do,
was, without any the least command, only that which the dignity of the matter
suggested to a pious soul v. 1. 2. and accordingly was approved by Nathan, v.
3. Go do all that is in thy heart, and also by God, 1 Kin. 8. 18. though he
were not permitted to actuate this pious resolution.

answer is, that the house that David would build was not to be a part of
worship, but by accident, as the house of Obed Edom, or the place where David
settled the Arc, and our Churches now, only a circumstance of worship. I
answer, 1. So is a Festival now, a time, as that a place, and so equally a
circumstance of worship. And 2. It being already evident that voluntary
oblations were then lawful, and that those are parts of worship, it is visible
that this had equally been lawful, if it had been a part, as it is now, being
but a circumstance of worship.

intention of building this place was sure a pious intention, an act of
reverence and love to God, whose house it was designed to be, and so that being
uncommanded must needs be an (...), and so directly parallel to the (...), to
which I thought fit to compare it.

virtue in these answers save only to evidence his distrust in his (...), and
to assure us, that he could not heartily believe, that voluntary oblations were
now abolished under the New Testament, for if really they were, having rendered
that for his first answer, he could not have wanted or satisfied himself with
such evasions as these.

Sect. 3. A 2d instance, and that under the New Testament. Paul's taking no
hire from the Corinthians; This, no action of common life, nor yet a due debt.
(...) for using, 1 Cor. 7. 31. 1 Cor. 9. 17. explained. The authority of
Augustine, Chrysostom and Theophylact.
instance was that of St Paul, who might have received hire for his labor
among the Corinthians, but would not, and counts and calls this matter of
boasting. This, says he, is as little to the porpose, if not less, for it is
not in an action of worship, but an action of common life as himself speaks,
and it is also a mistake to call it a free will offering, when it was a due
^^bt.

said that this was in an action of common life, the Reader, if he will view
the place at the top of p. 17. will find that it is misreported, and truly I
should have been to blame to think the Apostle's preaching and officiating
among the Corinthians, in which this was, to have been an action of common
life; And I shall appeal to this Diatribist himself, whether he can really
doubt, whether an Apostle's exercising his office be not an act of worship, and
consequently any (but) circumstance thereof, a circumstance of worship, and
this over and above, an act of sacred alms and so of piety. And if it be so,
then this instance of St Paul's not receiving hire, was either an action or in
an action of worship, or both, and so surely a (...) or free will offering.

due debt (for which he cites Chamier) I shall make my appeal no farther then
to the text it self, and the notion, which the Fathers had of it.

Cor. 9. The preaching of the Gospel, says the Apostle, was committed to him,
and was under precept and so no free will offering of his; That is his meaning,
when he says, For if I do this willingly, v. 17. (...), as a volunteer (so
says In 1 Cor. 9.
Theophylact, (...) (...), If I had not been commissionated to preach, but had
done it of my self, If I did preach the Gospel without any command, and so
necessity to do so, if of my self, spontaneously, (...), I have the reward,
this would be rewardable in me, i. e. the very preaching would, without any
other honorable circumstance to inhanse it, (...), but if involuntarily, i. e.
(...), says Theophylact, if I am commissionated to preach, and so my preaching
be an act of obedience to a plain command, and so necessary, v. 16. (and woe to
me if I do it not) then all that can be said of me is, that (...), being
entrusted with a Stewardship, I discharge it, (...), it is manifest that I do
it not spontaneously, but I perform my Lords command, for this is the meaning
of involuntary; And so there is nothing of excellence in this, (...) this will
bring me in no reward, Upon which it follows, (...); What reward then shall be
to me? i. e. What in this whole matter shall bring me in any reward? To which
the Apostle answers, (...), that preaching the Gospel, I do it freely, without
making it chargeable to the auditors, (...), so that I make not use of (not as
we render it, abuse not) my power or liberty that I have in the Gospel, i. e.
the power of receiving maintenance from others, whether by hire from them to
whom he preached, (the labourer being worthy of that) or by way of aid from
other pious persons (such as Phoebe and the like, intimated by the (...), some
Christian women that attended and ministered to them v. 8.) without putting my
self to bodily labor to earn necessaries, v. 6.

reward, And although this was not observed by Cephas and other Apostles, v. 5.
yet sure Cephas is not conceived to have sinned thereby, but it is positively
said that it was lawful for all, v. 7. 11. 14. for as for Cephas and others,
though only Paul would not use it, v. 12. and accordingly both there, v. 15.
and after, 2 Cor. 11. 9, 10. he distinctly counts and calls this matter of
rejoicing or boasting, in respect to the reward which he was allowed to expect
from God for it.

voluntary act of piety in that Apostle toward his Corinthians, and so sure it
was conceived by St Augustine, Potuit Beatus Panlus ex Evangelio sibi victum
quarere; quod maluit operari, amplius erogabat, Blossed Paul might have had his
food for his preaching; that he chose rather to labor for it with his hands
was a greater liberality then he was bound to. And In Act. 21. Tom. 4. p. 860.
l. 12.
St Chrysostom, (...), he said not those words, Act. 20. 35. because it was
ill to receive, but because it was better not to receive. And Ibid. lin. 20.
again, that it is (...) the fourth and highest degree of munificence, (...),
for one that preaches, and has power to receive, yet not to receive. And on
the place to the Corinthians, (...), One was a praecept, the other a virtuous
action of his own choice, (...), above the Commandment, and (...), in this very
respect, (...), it has a plentiful reward; And again, of the word (...)
necessity, he says, that it pertains to the command by which it became
necessary (...) in opposition to the freedom in receiving (i. e. the power to
receive from the Corinthians, v. 12.) forementioned. So again. Theophylact,
(...), etc. preaching the Gospel is a precept to me, and so a debt from me,
and if I do it, there is no great matter of excellence in it, (...), but to
preach without charging them is the honor of my will, and in that respect there
is place of boasting, in this I may fitly rejoice.

difficulties or doubts in this matter, and to show how punctually home it
comes to the matter for which it was brought, to show not only the lawfulness
but acceptance of such uncommanded performances now under the Gospel, as well
as the (...) under the Law.

exception he offers against this, is that from v. 18. where what he does he
says was done that he abuse not his power in the Gospel; But says he, to
abuse power is to sin, etc. But that is already answered, that (...) signifies
to use to his own advantage, and not only to abuse; Thus in Lysias, (...), he
took and used them, and in Isocrates in Panegyr. (...) to make a seasonable use
of other men's actions, by way of example: in Plato, (...), Ep. 8. he has not
rightly used the gift. And so 1 Cor. 7. 31. (...), using the world as if they
used it not, so it must be rendered in proportion to what goes before, weep as
though they wept not, rejoice as though they rejoiced not, buy as though they
possessed not, and so the vulgar reads, tauquam non utantur, as if they used
not. And so Chrysostom on Act. 21. in the place even now cited, does thus
paraphrase it, (...), not to receive what he has power to receive, and so here
Theophylact expressly interprets it, (...), the word signifies simply to use;
(...), showing that they which received, sinned not a whit, which is the direct
contrary to the conclusion of this Diatribist from the same premisse; And so
Chrysostom also (...), by this expression he showed, that they which received
are not worthy of accusations, guilty of any fault; which they must be, if they
are bound by any special call, as the Diatribist cites from Chamier (but
against the whole contexture of the place) to do what they did. And so this may
suffice for the second Instance, so particular, and that in the New Testament.

Sect. 13. The third of Paul 's going up to Jerusalem: this under no precept.
No refusing to suffer, no retarding of the Gospel. The example of Christ and S.
Paul at other times, the testimony of Origin, and confession of the Diatribist.
instance was taken from Paul's going up to Jerusalem, Act. 21. when, being
told by a Prophet v. 11. that bonds expected him there, he might lawfully have
avoided that danger, and gone some other way, and been justified by Mat. 10.
23. and yet in this conjuncture, when he might have abstained, he would yet
needs go up, v. 13. and so that was his (...). Now to this, says he, the like
may be answered, viz. that it was no free will offering, for though by the
general allowance he might have fled, yet if he should have refused to suffer,
with the retarding of the Gospel, he had surely sinned.

To this answer the reply may be brief, that Paul's not going to Jerusalem at
that time, did in no wise imply either his refusing to suffer, or retarding the
Gospel: 1. The not going, when he knows, that if he goes, he shall suffer, is
not refusing to suffer, it is only the diverting at that time, the not casting
himself upon apparent danger, which we find sometimes exemplified by Christ,
Mat. 12. 15. upon knowledge of the Pharisees design to kill him, though sure
he never refused to suffer, but esteemed it a prime part of his mission.

Contra Cells.
Origens observation, (...) etc. Christ did not this for fear of death, i. e.
refusing, or being in the least degree unwilling to suffer, giving thereupon
this universal axiom, (...), It Is no degenerous thing to avoid dangers
prudently, and not to go among them.

Paul who was not obliged to run into danger here, any more then to go unto
the multitude, or into the Theater, Act. 19. 30, 31. both which when he was
willing to have done, he yet abstained from both, upon the entreaty of the
disciples, and the Asiarchae that were kind to him, And accordingly we know at
other times he made use of the same liberty, and industriously avoided the
persecutors hands, 2 Co. 11. 33.

not going up was no way the retarding the Gospel, only the reserving himself
to do Christ more service upon earth, in preaching the Gospel and confirming
the Churches; For of this there is no question, that the Gospel might be
advanced by his life, as well as by his death, and as it appears in his Epistle
to the Philippians, it might be better for the Christians committed to his
charge, that he should continue to live and labor among them, and accordingly
the pious Christians here besought him that he would not go up, and, I hope,
were not guilty of designing treachery to the Gospel in so doing, and so the
Disciples, v. 4. who had by the Spirit, i. e. by the gift of prophecy received
knowledge of his danger, advised him also. Not that I think the Spirit, either
by them, or by Agabut, dissuaded his going, for then it had been an act of
obedience to the Spirit, and so of duty not to go, but that the Spirit made
known his hazard, which there he should run, leaving it free to him to go, or
not to go, and that there were Spiritual reasons on both sides, and for not
going, over and above, motives prudential, in regard of his own safety, and no
command to despise these, nor consequently ground of necessity or obligation to
go up, only an intuition of some things that seemed to be more excellent,
exercising of many admirable graces, of courage, and constancy, and confession
of a persecuted Christ, every of which received luster from the certain
foresight of his danger, and these, it seems, weighed down the balance with
him against all the importunities of his friends, superadded to the contrary
motives, and accordingly he chose that which was most noble, most excellent,
most contrary to flesh and blood, made not use of that liberty which God had
given him, and in that respect this is directly parallel to the former, that of
refusing of hire, (...), he made not use of the power which he had, and so
still his (...) his voluntary, spontaneous oblation of himself even to
martyrdom, without any command or obligation for it at this time.

Origin shall conclude this in his Books against Celsus, (...). Though a
Christian fly (and yet that is more then not going up here) yet he flies not
for cowardice, but observing the commandment of his Master, (and then sure he
offends not, much less betrays his Master) keeps himself pure, that others
may be profited by his preservation, and so still this is not the betraying,
but rather advancing of the Gospel.

command to S. Paul or others, binding to be bound, beaten, stoned, is here
acknowledged by the Diatribist, and from thence I conclude, therefore it had
not been sin in him not to go up, when he knew he should be bound, for sin is a
breach or transgression of a law. This Diatribist therefore denying it to be a
free will offering, that he chose the danger, when he might have preferred his
safety, ought in all reason to have showed the ground which rendered his going
necessary, which having not attempted to do, but only in stead of it,
affirming, that if he had refused with the retarding of the Gospel, he had
surely sinned (which is equivalent to acknowledging that his bare not going to
Jerusalem had not been sin, in case it had not been (as certainly it might not
have been) to the retarding of the Gospel) it is certain there remains no
appearance of reason for his negation, nor consequenly of objection or
pretense, why this should not be a (...) as well as the former, or any thing
which is most spontaneous.

answer of some, that this was an instinct or motion of the Spirit, is not here
adhered to by the Diatribist, and therefore I shall not speak to that, being
also sure, that no such thing does here appear in the Story, and therefore
must not be supposed, without all proof.

Sect. 14. The fourth of the more liberal almesgiving. Sadduces and Asidaei.
Righteousness. Mercy. Paul 's advice without command. 2 Cor. 8. 2. The
Diatribists answer satisfied. Alms the Christians sacrifice in the offertory.
Allowance no command. A latitude of degrees in the middle rule. The Apostles
direction of giving as God has prospered. Of the circumstances of giving.
instance is in the almesgiving or works of mercy where the quotum (what
proportion of the whole every rich man should set apart for this purpose out of
his yearly revenue) being left free, and not particularly defined by God, there
is evidently place for voluntary oblations, above that which is under command
or necessary, as is set down undeniably in that Tract.. 32.

evidencing of it; the first from the very denotation of the names, Saducaei
and Asidaei or Esseni among the Jews: A proportion there was of charity and
liberality, which was by law required of all, and this was called their (...)
righteousness, and from hence I suppose the Sect of the Sadducees, called
Tsadikim, first derived their title, they that observed the whole
righteousness of the Law, did all that by the Law they were required to do,
and so transgrest not in this respect, But beside this, there was (...) that
which exceeded this necessary proportion (...) abundance of goodness or mercy,
as has formerly been said, and from thence the Esseni had their title (...)
Chasidim or Asidaei, and they were supposed to have their (...), their
over-measure, performances more then the Law exacted from them, and so that is
an example of what I now speak of, the free will performances of mercy.

Second shall be from S. Paul's language, 2 Cor. 8. 2. where speaking of the
Corinthians equalling the Macedonians in liberality to the poor Jews, he gives
them no command to do so, ((...), I speak not by way of precept, v. 8.) but
only his advice or opinion, his (...), just as in the case of single life, 1
Cor. 7. 25. (...), (...), I have no commandment of the Lord, but I give my
advice; And if the Corinthians did observe and practice according to this
advice, if they did give in proportion to the Macedonians, or (in case they did
not) yet still the Macedonians themselves, which certainly were thus
exemplarily liberal, and that (...) of their own accord, v. 3. without any
obligation of precept lying upon them, and yet farther (...), above what they
were well able to do, are again an instance of doing more in this kind, then
either all men at all times, or they at this, were obliged to have done, and so
this was a (...) in them.

instance of works of mercy, he first resolves, that it may be answered in
part, that it belongs not to the question, which is of worship, not of actions
of civil life.] But to this I reply, 1. that an answer in part is no
satisfactory answer, and so this professing to be no more, needs not be
considered. 2. that the parity of reason holds from one act of Christian
performance to another, that if in duties of charity between fellow Christians,
there may be an (...), somewhat above the commands of the law of Christ, there
may also by analogy be the same in matters of Christian worship, there being
neither reason nor revelation of Christ's will, not yet of his allowance, to one
more then to the other. But then 3dly This of works of mercy is generally
defined to be, in a Christian performance of it, an act of worship, set in the
front of such by Christ, Mat 6. 1. appointed to be exercised on the Lords day
(as a work of the day) 1 Cor. 16. 2. and accordingly interpreted by Christ to
be done to himself, Mat. 25. 40. and so by S. Paul styled (...) and (...), a
sacrifice, an acceptable sacrifice, Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16. And yet 4. to
remove all scruple, I wish that after the custom of the Primitive Apostolic
Church, this alms be presented to God, in the offertory at the Sacrament, and
then, as it will certainly be a branch of Christian worship, so my instance
shall be set particularly to that sort of alms, and it will certainly hold in
that, as exactly as in any other.

imperfect answer being not confided in, he is pleased to add more, 1. That
the question is not of a degree of an act of obedience, commanded, as
Almes-giving is, but of the act it self, if not commanded nor allowed in the
special nor in the general. But this answer cannot be of any manner of use to
the Diatribist. For 1. The question being certainly this, Whether Ceremonies
and Festivals in a Church are criminous, if they be not commanded by God; and
ceremonies and Festivals, being gestures and times, and so circumstances not
acts of worship, it is visible that the question is not only of the act it
self. 2. The reason being the same of circumstances and of degrees, of one
accessorie and of another, it follows, that if uncommanded degrees, may be
lawful, uncommanded circumstances must be lawful also. 3. Though almes-giving
in general be commanded, yet as long as the degrees be uncommanded, the
argument from the lawfulness of those degrees will hold to the justifying of
Ceremonies or Festivals, because as almes-giving is commanded, so praying to,
and praising of God is commanded also, and these ceremonies and Festivals are
as visibly circumstances of prayer and praising as these degrees are of
almes-giving. Nay 4. To take away all possibility that this answer should be
useful to him, the instance which I set of almesgiving is of an uncommanded
act, for supposing the utmost degree of the uncommanded mercy to be once
defined and determined, and suppose me to exceed that proportion in giving,
it is evident that that exceeding is an act first, and then an uncommanded act;
an act, for so is every exercise or work of mercy, and this giving is such an
exercise; and an uncommanded act, for so is all which is not under precept, and
so this is supposed to be, and herein it is perfectly answerable to the
free will offering among the Jews; Sacrifice or offering was a determined and
commanded duty, and every exercise of that, above what was commanded, was a
freewill oblation, and as such accepted by God; and so it is here.

cautious restriction added in the close of that answer, which pretends that
the question is of such acts, which as they are not commanded, so neither are
they allowed in special or in general, he must needs know that this is an
imposing on the reader; For 1. The question being of the lawfulness of
uncommanded acts, and allowance, whether general or special, being yet no
command, for no man is bound to do all that he is allowed to do; it is evident
that the acknowledging the lawfulness of allowed acts, as they must needs be
lawful, if they be allowed, is the acknowledging the lawfulness of some
uncommanded acts; for such are they which are no more then allowed.

Diatribist this Dilemma; Are these high but uncommanded degrees of mercy
allowed either in general or special now under the Gospel, or are they not? If
they are not, then this cautionary clause was very impertinently added, and my
instance, though it proceeded of degrees which are not thus allowed, yet
proceedings of degrees which are not commanded, was a valid instance. But if
they are allowed, as I suppose by his caution he will affirm, why then, it
seems, there is either general or special allowance still under the Gospel for
uncommanded acts, and then there is as much for them under Christ, as there was
under Moses for freewill offerings, and so the Leviticalness of the freewill
offerings consisted not in this, that they were thus allowed, and then this was
no part of that Levitical Law, nor consequently of that which was abolished, as
p. 91.
before he had affirmed, and so the Diatribist's whole scheme is demolished, or
rather fallen asunder of its own accord, as all infirm fabrics are apt to do.

answer to the instance, is but an attempt or two of the Diatribist's, out of
my words to gain some advantage, and thereby to conclude that there is some
middle rule that binds men so, as that whatsoever is more or less then that,
offends either by way of excess or defect.] But both this and all the other
artifices were exactly prevented in the manner of my setting of the instance,
of a proportion exceeding that, whatever it is, which can be defined our duty,
and yet not offending against any other engagement of the givers. For if that
which is done be more then that which we are any way bound to, it is impossible
it should transgress in the defect; and yet being no way forbidden to give so
much, not being guilty of neglecting any other part of duty incumbent on us,
it is on the other side as impossible that there should be any excess. Nay there
being, in the New Testament, a visible allowance, of selling all and giving to
the poor, of laying that all at the Apostles feet, and St Paul commending the
Macedonians who had been (...) (...), willingly liberal above their power, 1
Cor. 8. 3. and the like, our greatest liberalities, if they be prudently
ordered and seasanably placed (and there is no necessity, that he that is most
liberal or merciful should be a fool) are competently secured from offending on
that side.

Diatribist that from the possibility of falling into extremes, was willing to
collect a middle rule, and from thence a debt, should in any reason have
assigned that rule, and produced his authority for it in the New Testament, and
then the weakness of his answer would soon have been visible. For I should
immediately have assigned some proportion exceeding that middle, and made my
instance of that, and so have proceeded as formerly. But the truth is, such a
middle cannot be produced; And if it cannot, then is this an evident proof,
that there are no such middle points quos ultra citraque nequit consistere
rectum, the variation from which is always criminous; Nay if it were not simply
impossible, and yet cannot easily be done by every man for himself, or by the
teacher for all, then still it is evident that this obligation is not
universally revealed, and so no duty universally obligatorie; and then my
instance shall be set to such a person, to whom it is not obligatory.

Gospel for defining or determining the middle rule, which constitutes a debt.
The truth is, that this middle rule consists not in any indivisible point, but
in a latitude, wherein there are many degrees, but all within the rule of
allowance, though not all within the rule of precept, he that observes the duty
in any degree of the latitude, does well (for if not, then that was too great
parsimonie, and so no obsers vation but a breach of the rule) and he that goes
yet farther, but not beyond the latitude, does better, for so he must, unless
he go too far, which if he do, then he is prodigal, and that is a breach of the
rule again on the other side.

allowance not only for some one point, but for every degree within the
latitude, so every degree of that latitude does not bind every man, so as to
make that degree a debt or duty in that man; No nor the general rule of giving
according to God's prospering them (the only thing which the Diatribist has
still behind) For besides that that rule, 1 Cor. 16. 1. seems to have a
propriety to that particular time in consideration of the great distress and
famine in Judea, and consequently is not a rule for all other times; Besides
this, I say, it is manifest, that they which do observe that rule, i. e. offend
not in the defect against it, may yet be able to exceed the proportion, which
that rule strictly required, and then not only do well (as they must, if they
offend not against any other rule) but also do better, for such must all that
be, which is more then well, and yet degenerates not into ill.

observe that rule of giving as God has prospered him, to give the tenth of
his profits weekly or yearly, and suppose him to do well in so doing, i e. not
to offend against the rule, as it is set and meant by St Paul, or if the tenth
be not a fit proportion, let any other be assigned which is fit, and then
suppose that man yet to give more, so that still he offend not against any
other precept by excessive giving, and then you have the instance of the (...)
the uncommanded yet acceptable work of mercy, still the same, as formerly,
though somewhat more explicitly set, and so a more manifest evidence, that
nothing is by this Diatribist (I may say, can be) produced as a valid exception
or objection against it.

circumstances of time and place and persons in regard of the necessities of
the poor, the case which I set is not capable of those considerations, my
instance being not laid in any particular alms, terminated in a particular
person (though that also would admit of a latitude, I might give as much as
were my duty to that particular person, and then I might exceed that, give more
to him, and that would be my (...)) but in a weekly or yearly consecration or
setting apart of some more liberal proportion for pious and charitable uses,
not foreseeing particularly what they are, and withal not restraining my self
from giving more, if objects offer themselves to my charity, above what my
assignation will extend to. This setting the case evidently prevents all those
difficultis arising from circumstance of time and place and persons by
remaining absolutely loose and abstract-from all these, and thus the case was
(and is to be) set, and will not doubt to secure it self from all objections by
thismeans.

Sect. 6. The fifth instance vindicated. Circumstances of Prayer acknowledged
free. Difference between placing worship in gestures, etc. and pleasing God by
them. So in Festivals,
fifth instance was in secret prayer, 1. of the adjoining bodily worship to it,
any such as is most humble, and yet not under command, as prostration etc: 2.
of the frequence of it, seven times a day, with David, or some other proportion
above that which is by the evangelical law supposeable to be required of us. To
this he answers briefly, that Prayer indeed is a worship of God, but for the
manner, gestures, times frequency, they are not properly worship, but
circumstances, rites, etc. left to the liberty of every person, and so though
free, not parts of worship.

answer is very brief indeed, but needed not to have been larger, being in
these few words a yielding of the whole cause; For is it not evident, that if
gestures and times be free, then ceremonies and Festivals are so too, and if
they are, then are they lawful at once and uncommanded, for freedom
comprehends both those being free to be done and so lawful, free to be left
undone, and so uncommanded. I need add no more, sure, of that.

plain matter, and reduce it into an intricacy: And the way to do it is to
confound or shuffle together, these two things, placing the worship of God in
them, and pleasing God by them. But to this I answer, that these are two
distant things, and so in all reason to be severed. He that justifies or
defends the use of the humblest gestures in the service of God, and affirms
them to be more acceptable to God, then either the less humble gestures, or
those which have no humility at all in them, does not yet place worship in them
but willingly acknowledges that God may be worshipped without them.

defending of other Festivals annually commemorative of the birth and ascension
of Christ, etc. beside the weekly commemoration of the resurrection, and
affirms it to be acceptable to God that we observe these also, and that the
thankful pious observation thereof is more acceptable to God then the contrary
whether negligence or contumacy, does not yet place the worship of God in these
Festivals, but in the prayer and thanksgiving which are offered to God in those
Festivals. And the same will certainly hold in all other particulars, to which
either the Treatises arraigned by this Diatribist, or this defense have
attempted to extend it. Such are the frequent, daily, and constant hours of
prayer, either public, or private, supposing as still I do, that they do not
interfere with, or supplant any other duty, or run out all into formality, etc.

frequency of Prayer, he would fain persuade us that it is not a (...) (but a
debt) and to that end tells us first of pray continually, that the scope of it
is to command frequent prayer every day, and 2. that it has respect to the
frequent occasions and necessities of men every day, and so binds to pray as
often as need shall be, with ejaculatory prayers at least. And yet in the midst
of this, speaking of the particular number of 7 times a day, he is content to
acknowledge it true what I say, i. e. that it is no debt. And if so, then is
that all that I contend for, supposing a man to pray as often as that precept
[Pray continually] obliges, and withal to use ejaculatory prayers as need
shall be, and yet farther to have more frequent daily returns to the solemn
performance of that duty, then that precept is pretended to require, then still
this is under no precept, and yet no doubt acceptable, and so still as exact a
(...) as could be pitched on.

Sect. 7. Of the difference betwixt a precept and a grace. The proportionable
return to grace is in a latitude. The highest no excess. A possibility for
grace to be given in vain.
mistake in making the difference so great betwixt a precept and a grace, And
my setting down of that difference consisting of many degrees, of which each
superaddes to the former, and not any one single, but all taken together are a
perfect stating of it, the Reader is desired to review the whole matter. 39.
and by so doing he will soon find that every of the Diatribists objections to
the former degrees, was perfectly prevented and answered in the following, save
only the last of them, and therefore that only remains to be now examined.

objection is p. 103. that sure as grace it self, so any measure or degree of
grace being a talent also, requires a proportionable return to that degree, as
to whom more is given, of him is more required. But to this also my answer has
formerly been intimated, viz. that as in the middle rule of almes-giving there
is a latitude, so here in the proportionable return to any degree of grace,
this proportionable return is not so placed in any indivisible point, that as
he that comes short of that point offends in the defect, so the exceeding that
point in the least degree shall be an offense also, but, as I said, in a
latitude, wherein there may still be a variation, and yet all the degrees of
that within the latitude.

And therefore as it may be true of two men that have the same grace in specie,
that both may use it well, and yet one make better use of it then another, so
it is supposeable of the same degree of the same grace, for though to that
degree of grace, there be some degree also of return proportioned, that who so
fails in that, offends by defect, yet it does not follow from thence, that
whosoever exceeds that minimum quod sic, that least degree that was proportionable,
shall presently offend by way of excess, but indeed the contrary will be most
visible, that he that thus exceeds is more acceptable and more highly
rewardable.

ten talents entrusted to him to occupy withal, and having gained other ten,
was accepted and rewarded, had he been yet more industrious, and brought in his
Master more profit, gained eleven or twelve talents by those ten, it is not
imaginable but this would have been acceptable also to his Lord, and yet more
highly rewardable.

labored more abundantly then all the Apostles, and this by the grace of God
that was in him, and by some eminent measure of that grace, and supposing that
measure to have been no greater in him then it was either in John or Peter, yet
would this certainly have been accepted by God, and more richly rewarded, and
not used like the giants on Procustis his bed, all the exuberance cut off and
cast away, I mean required to come down to that lower degree of return, which
either of those other disciples did make, or to lose his reward of that higher
degree. And so this is full answer to all his exceptions against the difference
by me assigned between Precept and Grace.

incidental wonder at my expression when I said [it is the design of grace
only to strengthen and incline, which he that makes use of as he should, is
promised a reward] upon which he cries out, This is strange divinity, does God
give grace only to strengthen and incline, and leave men free to use it or not
to use it? so grace might be given in vain.] To this I briefly answer, 1. from
the words of Scripture, Heb. 12. 28. that men are exhorted to have grace, i. e.
I suppose to make use of it, as when to him that has, Christ promises it
shall be given, and he shall have abundance, it is evident it signifies, to him
that makes use of the grace which he has, and certainly that exhortation were
in vain, if the contrary were not possible, and so likewise when he which has
not (makes not due use of it) is threatened with the auferetur, and ejicietur,
taking away from him his talent, and casting him into utter darkness, sure it is
supposed possible, that some man may not make use of his talent, or else these
threatenings must be in vain, or men both deprived and cast out without any
demerit.

Apostle exhort, that we receive not the grace of God in vain, that we grieve
not, quench not (as elsewhere there is mention of resisting) the Spirit? Does
he not tell us of some that did abuse the grace of God unto wantonness? and
can none of these be done? Is it not possible, through our own corruption and
sinful negligence and default, to resist, to grieve, to quench the spirit, be
it of prayer, of faith, of charity etc. to abuse it to wantonness, or not to
use it through idleness? What then is the meaning of laying up the talent in
the napkin, that was so punished? Did not he receive the talent, the grace in
vain?

Divinity most demurely, if they be a while observed, need no other evidence to
confute them but what their own words will yield us they that leave nothing to
man's will, do yet often exhort and reprehend men, which must certainly be vain
and ridiculous, unless they that are exhorted be in some possibility by Gods
grace to do what they are exhorted to do, and they that are reprehended in the
same possibility to have done otherwise; so has it happened to this
Diatribist; He that just now thought the Divinity so strange, that grace might
be given in vain, adds in the very next words that S. Matthew says, take him
and cast him into utter darkness for not using his talent, which certainly is
that identical strange thing, with grace being given him in vain, as to all
fruit, or use he made of that grace. And in the very next words again he adds,
Is he not threatened with loss of his talent for not using it?

strange divinity here censured, may have been somewhat else, not my supposing
that it was left physically free or possible for man to use or not to use
grace, but that it was morally free, i. e. lawful, or that which included no
sin, and then Gods not giving of grace in vain, must be his not giving it so as
that it shall be no sin not to use it; And if that be his meaning, then, as his
expressions were very strange, much more then my divinity, so strange that I,
whose divinity it was, could not understand it, as it was thus disguised by
him, (for who would say that to give grace without any design of laying
obligation sub periculo animae to make use of it, were to give grace in vain?
Is there no other possible use of grace but to condemn them, and render them
unexcusable? this indeed is another branch of no very old Divinity, though
these days have not made it strange with some men) so I suppose I have already
given answer to this in the former part of this. and must not now so soon
repeat it.

grace bring obligation with it, and that to some return proportionable to that
grace, yet still this proportionable return consists in a latitude, which has
several degrees in it, and as the lowest of these are under obligation, so the
superior are not, but yet such as will be accepted and rewarded by God, to him
that arrives to them. And so much for that of the difference between the grace
and precept, which he thought would have yielded him so great advantage.

Sect. 8. My answer to a first head of objections vindicated. Prudence lost by
man's own sin recoverable by grace. The punishments of Adams sin are not our
faults. Perfection of innocence capable of degrees. So perfection of the
Judaical law, and of the Christian. So mercifulness to ability. (...) 2 Cor. 8.
3. Merciful as God is merciful belongs not to the degree. Gods righteousness
punishes not where there is no law. Intuition of reward in Christian
performances, no Popery. Proofs of this from Scripture, from the nature of
Hope, Faith, Gratitude. Not always prudent to undertake the highest.
Martyrdom no conceited Popish perfection, yet under no precept to all. S.
Hieroms words examined. Two notions of the word Perfection. Some perfection
possible in this life, and yet capable of growth. The law, as it signifies the
condition of the first Covenant, is not now in force with believers. Of Christ's
perfecting the law. Every man is not bound to do what is best. 1 Cor. 7. 3. 8.
(...) of moral good. The saying of Gregory explicated.
Tract of Will Worship, was by me added for the preventing of mistakes; To
which end three heads of objections I proposed, the first arising from the
obligation that prudence seems to lay upon us to do always that which is
fittest and best, the second from the general precept of loving the Lord with
all the heart, etc. the third from the seeming favourableness of our doctrine
to the Romanists works of supererogation, and to each of these I gave
particular answers, which must be viewed in that Tract from. 40. to the end.
And to these answers, what he now opposes, I shall now examine (...).

Every man is bound to be prudent to that degree of prudence which he lost by
sin. To this I answer, that if he speak of the man's own actual sins, whereby he
has any way infatuated himself, there is then truth in his affirmation; but
it is not appliable to the matter in hand, viz. to such an high degree of
prudence as now I speak of, for of that he may come short, without any degree
of actual sin as shall thus infatuate and deprive him of prudence; and besides,
speaking, as I do, of a pious, merciful, and so of a regenerate man, I may
suppose him by the inlightning wise Spirit of God returned to that state of
prudence from which his own actual sins may have degraded him, and in case he
be so, then, as he is as prudent as by this rule of the Diatribists thus
understood he is bound to be, so certainly he is yet capable of growing in
that, as in other graces, and so of being yet more prudent, and if he do so,
and thereby obey that exhortation of S. Peter's, Grow in grace and in the
knowledge -- he is still free from sin in this respect, though he have not yet
arrived to the highest degree of prudence that humane, but lapst nature is
capable of.

sin he means not actual but original sin, and so thinks that every man is
bound to be prudent to that degree of prudence that Adam lost by his fall, this
sure will be found to be a mistake; For this loss of Adams was a punishment of
Adams sin, and when it is inflicted by God on his posterity, must be looked on
as a punishment, and he that is punished cannot be obliged not to be punished, No
man is now obliged to be as prudent as Adam was in his integrity any more then
to be as healthy, i. e. in effect to be immortal, Nay supposing Adam to have
sinned and so to have transgrest the Law in that, it cannot be imagined, that
it is over and above that, a new or farther act of sin in him to be less
knowing, prudent, or healthy, then he was; all these, without any new act of
his will, nay contrary thereto, falling upon him by Gods decree or punitive
justice; and if it were not sin in Adam himself, then sure it cannot be such in
his posterity, and so a man now, one of his posterity, cannot be bound to that
degree of prudence which Adam once had, any more then to be born in the state
of innocence and perfection, when yet he is necessarily supposed to be born
after the image of the lapst imperfect Adam, which he could not be, if he were
born in this perfection.

every man is bound to be pious in the highest degree, proving it by this, that
the law requires perfection of holiness, and the Gospel (says the Doctor) yet
greater perfection, and every man is bound to be merciful to his ability, as
our heavenly Father is merciful (which sure is the highest degree) this is but
an heap of paralogismes, no one of the proofs belonging to the highest degree
of piety or mercy, which was the one thing which was to be inferred from them.

perfection of holiness which the law required, was but either sincere and
upright, or at the most but unsinning obedience, and neither of those includes
the highest degree of piety, which is possible.

law be meant the Covenant made with Adam in innocence, then indeed it is true
that the perfection which that required was unsinning obedience, and if Adam
had performed that, it is yet evident that he had been capable of higher degrees
of piety then that law required, there being in unsinning obedience, a
latitude, and so many degrees, of which the lowest denominates it unsinning,
and so perfect in that sense, and all the superior degrees are additions, and
to each of those highest the Law cannot be thought to bind when it is
satisfied with the lowest.

instances formerly given of frequency in prayer etc. wherein it is visible
that Adam in innocence might have exceeded any proportion which Gods law will
be supposed to have required of him; And in a word, if Adam had never sinned,
yet might his state have been a state of proficiency, by which it is evident
that the perfection required of him was not the highest degree of piety, for
then he had sinned by any lower, and so innocence and growth in him had been
incompetible; Beside, there is no reason to doubt but that Adam and his
posterity should have been rewarded according to their works, and so have been
capable of different degrees of rewards; in case they had continued in
innocence, which yet had been impossible if every man had been bound to be
pious in the highest degree, and had sinned as often as he did not arrive to it.

speculation; and by the law I rather suppose he meant the law of the Jews, and
then the perfection of holiness which that required must, I suppose, signify
truth and sincerity of holiness, such as was in Zac. Lu. 1. 6. and in respect
of which he was said to be just and blameless in all the Commandments of the
Lord -- Now it is as certain that this perfection is as capable of degrees also,
and that all that are thus perfect, are not yet so in the highest, or in the
same degree, It Is certain Zachary and Elizabeth were both thus perfect, but no
way probable that they were arrived just to the same degree of it, one might
very reasonably be deemed to excel the other.

Judaical Law by that which we have often cited out of the Law, that there was
one degree of mercy which was called (...) their righteousness, that to which
they were obliged by the Law; another styled (...) abundance or excellence of
goodness, (...), which the Law didnot command, sub periculo animae, require or
exact from them: This is so plain I need say no more of it.

Secondly, That greater perfection, which Christ required, is yet but a higher
degree of the same perfection, but not the highest that is possible; Suppose
there be eight degrees as of heat in nature, so of zeal or piety, or
perfection, and suppose a Jew required to have so many of them as would
denominate him perfect, i. e. at least five of them, and a Christian to have
more then a Jew, suppose six, yet it is visible that he that has all that is
required of a Christian, is yet capable of having more, then is so required,
viz. seven, and yet not to arrive to the highest that is possible, i. e. to the
8. degree

degree a latitude also, and in it as it were fractions, of each degree (and
all this subdivision little enough to bear proportion with the great difference
of the works of pious men here, or with the difference of the degrees of their
glory hereafter) and he that has the lowest fraction of the sixth degree, has
the sixth degree, but not in so high a measure, as he that attaineth to an
higher, viz. to the seventh degree, or to another fraction of the sixth, and so
it is evident in the hypothesis or application, that every Christian may be
obliged to exceed a Jew in piety, mercy etc. and yet nothing hinder but that
one Christian may exceed another in every of these.

Thirdly, Though every man be bound to be merciful to his ability, yet 1. That
mercifulness which is according to ability is not placed in any indivisible
point; Two men that have the same abilities, and the same opportunity and
occasion requiring mercy from them, may very lawfully give or be merciful one
more then another; For supposing any sum that in all those circumstances both
are bound to give, yet certainly one may lawfully exceed that sum give more
then he was thus obliged, and yet not do beyond his ability; and 2. In case he
do yet give more, even beyond his ability, i. e. deny himself lawful
enjoyments on purpose to enable himself for this higher liberality, yet sure
this will not be sinful in him, but on the contrary more acceptable and
commendable, as it was in the Macedonians; of whom St Paul testifies that they
were (...) thus liberal of their own accord beyond their power, and as such
are proposed for an example to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8. 3.

Lastly, The precept of being merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful, is
not (the Diatribist well knows) applicable to the degree of mercy which is in
God, for finite creatures cannot attain to that but only to the kind of it,
mercy to enemies as well as friends, and so could not with any color be
brought for a proof of his objection. And indeed after all this the Diatribist
has let fall a few words in the close of this 4th. which show he had no belief
in the force of it, For having set the case so as is the most for his advantage
that he could wish, all circumcumstances so concurring that a man should be
bound to give so much as will supply another wants, and to give less were
neither prudent nor pious, yet he dares not pronounce if an offense against
either of those virtues, to go beyond this, but breaks off abruptly with these
words [whatever it were to give more] From which in confidence of his I shall
not doubt to infer, that in that very case, so clothed with all those
circumstances, he cannot deny, but that as I am bound to supply his present
wants, so I may make provision also against his future necessities, and be far
from sinning, do that which is more acceptable to God in so doing.

next return to a 2d degree of my answer, is taken from his old Topic, of
virtues consisting in a middle point between two extremes, from which if it
swerve to either extreme it is a fault though not observed, perhaps observable
by men, yet justly punishable by a righteous God. But to this though much might
be said afresh, from the consideration of that righteousness of God, which does
not use to punish those facts which have no Law observable by man to forbid
them, but first shows men his will, and what is good, and then requires
obedience to it, yet because so much has already been said both to that of all
virtues being placed in the middle, and to the latitude and not indivisible
point of that middle, I shall not now give farther reply to that; Any more then
to the next branch of it, of prudence in our created nature, requiring to do
what was fittest, for to that I have spoken already in this.

prudence, one farther degree of objection, I foresaw, viz. that Prudence
knowing the greatest perfection to be most gloriously rewarded, would bind a
man to aspire to perfection, and not to content himself with any thing but the
best. Upon the first sight of these words the Diatribist is startled, and
disclaimes making any such objection. But to this I answer, that he well knows
I had no intelligence with him, and consequently could not divine his pleasure,
but as well as I could proposed all objections I foresaw possible from him, or
any man else, of the most different persuasions.

other which have more force in them (as all this while he has not proposed
any, but such as those from the 2d Commandment) I might expect that this my
service should not be so very ill interpreted and fastidiously cast off, with a
[we should not have framed such an objection.]

averted, was it seems, a leaven of Popery, in those words wherein I had
proposed the objection; And 1. If it were so indeed, I wonder, what error I had
commmitted, or why Papists may not be permitted to make objections, or how the
Diatribist came to have the monopoly of making them. But then 2. What was the
suspicious phrase which I had used? Why forsooth, that I mentioned glorious
rewarding, This, says he, seems at first sight to touch upon the mercenary and
meritorious way of Romanists.

stay, and behold this rarity. For 1. Is the mercenary way all one with the
Romanists doctrine of merits? If it be, it is to be feared, that David was a
Romanist, for certainly he affirms it of God, that he rewards every man
according to his works, even when he deprecates the mercy and free grace of
God, and makes this the prime evidence of it that he thus rewards men. Nay what
is Christ when he minds them of their great reward in heaven that suffer for
him, Mat. 5. 12. That give, and pray in secret, Mat. 6. 2. 5. of a prophets
reward and a righteous man's reward, Mat. 10. 41. and of St. Paul of such works
peculiarly as were not under precept, 1 Cor. 9. 18. and a multitude of the like
nature every where in the Scripture? Is not this reward, merces, and is not all
that obedience which is performed in intuition of the glory which shall be
revealed, this very mercenary way? and being so, is it presently the
meritorious way of the Romanists; Is there not merces ex pacto, reward by the
tenure of Christ's promise, as well as merit either of congruity or condignity;
and is it as unlawful to look at and expect the performance of Gods promise,
as to challenge heaven as the merit of our works?

Christ proposed his rewards on purpose to allure us to come unto him? and is
it not lawful for us to come that very way which God has called us? Is not
hope a Gospel grace, and such as sets us a purifying, 1 John 3. 3. and is not
the future reward the object of that hope, and so that which regularly sets a
Christian about his work? Nay is not that Faith which justifies, in this
Diatribist's opinion, the belief of the promises? and may not a Christian then
look at those promises, which yet he must believe?

he must first look on the commands of God, and beauty of holiness, and seek
that first for it self, and by and by, it is but carnal prudence, advising
only or first to look at the perfection of glory. But to this I answer, 1.
That the form of my objection was not such as supposed prudence to look either
only or first on glory, but on the greatest perfection (of virtue here) as the
way to the most glorious reward (hereafter) And therefore to insert the word
[onely] was that to which he had no kind of temptation.

priority of order, looking first on the reward, it is visible that I had not
given the least intimation of it, but contrariwise I had said distinctly, that
prudence would advise to aspire to perfection, and to the best, meaning
evidently the perfection of virtue (not of glory) to which the most glorious
reward was proportioned. And yet after all this, suppose I had spoken of some
man (in my objection) who looks first at the perfection of glory, and in order
to that last end, pursues virtue as the one way to it, could he justly say this
were carnal prudence in him and sinful?

beauty of holiness is a thing seldom discerned but by the experience and
practice of it, and in that case sure there is need of promises to excite and
attract to that practice (yea and of terrors to drive) and the Gospel makes use
of both these, and so does Faith, which is the Spiritual, not carnal prudence.
And indeed, if the beauty of holiness may first be looked on, and that is one
promise, but that a less perfect one and to be enjoyed in this life, then why
may not the (...) or eternal reward, which is also the beauty of holiness, and
that a perfect beauty, a purity from sin, as well as immunity from burdens and
miseries, a wiping away spots, as well as tears, be first looked on also.

Diatribist, whether gratitude in a regenerate man who has received from
Christ the great benefits of election and redemption and justification, may not
be allowed to incite and stir up duty? If it may, I demand again, whether the
reward decreed to him in his election be not looked on by him, and whether that
do not excite this gratitude? If it do, whether this be a carnal gratitude, and
the mercenary way of the Romanists?

expatiate on such digressions: The Diatribists divinity in this point is but
suitable to what formerly he gave us a taste of, in the passage of slavish
fear, and both together are exemplified to us by the woman that went about the
city with a firebrand in one hand, and a basin of water in the other, saying,
that one was to burn up heaven, and the other to quench the fire of hell, that
neither hope nor fear, promises, nor terrors might have the least influence on
her, but pure ethereal love do the whole work. And all that I shall need add,
is only this, that still there is an heaven and hell in Scripture (and all duty
is not quite rarefied and converted into this love) and many good Christians
there are, which make use of both these, and offend against no precept of
Christ in doing so.

looking at the promises in our obedience, not only in a Sermon on 1 Cor. 7. 1.
but more punctually in an addition to the Pract. Catech. now in the Press, p.
416. etc. and so shall not here any farther enlarge upon it.

objection are fitter for the Diatribist to combat with. I proceed therefore to
consider what replies he makes to them.

first answer, which was this, That though prudence does advise to this of
aspiring to perfection, yet does it not lay any command, so as not to obey it
will be presently sinful] (a thing which had often been proved formerly, by the
example of S. Paul's advises when he had no commands, for sure Prudence may well
imitate S. Paul herein, and do so too) To this I say, he replies by bare
affirming but not proving or offering the least proof for the contrary, only
when he mentions the perfection of virtue, he adds [required by the commands
of God] as if the highest degree of virtue were under command, which he knows
is the thing which through this whole debate is denied by me, and the proofs
and reasons of my denying it given at large, and then what a begging of the
question is it to affirm it here, without any tender or overture of probation?

second answer then, which was by considering the want of strength in some men,
which makes it not prudent in them to undertake the steep way of the greatest
perfection, founded in the words of Christ, He that can receive it, let him
receive it,] He replies by asking what perfection I mean which will be
dangerous to undertake as a steep way? that which is required in the
commandments of the Law and Gospel?] I answer, twere a contradiction and
madness in me, when I speak of perfection, which is not under command, to mean
that which is required in the commandments, It is certain I mean uncommanded
degrees of virtue, the undertaking those courses be it of virginity,
austerities, abundant labourings, Martyrdom it self, when either I am not
competently furnished with strength from God for the going through with them,
or have not any reason to persuade my self that I shall be so furnished. For
then, if indeed I have not strength, the very undertaking such heights may
prove treacherous and precipitious to me. And that this is my meaning, he at
last takes notice, and fills his margent with proofs of it, both from this, and
from another Tract, and when he has taken all that pains to find out my
meaning (which I profess to be it, and thought it had been obvious to any man
before) he fairly takes his leave of it again, has nothing to say to it, but
returns to that perfection of holiness which, says he, is the duty of all, and
all that I need return to him, is this, that if it be so, it is not that
perfection I speak of viz. virginity, etc. for that, I hope is not every man's
duty, but at at the utmost his, who can receive it.

even the precept of God may sometimes interpose and make it unlawful for us to
aspire to the most perfect state (meaning evidently virginity, martyrdom,
etc.) he says this is as strange (and again in the rear, by way of
exclamation, What strange divinity is this!) demanding whether Gods precepts
cross one another -- when he cannot but see that my whole discourse and process
is founded in the supposition of that evident truth, that these states of
perfection are not under any precept of Gods, and so that the precept which
shall cross the undertaking of them, is far from crossing any precept of God.

exclamation and wonderment, he is content at length, as he says, to hear me
speak and explain my self. And my explanation being by supposition of a duty of
our calling awaiting us on the one side, and an opportunity of martyrdom on
the other, and that exemplified by S. Cyprian's case, that then obedience is
better then the richest sacrifice] here he finds place for triumph and
ovation. By this it is evident, says he, he means not perfection of holiness
according to the commandments of God, but a conceited perfection of martyrdom,
as Papists do.

Tract of uncommanded acts, should not mean that perfection which is according
to (as that signifies required by) the Commandments of God, is too evident to
be any special (...) or discovery at this time now toward the conclusion of his
view of that Discourse. Of that therefore he has my free confession; But if by
perfection according to the Commandments he will allow me to mean (as the words
literally import) that sort and degree of perfection which the Commandments of
the Gospel allow of very well, though they require it not of every man, or lay
it under precept, then I shall not doubt to approve the perfection which I
instance in, viz. that of martyrdom, to be such, (unless when some discharge
of known duty or yet greater good calls us another way) and if this be the
doctrine of Papists, I hope yet that all Protestants are not therefore bound to
disclaim it, I never heard that our old English reformation, which I thought
had been sealed by the blood of many martyrs, had looked on martyrdom as a
conceited Popish perfection, And if this be the privilege of the present
deformation to exclude martyrdom out of the catalogue of virtues, as the
Martyrs and Saints out of our Calendars, if this Diatribist be now one of that
Triumphant Church, which has thrown all cross from their shoulders, and
disclaimed all pretensions to this conceited perfection, and resolved all to be
Papists which shall thus communicate with the sufferings of Christ, and observe
this conformity with the image of Gods son, Romans 8. I shall only tell him that
I shall be very well pleased to be guilty of this piece of Popery, and to
suffer from this sword of the tongue till God please to call me to any higher
trials: Mean while when the Apostle and the Church which has transcribed his
style, have used the phrase (...) being perfected by sufferings, and called
martyrdom (...) perfection, I cannot retract that style, what envy soever fall
on me for the using it.

Does God call all men at all times to martyrdom? Is there any command for all
men to be martyred etc.] is directly the evincing my assertion against himself,
for upon that very foundation it is that I superstruct, therefore Martyrdom
which is the highest degree of perfection, is not under any command, Quod erat
demonstrandum.

third answer, which was, that perfection here had degrees in it, and
consequently supposing men bound to be perfect, Mat. 5. 48. yet it follows not
that they are bound to the highest degree of perfection) his answer is, he will
grant this, and yet deny my voluntary oblations still,] But how can that be,
when that higher degree of perfection is supposed to be under no precept, and
so to be free, and so when arrived to, a voluntary oblation? But his grant, it
seems was only conditional, for it follows in his words [For we say there are
degrees of, or rather to perfection here, upon condition that he will grant
that every degree, even the highest, is required by the law of God, and what is
short of that highest is so far culpable] This condition I confess I cannot
perform, and so must lose the advantage of his grant, And truly to require it
of me is to grant my premises, and require me to renounce my conclusion, For
from that concession, that there are degrees in perfection, and there may be
perfection, where yet there is not the highest degree of perfection, it
infallibly follows, that the highest degree of perfection is not under
obligation of that precept which requires no more then that we be perfect, as
when the precept binds to no more then to be merciful in some degree, it is
evident that it binds not to be merciful in the highest degree, and
consequently that the highest degree of mercy shall be still free, under no
obligation of precept.

own sense in St Hieromes words, Charitas quae non potest augeri etc. citing
Ep. 62 for it. But this citation is sure mistaken, there is no such thing in
that Epistle. The place sure is in St Hieromes Epistle to St Augustine, where
he desires his sense of those words, Jam. 2. 10. He that Tom. 9. p. 159.
keeps the whole Law, and offends in one point, is guilty of all. On which
occasion he discourses a great while, how one virtue may be found in them
which yet are guilty of other sins, and so from one thing to another, not by
way of defining, but by raising of difficulties to provoke St Augustines
solution of them.

virtue, that it is the loving of that which is to be loved, and is in some
greater, in some less, in some none at all, and then adds, Plenissima vero,
quae jam non possit augeri, quamdiu homo hic vivit, est in nemine; quamdiu
autem augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam aebet, ex vitio est. Ex
quo vitio non est justus in terra qui faciat bonum, and non peccet, etc. But
the most full virtue, such as cannot be increased, is in no man as long as he
lives here, But as long as it may be increased, that which is less then it
ought to be, is faulty, whereby it is that the Scripture says that there is
not a just man on earth, which does good and sins not; and, in thy sight
shall no man living be justified; and, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves etc.

view of the place it is evident that the virtue, which, on occasion of the
place in St James, he speaks of, being an universal, impartial observation of
the whole Law, and consequently every failing in that a vice (for to that all
the proofs belong, that there is no man but sins sometimes) there is no
reason to extend his speech any farther then to this, and then it will in no
wise be appliable to our business, which is only of the degrees of this or
that particular virtue, which it is certain that man may have, who yet is
guilty of some sin in other particulars.

fails of any part of his duty, is therein faulty, or this is ex vitio in him,
and if of that only S Hieromes words [quamdiu augeri potest] be understood (as
it is most reasonable they should, whether we judge by the occasion, or the
proofs of his speech, or by the express words, quod minus est quam debet ex
vitio est, that which is less then it ought, i. e. less then he is bound to do,
is faulty) then as I fully consent to the truth of them, so when that is
granted, no man can hence infer, therefore every regular act of obedience which
comes short of the highest degree of perfection, is a sin; for beside many
other inconveniences formerly noted, this fresh one will be observable from St
Hieromes own words, that then every act of virtue in this life is a sin, for as
for that fullest perfection which cannot be increased, the beginning of this
testimony acknowlegeth, that it is not to be found in any man in this life.

Perfection is capable of two notions, either it may signify the perfect
obedience of never sinning, and of this only St Hierome speaks, both when he
says it is not attained in this life, and when he adds, that whatsoever is
less then this is sinful. Or else it may signify any higher degree of
exercise of any particular virtue, chastity, mercy, fortitude, etc. And of this
only it is that I speak (and St Hierome in the words cited from him appears
not ever to have thought of it) and to this only my affirmation belongs, that
there are degrees in that perfection, and that he that has attained to any of
those degrees, sins not against Christ's precept of perfection, though he was
not arrived to the highest degree.

the Doctor goes on, If there be any perfection attainable in this life, twill
be capable of degrees and growth also] and then he adds, whether he be of
their mind who hold perfection possible in this life, I cannot say, but this I
can say, he speaks contradictions, for perfection admits of no degrees or
growth.

Reader may be abused, if I do not give him a true narration of my words in
that place,. 46. Having mentioned one interpretation of the perfection which
Christ commands us to aspire to, Mat. 5. 48. viz. that it signifies
mercifulness, Lu. 6. 36. I add, if that sense will not be admitted, yet if it
be any perfection acquirable in this life, twill be capable of degrees and
growth also. Now by a slight change of [if it be] into [if there be] this sense
is quite altered and made liable to suspicion, that I teach perfection (I
suppose he must mean the unsinning perfection spoken of by St Hierome) possible
in this life, and to the charge of speaking evident contradictions, that I can
talk of growth in such perfection.

justice in this, I hope he will be sensible of it. The perfection which I
there speak of, be it love and mercy to enemies, or be it any other Christian
duty set under precept by Christ, is certainly in some degree attainable in
this life by them which have sinned, and do still sin through infirmity, in
other things, and perhaps in some circumstances of this, and then I hope there
can be no heresy in this, to say that by the grace of Christ one may obey such
a precept of Christ's, love his enemies etc. when St Paul professes unlimitedly
he can do all things through Christ that strengthened him.

contradiction can there be in affirming that in this virtue of loving enemies,
of mercy etc. there are degrees and consequently possibility of growth? Of
mercy it has often been exemplified that it is so, and whatever particular
virtue it be that can be phansied to be meant by Christ by (...) perfection, I
doubt not but it will be as visible, when that virtue is named. But the
Diatribist attempts nothing that way, only mistakes perfection for some other
thing, either for a sinless perfection, or for such a state as cannot be
increased, knowing well enough that that is not attainable in this life, and
certainly is not the matter of Christ's precept, Mat. 5. and as certainly is
not the perfection that there I speak of.

if the perfection (spoken of in the objection) be not acquirable in this life,
it is certainly not under Evangelical precept now, citing that of Mat. 11. of
Christ's light and supportable burden, and his commands not grievous, i. e.
possible to be performed by us] falls under his very sharp discipline, This,
says he, is strong and strange confidence.

bear with, but thank him for it; I shall only examine the reasons which he
offers for thus accusing me. They are three, First, because the Law requires
perfect obedience of Christians, as the rule of eternal righteousness, adding
that all orthodox Divines have maintained this against the Church of Rome,
Only the Doctor is of the Church of Romes mind, and charges the Law with
imperfection, citing it from Pract: Cat: p. 94.

misadventures, I shall but name them, 1. That the Law requires perfect
obedience of Christians, meaning by that the Mosaical Law, for that only, be
knows, it is, which the Doctor charge with imperfection. The Law indeed
sometimes signifies the Covenant of exact unsinning obedience, and of that Law
or that Covenant it is most true that it required perfect, as that signifies
unsinning obedience. But then 1. This was the first Covenant, and is not now in
force with faithful penitent Christians, who are not under this Law but under
grace, i. e. under a 2d Covenant which requires not innocence but repentance,
sincere, not perfect obedience: And therefore 2dly. It cannot truly be said
that this Law requires this perfect obedience of Christians, nor consequently
that it is the rule of Evangelicall righteousness, i. e. of that righteousness
by which believers are now said to be justified: I shall not insist on the
proving of this here, because it is but a digression in this place, and is
abundantly explicated elsewhere, in the Pract: Cat. concerning the two
Covenants.

Law's requiring perfect obedience of Christians, to be one of the Doctrines
maintained by the orthodox against the Church of Rome, when it is indeed but a
contention of words, that the Diatribist (it seems) and some others have
espoused against I know not what adversary.

Doctors charging the Law with imperfection is a thing wherein he complies with
the Church of Rome, when it is evident in that place of the Catech: that 1. The
words of Christ that he came, (...) to fill up the vacuities of the Mosaical
Law, and 2. The many express examples of his doing so, in that 5t. of Mat. his
additions to the Law in so many particulars introduced with [It was said of old
-- But I say unto you] and lastly, the uniforme suffrage of all antiquity
joining in this interpretation of Christ's words, was the ground whereon I built
my affirmation, and if in this the Church of Rome were of my mind (as I do not
find it is, making some of those additions, Mat. 5. counsels, not all of them
precepts) I should never disclaim the doctrine upon that account, any more then
the articles of the Creed, which the Church of Rome is acknowledged to believe
with us.

proof is, that the Gospel calls for the perfection of the law, Be ye perfect as
he is perfect, Mat. 5. and be ye holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. I
answer, 1. this proves not his proposition, viz. that it was strong and strange
confidence in me, to say, that if the perfection be not acquirable in this
life, it is not now under Evangelical precept, Acquirable perfection may be (and
some degree of it is) under precept, but unacquirable perfection is not.
Christ's easy yoke is not now made up to us of impossible precepts. 2dly. That
perfection in one of the places mentioned by him, appears to be mercifulness,
and the holiness in the other, that of S. Peter being opposed (...), to the
former lusts, when they were in ignorance, respects either that sort of purity
particularly, or however that more universal purity, which is now more severely
required of all Christians, in an higher degree, then it had been under the
Jewish economy; and of either of these I never doubted, but they are now under
Evangelical precept. But then still that is nothing to the higher degrees of
those, or other Christian virtues, which all this while we speak of. No more is
that which follows from the Doctor himself, saying that Christ came to perfect
the Law. So he might do, and yet leave some degrees of mercy etc. free and not
under precept, as has often been said.

perfection which Christ came to add is still the perfection of the Law, It is
true, it was the requiring of what the law had not required, and so the adding
more to it, and perfecting it as a law, requiring all that ever shall be
required of men by law, or precept. But this concludes nothing against higher
degrees of this very perfection, being still left free, and not under law, the
only thing which now he contends against.

proof is taken from the account I give in the Pract. Cat. p. 95. of the
lightness and supportableness of Christ's burden, 1. in taking off the burden
of unprofitable ceremonies, 2. in taking away the damning power of every least
sin, etc. 3. in giving greater strength. From whence he concludes, It was not
then, that he required not perfect holiness under the Gospel. I answer 1.
(...), that this conclusion can with no Logic be thus deduced being a
testimonio negative. It is very possible there might be other reasons, beside
those I there named, My mention of three being sufficient for the matter then
in hand, did no way prejudge or exclude more. But then 2. I grant that this now
mentioned, neither was, nor well could have been any part of my account of the
easiness and supportableness of Christ's Evangelical burden, above that legal
of Moses, because it was common both to the law of Moses and of Christ, that
there were some degrees of perfection, which were by neither of them under
precept, Moses's law had place for free will offerings, as well as Christ's, nay
Christ's has put some things under precept, as I conceive, which were not under
precept by Moses's law, in this one respect there lies more weight on a
Christian then did formerly on a Jew, but that is abundantly recompensed by
other respects, which this is not a season to enlarge upon.

objections in this matter, it will I hope be consequent, that he has not yet
demonstrated the truth of that assertion, which from what he has said he
assumes to be apparently and visibly true, viz. that every man is bound to do
that which is best, because the law and the Gospel also require perfection of
obedience in every commandment; For to this I have often replied, that both of
them require perfect obedience to all, that either of them requires, which
notwithstanding there are still (...) under both, which no precept either of
law or Gospel requires, or puts under necessity of obligation to any.

falseness of that proposition, that every man is bound to do that which is
best, I had formerly evidenced by two means, 1. the words of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 7. 38. he that marries does well, but he that marries not does better, 2.
by this, that the best being a superlative, supposes the positive, which is
lower then that, to be yet good, etc.

answer; To the first, that well and better there, do not refer to moral
goodness but worldly good, for the preventing of troubles in those afflicted
and persecuting times. But this answer will be soon shaken asunder, 1. by
considering that as the well and better do certainly belong to the same kind of
good, so it is visible that the well cannot belong to the worldly but moral
good, and then consequently the better must do so too. That the (...), does
well, belongs to moral goodness, is evident by v. 28. where advising them that
are loosed from marriage, not to mary, he adds (...), but and if, or, though
thou do mary, thou sinnest not, and if the virgin mary, she sins not, What
can be more clear then that the doing well is not sinning, and sure that is a
moral, not only a worldly good.

Apostle is as express that the marying is quite contrary to the worldly good,
for having said, that they that mary sin not, he adds immediately v. 28.
(...), but such shall have trouble to the flesh, and what can be more contrary
to worldly good? But yet farther 3. the Apostle sets down the advantages of not
marrying v. 32. the unmarried cares for the things of the Lord how he may
please the Lord and the unmaried woman in like manner that she may be holy both
in body and spirit v. 34. whereas the married man cares for the things of the
world how he may please his wife, and the woman in like manner how she may
please her husband; And then are not these spiritual (not barely worldly)
advantages, and is not the holiness of both body and spirit, and the caring for
the things of the Lord, a greater moral or rather spiritual good, then the bare
caring for the things of the world, to please a yoke fellow? I hope I need say
no more on this; nor sure on that which he next adds, that if the person have
not the gift of continence, it is then not only good but necessary for him to
mary, for he knows that as S. Paul spoke of him that had that gift, when he
says he does better, so I that only cited S. Paul's words, must be resolved to
speak also. But as long as of him that has that gift, i. e. has power of his
own will, it is true, that if he mary, he does well, i. e. sins not, but yet
does better if he do not mary, it is evident that I have all that I pretend to,
and certainly this is given me by S. Paul's words.

argument that the best being superlative, supposes the positive to be good, he
replies [I hope the Doctor will not deny but works done by Faith are good, and
yet that they are not perfect in this life, i. e. come short of what we are
bound to by the Gospel, will he now say they are evil?] I answer, I will not
say they are evil, but they are good though not perfect from all possible
mixture of sin. And what now he can gain from this his question thus answered
by me, as he expects I should answer it, it will not be easy for any man to
imagine, For sure this is the confirming not the disproving of my argument, For
by his own setting it, it is manifest, that those things are not evil, which
yet are capable of a greater perfection, and then the perfection being the
superlative the positive is supposed to be good, and not evil, and yet evil it
must have been, if every thing which is inferior to the most perfect, were
sin, or if the highest perfection were under Precept.

Gregory, that all humane justice is convinced to be injustice, if it be
strictly judged] is 1. contrary to his former question to me [will he now say
they are evil?] whatsoever the Doctor think, the Diatribist it seems will say
they are convinced to be injustice, and that, I must suppose, is evil, (and is
not this great inconstancy in him?) 2. It is of no force against my
pretensions, for when I said, such a thing is good, and another best, I never
meant that either of them is not convincible by Gods strict judgment to have
some mixture of evil, but that the evil which is or may be adherent to it in
some other respect (as of all humane actions is acknowledged) being pardoned by
God in Christ, the lower degree being good, i. e. an act of obedience to
Christ's command, that which is higher and so better then that, may yet be
somewhat which he has not commanded, and so still a (...) in a Christian. And
thus much on occasion of the several degrees, and passages of my answer to the
first objection, which I foresaw, that which was taken from the consideration
of what Prudence might advise and seem to require of us, which has proved a
business of some length.

Sect. 9. My answer to a second sort of objection, vindicated. Loving God with
all the heart. Adam's love in innocence capable of degrees. Perfect love that
casts out fear, to be had in this life. Christ more intense in prayer at one
time then another, an argument that all is not sin that is less then the
highest.
objection from those large comprehensive words, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, etc. I answered thus, that that phrase [with all etc.]
denoted only two things, 1. The sincerity of this Love of God, as opposed to
partial, divided love, (to which I now add for farther explication, that what
we do according to the precepts of Gods Law, we do out of love toward God, not
hypocritically, or as by constraint; and 2. not admitting any thing else into
competition with him, this sincere love of God, mean while being capable of
degrees, so that it is very possible for two men to love God with all the
heart, and yet one to love him more intensely then another (as was exemplified
among the very Angels) nay for the same person, which so loves him, to love
him, and express that love more intensely at one time then another, as appeared
by the example of Christ, Lu. 22. 44.

these two are there required, but not only these, but perfect love, such as
casts out fear, 1 John 4. 18. such as was in Adam in innocence; To which I need
say no more then what has formerly been said, that even that perfect love
which was in Adam in innocence, consisted not in any indivisible point, but had
a latitude, and consequently several degrees of that perfect love. But then
withal it must be remembered that the perfect love, 1 John 4. 18. is not all
one with that which Adam had in innocence, for that he confesses is not
acquirable in this life, whereas the love in St John that casts out fear is in
every Confessor, and Martyr for Christ, and is elsewhere styled, (...), love of
Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. in the notion wherein perfection is all one
with sincerity; But then this also is capable of degrees, one Martyr or
Confessor may be more zealous, and express more intense and fervent love, then
another does.

Hierome, was in one part answered before, and must not now be repeated; As for
the other, it may answer it self, one part being directly contrary, if not
contradictory to the other; For when he has admitted and allowed of the
supposition, that sincere love is capable of degrees either in one man at
several times, or in two men at the same time, and so both obey the precept,
yet, says he, those degrees argue love not to be perfect, and so far faulty in
vitio,] But sure if those of whom the supposition is made, do both obey the
precept, then they do not offend against it; if they do not offend against it,
then is not this faulty, or in vitio, for sure every fault or vice must be a
transgression of the Law. The evidence of the matter may, it seems, extort some
few words of truth from a gainsayer, though to acknowledge it entirely and
constantly, it must not be expected.

argument from what we read concerning Christ himself, that he was more intense
in prayer at one time then another, when yet the lower degree was sure no sin;
and prepares to make answer to it, viz. that Christ was above the Law, and did
more then the Law required, but men fall short many degrees of what is required.

answer is nothing to the matter now in hand, for the evidencing of which that
example of Christ was brought by me, viz. that sincere love is capable of
degrees, This was first showed in several men, and in the same man at several
times, in the several ranks of Angels, and at last in Christ himself, more
ardent in one act of prayer then in another; wherein what is affirmed of Christ
is common to Angels and men, and so still may be though he differ from them in
other things, to wit, that he is perfect and never sins, though men be
imperfect and faulty, the best of them, For still it must be remembered, that it
is not the sinless perfection we speak of when we say it consists in a
latitude, and has degrees, but sincerity of this or that virtue, expressed in
this or that performance, and as this, though it excludes not all mixture of
sin in the suppositum (the man in whom it is) yet may by the grace of God in
Christ exclude it in this or that act (for it is certain that I may in an act
of mercy, give as much as any Law obliges me to give, and so not sin in giving
too little) so to this, his, answer belongs not at all, nor shows any
difference or reason why such sincerity may not in any pious Christian, be
capable of degrees, as well as in Christ himself, and the lowest of them be
sinless, and all the Superior, voluntary oblations, more then the strict Law
required of us.

ejaculation, pray to God sincerely and ardently, to avert an evil from him, I
shall ask, whether he commit any sin in respect of ardency? If it be answered,
yes, he does, in case it be possible for him, or any man else, or Adam in
Paradise, to pray more ardently, I shall then hope I shall have refuted his
answer, by the example of Christ, who when he prayed ardently, did not sin,
though he fell short of that higher degree, which after that we find he used.

alone he adds in this matter, that the example of Christ holds forth, that
great pressures call for inlargements of affections, not as voluntary
oblations, but as duties. I shall only ask whether they did so call for that
very degree of enlargement, which Christ at last used, If it did not, then it
seems this addition was little to the purpose, If he shall say it did, then how
could he even now say, that Christ did supererogate in this particular, and
that it was not appliable to men.

Sect. 10. My answer to the last objection, of Supererogation. A place in St
Cyprian vindicated from the Romanists reading. Imputare. An act of mercy in God
that our works are rewarded. Supererogation wherein it consists. The
Diatribist's etymology of the word disproved. Erogare. Erogatio. The
Diatribists ways of Supererogating. Pride, Glorying. More reward for eminent
uncommanded excellencies superadded to duty. The Diatribists charity, and
confession of us. His censure of the Bishops unjust.
answer to the last objection freeing this doctrine of voluntary oblations, or
of doing somewhat which is free and uncommanded, from all lyableness to the
suspicion of being favorable to the doctrine of Supererogation among the
Romanists, which is founded in their opinion that a man may by these
performances make satisfaction for his own and other men's sins, which I that no
way believe or acknowledge, cannot be charged as guilty of that opinion.

evidence,. 51, 52, 53. I shall here add, and apply one considerable saying of
St Cyprian's in the Epistle ad Lapsos, telling them that Qui in Ecclesia semper
gloriosi and granditer operati sunt, opus suum Domino nunquam imputaverunt,
Those which have through all times wrought gloriously and heroically in the
Church, yet never thought their Master beholden to them. That is the meaning of
imputare to reckon their layings out and charge him with whom they reckon to be
in their debt. For want of understanding of which (or from some worse
principle) the latter edition of St Cyprian by Pamelius leaves out the word
[nunquam, never] which the old Basil edition does retain, and the sense
evidently requires in that place.

full sense in this matter) and by what is already said in that treatise, that
objection is wholly superseded, for I do not pretend that God becomes a debtor
to any man for any of his most bountiful spontaneous oblations, but that it is
an act of infinite mercy in God, as the Psalmist says, that any the most
excellent work of ours is rewardable with him. And that partly because we being
sinners, the utmost we can ever do, can never make satisfaction for our sins,
and partly because whatsoever degree of perfection either by doing or suffering
we can aspire to, 1. It is still a work of God's good grace and strength in us,
(for what have thou which thou have not received? and then what place for
glorying?) and 2. It is in no degree meet or worthy to be compared, bears no
proportion to the glory which shall be revealed, and partly again, because God
wants neither our obedience, nor our richest performances, we only are like to
receive the benefit of them, and so we only are debtors to our selves, and can
claim nothing from him, save only on the account of mere mercy.

objects, is that this distinction betwixt doing more then is commanded, and
doing something which is not commanded, is new, and sometimes coincident for he
(says he) that does somewhat not commanded, does also somewhat more then is
commanded. And because he cannot but know my notion there of doing something
more, viz. doing all, and and more then all, he therefore presses it farther,
that in this sense the Romanists in their supererogation do not suppose that
he which supererogates has done all that is commanded him.

Romanist is not so gross, as to affirm him that supererogates not to have
sinned, And therefore I never defined that to be the Romanists doctrine, or
that our doctrine was by that one distinction, differenced from theirs, but
having by way of foundation laid that distinction (as will appear to any that
shall view the place. 51.) I make the notion of supererogation to be founded in
one of these two, either in having paid all that is due (i. e. having never
sinned) or 2. (having been a debtor, i. e. a sinner) in paying that debt by
satisfaction, And the latter of these two it was, and not the former, wherein I
placed the Romanists opinion, and wherein I conceived the doctrine of free will
oblations under the Gospel to differ from their doctrine of supererogating, as
appears. 52. And this he sees, and sets down in his next words, It was but the
multiplying of my lines, and his own, that he could not earlier take notice of
it.

prooeme he will proceed; that still I cannot free my doctrine from some kind
of supererogation, for, says he, such works have not their denomination from
satisfaction made by them, but they are therefore called satisfactions, because
they are something more then the law required, supererogare is as much as super
quod erogavit lex.

bottom all this Diatribists structure is built on, the extraordinary
etymology which his fancy, or somewhat else has suggested to him, of the word
supererogation, which if it should hold, I (after all this debate thus far
prolonged) am obliged to yield the cause to the Diatribist, thus far at
least, that I were a friend to one word made use of by the Romanists. But I am
so well assured of this Diatribists failings in this kind, by the experience of
his super statutum, from whence he would have superstition deduced (and lost
his chief hold, when that origination of the word was wrested from him) that I
may be allowed again to question his skill in that faculty. That erogare
signifies to lay out (and not to require) is evident enough, erogare pecuniam
in classem, to lay out money upon the navy, is Cicero's phrase, pro Flacco,
erogare pecunias ex aerario, in his Oration in Vatinium, erogare in oleum, in
Pliny Ep. 240. joined with confer in operibus balnei, unde in eos sumptus
pecunia erogaretur, in Livie l. 1. and the substantive erogatio for expending
or laying out, erogatio pecuniae in Cicero ad Atticum l. 15. 32. Tot impendiis,
tot erogationibus, says Pliny in his Panegyric, and in Suetonius it is
explained by largitio, and profusio pecuniarum.

supererogo is to lay out all and more, and from the opinion of pious men's
doing so, the Romanists have clearly raised their treasure of the Church, as
the bank into which these payments are made. I could not have expected that
there should be any question made of this; As it is, I hope this will satisfy
it, And then alas what a remote, unhappy etymology has this Diatribist fallen
on, supererogare is as much as super quod erogavit lex! Had he been pleased to
have englished this latin, the mistake had been too visible, and therefore
that was more prudently omitted; For what can erogavit signify in that period
of his? Required? (so he renders it in the following period, works, says he,
may be said supererogare, when men think they have done more then the law
required) But 1. that is in no wise the meaning of the word, as has already
been manifested; 2. whatsoever it shall be resolved to signify, yet in this
way of etymology, the erogavit belongs to the law, whereas we know in the use
of the word among all Romish writers it is the man or the works (not the law)
which erogates, i. e. lays out his money, pains, life, etc. and proportionably
which supererogates. 3. (and which is yet more gross) the super must in this
etymology be assigned to the man, as the erogating to the law, and so the one
word be divided betwixt them, the law must be said to erogate, the man to
super, and what is that, either nothing, or else to supererogate, and yet that
he cannot do in any sense wherein the law could be said to erogate. Thus
(beyond all either reason or grammar) incongruous, and inconsistent is this
etymology.

nature of the word, all that remains of his exercitation, being built upon
this mistake, is perfectly superseded, yet I shall attend him (...).

In many respects, says he, such works may be said to supererogate, 1. with
respect to the law it self, when men think they have done more then the law
required, which makes them not supererogatory, but derogatory from the
perfection of the law of God, and lays imperfection upon it (as the Doctor has
plainly done above) To this I answer, 1. that by his own confession these which
he now mentions, are not supererogatory works, but the contrary, why then does
he set them as a first instance of the many respects in which such works may be
said to supererogate? 2. When he knows, that that treatise of mine, on which
he exercises his discipline, does not defend the thinking a man's self to do
more then the law requires, but precisely (in distinction from that) to do
somewhat which the law does not require, why should he still confound things
thus severed, and lay that to my charge which he knows I am not guilty of? 3.
There is no truth in his suggestion, that this doctrine as it is taught by me,
is derogatory to, or lays imperfection to the law of God.

law of God, he mean the Mosaical law, then though from Christ's own words I
conclude that he came to fill it up, or perfect it, and so that it had in it
before vacuities and imperfections, yet the doctrine of the treatise of
Will Worship, is no way founded or concerned in that; As for the law of Christ,
under which, as well as under the law of the Jews, some things are left free
and uncommanded (and consequently I affirm it possible for a Christian to do
something which is not commanded him) I never accused that of imperfection, but
do without all doubting suppose it to be a perfect codex of commands, to which
God will never add more; and when I have done so, I found this doctrine of the
Christians voluntary oblations, in this perfection (not imperfection) of this
law, viz. that even in the greatest perfection there is a latitude, and the
higher degrees of that latitude are not under precept.

supererogating he mentions in respect to other men, as the Pharisee that said
with scorn and pride enough, I am not like other men, I fast twice a week, etc.
To this I answer, 1. that this as little belongs to the true, as it does to his
false notion of supererogating. For in neither of them does the super include
or intimate superiority above other men, and 2. that he that thus scorns and
exalts himself above other men, is far from doing more herein then is
commanded, it is evident he comes short of very duty in an eminent most
rewardable virtue, that of humility, wherein he that strives not to exceed as
much, and more, as in any voluntary oblations, it is evident that he is no good
Christian, and I never undertook to plead for such Pharisees, but of all others
think Christians obliged to use all diligence to avert this shipwreck.

Apostle himself both by his doctrine and practice, allows of a (...), that
signifies literally a glorying, but it is certainly an humble rejoicing, in
having done things which he knows are eminently acceptable to God, and
elsewhere, rejoicing in his own work, and as this is no way increasable to a
Christian by comparing it with other men's defects or (...), for his charity
makes him passionately wish, and his humility really think all others better
then himself, so it is very far from that scorn and pride in all Pharisees
which makes them discriminate themselves from other men.

with respect to the overpleasing and acceptance of God, when they that think
they can do something not commanded, expect to find more acceptance from God
then they themselves or other do for doing only what is commanded. To this I
answer, 1 That still this is nothing to the notion of the word supererogating,
(which sure signifies not overpleasing) 2. That if one caution be taken in,
viz. that uncommanded works can never satisfy for disobediences, and
consequently that it is perfect impiety and folly to neglect any duty, on one
side, and then to think to compensate that by doing more then is commanded, on
the other side: If I say, this caution he premised, and proportionably the
earlyest and principallest care be taken to secure duty, to make good
obedience, in cannot be amiss in the next place to superadde this other care of
the most eminent heroical (uncommanded) performances, and he that shall have
observed this method uprightly, eschewed evil, in a strict mortifying of lusts
etc. in abstaining from sin, and doing all that is commanded (as,

Virtus est vitium fugere, and Sapientia prima
Stultitia caruisse --)
And whenever he has failed, secured his retrait by an early humiliation,
confession, begging of pardon in Christ, and sincere reformation, and then
labored industriously to superstruct doing of good, works of the more eminent
(I mean uncommanded) degrees of virtue, I shall not doubt to encourage him, to
think confidently, and expect from our great (...) and (...) more and greater
acceptance (I shall add, reward also) then the same person could in reason
expect for doing only what is commanded.

compare himself with other men, the possible hazard of that, exemplified by
the Pharisee, persuading the contrary, yet of the truth of the success there is
no reason to make question, or suspect, but that of two men which have been
equal in obediences, one exceeding the other in acts of uncommanded
perfection, the more perfect shall have the richest reward, as is most evident
whether by considering the degrees of glory in heaven, or the rule by which God
distributes them still under the Gospel, by way of reward to every man,
secundum opera, according to his works.

Papists thinking they can merit with God by such works for themselves and
others, though ours, says he, are not come so far yet] is an essay of his
charitable opinion of us; and I shall take it by the best handle I can, and
conclude from it, then, by his own confession, we are not Papists yet, and then
I do not (after all that tract of Will Worship) maintain works of
Supererogation yet, and then I need only add, that it is no way useful for him
to lose his pains and his charity by confuting those of whom he only divineth
that they may hereafter fall into false doctrine, which yet I hope I shall not
do, having no temptation from all this Diatribist's Exercitation, and the
arguments therein contained, to fly to any other Sect of Religion to furnish my
self with answers for him.

Exercitation, is wholly spent either in proving it to be my doctrine (which I
willingly and expressly grant it to be) that the voluntary oblations are more
acceptable and rewardable with God, or in repeating his own sense, the more
voluntary the more abominable (wherein it seems we are already at distance
enough, a man need not fly to the Papists doctrine of Supererogation to make
the breach the wider) or in charging on this doctrine that it makes
Superstitious Will-worshippers and formalists to overlook others with abundance
of contempt and insolence, adding Characters, by which we may discern who they
are to whom he is pleased to affixe these titles.

answer is 1. with St Paul, Romans 14. that as those which freely do those things
which others account unlawful, ought not to despise those which do them not;
so on the other side, those which do them not, ought in no wise to judge or
condemn those which do them, and consequently that if our Bishops, whom he
seems to translate, those who did overlook others, had really been guilty of
contempt and insolence toward them, yet had not this been more criminous in
them, more contrary to St Paul's direction, then this which is here visible in
this Diatribist, in calling them Superstitious Will-worshippers, and
Formalists, which first presumes all use of uncommanded ceremonies to be
Superstition first, and then Formality: and so is a double untruth, and 2.
charges those two great sins upon his own Lawful Superiors, and so is a double
uncharitableness, attended with disobedience to and separation from them: I
delight not now to compare these sins, and affirm, which is more culpable; If
his own plain words or conscience do not accuse this Diatribist in any of
these, neither shall I accuse him, but rather implore God's pardon for him; And
only add 2. That I have reason to hope and believe that the Governors of our
Church, and those who lately presided in it, did not make their own voluntary
performances the foundation or occasion of any degree of contempt or insolence
toward others which used them not; If any did, I neither intended nor now
design any defense for them: And so much for the 2d Exercitation.

CHAP. VII. Of Christmas and other Festivals.
Sect. 1. The observance which is due to the Custom of a Church. The
Testimonies of Ambrose, and Augustine, and Isidore.
Festivals, I had thought that the customary practice of the universal Church
of Christ, and particularly the perpetual immemorial usage of the Church of
England, continued, as far as we can discern, from the first plantation,
without any interruption, to the time of writing that treatise, might have had
some weight with any that were not contentious, if it were but upon the account
of S. Paul's argument thus drawn from the customary practice of the Churches of
God.

Diatribist falls presently into the examination of that place where S. Paul
uses that argument 1 Cor. 11. 16. and inquires what inferences naturally arise
from the words of the Apostle. But I who designed to conclude no more from that
reference but only this, that the custom of the Church ought to be of some
force and weight with any meek son of the Church, have no need of following him
into that inquiry, if the loosest consideration and very first view of those
words do not prove that, neither shall I farther contend for it.

Paul argued from custom, and I proposed the like argument, and so made a
reference to S. Paul, whose example I thus far transcribed, and if in other
respects the analogy held not, it matters not, so it held in this, that custom
was considerable in circumstances of religion, such was covering or not
covering the head in the service of God there, and such is the observation of a
Festival here; And this is all that I need reply to his first.

ex abundanti add one or two testimonies for the confirming the weakest part
of that consideration, viz. the reasonableness of complying with, (so as not to
oppose) the custom of any particular Church, though they be no more then so,
though they pretend not to be derived from the Apostles, whether by institution
or practice, supposing withal that they are no way contrary thereto.

Ambrose, sufficiently known. Ad quamcunque Ecclesiam veneritis, ejus morem
servate, si pati scandalum non vultis aut facere; To whatsoever Church ye come,
observe the custom thereof, if you will neither receive nor give scandal.

Ep. 28. Tom: 1. p. 69.
St Augustine, Ego te illud breviter admonendum puto, traditiones
Ecclesiasticas (praesertim quae fidei non officiunt) ita observandas ut a
majoribus traditae sunt, nec aliorum consuetudinem aliorum contrario more
subverti. I would briefly admonish you that Ecclesiastical traditions
(especially such as offend not the faith) are so to be observed as they are
delivered by our Ancestors, nor must the custom of some be subverted by the
contrary custom of others. And yet higher in the same Epistle, Vnaquaeque
provincia praecepta majorum leges Apostolicas arbitretur, Let every Province
esteem the precepts of their Ancestors as Apostolical Laws, i. e. certainly pay
observance to them, though they be not of Apostolical institution.

Isidore, l. 2. de Eccl: Offic: c. 43. Nec disciplina in his melior est gravi
prudentique Christiano, nisi ut eo modo agat quo agere viderit Ecclesiam ad
quam devenerit. There is no better rule in such things for a grave and prudent
Christian, then to do in that manner as he sees the Church do to which he comes.

suffrages might be heaped up on this occasion; these few may suffice to
justify all that I had said in that first.

Sect. 2. Heathen adherents a proof of the first Antiquity.
argument for the antiquity of this usage among us, founded in the adversaries
suggestion against it. The adversaries generally accuse the Christmas
Festivity for some heathenish mixtures retained in it; From which, if it were
true, or however from the concession of those that affirmed it, I conceived an
argument might be drawn, that therefore it was to be taken as granted, that
this usage was continued among us from the time of our first conversion from
heathenism.

inference can be avoided; For how can any heathen usage adhere to this
Festivity, if all heathen customs were laid aside long before this Festival
were observed? Can it be imagined that after the ejecting of heathenism and the
solemn abolition of all their feasts, Saturnalia and the like, when
Christianity had gotten the possession, there should still continue among them
those adherent rites of their heathen feasts, so many accidents without their
subjects? Or that Christians that had long since renounced heathenism, and at
length received this Christian feast, should ransack their heathen rituals for
ceremonies wherewith to adorn it?

no way constringent with this Diatribist; For, says he, they might be added
some good while after the first conversion of some part of this Island, the
better to win the rest to a liking of Christian religion, by conforming to them
in the celebration of festivals. As the like was done to win the Jews in
observing the old sabbath, Pentecost, etc.

evasion; For 1. it is by this answer confessed, that as to some parts of this
Island, my argument is of force, and that in those this festival was introduced
as early as their Christianity, and if that may be granted me, I shall contend
for no more by this medium, but think I have gained a very fair confession for
the antiquity of this usage in this Church, that this festivity was thus early
introduced among us, even as soon, if not before Christianity had gotten
possession of this whole Nation.

Nation was not converted the several parts of it together (I mean not every
person of every part, but some of all) or that there was any such interstitium
or interval considerable betwixt the conversion of some part of this Island and
the rest of it, this is incumbent on the Diatribist to prove, or else the
argument remains in full force to the whole Nation, as well as to any part of
it. And for this he has offered no proof, and so has yielded the force of my
argument, when he went about to refute it.

Christians complying with the Jews, will stand him in as little stead; for
when was it that the Christians thus complied with the Jews, or that they
retained their old sabbath, out of that design of compliance with them? Was it
not at the time of the first conversion of the Jews to Christianity? Can it be
imagined that the Jews were a good while before converted to the faith and to
the doctrine of the abolition of the sabbath, and then, some good while after
that their conversion, the observation of their sabbath should be reduced,
expostliminio?

constringent argument to any gainsayer to prove that baptism was introduced at
the first beginnings of Christianity, because baptism is known to be a custom
taken from the Jews? And so sure of the sabbath, and the like; If any space or
interval had come in after the planting of Christianity among the Jews, it is
no way probable that the sabbath once laid aside, as a ceremony naild to the
cross of Christ, would ever after have been recalled, and observed among
Christians; only at the first conversion or plantation of the faith such things
might from the Jewish state adhere unto the Christian, though they were not
taught by Christianity, and so some others from the heathen also, it is possible
and imaginable; but it is no way supposeable after the space of many years, when
heathenisme with all its rites and adherents had long ago been cast out.

argumentum ad homines) as to deserve any greater length of discourse to
vindicate it.

Sect. 3. Of Crescens coming into France, and Simon Zelotes into England. The
difference of keeping Easter in the West and East. Testimonies for our
conversion in the Apostles times, Before King Lucius. The Diatribists
suggestion disproved. Britain not converted from Rome.
first planting of Christianity in this Nation by some Apostle or Apostolical
person, what was said with competent probability out of our histories, is
considered by the Diatribist in the next place, but nothing said or offered to
be proved by him, which may exact answer from me, the whole matter especially
being but a (...) to the business of Festivals: only some passages of his must
be shortly noted.

Crescens his being in France removes all improbability from those histories
that record the plantation of Christianity in these Islands in the Apostles
times] he seems to believe it my opinion that Crescens came over hither, (for
so, says he, the Doctor would have it, and proves it out of Scripture) which
very thing he knows I absolutely disclaim, and only conclude it as credible
that some other Apostle or Apostolical person should so early come over hither
and plant the Faith, as that Crescens should come into France in S. Paul's
days, which yet the French generally believe that he did, and have received it
by tradition, and the words of Scripture may very fitly be so interpreted as to
affirm it (and I do not believe that Estius has, or that this Diatribist can
demonstrate the contrary, I am sure he has here produced nothing toward it,
but the bare name of Estius.

Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes was the person that first planted the
faith here, I receive from our Stories by tradition, and accordingly satisfy
my self therewith, and never attribute it to Crescens or any other, but
particularly express my reasons why I cannot imagine it to be Crescens, and
therefore am very much misreported in this matter.

Crescens in that place was only this, that from the authority of the relations
of Crescens's coming so early into France, I thought I might conclude against
the improbability of Joseph's or Simons coming hither, the latter being
perfectly as credible as the former, and the passage from France to England so
short and easy, that there can be no difficulty or disparity in the matter,
that one should be believed by the French, and the other be incredible to us.
This was set down intelligibly enough in that treatise, if the Diatribists
haste or somewhat else had not cast the cloud over it.

time of celebrating Easter anciently in this Nation I conclude that neither
Peter nor Paul nor Crescens did first bring the Faith into this Island, and the
Diatribist thinks he has thereby gained an advantage, and that the same reason
is of force against Joseph and Simon Zelotes also, this is an evident mistake
in him. For it is sufficiently known that as the Western custom of keeping
Easter was deduced from S. Peter and S. Paul, so the contrary Eastern
observation pretended to tradition from other Apostles, particularly from S.
John. Now as to the former of these it is consequent, that none of the
associates or attendants of S. Paul or S. Peter were the planters of the Faith
here (and so not Crescens, who was such, 2 Timothy 4. 11.) because of those it is
not imaginable that they should vary from the custom received from those two
Apostles, as it is apparent the first Christians here did, in the celebrating of
Easter; so it is no way conclusible of all others, which related not to those
two Apostles, and such I suppose Joseph and Simon Zelotes were, it being very
possible that either of these might comply with the Jewish account, and accord
with S. John, and the Eastern Church in this celebration.

indication it appears, that the words of Metaphrastes concerning Simon Peter's
preaching the faith, and constituting Churches etc. in Britain in the 12th of
Nero, cannot be deemed to have truth in them, so if it may be supposed that
Metaphrastes, receiving his intelligence from some more ancient author or
tradition, mistook Simon Peter for Simon Zelotes, I see not what could be
objected against the probability of the relation. either in respect of the
person of that Simon, who is by very good Authors deemed to have been the
planter of the faith here, or in respect of the earliness of the plantation,
in or before the 12th of Nero, i. e. within 34 years after Christ's ascension.

antiquity of the faith in this Island, and that particularly by this Simon
Zelotes, I shall now add some few considerations: First out of the Sea Sir H.
Spelman De Exord. Christ. Rel. in Brit. p. 2.
words of Theodoret in his Therapeut: Ser: 9. (...), where having compared the
Apostles of Christ, under the title of p. 123.
(...) our fishermen and Publicans, with the Lawgivers of the Grecians and
Romans, he affirms that whereas these latter did not persuade or gain upon
their next neighbors to live according to their laws, those former wrought
upon not only Grecians and Romans, but (...) all the nations of the Barbarians
(among which we know the Britains were vulgarly contained) and brought them to
embrace the Evangelical law; and if this be yet too general, he then adds the
enumeration of the severals, and among them by name specifies the Britains,
(...). p. 125.
A clear testimony that the Apostles themselves in person paid this obedience
to Christ's command of going to all nations, none excepted, and that with some
kind of success every where, particularly here in Britain.

Hist. Eccl: l. 2. c. 40.
Nicephorus Callistus, who setting down the several plantations of the
Apostles, has these words of Simon Zelotes, (...). After the coming of the
holy Ghost upon him, he betook himself to Egypt, and Cyrene, and Africa, and
passing through Mauritania and Lybia in the preaching of the Gospel, and
adventuring on the Western Ocean, and preaching the Gospel to the British
Islands, and depredicating Christ as was needful both by many signs and
wonders, and by divinity and doctrine, and being tried with many afflictions,
at last with endless joy embracing the death of the cross he departed to his
Master. Which last passage of his death, that it belonged to these Islands
also, is affirmed by Dorotheus, who adds that he was slain and buried here,
and thereto accord the Greek Liturgies in their Menelogie, though Baronius and
others dissent in that particular of his death.

Gildas Brito or Badonicus, who affirms that Christ was preached to Britanny
(under the name of glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae) summo Tiberii Caesaris, in
the last year of Tiberius Caesar, i. e. in the fifth year after Christ's
resurrection, is by Sir Hen: Spelman cited as author gravis and eximiae fidei,
a grave author and of great fidelity, anciently styled Sapiens, The wise, and
so agreeing with these former testimonies, may deserve to be heeded by us, and
not cast off, as by the Diatribist he is, magisterially dictating, that his
affirmation was mere tradition and far from probability, but not adding the
least proof of it, but only that no authors of any credit lay it so high, with
what truth, does now competently appear, and is yet farther confirmed by a
former testimony brought by Mr. Fox out of Gildas Albanicus in his book of the
victory of Aurelius Ambrosius, where he affirms p. 107.
Britannie received the Gospel in the reign of the Emperor Tiberius. To this
accords also the Vatican MS. out of which Baronius places the reception of
the Faith in this Island about the year 35. which is two years earlier then the
last of Tiberius.

other passages to the same purpose, especially for the relations of Joseph of
Arimathea in Guil: Malmesbur: I refer the Reader to that worthy Antiquary, Sir
Henry Spelman, de exord: p. 4. etc. And whatever the Diatribist suggests, I see
not indeed in any or all of this the least degree of either impossibility or
improbability; For of those Apostles that immediately after Christ's ascension
took their journeys to several corners of the world, to publish and propagate
the Gospel, what difficulty is there in believing, that in the space of four or
five years, some one either by himself, or by his missive, at least that the
tidings of that blessed news, should find the way hither into this Island? I
shall now add no more of this.

supposed words of Eleutherius to King Lucius, the Diatribist charge me for
leaving out or not translating nuper (which the Latin in my margent retained)
adding that I did it wisely (I suppose on some design to assist my cause) and
leaving others to judge why it was done; this is but a calumny all this while.

nuper in the margent, that was a fair evidence to any charitable person that
there was no treachery designed the Reader, for it being certainly foreseen by
me that my Readers would easily understand so much Latin as the rendering of
nuper would amount to, I had been by any such design engaged to conceal the
Latin also, the setting down that, was the certain way of discovering any such
supposeable treachery, and so sure no artifice or master piece of wisdom
(which the Diatribist imputes to me) but at once an act and punishment of folly
such as I heartily desire may always attend such enterprises.

prelusorie answers as these, the matter is plain to any man that has eyes in
his head; My English translation was not verbum verbo, yet by way of paraphrase
perfectly answerable to the Latin, the Latin is, Suscepistis nuper
miseratione divina in regno Brittanniae legem and fidem Christi, and the
English is as explicit to every minute part of it, that before that writing of
his (is not that the full paraphrase of nuper, without defining what is not
there defined, how long, or how little while ago this was, but only before the
writing of Elutherius's Epistle) the kingdom of Britain had received by Gods
mercy the law and faith of Christ. I see there is no hope of approving my self
to this Diatribist, If there were, I should not have fallen thus causelessly
under his severest discipline, for such I must esteem this his suggestion, and
the insinuations accompanying it.

viz. not rendering nuper at all, on purpose that this conversion of the Island
might be thought to be long before the time of Lucius and Eleutherius, which
was above 140 years after Tiberius's decease, I hope it is by this time plain
by what has here been said of our conversion by some Apostle, particularly by
Simon Zelotes, that I should not much have abused the Reader. That the faith
was not first preached in Lucius's days, but revived after the death of the
first planters of it, I refer the Reader to learn from Sir Henry Spelman p. 12.
out of our ancient records: And for the truth of the passages between
Eleutherius and Lucius, as I never had engaged my self, so if from thence, as
the Diatribist pretends, any inconveniences be now found consequent toward the
support of the Romanists plea to our subjection, it will be his (not my)
concernment to fence himself against them, having here thus far acknowledged
the truth of the story that Lucius sent to Eleutherius for some to baptize him
and his people, withal from hence concluding that Christianity was not here
planted from the Apostles times.

Nation first received baptism not from any Apostle or Apostolical planter, but
in Lucius's days from Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, it could not well be imagined
how our ancient British should be found so different from the usages of Rome in
the celebration of Easter etc. as it is known they were before, and at the time
of Augustines coming hither. For certainly the Western manner was conveyed to
all who had their Christianity or baptism from Rome.

Christianity first from Rome in Augustines time, if we be yielded to have had
it first from Rome in Eleutherius's time? I desire the Diatribist, which even
now foresaw the danger, will now see to it.

(viz. that the Eastern Christians which kept their Easter after the Jewish
manner, kept it not so in the Apostles times) is neither proved to have any
truth in it, nor if it had, would it give any account of the reason of the
British retaining the Jewish and Eastern custom, in case they had their
baptism from Eleutherius, for as to the latter of these, though this
difference were granted to be of a later original then the Apostles times, yet
what possibility were there that the British should have the Eastern Jewish
custom from Rome, when the Romish was constantly the contrary, or that
receiving Baptism from Rome, we should have our most ancient rites from
Greece, quite contrary to the usages of Rome.

Sect. 4. The keeping of Easter in the Apostles times. Polycrates 's Epistle to
Victor. The Asiatick way from Philip and John. From Philip derived to Britanny.
(...). The testimony of Socrates against Festivals, examined.
truth of his negation. 6. that the Eastern Christians which kept their Easter
after the Jewish manner, kept it not so in the Apostles times] It will deserve
considering a while, and the rather because this of Easter being certainly a
Christian Festival, the annual commemoration of the resurrection of Christ, and
that observed by the Asiaticks on any day of the week on which the quartadecima
Lunae should fall, and not only on the Lords day, if that shall be found to be
so kept by any of the Apostles themselves, this will be no small prejudice to
the Diatribists pretensions, who will not, must not allow any other festival
among Christians, but that of the weekly sabbath or Lords day, as it is by him
deduced from the fourth Commandment. And accordingly in his reasoning here
against it, his arguments proceed not only against the Jewish manner, but
against the feast it self being observed in the Apostles times, as will
presently appear.

trial of this negation of his, on which his cause so much depends, I appeal
to the history of that question or controversy betwixt the Eastern and Western
Church, as it is set down with very little difference by Eusebius l. 5. and
Nicephorus l. 4.

Eusebius affirmation of it that all the Provinces of Asia observed it on the
fourteenth day, (...) l. 5. c. xy.
(...). as from a more ancient tradition, and again as (...), a custom long
before delivered to them; which, considering the time wherein this question was
agitated at the end of the second Century, can amount to little less then
Apostolical.

weight on this, his 24 Chapter gives us the full debate of it in the Epistle
of Polycrates to Victor.

Polycrates was the eighth Bishop of Ephesus, and was then 65 years old, which
reaches up very high, within 30 years of S. John's time, and he (...). Niceph.
l. 4. c. 37.
set down and manifested the tradition to be Apostolical, expressly deducing
it from two of the Apostles, Philip one of the twelve, which, says he, died at
Hierapolis, and John the beloved disciple of Christ, who lived and died at
Ephesus, adding to these Polycarp Bishop and Martyr of Smyrna, and Thraseas
Bishop and Martyr of Eumenia, Sagaris of Laodicea, Papyrius, and Melito of
Sardis, All which, says he, observed, the fourteenth day (...), according to
the Gospel, (...), keeping exactly the Canon of faith, and no way varying from
it.

Asiatick custom was by Polycrates (and all the Bishops of Asia (...)
consented to this Epistle of his) fetched from two of the twelve Apostles, S.
Philip and S. John. And if that which See Guil. Malmesb. de Antiq. Glaston.
Eccl. ex Freculpho l. 2. c. 4. Et Baron: Tom. 1. an. 35. number. 5. Et MS. Hist.
Angl: in Vatican. Biblioth.
our stories tell us of Philips being in France, and sending Joseph of
Arimathea and others into Britain, be to be understood of Philip the Apostle,
as Addit is missum suisse Gal^^^i in Britanniam a Philippo Apostolo Josephum
Arimathaeum. Sir H. Spelman Appar. p. 1.
Gildas Albanicus expressly affirms, then have we a clear account of the
derivation of this custom of keeping Easter in this Nation from Philip to our
first Christians, just as Polycrates in Asia deduces it from the same Philip.

irrefragable instance of the observation of Christian festivals among us, not
only from the first plantation of Christianity among us, but even from the
practice of the very Apostles themselves, which was the utmost that I could
pretend to in this matter.

8. And it is farther observable, that Pope Victor of Rome, though he was
willing to have proceeded with greater rigor against the Asiaticks, even (...).
(...), to cut off or excommunicate all the Provinces and Churches of Asia,
(...), as heterodox, yet never questions the truth of Polycrates's
affirmations, concerning his receiving the custom from those Apostles; And
indeed the other Bishops assembled, were not for such severity, but for peace,
and unity, and charity with these fellow Christians, and reprehended Victor
severely for his thoughts of severity.

(...).
Epistle of Irenaeus to Victor is very considerable to this purpose, who though
he resolved on Victors conclusion for the keeping it on the Lords day only, yet
he is absolutely against excommunicating the Asiaticks upon this very ground,
that these Churches of God did (...), observe the tradition of ancient or
original custom, and he farther tells him that the Bishops before him had
never broken peace with any on occasion of this difference, instancing in
Polycarp who came to Rome in Anicetus's time, and as Anicetus could not
persuade him to leave his custom, (...), as having observed it always
according to the practice of John the disciple of the Lord, and the rest of the
Apostles with whom he had conversed, So neither could Polycarp persuade
Anicetus to leave his way, and yet they communicated one with another; Here
again by Irenaeus his own confession, who was for the Western custom, the
Eastern was practiced by John and the rest of the Apostles (sure more then one)
with whom Polycarp had conversed.

Lastly, There is no doubt all this while of that which the Western pretended
for their custom, that they had it (...) by Apostolical tradition, says
Eusebius, (...) l. 5. c. (...).
following the Apostolical tradition upward, or from the beginning, says
Nicephorus, and that expressly l. 4. c. 36.
from S. Peter the Apostle, which still leaves the matter most evident and
irrefragable, that this feast of Easter, which sure is a Christian festival
(and all others are to be rated by that standard) was observed and celebrated
by the Apostles, and so is the evincing of all that I need to pretend to, for
the vindicating of that Resolution of the Quaere concerning the Festivals of
the Church.

reply to this argument thus enforced, I profess not to be able to foresee;
what he has thought fit to offer for the proof of the contrary, I shall now
very briefly consider.

there is no mention of the institution or observation of it in Scripture, nor
any ground to found it on, But to this, 1. It is sufficient to answer, that
there is small virtue in this argument from Scripture negative. 2dly That the
Apostles word (...) let us keep the feast, which by circumstances is applied to
the feast of Easter, is some (be it acknowledged a less weighty) ground in
Scripture for the observation. 3dly That the mention of (...) the Lords day,
Rev. 1. is some farther ground whether that signify the weekly or annual Lords
day; If it be the annual, there is then a clear evidence for the observation of
it in the Apostles days; and if it should be the weekly, yet in any reason the
annual day of the resurrection was the foundation of this weekly day, which we
know is to commemorate the resurrection, as it is evident that the weekly
friday fasts in the Church had their foundation in the annual great fast on the
day of Christ's death in the Paschal week.

Scripture should give us no kind of mention of this, yet seeing it has
otherwise appeared from the most ancient and undoubted records of the Church,
that Easter was observed by the Apostles, by Peter and Paul in one manner, by
John and Philip in another, what place of doubt or question can there be in
this matter?

close of his first reason that the Apostles were so far from instituting
these as Christian feasts, that they do expressly repeal them and cry them
down, has not the least degree of truth in it, as has formerly appeared in
the view of Gal. 4. 10.

Socrates the Historian saying that the Apostles were not solicitous to appoint
any festival days at all, therefore not this of Easter. To this I answer, that
Socrates's words do not at all deny this to have been the practice of the
Apostles, only his conceit is, that neither Christ nor his Apostles l. 5. c.
(...).
(...) commanded to observe this by any law, and again that they intended not
(...) to make laws of festival days, referring the original of them to custom,
which varied in several regions, as appeared to him by that difference betwixt
the Asiatick and Western Christians, from whence his conclusion, or (as in the
same matter he says, (...)) his conjecture was, that (...), the feast of
Easter among all sorts of people had a peculiar different observation from some
custom, because none of the Apostles had made any law concerning it.

Socrates saw that several Nations had their several customs of keeping
Easter, some, says he, from John, others from Peter and Paul, setting down the
very story, as we have given it, out of Eusebius, and from thence he collects
(how truly it matters not) that no Apostle had given any binding law to all
Christians concerning it.

practice Apostolical, and not at all of their (...) commanding it by law, am
no way incommodated by this testimony, And for any more then so (practice and
custom Apostolical) it will be hard for the Diatribist to produce any evidence
for the weekly Christian sabbath or Lords day; sure the New Testament has no
where any (...) giving of law concerning it.

difference of the observation of it in the Eastern and Western Church, which,
says he, makes it evident that it was not instituted by the Apostles has sure
now been competently answered, for though that difference conclude against the
(...) or appointment of the day by universal law, yet it no way prejudgeth the
practice Apostolical, or the derivation of the several customs from this
original.

true, or pertinent to his purpose that is which follows, that the observation
of Easter has better antiquity then this of Christmas, though not Apostolical,
does already sufficiently appear, the Apostles practice for the one being so
evident on all hands, by the confession both of the Eastern and Western
Christians, (the several practices being derived from several Apostles) that
there can be no doubt in that matter; And then the analogy holding, and the
argument proceeding in full force from one Christian festival commemorative of
Christ's resurrection, to another commemorative of his birth, or his ascension,
will certainly justify the lawfulness of the observation, though the
antiquity should not equally be pleadable for it.

cleared and vindicated the concludency of this argument.

Sect. 5. Midwinter-day. The Winter Solstice. Julius 's Calendar.
argument drawn from the title which our ancient records give Christmasse day,
calling it (...) Midwinter-day (and as I now find in other Saxon monuments
(...) Midwinter-mass or feast) and with this he is pleased to refresh himself
and to be cheerful [How sweetly all agree, etc.] and then to make offer of some
answer; But the truth is, he has not made any the least discovery by those
answers, that he adverted at all to that one thing, wherein alone all the force
of the argument was placed; I shall therefore repeat it again for him.

Winter solstice falling now many days earlier then the 25th of December, the
acknowledged day of Christ's birth, we are in reason to believe, that at the
time when that title of Midwinter-masse was bestowed on this festival, the Sun
entered into Capricorn (i. e. the winter solstice fell) if not upon, yet very
near to the 25th of December. And then this will drive it very high, up to the
Apostles and our Saviors time, at the year of whose birth though as the
learned exactly calculate it, the Sun entered Capricorn on the 24th of December
at Rome, yet it is certain that Julius Caesar ordering the Calendar 43 years
before that, and believing that in his time it was as Hipparchus had said (viz.
that the solstices had anticipated 8. days, for so in his time Hipparchus had
observed) he placed the solstices on the eighth of the Calends, i. e. on the
24th of June, and 25th of December: In consonance whereto, the difference being
yet not great, the first Christians might well call this feast Mid-winter
mass, being indeed so near the solstice then, though the farther we descend
from those first times, the less exactness of truth we shall still find in
that appellation.

C. is not pleased to make the least word of reply, and so has not qualified
himself to expect any syllable of return from me to his 7th. Only I shall tell
him for his utmost satisfaction, 1. That my argument no way depends on the
falling of John Baptists, day on Mid-summer day, and only mentioned it to show
the agreement betwixt them. 2. That if Christmas day were not celebrated till
the end of the 2d Century, it could not with any propriety be called Mid-winter
mass, for An. 200. the Winter solstice was certainly at a pretty distance from
the 25. of December. 3. That though now Mid-winter day be a fortnight sooner
then the 25. of December, yet in the Apostles times it was not so, and so that
is an argument for, not against the observation of it in, or near the times of
the Apostles, for else it could not with any truth be called Midwinter day.

Diatribists eyes may be opened to discern some force in this argument, and
how nothing he has replied to it.

Sect. 6. Festivals not Romish. The primitive Churches pure from the heresies
that solicited them; The Romish corruptions not fetched from them.
inferences, the former of which being only this, that the antiquity or
immemorial usage of any festival in our nation does no way argue that it has
any of the corruptions of the Roman See adhering to it, but the contrary, It
is freely granted by him: And then I may for once congratulate the unexpected
success of that Paper. For it seems the use of Festivals is not Romish and
Antichristian, on the score of which he certainly knows some who have cast
them out, and I foresee not how he will ever approve himself to them again,
after this one confession.

reparations, For though festivals have none of the corruptions of the Roman
See adhering to them, yet, says he, they may have too much of the corruption
of those Churches wherein they were first invented, corruptions which crept
into those Churches not long after the Apostles days, and the Romish religion
is a bundle of most of those corruptions.

unjust at once and improbable, then what is here without either proof or
diffidence suggested against the most ancient Primitive (and next to
Apostolical) Church.

foul and dangerous errors which very early, even in the Apostles days,
solicited and infested the Church, there is no doubt; that impure detestable
sink of the Gnostics, and the several sorts of heretics which all joined
together under that title; But then it is most evident that the Governors of each
Church, by the strength of that depositum committed to them by the Apostles,
used all care to secure their flocks from such pests as these, and were by Gods
blessing successful in it, noted, branded, expulst these heretics, and kept
the Catholic Church entire from their corruptions.

Churches that censured these corruptions, should be infected with them, so
nothing can be more unjust, as well as uncharitable and impious, then to affix
that character on the Churches, which belonged only to the heretics that
disturbed and were ejected out of those Churches.

Apostolical Churches themselves, whilst the Apostles presided in them, might
be blasted also, for we know there was in their very time a mystery of
iniquity, (...) deceivers and Impostors, Antichrists, and false teachers good
store, but, as S. John says of these, that they went out from us, separated
from the Churches, and so discovered that they were not of them; So it was also
after the Apostles death, the heretics and schismatics infused not their
corruptions into the Church, and so they cannot with truth be imputed to those
that were preserved pure from them, the corruptions of the enemies of the
Church, unto the Churches.

Doctor have been accused sometimes of complying with the Papists, I am
confident he never let any thing fall which yielded them so true and solid
advantage, as this one affirmation of the Diatribist, that the corruptions, of
which the Romish religion is a bundle, are those which crept into the Churches
not long after the Apostles days: For what is that, but an agnition, that the
most accused Romish practices now adays are the same which were delivered to
them from the Primitive Church. For my part I protest my dissent (and so sure
does the whole Church of England, and every true son thereof) to this
conclusion.

Sect. 7. The grounds why this Feast may not be abolisht among us. The
Diatribists mistake of the question.
inference now follows, that any such ancient usage of this particular Church,
if it had no other ground to stand on (as its foundation) or concurrence of all
Christian Churches (as pillars) to sustain it, were a very competent authority
for the present continuance of such a practice in the Church, and that upon
this score, because the Anglicane Church being one of those which by its
foundation is (...) subject to no foreign Patriarch, is consequently invested
with unquestionable power to institute Ceremonies for it self, which
consequently may not without great temerity be changed or abolished by any.

objections inserted by the Diatribist, before I read them over, I desire it
may be adverted, wherein the force of my inference consists, viz. in these 3
things, 1. that this particular Church of ours being first planted by some
either Apostle or Apostolical person was thereby constituted (...) of absolute
power within it self, as that excludes subjection to any other forain power.

feast was set up, or celebrated here, by those that first planted the faith
among us, i. e. by some Apostle or Apostolical person, by Simon Zelotes or by
those 12 which were sent higher by Philip the Apostle, and Joseph of Arimathea
one of those.

3 That what was by so good authority introduced, having no equal reason to
supersede it (such as was the contrary tradition Apostles in the business of
Easter) may not without temerity now be abolished by any; not by any other
person or persons, Pope, or Consistory, because no other has power over a
Church which is (...) founded by the Apostles, and not subjected by them to
any; not by the Church it self, which cannot now be supposed to have any such
persons in it, as may be fit to compare with the first founders of it, at
least, not without some greater reason for the changing and abolishing, then
they may appear to have had for the using of it.

grounds my inference being built, as is there apparent by the premises, and
the very expressions cautiously used in setting it down, let us now see what
the Diatribist has to object; And 1. that it is (...) by its foundation, he
willingly grants, subordinate to no forain Patriarch, I shall only demand
whether it be subordinate to its own sons, or to any but the legal Fathers of
it? I hope it will be as reasonable for me to presume it is not, as it was for
the Diatribist to grant the former, for else M. C. a son of this Church by
devesting the Pope of his authority, shall only have removed and vested it in
himself, and such as he, translated it from the Papacy to the Presbytery,
which I hope he will not profess to do, lest that be the very crime which was
charged on our Bishops, that they assumed to themselves the Papal power, or the
power of ordaining ceremonies, which sure is no greater then that of abolishing
them.

Church, it is observable what he presently interposeth, Yet, says he, we
justly question whether it be invested with such unquestionable power to
institute what ceremonies it please, which may not upon good reasons be changed
and abolished In which very form of proposing his question or exception, it is
visible what change he has thought fit to make in my inference, when I spoke
of the power of this Church to institute ceremonies for it self, I never
affirmed of those ceremonies once instituted that they might not upon good
reasons be changed and abolished, for I doubt not but the same power which may
on good reasons institute, may on good reasons abolish also; But first I
desired to examine the present reasons of abolition of this Festival, whether
they were as important as those whereon this Festival was supposed to be
instituted, viz. that of the pious and thankful commemorating the birth of
Christ; and withal 2. whether those reasons pretended for abolition, were not
feigned reasons, as those taken from the heads of Will Worship, and
Superstition, have, I must hope, been evidenced to be: or again 3. whether they
might not otherwise be satisfied, as that of the riot (charged only as a
consequence accidental to the Feast) by care and exercise of discipline.

aphorism of Christian policy, that what was thus brought in on such grounds
by the governors of a Church, supposing them but such as are of an ordinary
rank of governors, and not the Apostolical founders of the Church (to whom
certainly more respect is due) may not be cast out by sons of the Church, or
indeed by any other then the authority of the succeeding Governors.

considerations I suppose, may competently evidence the unreasonablenesse of
this changing the terms of the question, if not of his plea for the abolition
of the Festival.

occasion, he enters into a large discourse concerning the power of the Church
to institute ceremonies, I shall take leave to pass it over untoucht, it being
certain that the two branches of the one proposition, for which I contend, are
no way concerned in any part of his state of this question, nor indeed any
thing with the least probability suggested against either, viz. 1. that a
National Church planted by the Apostles or their successors may lawfully use a
festival for the commemorating the birth of Christ, and on it pray to, and
praise God in the solemn assembly, preach out the word and Sacraments,
exhorting all good Christians to partake thereof and to lay aside their
ordinary labors, that they may be vacant for such holy exercises; and 2. that
when such a pious usage has gained a reception, either from the time of the
first planting of the faith among us, or however by immemorial custom (all
other Churches in the world for very many hundred years, and for ought we can
discern, from the very Apostles practice, concurring with us) it ought not to
be declaimed against, as Antichristian, or laid aside, or covenanted against by
this Diatribist or others, persons not in but under authority, upon no weight
of solid resons, but upon some causless suggestions, that it is criminous,
under the head of Will Worship and Superstition.

debate betwixt me and any gainsayers, that there was nothing left to the
Diatribist, but briefly to point at the weak part, if there appeared to be any
such in either branch of this proposition, and having nothing from him to this
purpose, I shall now omit to take notice of the infirmities of which this
discourse of his is as full as from any writing of no greater length may well
be expected, and hasten to his following. in hope of springing somewhat more
pertinent to our controversy.

Sect. 9. The Reformation in this Kingdom. No imperfection in it in point of
Festivals. The states joining in it no disadvantage to the Church.
considerations, the adverting to which might render this change or abolition
of the Christmas Festival more unreasonable; As 1. that this observation was an
undoubted part of that establishment which the Reformation in this kingdom
enacted for us, and that by act of Parliament, and not only by Church Canon.

the Reformation was not so full as the Reformers themselves could have wished;
Never considering how far this is from being applicable to the point in hand,
For I shall demand, Did all or any of the Reformers, to whose piety and temper
we ow our establishment, ever express their wish that all Festivals,
particularly this of Christmasse should be abolished? or did they not? If it
shall be said, they did, I then press that the Record may be produced, by
which this has been notified to the Diatribist; But if he confess they did
not, or offer no proof, that they did, then what is it to this matter of
festivities, wherein only our present debate is concerned, if in other things
of a quite different nature, as that of bringing all notorious sinners to
penance every Lent, mentioned in the office for Ashwednesday, they wished, and
expressed their wish, that the Reformation were more perfect? The rule in law is
seasonable to be here applied, Exceptio firmat in non exceptis, Their
expressing their wish that other things might be more perfect, gives us
assurance, that they wished not any farther change in this particular of
festivals, then that which they made in the Romish Calendar.

answer therefore had little of advantage for him, and yet his only Reserve is,
that 2. this seems to grant that the Reformation was made by the State and not
by the Church, which now is pleaded for.

disadvantage of the Church that the State joined with it in the Reformation,
confirming and establishing it by Act of Parliament; or 2. why is that the
fitter to be abolished which stands by Statute law, as well as by
Ecclesiastical Canon, and Custom immemorial; or 3. how does the Parliaments
confirming the Liturgy, and therein the festivals, infer that this festival
was not first introduced by the Church, when it is most evident that the
Festival was in the Church long before that Act of Parliament?

answers we can have to an argument, which seemed to have been of some force
with a friend of Parliaments or established laws: and therefore we must
content our selves with them.

Sect. 3. The Lutheran Churches accord in this. Morney's wish. The Helvetian
confession. Rivets custom of preaching on the day.
consideration was, that this and other feasts of Christ are retained in the
reformed Lutheran Churches, and where they are taken away, wished for by sober
members, as Ph: Mornay Du Plessis, and approved by the confessions of those
Churches as the Helvetian, and in other places the day of Christmas afforded
the solemnity of a Sermon.

answers, that the Lutheran are not reputed the best reformed Churches, nor by
the Doctor, he believes, thought fit to be compared with England, and so not
fit precedents for our Reformation.

Lutheran Churches concurring with the English in this of Festivals it is no way
to the disparaging of my argument, that I do not compare the Lutheran Churches
with that of England; It Is certainly sufficient if they and the Church of
England together may be able to compare with all other reformed Churches which
have cast out all festivals as superstitious or Antichristian; And thus I
shall, without much insolence, adventure to make the comparison.

private persons wishes, as that of Ph: Morney Du Plessis, I may reasonably
reply, that how fastidiously soever he reject it, it may very well be allowed
to keep the practice of the Church of France from being any example or
precedent to us, when the prime members of their own Church have expressed their
dislikes of it.

Helvetian confession worth his taking notice of? that was no bare wish of a
private man, but the approbation of a Church, which Mr. Calvin thought fit to
write to for their judgment and suffrage to his new erected model at Geneva.

giving Sermons to Christmas day, I see it is mistaken by him, and applied to,
as spoken of himself and such as he in their former practices, and upon that
misprision it is, that he is so much concerned to have their prayers as good
and as large as the Liturgies, (by the way, if they be not much better, and
sure always to be so, why must the Liturgy be abolished?) whereas all this
while I never thought of him, or such as he, which it seems, kept fair with
Christmas (from whence I am in charity to believe they thought it not
Superstition) till they had an advantage of ejecting it, and then made all
speed to close with the opportunity, but of some other preachers in other
Churches, where this Festival was not observed, such as Andrew Rivet in the Low
Countries, who, as I have been informed, constantly preached on that day to his
auditors, which was a civility fit to be mentioned to those that will now
perform that office on any day of the week, rather then on that.

Sect. 10. Ejecting festivals. Separation from the purest times, even those of
the Apostles. Our Churches departure from Rome unjustly paralleld with the
departure of sons from our Church.
consideration was, that the rasing this Festivity out of the Calendar is an
act of separation from the Church of England, and the universal Church of all
ages, especially of the first and purest times.

answers by denial of both parts, Not the latter having proved, as he says,
that the first and purest ages of the Church did not observe it, Not the
former, unless I yield that the Reformation of the Church of England was a
division and separation from the Church of Rome, or the reformation in Luthers
time a separation from the Catholic Church, as Papists say it was.

demand, where it is that he has so proved this of the first and purest ages
not observing festivals, that he can affirm it certain that this of disusing or
laying them down is not separation from the Church of those ages? Truly my eyes
or my memory very much fail me, or he has not as yet proved it in any degree,
much less so demonstrated it that a Corollary deduced from thence, and
depending on that probation, should deserve to be pronounced certain.

occasion offered him (at least made use of by him) to attempt so impossible a
thing, as is such a negative probation. Of this I am sure, that for this
Festival and that other of Easter the reason must be the same, and I have
already made it as clear as the day, that that was observed by the Apostles of
Christ, by Philip and John on the Jewish day, and by Peter and Paul on the
annual Dominical; And if through the dimnesse or want of stories of those
times, this be not so evident of this particular Feast of Christmasse, yet the
analogy holding directly betwixt the one and the other, the argument remains as
firm, that the laying aside either this or that festival, is a separation from
the Apostolic, and those sure are the first and purest times.

solemnities and festivities commemorative of the Martyrdom of Ignatius and
Polycarp, two Bishops that lived in the Apostles times, were observed from the
very times of their deaths, and that in compliance with other the like
festivals of the Church before them, which must needs come home to the
observation of festivals in the Apostles days.

Diatribist flatter himself that he has proved the contrary to this, when he
has not so much as offered either the least answer to these, or any the least
reason or proof of his negation?

latter, I reply, that there is no analogy betwixt the Church of Englands
departing from Rome, and the Diatribists departing from the Church of England,
I might instance in many, twill be sufficient that I show it in two
particulars, 1. the Church of England in the Reformation departed not from
their lawful superiors, being, as the Diatribist acknowledges (...), and owing
no subordination to the Church of Rome, when she departed from her, whereas the
persons then spoken of by me, and the Diatribist for one, were certainly
members that ought a Christian obedience to the Church of England, as inferiors
to superiors, and so departed from their lawful superiors wherein Schism does
principally consist, as has elsewhere been shown.

Church of England reformed, and departed from the Romish opinions and
practices were none of them such as this of festivals now appears to be, i. e.
common usages of the Universal, ancient, especially of the Primitive purest
Church, but innovations unduely brought in by them, and imposed on all
Christians.

Diatribists confession here, is more to the advantage of the Romish Church,
then any thing that he could likely have said, no way clearing his fact from
Schism, nor offering the least color to it, and yet acknowledging that the
Church of Englands reformation, and so Luthers reformation also, was as truly
an act of Schism from Rome, as is theirs from the Church of England. But I
must put in my protestation of dissent to this proposition also, and that is
all I need to say to that answer.

Sect. 11. The profaneness objected to the Festival. Casting out the Creeds.
answer to the 4th consideration is so slight, and therein so little on which
to fasten any reply, that I may safely entrust the Reader with it, and only
mind the Diatribist, 1. that till he has more solidly proved the observation
of this Festival among us to be superstition, then hitherto he has done, twill
be great uncharitableness thus to accuse it, and greater injustice to destroy
the innocent for this (if it were true, yet but) accidental and removable crime
imagined to be adherent to it.

tract of profaneness as he has done of Superstition, and been more
successful in his evidences that this Festival is guilty of it, showed that
that is derived from super statutum also, or evinced the same thing by some
more sensible way of probation, it is but a pitiful begging of the question, thus
irrationally to accumulate crimes on innocence, to add the Profaneness to the
Superstition, to suppose the Festival able to work miracles, to reconcile the
most contrary extremes (as if in the vein of declaiming he should call the same
man first Papist, then Socinian) for such he knows are Superstition and
Profaneness.

seasonable for him sadly to inquire, which is most liable to the charge of
profaneness, the setting apart a festival from common uses to the
commemorating the birth of Christ in Prayer, Praises, Eucharist, hearing the
word read and preached, and profiting by all these; or the fastidious refusing
to join with the Church of God in all or any of these offices at that time,
following the Plough, or attending the Shop in stead of it.

seriousness desire him to review his words p. 147. Where in answer to my
mention of disusing the Creeds and Catechism, he says, in a parenthesis, that
the Creed is still to be retained in and with the Catechisme] and demand
whether he does not know, that the same Tempest that carried away the
Festivals, swept away (more then one) the three Creeds received from the
ancient Church and retained in our Liturgy, and together with them the Church
Catechism, of which, he knows, I spoke.

parenthesis, unless it be only this, that these are still retained in our
Books (which they have joined to condemn) though they be not retained in their
offices, but solemnly ejected by them. Such equivocal answers or responses as
these he knows from what oracles they were wont to be delivered, and therefore
should not be imitated.

Sect. 12. The Diatribists change of my words, his causlesse praise of himself,
and censure of others.
deeper knowledge of some, which was some degree above the vulgar ignorance,
and yet was observable to be impatient of sound doctrine, to be ready to
embrace any thing that was novel, and contrary to the ancient faith and
Principles] he answers, that the impatience of sound doctrine, and readiness to
embrace any thing that is novel, is not to be found in those of deep or sound
knowledge.

[sound] can he imagine that I spoke of those of sound knowledge, when I spoke
of impatience of sound doctrine, It Was visible enough that I spoke of those,
which while they less seemed to want such helps as Christmasse services and
sermons to teach them the sound doctrine of Christ, did yet most really need
them to cure the vanity of their own minds, and their itch of any thing that
was novel.

temptation he had to break out into those Eulogies of himself and his friends,
to which certainly I never constrained him by those words that belonged not to
the Pastors but only to their auditors, who when they have attained to some
measure of knowledge above the more ignorant, are yet experimented to be very
fickle and apt to fall off into new doctrines.

flatter himself as he does, that those that ejected these Festivities under
pretense of Reforming abuses of superstition and profaneness, are the men only
or chiefly that propugne and maintain sound doctrine, when, as he goes on very
glibly, those that were the greatest favorers of those Festivals, are fallen
into Arminianisme etc. or do little appear to maintain the truth.

Pharisee could have said more in his solemnest Magnificat; He, forsooth, and
such as he, are the men that only or chiefly propugn and maintain sound
doctrine, and who can doubt it when he has thus affirmed it of himself? and
all others are but as this Publicane, for so this new style of Arminian bears
proportion with that ancient; and whosoever will not think as this Diatribist
does, that Festivals are forbidden in the 2d and the 4th Commandments, that
will favor slavish fear, or mercenary obedience, or suspect that grace may be
received in vain, must presently fall under that condemnation; and then the
best that can be said of them is, that they do little appear to maintain the
truth.

Sect. 13. His 2d change of my words. Gedeons golden Ephod not appliable to
Feasts.
designs of this solemnity, no other then to teach us what we have received in
Christ, and assist us to render God a pious public acknowledgement of it, He
is pleased not to understand this, but to interpret it (contrary to the express
words) of the design in the first instituters of this piece of service to
Christ Jesus.

change? why, to make the example of Gedeon's golden Ephah applicable to it, in
the making of which, says he, though Gedeon's design was very fair to leave a
monument of his victory, yet it proved a snare to him and his house and all
Israel.

example, no doubt, it follows that every Festival, or what ever else is
designed as a public pious acknowledgement of the Christians thankfulness to
God, is to be looked on as a snare to all the people of God, and so upon all
reasons of piety to be abolished.

conclusion thus inferred, if our common notions, or Logic had not warned us
that particular premises would never induce a conclusion, and that examples are
not always argumentative, For then indeed the Lords day which is supposed to
have been designed for all these good ends, must upon the same account be
abolisht also.

Sect. 14. Strictures on his 16th. Our Festivals unfitly compared with the
Romish. How observation of Festivals may be a duty of the 5t Commandment. The
fourth Commandment no way contrary to Christian Festivals. Venial sins. All
mistakes not sins. Chemnitius not producible against me.
charge of Superstition and Will Worship against this Festival, And it is
certain that I have been large enough on these subjects already, as far as any
thing that he could suggest, appeared to have the least force either against
ceremonies in general, or particularly this of Festivals, and therefore I shall
not still bind my self and the Reader to that ungrateful penance of drawing
the same Saw for ever, Yet if any thing shall now be afresh objected, I shall
not omit to take notice of it.

appearance of Will Worship, I say that those that retain the usage, observe it
in obedience to the Laws of the Church, he has great displeasure to this, 1.
Because I ought first to have proved that they which instituted that Festival
had a Lawful power to do it, adding that the Papists may use the same argument
for observation not only of their Holy days, but of their invocation of
Saints, adoration of images, and the Mass it self.

not proving of this was founded in my supposing it. And the reason of that
supposition elsewhere competently explained, that as Magistrates in general,
so particularly the Governors of a Church have an investiture of power from
Christ to the Apostles, whose successors they are, to ordain and institute such
circumstances of the public worship of God, as are times and place and gesture
and the like, in order to decency, uniformity, and the benefit of their
Churches.

Diatribist can again think fit to compare this with the Papists observing
their own holy days etc. is interpretable as a far greater kindness to them,
then I have ever been guilty of, For the plain inference is this, 1. The Church
may command in lawful things, therefore it may as well do so in unlawful.
2dly There is no more unreasonablenesse in besainting all those that are gotten
into the Romish Legend and Calendar, and consecrating several days to the
commemorating of them, then in commemorating the birth of Christ himself. 3dly
It is as lawful to invoke all the Romish Saints, as publicly to pray to and
praise Christ on the 25th of December. 4thly It is as safe to adore images, and
the very bread in the Mass, as to adore and commemorate Christ on that day.
What could passion, or interest, or (...), or (...), have suggested more
unadvisedly then this?

dislike and exception is, that having formerly founded times or days designed
to public worship, on the equity of the 4th Commandment, I should now devolve
the observation of this festival to obedience to the laws of the Church, and
so reduce it as a duty to the 5th Commandment, and upon this, as an especial
advantage, he is pleased to expatiate.

clear enough, and was so, till he had taken pains to involve it. The
difference is very conceivable and intelligible betwixt time or times for Gods
service generally considered, and this or that particular time. That God should
have some times assigned for his service is of the very law of Nature, and so
much of morality there is fundamental to the positive precept of the weekly
sabbath in the 4 Commandment: Nay farther, the 4th Commandment being given to
the Jews for the observing one day in seven, as a fit and moderate proportion
of time to be required of every Jew, it might equitably be inferred that a
Christian should at least set a part one day in seven for our great Christian
purposes, the first day of the week on which Christ rose from the dead, And
accordingly I suppose it instituted by the Apostles of Christ.

Jews beside the weekly sabbath required by the fourth Commandment, they had
many other times of festivity, and fasting, some appointed by God himself in
the time of the (...), others instituted by men, and yet constantly observed by
Gods people and accepted by God, and some approved by Christ himself, and all
this without any prejudice to the fourth Commandment, though not by any force
of that, so now still under the Gospel nothing hinders, but that the Church of
God by the power left to, and deposited with them, may ordain Christian feasts,
and fasts, and obedience be paid thereto by all dutiful meek sons of the
Church, and this obedience be in them that are thus under authority no act of
Will Worship or spontaneity, but of honor and observance to this ordinance of
the Church, and so a duty of the fifth Commandment.

we Christians are by Christ reduced to the fourth Commandment, as for one day
of seven to be holy, so for our allowance of six days for our own works, 1. It
has not the least appearance of truth in it, for where did Christ reduce us to
the fourth Commandment? and it is visible what the consequence must be in
affirming it, even an obligation to the Jewish Sabbath, for that certainly was
the subject of the fourth Commandment.

Christians allowed six days for their own works, it is yet visible that some of
these six may by the free act of particular men be used, or by the power of the
Christian Church be set a part to Christian uses, as well as some days were
(not only by God himself, but) by the Governors of the Jews, Judas Maccabeus,
and others, set a part for the public service of God in the old Testament, at
which time it is by all confessed that the fourth Commandment was in force, in all
parts of it.

exception I shall note in this. p. 157. when upon these words of mine
concerning the possible mistake of the day, that that will be pardonable in
those that verily think they are not mistaken, and that in them that do
perform the business of the day as completely on a mistaken day as on the
true, the excuse of blameless ignorance will wash away greater errors then
this,] he presently replies, Does not this sound somewhat like the Papists
doctrine of venial sins? and upon that occasion is put in mind of Bellarmines
defense against the peril of idolatry in the Mass, in case the bread be not
transubstantiated: And then he asks, Can any ignorance be blameless against
the Law of God, or wash away any error without the blood of Christ?

fallacy presently discoverable, For 1. he that talks of venial or pardonable
sins, must not be presumed to exclude the blood of Christ, those sins are
pardonable under the Gospel for which that (...) was paid, and such are all
sins that are reconcilable with true repentance, or the sincerity of a
regenerate state.

sin so much as of ignorance, to mistake in the day of Christ's birth; every
mistake is not a sin, but only that which is a breach of some law, and
therefore I suppose it is, that the Diatribist was compelled to say, Can any
ignorance be blameless against a law of God? But then I profess not to know
any law of God, against which it is a sin (though but of ignorance) to mistake
that day for the annual day of Christ's birth, which really is not the day.

ten Commandments or any other law of Gods in the Old or New Testament this is
a breach. When he tells me this, I shall attend him more diligently to the
remainder of this Section, and answer his instance of so weighty consideration
about the very day of the Jews passover, of which he acknowledge; that the
very day was as strictly commanded as the business it self, and so the error
must be an error against a law, whereas he as certainly knows that this day of
Christ's birth is by none so much as pretended to be so commanded.

Chemnitius's charge of Superstition, on Papists observation of their holy
days, is all answered before it be produced, by this one consideration, that
Chemnitius, as a Lutheran, is by the Diatribist confessed to allow this and other
Festivals; For then has he granted all that I contend for, who undertook not
to be advocate for the Legend or Calendar of the Papists.

Sect. 15. Of riot. Christian joys no way contrary to our Festivals. Riot as
separable from Christmas as the Lords day. Heathen customs cannot be objected.
Gods judgments vainly urged for arguments. The charge of want of hospitality on
those that retain festivities. The hospitality at Christmas a pledge of it all
the year after. Reformation of excess without abolition of the Festival.
Attempt to reform, previous to abolition. The Agapae no example for abolishing
Festivals. Cures for diseases, excisions only for desperate spreading evils. No
cards on Christmas day, as much strictness on Christmas, not more sacredness
then on the Lords day. No design of making the Lords day no institution of the
Apostles. Neither Superstition nor hypocrisy in abstaining from Cards on
Christmas day.
Riot. Which I was careful to remove from this Festivity, And first having
disclaimed it as more intolerable in a Christian then in a Jew, and that upon
this account, that Spiritual joys are his eminent if not only portion under
promise, His answer is, that these are not limited to one or twelve days in a
year, but are daily joys, every day is a Christmas to a godly heart, Rejoice
in the Lord always etc.

weekly Lords day is set apart for a Christian Feast dedicated particularly to
these Spiritual joys; and that this was very reconcilable with the text that
said once and again, Rejoice always, and how then can this be opposed to an
annual Festival?

Christian joys should principally be Spiritual, and this not as a proof of
the lawfulness of Festivals, but of the unlawfulness of riots, and the
Diatribists answer is wholly to that other head, to which that was never
designed as a medium.

To which I might 3dly add, that that text to the Philippians is an
exhortation to rejoicing in tribulations, in the saddest as well as the
cheerfullest seasons, and so the always is to be limited by the context; And
then the application of it here was still so much less pertinent.

separable all riot was from this Festival, by the nature of Christian
dainties, instruction, prayer, praises, alms, and the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper (none of which were capable of luxury) and Festivity and Hospitality,
which were clearly separable from it; His answer is, 1. that these two last are
thus separable from riot, but very hardly; And I shall only demand, Are the
leisure and cessation from business on the Lords day, experimented to be more
easily separable from it? Is it more ordinary for the same men to be drunk upon
Christmas day, then upon all, or upon any one Sunday in the year? And have not
preachers and magistrates been as industrious to cast out this profane Spirit
on the Lords day and been as unsuccessful in their indevours? And shall this be
any argument for the abolition of that day?

the heathen usages in it (almost yielded. 2.) as they imply that the festival
was instituted to gratify the heathen, so God to show his dislike of them, has
suffered them to be attended with two extremes of true worship, superstition
and profaneness. But to this I say, 1. that the heathen usages were no way
yielded. 2. but only an argument used ad homines that so affirmed. 2. If there
were heathen usages in it, those would no way imply the Festival to have been
instituted to gratify the heathens, It was instituted to the honor of Christ,
and the heathens were far enough from being gratified with that, and it is
sufficient if the converted heathens, among whom it was instituted by their
converters, did of themselves assume some of their Gentile customs by them
thought innocent in the celebration.

presumption and intrusion into Gods secretest Counsels, to say that Gods
suffering this Festival to be attended with superstition or profaneness was to
show his dislike if not detestation of it; For who revealed this counsel of
Gods to this Diatribist? Besides, how easily might this argument be retorted on
the Lords day by a Jew, and all the riot and unprofitableness of hearers on
that day be made an evidence of Gods dislike if not detestation of the setting
apart of this day to his service? What impiety of any Sect would want arguments
to support it, if such as these might be admitted? Now lastly, the matter of
the present debate being only that of riot, what had superstition or
profaneness (either or both) to do with that?

who keep up and cry up the custom of the festivity, yet have taken liberty to
lay aside hospitality and charity not only at the time, but all the year long.
To which it is sufficient to answer, that then it seems, their hospitality is
not the occasion of riot to any, and that is a Competent means of vindicating
the festivity so far from that part of the accusation, which now we have
before us.

examining what degree of truth there is in the suggestion, and in what
instances it is founded; something like this he had once suggested before, and
I had then thought that it was not worthy taking notice of, But now the
returning of it again more solemly makes me suspect there may be somewhat in
it; And having no other clue to introduce me into his secrets, and the charity
and hospitality of those that have cast off the festivals, and with it their
obedience to the Church, beyond those that have retained both, having never
been so notorious, that I could take cognizance of it, and the writing a
Diatribe against all freewill oblations in a Christian, being no vehement
indication that those in whose defense it was written, were very eminent in the
exercise of those virtues, I began to pitch upon one thing that might of late
have yielded some show of truth to his observation, viz. that the condition of
many men's worldly plenty has been so changed of late, that the men have been
forced to abate somewhat of the degree of that charity and hospitality that
formerly they had both ability and will to exercise, and that these fall out to
be the men that retain obedience to the Church of England, and so keep up and
cry up the festivals of the Church, though they are not able to keep up the
good cheer of it in that degree, which formerly they have done.

Diatribist was willing to take notice of this turn of the tide, and being
himself one of the prosperous party that had cast off obedience and festivals,
but retained hospitality and charity, was willing to compare himself with
others who being deprived of all their revenues, were not likely to hold up
their hospitality, then sure this is a way of answer which might soon be
retorted, if justice were allowed to take place, and every man were reinvested
in his own again.

ability to be charitable on one side, as to be occasions of riot on the other,
if they must be reproacht for their defects in one, should not in reason be
accused for excess in the other: And that is all I shall reply to this answer.

hospitality attendant on this Festival was never by me defined or imagined,
and is with no justice by him supposed to be a misers feast, nor know I any the
least necessity that it should be followed with a neglect of charity all the
year after, but rather that it be looked on as a copy which the whole life of a
Christian is to transcribe from this manner of solemnizing the birth of Christ,
as a first fruits of this duty then paid, as a pledge of the future harvest, as
a solemn entrace on that duty then, which in some degree is to be exercised all
the year after.

case of notorious abuse I will believe there is place and season for
reformation (which I most willingly yield, being, as he knows, as inclineable
and desirous as he or any man, that all excesses should be reformed, and never
endured among Christians of all other men in the world) his conclusion has
very fairly taken in one term more then was in the premises, and to
reformation of excess, annexed of the Festivity it self, meaning evidently,
according to the modern style, abolition by reformation; For else, after all
his dexterities, it will not do his business.

excess should be abolished, that the Festivity should be drained from all such
unchristian mixtures, and reformed in that meeker sense, was visibly the
design of the Section to which this of his was confronted; And that, it seems,
will not serve the turn, but as if reformation were never reformation, unless
like the breaking in of the Ocean it sweep and carry away all before it, as if
our Dictionaries were to be changed, and that word were to be glossed by
nothing but vastation and depopulation, all that I had said of reformation of
excesses signifies nothing with him, unless the Festivity it self be reformed
also, and that just as Episcopacy was to be reformed, by being turned out of
the Church.

because the Festivity has ordinarily been attended with such mischiefs
without the least attempt of reformation) if it have any the least truth in it,
is visibly a reason for the contrary; For is it not madness to destroy the
vineyard, before any least attempt has been made to dress or manure it, to
cut down the tree before ever it was once dug about? were it reconcilable
with any tolerable sobriety to abolish the Lords day upon any, much more upon
such an account as this of riot and drunkenness ordinarily attending it,
without ever giving the offender the first or second admonition, without ever
attempting to reform it? Certainly the rules of sober discipline are directly
the contrary, to attempt and deligently endeavor the reformation of the excess,
and never to proceed to severer remedies, till the evil is experimented to be
not only obstinate but desperate, and yet then too, to divide betwixt the
nocent and guiltless, and not involve both in the same condemnation; And
arguments must sure be very scanty, when those come to be used for the
affirmative, which were proper only for the negative; And yet thus is it at
this time with the Diatribist.

example of this destructive, exterminative reformation, St Paul's discipline
on the feasts of charity by way of destruction and abolition, when they began
to be abused to surfeiting and drunkenness, 1 Cor. 11. 17. But herein are good
store of mistakes, For 1. If that place to the Corinths be examined, it is most
evident that it was the Lords Supper, into which that excess was crept, and
accordingly as he tells them v. 20. that this is not to eat the Lords Supper,
so for the reforming of what was amiss, he tells them what the institution of
Christ was in it, and there expressly sets down the first institution of the
Lords Supper, In the night he was betrayed he took bread, v. 24. etc. And then
I must demand, did St. Paul destroy and abolish this feast wherein these abuses
were observed? if he did, he abolisht the Lords Supper, and then here is indeed
an instance home to his purpose: But if he did not, why did the Diatribist
tender us this instance, when he knows that drunkenness and most unworthy
behavior at the Sacrament never suggested to the Apostle the least thought of
abolishing or disusing the Sacrament.

viz. that there were two parts of this (...), Lords Supper, one in taking a
morsel of bread, and tasting the wine, in commemoration of Christ's body and
blood, another in eating and drinking together more liberally, after the former
was done, and that this latter is it which is meant by Agapae in S. Jude, and
that this latter was taken away out of the Church, upon the too common
unreformable abuses of it; yet still this is nothing of advantage to the
Diatribist; For still this will but conclude that the carnal external part of
the Festivity, the eating and drinking part, should fall under this discipline,
not the Spiritual more Christian part, and it is evident one of these is as
separable from the other, as the Sacrament from the Agapae.

instance of the Love Feasts was opposed, and it is certain no more can
rationally, by any analogy, be concluded from it.

my turn (and so I hope not for his) then this of the Agapae. For when this
disorder at Corinth had brought this attendant on the Christian festival under
some censure, it was thus reformed, (as appears in Justine Martyrs Apology,
where he sets down the whole course of the office) The offerings were not
lessened by this means, but otherwise disposed of, and that which was not eaten
at the Lords Table, was kept in a common bank for the poor, the Stranger, the
Fatherless and Widow, and a very competent provision was made for all by this
means.

inquiry it be found that the Christmas liberality and hospitality still ends
in riot, and that there is no hope of restraint to be laid upon it, as it
runs in that channel, It is most obvious and easy for every sober Christian
to turn the stream another way, to lay aside for relief of the poor, that
which was usually laid out in the extraordinrry entertainments at this time,
and as that is the utmost, to which the severity used on the Agapae can extend,
or suggest, so it is the very thing which was proposed. 20. but it seems cannot
yet satisfy this Diatribist.

pretty untempered mortar, will not, I believe, be found so, in any sober
judging. It Is only this, that though the eating and sporting part of this
festity be strictly to be kept within bounds and as strictly to be reformed
wherein it has been discerned to exceed (this had been set down before, and
was now supposed) yet for abolition of all hospitality and recreation, or (...)
remission (as Nazianzen styles it) at these times it was to be looked on as a
last remedy, and so not proceeded to till the disease were universally
spreading and obstinate against all cure, for whilst it were lower then so, it
was still but the season of reformation.

Diatribist should think fit to infer it my sense (that he might accuse me)
that less or less general abuses need no reformation, there can be no
tolerable account rendered, but only this, that his ears have been so accustomed
to the new dialect, that of exterminative reformations, that he cannot think
the word signifies any thing else, by whomsoever it is used, but (that which
indeed it never signifies in any propriety of speech) extirpation and
abolition. In a word, I think there is no necessity of excision till the part
begin to gangrene or corrupt and spread, yet I can admit of medicines long
before, and heartily advise timely prudent applications, as soon as ever the
patient begins in the least measure to be distempered.

cards on the Lords day after the evening service, and the upbraiding their
superstition that they will not touch cards or dice on Christmas day; and the
answer is sufficient, that as I spoke not a word of them that did thus, so I
never heard of any that thus made a difference betwixt Christmasse day and the
Lords day, but that if they used that liberty on the later, they used it on the
former too; However if by the Diatribist it were deemed criminous in the one, I
should have hoped he might have been gratified by hearing it was abstained from
in the other: For my own part I never allowed my self the liberty on either,
and know not that I ever saw it used, and therefore I am sure there is nothing
farther to be replied to by me in that. I as heartily with a devout,
conscientious, profitable observation of the Lords day, as of any other
Festivity, and cannot justly fall under the Diatribists censure for any thing I
have so much as intimated in this matter.

doctrine as a crime, and a part of superstition, that the day has been
accounted more sacred then the Lords day, and the proof brought out of my 20th.
where says he, I call it most sacred, and out of my 24th. where I say it has
been kept if not much more, yet certainly as strictly as any Lords day in the
year.

misprision in each of these; The phrase most sacred. 20. does not at all
belong to the day, (much less to the preferring it before the Lords day in
respect of sacredness) but only to a Christian Festivity, as that is made up
of prayer, praises, Eucharist, charity, hospitality, etc: All which being put
together I hope I could not offend in styling it most sacred, such as the
extravagant, irrational riots of men ought not to assault and pollute.

sacred to be found in that 24th. all that is said is, that in this nation the
day of the birth of Christ has been kept (if not much more) certainly as
strictly as any Lords day in the year, and this interpreted most clearly by the
following words) in frequenting the services of the Church, in the use of the
Liturgy, Sermon, Sncraments, etc. And I cannot imagine how this manner of
strict observing of it can be criminous in it self, or to the prejudice of the
Lords day, on which it is no news to say that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
which I make an ingredient in the strictness of the celebration, and that
which denominates it more strict, is not constantly celebrated; and yet sure no
fault that it is constantly celebrated on Christmas day.

strictness of observing is one thing, and the sacredness is another, Any
private fast may be more strictly observed, more, or more severe strictness of
duty allotted to it, then to the Lords day, and yet the Lords day, as set apart
by the Apostles of Christ, in respect of that institution, and of the
resurrection of Christ, to the commemorating whereof it was consecrated, be
esteemed and looked on as most sacred. I need to say no more of that.

ground which he pretends from his own knowledge, to assign of my thus
speaking: viz. that we may make the Lords day and Festivals to be founded on
the same authority, viz. of the Church, this he must very much dissemble his
knowledge, if he confess not to be a mistake also.

margent he grants that I say that the Apostles instituted the Lords day. 31.
and so certainly I do (though I know not in what words of Scripture that
institution is set down) But, says he, there be other words. 57. which speak
of the Lords day by the same authority appointed. To which I answer that the
words there used [though the Lords day be by the same authority appointed]
belong not at all to the stating, of this question, and being introduced in
that form [though etc.] they are not any affirmation that the Lords day is not
instituted by any higher authority then Christmas day, but only a concession of
what was asked by the Quaerist, without so much as examining or inquiring into
the utmost of the authority by which it stood. Of this I had sufficiently
expressed my sense. 31. as the Diatribists margent confesses from me, viz. that
the Apostles instituted the Lords day, whereas in that 57th. I speak as plainly
of Christmas day, that it has its authority from the institution and usage of
the Universal Church; And if when the matter is so clear, and my meaning so
express both for the one and the other, I must yet be accused for the
contrary, and this be affirmed from the Diatribists knowledge to be my ground,
viz. a design to make the Lords day and Festivals to be founded on the same
authority, and that by him specified, viz. of the Church; It Is certainly most
visible, that either this is a calumny in the Diatribist, or else that the word
Church must be so taken as to comprehend that part of it, of which the Apostles
were rulers in person, and then what harm has been in that speech thus
interpreted, the Church of the Apostles instituted the Lords day, and either
they personally, or their successors used and delivered down the other
Festivals, the Festival of Easter being derived undoubtedly from the Apostles,
Philip and John, Peter and Paul, as has already clearly appeared out of the
difference betwixt Victor and Polycrates; And other Festivals by the passages
of the Martyrdom of Ignatius and Polycarp, i. e. by evidence of story being
demonstrated to be little later, though of Christmasse this do not so
expressly appear to me as to be any where affirmed by me.

not usual to touch cards or dice on Christmas day, and this must add either
to our superstition or hypocrisy, our superstition, if they be lawful, in that
they forbid them on that day, that God has not forbidden them; Hypocrisy, if
they be unlawful, in abstaining then, and yet using them on there days. But we
shall soon be extricated from the power of this Dilemma, by affirming, 1. that
those sports used moderately, as diversions, and no way abused by our
inordinacy, are not by any argument that ever I met with, proved to be toto
genere, or absolutely unlawful, and so that they may be used for divertisement
on other days, and particularly on the following days of that Festivity, and
yet 2dly that they are no way necessary, and so that no man offends, that
abstains from them on all other days, and employs himself better constantly.

consequent also, that he that has fed on the body and blood of Christ, and
consecrated himself in an extraordinary manner to commemorate the mystery of
our redemption on Christmas day, and agreeably thereto, desires to spend it so
much more strictly then other days, as not to admit those sports (which are
lawful on other days) to divide any part of that, can never be criminous in so
doing.

riot (but such is not all lawful divertisement) on the following days, he
knows they are no way pleaded for by me, and if any be guilty of them, as the
shame thereof is due to the offenders, not to the festival, which is innocent
and laudable; so it is too well known that the Lords day it self has not been
secured from the same unhappy adherences.

heathens worshipped the Sun on that day, and that revelling upon it are fitter
for such heathen feasts then for Christians, as the Diatribist could suggest in
this place that the Saturnalia were celebrated about the same time that
Christmas was, and that the excesses of the following days are services fitter
for the revels of Bacchus and Saturn or the birth day of Herod, then for the
festivity of a spiritual Savior. All this is true, and equally granted by both
parties, and so has no propriety or pertinency to the dispute between us.

Sect. 16. Christmas, if of the same original with Easter, certainly
Apostolical. However, of the practice of the Primitive Church. All rendering of
motives no (...).
introductory to a discourse more general, to show by what authority, festivals
in general, and particularly this of Christmas, pretends to stand in the
Catholic Church, which I acknowledged not to be by any institution of Christ's,
but to have had the beginning from the Apostles or the succeeding Church.

originals, beginning first with that of the Apostles. And of this he thinks he
need say no more, then to appeal to the same arguments which he had used
against the Apostles institution of Easter. 6. viz. 1. the no mention of such
institution in the Scripture; 2. the express words of Socrates, that neither
Christ nor his Apostles commanded the feast of Easter to be observed.

return having now paid it so punctually in the 4h. where beside clear answers
to the Diatribists arguments, I added evidences undeniable that the feast of
Easter was observed by the Apostles, And I cannot doubt but they will be of
force with him, when he shall take leisure to weigh them; And then if the case
shall be acknowledged the same betwixt Easter and Christmasse, that of the
resurrection and this of the birth of Christ (as the Diatribist seems to
acknowledge in tendering no one argument more against the Apostolicalness of
Christmas, then he had before produced against the institution of Easter by
them) then it is evident my affirmation must ascend higher then it ever meant
to have done, and not proceed disjunctively, that this feast of the nativity is
derived either from the Apostles or the succeeding Church, but leaving out the
latter part of the partition, fix upon the former, that, being yielded to have
the same original with Easter, it is certainly derived from the Apostles, from
whence it appears that of Easter is derived.

evidences which may justly pretend to some force, at least ad hominem, to him
that has no more against this, then against all other Christian festivals,
viz. those from the martyrdomes of Ignatius and Polycarp, written by those that
were present at them, and so lived soon after the Apostles.

Polycarps recorded in that famous Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, I have set
down at large, and made my inferences from it. 33. and 34. of that treatise of
Festivals, To which I have here formerly added that other parallel testimony
from the acts of Ignatius.

affirmation, without all diffidence, that other Festivals beside that of the
weekly Lords day, were derived to us, some certainly from the Apostles, others
from the Church immediately succeeding the Apostles; In one of which ranks
though I have no reason to doubt but this of the Nativity of Christ is to be
placed, yet because we have not those evidences of the fact which we have for
Easter and others, I shall not build upon any degree of uncertainties, nor
affirm more then what that treatise has showed out of the ancient Fathers,
that this feast is deduced to us early from the first antiquity.

Socrates nor my L. of Falkland (who is joined next to him) has suggested any
thing; and then what was thus done by them, must not in equity fare the worse
for my adding the mention of a motive or incitement that might reasonably
recommend it to them, which is therefore presently styled (...), a show of
wisdom, as if all reasonable motives were to be blasted under that title, as
all uncommanded performances here are said to be by the express words of the 2d
Commandment, and Col. 2. 23. But sure we have formerly spoken enough of this
arguing.

Sect. 17. The Encaenia, a religious feast instituted by the the Jews, and
approved by Christ, vindicated from all his exceptions. Marriage feasts.
Religious feasts cannot be unlawful, if civil be lawful. The feast of Purim a
religious feast.
Encaenia among the Jews, the feast of dedication not instituted by God in the
Law, but in commemoration of the purging of the altar by Judas Maccabeus, and
yet this observed by the Jews, and approved by Christ's presence at it, Joh:
10. 23.

Diatribist answers, that there may be many mistakes in this, And truly it
matters not how many there may be, as long as there appears not to be any one.

there were three feasts of dedication, and I cannot but know that learned men
are divided of which it is here meant. But how can this first answer be of any
avail, when I that took notice, as he confesses, of the three, made it evident
that the place was meant of the third, that instituted in the Maccabees, and
the Diatribist cannot deny but it is probable so it was, and offers not to
answer the proofs, or to pretend ought for either of the two former against
this.

granting it to be the last, yet there are reasons to think it was not a
religious Festival but a civil, as the feast of Purim seems to be, Esth: 9. 21,
22. But it is not imaginable the Diatribist should thus think, or be persuaded
by these reasons.

reason is from the words 1 Mac. 4. 59. They ordered it should be kept yearly
with mirth and gladness, adding that though it be said v. 56. they offered
burnt-offerings, yet that was v. 53. according to the law, and so was worship
commanded.

proof, that this was a religious feast, and it was great surprise to me to see
it brought to infer the contrary: For what greater evidence can there be
brought of a religious feast, then this, of which out of the Story he has set
down a considerable portion, but lies in the Maccabees more completely thus.

Now on the 25th day of the Ninth month (which is called the Month Casleu) in
the 148th year they rose up betimes in the morning and offered sacrifice
according to the law upon the now altar of burnt-offering which they had made;
look at what time and what day the heathen had profaned it, even upon that was
it dedicated with songs and citherns, harps and cymbals; Then all the people
fell upon their faces worshipping and praising the God of heaven who had given
them good success, and so they kept the dedication of the altar 8 days, and
offered burnt-offerings with gladness; and sacrificed the sacrifice of
deliverance and praise etc. and then v. 59. Moreover Judas and his brethren
with the whole congregation of Israel ordained that the days of the dedication
of the altar should be kept in their season from year to year by the space of
eight days from the 25 day of the month Casleu with mirth and gladness.

Diatribist, Is there any reason to think this was not a religious festival,
nay is it possible for him to give any account, why in setting down the
passages of it, he should omit the peoples falling upon their faces,
worshipping and praising the God of heavens and sacrificing the sacrifices of
deliverance and praise, together with Judas and his brethren and the
congregation (which is not God, as has hitherto been pretended it ought to be
from the 2d and 4th Commandment) ordaining that it should be so kept for the
future from year to year?

religiousnesse of the Festival, or the institution by man and not by God? And
is there now against all this any force in the words v. 53. [according to the
law] which the Diatribist confronts to the mention of burnt-offerings, as an
answer, or reason, why that which was kept with burnt-offerings, was yet no
religious feast? May not burnt-offerings according to the law, such as the
Mosaical law approves of, yea and commands to be used for burnt-offerings, be
used in a religious feast? what was ever suggested by any disputer with less
appearance of truth or probability? He knows that in the free will offerings
there were yet laws given by Moses according to which they were to offer, and
why should it not be so in a feast ordained by Judas? would he imagine that
illegal offerings should have been sought out for it, to constitute it a
religious feast?

conviction to the Diatribist, I shall not inquire why it did not prevail with
him. Only of this I am sure, that if this one instance had been permitted to
appear, what indeed it is, and now is visibly demonstrated to be a religious
feast instituted by the Church of the Jews, and not by God, and yet approved
by him, there can never need any farther evidence to confute and demonstrate
the vanity of all his three Diatribae of Superstitition, Will Worship,
Festivals, his suggestions from superstatutum, from additions to the word, from
the 2d and 4th Commandments, from Col. 2. whether as it mentions Will Worship
or the Commands of men.

Christmas festivity, supposing the utmost that he can wish, that it was not
observed by the Apostles, but instituted by the Church, be two or three hundred
years after Christ, being perfectly answerable to this of the dedication, and
so demonstrated, by analogy with that, to be approved by Christ.

evidence should by all convenient means be rendered uneffectual, All the
unhappiness of it was, that the matter would not yield any such, and so the
Diatribist was to content himself with such as we have now discovered.

discovered, and that yet it will be (more then) said that it was a religious
feast and so observed, he therefore has a 3d answer in reserve, Then says he,
it may be fairly suggested that they went beyond their commission in making
this feast annual and perpetual, which neither Solomon nor Zorobabel did
theirs, for ought we read.

symptoms of a desperate cause, that fain would catch at some supports, but is
forsaken of all. It Is evident Judas and his brethren and the whole congregation
ordained that it should be kept thus from year to year, 1 Mac. 4. 59. and as
evident that it was (...) observed by the Jews even in Christ's time, and as
evident still that Christ was present at that feast (and so approved of and
confirmed it) Ioh. 10. 23. And yet says he, it may be fairly suggested that
they went beyond their commission in making this feast annual, what again could
have been said more unluckily then this, more contrary to express evidence in
every degree of it?

feasts of dedication, at the erecting the Temple in Solomon's, and reedifying
it in Zorobabels time, if they were annual, were fully parallel with this, and
that they were so, was by this Diatribist affirmed to be the opinion of learned
men, in this very page, who, says he, interpreted the place of John 10. some
of the one, some of the other of these, which twere ridiculous for them to do,
if it were not annual.

once a piece, I shall now demand, why might they not as lawfully be celebrated
often, or annually and ordinarily, as for one turn and extraordinarily? If the
first offended not by being super statutum, how could the second or hundredth
or thousandth repetition render it criminous? It Is not imaginable what reason
can be given for this, that what was lawful last year, shall be impious this
year; what ground of so great difference, that one should be approved, the
other condemned, one not only innocent but commendable, and the other (i. e.
the same received into constant annual practice) repudiated and rejected.

difference lies all this while, extraordinary days of thanksgiving for one
turn says he, he accounts lawful to be done by the higher powers, and so
extraordinary days of humiliation; From whence I conclude, that if King Lucius
1400 years ago kept Christmas day for one turn and no more, and so Good Friday
also, he had the Diatribists leave to do it very freely and lawfully; But if
when he had done so once, he shall offer to do it again, the next year, then
Mr. C. must needs write Triplicem Diatriben against him.

last mistake in me, will be soon found of the same rank with the former.
Another mistake, says he, is this, that that feast was approved and confirmed
by Christ's presence at it, whereas, says he, the text produced says no such
thing, but only thus, It was at Jerusalem (mark that, not at the Temple) not
elsewhere, the feast of the dedication, and v. 22. Jesus walked in the Temple,
so he did other days, any day when no feast was etc.

arguing, for it will not easily be paralleld in any Diatribist, All that is by
me affirmed from the text, is that Christ was present at it, the rest is my
deduction from thence, and I hope I have not offended therein, For is not that
an evidence of Christ's approbation, and so confirmation of it? would Christ
have been present at an unlawful, nay (as this must be by the Diatribists
divinity) superstitious detestable feast, wherein the 2d and 4th Commandments
were directly violated by the very keeping of it, and never have reprehended
it? would he not have scourged it and dispatched it out of the Temple, as he did
that huckstring custom of buying and selling there, and expressed as great
impatience against such superstitious violations, as those other profanations
of his Fathers house? would not his presence at the Feast have had the scandal
of superstition, if the Feast it self had had that crime in it?

marked, that this Feast was at Jerusalem, not at the Temple, is very strange.
For if it were a religious Feast (as has already appeared it was from the
story of the institution in the Maccabees) then sure it was in the Temple, and
so at Jerusalem, where the Temple was. And what if Jesus walked in the Temple on
other days, when no feast was, does it therefore follow that now it was not the
Feast, when he walked there, and when the text says expressly that it was the
Feast? This is a new sort of arguing still, and this may be reiterated more
turns then one, and yet nothing amiss in it.

Encaenia, is appliable, says he, to my second instance among the Jews, the
festivities of marriage, For marriage it self, says he, is a civil thing and
not religious. But I shall not engage farther in new controversies, having enough
before me already (else sure marriage might be approved to be religious) I shall
only need to demand on this head of discourse, what the difference is between a
civil, and a religious festivity? I shall suppose only this, that in the one
the public services of the Church, among Christians, prayers, Psalms, Sermon,
Eucharist, (some or all of them) are used, as among the Jews, sacrifices, etc.
adding to these festival diet also, whereas the other is made up only of the
latter.

Diatribist grants) lawful among the Jews, and so among Christians at the
celebration of marriages, I shall demand how it is possible, the other should be
unlawful? Can the services of the Church being added make that criminous, which
was innocent before? It Is possible indeed for a profane mixture (such as riot,
etc.) to defame and pollute that, which is most sacred, but have the sacred
offices of the Church that same accursed force in them, to make that which was
but civil before, sacrilegious and impious? This is another rarity, that I had
not formerly been acquainted with.

affirmed of the feast of Purim among the Jews, of which though having made
mention in the Practical Catechism, I added no more in the Treatise of
Festivals, yet there cannot be any thing more pertinent to our present debates,
this being without any direction from God, voluntarily instituted by the Jews
not only for one turn, but as an establishment among them, on the 14th and 15th
day of the month Adar yearly, Hest. 9. 21. Now of this he takes notice by the
way. 29. (treating of the Encaenia) and says of it as of the other, that it
seems to be a religious festival, but a civil; But this again without the least
show of probability.

text to demonstrate it, Hest. 9. There v. 16. the Jews had rest from their
enemies, and thereupon v. 17. on the 13th day, and 14th of the month Adar
rested they, and made it a day of feasting and gladness and v. 18. The Jews
that were at Shushan assembled together on the 13th day, and the 14th day
thereof; and on the 15th they rested and made it a day of feasting and
gladness, and v. 19. the Jews of the villages made the 14th day of the month
Adar a day of gladness and feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions
one to another, Here I cannot but suppose that a day of rest, of assembly, of
feasting, and gladness, a good day (i. e. in their style a festival day) a day
of hospitality and charity, sending of portions ((...), such as in a sacrifical
feast) will to any impartial readerpasse for an indication of a religious feast.

days were observed for the first turn, so they are established for a yearly
observation, v. 21. 22. And the Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon
their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves to them, so as it should not
fail, that they would keep these two days according to their writing, and
according to their appointed time every year, v. 27.

religiousness, and for the establishment for continuance; and this still a
feast instituted by the Jews, and not by God himself, and so as clear an
instance, on our side of the matter contested, as is imaginable.

Sect. 8. How the comparison holds between the Lords day and Christmas day.
Institution, usage Apostolical for Festivals. No law in Scripture for the Lords
day.
Lords day, not instituted by Christ, or God himself but by the Apostles,
without any mention in the New Testament of any prescription or law for the
observing of it.

proceed, hoping for some great advantage from it; let us see what the success
will prove.

there want not learned men who think that Christ did design the day. But I
must demand whether he can imagine that those learned men were in the right in
this, or have herein expressed any of their learning? If he cannot think they
have, why does he lose time and gain nothing by the mention of them? If he can,
why does he not so much as offer their grounds of thus opining, when he knows
nor Scripture nor antiquity says any thing of it, and when it were as
tolerable in any opposer to offer his opinion also, that Christmas day was by
Christ himself designed also.

if the Apostles did institute it, that is more then he dare say of Christmas
day. And what if it be? Does that prejudge the observing of Christmas,
supposing it certain (as I do suppose) that it was either of the Apostles or
the succeeding Church? Suppose some feasts of the Jews instituted by God or
Moses, others by the Church of the Jews, and not by Moses, as the Purim and
Encaenia, Are not these latter as lawfully to be kept to all posterity of the
Jews, as those former?

parallel that I set betwixt the Lords day and Christmas day, was only this,
that as neither of them was found prescribed, or by law commanded in Scripture,
so the want of such law should be no prejudice to the one, more then to the
other, as long as by some other way it appeared of the one, that it was derived
from the Apostles or the succeeding Church, as of the other, that it came
immediately from the Apostles; It being evident that if the Apostles usage gave
to one a divine authority, the usage of the succeeding Church must be next to
that, though not divine, and the latter lawful, yea and obligatory, as well,
though not in so high a degree, as the former, as the Encaenia were as lawful,
as the Passover, and were obligatory also, though not by the same authority. By
this it appears that there is certain obligation for the observing of
Christmas, though there should be no certainty of the Apostles instituting it.

If the Lords day was instituted by the Apostles of Christ, do not their
institutions carry in them divine prescription or Law? I answer, that if by
institution be meant giving Law for the observation of it, then there is no
doubt of his proposition, the predication being identical, institution in this
sense, is prescribing, or giving Law.

institution of the Lords day by the Apostles] may signify another thing, viz.
that the Apostles practice, assembling weekly on the Lords day, should have the
force of an institution, or a Law with the succeeding Church, though indeed the
Apostles gave no Law for it, or if they did, no such Law appears from them.

examples of the Apostles are the only way of conveying some usages to us
without any their prescript Law; And accordingly in this sense also I consent
to the Diatribist, that their institutions carry in them divine prescription or
Law, and so I shall no way contend with him in this matter.

grounds, I shall demand, that whatsoever else shall be in the same manner
derived to us, through all ages of the Church, from the times of the Apostles
themselves, may be acknowledged also to carry a divine impression upon it. And
then, to omit Episcopacy (which he cannot but know has perfectly as much to be
said for it in every respect as the Lords day) I shall insist only on the
feast of Easter, which has been demonstrated to be derived from the Apostles,
and so is an instance of all that I pretend in the point of Festivals, leaving
Christmas day to the equity of proportion, and the other evidences that are
produced for the antiquity of it.

no Law, that appears in Scripture for the Lord's day. In order to which I
said, that if any thing of that nature be sought there, it will rather appear
to belong to the annual, then weekly feast of the resurrection, naming 1 Cor.
5. 8. (...) let us keep the feast, and the mention of (...), the Lords day,
Rev. 1. 10. by some thought to belong to the annual day also.

authorities of some ancient and modern writers, which, says he, do not seem
to understand these places thus. And though twere no impossible thing to answer
those testimonies, yet I shall never discourage him in that very reasonable
course of appeal to the judgment of the Fathers, and other such Learned men,
but yielding him all he desires of both these places, I must only desire him to
remember, that this will no whit advantage him or prejudice me, unless he can
bring out of the Scripture some other places, which are more apodicticall
evidences of Apostolical Law for the weekly Lords day, then these are for the
annual; For the matter is clear, all that I was there to prove, was no more but
this, that there was no Law in Scripture for either of them.

Sect. 19. Aerius 's herisie that Festivals are unlawful. St Augustine's
testimony added to Epiphanius 's. The Diatribists inconstancy. The testimony of
the Church of Smyrna, an evidence of keeping the days of tho Apostles
martyrdom. The Testimony from the martyrdom of Ignatius according with it.
Testimonies for the antiquity of Festivals.
Epiphanius's censure of Aerius as of an heretic, for affirming festivals
unlawful, his answer is, that all is not heresy that Epiphanius calls so, nor
all Aerius's opinions justly censured as heretical.

Diatribist is concerned to think, both in respect of this and some other
interests, that especially of Episcopacy. But for the averting of so great a
crime, it would well become the accused to offer some reason for the clearing
himself, and not only to have mentioned the name of Osiander the Epitomizer of
the Centuriators, wose words are not affirmed to belong to this particular of
Festivals, and if they did, whose authority is sure so Incompetent to weigh
with Epiphanius in setting down the sense of the ancient Church, that in all
reason some evidences should have been annexed to add weight to him.

strange, that they which transcribe that affirmation from Aerius, will not
allow it to be heresy in him; I will only demand whether St Augustine be of
any better account with him, Haer. 53. he knew what heresy was, and what
Aerius was guilty of, and whether elsewhere he may deserve to be believed, when
in consort with himself and with Epiphanius, he says, Recte festa Ecclesiae
colunt, qui se Ecclesiae filios Sam. 253. De Temp. Domin. 1. Adv.
recognoscunt, they that profess themselves sons of the Church do duly observe
the feasts of the Church, setting this of the nativity in the front of such,
where surely those that do not observe them, must disclaim their sonship, and
that is but a paraphrase to express those, whom Epiphanius styles heretics.

evidences, that they that observe feasts are superstitious, I shall think my
self obliged to do more then deny the accusation.

festivities of martyrs mentioned by me in the same. he acknowledges they began
betimes, as superstition, says he, ever attends religion and devotion, adding
that though they were intended for good ends, yet they produced in time much
superstition.

answer is very unsufficient, and inconstant; Insufficient, for what if it were
granted that in a process of time these festivities did occasionally produce
some evil, so Christianity it self, so all things that should have been most
for our wealth, may through the vices of men be perverted into occasions of
falling; But what is that to the antiquity of Festivals, which is the only
thing that these instances were required to testify.

inconstant, for at first these festivities are looked on as superstition
attending religion and devotion (and by the way, if that be applicable to these
festivities, that will be a competent character of their antiquity, for
religion and devotion, were brought in with Christianity, and if the
Festivities were the superstition that attended that, they will be pretty
ancient) and yet in the latter part it is said of them, that they produced in
time much superstition, which latter if it be true, then the former which was
contrary, is not true, and that is sufficient to be replied to that answer.

presume too much upon my own reason in concluding from the testimony of the
Church of Smyrna, that the days of the death of the Apostles themselves were
solemnized thus early, i. e. before Polycarps death] Sure his censure is not
over reasonable; For when by those express words of that Churches Epistle it
is first apparent, that Polycarps death was thus celebrated, 2. That this
Polycarp was immediate successor to the Apostles, and lived in the same time
with them, 3 That this commemoration of Martyrs was before this time used in
the Church, and no new thing now to be done to Polycarp; what reason of
doubting can there be, but that at this time the Apostles having received (many
of them) this crown of martyrdom should be thus commemorated (...) in joy and
exultation, i. e. with a festivity, when this appears so expressly of
Polycarp, and that in accord to former practice, especially when to that is
added the instance perfectly parallel of Ignatius, yet more ancient then
Polycarp, and the day of his death precisely observed by those that were
present, on this very purpose, say they, ut secundum tempus martyrii ejus
congregati communicemus athletae, that they might assemble at the day of his
martyrdom, and communicate with this champion.

more or more express testimonies for the festivals of the Apostles, need not
seem strange, the records being so few which remain of those times, and my
reading being so small; For the present, these two may be considered, being
testimonies of competent antiquity, and force to prove what I pretend to prove,
that Festivities were observed by the Church next succeeding the Apostles, and
why Polycarp and Ignatius should have that honor, when Peter and Paul were not
allowed it, I still profess not to discern reason, nor consequently to make
any doubt of it.

Diatribist is willing to form an argument from my not bringing of testimonies.
33. it is remarkable that. 34. is wholly past over in silence by him, which
yet produces the authorities of Gregorius Thaumaturgus, of Cyprian, of
Tertullian, ex majorum traditione (and so of those that were much more ancient
then he) and so entirely made up of testimonies of the first antiquity
concerning the memories of the Martyrs (which must sure include the Apostles,
as many of them as were thus crowned) before any Churches were built, wherein
to assemble and celebrate their Festivals.

Diatribist had little reason to complain of want, at that very time when he
was thus overcharged with plenty of testimonies, and has not a word to return
to any one of them, any more then he does. 35. to the mentions of Origin,
Cyprian, and Chrysostom, deducing the Christmas festivity from the first
antiquity.

Sect. 20. Strictures on. 35. The author of the Constitutions a competent
testifier when in accord with others. Justinus 's edict for Festivals
reconcilable with the Apostolical usage of them. The 20000 slain by Diocletian
on Christmas day. Objections against the 25th of December answered. The
controversy in Chrysostom about the day, not the Feast. (...). His words full
for the Apostolicalness of both.
weight in it, that I must not allot any solemn answers to it, the lightest
strictures will be more proportionable.

Author of the Constitutions he says, this will weaken my cause the more,
because they are generally accounted spurious, This sure must be very unjust,
that what was confirmed so newly from Origin, Cyprian, and Chrysostom, should
not only not gain, but lose strength by the addition of the Constitutions,
which besides that they are acknowledged ancient by all which least believe
them Apostolical, are known to be designed to imitate that antiquity they
pretend to, and are never justly rejected, but when that which they affirm is
found discordant to the affirmations of other writings of undoubted antiquity,
which having no place here, there is as little room for the Diatribists censure.

Justinus's edict (which I mentioned) that it was a proof that the Apostles did
not institute it, is already answered by saying that the Apostles practice
being all that is pretended for the institution, the edict of the Emperor for
the Universal observation of it is very reconcilable with that, (and so also
with the usage of the first ages after the Apostles in case it be divolved no
higher then these, as the several decrees of Magistrates Civil and
Ecclesiastical for an universal observation of the Lords day are sure perfectly
reconcilable with the Apostolical original thereof.

Christians that were burnt by Diocletian on this day (sure long before that
edict of Justinius (at which time says the Niceph: l. 7. c. 6.
Historian, (...), all that were called Christians of all ages assembled in the
Church to celebrate the nativity, And to that, it seems he has no other
return, but his advertisement that Nicephorus says it was Maximinus, that was
thus bloody, Maximianus, I suppose he would have said, who reigned with
Diocletian, and then it comes to the same pass, and the truth is acknowledged,
which soever the name were.

day of this festival to be December. 25. his proofs are extraordinary; 1. from
the Doctor himself, that it was called Midwinter day, which is a fortnight
before. But that has already been answered, the variation being evidenced to
be from the want of exactness in our Calendars, not from any doubt of the day.

opinion of many Divines, that our Lord died when he was 33 and halfyears of
age, or near unto 34, as says he, the Doctor says, Qu. 1.. 10. What Divines
these are that thus calculate, I am not told, nor how competent they are to be
confronted to the censual Tables, from whence S. Chrysostom fetches the day of
his birth: But the luck of it is, that citation from the Doctor was easily
consulted, and on view of the place, there is no more but this, that Christ
preached the will of his Father three years or four together, which I thought
had signified no more then for some uncertain space betwixt 3 or 4 yeears; And
if he were born in December and died in April, what difficulty is there in this
calculation? or what needed the Diatribist to have cited from the Doctor the
words [neer 34.] when he knows there is nothing to that sense said by him?

many, will be a faileur) which may make us doubt of the truth of the
calculation, is the younger date of the Arabic Codex of the Councels; But when
that Codex was dated, he has not told us, And if it were later then I thought,
it may yet possibly speak truth, and so that will give us no reason of doubting.

Doctor is upon Ifs, and It Is probable, And I heartily wish the Diatribist would
but speak probably, and till he does so, that he would not have such aversions
to the Doctors Ifs, I mean, that he would use diffidence, when he pretends not
to demonstrate.

returns about the Epiphany, but leave them to be judged by the. to which they
are opposed.

Chrysostom, and his dispute against that Father, my answer is very brief,
that all that I attempted to prove from Chrysostom, was the due timing of the
feast on the 25th of December, and that being done beyond controversy, I
pretend not to derive other decisions from that testimony, but leave them to
stand on their own basis.

Chrysostom, he at length concludes the authority of the Church in
constituting, and celebrating this festival in all ages much shaken, I must
reminde him that that Fathers words which affirm it a question at that time,
belong not to the Festivity it self, but only to the (...).
particularity of the day, whether it were to be kept on the 25th of December
or on some other day, and accordingly his proofs proceed, (...) that this is
the very time; And though some doubted whether this were a new, or the (...)
ancient day of the festivity, yet says he, others defended it, (...), (...),
that it was old and ancient (or original, so (...) from (...) signifies, and is
all one with l. 1. contr. Marc. c. 5.
Tertullians quod ab initio, as that with quod ab Apostolis) and from these
ancient, if not these first timas (as (...) commonly imports, and so again in
Ib.
Tertullian, ordo ad originem recensus) it has been manifest and illustrious
to all that dwell from Thrace to Gadeira, from East to West, that sure with him
signifies, all the world over.

dispute, which side soever was in the right, is founded in a supposition of
the feast it self being (...) and (...) original and from the beginning, And
indeed if the first proof which he offers for it be considered, it is not
imaginable how he should say more to the asserting of the Apostolicalnesse both
of the Festivity and the day also.

That this is the season, says he, on which Christ was born, the first
demonstration is (...), that the feast was so speedily promulgate every where,
and ascended to so great an height, and flourisht, adding that as Gamaliel said
of the preaching of the Gospel, that if it were of men it would come to naught,
but if of God, ye cannot dissolve it, lest ye be found fighters against God,
the same he might say confidently (...) of this day (not of the Gospel, as the
Diatribist afterward says, he thinks he means, but cannot really do so in this
place, against such (...)
express words) that (...), seeing, or because it is from God, therefore it is
not only not dissolved, but every year advances, and becomes more splendid, and
yet farther adding (in the words recited by the Diatribist, and by omitting the
former, rendered capable of being misunderstood) (...), seeing the preaching (of
it certainly, i. e. of the day, or else it can have no coherence with the feast
or antecedents and whole contexture) in a few years took possession of the
whole world, though tentmakers and fishermen, unlearned and idiots brought it
amongst them.

prejudice to the Universal observation of this day in the Apostles times, I
leave the Reader (and, if he please, the Diatribist also) to consider.

Sect. 21. The Diatribists answer to my conclusion. Strictures on some passages
in it.
reply to my conclusion, that the fastidious rejecting or not observing the
Festivals of the universal Church must be looked on as an act of affected
departure from the universal Church of Christ in all ages, and not only from
the reformed Church of England.

This, says he, is an heavy charge, if it can be proved. And for that I must
now refer my self to the premises in that treatise and in this defense, nor
indeed can it be reasonable that I descend to any other way of probation or
vindication, till this which I have used be invalidated; For a conclusion being
(as this is) deduced from the premises, what more can be required to establish
the conclusion, then the confirmation of the premises?

laws of Discourse for the Diatribist to confute or deny, or make answer to the
conclusion, any otherwise then by refuting the media, which have inferred it;
so must it be in me, to reply to such offers of answer, which can never
signify any thing, as long as my premises stand in force, especially if it
proceed by denying those things, which this vindication has undertaken to
prove, without offering answer (as without the spirit of divination it could
not) to those proofs.

example, The Diatribist here begins with this affirmation, that I have not
proved that the universal Church of the first age has observed any of the
Festivals, And I have here evidently proved that Easter was observed by Philip
and John the Apostle, and from them received by the Asiaticks, or Eastern
Christians and so likewise by the Western from S. Peter and S. Paul, and so
sure there is no farther need of refuting this affirmation.

appear in each ensuing step of his answer, and the rule by which he is content
to be judged applied exactly to the condemning him in this very business of the
Easter Festivity, which is of as much force, as if it equally appeared of every
other of the great Festivals: But still this were to repeat what has here been
already said, and vindicated from all his exceptions.

news in it. And 1. let me admire his candor, when he will not stick to grant
this rule to be good, that whatever doctrine or practice has the concordant
attestation of the Churches of the Apostolical time, while they were yet alive,
it was Apostolical] but withal adds as if he had been too liberal, that the
negative is a surer rule to judge by, (as if indeed any predication could be
surer then that which is identical.)

argument against the concordant attestation of the primitive ancients
concerning Apostolical tradition drawn from Papias's affirmation of the
Milennium, had not, I confess, formerly been produced, but it falls out that I
have Qu. 1.. 38. and in the Def. of L. Falklands Tract of Infall.
elsewhere sufficently cleared it.

p. 197. from the Pract. Cat. p. 181. that Christmas was not universally
solemnized till about 400 years after Christ, and after (a little more to his
advantage) till at least the 400 years, p. 201.] is both as to the words and as
to the sense very much misreported; The place is ready to be seen, and lies
thus. The authority by which this festival stands in the Church, is that of the
practice of the Primitive universal Church, and this made appear 1. from the
immemorial observation of it, 2. from the ancient Fathers speaking of it as an
ancient usage (in the notion of (...) even now given) 3. by the testimonies not
only of the author of the Constitutions (ancient though not Apostolical) but of
Origin, of Cyprian, of Ammianus Marcellinus, speaking of Julian 1300 years
since, and mentioning the Epiphany as a known festival of the Church, and so
both that, and Christmasse of a far greater antiquity, then the time of Julian.
Lastly, by the words of Chrysostom, that though the particular day December
25. was not fixed at Antioch till his time, yet from Rome over all the West it
had been so observed from the most ancient records of Christianity, Upon which
my conclusion is, that it appears at least to be an Ecclesiastical constitution
very early received over all the West, the far greatest part of Christendom,
and within 400 years universally solemnized, and this a very competent
authority, when withal it is so probable, that it may be more, according to a In
cis quae scriptura nec jubet, nec prohibet, illud est sequendum quod consuetudo
roboravit, quae sine dubio de traditione manavit. Tertull. de coron. milit. and
Quod universa tenet ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi potestate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. Aug. de bapt.
con. Donat. l. 4. c. 23.
rule of the Fathers, That very ancient and general usages, whose beginnings
are unknown, may be resolved to be of Apostolical institution or practice etc.

transcribed from that place, to demonstrate what fidelity there was in this
citation, not only in applying that to the Festival, which belonged peculiarly
to that particular day Dec. 25. but also in affirming from me, that it was not
universally solemnized till about 400. years and till at least the 400. year
(which leaves it free to be of a dote yet later) when I say it is so probable
that it was of Apostolical institution or practice, that the feast of
Epiphanie was spoken of, as a known festival long before that time, and the
feast of Innocents, attending this of Christmas affirmed by Origin to be by the
holy Fathers according to the will of God commanded to be for ever celebrated
in the Church, and only added, that it appears to be at least an
Ecclesiastical institution very early received over all the West, and the
far greater part of Christendom, and within 400. years universally
solemnized.

unjust then this? or what heed can be given to testimonies thus transformed
into shapes, which the writer never dreamed of, and yet from them conclusions
deduced such as here follow in this place of the Diatribist, that my rash zeal
has carried me beyond the bounds of Reason and Religion.

expression of his all that I have to say is, 1. That my conclusion was
inferred out of premises, not dictated by zeal, 2die. That it affixed no
censure on any person, belonging only to those who should be found guilty of
it, and so was wholly designed to ends of charity, to reform, not to reproach
any: 3. That if there had been any thing of rash, or bitter in it, it might
have admonisht the Diatribist (...), not to be so soon guilty of greater
sharpness; As it is, I must only infer, that it seems the guilty person
has the privilege of accusing and judging in any form of language, and so I
shall not be so unseasonable as to admonish him of the injustice of it, at a
time when it is so improbable he will reap profit by it.

fastidious reflections upon three Quaestions which I had returned to the Author
of the 16, Quaeres; But because I see he likes not the Quaestions in my terms,
and in his proposing of four others, inserts particulars, wholly rejected by
me, as that of [parts of worship] adding [as it is propounded,. 9.] (but I
hope not by me so propounded) of abuse to superstition and profaneness, etc. I
shall be as little obliged to accept them in his terms or tempted by the
nature of the task or by the probability of the success of it with this
Diatribist) to begin new desputes at this time; It is not amiss that we shake
hands for a while and commune each with his own heart in stillness: And so I
heartily take my leave of him.

The End.
ERRATA.
Page Line Read 1 38 so full 3 26 if we 12 3 species 14 10 whither with 18 22
without 24 29 superstitious 25 38 destructive 26 24 (...) 38 3 that without 39
8 in it 42 7 of other 45 11 dele to 48 13 rerumque 25 I shall 75 24 worships 80
34 of this 83 38 institutione 86 17 of my sense 28 36 (...) 108 26 rendering,
These 109 11 and 113 3 words 116 6 on mine 117 28 of, not 129 32 (...) 150 2
Will-devised 152 23 (...) 30 dele be 154 12 place all 171 35 (...) 180 38 on
his 187 4 (...). 192 3 (...) 206 16 41. 207 35 depredicates 208 2 and St 213 20
proposes 224 10 gloriose 228 32 it 229 4 dele, 237 32 (...) 239 38 rendered 243
29 downward 250 2 hither 251 32 reach 268 18 entrance 272 1 wish a 279 7 after
be add, 17 be it two 286 17 whose 22 think

p. 10. in marg. read (...). p. 48. in marg. l. 1r. Chalcidius.

p. 131. marg. li. penult. r. (...).


