Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkyns R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno. GILBERTO Divina
Providentia Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aed. Lamb. Festo Sti Andreae, 1667.
DEUS JUSTIFICATUS: OR, The Divine Goodness Vindicated and Cleared, against the
Assertors of Absolute and Inconditionate REPROBATION.

TOGETHER WITH Some Reflections on a late Discourse of Mr. Parkers, concerning
the Divine Dominion and Goodness.

(...).

Plato. WISD. xi. 23. For thou love all the things that are, and abhorrest
nothing which thou have made; for never would thou have made any thing, if
thou had hated it.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in
Duck-lane, 1668.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT cannot be unknown to any man who has either carefully observed the manners
of Mankind, or perufed the Writings of those of this present Age, who have made
many sad Declarations against the general Corruption of the World; that either
men are stupidly and blockishly Ignorant, even in these days wherein Knowledge
so much abounds; or their Leaders have caused them to Err, by instilling into
them such Principles, as may fairly consist with the practice of Vice and
Immorality; which easing them of that tedious burden of severe Mortification,
and sharp Conflicts with the irregular and inordinate motions of sense and the
bodily life; soon captivated them to the embracing of them, and made a speedy
conquest of their unwary Judgments; and so infinitely prejudiced their minds
against the reception of better Sentiments and Notions, that they cannot
believe either the sense of the most pious and venerable Antiquity, or of our
own present Church to be Orthodox. And I wish I could say that this latter has
not been the greater cause of those monstrous Impieties, which in these late
times so much prevailed amongst us; For certainly, men's natural Faculties and
Capacities, are no whit worse for the entertaining of Truth, if it were rightly
and duly propounded to them, than former ages: but might be much better, if
every Preacher of the Gospel, and Steward of the Mysteries of God, had
faithfully discharged the trust committed to him. But when those that took upon
them the title of Evangelical Shepherds, came not in at the right door, but
impudently challenged and usurped that Sacred Office and Dignity, of being
Co-workers with Christ the chief Shepherd, in that great work of implanting his
own life and lovely Nature in the lapsed and degenerate souls of men, it is no
wonder if the Flock went astray, and became faint and weak through the
unwholesomeness or undue order and proportion of their food. And doubtless the
blessed Jesus who came into the World to heal and cement the broken ruins and
decays of our Natures, did not intend to bring this Heroic undertaking to
perfection by perpetual Miracles, but by a natural and orderly Method; and
therefore, as he himself, before he left the World, breathed on his Apostles,
and gave them Commission both to Teach and Govern his Church: So did they
(having received Authority from the Prince and Head of the Catholic Church,
the Lord Christ) Ordain and Constitute fit persons to succeed them in that
Function; by which we are sufficiently instructed, that it is not for every man
to take upon him the Office of a Minister of the Gospel, lest God take as
little delight in him, as he did in those Prophets of old, who run before they
were sent, (which too many did in the late times, upon the pretense of some
inspired Excellency and Perfection above their Brethren) but only for those
that come into their Office by a regular and due manner; and according to the
Fundamental Laws, and Apostolic Constitutions of the Church wherein they live.
I may therefore refer the Miscarriages observed amongst us, to these two
General Heads.

1. The great Pride and Self-conceitedness which reigns in vulgar spirits,
whereby they make their vainglorious Minds the estimate of their Perfections,
and by puffie conceits of themselves, crumble into infinite Sects and
Divisions, and he that can best act the part of an inspired person, and cant
most fluently in Scripture expressions, becomes the Ring leader of the Sect.
And what gives greater occasion to this, then that pleasant Doctrine to carnal
minds, which teaches them, that when they can but collect themselves to be
heirs of heaven, and fancy their names enrolled among the Stars, they are then
safe enough; They shall tread upon the young Lion and the Dragon, and the enemy
shall never be able to move or disturb their rest. And all this shall be
conferred upon them without any attempts or endeavors of their own toward the
attainment of it: This cannot but fill their sails, and blow up their light
heads, when they consider how easily they have obtained heaven, and how God
himself by a peculiar and discriminating love has separated them from the rest
of the polluted rabble of mankind, and dignified them with the title of his
Beloved Ones. And (as the Nature of every Heresy is to diffuse and spread it
self, and by a contagious affriction, savor all capable Subjects round about
it: no sooner is this Doctrine propounded, but it finds good entertainment by
the unstable and injudicious; because it complies with, and patronizes their
darling Vices, and renders it self very grateful to the Animal Life; and withal
requires no great pains or labor to be fully instructed in it; nothing that
shall rouse them up from their deadly slumber, or molest their desired
security; the whole business is nothing but an inactive and easy belief of
certain propositions, and a delight some application of them to themselves; and
then Heaven cannot fail of being their portion, and reward. Thus while they
soar aloft, and fly in their vain dreams and imaginations, they are really
sucked into a living Hell of woe and misery: and the unrighteous nature, whose
counsels are the very inspirations of that bottomless-pit, takes greater hold
upon them; and having no substantial foundation to bottom themselves upon, they
perish in a storm, and the winds of adverse fortune sink them, even when they
think themselves in the haven of Felicity. True goodness and righteousness
cannot consist with a proud and haughty spirit, and is never found but in that
humble Temper which the Blessed Jesus recommended to all his followers, when he
said, Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly of heart. And certainly it is the
greatest Obex, and impediment to real and solid wisdom that possibly can be
imagined, when we are impatient of instruction, and refuse such wholesome
precepts and counsels, as tend to the building of us up in our most holy Faith;
and by high-flown imaginations climb to the highest boughs of the tree of
knowledge, when we are yet unacquainted with the Rudiments of Christianity. The
way to life and blessedness lies not in the self-chosen tracts of opinions, nor
in sequestring our selves from the rest of the world by an impertinent
contention about words and names; things of no value or concern in comparison
of those momentous and great aims of Religion in perfecting the soul in
Justice, Righteousness, and Goodness; these only will give free access to
Heaven, when the nice speculations of curious Wits, devoid of purity and
innocence, whiter then the light and snow, are not able to waft the soul over
the perturbed casualties and adverse occurrences which are the genuine
productions of this inferior region of Mutability. God is not taken with
shadows of Holiness, nor pleased with Enthusiastic heats, and Paroxysms of
furious zeal: but with those mild and gentle motions, which are begotten and
raised up by that internal Vestal fire, that perpetually burns bright within
it is own Orb, and spends it is Celestial vigor and activity, either in the
consumption or conversion into it is own nature, of whatever is stubborn and
inobsequious to those laws which are the foundation of it is being; and thus
amplifies and enlarges it is dominion by the new accession of superadvenient
forces from it is now-conquered enemies. The true Christian descends not so low,
as to make himself a party against any one (be he of what Judgment or Opinion
he will in matters af speculation and lubricous uncertainty) who sincerely
follows the dictates of his great Lord and Master, whose Birth was ushered in
with an Anthem of Peace and Goodwil amongst men, sung by an Angelick Quire, and
his life spent in diffusions of Charity, and in uniting the hearts of all
mankind to the first and ever-blessed Author of all things. The first cause of
evil to the sons of men was, (...), That they would be their own, or
themselves, as the Philosopher speaks: And now that we are Inhabitants of the
earth, those wrinkles which we contracted from the aged and polluted brow of
Adam, show themselves; and every man looks upon himself as a particular being,
divided and separated from the rest of the World, and sent hither to manage and
carry on the cause of self-interest; and being thus principled, hates all
instruction to the contrary, and scorns to be reformed: And through this
excessive Fastus and swelling pride, the great fomentors of Debates and
Contentions, the whole Earth is overrun with Cruelty and Barbarity; For, from
whence come Wars and Bloodshed, but from that unquiet and turbulent spirit
which cannot rest within it is own Sphere; but by tumultuous and giddy motions,
shakes the Peace and Tranquillity of all round about it? Those wounds which
this Nation not long ago received in her body Politic, the scars of which are
not worn out to this day, are too sad and sure an evidence of those direful
effects which Pride and Ambition produce; especially when cherished by affected
Knowledge, and the unruly and rapacious flames of mistaken Zeal. And when the
unerring and Allcomprehensive Providence of God, which rules and governs the
affairs of this inferior World, was pleased to permit the pride and malice of
profane and immoral persons, to arise to that hight of impiety and
brutishness, as, in defiance of heaven, in despite of the loud clamours of
their own consciences, and without any sense or regard to the common interest
and Good of the Nation, whereof themselves made an unworthy part, to take away
by wicked hands the life of our late Gracious Sovereign, thereby drawing a mask
and veil over the beauteous face of our Church; which like the Heliotrope, must
needs close up her leaves in pensiveness and sorrow, when the Sun that cheared
and enlivened her by his kindly influence, was set and withdrawn from our
Horizon; then, I say, did Wickedness and Irreligion, deluge and overspread the
whole body Politic, like the wild Ocean breaking through it is ancient bounds,
and with a foaming rage swallowing up whole regions at once: and indeed little
else could be expected when once the walls and banks, which restrained and
curbed it is luxuriant pride, were overturned and broken down: Then was Monarchy
stigmatized with the infamous title of Tyranny, and Episcopacy (which excellent
and well-tempered Constitution, both Reason and Scripture averr to be
Apostolical) styled Antichristianism, and new-model'd Popery; and those, who
out of a sense of faith and obedience to God, and generous Loyalty and
Allegiance to their Prince, could not comply with those impious Designs, and
unchristian Projects then set on foot, were accounted Schismatics and
Dissenters from the public interest: And what was it gave birth to these
tragic Scenes of sorrow and disorder, but only the restless and unstable
spirits of injudicious persons, who being puffed up with aspiring thoughts, and
the fantastic images of Glory and Ambition, cast an envious eye upon every
transaction, whether in Church or State, that did not compromise with their
interest, and suit with the ill-contrivances of things their busy minds had
been working out? And that the Gospel which carries Peace in it is forefront,
and owns no other Parent but the Prince of Peace, all whose productions are
like himself, should be made to give an alarm of Rebellion and War, is the most
audacious piece of treachery to God, and uncharitableness to Men, in the World;
as if God were more pleased with the title of the Lord of Hosts, then in being
styled the Father of Mercies, order and consolation throughout the earth.
Surely, he that once said, By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, did
likewise command, to be subject to them, and honor them; as being accountable
to him alone, for the management of the trust committed to them. And it cannot
be a greater reproach and scandal, to that peaceable Religion we profess, then
to see those that own it, and seem to contend most for it, to be such ill
practitioners of those plain Precepts of Obedience to our lawful Magistrates,
and by varnishing them over with the distorted Glosses of their corrupt minds,
make them speak what they never intended in the least to countenance or favor.

2. The second General cause of our Miscarriages, is the precipitant and
inconsiderate Zeal and Fervor of those who took upon them to instruct the
people, which draw along with it many evil and pernicious consequences. And
though I have so much Charity as to think, that most of them directed their
labors, in that kind, to the glory of God, and made that the ultimate end and
result of their Preaching; yet, there is a zeal which is without knowledge and
judgment, and the interest of Religion is not then best advanced, when her
Priests (from whose lips should flow wisdom) are most ignorant. But that I may
not seem to charge them only with Generals, I will descend to some more
particular Considerations upon this head; by which it will easily appear, with
what great indiscretion they managed that high affair they undertook.

1. Therefore they exceedingly erred in propounding to their Charge, such crude
and uncocted Doctrines, as (besides the inconsistency of them with the
principles of Reason, and Truths of first inscription, and incoherence with the
Divine Attributes, (then which, nothing can be excogitated more infallible for
the Exploration of whatever falls under humane cognizance) which is, in some
measure, made good in the following Discourse) they likewise put a certain stop
to the progress of Christianity throughout the World, and are the greatest
impediment to the dissemination of the Gospel, to them that are without; it
being given to be the Religion of all mankind, to run and be glorious, and to
conquer and subdue the Nations to the entertainment of it. For, unless we will
imagine men so stupid, and ignorantly devotional, that they will embrace any
thing, though never so disagreeing with the native sentiments of their own
minds; it is impossible they should ever give any real and unfaigned assent to
such Dogmata of Christianity, as pretend to no other Author, but the Eternal
Logos and Wisdom of God, and are propounded to rational and intellectual
creatures endued with a discriminative sense and perception between truth and
falsehood; and yet, by all the reason that is in them, cannot make them to
appear so. And though the Doctrins themselves should not be in their whole
frame and contexture irrational, yet if we give absurd and inconcinnous
explications of them, there will be as small hope and expectation that any man
should be convinced and persuaded by them, as if they were altogether false.
Such is the intellectual Fabric of men's minds, that they cannot believe or
disbelieve what they will; but there are certain laws and principles interwoven
in the essential frame of their Natures by the great Architect of all things,
by which they are bound up and limited, and which are the foundations of all
Knowledge, whether Natural, Moral, or Metaphysical. And it is very strange to
think, that infinite Wisdom, which alone works constantly and evenly, and
according to the capacities and measures of creatures, should now in this grand
Mystery of the recovery of the World, which of all things is the most like that
high and incomprehensible intellect, which gave birth unto it, so deviate from
the unchangeable laws of it is own being, as to propound such Articles and
Propositions to the World, which without the greatest reluctance and violation
of their Natural Powers and Faculties, they can never fully credit or believe.
And questionless such a way and method of proceeding would so miserably
confound the beautiful Order and Symmetry of things, that beside it must
necessarily engage the Divine Power to the production of a perpetual Miracle
for the begetting Faith and Assent in men; it likewise lays them open and
obnoxious to inevitable Errors, Falsities and Delusions, and there will be no
means left for the attaining to the truth of any thing. And now let any man
consider, what little probability or plausibility of reason there is, that such
a Doctrine as this, whether positively declared so in it self, or made so by
the perverse Glosses, and Paraphrastical Expositions of others, should win and
gain ground upon the World, and effect that purpose for which it was at first
intended.

It was the advice and counsel of the Apostle 1 Cor. x. 32. that we give no
offense either to the Jew, or to the Greek, whereby to alienate their minds
from so excellent a Religion; for there is nothing so much obstructs the
diffusion of any Principles or Dogmata, be they of what sort they will, as when
they contain something which may administer just cause of scruple, and beget an
aversion to it in the mind of a rational and unprejudiced person. He therefore
that would bring over a free and ingenuous Spirit, whether Jew or Heathen to
Christianity, must be sure that he assert nothing Dogmatically, or positively
lay it down as an indispensable Article of the Christian Faith, which the other
can reject upon clear and solid grounds of Reason; for, assuredly, no part of
Christianity can be repugnant to Right Reason. Therefore to begin with the Jew,
who taking just exceptions against many Dogmata of Christianity, as they are in
common vogue amongst us: but particularly disgusting that harsh and rigid
Doctrine of Inconditionate Reprobation, expresses his dislike and
dissatisfaction in such like terms as these; That God gave Statutes, and
Judgments, and delivered a Law to Moses on Mount Sinai, I am sufficiently
convinced of, from the constant and uninterrupted Tradition of our Fathers, and
that I am equally obliged to perform due obedience to it, is in my apprehension
a truth as indubitable as the other: But that I should desert the Religion of
my Ancestors, and embrace a Novel Doctrine wholly repugnant to, and
inconsistent not only with the common principles of Reason, but the Law of
Moses, and Prophetic Writings, and manifestly tending to the eversion and
extirpation of all Religion in the World (for, who will put his trust in that
God who takes greater pleasure in Destroying, than in Saving of his Creatures?)
will argue as great Impiety, as it will appear Fantastickness and Imprudence in
the eyes of all that believe a God and Providence in the World. For under the
Mosaical Economy, God like a just and prudent Legislator, makes the ground and
foundation of all his Promises and Menaces, to be the Obedience or Disobedience
of his Subjects; and Benefits are not conferred but hypothetically, and with
respect to the condition annexed to them; nor Punishments executed, but upon
the actual breach and violation of a Law: And beside this, you tell us, that
when the Messiah comes, he will bring into the World such a Religion and
Service as will most suit with our rational and intellectual Natures, such as
may approve it self to our inward and divine sense as truly excellent and
lovely, comprehending the flower and sum of whatever is Worthy, Noble, and
Generous; which, you say, is most lively depainted and set out to us in that
which you call the Christian Religion, the great Arcanum and Mystery of which
(according to the principles of your Doctrine) seems to be this, That God has
eternally Elected a certain number of persons to inherit Blessedness with him,
and sent his son to signify the same to them, and to publish this his decree:
but to cast away the rest upon the pretense of his Sovereignty and Dominion
over them; either therefore the coming of Christ is upon rational grounds yet
expected, or if he have been already manifested to the World, your Religion is
none of his, nor was he ever the Author of it, but the spurious results and
effuxes of fanciful persons obtruded as necessary Articles of faith upon the
World. It is impossible I should ever believe, that the great Creator of the
Universe, who in our Law declared himself to be The Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness; and who so often forgot the
Crimes and Apostacies of our Forefathers, when they returned and sought him
with their whole heart, should now so change his Nature, and suspend the rays
and benign emanations of his communicative life, in this which you affirm to be
the last and most perfect manifestation of himself, as not only without any
regard had of their just provocations, but even before they became sons of
sense and were born into the World, to Reprobate the far greatest part of
Mankind, and make them the unhappy objects of his endless displeasure. And
surely if he himself once judged it a less merciful and benign Economy to use
his Prerogative of Absolute Dominion in visiting the sins of the Fathers upon
the Children though otherwise culpable, and therefore confirmed it with an
Oath, that As he lived, there should be no more cause of using that Proverb in
Israel, The Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on
edge; he will not in these last days, wherein you tell us, he has clearly
explicated and unfolded his Everblessed Nature, so far derogate from his
illustrious Goodness, as to become more harsh and severe, in making Innocence
it self feel the heavy weight of an implacable vengeance. Was he once so
gracious as to accept of an atonement for sin, and pardon iniquities upon the
Oblation of an Expiatory Sacrifice; and will he now have no mercy and
compassion upon the blameless works of his own hands, who never offended unless
it were in acting according to those principles his own good hands placed in
them? The first man was not turned out of Paradise, and condemned to manure the
Earth, till he rebelled against his Maker, and tasted of the tree of Knowledge:
but according to your Doctrine, the souls of men are no sooner created, but
immediately thrown out of those arms which then embraced them, into a state of
bitterness and sorrow, a region of malediction which both God and man abhor.
In a word therefore, if the long-expected Messiah have propagated this Doctrine
in the World, I dare not be so treacherous to God and Reason as to entertain
what in my apprehension they both plainly deny.

Having seen the just exceptions of the Jew against Christianity, occasioned by
that precarious Assertion of Irrespective Decrees, which to every discerning
eye appears a mighty impediment and hinderance to the planting in them a true
value and esteem of the Doctrine of the Holy Jesus, We may in the next place
attend a while to the Heathen, who though he be deprived of those clear
Declarations of the Nature and Mind of God, which Christians do plentifully
enjoy; yet having the principles of good and evil, just and unjust, displayed
upon his Nature by the bountiful maker of all things, and Truth being always
like it self in however various subjects it may reside, thus bespeaks those
vain Theologasters who out of an imprudent zeal, think no man well till he
entertain their nice and impertinent Doctrines.

When I look into the outward Fabric of the corporeal world, and revolve the
exact Order, Symmetry and Beauty of the external Creation, how every thing acts
regularly within it is own Sphere, and all conspire to the mutual good and
perfection of the whole, I cannot but acknowledge the existence of an Eternal
mind, from whose pregnant fecundity this great ball of the Earth, the blew
Ethereal sky, and whatever lies hid and undecerned within the vast capacities
of immense space, received their being and subsistence. From this exuberant
source of Goodness did mine and the souls of all mankind flow, and those
various orders and degrees of rational beings which taste the bounty of their
Creator in their several stations and capacities: and all these, though in
different measures and proportions he loves and cares for, and takes an
infinite delight and complacency to see them all exert those ^ital powers he
was pleased to bestow upon them; For I cannot think that God made any of his
creatures to be miserable, or that he should so much darken the early rays of
his Paternal benignity in bringing them into being, by making their Existence a
burden to them, and serve for no other end then for a protraction of their
miseries; least of all can I, without a manifest violation of my faculties,
yield my assent to that horrid Doctrine which you maintain and propound as
necessary to be believed by every one who expects a blessed immortality with
the Gods above, viz. That the Benign and All-wise Maker of the World did
resolve from the outgoings of Eternity, to destroy the greatest part of his
noblest Creation; and therefore decreed, that out all mankind whom he intended
to send down upon Earth, he would oull out a small number, known to him by
name, whom he would irresistibly (without respect to their future Faith or
Obedience) make happy in the fruition of himself: but determined (without
consideration or prevision of their sin and disobedience) to damn and
excruciate with interminable torments, mee^ly upon his own will and pleasure,
all the rest of the World, so soon as Death should deliver them from the
infelicities and burdensome circumstances of a painful ^ife here upon Earth.
This, I say, which you exact of your Converts, I have not fith enough to
receive; For, can any ratinal person imagine, That God should become a Tyrant
to his creatures? That he should have no compassion toward the works of his own
hands? Nay further, That he should introduce them upon the stage of being on
purpose to reproach and make them miserable; that let them do what they can in
order to their future Blessedness, they should be befriended of none, nor ever
pitied by the tender bowels of that Almighty Goodness which first brought them
forth, but lie as unfortunate marks against which the arrows of Divine
vengeance are perpetually levelled, and their cries no more regarded by the
Father of Spirits, then the groans of dying Victims by those insolent and
unpitiful Deities to whom they are offered; and which yet casts a greater stain
and blot upon the Economy of your God, that he might not seem to condemn the
innocent, but to act under the specious pretext of Justice, you make him first
design, then plot and contrive their ruin; which to effect, that he might set
the better face upon it, he enacts a Law, entailing a sure and severe
punishment upon the breach of it, and in the mean time not only not affords
those whom he intends to destroy, the least strength imaginable to perform it:
but on the contrary, by an overruling and uncontrollable power (which some of
your Authors magnify as the fairest gemme in his beautiful Crown of Glory)
necessitates them to have a vile commerce and correspondence with Sin and Hell,
that the beams and rays of his Justice may shine with the more dazeling Luster
in their perdition and destruction: but as for those whom his discriminative
love selected to the participation of his own pacate felicity and beatitude,
the same unlimited power most effectually carries them on through all states
and conditions, winking at their most enormous and heinous lapses, perhaps into
Adultery and Murder, or other course Impieties, and never forsakes them till
they they are brought to the quiet possession of what was theirs by an
unchangeable Decree before the World began. How deeply will the whole Creation
of Rational beings resent such an act as this? and what small reason can any
man have to cast his care, and erect a foundation of his hope upon that God who
notwithstanding the greatest expressions of love and kindness to them, the most
pathetical invitations of them to accept the gracious overtures of his
Goodness, the highest sense of aversion to their misery, accompanied with Oaths
and Protestations against it, and the fairest promises of Rewards and Blessings
to them if they will obey, shall yet underhand lay an inevitable train of
causes to entrap and foil them? I find that my dear spirit affectionately
breathes after a freer participation of the Divine Life and Nature, and makes
many little sallies and attempts to arise beyond the strait and narrow laws of
corporeal life, into a state of true freedom and liberty; and I cannot but
heartily complain of the charming and alluring Magic of the Earthly and
Brutish life in me, that I am too much awake and alive to the effluxes and
emissions of the material World, whereby the (...), the Divinity that is
enwrapped and as it were incarnate within me, becomes weak and unactive: but my
hope is, that through the mighty Power of that Divine Love which upholds the
Creation with extended arms, the heavenly part within me shall prevail, and
gain a complete Conquest and Victory, and that when this mortal life shall
perish, I shall become (...), An immortal God, no more depressed with the
weight of Terrestrial encumbrance. But alas, according to your Doctrine, if
this be all, it is but like the Prelude to a fatal Tragedy, or the sudden blaze
of a dying Lamp, and I may for all this fall short and be deceived; for if you
attribute a Power to your God of Simulation and Fraud, he may evacuate all my
expectations, notwithstanding the pretended Declarations of his Will and
Veracity to the contrary. To say no more then this, Can he punish those effects
or operations in me which his own immediate and energetical concourse was the
cause of? Am I become guilty because I acted under the irresistible impulses
and motions of his will? If this therefore be a true description of the Nature
of God, there is no reasonable man but would judge him to be rather some
flaming Erynnis with curled Snakes and knotted whips to chastise the World,
then an Almighty, Good and Wise Numen.

We see then what little hope there is of ingratiating and recommending
Christianity to those that are without, while we either positively maintain, or
consequentially introduce such Doctrines as Christian, which in their very
frame and complexion are repugnant to Right Reason, and inconsistent with the
Economy of Providence in the World. And while the Preachers of the Gospel
impose upon men such crude notions, they not only do them the most uncharitable
piece of service that lightly can be imagined: but likewise block up the way
and passage of truth to others who may be in very forward degrees of
preparation to receive it.

2. They were very much mistaken in the Order and Method of propounding the
Articles and Doctrines of Christianity to their Auditors, and by that means
(supposing the truth of those Notions they desired to implant in them) rendered
them far less acceptable then otherwise they might have been. The ever-blessed
Son of God, the eternal mind and wisdom of his Father, when he descended from
his glory and became a Man, that he might teach the World that salutary
Knowledge which should instate them in their pristine Blessedness, did not
communicate to them that recondite Mystery all at once, but (...), as they were
able to hear it; that is, according to their Measure and Proportion. Every man's
Criterion and discriminative faculty is not in a due and fit disposition for
the reception of high and raised Speculations, no more then every ear is fitly
qualified for the judging of Harmony. As in all Arts and Sciences there are
some Rudiments and Principles to be learned before we can arrive to a
considerable measure of perfection in them; so in Religion there are some
Catechetical Instructions and Cognate Preparations to be used before we enter
upon the Sublime and Theoretical Doctrines contained in it. For considering the
great degeneracy and Apostasy of mankind from their true Happiness, and with
what exorbitant and unlimited desires and passions they come into the World
toward the things of this present life, and how hardly they are wrought of to
the entertainment of what is truly good and holy, the propounding of intricate
Mysteries to them, while their distinguishing sense of good and evil is so
monstrously depraved and out of order, is but (to use our Saviors similitude)
to put new Wine into old Bottles, offensive to the hearers, and corruptive of
the Truth it self: and we may with as great reason expect a Substantial and
stately Edifice without any foundation, or full eared-Corn so soon as the bare
Grain is cast into the ground, as look for the perfect and complete Image of
Christ in him who does not yet understand the Principles and Rudiments of
Religion. For what specimen does that man give of the pure and undefiled Nature
of God living in him, who can knowingly injure his Brother, or pass by with an
unconcerned look the calamitous objects of Pity and Compassion? Or, what proof
can he bring that he is acted by that Almighty Spirit of Holiness and
Righteousness, and renewed into the blameless Image of the blessed Jesus, who
omits no opportunities of Injustice and Oppression? These things therefore
which are the very groundwork and foundation of that Evangelical Building
which Christ came to erect in the souls of men, ought with all dure care and
diligence, and with great earnestness and seriousnese to be pressed upon men by
the Preachers of the Gospel, that the People may be convinced their Teachers
are real and sincere in the business, and that what they so inculcate upon them
is for the future and unspeakable benefit of their immortal souls. And by the
frequent use of these Monitory Cautions and Exhortations it is to be hoped that
men will grow more holy, and practice with greater circumspection the plain
duties of Morality, by which means they will be more apt to conceive and judge
of the other more Speculative Doctrines and Articles of Christianity, which
ought to be let alone till their proper-time come, wherein they may with some
advantage be propounded to the hearers, they being by the constant exercise of
the Precepts of Justice, Equity and Goodness prepared and competently well
fitted for the reception of the Mysterious and Recondite part of Religion. It
cannot therefore but be acknowledged a piece of great inadvertency and
opinionative Curiosity in the generality of Preachers in these late times, to
make it their business, in the first place, to instruct their Hearers in the
most difficult, and many times disputable points of the Christian Religion, and
fill their heads with unprofitable opinions, while they neglected the (...),
the more serious and weighty matters of Justice, Mercy and Compassion. From
hence came it, that in their Catechisms and Confessions of Faith, they crowded
so many unnecessary and fruitless Doctrines under the name and notion of
Indubitable Articles of the Christian Faith, and which were necessary to be
believed in order to Salvation; such as are the Positions concerning Gods
Decree of Election and Reprobation, etc. And here I cannot but with all due
regard and honor, commend the great Prudence of the Compilers, as of the whole
Liturgy and Service, so particularly of the Catechism of the Church of
England, for the Instructing of the younger sort in the Rudiments and
Principles of Christianity, wherein as there is nothing propounded as
indispensably necessary to be believed, but what is undoubtedly so; in like
manner they modestly contented themselves in inserting only such things as were
by all the reformed part of Christendom looked upon as unquestionably true,
and the contrary condemned as false and adulterate: so that I may say of it as
David of Goliahs Sword, There is none like it.

Thus (Reader) I have given thee a full Account and Reason of the following
Discourse, and of the Necessity of some such way and method of Instructing the
People as I have here described; which certainly is not to fill their brains
with puffie Opinions, and jejune Disputations: but a zealous cautioning them
against all Vice and Immorality whatever, and a serious exhorting them to the
practice of Holiness, Justice and Equity, Obedience to their Lawful Prince, and
to all inferior Magistrates, to do good and communicate to the Necessities of
the Indigent and Calamitous; and when the case requires a further instruction
in the Mysteries of Religion, such a full and easy Explication of the several
Articles and Doctrines contained in it, as may best suit with their Capacities
and the plain Texts of Holy Scripture, which as it is recommended as most
useful for the promotion of Piety by our Mother the Church of England; so it is
most agreeable with the Nature of the thing it self.

GODS GOODNESS VINDICATED, Against Absolute Reprobation.
CHAP. I. Inconditionate Reprobation inconsistent with the Declarations of God
in Holy Scripture.
THERE is scarce any Doctrine or Opinion maintained in the World (be it never
so Monstrous and Irrational) but pleads Scripture to countenance and authorize
it; and though Truth be but one, yet every Sect and Faction claims an Interest
in it; and that Error may pass more freely disguised and undiscerned amongst
men, it is now-become a fashion to allege the Divinely-inspired Writings, as
an unquestionable Evidence for the reasonableness and Truth of whatever strange
and uncouth conceits men please to divulge in the World. Such is the Hypothesis
of Absolute Reprobation we have in hand: And he that shall peruse the Writings
of those who desire to maintain it, and consider with what wonderful confidence
they assert it, and how thick-set the Margins of their Treatises are with
citations of Scripture to patronize and defend it, and yet how little or
nothing there is in that Sacred Volume that in good earnest looks that way,
will be soon persuaded, that it is an inveterate prejudice, rather then any
probability of Truth, which makes them such pertinacious Adherents to so
ill-framed a Doctrine. And that I may make good what I have affirmed, I shall
begin with Divine Revelation, wherein God declares his gracious Economy and
Dispensation with mankind, and Vindicates the glory and honor of his Nature
and Attributes, from the aspersions and imputations of cruelty and injustice,
asserting his Rule and Dominion in the World to be Righteous and Equal, and
perfectly agreeable to the highest Wisdom and Goodness; so that none of his
Creatures, unless it be such who are desperately forlorn and wicked, can
possibly wish his Not-being in the World. This is his Name whereby he proclaims
himself to Moses, The Lord, the Lord God, Exodus xxxiv. 6.
merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth: and
this Name God has verified in the whole Economy of his Providence to the
lapsed World, Deuteronomy. v. 29.
Oh that my people had such an heart in them (says he) that they would fear me
and keep my Commandments! But why does God wish this? not for any self design
or particular interest (for our goodness extends not unto him, nor can our
sins detract any thing from the sedate and composed happiness of his
everblessed Nature) but that it might go well with them, and their Children for
ever. Behold here the flagrant love and intense affection of the God of Israel,
to a stiff-necked and disobedient people! Do not these passionate streins
proceed from his whole heart, and are they not Arguments of the greatest
seriousness? How then can he unfeignedly desire that they should walk in the
ways of life, when his own good Pleasure from the outgoings of Eternity has
irresistibly determined their motion into the paths of destruction? Can a
tender Mother expose her innocent Babe to be devoured by wild Beasts, or sawn
asunder before her eyes? Isai. xlix. 15.
Can she forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion upon the
Son of her womb? Suppose there may be some so obdurate and unrelenting that
their bowels will not yern over such a dismal spectacle, yet they are but few
that have degenerated so deeply into this more then brutish stupidity; and can
we think the compassionate Father of Spirits who is infinitely more pitiful in
all the degrees of intension and extension then the best of the Sons of Men,
will betray his own dear offspring, or prove so unnatural to design them to
the most acute torments the wit and subtilty of Men or Devils can invent, and
that to eternal ages, before ever their Existence gave them the least
opportunity of offending him? 1 John iv. 16.
God is Love it self, whose nature is ever to be diffusive and communicative to
all the possibilities of beings, and therefore glories not in this that he is
powerful to slay, to damn and excruciate in unheard and perpetual torments:
Isa. lxiii. 1.
but that he speaks in righteousness, and is mighty to save. And that he might
fully convince the World of this gracious property of his, he has pronounced
Judgment to be his Strange work, and his Strange act, which men's Impenitencies
only force him to; for he will not that any perish: but that every Creature
should be happy in it is measure and capacity. And lest we Sons of Darkness
should entertain any such thought of the God of Light, as if he pleased himself
in our ruin, he has joined an Oath to it, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
and has sworn As he lives he has no pleasure in the death of the Wicked,
but that the Wicked turn from his way and live. He would have all his Creatures
know that he is no way accessory to their destruction, Hos. xiii. 9.
O Israel thou have destroyed thy self; but in me is thy help. And when he sees
what froward and untoward Creatures we are, that readily forsake what he loves,
and run after that which his soul delights not in, making such unhappy
choices for our selves, as if we studied how to be our own Executioners, then
he begins to reason with us, O my people, what have I done unto thee, Mich. vi.
3.
or wherein have I wearied thee? Testify against me? Jer. ii. 5, and 31.
What evil have ye found in me? Have I been a barren Wilderness unto you, or a
Land of darkness? and if any shall yet be so presumptuous as to cast the blame
of their wretchedness and misery upon so benign a Father, he stands ready to
acquit himself, and calls heaven and earth to record against them, that he has
set before them Life and Death, Deuteronomy. xiii. 19.
Blessing and Cursing, and requested them to choose that which may make them for
ever happy; Joh. v. 40.
But they will not come unto him that they may have life. Nay further, that God
might take away all manner of excuse from the Sons of men, and manage his
cause in a way of Reason and Equity, he has not only showed his Righteousness
to the Heathen, and declared his Salvation to the Ends of the Earth: but
asserted it possible for men to perform his Will, so that his yoke is in it
self easy, and his burden is really light, and his service is reasonable
(...).
; that is, agreeable to the dictates and sentiments of our rational Nature;
Romans xii. 1.
For, the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise; the Word is
very nigh thee, Romans x. 6, 8.
in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. No man can complain of
any hard usage, that God commands impossibilities, and injoyns things that are
above his reach; For the Spirit of God, that mighty principle of Life and
Vigor which pervades the whole World of intellectual agents, is ready to
assist the generous and hearty attempts of all sincere persons after the Divine
Life and Nature; for so he who gave that gift to his Apostles, and assured
mankind of the continuance of it till the end of the World, has long since
made known to us, that if Earthly Parents know how to give good gifts to their
Children, Luke xi. 13.
God our heavenly Father should much more give his Holy Spirit to all that ask
it of him. He would have all the Creation take notice, that it is not for any
ends of his own that he is at such pains with us; My people (says God) have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, Jer. ii. 13.
and have hewn out to themselves broken Cisterns which can hold no water;
Methinks the words signify thus much, as if God should thus bespeak us, O my
people if you could mend your selves by forsaking me the fountain of living
Waters, then I could be content, and reason would that I should bear with you:
but that you should betake your selves to broken Cisterns which can hold no
water, and are then dried up when ye most stand in need of them, this argues
your lightness and folly. Isai. xxx. 18.
God waits to be gracious, and with infinite patience and long-sufferance
expects our Repentance, and suffers that tempestuous whirlwind of enraged
Vengeance which Sin and Vice have fed and congested, to roll long within the
Orb of Mercy before it burst forth, and bear down the sinner into the horrors
and agonies of Eternal ages. And this is sufficiently evidenced by those
Pathetical expressions of his unwillingness to punish his Creatures, till at
last being compelled to it, he sets about it with a kind of reluctance of
spirit, and is as it were, grieved to the heart that he must use such rigorous
means to reduce them to himself; Hos. xi. 8, 9.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I
make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within
me, my repentings are kindled together. This is Gods gracious Expostulation
with himself, as if he should have thus said, What shall I do unto thee O my
people? or how should I behave my self toward thee? Should I make thee an
example of my judgment as Admah? Or, should I consume thee in a moment like
Zeboim? No surely, my heart is quite averse from such harsh proceedings, they
are even extorted from me; therefore my heart yerns after thee O Ephraim, my
bowels are turned and melted within me, (an expression of the dearest love and
affection that possibly can be, Jer. xxxi. 20.) I am even overcome with those
deep-fetcht breathings of affectionate Love which I bear unto thee; therefore I
will not execute the fierceness of my anger, for I am God and not Man, I bear
no malice against any of the Creation, but had rather my kindness then my
displeasure should endear men to the consideration of their own happiness. And
at last he appeals to our own Reasons and Consciences, and is content to submit
himself and his Dispensations to our own thoughts, whether we can imagine any
better course then that he has taken, to reform us; Isai. v. 4.
Judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard; what could I have done more to my
Vineyard then I have not done? So that it is only when all means prove
ineffectual, that the God of Love turns to a consuming fire, and makes us the
proper objects of his direful Vengeance. To take yet a more direct view of that
fair Perfection, the very root and center of the Deity, I mean Goodness or
Love, let us behold God manifest in the flesh, and look upon him who being the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, the express Image and Character of his Person,
encircled with the loving arms of Heaven, and folded up in the bosom of
Blessedness, yet left those sacred Mansions of Happiness out of pure good will
to the race of Mankind, and put off the robes of Glory, that he might be
capacitated to dwell in a body of flesh, to the intent that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. That pure soul which
shone with an Ethereal brightness, far surpassing the glory of the Sun, being
vitally united with the Eternal Logos, and full of the Divine Life, did
inwardly pity and commiserate the lapsed posterity of Adam; wherefore that he
might more abundantly demonstrate the riches of his grace, he declared himself
the Savior not of some few only, but of the whole World, that the design of
his appearing was to scatter an healing influence upon the broken and
distracted Sons of men, and that the effects of it should be good tidings of
great joy to all people, assuring guilty sinners of the love of their offended
God, and that yet they had not sinned out of the reach of Mercy, but that now
while it is called to day, if they would hear the God of love speaking to their
consciences, and gently mollifying their obdurate hearts, they should run unto
him by a speedy repentance, and he would melt and thaw their frozen spirits
into a pliable ductility by the warm gleams of his Eternal Love, loosen the
wings of their entangled Souls, and secure their flight into the quiet regions
of Peace and Joy. When this Son of Love who was always going about doing good,
saw the Multitude scattered abroad like Sheep that have no Shepherd, it is
said, (...), Mat. ix. 36.
He was moved with compassion on them: which word (says a Learned Critic)
denotes, Summam and vehementem commiscrationem ex intimis visceribus profectam,
Such an inward feeling and yerning of the heart and soul, as melts the very
bowels into a pitiful commiseration of the object they are affected with: which
intense affection is called (...), The bowels of the mercy of God, Luke i. 78.
And when he came to Jerusalem, how did he weep over her, and moisten his fresh
Laurels with a shower of Tears, O Jerusalem, Matthew. xxiii. 37.
Jerusalem, thou that killedst the Prophets, and stonedst them that were sent
unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together as an hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! His heart was so full
of grief, that it could hold no longer, but must empty it self in a
sympathizing flood of tears over that incorrigible City, softning that ground
with his watery eyes which shortly after should be bedewed with blood. Oh that
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong
unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. Surely there is no man so
blasphemous as to think Christ wept tears of deceit and treachery; No, they
were the very breathings of his heart to a people that were going into
inevitable destruction. For if we look into the whole History of the Gospel, we
shall find, that our blessed Lord was of as tender and passive a constitution
as ever the world had any cognizance of; and in this very instance, which was
Christ's last solemn visit for the recovery of those rebellious Jews, he has
left upon record to all succeeding ages of the World, the fervency of his Love,
and the greatness of their Obstinacy and Rebellion: He rode in triumph, the
children sang Hosanna to him, and he cured many impotent and diseased persons,
that at least that miraculous and wonder-working Power residing in him might
extort this confession from them, that he was the Son of God and the promised
Messiah; and after all this, he weeps for their Infidelity and pities them with
tears, and having his heart and spirit full of love that is stronger then
death, he leaves no way untryed: but spends the whole day amongst them, and
looks round about him toward evening, to see if any would invite him home,
being unwilling to depart, till their Ingratitude forces him away. And now that
he is exalted in Glory, and sits at the right hand of his Father invested with
Majesty and Power, his Compassions are no whit abated, nor is that benign care
and Providence, which in the days of his Humiliation and condescent he
exercised over the fallen generations of Men at all lessened by the
augmentation of his Blessedness and Felicity: but daily woes and beseeches us
by his Ministers and Servants to enter upon terms of amity and friendship with
God, who in him has been pleased to reconcile the World unto himself. Should
we now cast our eyes upon the whole frame and fabric of the Gospel, we shall
find it to be the most effectual engine that infinite Wisdom could contrive
for the winding of the minds and spirits of men from their too eager pursuit of
the pleasures and gratifications of the lower life, and working them up to
those noble and high purposes for which they were made. And doubtless there is
no man in whom prejudice does not outbalance reason, but will readily set his
seal to this truth, there appearing in the Gospel such sweet condescentions to
our capacities and complyances with the frailty of our condition, such infinite
aversness to our misery and destruction, and such powerful endearments and
attractives to Holiness and Righteousness, that he cannot judge it to proceed
from any other, then a principle of Infinite Goodness, Love and Wisdom. I
might here further tell you, that the Gospel being designed to be the Religion
of men of all sorts and conditions, of all ranks and qualities, and so adapted
to our rational powers, and in the main drift and scope of it so plain and
easy even to the most illiterate capacities, Divine Wisdom could not but
highly approve of it, and by a favorable benediction suffer it to have that
Universal effect it pretends to; that is, the full and complete renovation of
all mankind that would not wilfully reject the counsel of God against
themselves, and the perfecting every one without exception or limitation that
would faithfully and cordially to his utmost powers adhere unto it.

CHAP. II. Absolute Reprobation repugnant to Right Reason: wherein is set out
the Moral Nature of our Souls in reference to Good and Evil, Truth, and
Falsehood. And this Second Argument made good in Four Propositions.
THere is nothing that can lay any claim or pretense to the decision of
Questions of a Moral Nature and Import, but will appear very lame and
ineffectual, without the aid and assistance of Right Reason, which is so noble
and generous a principle, that if we take a serious view of it, it will soon
discover to us it is Royal Pedigree and Divine Extraction. There is a near
alliance and consanguinity between the Reason of Man, and that Eternal Goodness
which at first sealed it as an impression of his Nature upon our souls, and
therefore there need be no such distance between true Christianity and it. For
assuredly, that Divine Wisdom which at our first production implanted in us the
apprehensions and Idea's of things did so order the business, that if we used
our discriminative faculties aright, we should have no other conceptions of
them then what did really and significantly express the Natures of the things
themselves, and such as were Eternally lodged in the All-comprehensive
Intellect of the Deity. There being then no Judge on Earth whose Dictates and
Determinations may be credited as Authentic and Infallible, and every man
being commanded to prove all things, to try the Spirits whether they be of God,
and to look carefully and diligently to himself that he fall not, nor be led
into Error, and the Reason and understanding of man if rightly managed, being
the Candle of the Lord, whereby he is enabled to examine and judge of
Doctrines, it will follow, that it must determine of whatever dictates shall be
propounded to him. He therefore that considers we were made by an Eternal mind,
that the original of our beings is from an All-prefect Author, who at our first
Creation stamped the impresses of his Nature upon us; and every thing that
derives from him being in some measure and degree like himself, will without
any hesitancy assent to this Truth, viz. That whatever offers it self to our
rational Nature by a clear and distinct perception, is infallible so, and we
are no longer to doubt of the truth of it. And unless we grant this, it is
impossible we should ever come to any certain knowledge of any thing in the
World. Now that those Idea's which thus offer themselves to us, that is, by a
clear and distinct perception are certainly so in the nature of the things
themselves, we are no longer to doubt of, because Veracity is an Essential mode
and Attribute of the Author of our beings, and therefore it is impossible he
should deceive us in those things which we have an evident and distinct
apprehension and cognizance of; and further we may take notice, that that Power
in us which discriminates between the Beings and Modes of things, is the same
that is in This made the bold Stoic affirm, that (...) a man is (...). Arrian.
God, and participates of his Nature, and is nothing but a ray and beam let
down from Heaven, by whose light we discover and apprehend the various kinds of
objects, whether Moral, Physical or Metaphysical; according to that of
Epicharmus, (...) and being so, the cause of all our Errors and Mistakes must
be attributed to our selves; not that we want those faculties which should give
us a faithful and true representation of things: but because we abuse them,
whether by an inadvertency and anticipation in judgment, or by an inveterate
prejudice contracted from an evil Education, or by what other means soever it
comes to pass. Reason therefore is the Vicarious Power of God in the Soul, and
to refuse it is Authority in such things as of right belong unto it to judge of,
is to reject the light of God shining within us, as Hierocles excellently
discourses, In Carm. Pythag.
(...) that is, To act according to the dictates of Right Reason, is the same
as to obey God; for the rational Nature being once raised to the possession of
it is native brightness, wills and acts according to the determinations of the
Divine Law and pleasure: and the holy Soul that thus participates of the Deity,
becomes in every thing conformable to the mind of God, and frames the whole
System and comprehension of it is actions by the conduct and guidance of that
Eternal Splendour. All our knowledge in this our state of degeneracy and
imperfction, may not unfitly be called, according to the Platonists, a
Reminiscency, or an awakening those multifarious Idea's either by her own
internal Energy, or by the occursions of sensible Phantasms, which are
treasured up in the essence of the soul her self; for now that the soul is sent
into this World, and roused out of her long sleep and state of Inactivity, she
acts over again her former life, and recals those Idea's and Notions of things
which upon occasion she exerted somewhere else. But whether we give heed to
this Hypothesis or no, it is certain, that our souls, as they come out of the
hands of God, are not like transparent Globes of pellucid Crystal, or fair and
white sheets wherein nothing is written, but essentially stored and filled with
the indelible Characters and Idea's of Truth, to whose light so long as we
faithfully attend, though we wander in abstruse, rugged, and dark paths, we
need not question but that at last by their safe conduct we shall arrive to the
regions of light, where all the mists and difficulties which before enveloped
us shall vanish into perfect day, and all things appear in their own proper
dress, and essential Characters: but when we neglect to give heed to these sure
and infallible guides, we are distracted and miserably confounded in the
contemplation of things, and are at a loss where to bottom or settle our
selves, which the forementioned Author took notice of in these words,
Hierocles in Carm. Pythag.
(...). That the Essential forms and Idea's of things are centrally co-united
to the soul, and not then first begotten when brought into actual Existence
upon the several emergences of life; but the effects of that innate and
pregnant Fecundity the kind and liberal hand of God bestowed upon her, is a
Noematical truth, and cannot but appear so to those who attentively consider
and weigh the various animadversive acts, and discriminative judgments the soul
makes of things: Not to instance in those relative notions of similitude and
proportion, and the consideration of Universals which have no foundation in any
thing beside the mind it self, what is it that can conclude the true magnitude
of objects? For though we grant, that there is some picture or representation
of the object drawn in the bottom of the eye; yet that being far less then the
real proportion and magnitude of the external object, it will be necessary that
the soul exert some innate Idola, whereby to give an exact and perfect judgment
of it. These (...), or first notions and apprehensions are the foundations of
all Arts and Sciences, and of all Knowledge in the World, and whatever affects
us from without, does but administer several instances and due occasions to the
soul of working, and unravelling her own Uniform essence for the bringing into
actual existence this or the other Phantasm. Wherefore in this the soul of man
resembles that ancient fountain of Blessedness which brought her into being;
and as he by his Almighty Fiat, gave actual being to the multifarious forms and
Idea's eternally comprehended in his Infinite Wisdom: so the humane soul by
the energy of her will commands from her central pregnancy and fecundity, such
Images and Idea's as by their gentle light, fairly lead her to the knowledge of
her self and the whole Creation. These are the glass which represents the
lively Images of things, and from their convenience or disconvenience to these
common notions arise their several differences and reasons: As for example, the
denominations of good, and evil, pulchritude and deformity, and all those moral
Entities spring not from any arbitrarious power which upon the impulses of
humor and will, can make them cease to be what they are, nor do their Natures
change and correspond to the different modes of our conceptions, but remain
Eternally and Immutably what we find them to be; for if they were so only to
appearance, and not really and substantially, as some Philosophers of old
affirmed, all Moral Goodness and Righteousness would vanish into empty names
and words, and Wickedness and Evil would have nothing but a Pyrrho denied that
there was any turpitude or honesty, justice or injustice, or any truth (...),
but (...) Diog. Laert. in vita Pyrrhonis.
Fantastic being. We are therefore to conceive an innate Goodness and Evil in
things antecedent to our apprehensions of them Thus Tully speaks de Leg. 1. Nos
ad justitiam esse natos, neque opinione sed Natura constitutum esse jus.

And Seneca Epist. 97. Illic dissentiamus cum Epicuro, ubi dicit nihil justum
esse natura, and crimina vitanda esse, quia vitari metus non potest.


: By the Goodness of Moral objects, I mean, their congruity, convenience and
harmony; and by Evil, their dissonancy, disconvenience and disagreement with
those Eternal Verities or common notions God has interwoven in the Essential
contexture of our beings. Now because the soul of men (not only in his lapsed
and degenerate estate, wherein sin has defaced the workmanship of Gods own
hands, and spread a cloud of death and deformity over heavens brighter Image,
but in his greatest innocence and glory, before he knew what Rebellion meant)
consists of a double Nature, the one merely Animal, governed by sense and the
principles of pleasure, and rellishing nothing but the grateful and alluring
motions of the body; and the other Intellectual and perceptive, a ray and beam
let down from the Sun of heaven, and of a near cognation and affinity with the
Deity; therefore I say, we are not to discriminate Moral acts by their harmony
and dissonancy with the Animal, but Intellectual man; for the proper object of
the first is the (...), whatsoever is pleasant and delightsome, luscious and
sweet, dispreading all it is powers into the luxuriancy and exorbitancy of
corporeal life: But the other more severe and castigate part of the souls
dictates, the (...), what ought to be done, that is, what contains in it an
eternal and indispensable necessity. Since therefore all those Moral Axioms
and Propositions which we find treasured up in the soul, are not Thetical and
positive, as depending upon the efflux of Gods will and power; but natural and
immutable, and can no more be altered by him then he can die or put a period to
his Existence, and the intellectual faculties of men being gradual derivations
and declensions from the Divine Nature, and made up of such unalterable
principles, it must needs follow, that whatever bears an amicable
correspondence with them, should be accounted as indubitable and certain, and
their determinations revered as sacred and holy. For such is the frame and
furniture of our Spirits, that they cannot become indifferent to the reception
of every thing propounded to them, but are fatally and necessarily bound up to
certain Laws and Conditions, which (as I said) are the transcripts of the Moral
Nature of God, and both guide us through the Labyrinth of the abstrusest
Theory, and serve for the exploration of whatever Doctrine either is known
already, or we have great reason to suspect to be adulterate. These are the
very constitutive and fundamental Principles of our being men, and he that is
thoroughly conscious of the innate Generosity and Manlyness of his own mind, can
no more violate any of them, then endure a painful discission and dilaceration
of his bodily life. I confess there are some so strangely perplexed and
confounded within themselves, partly from their own depraved tempers, and
partly from the distortion of those genuine forms by an evil education, that
they can scarce assent to a Mathematical Demonstration: but yet if they would
give themselves liberty of a free enquiry into Truth, they are not incapable of
a Divorce and Separation from those perverse Principles; which can no better
way be done then by suspending their assent, and laying aside all their old
Phantasmes and Prepossessions, till they attain to a clear and distinct
apprehension of whatever it be that they converse with; and by so doing they
shall at last put a final stop to the importunate incursions of those false
Judges, and clear themselves from all their formerly imbibed Prejudices, and
Truth will shine forth arrayed and decked with her own native beauty and luster,
and we shall find a lasting peace and calm within us. In the management
therefore of this Argument we shall follow the clear duct of Reason, and guide
our selves by those Sacred Laws we find indelibly engraven in the center of our
beings; and in conformity to this, we shall lay down several Propositions, by
which the unreasonableness of this rigid Doctrine we are Impugning, will
manifestly be detected.

Prop. 1.
1. To render any being in a far worse condition, and more miserable state,
then it is nature and capacities were intended for, without any consideration of
an antecedent Crime, or Subsequent advantage accruing, merely upon will and
pleasure, is repugnant to the light of natural Reason.
There is no life so fallen out or dissatisfied with it self, as to seek it is
own ruin and torment, but studiously endeavors to assert it self into the
highest happiness it is nature is capable of, and exerts and displayes all it is
powers for the acquisition of what is most congruous and suitable to it is
internal frame and complexion: Now to disturb the kindly actings of such a
being by a perverse dislocation of it is contexture and capacities, raising
thereby the most exquisite sense of pain and torture, merely for the
satisfaction of an unaccountable fancy and petulant humor, what is it but to
act according to the principles of the highest cruelty and oppression? For what
greater act of ferity and barbarity can be imagined then to vex and hurt the
innocent, and that upon no other account but because we will have it so? yea,
it is judged so high a piece of depravity and degeneracy, that wise men have
thought it inconsistent with the very nature of the Devil, to do mischief for
mischiefs sake. Yet such a face of things do these Absolute Reprobationists
represent to the World, while they make the benign Father of humane souls, to
be so far displeased with his own dear offspring, as without any fault of
theirs, to detrude them from that happy state wherein at first he made them,
being capable of the reception and communication of his own Nature, into a
condition of intolerable and endless misery, and all this merely upon his will
and pleasure. For surely the souls of men as they come out of the benign hands
of God, are fitted for very noble and excellent purposes, and may if God so
please, acting according to their intrinsic powers, become the capable
subjects of his boundless Goodness, and rejoice in a cheerful contemplation of
their own powers and faculties, and the Theory of the outward Creation, and in
beholding the Symmetry of all things with that first and Architypal Idea
according to which all things in their proportion were framed. And if beside
this, we consider what high improvements the soul is capable of, and the
excellency and glory of her Nature when divested of the rags of Mortality (an
obscure subindication of which we have, as well in those conflicts she has
with the body, wherein she aspires and elevates her self to the obtaining
something better then she now possesses, and also in those high and raised
presages she makes of a transcendent, free, and enlarged life when she takes
her flight from this lower world) if I say, we consider the extent of her
capacities, and the exquisite pulchritude and beauty of her frame and
structure, it will appear an act of the highest unreasonableness, that I may
not say extremest rigor and injustice in the World, to render her being
innocent and blameless the more miserable by being once happy, and to make her
condition infinitely worse then that wherein she was at first created, or to
which she is in a possibility of attaining. Nor can this be salved and cured by
the (...) of Gods unlimited and uncontrollable Power and Dominion over his
Creatures, whereby he may do with them whatever he pleases; For beside that
it is no way dishonorable to Gods everblessed Nature to say, that his Will and
Power are not arbitrarious and ungovernable; but regulated and ballasted by a
Supreme Goodness: we are not in this case to look for bare Will, which is in it
self a mere blind principle; but for something more Sovereign, for Wisdom and
Counsel, and for ends worthy of that adorable Majesty which not only brought
into being, but perpetually interesses it self in the affairs of the whole
Creation. God cannot act below himself, or stain the beauteous productions of
his fertile Nature with the base alloy of self-advantage and accruments; but
always works conformably to Absolute Goodness, in which all his Actions are
terminated and concluded. It was from this fertile womb that the whole Creation
issued forth, and God can deal no otherwise with his Creatures then may be
consistent with the Eternal and Unchangeable Laws of so Majestic a principle:
and if it were once concluded against the proud Pharisees, by him who is the
Essential Wisdom of God, That it is better to save life then to destroy; we may
be sure that Almighty arm which sustains and governs the World, will never
hurt any of mankind before they ruin and undo themselves. Sooner may those
bright Lamps of Heaven, which are perpetually circling us, keep back and
suspend their beams, then the Divine Goodness be separated from any thing that
is willing to be united to him. Gods Rule and Dominion over the World is good
and just, (...), as Hierocles speaks out of Plato; that is, God being naturally
and essentially Good, cannot possibly conceive any envy or hatred at the
condition of any thing he has made. He is not like the Ostritch, which (as Job
tells us) leaves her eggs in the sand, and forgets that the foot may crush
them, and hardens her self against her young ones as if they were not hers: but
exercises a tender care and loving Providence over the whole Creation, and
sheds a benign influence upon his numerous issue. And to this the inward sense
of every good man bears witness, whose felicity is multiplied by seeing others
as happy as himself: and if it be a perfection in our Natures to be propense to
mercy and compassion, and to do all that good which lies in our powers, then
surely if we take a prospect of Gods infinite and complete Goodness from the
benign and harmless temper of a virtuous and good man, we must necessarily
conclude, that he cannot make any of the Creation miserable without
consideration of their own default. A good man looks not upon himself as some
particular being divided from the rest of the World; but as a member of the
whole Creation, which in conformity to his Great Maker, he accounts a part of
his care, and grasps every degree of life within his boundless mind; and if it
lay in his breast he would invest them with all that happiness God made them
for. And beside, what every bountiful and benign man experiences in himself,
we have some instances of this Universal Charity left upon record. What
passionate eruptions of spirit do we find in the holy men of old? Blot me out
of thy book, says Moses; and, I could wish my self accursed from Christ, for
my Brethren and Kinsmen according to the flesh, says St. Paul: Yea further, I
am persuaded, that if it were possible for a good man to be slain a thousand
times; yet so often as he revived, he would still forgive the hand that struck
him: and which is yet more, he could be content (if it might stand with the
goodness of God) to lie in Hell to all Eternity, so that he might be without
sin, rather then that any of the sons of men should be forever excluded and
debarred from the love and favor of God. And now do but compare this Noble and
Heroical Spirit, with that inexhausted fountain of Goodness which is concentred
in the Essence of the Deity; and we shall soon see, that God is so far from
making any of his innocent Creatures miserable; that, acting according to the
eternal laws of his own Nature, he must necessarily consult the good and
welfare of them all. God is Essential Goodness, an immense Ocean of love, which
knows no bounds nor limits: Man is only good by participation, and his greatest
perfection is but a derivative ray from that spotless Orb of light and glory.
Man can but wish and desire the accomplishment and perfect establishment of
every thing in that happiness it is capable of; but it is in the Power of God
not only to wish all things happy: but if he please, to make them really so.
What is there then left but the malignity and bitterness of peevish Spirits to
hinder or discountenance the Universal happiness of the whole World? I wish
therefore that the strenuous asserters of Gods (...) and unaccountable Dominion
over his Creatures, would take heed, that under pretense of magnifying his
Power, they do not derogate from those more excellent perfections of his
Nature, Wisdom and Goodness. There are certain immutable and unchangeable laws
fixed and radicated in the very center of the Deity, and which he can no more
swerve from, then he can cease to be; and Goodness being the first pregnant
root of all things, cannot fail of acting according to it is Essential plenitude
and exuberancy; that is, of communicating it is self to all capable subjects, as
the light cannot withhold from darting it is beams through the pervious air.

And here I cannot omit to recite those blasphemous Positions which have been
maintained by some rigid Calvinists, that the World may see how far men may
put out the light of their Natural Reasons by prejudice and passion, and yet
avouch their Dogmata as Oraculous.

Amyraldus apud Curcellaeum de jure Dei in Creatur as innocents, Cap. 7. Hoc
igitur ex ista Jobi historia colligimus; licere Deo si vellet, ab illo jure
quod positum est (...), ea facere quae ab Arminianis injusta esse judicantur --
Causa enim certe illius erit in Majestatis eminentia immensa; quae quia immensa
est, praestabit ex aequo, ut quae minus and quae magis injusta sunt, facere
possit (...). Statue igitur quantamlibet injustitiae magnitudinem in ^o quod
creatura insons addicitur cruciatibus aeternis: attamen id si Deus faciat,
Majestatis quae in ipso est magnitudo, actionem ab omni reprehensione aut
coercitione vindicabit.

So likewise Szydlovius in Praefat. ad Vindic. as he is cited by the same
Author, Dico hic ingenue, quoth. scil. Deus and possit unius peccatum alteri
imputatum morte aeterna punire, and possit ad interitum ordinare, obligare
hominem ad impossible, and ob non praestitum hoc quod ei dare non decrevit,
eundem punire: Quod velit peccatum: Quod prohibendo aliquid, contrarium ejus
facere ipsemet possit: Quod quae velit ideo justa sint, quia vult, non vero
ideo velle quia justa sint, etc. Quae omnia cum verissima sint; ideo tanto
periculosius negata fuerunt, quanto propius (ut sic dicam) Dei potestatem
extenuabant and enervabant.

These Positions are so full of horrid consequences, so inconsistent with the
blessed Nature of God, and so contrariant with the natural and easy Idea's of
our minds, that it shall be enough to have transcribed them. In the mean time
it highly concerns every Good man to think as honorably of God as possibly he
can, and render his apprehensions of that adorable Being, amiable and lovely;
for the time will come when God will unmask all the false and unworthy
conceptions men have entertained of him, and vindicate his abused Glory from
all the defiled spots they have sullied it with, and discover to them their
perverse and obstinate Errors, by a light clear as the noon day, and every one
shall be ashamed that has not thought so magnificently of his Nature as he
ought to do.

But here I foresee it will be Objected by some, That since none of mankind can
be good to God as advantaging him any thing, and the sole end of their Creation
being for their own good and happiness, that benign Author considering what and
how he had made them, and what was likely to be the sad doom of most of them by
revolting from his blessed life through the necessary imperfection of their
Natures (Lapsability being essentially interwoven in the very contexture of
their beings) he should be obliged through the infinite fertility of that
principle of Love out of which he made them, and which delights not in the
calamity of any of the Creation, to have made them impeccable, that so they
might never have lost those beautiful forms he engraved in them, and
consequently never incurred the severity of his displeasure.

And here, that I may keep my self within the bounds of sober Theology, and
determine nothing inconsistent to those Sacred Oracles whose Authority ought to
be tenderly regarded: I answer,

1. That God making all things according to their respective Idea's, which
eternally shone in his All comprehensive Wisdom, it became necessary that he
should bring into being such lapsable Creatures as the souls of men; for there
being a fair possibility of such intermediate Essences as humane souls, which
should be something below the Nature of Angels, and yet superior to Bruts; and
the Divine Fecundity being such as (to speak with reverence) did necessarily
constrain him to expand his infinite Plenitude in the production of whatever
included no incomposibility of Existence, it is not to be imagined that his
Nature should be less fruitful then the conceptions and apprehensions of men,
who can distinctly and rationally place another Species of Beings, and fill up
that empty Chasme between those two so vastly distant degrees of life, Angels
and Beasts. And therefore if men had been made Impeccable, there would want
such an order of Creatures in the World, as might with those glorious
Morning-starrs actuate a body of an Ethereal and heavenly consistency, and yet
with Brute-Animals be furnished with a congruity to inform courser matter, and
appear upon the earth clothed with flesh and blood.

2. God who is in himself a full and complete Happiness, did likewise grant to
all the productions of life, a power of exerting those faculties his bountiful
hand bestowed upon them, and so of enjoying themselves in the free use and
exercise of them, and like an indulgent Father permitted them the pleasures and
gratifications of every degree of life he had placed in them; so that it seems
a Benefit or Sacred Donative collated on mankind, that they were not stated in
an inamissible Happiness. For though we should say with some, that such is the
Nature and Fabric of humane souls, that unless we engage Divine Power in a
perpetual Miracle, they could not be constituted in an Illapsable condition;
yet that All-knowing mind foresaw, that the calamity which many of them were
like to undergo by deserting their primitive Happiness, was not sufficient to
out-ballance the good which might accrue to themselves and the rest of the
Creation in their production; for albeit they were made Lapsable, yet it was no
ways necessary that they should actually recede from their blessed life, and
it was only their careless and negligent use of Gods paternal bounty in taking
to themselves too great a liberty of enjoying the pleasures resulting from
Corporeal life, which were allowed them in due measures and degrees, whereby
the Animadversion was too far called off from a steady observance of the
Commands and Laws of the Divine life, that turned Adam and the rest of his
Offspring out of a Paradisiacal felicity into a World of briers and thorns.
But beside this, God eternally beholding in himself the Idea's of such mutable
creatures, which being brought into Being, would afterward ruin themselves,
did as it were on set purpose interweave many acerbities and incommodities in
the structure of their beings, which might check and restrain their otherwise
exorbitant lusts, when they are seducing them to an easy descent, and
seasonably remind them of that better state they are apostatizing from. Lastly,
God beholding the lapse and degeneracy of humane souls, and considering that it
somewhat proceeded from that incompossibility he himself had wrought in their
Essential structure, he determined to send down upon earth the Messiah, whose
pure and immaculate soul never left the bright Mansions of Innocence with the
rest of his degenerate Brethren, to the intent that he might declare to fallen
men, the unfeigned desire and will of God, to re-instate them in the possession
of their ancient glory; and in pursuance of this good intention of his, to
assure them of the powerful conduct of his everblessed Spirit, which should be
in them a never-failing principle of life, both in this World, and the other.
Thus we see, that notwithstanding the infinite fullness of the Divine Goodness,
abundantly shed abroad upon the whole Creation; yet was not God at all obliged
to create man impeccable.

2. To determine by an absolute and positive act the Happiness of some, Prop. 2.
and the Misery of others, and yet to Decree the same upon condition of their
Obedience or Disobedience, is inconsistent with the light of Reason.
That the same thing be both Absolute and Conditional, is as great a
contradiction as can be imagined; and therefore to decree a benefit to any
person absolutely and without any respect whatever, and yet to propose the same
under certain terms and conditions of acting, must needs be of the same Nature.
But here that the Asserters of Gods Absolute Decrees concerning the Salvation
and Damnation of particular persons, might save the credit of their Doctrine
from those absurdities it lies obnoxious to, they have invented a pretty
Subterfuge, and they tell us, That God does irresistably work the condition in
those whom he intends to save. And what is this but to make God a (...), one
that acts upon such arbitrarious Principles, as every wise man would be ashamed
to own in the conduct of his life and actions? It Is very stange to see how men
will labor and toil to support and keep up a ruinous fabric, which if let
fall, would assuredly prove an advantage to the Christian world: but surely God
needs no such Patrons to defend the righteousness and equity of his dealing
with the sons of men, and I may say to them as once Job expostulated with his
Friends, Will ye speak wickedly for God? or talk deceitfully for him? will you
accept his person? This is, as he afterward tells them, to mock God, as one man
mocketh another. For if he determine salvation to men hypothetically; that is,
with respect to their obedience, and he himself work the condition in them by a
supervenient and irresistible force, How can they be said in propriety of
speech to have performed it? and, how can their Obedience (if it can be called
so) be termed an act of their duty (which is always in respect of a Superior)
when they themselves are wholly passive? Wherefore, according to this rate of
speaking, God must be said to reward himself. Lastly, He that promises a reward
upon condition of Obedience, supposes the person to be in a capacity of
disobeying, and the reward is added as an incitation to quicken and actuate his
Obedience; otherwise it will be as ridiculous as to confer a benefit upon a man
if he will breathe; for the man is no more able to disobey, then a stone not to
fall downward, or flame not to ascend. Now if God transact the whole business
by his Almighty and never-failing Power, without any the least attempts or
offers of man toward it, how is he left in a possibility of disobeying? and,
What need there any reward be adjudged to man for the performance of that which
God intends to bring to perfection without his cooperation or endeavors? So
on the other side, Is it not a strange dispensation, and wholly unworthy the
God of Truth, thus to deceive his Creatures, by telling them, that tey are the
cause of their own ruin, and that it is only their own obstinate and perverse
wills which deprive them of that Blessedness he prepared for them, and cause
them to inherit bitterness and sorrow, when he did by an Antecedent and
Inconditionate Decree, destinate and mark them out to an Eternal Misery? The
truly knowing Spirit will not be put off with Pageantry and fair shows; but
will look for something solid and substantial, which may be indeed (...),
worthy of that Excellen^ Goodness and Wisdom, which brought into being the
beautiful frame of Heaven and Earth. If such shifts therefore as these may pass
for current at the Great day of God, I cannot see how Wicked men's mouths can be
stopped, and the whole unrighteous World become (...), Subject and obnoxious to
the just Judgment of God. For, how easy is it for them to plead an exemption
from Punishment, although they never performed the conditions of the Gospel;
because the same absolute and peremptory Will which of old designed their
destruction, did likewise perfectly disable them from doing any thing that
might conduce to their Happiness? and, What were they that they could withstand
God?

3. Prop. 3.
To command men to Act according to a Law under a certain and severe
Punishment, and yet to take away all Power and Ability of Acting according to
the Tenor of that Law, is contrary to the dictates of Right Reason.
That I may fully clear this Proposition, I shall go by these Gradations.

1. That men may reasonably come under any Obligation by a Law, it is necessary
that that Law be Promulgated, otherwise it is no Law, nor can it reach or have
influence upon any man's person; for the Promulgation of it is an Essential
qualification of a Law, according to that known Maxim of the Canon Law, Leges
Constituuntur cum Promulgantur: Laws are then Constituted when they are
Promulgated: And that of the Civilians, Leges quae constringunt hominum vitas,
intelligi ab omnibus debent; Those Laws which have influence upon Men's lives,
ought to be understood of all. Thus among the Romans, the manner of publishing
a Law, after it had been approved and recorded, was, by hanging it up in Tables
of Brass in their Marketplaces, or at their Church doors, as Tacitus in his
Annals reports; whence legem figere, is to Enact and Establish a Law. Hence it
is that the Jewish Law has no obligation upon Christians, because it was
Promulgated only to them, and so became peculiar to their Nation, Audi Israel,
Hear O Israel; and if any part of it have influence now upon the Christian
World, it must be because it is repeated anew by the Son of God, the great
(...) of the Christian Economy; for whatever is contained in it beside,
conformable to the laws and dictates of Nature, obliges us not as given by
Moses, but by virtue of that antecedent Universal law common to all rational
beings. Nor was the Heathen World at all concerned in the Jewish Discipline,
upon the same account, because it was restrained and confined to the Judaical
Republic; for had it been of an Universal extent, there is no doubt but it
would have been published to the Pagans also; and the Jewish Prophets when they
reprehended the Heathen Kings for their enormities, would likewise have taken
notice of this in especial manner, that they did not conform to the Discipline
of the Jewish Church, and accordingly sharply reproved them for it, which we
never find they did at any time.

2. That a Law may have force and obligation upon Men, and they be reasonably
punished for the transgression of it, it is requisite that it be so framed, that
every man who hears of it, may know by some general or particular notices
whether he be concerned and interessed in it or no.

Our blessed Lord having finished all things committed to him on Earth, and
being now to enter into his glory, gave command to his Disciples and Apostles
to Preach the Gospel (...), to the whole Creation of mankind; by which he
sufficiently evidenced, that it was his mind and will, that all the World, to
whom it should come, should yield obedience to this his Evangelical
Institution; for he adds, Whoever believes and is Baptized, shall be saved:
but he that believes not, shall be damned: wherefore every man must look upon
himself concerned in this holy Dispensation. But according to the Calvinistical
Doctrine, Reprobates cannot in reason be punished for their non-submission or
violation of the Evangelical Law, because they are no way included under it;
not in their personal capacities, as being not by name specified in it; nor
under any general terms, for the Gospel (say they) was not given to Reprobates,
to the intent that they should be saved by their obedience of it: but the
ministra on of it is continued merely upon the account and interest of those
few Elect, whom the Divine Pleasure intended by a fair and irresistible gale to
carry into the Port of Eternal Bliss and Felicity. Wherefore this new and
perfect Law, seems not at all obligatory to Reprobates; for, how can they be
said to be damned for not obeying the Gospel, when they were from all Eternity
destined to destruction by an irrespective and irrevocable Decree?

3. That a Law may be Obligatory, it is necessary that it enjoin nothing but
what is possible to be performed Solon apud Plutarchum, (...).
, both in reference to the present capacities of the interessed persons, and in
respect of the matter or things themselves commanded in it.

That no man is bound to impossibilities, is as indubitable in Morals, as the
circulation of the blood in Medicks, or the regular motion of the Planets
around their center in Natural Philosophy: God cannot therefore in Equity
command, nor in Reason expect, that an impure and unholy person who is alive
only to the brutish life, should of a sudden leap from this frail and perishing
state of Mortality, into that exalted and Deiform condition of the Spirits of
just men made perfect; because there is an impossibility contained in the
command, considering the incapacity of the Person for such a sudden
undertaking, his faculties being broken and disjoynted, which require time to
be set in order, and recover their strength again; and withal bearing in mind,
the power and vigor of the life of sense and corporeity, which is so great
that it is lovely contrary like an oppressed Prince, can only continue it is just
and rightful claim to the Empire and Sovereignty of the man's mind, but cannot
attain to the full and complete possession of it is dominions, till after a long
and tedious dispute with the unrighteous Nature, and it is treacherous
Adherents. Should the All-wise Governor of the World command men to gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles, Reason it self would admit of their
Apology, in that the matter would not admit it, there was an impossibility in
the case, considering the Natures and Proprieties of things. In like manner, to
apply this to the Decree of Absolute Reprobation: Can God in justice expect the
fruit of Righteousness from those forlorn creatures, whom he has made a prey
to a certain ruin, when his blessed hands never vouchsafed to sow the seed of
his preventing and exciting Grace toward the completion of any living
formation? Can he expostulate with them that they did not walk in the ancient
paths of Truth and Virtue, when he himself turned them out of that good way by
a fatal Decree, into the dark and miry tracts of sin, where yet his benign
eyes saw them lie grovelling, and refused to put under his compassionate arm to
raise them up? Can he, without Hypocrisy, invite them to drink of the waters
of life freely, and punish them for not coming to those salutary streams when
he has deprived them of their legs, the principles of spiritual motion, which
should convey them thither? The good Samaritan in the Gospel, was commended for
lending a Charitable heart and hand to the calamitous person that fell among
Thieves: But these make God to be less pitiful to his Creatures; nay, to have
less Justice than an ordinary man, by representing him coming to the Wounded
souls of Reprobates, and commanding them to perform his will, and act their
parts in the Family of the New Creation, when he himself had before contrived to
send them as a prey to Thieves, who stripped them of their raiment, and so deeply
wounded them, as that they quickly became destitute of all sense and motion,
and almost life it self. How unreasonable a thing is it, if any thing in the
World deserve that Name; for God to punish men for not lifting up themselves
upon the wings of faith and love, and taking their flight toward the New
Jerusalem, when he himself has made them Apterites, and dispoyled them of their
plumes, and yet will not scatter the dewy influences of heaven, nor suffer his
clearing life to fall on them, that they may spring again? Can it be suitable
to that blessed Being all whose actions are just and righteous, and whose
Nature is that living law of Equity, according to which the whole World is
governed, to command Impossibilities, and call men to an account for what was
not in their Power to perform? The Stoic judged this unworthy the Deity, in
that interrogation, (...); Arrian. Epict. l. 1. c. 12.
and if it may pass for a piece of warrantable Justice in the Righteous
Governor of the World to require that at our hands, which we never were enabled
to do, there will be no security left of our future subsistence, much less that
we shall be happy in the other life. Yet in such an Aspect as this we may
behold the Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, and being such in the main parts
and lineaments of it, there is no man but may easily judge of the whole. And if
you will have a cast of something to this purpose Mr. Calvin himself will
furnish you, Instit lib. 3. cap. 24. Sect. 13.
Ecce vocem ad eos dirigit, sed ut magis obsurdescant; lucem accendit, sed ut
reddantur caeciores; doctrinam profert, sed qua magis obstupescant; remedium
adhibet, sed ne sanentur: that is, He calls to them, (viz. God to Reprobates)
but it is on purpose that they may be more deaf; he sets a light before them,
that by that luster they may be more blind; he lays down a Doctrine, that he
may more confound and amaze them; lastly, he applies a remedy, but with this
intent, that it may not heal them. And will you think this worthy and becoming
the Majesty of that Good and Just God, who has taken such strange and
unimaginable ways to make his Creatures happy, and who daily woes the Sons of
Men with arguments of the greatest weight and seriousness to accept his offered
Salvation? I cannot but speak, and it were a crime to be silent, when the glory
of heaven thus lies at stake, the honor of my Creator trampled in the dust,
and the spotless purity and holiness of his Nature sullyed and defiled by the
impure conceptions of unhallowed judgments: Hear O Heavens, and give ear O
Earth, while I plead the cause of the holy One, who is of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity, against the ignorant zeal of inconsiderate persons, who under
pretense of doing honor to his Name, do really render that admirable
contrivance of God in the Gospel, than which nothing was ever communicated to
the World more full of incomprehensible Wisdom, the most unreasonable project
in the choicest parts of it, that ever was set on foot among the Sons of men!
Do you think the Eternal Logos or Reason of God, would declare a Doctrine to
the World that should be in all points, of all his numerous issue only unlike
the Father; that is, that the Gospel alone, among all the projections and
contrivances of that All-comprehensive Wisdom should be found unreasonable?
Reflect a while upon the Heroic Generosity, and Innate Nobility of your own
Spirits, and let not your conceptions of God and his Works dwindle away into
childish Words and Names, nor stifle and suppress any noble sentiments by
perverse altercations about terms; but let a manly spirit possess your
breasts, and look upon men as rational Creatures, the composure of whose souls,
I mean their Intellectual frame, is such, that every thing is not a congruous
and proportionate object of their inward sense, and it is not in their power to
receive Truth and Falsehood alike; but as the eye cannot behold the sun (...),
unless it have some resemblance of the Sun it self; so neither can the soul,
without a great deal of molestation and regreat, embrace what is not
congenerous to it is rational Nature. And as it is in Nature, every Plant is not
adapted to entertain every particle that comes to nourish it, but admits only
such as are consimilar to it is own pores; so the spirit of man being rational
in all the ducts and lineaments of it is moral structure, cannot acquiesce in
any thing that is irrational, nor receive any Doctrine but what is homogeneal
to it is inward temper. Consider this I say, and judge of the Doctrins you so
earnestly contend for by this Index and Rule, and remember, that so often as
you propound any of the Dogmata of Christianity either as unreasonable in
themselves, or make them appear so to others by your unwary and irrational
Explication of them, you become treacherous to your Savior by hindering as much
as in you lies, those good effects he intended by the Propogation of the Gospel
throughout the World, and you likewise do violence to the Nature of Mankind, by
imposing upon them what is plainly repugnant thereto. But I fear I have been
too luxuriant in this sudden, though not wholly impertinent Excursion; I shall
therefore immediately fall upon the last Proposition, which is,

4. Prop. 4.
That to Create and bring into Being on purpose to destroy and make miserable,
is most irrational.
There is no Being whether merely Sensitive or Rational too, but by a natural
sympathy and propension, loves and takes care for it is own offspring: The
Beasts of the field, and the Fowls of the air, bear a tenderness and affection
toward their young, and never cast of the care and protection of them, till
time have enabled them to shift for themselves: The Hircanian Tigers never
discover the fierceness of their cruel natures more vehemently and
passionately, than when they are in danger of being bereaved of their whelps.
Thus have I seen a Serpent pull down the nest, and devour the young ones of a
little Bird before her eyes, while the innocent damme, not daring to come nigh,
and yet unwilling to fly away, suffers a pretty controversy between love and
fear within her breast, continually environing her more powerful adversary by
many circular flights, and pouring out in vain her pitiful complaints into
those insensible ears, till the cruel beast has eaten up her loving care and
charge, and then she mourns and makes the trees participate of her grief, and
often with sad notes visits the place where lay the tragic Scene of her latest
sorrows. Should we ascend to men who bear the similitude of heaven, even the
most barbarous not excepted, they all have a more regular care and love to
their offspring than brute Animals, inasmuch as they partake of a higher
degree of life, and have the principles of Reason seated in them: And can any
tender and compassionate Father behold without a relenting and bleeding heart,
his only Son racked or massacred before his eyes, to satisfy the brutish
passion of some blood-thirsty Tyrant? Shall frail men then be a precedent of
love and tenderness to his Maker? Shall God, whose love is always amiable and
serene, without the least disturbance or cloud of passion, be less pitiful to
what he has brought into being, then frail and imperfect mortals? It was a
prevalent argument which Moses used in the behalf of the murmuring and
discontented Israelites, That if God proceeded against them in fury, to their
utter undoing, Numb. 14.15, 16.
the Nations which had heard his fame would say, Because the Lord was not able
to bring his people into the land which he swear unto them, therefore he has
slain them in the Wilderness: and may not the same infamous obloquie, with a
far more specious pretext, be cast upon the righteous Providence of God, while
in displeasure he persecutes to the death his innocent Progeny: That because he
was not able to maintain them in that happiness he designed them for, he has
by an unalterable law fixed their eternal misery and destruction. The ancient
Philosopher Pherecides taught, that God transformed himself into Love, when he
brought into being the whole Creation; and surely that Love which moved him
first to act, cannot be thought to degenerate so far from it is Nature, as to be
busied in contriving the ruin of what is so newly brought forth. And though the
Ancients did veil and obscure their choicest Mysteries in Fables and
Aenigmatical Symbols, yet the intelligent inquirer may gather many substantial
truths from them, which being in themselves so coherent with the Divine
Oracles, seem to be a firm indication of Gods love and affection to the Sons of
Men, and that Providence being never excluded from any time or place, did in
all ages and parts of the World, raise up such considerable persons, and every
way furnish them with gifts and abilities, as might serve as instruments in her
hand, to teach and instruct mankind in the true knowledge and worship of the
Deity. Hence it is, that in the Gentile Theology, Love is made the most ancient
of the Gods, and the Sire of all things Plutarch tells us, that for this reason
Hesiod made Love the most ancient of the Gods, (...).
, and is described by Simmias Rhodius in a pair of Wings, which suited well
with the Symbolical representation of the Chaos, by an Egg which was brooded
and hatched under these wings of Love. Something of this we find Aristophanes
in Avibus sporting withal, (...).

This Love therefore, according to their Divinity, being the benign Creator of
all things, the Father of Men and Angels, from whose bounteous fecundity, the
vast spaces of the external Creation became replenished with suitable
inhabitants, must needs be ever present with every thing he has brought into
being, and communicate himself to all his Creatures, so far as their respective
Natures are capable of receiving the influxes of his Paternal Goodness. What
was therefore obscurely and imperfectly delivered by the Heathens, concerning
the production of things, we have fully declared in the Mosaical history of the
Creation; where we find the Holy Spirit of Love, by his fostering incubation,
bringing into being, and cherishing under his extended wings, the newborn
World. Which manner of production surely denotes, a tender care and dear regard
of whatever is brought into being; and therefore the Metaphorical expression of
Wings is often used in Sacred Writ, to set forth Gods loving care and
providence; Psalm. xci. 4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, when thou
betakest thy self under the shadow of his wings. And when the blessed Jesus
would denote that dear love wherewith he would have embraced Jerusalem, had she
returned unto him, he tells us, that he would have gathered her children
together (...), as a bird gathers her young under her wings, Mat, 23.37. God
cannot be separated from any of mankind, but as he brought them into being for
no other end but that they might taste of the communications of his Nature, so
he takes care that none of them shall fall short of this desirable end, but
through their own default. (...) (says Trismegist.) (...) i. e. That mind
which is the Father of all things, being life and nature it self, produced man
like unto himself, and loved him as his own offspring. But far short of this
comely Idea of the Divine Nature is that of Calvin, who had he been to describe
the barbarous stratagem of some cruel Nero, or one more inhumane than the World
has yet known, contrived to slay the innocent under color of Justice, could
scarce have done it with more horror and amazement, than that wherein he lays
down the eternal counsel of God against Reprobates; Instit. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Sect. 12.
Quemadmodum suae erga electos vocationis efficacia, salutem ad quam eos
aeterno consilio destinaret, perficit Deus: ita sua habet adversus reprobos
judicia, quibus consilium de illis suum exequatur. Quos ergo in vitae
contumeliam and mortis exitium creavit, ut irae suae organa forent and
severitatis exempla; eos, ut in finem suum perveniant nunc audiendi verbi sui
facultate private: nunc ejus praedicatione magis excaecat and obstupefacit: i.
e. As God by the efficacy of his Vocation toward the Elect, compleates that
Salvation to which he designed them by an eternal decree; so he has his
determinations against Reprobates by which he executes his decree concerning
them. Those therefore whom he created for the reproach of life and perdition of
death, that they might become the instruments of Anger, and examples of his
Severity; those, that they may arive to their end, he sometimes deprives of the
means of hearing his Word, and othertimes more blinds and amazes by the
preaching of it. But is the Name of a Creator, nay of a Father no more
promising? Why was Man made in the Image of God, unless he intended to deal
with him according to that relation he stood in unto him? We do not read, that
God has dealt thus with any of the rest of the Creation; for the rebellious
Devils were not cast down from the higher regions of light and glory, till they
apostatized from God, and drew with them the race of Mankind: And shall Man
alone, the noblest part of that Creation to which God once vouchsafed that
cheerful Elogium and Approbation, that it was very good, shall he only, I say,
be banished from the participation of that All-comprehensive Goodness? I can
sooner therefore believe that the proud Giant, the fanciful Poets have placed
under mount Aetna, should by his own native effort, throw of that heavy burden
from his oppressed breast, or that the spirit of Nature should convert a flinty
rock into a heap of fragrant flowers, than that God should create any of
Mankind, on purpose to make them the pitious objects of others scorn, and his
own powerful and implacable vengeance. I can never believe any thing, I say,
that savours of such irrational and unjust proceedings; but rather affirm, that
the Eternal benignity of the Holy one, diffused and communicated through the
whole Orb of beings, and comprehension of Nature, will so certainly take hold
of every thing that is capable of enjoying it, that it shall not fail of being
happy, so long as it acts evenly and regularly in that place and state infinite
Wisdom has allotted to it. Hence Synesius: (...)
(...),
(...)
(...);
Hymn 3.
What wonder is it, if God
Who did the World create,
From his own works repel
All sad and evil fate.
As if it were contradictory to the very Nature of God to be the Demiurgus and
Maker of all things, and yet not to render his productions as happy as the
capacities of their natures will admit: For nothing advantageth him ought, and
all the happiness or misery the Creatures run through in the course and order
of things, is neither an addition nor detraction of his felicity; only he being
Essential Love, which envies not, nor thinks any evil, delights to communicate
of himself in effects of kindness, tenderness and beneficence to all beings
round about him. The whole Creation tastes of it, having all it is parts
cemented with Goodness, and it is foundation laid in Love. The Heavens, the
Earth and Sea, and whatever moves within the compass of them, bear witness to
this Truth: This is that All-mighty Love which feeds the young Ravens when they
open their mouths toward heaven; and provides for the Lybian Lions when their
souls are pincht with hunger, and they roar after their prey: He it is that
opens the windows of heaven, and refreshes the dry and parched Earth; causing
the grass to grow for the Cattle, and herb for the service of Man: All things
in their order wait upon him, and he scatters his bounty in the midst of them,
and by a provident care looks down from Heaven and tends all his charge, so
that not a Sparrow closes it is wings on Earth, but that watchful eye observes
it is fall. And it is very strange, that those arms which fold and embrace every
thing that exerts any faculty and degree of life, should be employed in
plunging humane souls while innocent and undefiled, into woe and misery (...)
Porphyr. l. 2. (...).
, and that to Eternal ages: Where is that love and pity which all Creatures
proclaim to be in their Sovereign Lord and Maker? And if it were an Almighty
Goodness that brought them into being, surely the same Goodness being never
disjoined from an All-comprehensive Wisdom which beheld the Natures, mutual
relations and dependences of all Creatures, would have judged it fitter never
to have brought them into being, then that they should be made perpetually
unhappy so soon as ever they were created.

To conclude this Argument, Our Religion being in all the parts of it highly
reasonable, as being propounded to rational natures, in whom there are manifest
Idea's and notions of Eternal verity, and they being so deeply sealed upon
them, that it is neither in their power to obliterate, nor without great
reluctance receive any thing repugnant to them, it will appear from the nature
of the thing it self, that there can be no such absolute Decree of Reprobation
as some pretend.

CHAP. III. The third Argument taken from the Consideration of the Moral Nature
of God; from whence are deduced such legitimate Inferences and Conclusions as
diametrally oppose the Doctrine of Inconditionate Reprobation.
TO speak worthily and becomingly of that adorable Being, to whom we and all
creatures else owe not only our Existence, but our present subsistence and
conservation in the several states of life wherein we are, and to have right
apprehensions of his Nature This is made by Epictetus, ^p. 38. a Prolepsis of
Religion. (...).
, as it is a great piece of our duty, so it spirits and invigorates our minds
to manly and generous attempts, and leads us to the knowledge of the most
considerable Theories in Nature and Providence. For whether we consider the
exuberant plenitude and fecundity of the Divine Goodness, which cannot but
communicate it self to the utmost capacities of things; or the fathomless depth
of that Wisdom, which has framed the whole world with such curious and
exquisite Artifice, that the most perspicacious wit cannot find the least flaw
in that beauteous structure, and yet was able to produce it after another
manner beyond our conceptions, if he had so pleased; or whether we weigh the
infinity of the Divine Power, which is able to effect any thing that implies no
contradiction in Naturals, or deformity in Morals; Or lastly, whether we
contemplate the vast fetches and circuits of Providence, which though to the
low and contracted spirit seem to clash and interfeer, yet to the noble and
capacious soul are all concentrick and harmonious, and make that still and
sweet Music in his ears which the mistaken vulgar, thought Pythagoras heard
from the motion of the Spears, whereas it was nothing in reality but that
admirable and enravishing consent of Providence, which God the great Harmostes
orders in such tunable and methodical proportions; whether, I say, we attend to
any of these things, the contemplation of them cannot but widen and enlarge
that which is the flower and summity of our souls, I mean their Intellectual
Natures, and fill them with such raised and sublime Notions and Idea's, that it
will be almost impossible for us to miss of finding out some material Truth
which shall be worthy the Author of all things, and gratify and reward our
diligent inquisition. Now that we may have a true and genuin conception of the
Nature of God; it is altogether necessary that we free our minds from all
prejudice and anticipation of judgment, and purge them throughout from the
gross and impure steams of the Corporeal life, lest when we think we have an
Idea of him, it be only an Image of our unclean fancies and imaginations: but
as that Holy One is altogether Spiritual and immaterial, so must our
apprehensions of him be spiritualized and removed as far from the vile commerce
with matter as possibly we can, that our eyes being freed from the dust and
soil of the earth we may behold him as he is, that is, as a Being absolutely
perfect. For he that thus judges of that ever-blessed Being, not only removes
from him all imbecility and imperfection; but invests him in the most infinite
manner with whatever the mind of Man does rationally repute to be an excellency
and perfection. And whatever the profane Atheist may object, who under
pretense of honoring God with the title of Incomprehensible, removes him so
far, that he professes, he can have no certain conception of him at all, and
therefore concludes that he is not, and perversely laughs all incorporeal
substances out of the World, as if there were a contradiction in the very
terms; yet he that will discard the perplexed dictates of Fancy and Imagination,
and keep close to the sure Deductions of free and solid Reason, will (I doubt
not) ingenuously confess, that the Idea of God is as easy and natural, as of
any thing else in the World. But it is no wonder if he whose mind is
perpetually enveloped with a cloud of vice and sin, cannot behold the Eternal
Existence of that glorious Being which we call God: or acknowledging of him yet
deciphers him to the World by such strange Characters, as no reasonable man can
believe to be a true copy of his Nature. It is an indubitable Truth, that
(...), Every thing is best known by that which is most analogical to it; and as
the eye cannot behold the Sun (...), unless it have some picture and
resemblance of the Sun drawn in it; no more can any Man have a true notion of
the Deity (...), unless he be made God-like and partake of his image and
similitude. There is a certain congruity and harmony between Truth and the Soul
of Man; and however that ancient league by our unhappy lapse came to be
violated and broken: yet still there are some strokes and impresses in our
minds, which claim a cognation and affinity wherever they meet with it. And
those few sparks which yet remain after the extinction of that great fire of
Divine life, whose harmless and innoxious flame burnt bright within us, and by
it we saw our selves, and beheld the Natures and proprieties of things, till we
suffocated and choked it by casting an heap of dust and rubbish upon it;
these, I say, though faint and glimmering, yet retain their alliance with
heaven, and God owns them as the projections and rays of his own good life,
and whoever sincerely follows their conduct, shall be led to the knowledge of
their inexhausted source and origin. Having therefore such a determinate
notion of God before us, we shall descend to some particular Deductions from
the consideration of his Nature. As

1. That there is something Sovereign in the Deity, which is the root and
spring of all his other perfections, and that this is Absolutely full Goodness.
That the Attributes of God are arbitrarious, and like loose-hanging adjuncts
to be put off and on at pleasure, I think there is no man who knows what he
says, so blasphemous as to affirm, but God is what he is by the necessity of
his Nature; for he cannot be God, except he be immutable in all his essential
proprieties: which immutability of his is such, that he can neither cease to
be, nor act any otherwise then may be consonant to the fundamental laws of his
own Being. Wherefore God being the highest and most incomprehensible life and
activity, cannot fail through the Essential fecundity and plenitude of his
blessed Nature of communicating himself to all possible and capable subjects;
for the more perfect and complete any life is, the more diffusive it is of it
self; and the reason why Creation is not competible to any Being below the
Deity, arises not from any positive will of God to the contrary, but from the
impotency and imperfection of it is Essence. But God being no steril and barren
principle, but every way full and absolute, is not only carried forth to the
production of things, but to the order and management of them in such a way as
may most correspond and suit with their intrinsical natures. Whether therefore
these operations of God ad extra (as the Schoolmen phrase it) be guided and
steered by an explicit and arbitrary Will, or whether they have not some other
primary foundation, from which it is impossible they should at any time swerve,
and in which they are all terminated, comes now to be demonstrated. For to say,
that they are all bounded in the Divine Essence, and swallowed up in that
immense Abyss, introduces such a confusion in the Divine Attributes that our
minds can have no particular or distinct apprehension of this or the other
mode, and beside gives no satisfaction to a rational inquirer, who would be apt
to question, Whether there were not a subordination in the Divine Idiomata?
and, Whether they be all equally active and operative? and lastly, Whether the
Holy Scriptures do not universally magnify and extol some one Attribute above
the rest? For the Solution of these Difficulties we must examine our own
faculties, and consider what we mean by that Idea and representation we have of
the Divine Nature; and, what it is that principally confers to the formation of
that notion and conception we entertain in our minds of God. That there is in
us naturally an Idea of a Being absolutely perfect, which we neither derived
from sense, nor framed by the power of Fancy and Imagination, but is indelibly
wrought and engraven in our souls by a Divine principle, and of the sense of
which we can never totally rid our minds, however impiously diligent we may be
in debauching our Spirits, and Sacrilegiously racing the venerable Name of the
Deity out of his Temple, I shall take for granted: But there are some
perfections which do more signally appear in the Deity, and which peculiarly
constitute the Nature of a God; such as absolute and complete Goodness, which
being so boundlessly diffusive and communicative of it self, is necessarily
attended with an infinite Wisdom to govern and direct, and Power to execute and
bring into being, whatever this fertile womb of Love shall travail withal.
These are the constitutive Principles of a Deity, and all other proprieties are
but those three grand Attributes severally varied and modified. Now that they
are not all of equal worth and excellency, will appear, if we look upon them as
so many distinct qualities in created Beings, wherein there appears such pain
dissimilitude, that a man can scarce withhold himself from concluding, that
they will likewise retain their differences when exalted into the Nature of God
himself. Goodness is of an universal latitude and extent, and all other
excellencies and perfections of humane Nature are indiscriminately complicated
in it. For a good man is not only excited by the innate generosity and goodness
of his mind to do that which is best, but summons his Wisdom and Knowledge to
project and contrive, and then uses his utmost Power to bring it into act.
Goodness is the rule and measure of his actions, and Wisdom and Power receive
their worth and excellency from the degree of Goodness they partake of.
Knowledge and Power are more particular and strait, and more in a lower sphere,
and our actions receive no moral denomination from them, but as they
participate more or less of Goodness. For a clearer illustration of the present
Theme, we will suppose Power to have actual Existence, and carried out to the
effecting of whatever lies within it is sphere and comprehension, and being
infinite and unlimited, to be utterly incapable of any hindrance or impediment
in it is operations, and it will amount to no more than a furious and Gygantick
self-will, wholly indeterminate to good or evil, and as indifferent to destroy
and remand back again into nonentity what it has made, (if we can without a
contradiction attribute to it the Power of Creation) as at first to make it,
whose blind and impetuous self-will, is the sole rule of all it is exorbitant
actions, which being no knowing principle they may often prove as ridiculous as
the vain attempt of those mighty Giants to scale heaven by throwing mountain
upon mountain. We see then, that Power alone though we imagine it to have
actual Existence, speaks no more perfection than that great and mighty wind
which rent the Mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks, when God passed by
before the Prophet Elijah: And as the Lord was not in the wind, so neither is
he to be found in such boisterous effects whose productive cause is mere
selfishness and inconsiderate Will. God works not after any such unaccountable
impulses, nor are we to look for mere Will and Power in the Creation of things:
but for Wisdom and Counsel deriving from immense benignity and love, which
never acts but for worthy and decorous ends, and for the behoof of things
themselves. This being therefore the Nature of Power considered in it is
distinct capacity, let us add to it the principles of Wisdom, and then it will
suggest to us the Idea of the Manichean God, whom they make the Author of all
the evil in the World; For Wisdom and Power disjoined from the blessed
fountain of Goodness, is nothing else but armed wickedness. There is no Being
can communicate any thing to another which it self is not invested withal; and
if we suppose the Existence of a Being of infinite Subtlety and Power, it is
impossible it should be the Author of any Good in the World, because it is
possessed of nothing but an unlimited desire of doing mischief; and for this
reason alone, Wisdom and Power are no further good, or speak perfection then
they are in conjunction with Absolute Goodness: and consequently must depend
upon it as the beams of light dispersed through the air upon the Sun, or
faculties and actions upon the principles from whence they flow. That Wisdom
which is devoid of Goodness, is nothing but a higher degree of craft, something
of the Nature of that cunning and wilyness we may discover in voracious Beasts
and Birds when they deceive and prey upon the more innocent and harmless sort
of Animals; so that we plainly perceive, that Wisdom and Power separated from
Goodness, offer no notion of perfection at all to our minds; and therefore
there is something in the Deity more amiable and lovely, and which as it speaks
perfection it self, and is the most desirable and excellent thing upon earth,
so it is the spring of all other Attributes in the Deity, which are no further
morally good, than they are united with this prime and noble quality. Hence
Tully introducing C. Cotta disputing against Velleius the Epicurean, tells him,
that Epicurus by taking away Love from the Deity, Tollit id, quod maxim
proprium est optimae, Lib. ^ de Not. Deorum. Seneca Epist. 95. Primus est
Deorum cultus, Deos credere: deinde reddere illis Majestatem suam, reddere
bonitatem sine quae nullae Majestas est.
praestantissimaeque naturae. Nihil enim melius aut praestantius bonitate and
beneficentia. Let us now reflect upon that Archetypal Image according to which
man was made, and if we do not wilfully blind our eyes, we cannot but see that
it was neither Wisdom nor Power (though we partake in some measure of both) but
Goodness and Love, whose glorious forms and Idea's are disseminated through the
intellectual World, and impressed upon every rational Being: The Angels
themselves, who far exceed us in Power and Wisdom, yet should they exercise
them without the ballast of Goodness would prove more exorbitant and
ungovernable then the Apostate Devils. For wherein consists the height of that
degeneracy and revolt of Men and Angels from God, but only in this that they
are departed from the eternal laws and rules of Goodness, and strive to sustain
and prop up themselves by their unlimited self-will? and hence it comes to
pass, that having no sure and steady foundation to bottom themselves upon, they
fluctuate and are tossed to and fro by every unruly passion and desire. (...),
all good is governable and uniform; and it is immutable Goodness above that (to
speak with reverence) makes the Divinity a Uniform Being: for Wisdom and Power
are in themselves so arbitrarious, multiform and uncertain, that without the
poize of Goodness, they cannot settle and radicate themselves upon any
permanent Center. This great Truth the ever-blessed Son of God verified, when
he left the glory and beatitude of Heaven, and pitched his Tabernacle amongst
men. For wherein consisted the flower and excellency of his Divine Perfections?
Was it not in that Universal Love and Benignity he expressed to the whole
World? and in that tenderness and compassion he showed by going about doing
good, and casting an healing influence upon the bodies and souls of Men? This
surely was the brightest ray of Divinity that ever shone from God manifested in
the flesh; and to this, every holy man's experience bears witness, who then
finds himself most peaceable and calm, and most conformable to the Divine Image
and Pourtraicture, when he is doing the most good, and his love most enlarged
and comprehensive; which Love never ascends more acceptably to Heaven, than
when it overflowes all capable subjects here below, and strives to unite and
draw them up to God their great Source and Parent. Wherefore by what has been
said for the explication of this Proposition, it sufficiently appears, that
Goodness is the inmost Center of the Deity, and Wisdom and Power ray forth from
thence like the beams of light from their lucid Center, (...).

2. That that which is most precious and best (as I may so speak) in the Divine
Nature, will be sure to work first, and extend it self to all the capacities
and possibilities of things.
We have already proved, That the Deity is no Arbitrary Being, but that all his
Actions and Determinations relating to us, have their Original in Infinitely
full Goodness; which being the most precious thing in the Nature of God, and
the measure and rule of all his other Attributes and Perfections, it cannot but
seem most easy and natural to conceive, that this Sovereign property, as it is
the best, so it should likewise obtain the first place in working. For infinite
Power never acting but in subordination to directive Wisdom; nor Wisdom and
Power exerting themselves but in the way of, and according to the laws of
Goodness, which being in it is own Nature so fruitful and communicative, that
all other Modes and Attributes are tinctured with it, and lie in a laxe and
diffuse manner within the sphere and comprehension of it is Energy, it must also
obtain the first place of acting as of right belonging to it. And if we look
out and take a view of the several rancks and orders of intellectual Beings, we
shall find in every of them something of greatest value and excellency, which
as it exceeds in worth all other perfections of their Natures, so it will be
most energetical and of the largest extent in acting; and contrarily, that what
is of less excellency, is more contracted and circumscribed, and of less
efficacy and virtue. The soul of man, though one entire Orb in the whole
latitude and comprehension of her Essence; yet is made up of distinct powers
and faculties, which are not all of equal value and excellency, nor do they all
operate in the same order and manner. The lowest power which we take notice of
in humane souls, is that Plastic or Formative virtue wherein consists the
Vital Union between soul and body, and whose peculiar office it is to conserve
the motions and keep in play all the Engines of the whole corporeal Machine:
and this being so stupid, languid and inert, is perpetually transfixt by the
inevitable motions and variegations of matter, and fatally bound up to those
operations which are common to us with brute Animals. But as we ascend higher,
the Powers of the soul are more explicate and large, and according to their
worth and excellency, obtain a more or less ample sphere of Energy and Life:
Thus they gradually arise till they come to that which is the Quintessence and
choicest perfection of humane souls. Reason or Intellect, which being
sanctified by the Divine Life, blossoms and rays forth on every side to the
circumference of it is Essence, and hallows all the Corporeal and Animal powers
(...), as the Platonist speaks, with an Intellectual touch and Divine emanation
that in a sense pervades the very lowest of them: For as Intellect becomes more
refined and sublime, and the Divine light by it is silver cords takes greater
hold upon it, so the exorbitancy of the lower powers decreases, and they are
made more castigate and obedient to the dictates of the Superior Faculties.
When therefore Reason is perfectly released from the burden and encumbrance of
this sluggish and earthly body, and freed from the noxious fumes ascending from
that cadaverous Dungeon, and shines in it is own native and irreprehensible
beauty, it cannot be doubted but that as it is the most precious part, the eye
and glory of the soul, so it will have a full and absolute Sovereignty and
command, and be the first mover and productive cause of all those operations it
self is conscious of. And though now we have almost lost the genuine sense and
relish of Truth and Righteousness, and Interest or Passion and the satisfaction
of a baser appetite, dethron our despotick and Lordly powers, and usurp the
Government of our minds; yet who so manfully resists this tyrannical Dominion,
and strives to reinstate himself in his former liberty shall find that those
moral Idea's of Goodness, Beauty, Truth, and Righteousness do more frequently,
constantly and evenly display themselves than any other whatever; and these
being likewise more excellent then the Universal notions of any other Science
or Knowledge, they are also impressed deeper and more indelibly sealed upon our
minds and spirits.

But here I find it will be objected, That although according to this way of
raticionation, Goodness seems to be the highest perfection of the Moral Essence
of God, and consequently to have the first place in operation; yet God being
Essentially all these perfections, that is, Infinite Goodness, Wisdom and
Power, he might impress upon us what notion and Idea's he pleased; and though
he have so signally engraved that universal Idea of Goodness upon us, yet
notwithstanding he himself is free from all Law and Rule of acting, being in
himself an Infinite Will and Authority, and has bestowed on us those
perfections we find in our selves by his own arbitrary pleasure, and therefore
we cannot give any satisfactory account of his Nature by what we find in our
selves.

In answer to this, I affirm,

1. That those Universal Characters or Notions wrought into the Essential
composition of our Natures, and which render us Intellectual Creatures, are a
sufficient guide to lead us to the true and certain knowledge of the Nature of
God. For those common and rudimental principles of Knowledge being placed in us
by something far more excellent than our selves, and not then first begotten
when some apt and fit instances and occasions from without lead us to
particular considerations and applications of them to this or that singular
Mode or Being; and since we our selves cannot without a manifest repugnance to
our Natural Powers and Faculties, contradict and oppose any of those general
Sentiments, it must needs follow, that we must survey all things falling under
our cognizance by those easy and natural rules and measures; and if now we
remind our selves, that the Notion of a God, that is, of a Being infinitely
perfect, is one of those indelible Characters impressed upon our minds, and
that we can no otherwise signify our conception of so illustrious an object,
than by removing whatever speaks an imbecility and imperfection, and adorning
it with all those glorious attributes which in the nature of the thing it self
and in the judgment of all rational men, design the highest accomplishment and
perfection; it will unavoidably follow, that either we in this our state of
weakness and degeneracy, can never attain to any settled and firm notion of the
Deity (which I look upon as a wide inlet to Atheism and Irreligion) or we must
necessarily frame his Idea according to those immutable notices and Images of
perfection, we find in the survey of the innate Treasure and intellectual
Furniture of our minds. Now what is there the mind of man can possibly
excogitate more expressive of a Being of infinite Perfection, than Infinite
Goodness, Wisdom and Power? which Perfections appearing not to us of equal
worth and excellency, we are led by the plain laws and dictates off reason to
ascribe to that the first place of working, which includes the highest and
largest Energy and Virtue. God therefore acting according to the essential
measures of an Universal and Almighty Goodness, cannot be looked upon as such
an Arbitrary Being as the Objection presupposes: Beside, that it is highly
improbable in the nature of the thing it self, that there is any such thing as
infinite Will and Authority, that is, as I understand it, such a Being whose
operations are steered and conducted by no other principle but Will and Power,
it is certain that we judging of things according to those innate Notions we
have of them, cannot frame any such conception of the Deity; for although it be
true, that God might have placed other Idea's in us (and had his Nature been as
Arbitrary as some conceit, no question but he would have done so) yet it being
likewise evident, that he has not stamped any such Characteristical Notes of
his Essence upon us, it is impossible we should entertain any other Notion of
him then what plainly and apparently arises from that natural Idea of himself
he has signed upon every individual person of Mankind. Thus although we should
affirm, that God might so have ordered things at the first Creation of Men, and
so attempered and disposed our Faculties in reference to the objects both of
the Corporeal and Intellectual World, that our Idea's of them should be quite
contrary to what we now find and feel in our selves, e.g. That the Idea of
Matter should agree to Spirit, and that of Spirit to Matter; yet they being de
facto otherwise, we can assign no other difference then what is now in the
things themselves.

2. It is altogether inconsistent with the Eternal and immutable Veracity of
God to invest our souls with such Notions and Apprehensions as were not truly
significative and expressive of his Nature. For this Eternal Mind intending the
good and happiness of all created Beings, endued them with Powers and Faculties
agreeable to their respective Idea's, and so contrived all things by an unerring
Wisdom, that nothing should want it is part of that pleasure and happiness for
which it was at first made. Wherefore the noblest satisfaction and felicity of
humane souls lying in the exercise of their intellectual powers, and the
delight accruing thence, being more or less intense, according to the nature of
the object they conversed with; as it could not stand with the Goodness of God
to deprive them of any innocent gratification of their minds in the
contemplation of the outward World: so neither could it fairly accord with his
Veracity, to prepossess them with such conceptions of things as are no where to
be found in the natures of the things themselves. Since then we can no way
doubt but that the blessed Author of our Beings is infinitely Veracious, this
most precious Attribute of his, will be sufficient security to us that we are
not made perpetually and inevitably fallible: but that there is a due
proportion and harmony between our faculties and those objects whereof we have
a clear and distinct apprehension. And there is no reason or plausible pretense
we should think otherwise; (...) arising from impotency and weakne(...) in us,
is nothing but the sickness of our minds, it is wholly repugnant to the most
perfect Being, so to work a deceit in the intimate frame of our Natures, that
we should always be deluded in what we imagine we have the clearest evidence
of. Wherefore we being assured of the Truth of our Faculties from the Veracity
of God, we have a sure guide to lead us in the contemplation of his Nature and
Perfections, and may give a rational account of them from what we find in our
selves.

From these foregoing Considerations, we may by an easy and natural deduction
infer, that God never destinated any of mankind to Destruction; but that all
the calamity and misery they undergo, either in this World or the next, is the
proper issue and product of their wilful Apostasy and defection from him. For
God being Infinite Love, and this Love the most precious Attribute of the
(...), and the cause of all things else, it must necessarily follow, that
whatever designs or projections were intended in reference to mankind, they
must spring and derive from Goodness, which as it is Best, so it cannot but act
that which is Best, and most behoofeful to the things for which it acts. I
confess, though this way of Argumentation from the Nature and Attributes of
God, appear to me as convictive as any Mathematical Demonstration, and I feel a
more irresistible and captivating force in it, than in any other way of arguing
whatever; yet because there is required a peculiar Crasts of soul to be
convinced by it, I do not wonder that so many look upon it as weak and invalid.
For my own part I fully believe that should God by his Absolute Will and
Pleasure place any such conceptions of himself within my mind, as that he hates
the greatest part of Mankind for no other reason but because he Will, it is
impossible I should ever credit those stranger guests to be sent from him whose
Name is Love, and glories most of all in that fair and noble title; for those
apprehensions having no affinity or alliance with the ancient and first
inscriptions of heaven upon my soul, would grow there but as strange Plants in
a forced and unnatural soil, being destitute of that proper and radicating
moisture which should dispread them in a flourishing and kindly growth. There
are some indeed who by reason of the penury and straitness of this Noble and
Heroic qualification of Universal Goodness and Love within their own breasts,
and confining themselves to particular Interests and Engagements, shape the
Idea of God as suitable to and resembling their contracted Spirits as they can,
and therefore attribute Love to him only secundum effectum, not affectum;
whereby they would make us believe, that there is no such real propriety or
affection as Love existing and living in the Deity, but only a bare indication
of it by certain effects, which because our short and steril understandings
know not how to express otherwise, we give them the denomination of Love or
Goodness. Now although the Deity be not subject to those variable passions
which in our selves we style Love and Hatred, and which are seldom grounded but
upon Humor and Fancy; yet to deny that there is any such thing really and
formally in God as Love and Goodness, such a principle as carries him out to
the production of all possible Beings, and whereby he takes an Eternal
Complacency and Delight in whatever acts regularly within it is sphere, is in it
self but a groundless fancy: For that beloved Disciple of the blessed Jesus St.
John, who leaned on a breast never void of Love and Pity to the Sons of Men,
and had a very potent and vigorous sense of this Divine passion within him,
when he would set out and express the Nature of God to us in the most
significant and yet Evangelical and attractive manner, tells us, that he is
Love, which doubtless denotes something real and certain, not a bare notion or
airy Idea and fantastic dream known only by some effects, being something only
(...) not (...).

3. Conclusion. That the Divine estimate of things and persons, is according to
the truth and reality of their respective Natures; and that when God makes
judgment of Intellectual Creatures he does it by viewing their moral frame and
constitution, and accordingly stands more or less affected toward them.
We fond Mortals being prone to Love and Hate at our pleasure, beholding things
through the vitiated and corrupt Medium of our lusts and passions, are very apt
to make to our selves false representations of them by dressing them up in the
filthy shape of our own distorted fancies; like Icterical persons who imagine
all the approximate objects of sight tinctured with yellow, when as the color
is all the while in their own eyes, and made only by the motion or striking of
certain vapors upon the Optic Nerves: thus many contaminating and defiling
their reasons by a familiar converse with sin and wickedness, and setting their
own Self-will in the Throne, and transacting the whole business of their
Religion upon the stage of Fancy, never looking higher then to the
gratification and satisfaction of the Animal powers, and by that means making
Vice connatural to them, and losing the true distinction between Good and Evil,
Calling Good, Evil, and Evil, Good; putting Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness; Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter; they frame an Image of the
Deity by an Idolum of their own, and think that God has the same good
apprehensions of their persons and the same conceptions of all things else as
they themselves have. But that immutable Goodness which gave being to the
Heavens and the Earth, and every thing contained in them, and is not subject to
humors and partialities, but pervades the Essences of all created Beings, and
feels all the intrigues and mysteries of each of them by a stable and
Omnipresent Knowledge, judges of them according to their present state and
capacities. As suppose this man righteous and holy at present, should afterward
apostate from that perfect state, albeit his future lapse be an object of the
Divine Knowledge; yet is he not denominated from that, but from the exigency and
import of his present condition, and from hence is approved of God, and under
the decree of life and happiness: but when he actually prevaricates and commits
iniquity, he falls under the decree of death and damnation, notwithstanding all
his former righteousness. There are some things which are of an immutable and
indispensable necessity, and are eternally unalterable even by God himself;
such are the notions of God and Evil, Justice and Injustice, and all Moral
Rectitude and Deformity; and according to the importance of these, so is Gods
Estimate of all rational Agents, without respect to any external qualifications
or natural endowments. And wherever he finds the least measure of his own good
life springing up, he is so far from destroying it, that he upholds and
nourishes it by the vital streams of his Immense Plenitude, and quickens and
causes it to distend it self through the powers of the soul by a gentle and
divine heat; and knowing it to be his own genuine offspring by those Sacred
Hieroglyphics and impressions it bears upon it, he can never forsake or cast
it of as a contemptible and worthless thing: but embrace it as that which has
the truest and most undoubted right to the Government of the whole World, and
take the greatest pleasure in dispreading it throughout all the lapsed
Creation, as being nothing but his own blameless Nature displayed and taking
hold of so many several subjects to unite them to it self, as to the most
absolute and self-originated Good. And this is no more then what the sacred
Writ gives it is suffrage for; Act. 10.34, 35.
God is no respecter of persons: but in every Nation he that fears him and
works Righteousness, is accepted of him. As our growth and increase is in the
Life and Nature of God, so do we proportionably come under his favor and
acceptance. For we must not think that so soon as ever this Potent and Divine
principle begins to set us free from that heavy slavery and captivity we were
detained under by our Tyrannous self-wils; that we are immediately so far
advanced into the Divine Favor, as will admit us into the sacred Adytum or
Holy of Holies in the highest Heavens, to see and enjoy the glory and presence
of the Divine Schehinah, and recreate and refresh our selves with that adorable
splendour: but we are to reckon our selves so far under the benign aspect of
heaven, as the Holy Life of God rules and bears sway within the Empire of our
minds. Heaven is not taken with the Grandeur and Blandishments of the world;
nor is a man so accounted in the balance of the Divine judgment and
approbation, as he is valued in the fallacious estimate of frail mortals (for
God sees not as we see, nor are his thoughts as our thoughts) but such is the
man as is the inward frame and temper of his spirit, unbared from that swelling
pride and ostentation, and the painted gloss and varnish of Hypocrisy which
set him off in the eyes of men. There is nothing God takes greater joy and
contentment in, than the expansion and dilatation of his own Nature and
Attributes; and he never suffers his blessed Life solitarily to contest with
the Rebellious and Gygantick lusts in men's souls, and then to be vanquished and
die in the midst of enemies for want of his powerful assistance: but
perpetually aides and succors it, making it victorious to the casting down
Principalities and Powers, and everting and conquering the whole Kingdom of
Darkness, and every thing that opposes it is Crown and Dignity, leading the soul
as a glorious spoil taken out of the hands of the airy-Apostate Legions (who
are but Usurpers and Intruders upon the Rights and Proprieties of the Kingdom
of light) into it is native Country, that (...), the land of Truth and
Righteousness. All sin and unrighteousness is directly contrary and opposite to
the eternal Rectitude of Gods blessed Nature; and being so, it is impossible he
should ever be reconciled to it, or cast a favorable aspect upon it. He will
ever be chasing, pursuing, and beating it out of the World, and never suffer it
to rest any where in peace, but will always lay siege against it, and will at
length prevail and settle his own life upon it is rightful Throne, and put all
the Powers of Hell and Darkness under his feet. These are the two mighty
Empires which have been ever since the revolt of Men and Angels from God, and
are still contending for the Government of the World, and industriously
promoting the amplitude and enlargement of their respective Dominions, and to
one of these every man associates and adjoynes himself in this life, either by
a manly courage and resolution in the ways and practice of virtue, or a
pusillanimous declension to iniquity and vice. And therefore the Philosopher
spoke well and agreeable to the sense of Christianity, Porphyr. (...) l 2.
(...) i. e. The more we neglect the extirpation of our passions and
exorbitances, the stronger hold has the unrighteous nature upon us, and the
nearer are we conjoined with it.

The sum of all is this; God looking upon and judging men according to their
moral habitudes and capacities, and beholding them all upright and perfect as
the workmanship of his own hands before our great Protoplast Adam transgressed
in Paradise, could not but intend graciously to them and treat them according
to the innocent purity of their Natures, and therefore never conceived any such
dismal purpose of damnation against them, because they were not then in the
nature and reason of the thing, objects of his hatred and displeasure; nor
could they become obnoxious to punishment, till they had actually violated some
Law and Command.

4. Conclusion. That all the results, operations and designs of the Deity,
relating to and terminated upon something without him, are the emanations and
effects of Absolute and Complete Goodness.
It was not any benefit or addition to his stable glory and felicity, which Men
or Angels might contribute, that first moved and incited the great Creator or
the Universe, to bring all things into Being: but it was to communicate his
Nature, and display his Goodness in the production of all things capable of
existing. The whole frame of Nature depends upon him, and he upholds it in the
circle of his benign Arms; and his exuberant Love, like an eternal spring, is
perpetually sending abroad it is streams, and watering all the parts of the
Creation with a Divine influx. God is not like ambitious Man, who acts that he
may make himself great, and purchase a few swelling titles by sucking in the
aerie breath of Popular Applause, and like proud Haman, contrive and design the
ruin of every one that will not bend the knee, and adore with humble
prostrations the vainer Image of a more conceited Majesty; or like those
self-willed aspiring Spirits of whom it is affirmed, Porphyr. (...). l. 2. Sect.
37.
(...) That they will do mischief if once they are incensed by neglect of their
due worship and service: but will presently become beneficial if flattered and
collogued by Prayers, Supplications, Sacrifices, and other accustomed Rites and
Ceremonies. He never acts out of such scant and parsimonious principles, nor is
he such a mutable and peevish Being, as to be overcome with Anger and Revenge
upon every slight occasion; and yet so easy, and fond, and thirsty after the
praise and glory of his Creatures, as to be appeased with a few trivial
performances and demure submissions: but his Holy Nature is steady and
unchangeable Goodness, which exerts not it self precariously and arbitrarily,
being never disjoined from an All-comprehensive Wisdom, nor ever subject to the
passions of Envy and Vainglory, or clouded by inadvertencies and surprizals of
pettish Wrath; but like the Sun beyond the Planetary regions, communicates his
amiable life by ever serene Radiations, and uninterrupted influences. There is
nothing in the Deity which arises out of Poverty or Indigency, but of infinite
Plenitude and Fullness; and no creature can augment his Felicity, who is in
himself a perfect Self-sufficiency and complete Happiness. Strom. 5.
Wherefore Clemens Alexandrinus well observes out of Plato, That God brought
not the glorious Fabric of the World into Being (...), out of indigency, or
that he might receive praise and glory from Men and Angels, as a tribute to be
paid him by his Creation. It is the impotency and effeminacy of men's
intellectual powers which lessens and straitens their apprehensions of the
Deity, that they cannot frame any other conceptions of him then they do of
themselves, as if he sought for Honor and Advantage, and something without
himself, which he was not as yet possessed of by bringing his Creatures upon
the stage of Being. And if these uncouth Idea's chance to light upon a subtle
and unhewn temper, he will easily be provoked to deny the very Existence of God
in the World, whom he cannot imagine to be Almighty Love and Immense Fullness;
when he plots and contrives to augment the revenues of his glory by those
ignoble and dishonorable ways of destining his Creatures to misery, to the
end he may appear potent and magnificent in their destruction. For as the great
Proplastes of the Universe beginning the efformation of a plant, and meeting
with stubborn and inobsequious matter, gives it a different signature and
impression from it is natural Idea; and instead of adding to it it is due
proportions and lineaments, despoils it of it is native form and beauty by many
misshapen botches and protuberances: In like manner these direful and harsh
apprehensions of the Deity, meeting with a rough and unmalleable disposition,
instead of forming any consistent notion, beget in it by their contagious
affriction an utter aversation and malice against the thing it self, and
exasperate it so far that it bends all it is strength of wit and subtlety, to
eradicate the very Being of a God out of the World. For undoubtedly if the
minds of men be too untractable to become Devotional and Religious, the next
step will be to take away all sense and veneration of a Supreme Numen as being
something which otherwise would too much curb and restrain them from
prosecuting that liberty their corrupt and debauched Natures assume to
themselves. And what is it that gives occasion to such dismal thoughts, and
renders the lovely Idea of God such a Mormo and bugbear to men, that they
endeavor by all possible ways to extirpate it out of their minds; but only
because they see those who pretend to be the great lights of the Gospel and
Religion, and instructors of others in the ways of Righteousness, make such
dreadful representations of his Nature, and set him forth in so frightful a
dress, that they think the World had better be without, then groan under the
Tyranny of such a blood-thirsty Deity, who like churlish Saturn, destroys his
offspring so soon as brought into Being; nay before they were any thing but
Idea's in the Divine Intellect, designed them by an irrevocable law to most
sharp and uneasy torments? This certainly is the very inward sense of the
Atheist, who finding very contradictory and unaccountable explications as well
of many other grand pieces of Christianity as of the Nature of God, made by
many who took themselves to be (...) in the late times, wherein true Religion
dwindled away into nothing but formal performances, long and pompous Devotions,
tedious and anxious Confessions, as well of the Articles of their Faith as
Obliquities of their lives, and pedantick niceties, took a fair occasion to
disbelieve all, and by a hellish kind of policy, contrived at once a total
eversion of Christianity, by taking away the object of Religious Worship and
expunging the notion of a Deity out of men's minds. What Plutarch somewhere
speaks of a barbarous sort of people, the Atheist retorts upon those rigid
masters of Theology, that it were much better to have no notion or conception
of God at all (...), than to think that he takes pleasure in the blood of slain
men, and accounts this the most perfect and consummate Sacrifice and Devotion.
But this need not have driven the Atheist so far as to deny the Existence of
God; for had he looked into the inbred forms and characters of his own mind,
and withal viewed the original draught of God in the Holy Scriptures, he might
have taken a far more true, lively, and amiable resemblance of the Deity, than
that which scared him from the very thoughts of his Being. God is one who
carries on no self-interest or particular design: but that which he most of all
aims at and intends shall take place upon Earth, is the propagation of his own
Life and Nature, and the general good and welfare of all the sons of Men. Fond
and unreasonable Man indeed, when he has gotten power into his hands, delights
himself in making happy or miserable at his pleasure: but that steady and
immutable Goodness which neither rises nor sets, nor admits any variation or
shadow of turning, glories not so much in the displaying of his power and
making himself formidable to the Creation, as in the expansion and dilatation
of his Love, as the glory and beauty of the Sun are those pleasant rays that
flow from him. Gods power is nothing but Goodness arming and exerting it self
for the bringing about some design of Love; nor can he ever Will any thing but
what is every way suitable and correspondent to his invariable Goodness, which
is the measure of his Will. And therefore to think that God takes any
complacency in the sole exercise of his Sovereignty and Dominion over his
Creatures, or advances his glory by exalting and casting them down, and making
them the objects of his Love or Hare, according to his arbitrary Will and
Power, is all one as if a Man should seek for a name and glory by going about
and treading upon a few poor Worms. We all talk much of the glory of God, but
many of us have very short and contracted conceptions, and too often adopt our
own fancies for genuine and natural apprehensions of it, as if it consisted in
the putting forth the acts of an unlimited Will and Power how and when he
pleases, and declaring their effluxes and emanations to be the rule of reason
and measure of all Moral Actions, and the grand Law of the whole Creation, or
else in those Hymns and Hallelujahs which are offered up to him by intellectual
Beings from all quarters of the Universe: Whereas in truth his Glory is nothing
without himself, nor any acquisition and purchase to augment his happiness (for
he being an Infinite Plenitude of all Perfection, is incapable of receiving any
complement of Glory or Blessedness) but then he most of all elevates and raises
his glory and luster, when he most of all communicates his Nature, and shines
in with a full and uninterrupted light of Truth and Goodness upon all the
intellectual Creation. He never seeks his Glory in respect of us in any other
way, than by dispreading and imparting those Sovereign Attributes of Love,
Mercy, Patience, Wisdom and Justice. And we in the most proper sense do then
advance the Glory of God highest, and discover it to the World in the most
ample and transcendent manner, when the life of God becomes a Vital Principle
in us, carrying us beyond the reach of corporeal exsudations and defilements,
which render the soul inept for a conformity to his blessed Image; and when
Truth, Holiness and Righteousness in which the Divine Nature is copyed out,
become not empty and insignificant Names and sounds of words, but actuating and
quickening Principles, and we studiously endeavor to engrave those beautiful
Forms in our minds and spirits: In a word, then do we glorify God, when we
converse with him in the Temple of an unspotted heart, and derive from him in
whom there is no blemish of iniquity, such an Universal Holiness as lives
within us, and pervades and sanctifies all our actions: And this the Lord
Christ who best knew how to glorify God, has intimated to us, Joh. xv. 8.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit.

I have now finished this Argument from the consideration of the Divine Nature,
and have deduced such genuine and legitimate Conclusions, that if rightly
estimated and weighed, cannot but implant for the future in every unprejudiced
mind more generous and serene Apprehensions of the Deity, then are offered in
any Scheme of the Supralapsarian or Sublapsarian Doctrins; both which concur
in that which appears most deformed to every pure and defecate eye, viz. The
Eternal Reprobation and Confusion of the greatest part of Mankind, the one upon
pretense of Gods sole Will and Pleasure, and the other under the mantle and
cover of Adam's transgression, in whose loins the whole race of Mankind was
included, when he fell and lost his Paradise. Both which opinions, though never
so fairly gilded over, do really make God put on the mask of cruelty and
rigor, that he might appear just in his Economy and Administration of the
affairs of the World: and that which is most barbarous and infamous in the eye
of reason is made to speak the glory of the Deity. And that God might bring
about this dismal and black design of Damning his Creatures, he must compass it
by injurious artifices, and tyrannical contrivances; rot unlike that inhumane
fraud Tiberius used to Brutus and Nero the sons of Germanicus, Suet. in Vit.
T^b. c. 54.
Varia fraud induxit ut concitarentur ad convitia, and concitati perderentur.
How deep a stain does this cast upon the lovely rays and efflorences of the
Divine Goodness and Mercy, making him to become the Executioner to his own
offspring, and rend that dear life in pieces, which his own hands gave Being
to? And although the Sublapsarian Dogma be entertained of some, on purpose to
mollify that harsh decree of the Supralapsarian Reprobation; yet if we divest
it of those terms and artifices of words wherewith it is mantled over to appear
more specious to the World, we shall find it cast as great a blot upon the
Divine Nature as the other. For, whether is it better to say, That God by his
Eternal Prerogative of Absolute Dominion over all his Creatures, has adjudged
the greatest part of Mankind to inevitable misery, for no other reason but upon
the impulse of his own Will, and to show the glory of his Power: Or to say,
That God for the sin of one Man (whom he made the Representative of the
succeeding Generations of Men to the end of the World) committed some thousands
of years ago, and imputed only to his Posterity, who were no more able to help
it, than to hinder their being born into the World, should take the advantage
of his lapse, and decree the greatest number of Mankind to Everlasting
destruction. And if we impartially view this latter, it will appear no less
precarious and absurd than the former. For though it be true, that we are
really and formally guilty of Original Sin; yet to say, that God did physically
predetermine Adam's fall: or in the mildest sense, That he looked upon man as
fallen (for the Reprobationists are not consistent with themselves) and so took
the opportunity which he foresaw would offer it self by his lapse to bring
about his design of ruining the greatest number of Mankind, is to bring
Almighty God the Father of compassions upon the stage of the World, speaking
unto the calamitous Offspring of Adam, like the Wolf when he intended to
devour a Lamb: Ante hos sex menses, ait, maledixisti mihi;
Respondit agnus: Equidem natus non eram.
Pater hercule tuus, inquit, maledixit mihi:
Atque ita correptum lacerat injusta nece.
Should God take the souls of men being yet innocent, so soon as he set them
upon acting in the World according to those Principles and Powers he bestowed
upon them at their first production, and cast them into everlasting burnings,
they would have this comfort left to them, that they suffered innocently, and
never in the least measure violated any of the sacred Laws of Heaven: But when
they shall hear that their Creator and Father (who upon that very account could
not inflict a greater evil than the good he bestowed on them) has contrived
their death, and drawn them into sin, that he might with the fairer show of
equity, punish them with infinite tortures both in body and soul, this
injustice must needs appear unspeakably grievous. For although some would seem
to excuse this Economy from all harshness, iniquity and rigor by substituting
the softer terms of Preterition or negative Reprobation; yet if they will
unmask their apprehensions and speak plain sense, the difference will appear
only in words, not in the thing it self, and is all one as if a man should seek
to alleviate the calamity of a condemned Malefactor, by telling him he should
not die by Common but Noble hands; For the event declares Gods intention: and
the denial of his help to extricate them from misery, is equivalent to a
positive Reprobation. Let us consult a little our own faculties, and reason the
case; Is it at all consentaneous to that communicative Goodness, wherein God
takes most delight to glorify himself, to make those souls the desolate
Victims of enraged Vengeance, who never had any more then a capability of
Existence when their first Parent sinned against heaven, and could no more
prevent their defilement by that diffusive contagion, then hinder themselves
from being first made? Arrian makes a very near cognation and affinity of the
souls of Men with God, Cap. 14. lib. 1. in Epictet.
as if they were (...), particles and avulsions from him; and when Moses made
intercession for the Israelites upon the Rebellion of Korah, he uses this Title
or Appellation, Numb. xvi. 22.
The God of the spirits of all flesh, as the most prevalent Argument to induce
him not to be wrath with the whole Congregation for one man's sin; forasmuch as
he was their Creator, and therefore could not but pity the works of his own
hands: And the Author to the Hebrews styles this everblessed Being, Chap. xii.
9.
The Father of Spirits, who for that very reason, can never cast of that
Relation, and become unpitiful to his own lovely Offspring, who in their
lowest state and greatest degeneracy were vouchsafed to be called (...), The
Sons of God. Joh. xi. 52.
And now what other can these things signify, but that there is a very near
alliance and consanguinity between God and the souls of Men? and that it is
only the corrupt imaginations of men which introduced those horrid Decrees, and
represented God as a hater of Mankind, and desirous of the death of his
Creation? But to carry on this a little further: That God should hang the
everlasting interest of millions of souls upon the frail and mutable Will of a
single Person, whom he foresaw would lapse, and by it ruin and undo the greater
part of his yet uncreated Posterity, is an Economy too harsh and rigid ever to
be put in execution by the God of Love, and unworthy the Nature of him who is
the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in him the Father of Mercies and
Compassions. Let us be wise unto sobriety, and act like men who care not for
Words and Names, but Things: Suppose an hundred Persons condemned to die,
equally culpable, equally criminal; and it be in the Power of some Good Man to
save ten, twenty, or all if he please, will he not rather deliver all, than
only redeem twenty or a less number, especially when he may do it with the same
expense and cost? and shall we imagine God to be less Good than a charitable
and kind-hearted Man? Do God and his holy Angels take an infinite complacency
and delight, and rejoice at the Conversion of one sinner, and can we think they
take pleasure in the destruction of Myriads, even before they ever actually
offended? This made Mr. Calvin betake himself to the defense of the
Supralapsarian cause, because he knew not how the Personal sin of Adam should
be derived upon his Posterity, and make them formally guilty, so as God might
Salva bonitate and justitia, Reprobate them as sinners, and cast them into the
lowest hell: Wherefore he ascribes all to the Divine Preordination, and doubts
not to say, In Resp. ad Calumn. Nebul. ad Art. 1.
Nihil ad nos unius hominis culpa, nisi nos coelestis judex aeterno exitio
addiceret. But let us hear him speak out his mind more fully to this purpose,
Instit. lib. 3. cap. 23.. 7. Disertis verbis hoc extare negant, decretum fuisse
a Deo ut sua defectione periret Adam; Quasi vero idem ille Deus, quem Scriptura
praedicat facere quaecunque vult, ambiguo fine condideret nobilissimum ex suis
Creaturis. Liberi arbitrii fuisse Dicunt ut fortunam ipse sibi fingeret: Deum
vero nihil destinasse nisi ut pro merito eum tractaret. Tam frigidum commentum
si recipitur, ubi erit illa Dei Omnipotentia, qua secundum arcanum consilium,
quod aliunde non pendet, omnia moderatur? Atqui Praedestinatio, velint, nolint,
in posteris se profert. Neque enim factum est naturaliter ut a salute
exciderent omnes unius parentis culpa. Quid eos prohibet fateri de uno homine,
quod inviti de toto humano genere concedunt? Quid enim tergiversando luderent
operam? Cunctos mortales in unius hominis persona morti aeternae mancipatos
fuisse Scriptura clamat. Hoc cum naturae ascribi nequeat, ab admirabili Dei
consilio profectum esse minime obscurum est. Bonos istos justitiae Dei Patronos
perplexos haerere in festu a, altas vero trabes superare nimis absurdum est.
Iterum quaero, Unde factum est ut tot gentes una cum liberis eorum infantibus
aeternae morti involveret lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum
est? Hic obmutescere oportet alicqui tam dicaces linguas. Decretum quidem
horrible fateor; inficiari tamen nemo poterit quin praesciverit Deus quem
exitum esset habiturus homo antequam ipsum conderet; and ideo praesciverit,
quia decreto suo sic ordinarat. It cannot be denied then, but that the
Scripture abundantly testifies, and our daily experience asserts the Lapse and
Apostasy of Men from God, and that they are really guilty of an Original
contagion: but that it came by any Ordination and Decree of God, neither
Scripture not Reason will assent unto. And for this Degeneracy God might justly
have punished all the World, since that every man had made himself obnoxious by
departing from him, and violating his Sacred Law: But God whose Goodness never
fails, was so far from taking advantage of the deplorable state of Mankind,
that he had a design of Good toward them, and sent the Lord Christ into the
World, who taking upon him to become a (...), or expiatory Sacrifice for the
sins of men, took of all that displeasure which was conceived against them,
according as the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. v. 19. Col. i. 19, 20.
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself: And again, It pleased
the Father that in Christ should all fullness dwell, and (having made peace
through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself,
whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven. By which Reconciliation
is meant Gods taking into grace and favor lapsed Man, and forgiving their foul
degeneracy from him, and assuring them that their past obliquities shall never
ruin them, if now they will endeavor to become New-creatures, and that now he
has entered upon a Covenant of Peace, wherein he promises to them all the
assistance that possibly can be given Rational Beings; so that now no man is
damned for his Original, but Actual Transgressions: otherwise it cannot be
understood how God through Christ should reconcile the World unto himself, or
how the Grace of God which came by Christ did abound, and was made more
efficacious then sin; For if the sin of Adam destroyed and slew more, than the
Death and Passion of the Lord Christ made alive, then were Sin of a larger
extent and more potent than Grace; (...) v.
and the Apostle could not truly affirm, That where Sin abounded, Grace did
much more abound.

CHAP. IV. A fourth Argument against the Doctrine of Inconditionate
Reprobation, taken from the Evangelical Dispensation; wherein is shown, the
purport and design of the Gospel, which is to reinstate all men into the
Participation of the Divine Nature, and that that Rigid Doctrine is destructive
of so high and glorious an end.
THere is no Man that knows himself, and discerns the true frame of his own
Being, what sublime and noble perfections the soul is capable of, and withal
reflects upon the weak and imperfect state of the Sons of men, how uncertain
and fluctuating their judgments are at the best, and how frequently obscured
with prejudice, how impotently stubborn their wills to the election of
substantial good, and how broken and disordered the faculties of their whole
man, but will assuredly conclude that all Mankind (however it comes to pass)
are extremely alienated and apostatized from that innate purity and excellent
state in which they were created (for no Man that believes himself made by an
Alwise and infinitely perfect Author, can imagine that he came thus lame and
maimed out of his hands) and sunk as low as the capacities of their Nature will
permit, being only vivacious and active to trifling, low, and bodily interests
and concernments, carrying on such poor and momentary designs as are unworthy
the native generosity of their minds; in a word, so devoid of that life in the
possession of which consists their true felicity, that they are past hopes of
recovering by their own solitary endeavors their pristine and ancient glory.
But although Man by that venturous and bold revolt from the blessed Kingdom of
Light, dispossessed himself of Gods favor, and forfeited all right and title
to his ordinary care and Providence; yet that ever-to-be-magnified Goodness
which made him at first Lapsable, beheld him as a calamitous object of
compassion, and designed the erecting and reedifying that glorious Temple which
sin and unrighteousness had miserably defaced and ruined, and the repossessing
his own life of it is rightful Government and Dominion in the Souls of Men,
which however they come into the World the subjects of brutish lusts and
passions, are yet capable of Angelical accomplishments, and a Vital Union with
the Creator of all things: God therefore being the highest and most perfect
life, and feeling and knowing his Nature to be the most precious thing in all
the World, and the utmost perfection of every Rational Being, could not but
intend graciously to his lapsed Creatures, and seek the extension and
dispreading of his goodly Attributes over all capable subjects of the World of
life. For he that shall look upon the diligence and activity of the dark Powers
in enlarging the bounds of their usurped Kingdom, and consider the contagious
and disseminating Nature of every pitiful and degenerate lust, how every crazie
and sickly vice attempts and offers at a further explication of it self, and
every small Exarchat of that Hellish Principality endeavors daily to make new
additions, and take in fresh supplies to maintain the general cause of
unrighteousness, and augment their petty Royalties, can never think that God
will sit as a disinteressed spectator; but promote and advance his own good
life to the command of the whole Creation, and brake down the power of that
great Arimanus, who captivates the sons of Men in the fetters and shackles of
Mortality and Death. The life of God is a strong and powerful principle, and
has always the arm of Heaven to aid and assist it: but all sin and
unrighteousness is a mere poverty and deficiency, not able to exist in the
World, did not the self-wills of men uphold it, and can never stand against the
potent assaults of the Heavenly Nature. Which holy life that God might
reestablish in the World, he has delivered the Gospel, the last and most
perfect dispensation that ever was or shall be communicated to Men, which
consists not in an external and dead form of words, nor is it a mere systeme
and compendium of such precepts, that like the Mosaical Law, sanctify only to
the purifying of the flesh, but cannot (...), Perfect him that does the service
as pertaining to the Conscience; that is, Purge and cleanse his mind from dead
Works, and make way for the consummation of the life of God within him, whereby
he shall no longer be in bondage and servility to every caitive lust, but act
spontaneously under a free and generous principle, and become a law to himself:
but such a Method of perfect Righteousness and Virtue as shall purify, refine
and exalt the spirits of Men from all feculent concretions, and subdue every
irregular motion and unruly desire that would tempt and solicit their choice
of corporeal joys, and beget in them so true a relish of unblameable Goodness
and Holiness, as should at the end of their mortal life instal them in the full
possession of everlasting Tranquillity and Peace. Of which glorious contrivance,
though we have a Scheme and Model drawn out in the Holy Gospels; yet there is a
life and spirit in Christianity that cannot be blotted on paper, but lives and
acts in such hearts as are framed and squared according to those Rules
contained in the Sacred Writings. And this he who is the Author of our Faith
and Blessedness testified, when he said, that his Words were Spirit and Life;
such as were able, and designed to revive the dead and senseless minds of Men,
and propagate a vital heat and motion through the torpid and benumbed World:
and accordingly the Apostle St. Paul tells us, that Christianity is indeed
(...), The Law of the Spirit of life: Romans viii. 2. 2 Cor. 3.
and in another place, (...), The ministration of the Spirit, and the
ministration of Righteousness, in opposition to the (...), The dispensation of
Death and Condemnation; intimating, that under the Gospel men shall not have a
Mechanical and Artificial Religion, but such as frames the life and spirit of
God in their hearts, and becomes a Vital form, tuning their souls into an
Universal consent with Gods own Will, whereby they send forth most harmonious
and Divine accents, not only when they are stricken and beaten upon by an
external hand, like Memnon's statue, whose Musical notes ceased so soon as the
Sunbeams were withdrawn from it; but from an internal Power, incorporated and
made one with their own spirits. It is true, when God at first made Man, and
sent him into this lower World, he left him to be governed by those innate
prescriptions and rules of Righteousness he interwove in the constitution of
his Nature at his first production; and while he followed this light, and
turned not aside to the false fires of his depraved will, he walked in safe and
secure paths: But when Men began to multiply upon earth, Sin and Vice
increased, and the infectious steams of Iniquity soon grew into a cloud and
obscured the light of the day, and men forsook their ancient Guide, and wandered
about in Darkness and Error; and the voice of Reason was not heard when
Self-interest and Passion became the sole principles of action. Hence it came
to pass, that in succession of time Men's discriminative faculties growing
insensate and dull through the life and vigor of their Animal powers, and
their Criteria abating and loosing their quick and nimble taste and relish of
true good and happiness, they choose only the present satisfaction and pleasure
of their corrupt Appetites, and embraced blindfold every inordinate motion and
passion; and it was too late now to curb and restrain their lawless and rampant
Desires. For although Divine Goodness which was never absent nor withdrawn from
the World, did in all Ages and Places raise up considerable and holy Persons to
instruct the perverse Sons of Men in the ways of Righteousness; yet their
Precepts and Admonitions were entertained by very few, the rest of the World
still slumbring in their old wickedness and stupidity, and choosing such faint
and glimmering flames to guide themselves by, such weak and sickly Principles
as might least distrub their fancied Peace, and molest their desired Security.
Wherefore when this way proved unserviceable and unfit for Man's Restoration,
God entered upon a new Dispensation, and revealed himself more plainly to the
Jews, selecting Jacob for his Portion, and Israel for the lot of his
Inheritance, conducting them by an infant Religion which should make way and
prepare their minds for the reception of that glorious Mystery which in due
time should be communicated to the World; and delivering to them Laws, Statutes
and Judgments, fencing and hedging in the impure eruptions of their debased
Natures by Judicial Decrees, and besiedging Vice and Iniquity by the actual
promulgation of a Law. But the main of this Economy was only Thetical and
Positive, deriving it is obligation merely from the Divine Command, and adapted
for the most part to the Plastic Powers of the soul; for it consisting chiefly
in external Performances which had no intrinsic Goodness contained in them,
nor any other Reason of their injunction, but the will and pleasure of the
Imposer, it could not ascend higher then the Fancy or Imagination, nor
contribute any thing to the sublimating Reason and Intellect, while all it is
motions were determined in so low a spear. And hence arose the great
imperfection of the Mosaical Law, in that it had only an Adumbration, and
presented a Landtschap of good things, and not the very image and substance,
Heb. x. 1.
and consequently was altogether destitute of a Vital and Energetical Power to
promote true and substantial Holiness, or extirpate and mortify the exorbitant
passions of corporeal life. For indeed the whole body of the Judaical Service
was only a Prefiguration of something more perfect and illustrious to be
discovered to the World, the most mysterious part of it being Typical and
Emblematical, carrying an abscondit signification under an External Symbol;
which the Author to the Hebrews seems to allude to, when he says it was
necessary that the (...), Heb. ix. 23, 24.
The patterns of things in the Heavens, should be purified with these -- And
again, Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands (...), The
figures of the true -- But when notwithstanding this careful Discipline men
were still corrupt and satisfied themselves with the bare observance of the
letter of the Law, neglecting the (...), the weightier and more principal
matters, such as Justice, Righteousness, Truth and Goodness, God grew weary of
this Economy, and called more for the performance of the Moral then Ceremonial
part of the Law, and when the fullness of time was come resolved to bring about
his last and most perfect determination, which was to send down his
well-beloved Son with full Power and Authority to communicate an Everlasting
Righteousness, and deliver to the World the Gospel, which is the sum and
substance, the flower and quintessence of those (...), exterior modes and
schemes, wherewith he instructed the Jewish Church of old, and which retains
only such Ceremonies as are necessary in regard of our frail and mortal state
(in which we are more affected with the propulsions and motions of sense, then
with Truths of a refined and intellectual constitution) and is compounded and
made up of such things as are naturally and immutably good, such as have an
eternal and indispensable obligation, being nothing but the Idea's of our own
souls which we had buried and obscured by our fall, raised and brought to light
again, the results of Gods own Nature imprinted upon our minds, and his moral
Being explicated and dispread throughout our spirits. The Gospel is nothing but
God manifested in the flesh, his Goodness, Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy veiled
under the Cortex of words and expressions adapted and fitted to our mean
capacities, and it is highest aim and design is to make us (...), Partakers of
the Divine Nature, and perfect us according to his own Image of Righteousness
and Truth, and in our due time invest us with the immortal robes of life and
glory. This was the Noble end of the Pythagorean Philosophy, Hierocles in Carm.
Pythag.
(...). And questionless a Divine and Heroic spirit moved in those
Philosophers veins, and they knew and felt the irradiations of that Heavenly
life, which quickens and informs every Rational Being that puts no wilful stop
and impediment to it is kindly operations: But whether ever they obtained that
high and excellent achievement they aimed at, by living up to the Precepts and
Principles of their Philosophy, I shall not now enquire. Sure I am, there was
never any Economy yet divulged to the World, which more illustriously
propagated the Divine Life and Nature, or more effectually conduced to the
drawing Men from Sin and Wickedness, and weakening the Diabolical Kingdom, then
that Evangelical Mystery which has been hid from Ages and Generations; but is
now made manifest to Mankind by the appearing of Jesus Christ. That we are
deeply lapsed and degenerated from God, is the universal consent of all Men,
although they differ in the manner of it is explication: Plato taught that the
Fall of Man consisted (...), in the defluxion of the souls pinions; whereby not
being able any longer to bear her self up in the higher Regions, she fell to
the Earth, and inhabited a Mortal body, which the above named Author thus
Paraphrases upon, (...) that is, As our departure from God, and the defluxe and
moulting of our plumes, whereby we soared aloft, caused our descent into the
region of Mortality and Wretchedness; so it is the rejection of our bodily
passions, and the growth and springing of virtue as of new wings, which will
carry us to the pure habitations of Holiness and Divine felicity. But whether
our lapse were thus or not, it makes little; however it was, this is certain,
that our Reascent to God, must be in all points contrary to our Apostasy from
him. As we have polluted our Natures by a boundless regard and Adhesion to
corporeal pleasures, and sunk our selves deep into the material World; so on
the other side, our reversion to our lost happiness must be effected by
refining our souls from terrene dregs, and conversing with our mind and
intellect, and subjugating our Animal powers to the dictates and Imperium of
Reason. As our descent came by listening to the impure whispers and titillations
of the bodily life; so our ascent and Resurrection must come by harkening to
the suggestions of the Intellectual Man. And what more effectual and powerful
means can be excogitated to recover mankind from the thraldom and bondage of
sin, then that sacred method divulged to the World in the manifestation of the
Gospel, whose great tendency and scope is to enforce the necessity of a good
and virtuous life, and mortify all irregular and inordinate desires, and
reinthrone Divine Righteousness to it is just rights and possession in the
hearts and minds of men? To what other purpose are we commanded in the Gospel
to extirpate every extravagant lust and passion, and crucify the spurious
productions of Vice, and prosecute with all diligence and affection their
lovely contraries: but because the one depresses our minds from their true
state by subjecting them to a base and ignoble drudgery, and the other recovers
them to their first and genuine freedom, and puts them into a capacity of
immortality? For all passions, the more corporeal they are and participate of
the body, the more they draw and wind the soul to the center of the Animal
life, which by a copious emission of fuliginous rays, obnubilates the
intellectual and perceptive powers, and whoever purges himself from these,
shall be a vessel unto honor. This purgation of Soul and Spirit was judged
indispensably necessary for the recuperation of the Divine Image by the
Pythagorean Philosophers, and is called by Porphyry (...), the ablation of
every thing extraneous, leaving only such forms in the soul as are congenit
with it is own Nature. It Is true, as we come into the World, we relish little
else but the fond gratifications of the body, and are taken up and enamored
with the inescations and allurements of the plastic life, whereby our better
parts are dulled and stupefied, and in this degenerate state the soul is truly
said in the Pythagorick sense (...) to pass into brutes, not by a (...),
transfusion of the humane soul into Beasts, but by it is descent into the
brutish life, and assimilating it self to ferine passions and inclinations;
(...); as Arrian expresses it. The great work therefore of the Gospel is to
beat down and conquer the brutish and irrational part in us, to eradicate our
vile and depraved affections, and to place the Divine life in a full and entire
command over all our inferior faculties. To the bringing about which blessed
design, and to complete and perfect a through Purgation of our minds, we are
enjoined in the Gospel great Temperance, Sobriety and Moderation of all
terrestrial desires, as the most conducive means to spiritualize and attenuate
our minds, whereas the contrary drowns (...). Porphyr. l 4. (...).
them in corporeal effluxes and exsudations: And moreover we are commanded an
Universal abstinence from all wrong and injustice, and a hearty love and good
will to all mankind; to hold fast that which is good, and abstain from all
appearance of evil; to abstract our hearts from Mundane and Temporal
felicities, and make treasures for our selves in heaven, and to be no more
sollicitous for terrene concernments then the Lillies of the field, or the
fowls of the air; to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and
to depend upon his Fatherly Care and Providence for the necessities of our
lives; to keep our selves pure and undefiled not only from outward and grosser,
but internal and more refined pollutions; to be ready to do good and distribute
to the necessities of our Brethren; to live peaceably if it be possible, with
all men; In a word, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever are pure, whatsoever are lovely,
whatsoever are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise
to think on those things. These are the proper food and nourishment of our
intellectual man, and bring a present pleasure in the exercise of them, far
surpassing the choicest entertainments of sense. For what truer and nobler
delight can accrue to our spirits, then to have done an act of Charity, to have
bound up an aching head, dried up a watery eye, and relieved a naked and hungry
body? How sordid and base is the narrow and contracted mind that never looks
beyond it self, but moves in a sphere distinct from all the World beside, as if
it were some particular Being, and not a part and member of the Universe? What
is there more noble and Divine than Love, which neither envies nor seeks it is
own, but fills the mind of man with a solid peace and contentment? and, How
broken and troublesome is the state of that man, whose heart is continually
corroded with Envy and Malice, and cannot look upon his Neighbor without an
evil eye? What serenity and quietness of life is he possessed of, who following
the Precepts of the Gospel, makes himself master of his passions, and never
suffers any impure and brutish lust to creep up into the bed of Reason and
defile it: but lives in a clear exercise of his discriminative faculties, and
subdues all his lower powers to the obedience of his mind and Intellect? while
he that renders himself captive to the passions and various motions and
inclinations of sense which God gave to be his servants, never possesses any
true and real tranquillity, but carries a Tempest within his breast, which
perpetually tosses him to and fro, like those disconsolate spirits our Savior
mentions, Matthew. xii. who walk through dry places, seeking rest but finding
none. He that sincerely conforms himself to the Evangelical method of Truth and
Righteousness, forsakes the muddy and grosser World, and ascends above the
clouds in Divine and peaceful Contemplations, and finds himself out of the
reach of the storms and thunders of the troubled air he has left behind him.
He apprehends God as the most lovely and desirable object in the whole World,
and then feels himself most at ease when he endeavors to unite and become one
with that ever-blessed Being, subtracting his affections from all earthly
vanities, as finding something more noble and worthy to bestow them upon; Lib.
4. (...).
and thus as Porphyry speaks of the Egyptian Priests, (...), He has given up
his whole life to Divine Contemplation and search after the Deity. Such Power
have Evangelical Truths over the minds of men, that they transform them into
their own native image and similitude, and the more they are looked into, the
more they enravish them with their heavenly beauty and pulchritude. And because
afflicted and persecuted Virtue could not be thought eligible merely for it
self, nor be a sufficient argument to induce us to the love and practice of it
who were so fatally addicted to the concerns of sense; therefore God who knew
our frame and how far, and to what degrees we had apostatized from his holy
Nature, did not only propound good things to our choice, but solicit our wills
to the embracing of them by the strongest evidences and most attractive motives
that our Natures were capable of receiving. The life of sense being more
powerful and laying a greater, though not a juster, claim to our minds as we
are born into this World, God was pleased to deal with us after a sensible
manner, and in a way of condescending Wisdom, proportioning the Truths he
delivered to us to our capacity of reception: And this was that the Apostle
called the Foolishness of Preaching, wherein God stoops down and puts on the
garb and frailties of humanity, and suits the results of his will with our mean
and shallow apprehensions. Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was
manifested in the flesh, and cradled in the circle of a Virgins arms: which
clearly demonstrates, even to outward sense, the exceeding Goodness and Wisdom
of Almighty God, that he has not cast off the care of Mankind, but is at peace
with the World, and has put on the bright robes of Loving Kindness and Mercy,
which he has given a large Specimen and full proof of in the Mission of the
Lord Christ from heaven. God would have all men lay aside their hard thoughts
and causless-jealousies and suspicions of his Nature, as if he did not from his
heart intend them good, but only suspended his anger for a time, which might
again break out upon them in prodigious floods of vengeance and fury. For this
is the most certain sign that God wills and desires our happiness and welfare,
in that he has united himself to our Nature, and sent down his only begotten
Son for no other purpose, but to seek and to save that which was lost: And if
he spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? What is there now can lay a greater
tie upon ingenuous spirits, then the discovery of so much undeserved kindness
and love? What heart is there so obdurate and rocky, that this will not
dissolve into the tears of love and joy, to behold the blessed Jesus hanging
between heaven and earth upon the Cross, that he might reconcile all things
that are in heaven and earth, and become a propitiatory Sacrifice for all men's
sins in the World? It is said of Socrates, that he was so enamored with this
Divine passion of Love, that he styled himself (...), A servant of Love: Let
therefore Love, which is the Proxenet of Nature, the great instrument of
conciliating hearts, beget in thee a return and retribution of Love, and never
think of those streams of blood which so copiously flowed from the wounded body
of thy dying Lord, without a passive and melting spirit; but be likewise a
servant of Love, and act under that generous principle, for Love is of God: And
every one that loves is born of God, and knows God.

And that we may not think we are set to remove mountains, or perform
impossibilities when we are exhorted by the Gospel to the participation of Gods
holy life, we shall never be left alone to sink under our load and die; but
shall have the assistance of that Almighty and Demiurgical spirit of Love, who
hovered over the dark Chaos, and brought into Being the goodly frame of heaven
and earth, and replenished all the immense tracts of space with suitable
inhabitants. Wisd. chapter vii.
This is that Wisdom which is the brightness of the Everlasting, the unspotted
mirror of the power of God, and the Image of his Goodness; which remaining in
her self makes all things new, and in all ages entering into holy souls makes
them friends of God and Prophets. She will not lodge in a sinful body, nor
abide when unrighteousness comes in; For she is more beautiful then the Sun,
and above all the order of stars, being compared with the light, she is found
before it. This kind and loving spirit will God bestow upon every one that asks
it of him, to repair his broken and decayed Nature; to raise up the Divine
Image, to joint and confirm every perverse dislocation in the frame of his
soul, and to perfect and complete the living efformation of Christ within him.
Let no man then despair of attaining to a state of Blessedness under the
Gospel; for this Benign Spirit, whose delights are with the Sons of Men,
pervades the whole World, and touches and overshadows every man with
outstretched wings, who is willing to have the Divine Image and Pourtraiture
formed in him, and does not by impurity and uncleanness chase it away. Though
our enemies are mighty, and our souls weak; yet let none despair of Victory;
for through the assistance and conduct of that Almighty, we shall be able to
overcome them. He is ever cherishing and fostring the life of God wherever it is
born into any soul, and sweetly insinuates into our minds, and hallows and
sanctifies all our powers, and excites us to a serious and hearty pursuit after
the indispensable laws of Truth, Righteousness and Goodness. We are not fallen
and degenerated beyond the power of God, but his Spirit is able to raise and
bring up our souls from the lowest Hell, and to renew and reform our debased
and wretched Natures. For what cannot he do, who at first made us faultless and
happy, till we ruined and defaced his blessed Image, and rendered our selves the
miserable objects of his compassions? What is there in our frame so stubborn
and insequacious that he cannot rectify and redress, who at first created all
things, and brought into Being all the Beauty and Harmony of Heaven and Earth?
He will never leave us destitute and forlorn, but will take hold of every
fitness and capacity till he have perfected in us the Divine life and brought
us unto Glory.

But because Examples are more prevalent with mankind then Precepts and
Instructions; that God might not leave any thing undone which would in any kind
conduce to our Interest, he has recommended to us the Example of his Blessed
Son, as the fairest copy of Holiness, Justice, Compassion and Self-resignation,
that ever was yet discovered to the World. For should we compare him with the
greatest lights that ever shone upon the Gentile parts of the Earth, they would
appear as foils and shadows to set off his glorious luster and Divine splendour,
as has already been made good by a Reverend and profoundly Learned Person.
There is none can hold any equality with the Lord Christ; not Moses himself,
the Divine Lawgiver of the Jews, who indeed was faithful in all his house, Heb.
chapter iii.
as a Servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after:
But Christ is a Son over his own house, being the Heir of all things, and
therefore is counted worthy of more glory than Moses. And though we read, that
Moses was meek, above all that dwelt upon the Earth; yet when he was to fetch
water out of the Rock for the murmuring Israelites, his spirit was so far
provoked, that he spoke unadvisely with his lips; and after forty years
troubles and vexations in the Wilderness, he brought not his people into the
land of Canaan, but dyed after he had taken a prospect of the Promised
Inheritance, which he must not go to possess. But on the contrary, the Lord
Christ whose lips were full of Grace and Truth, and in whose mouth never was
any guile found, not only promised a spiritual Canaan, a Land of immortal peace
and rest, but went also himself and took possession of it, and signified the
same to the world by sending down his holy Spirit upon his Church. All the time
that he dwelt upon Earth and conversed with Men, he was full of the Spirit of
Love, Tenderheartedness and Compassion, perpetually going about doing good,
binding up the brokenhearted, gathering the Lambs in his arm, and carrying
them in his bosom, and gently leading those that are with young, healing all
their infirmities, curing their diseases, and easing them of their painful
sorrows. He that was purer then the Sun, and whiter then the Robes of Angels,
yet was content to veil his Glory, and put on the dark and course mantle of our
flesh and blood, that he might teach us humility and submission to the will of
God. He whose the Earth was, and the fullness thereof, would not be born in a
Princes Court among the Sons of Nobles; but in a Stable, at a small Town, and
among the meanest of his Creatures, that he might abate our Pride and Grandeur
in ostentation of our selves to the World. His life, though a perpetual
Tragedy, encompassed with hardships and afflictions, and drawn out into many
Scenes of trouble and sorrow; yet was always holy and harmless, and never
stained with the least sin or unwarrantable action. His Soul was a pure and
spotless Temple, eternally consecrated to the Divinity residing in him: His
Heart the holy Altar upon which no unchaste flames ever burnt, but the fire of
Zeal and Love which was kindled from Heaven, and daily sent up clouds of
Incense as a sweet smelling savor thither again: His Meekness and Patience
were no less conspicuous, than those other radiant virtues which rendered him
acceptable to God and Man; for being reviled, he reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not; but committed his cause to him that judges
righteously, and thereby he became glorious in the eyes of God, who recompensed
his Indignities, by giving him a Name above every Name. If we look at his
outward condition, he became poor and needy for our sakes, that we through his
poverty might be made rich; for though we read that Judas bare the bag, yet his
holy Lord and Master was forced, by the expense of a Miracle, to pay his
Tribute penny to the Roman Governor. The Foxes had holes, and the Birds of the
air nests, but the Son of Man had often no where to lay his Sacred Head, but on a
pillow of grass, and his covering was the bright and spangled Canopy of Heaven;
and yet we never find him murmuring or disobliging Heavens Care and Providence
by a repining spirit: thereby teaching us, that our happiness lies not in the
abundance of earthly Goods, but in the Godlike temper and frame of our minds,
and that having food and raiment we ought therewith to be content. When he was
entering into the shadow of Death, and beginning his bitter Passion, with what
manly courage did he behave himself? and, How illustrious did he appear in a
patient and magnanimous suffering all those Ignominies and Disgraces that were
put upon him, beholding through the cloud or shame and reproach, the good
effects of the travel of his soul, and confidently believing, that though he
sat in Darkness for a while, yet his Light should break forth from obscurity
more glorious then the Sun when he rejoices as a strong man to run his race.
And when his Humanity began to sink, and that which was Natural in him cried
for ease and relief from the heavy pressures of that doleful Agony, so that he
desired if it were possible that that cup might pass from him; yet through the
life and vigor of the Divine Spirit by which he was acted, he resigns over his
whole will and desires to the wise disposal and pleasure of his Heavenly
Father, Not my will, but thy will be done: Hereby giving us a Sacred Method and
Rule whereby to demean our selves, when the Divine Providence brings us into
Calamities and Afflictions; namely, to imitate the Holy Jesus and follow his
steps. Let us now accompany him to his painful bed of sorrows the Cross, where
his friends forsake him and stand aloof of, and his enemies compass him round,
where his holy ears that used to hear the melodious accents of Angels, are
grated with the profane obloquies of disobedient sinners; and his eyes which
beheld the glories of Heaven, and the beauty and luster of Divinity, are now
forced to see the instruments of his misery and sorrow; yet when his Crucifiers
meant him the most evil, he breaths forth from a heart which never knew what it
was to hate, this passionate Prayer for them, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do. This also was written for our instruction, that we might
love our enemies, bless those that hate us, and pray for them who despightfully
use us, and persecute us; and by so doing, become the children of our Father
which is in heaven, who makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just and on the unjust.

But all this would yet have proved weak and ineffectual for the promoting the
Divine life in the World, if Christ had not visibly ascended into heaven, and
given us a sensible assurance of a blessed state in the immortal Regions above,
that he will take up Humane Nature after due purifications and refinements into
a participation of that transcendent felicity he is fully possessed of. For if
men had been left in suspense and uncertainties, it would cast a fatal damp
upon their attempts and endeavors after righteousness; but being fully
convinced as well of the Existence, as that God will take care of their souls
when they depart this obscure and evanid life, and recompense their labor and
trouble here with such great degrees of Happiness as shall far surpass the
highest calamity they can suffer in this World, it cannot but inspirit their
minds with life and resolution to break through all difficulties and
discouragements, and with a manly valor fight the good fight of Faith, and
never give over till they lay hold on Immortality, and God Crown them as
Victorious Conquerors with wreaths of immarcescible Glory. It is but a
groundless fancy in some to think, that the intuition of the reward proposed to
us, in order to our further progress in Holiness and Virtue, is acting upon
Mercenary principles, since that Christ himself in his greatest Agonies and
conflicts supported the weakness of his Nature with the consideration of the
reward he should receive as the compensation of his humiliation and sorrows;
for so we read, That he endured the Cross, Heb. xii 2.
and despised the shame, (...), for the joy that was set before him. Besides,
they understand not the nature of the Reward promised to us in the Gospel; for
Glory, Blessedness, and Felicity are not Other things from Piety and Holiness,
but the consummation and perfection of that Divine Nature, whose efformation is
begun in this life. Grace and Holiness is but Happiness wrapped up and closed,
and Glory is nothing but Holiness explicated and unfolded to it is due latitude
and dimensions. Piety is Heaven masked with a cloud of flesh, and begirt with
sorrow; and Heaven is Virtue shining in it is native brightness, and clothed
with a Celestial splendor. And that Ethereal and Paradisiacal body, with which
all believers shall be arrayed through the gracious bounty of the Lord Jesus at
the Resurrection of the Just, is the necessary appendage of our felicity, and
by it is easy and obsequious motions will raise in the exalted powers of the
soul, the highest sense of love and joy, and delightful enravishments of
spirit. He then that loves Virtue for it is appendant reward, does in effect
love it for it self, and is no whit behind him that is attracted by the naked
pleasure resulting from it, and thinks it eligible amidst the hoarse bellowings
of Phalaris his Bull, because the Reward has a very great affinity and
cognation with Virtue, and is no otherwise attainable then by a full and
perfect exercise of it. This great happiness therefore accruing to the soul of
Man when refined and purified from the dregs of Earth and Mortality, is very
rationally set forth in the Gospel to invigorate the minds of men, and raise
them to the free exertions of the Divine life, and to animate their dying
resolutions when they walk through a troublesome wilderness, and are called to
resist even unto blood. And if it were not for the expectation of future
Blessedness, all Religion would fall to the ground, (the inward sense and
feeling of the soul being so much weakened and debilitated by her continual
imbibition and attraction of the dregs of the Earthly and mortal Nature,
whereby she is become sluggish and inactive, (...), her passions and
apprehensions being in a manner wholly corporeal) and Truth and Virtue be but
idle names or dreams of a shadow, existing only in the tongues and fancies of
Men, but never descending into the depth of the soul, and impregnating it with
their living Image.

These are the grand Instruments which the Spirit of God makes use of in the
Gospel, to induce and persuade the World to act under the Government of the
Divine life; which if skilfully applied and managed, will undoubtedly complete
and perfect that blessed work which Providence intended them for. For we cannot
think that Heaven would alarm the World with a false report, or raise the
expectations of Men by a great sound and noise of something extraordinary, when
in the conclusion it amounts but to some inconsiderable and trifling design.
The Eternal Son of God, who was that Wisdom which is the delight of Heaven, and
rejoiced in the habitable parts of the Earth, brought down with him from the
seat of Majesty, that Sacred and recondit method of recovering lapsed mankind,
which was carried in the pregnant womb of Goodness from the days of Eternity,
and he became our Redeemer, and pervades the very Center of our Being, and
shapes and frams his Image of Wisdom and Righteousness there, strengthening our
decays, and supporting our weakness, and consuming and expelling all our dross
and corruption by a subtle and powerful Energy, which in Scripture phrase is,
to be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. We are fallen into a narrow
and contracted state, and those Divine forms in our union and fruition of which
consisted our blessedness, are quite defaced by our fond longing after, and
adhesion to, corporeal features: Now God manifesting himself in our flesh,
renews and perfects those glorious Images again, and stamps his impress upon
us; and, as the great conciliating Principle of the corporeal World, figures
and shapes out of prepared matter the body of a plant; so the Holy Spirit
frames and shapes out the Divine Nature in the lapsed World of Mankind.

But this great purpose of the Gospel, this great design and plot which God
has laid to reduce Mankind to that blessed state from whence they fell, is
wholly frustrated and evacuated by the Doctrine of Irrespective Decrees. And
that I may not charge it with what it stands not guilty of, I shall make it
good by these two Instances:

1. It renders ineffectual the purpose of God in the Gospel, by lulling Men
asleep in the lap of Security and Presumption of their good estate, upon the
groundless fancy of their Absolute Election from all Eternity. For Men being
once initiated and instructed in the Mystery of this profound Doctrine, will
with much anxiety and vehemence of mind, contend for the truth of that which
they so passionately desire to be so, and having withal so amorously courted
and espoused their lusts and unruly passions, and yet being terrified and
affrighted with the lashes of their own Consciences, they will with great
easiness and zeal take sanctuary in so pleasing an opinion which both gives
them a fair countenance to enjoy and reap the pleasure of their sensual
passions, and secures them from those domestic furies which perpetually
hurried and tormented them, and over and above sooths them up with a confidence
of eternal bliss and felicity. And he that can attain to this Plerophory or
full persuasion of his Election from before the foundation of the World, has
the White Stone given to him (though he be so far from eating of the hidden
Manna, that he feeds upon nothing but husks and vanities) and his name is
enrolled among the Stars, and he is (...), out of the reach of danger, and if
he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for God will raise him up: The
gates of hell shall never pluck him out of Gods hands, nor separate him from
his eternal Love; for having loved his own, he loves them unto the end. The
thickest cloud of sin and darkness arising from his polluted and rotten heart,
though it may suspend for a while, yet can never totally divest him of Gods
paternal Love and favor, because he is one of Christ's Sheep, of his little
flock, and he knows him, and is confident he is known of him: and though he
have lived in vice, and rolled in the dirt and mire of the Earth till the
utmost Period of his life; yet the holy Spirit will infallibly and irresistibly
at the very Exit of his soul, change and renew it, and cast the robes of
Christ's spotless Righteousness upon it, and then it is impossible the man
should miss of heaven.

And is this a Doctrine adapted to the carrying on the design God intended in
the Gospel, namely, the Reduction of the world to a conformity to the Divine
will, to forsake and abandon all their sinful and false ways, and to live in a
universal submission and resignation to his holy Laws and Commands? What proof
or evidence does it bring that it aims at any such thing? Is it in that it
declares to a man that Faith and Repentance and every good motion of the soul
is the irresistible work of God, and that it is no more in his Power to confer
any thing to his being a good Christian, a just and Righteous person, than to
add one cubit to his bodily stature: but if he be not as yet regenerated, he
must stay and wait till that good time come, wherein the Spirit of the Lord
shall enter into him, and make him a New Creature, for the wind blows where
it lists? Or is it in that it affirms, That Christ dyed for the Elect, and
(though the value of his Satisfaction were infinite, and sufficient to redeem
the whole World) for them only, and that his death has satisfied for all their
sins, and that now God imputes the Righteousness of the Lord Christ to them,
and upon his account they are esteemed as righteous as if in their own Persons
they had fulfilled the whole Evangelical Law, though in the mean time their
hearts are very corrupt and unsound? Are these the Demonstrations by which this
Doctrine of Irrespective Decrees manifests it self to come from God? If it bear
the Superscription and Image of God upon it, it is then as he himself is,
Light, and there is no Darkness, no mixture of impurity and humane imagination
in it; for God cannot patronize any thing but what is holy as he is holy, and
pure as he is pure. But if we consider well, such Positions will appear very
obscure and frightful, horrid and amazing, savouring of the Prince of Darkness
by whom they were breathed into the minds and spirits of unsanctified Persons,
and by them communicated to the World as the Arcana of Christianity, but
tending in reality to the eversion of it, and the augmentation and increase of
the Devils Kingdom. For when Men shall hear, that upon such and such
Pulpit-signs which their Impertinent Preachers deliver to them, they may gather
their Election from all Eternity, and that maugre all the Oppositions of Men
and Devils, they shall never fall quite away by a final Impenitence, but
assuredly recovered by an uncontrollable and peremtory power: when they shall
be told likewise, That Gods calls are at certain times and seasons, and that
till they perceive themselves forcibly inacted and carried away by the impulse
of the Divine Spirit, all their previous actions are to no purpose; Will not
these things cause them to sit down in laziness and take their ease, without
troubling themselves with the renovation of their minds, since that God will
take care for that, and soak themselves in terrestrial joys and pleasures,
till the dead-awakening trump (which when it will be they know not) call them
from the Grave of sin and death, as Christ did Lazarus, and bid them come
forth? Will not the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and the mantle of his
Satisfaction, damp the endeavors of men after real and inward Righteousness
and inherent Holiness, by which they attain to a participation of the Divine
Nature, since they can have another at so cheap a rate, which will likewise be
as beneficial and stand them in as much stead as if they had of their own? Men
are prone to palliate their sin, and take hold of any pretense to stop the
mouth of their accusing consciences, and need no such artifices to lead them
into those paths that go down to Hell, and the comfortless chambers of death.
Their evil Natures and the examples of others, and temptations of Satan are
sufficient to draw them into Vice and Irreligion, that none need disseminate
such doctrins as shall invite them to immorality and iniquity from the
Authority and Countenance of Gods word. But it is supposed that every Christian
M^stagogus, who acknowledges himself to have a Master in heaven, to whom he
must give an account for the souls committed to his charge (if not for theirs,
yet for his own felicities sake) will have so much prudence and circumspection,
as not to build on the foundation of the Gospel, Wood, Hay, or stubble, any
such Doctrins as will not abide the test of Reason, but prove both to God, and
Men's souls very mischievous and injurious; for though he does it ignorantly,
his work shall be burnt, but he himself shall be saved (...), yet so as by
fire; that is, with extreme difficulty, as he that hardly escapes out of the
fire.

2. The second Instance wherein, the Doctrine of Irrespective Decrees inverts
and destroys the end and purpose of God in the Gospel is, by leading Men into
desperation. I do not mean, that they should despair of mercy so long as they
continue in their sins (for this every Criminal ought to do that he may be
induced to come out of them the sooner) but by Desperation here, I mean, a
disbelief of Gods will or power to save them, whereby they go on carelessly and
resolutely in a course of Rebellion and Iniquity. For being persuaded on the
one hand, that the number of the Elect is but small in comparison of
Reprobates, and that both the one and the other are particularly designed and
marked out by name, (for the Lord knows who are his) and that all the labors
of men after the Kingdom of Heaven will prove unsuccessful and abortive, till
God by a high and mighty hand come upon them, and powerfully convince them of
the evil of their ways, and astonish them with the weight and multitude of
their sins, laying them low and bringing them down (as they phrase it) to the
gates of Hell, and showing them the worm that never dies, and the fire which
never shall be quenched, and then making bare his arm and demonstrating his
Power by lifting them up from thence into the warm Sunshine of his favor,
where they shall remain as secure of Heaven as if they were there already, till
God please by death to translate them unto glory: And being taught on the other
hand that whoever finds not this mighty work of Grace within him, and feels not
this great change wrought in his spirit, it is a certain sign he is in the
state of Reprobation, and one of those who were of old ordained to
condemnation: Men, I say, being thus instructed and misguided by Pragmatick
zeal, that sets up it self in the place of Reason, and not knowing that ever
they had any sense or perception of those forementioned effects being wrought
in them, presently conclude, that there is nothing to be expected for them but
a sure and inevitable Damnation. They never heard the sound of that breath of
heaven which quickens dry bones, and makes them stand up and live; nor ever
were acquainted with those impetuous agitations and convulsions of spirit,
whereby the New Birth is formed in them: they never took notice of any such
audible Voice behind them, saying unto them, this is the way, walk in it: Nor
ever felt any such black tempest of horror and trembling seazing on them, which
presently (the cloud being blown over) was turned into a serene gale of
quietness and peace. Now it being thus with them, what other conclusion can
they draw from such Premises, but that they are the objects of Gods hatred, and
are utterly excluded from all hope of happyness by a Decree unalterable as the
Laws of the Medes and Persians? For God has determined (say the
Reprobationists) and purposed in himself (and he is not as Man that he should
lie, or the son of Man that he should repent) that he will show mercy to none
but those few whom he has pre-ordained to Salvation for the illustration of
the Glory of his free Grace. What shall I now comfort those despairing and
disconsolate souls withal? Should I tell them, that God hates nothing that he
has made, that he is the Father of Spirits, and no Parent will tare out the
tender bowels of his own dear offspring; they will presently reply, that
though the number of souls be as the sand of the Sea, a remnant only shall be
saved; a little flock, a tenth, as the shaking of an Olive tree, two or three
berries on the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful
branches; and though it be true, that God is the Father of Spirits; yet he is
likewise the Supreme Lord of his Creation, and May he not do what he will with
his own? has not the potter power over the clay? and therefore they are
certainly vessels of dishonor, and included in that great multitude which
shall inherit bitterness and sorrow. Should I declare to them, that God is
merciful, and will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth, and to this end has sent down the Lord Christ from heaven to declare to
mankind, that he is reconciled unto them, and thinks thoughts of Love and
Goodness toward them, and that if they will repent and turn to him, he will
blot out their transgressions and remember their sins no more; that Jesus
Christ is become an Alsufficient sacrifice for the sins of the whole World, and
has taken away that anger and displeasure that was conceived against the Sons
of Men, having tasted Death for every Man, and that now he invites all in the
most condescending terms to come unto him, and has promised that Whosoever
comes unto him, he will in no wise cast out: And what return now shall I have
to these persuasions? they will tell me that it is true, God is merciful, and
would have All, that is, some of all sorts and conditions of men to be Saved,
and to this end Christ came down from heaven, and was made man, that he might
gather together the World of his Elect, and tasted Death for every one of them,
and these he invites, and these shall come to him, but none else, for no man
can come unto Christ, except the Father draw him; and we have no evidence, or
but plausible grounds, to think, that he either has or will draw any of us:
his Sheep only know his voice and follow him: but we have no proof whereby we
can collect our selves to be of his fold. Wherefore all our arguments are
fruitless and vain, and you can give us no solid and substantial comfort to
uphold our weak and dying hopes that we are not in a state of Reprobation.

I might here, before I leave this Argument, demand of the stout Champions and
Promoters of this rigid Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, What they think of
those general calls and invitations of all lapsed Mankind in the Gospel? and,
How they will make them consistent with that sower Dogma? for, to what end or
purpose were these and such like expressions inserted? Mat. xi. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heaven laden, and I will give you rest.
If any man thirst, Joh. vii. 37. Isai. lv. 1.
let him come unto me and drink. Ho every one that thirsts; come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, Come ye -- Behold I stand at the door and
knock: Rev. iii. 20.
if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will
sup with him, and he with me. Wisdom cries without, Prove. i.
she utters her voice in the streets: How long ye simple ones -- Turn ye at
my reproof -- The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that hears say,
Revel. xxii. 17.
Come, and let him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely. Why does Christ invite Reprobates to come to him, when he
denies them his gracious Assistance, and intends they shall not come? For that
they are included here, I think none can question that attends how general the
terms are, and if the balance be cast on either side, the advantage will accrue
to Reprobates; for Christ came not to call the Righteous (those who presume
themselves to be Elected) but Sinners (such as the World judges Castawayes) to
repentance: and besides, the Text plainly implies the same; for who are more
weary and heavy laden, than those who are daily burdened and know not where to
rest? Who are more thirsty than those who are scorcht with perpetual heats, and
travel in unknown deserts and solitudes, panting, and gasping, and lifting up
their dying eyes to Heaven, and yet cannot obtain so much as one drop of
cooling dew to allay the flames and ardors of their parched souls? And if it be
certain (as it cannot be denied) that all men whatever are interessed and
concerned in these passionate invitations, it is likewise clear as the Noonday
Sun, that all may come and receive the benefit designed in them. If it be
otherwise, can it consist with the Goodness, Justice, and Veracity of Almighty
God thus to tantalize and deceive his helpless Creatures in things of so great
weight and moment?

Wherefore to avoid the dint and stroke of this Dilemma, the Reprobationists
have still a reserve, a (...), to creep out at, and it is this, That the Gospel
is offered to Reprobates to leave them inexcusable. But they are deceived if
they imagine this will serve their turn, and stand when assailed by the shocks
of severer Reason. I must confess it is a very impertinent piece of work to go
about to confute every petty Nicety and Evasion, which scant and straightened
spirits invent to patch up their ruined and decayed opinions; yet because it
comes in my way, I shall take the pains to examine it, that men may extricate
themselves from prejudice and error, and see where their unwary credulity and
innocent simplicity has been betrayed into the Sacrilegious hands of
unfaithful persons, who have (as much as in them lies) hindered the Progress of
the Gospel, stifled the life of God, and bedwarfed Men in their spiritual
growth and stature, by making them stand at a stay, or rather go backward in
Christianity, through their administering to them such vicious and unwholesome
nutriment. But to reply to this frivolous Answer; I say then, the Gospel which
is confessedly offered to Reprobates, cannot be said to leave them inexcusable,
and that upon these accounts.

1. That Reprobates may be left inexcusable for not embracing the Gospel, it is
necessary that God should put them into a capacity of yielding and
condescending to those terms and proposals he shall make to them. But God has
not dealt thus with the greatest part of the World (according to the Doctrine
of Absolute Reprobation) and therefore is so far from taking from them all
excuse, that he has left sufficient arguments, whereby according to the
strictest rules of Reason and Equity they may plead an exemption from
punishment, though they do not perform that which he commands them. For can it
enter into the heart of any good and rational Man to think that God does not
only command and exact such things of his Creatures which he never endued them
with power to do, but also punishes them for not performing of them, when yet
by his secret will he determined they should disobey him? It was once said of
the proud Pharisees, that they rejected the counsel of God against themselves,
and all impenitent sinners do the same: but Mr. Calvin will have their refusal
of the Gospel to proceed primarily from the unsearchable Decree of God, who
first determined their Destruction, and then to accomplish this, designed their
contempt of the means of their Salvation. I^s^t. lib. 3. c. 24.. 4.
His words are these, Quod igitur sibi pat^facto Dei verbo non ebie^ perant
Reprobi, probe id in malitiam pravitemque cordis eorum rejicietur, modo simul
adjiciatur, ideo in hanc pravitatem addictos quia justo, sed inscrutabili Dei
judicio suscitati sunt, ad gloriam ejus sua damnatione illustrandam. But
moreover, should God declare a Peace and Agreement with the Rebellious Sons of
Adam, and not only offer to the World a Treaty of Grace and Salvation (as it is
granted he does to multitudes who die in impenitency, and never embrace those
blessed terms of life) but press upon them with the strongest motives and
incentives of Love and Tenderheartedness that infinite Wisdom can contrive in
order to their felicity, having deprived them (though justly) of that power
whereby they might have rendered themselves capable of Heaven, by accepting
those gracious overtures of Peace, if it had not been taken from them, and
should conferr none other upon them in the stead, This would be such a strange
Economy and dispensation toward objects of misery, as can in no wise be
deemed (...), worthy and becoming the Majesty of heaven to interess it self in.
I cannot think that God will allow that in himself which he condemns in his
Creatures: And if he judge it an unprofitable and ineffectual piece of Charity,
Jam. ^. 15, 16.
and which in it self is no better then a mockery, supposing our selves able to
do otherwise, to bid an indigent Person be warmed and filled, and yet give him
not wherewithal he may be so; he will certainly esteem it below the Dignity of
his everblessed Nature, to invite the Sons of Men to be happy, and inherit the
treasures of a never-fading Glory, when notwithstanding he never affords them
the least help or assistance in their attempts and offers toward it.

2. The external application of the Gospel to Reprobates, cannot leave them
without excuse, unless it be rejected, which in them cannot be denominated a
crime, because it is inevitable and no more in their power to help, then to
alter whatever Decree God will pass upon them. Heaven had before irrevocably
determined, and so implicated and entangled them in such a train of causes as
should necessarily make them rebel against and resist the offers of the Gospel,
and therefore they did but act under the more forcible impulse of Gods will:
Now those actions of Reprobates are so far from deserving the name of Crimes,
that they rather merit the title of Obedience, forasmuch as their wills are
fatally determined by an external Power inacting them, and irresistibly
exerting such and such motions. A Doctrine long ago maintained by the Stoics,
who ascribed every thing to the dispensation of a sure and inevitable Destiny:
Fatis agimur: cedite fatis
Non sollicitae p^ssunt curae
Mutare rati stamina fusi.
Quicquid patimur mortale genus,
Quicquid facimus, venit ab alto.
Omnia certo tramite vadunt,
Primusque dies dedit extermum. Senec. in Oedip.
Fates guide us, unto Fates yield we,
Care cannot alter their Decree.
For what we suffer, what we do,
Celestial Orbs proceeds from you.
All go in a prefixed way,
The first prescribes the last day.
And for this Reason Fools and Mad men are not found guilty, nor made obnoxious
to punishment, either in foro externo, or in foro conscientiae (though they
commit such things as otherwise were punishable) because their faculties are
overacted by the inordinate motions and rude agitations arising from the body,
and the souls instruments whereby she spontaneously moves the corporeal
Fabric, being vitiated and rendered inept, she has no power to countermand
them. To this purpose Lucian brings in Sostratus reasoning with Minos the Judge
of Hell concerning the Justice and Equity of his proceedings; (...) (...) So
that the external oblation of the Gospel to Reprobates, is so far from rendering
them (...), that (if we consult those faculties God has given us to be the
Judges of right and wrong, good and evil) we shall find their Apology to be
as reasonable, as if God should expostulate with them for not creating the
World, or raising the dead.

3. The Gospel in propriety of speech, cannot be said to be offered at all to
Reprobates without the greatest Hypocrisy and Dissimulation imaginable, much
less that by it they should be fairly rendered without excuse. For by the Gospel
we understand (...), the New Covenant which God has made with the world in the
Lord Christ, to which both God and Man have set their Seals; God has promised
for his part, that he will give a free pardon and indulgence for all their sins
upon their true Repentance, and will assist them in the performance of his
Commands with his Divine Spirit and Benediction, and at last upon their
perseverance in Holiness bestow upon them Immortality and Life. And Man engages
that he will faithfully perform the conditions according to the utmost of his
power and ability which on his part he is obliged to; which are expressed to be
Faith and Repentance; a putting off the Old man, and putting on the New; a
being buried with Christ in his Death, and rising again with him to Newness of
life. And this Notion seems to be intimated by the Apostle, 2 Timothy ii. 19. The
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are
his. And let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
Where (...), which our translation renders [foundation] signifies here the
Compact or Covenant of God, the (...), stability or firmness whereof there
enforced, assures us, that there is no salvation to be expected, but according
to the contents of that Great Indenture once for all sealed in the blood of
Christ, of which, as that indeed is one part, which is inscribed on one side of
the Seal [the Lord knows who are his] that is, he will never fail to own
those who continue faithful to him; so on the other side is most Emphatical
[let every man that names the name of Christ depart form iniquity] which if he
do not, he has forfeited all the privileges of Christianity. And it may
further be observed that the word (...) which is sometimes rendered (...), is
also expressed by (...), Isay 30.1. as a Learned Critic notes. This being then
the Nature of the Gospel, it cannot without deceit and fraud be offered to
Reprobates: for God cannot in his Word command them to believe in Christ as
their Savior and Redeemer, without injoyning them to believe a lie; nor can he
exhort them to Repentance without Hypocrisy, having by a peremptory Decree
secluded them from a participation of those (...), free and gracious donations,
whereby they should be empowered to forsake their sins, and which he has
obliged himself to extend to all the World on his part of the Covenant. If God
therefore intended not to own them for his, nor give them his Grace and
assistance to conquer and subdue their rebellious Natures, they are not
included within the terms of it; And how can any man be convinced of Contumacy,
and so left inexcusable for rejecting a Doctrine not at all belonging to him?
for conviction supposes a man to have done otherwise then he might have done,
and to have left undone something which was in his power to perform, which
cannot be affirmed of Reprobates.

To conclude this Argument, if this Doctrine of Irrespective Reprobation may be
admitted as true and genuine, the whole Ministry of the word is but a more
solemn kind of Pageantry and flattery, and Gods Ambassadors, by whom he
beseeches mankind to be reconciled unto him, treat with the greatest part of
them upon false grounds and beside Gods will and intentions, bearing them in
hand that God desires their welfare and happiness, -- tolluntur in altum
Ut lapsu graviore ruant --

till they have brought them to the confines of Hell, where they shall feel
those acute pains to never-dying ages, which were their destined portion from
before the foundation of the World. And now let any rational man judge, whether
this Doctrine, as it is here represented all along (and it is no otherwise then
may easily be proved out of the writings of the favorers of it) do not
infinitely obstruct the progress of real and unfeigned Righteousness in the
World, and scatter a malignant influence upon men's practice in order to
Holiness and a good life, while some (as if they had been of Heavens counsel,
and seen their Names enrolled above) cannot look upon themselves under any
other position, but that of Gods peculiar and selected ones; and for that very
reason believe themselves out of the reach of Apostasy and miscarriage, than
which there can be no greater allay to a diligent search after the true and
living Nature of God: for while their endeavors after it cool like the air by
intervening showers, and they swallow every bait, and neglect to excite their
powers and faculties by a timely care and industry, upon the stock of a secure
confidence of heaven, the enemy forrages and spoils, and makes daily inrodes
upon their hearts, and they are upon the margins of destruction ere they are
aware. Others despairing of life, and believing every thing adverse to their
felicity, have no heart to go forward, and either wear out their lives in a
sottish senselessness and stupidity, or spend them in jollity, and crown their
heads with rosebuds and forget God, resolving to make as good use of the
present time as they can, knowing that when this fleeting and perishing life is
ended, they shall be plunged into everlasting misery.

CHAP. V. A fifth and last Argument, wherein is shown that the Doctrine of
Irrespective Reprobation takes away the liberty of Man's Will, and consequently
leaves no place for reward of Virtue, or punishment of Vice.
THat there is a free principle in Man, a (...), and (...), a self-moving power
and life which is able to segregate Truth from Falsehood, Good from Evil, Hence
the Stoics say the (...) of Man is (...).

And the Greek Fathers add to those Epithetes, (...).


and accordingly elect as the Arguments shall appear more or less convictive,
is not only the judgment of Reason, but the sense of the most Orthodox
Antiquity, whether Theology or Philosophy; although the Truth is, in this
diseased and distempered condition all men lie under, the manner of the Wills
election shows, that it is in the greatest measure inclinable to evil, as will
appear further hereafter. And that I may not seem barely to assert what others
so strenuously oppugn, I shall allege some plain and perspicuous testimonies
out of the ancient Fathers and Philosophers, who have manumitted the will of
man, and left it free to choose Good or Evil, though when it is determined to
one, it may be drawn by weightier grounds and reasons to the election of the
contrary part; and when the Arguments on either side are equally balanced, it
hangs in an equilibration and hovers in suspense till something intervene,
which represents one of them to be the more eligible.

Tertull. advers. Marcion. 2. Tota ergo libertas arbitrii in utramque partem
concessa est illi, ut sui dominus constanter occurreret, and bono sponte
servando, and malo sponte vitando: quoniam and alias positum hominem sub
judicio Dei, oportebat justum illum efficere de arbitrii sui meritis, liberi
scilicet. Caeterum nec boni nec mali merces jure pensaretur ei, qui aut bonus
aut malus necessitate fuisset inventus, non voluntate. In hoc and lex
constituta est non excludens, sed probans libertatem, de obsequio sponte
praestando, vel transgressione sponte committenda, ita in utrumque exitum
libertas patuit arbitrii.

Again, Igitur consequens erat, uti Deus secederet a liberate semel concessa
homini, id est, contineret in semetipso and praescientiam and praepotentiam
suam, per quas intercessisse potuisset, quominus homo male liberate sua frui
aggressus, in periculum laberetur. Si enim intercessisset, rescidisset arbitrii
libertatem, quam ratione and bonitate permiserat.

Origin. Contra Cells. lib. 4. (...).

Tatianus: (...).

Justin Martyr in Apol. ad Senatum. 1. where he tells us, the Christians
rejected the Stoical Fate upon this ground; (...).

And a little above, (...).

Et in Apol. ad Imper. Antoninum; (...).

August. lib. 3. de liberto Arbitrio. cap. 5. Motus quo huc aut illuc voluntas
convertitur, nisi esset voluntarius atque in nostra potestate, neque laudandus
esset homo cum ad superiora, neque culpandus cum ad inferiora deiorquet quasi
quendam cardinem voluntatis.

Et in Epist. 41. ad Valentin. Obedientiam nostram requirit, (Deus) quae nulla
potest esse sine labero arbitrio.

And Calvin himself acknowledges that it was a tradition for many ages, Hoc
modo a Deo moveri voluntatem ut nostrae sit electionis motioni Dei obtemperare
aut refragari.

To these I shall add Hierocles, who is thought by many Learned Persons to be a
Christian, in Comment. super Carm. Pythag. which he tells us were not the (...)
of some one Pythagorean, but (...). So that in this one testimony we have the
sense of the whole Pythagorean School or (...); and it is this, (...) (...).

But for our better understanding the nature of Man's Free Will, and in what
degrees it is seated in him, we must consider all Mankind under a threefold Law
or Dispensation (which if duly examined, will help us not only to the
explication of many difficult texts in Holy Scripture, but to the solution and
determination of many Theological Controversies) treated of by the Apostle in
the seventh and eighth Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans.

1. First there is (...), The law of sin which is in the members, Chap. vii.
23. and under this Law are comprehended all such as the Apostle, v. 14. by a
figment of his own person represents, -- I am carnal, sold under sin. For
though the Apostle throughout this Chapter speak in the singular number, yet he
understands not himself, nor expresses his particular state; but by a fiction
translates the business to himself, and by it describes the several states and
conditions of men in order to God and Religion; which way of Locution he makes
use of in several other places, as 1 Cor. x. 29, 30. and iv. 6. and vi. 12. and
xiii. 2. Gal. ii. 18. For surely the Apostle, when he wrote this Epistle, was
not (...), carnal, which in the mildest sense is to be but in the dawning and
infancy of Religion, and is opposed to (...), the spiritual man, who is strong
and well grown in Christianity; 1 Cor. iii. 1. And I, Brethren could not speak
unto you, (...) as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto babes in
Christ. Nor can the other expression [(...), sold under sin] agree and suit
with a Regenerate Man, as we suppose the Apostle to be; for, to be sold under
sin, is to be the Vassal and bondslave of sin, to be under it is command, and
totally subject to it is licentious dictates: A phrase peculiarly attributed to
Ahab, of whom it is said, (...), as the Septuagint, he sold himself, or was sold
to work wickedness, 1 King. xxi. 25. Now unless we will say, the Apostle was
sold under sin after this manner (as the Romans of old made their captives pass
sub hasta, as a token of their servility and slavery) we cannot imagine he
speaks this of himself. To this we may add, v. 23. I see another law in my
members warring against the law of my mind, and captivating me to the law of
sin -- All which expressions if they be understood of St. Paul when he wrote
that Epistle, the Character of a Regenerate Man must be this, viz. That he is
one who is carnal, and sold under sin, omitting the Good which he would, and
doing the Evil which he would not, and through the Prevalency of that other law
in his members which wars against the law of his mind, he is at last overcome
and brought into captivity to the law of sin: which is the very description of
an unregenerate and wicked person; for he that is born of God sins not,
neither can he sin, because he is born of God; and he that is become the
servant of God is made free from sin, which is directly contrary to being sold
under sin. Now those who are in captivity to this law of sin and vice have very
poor and exile remains of liberty in their souls, as is sufficiently apparent,
in that every pitiful vice enslaves them, and every importunate lust usurpes
the Authority of Right Reason, and leads them to the commission of the most
shameful and vile actions imaginable. For surely if there were such great
degrees of liberty of will in this which is the lowest state of Man's
degeneracy, the habitations of the earth would never look so squallid and
uncomfortable, nor justice and mercy be out balanced by cruelty and oppression,
filling every place with the calamitous objects of pity and compassion. The
World could never have been so universally overspread with a Deluge of sin and
unrighteousness as now it is, (For the arguments inciting to Virtue and
Goodness, being far more ponderous then any can be brought for the patronizing
sin and vice, the wills of Men would not fail to be inclined to them) but the
fair and spotless image of Truth would take place in men's minds; and that
Divine Wisdom which descends from the Father of Lights, exert it self in
pure, peaceable, gentle, merciful and impartial actions: But we finding all
things go contrary, and Autaesthesie the Grand principle of our deviation from
God so mischievously powerful, leading men to a life of self-seeking, and
inamouring them with the fading beauties of this inferior World, making
Intellect and Reason drudge in unjust policy and subtlety for the promoting
self-interest, and carrying on little and private designs for the treasuring up
Riches, though by the greatest Extortion and Rapine, and consuming and
overrunning the poor and innocent like a sweeping Torrent that leaves nothing
behind it but the miserable tokens of ruin and desolation: This being the
state of men (and far worse then I have here represented it) under the brutish
life and law of sin, what signs can they show that they are arrived to any
considerable measure of liberty? For it is not some one particular lust, but
the whole unrighteous and Diabolical Nature which mingles and insinuates it
self with the whole frame of the soul, and enthrals it to it is imperious
dictates. But yet there is some freedom left still, and men are not destitute
of a light though languid and glimmering to lead them to greater degrees of
Virtue, if they would suffer themselves to be guided by it: There is yet in
every man in his greatest Apostasy and lapse from the Divine life a Principle
of Conscience accusing and condemning him for the perpetration of evil; and
that regret and shame a man finds in himself after the commission of impiety,
is a manifest evidence that he had Power to avoid it.

2. Again, there is (...), the law of the mind or conscience, ver. 23. --
Another law warring against the law of my mind. And this is the second state
and condition of mankind. For as while they were under the Law of sin, they
were wholly alive unto themselves, and disjoined from the Universal Spirit of
life and true freedom, they became at last strangers to their own Beings, and
ignorant of their high and noble extraction: so under this Dispensation of the
mind or conscience, there is a (...) or double-livedness within them, being
partly alive unto themselves, and partly unto God, sometimes lending a patient
ear to the soft whispers of Divine wisdom, and at other times carried away with
the loud murmurs and noises of that worser Principle; as Medea in Euripides
complains: (...)
(...)
My Conscience tells me that I act amiss,
But fury stronger than my Reason is.
And now they begin to awake out of their lethargick drowziness and sleep, and
open the windows of their souls, and receive in some beams of the Sun of
Righteousness that has long circled about them, and by his light they see
themselves in a broken and unhappy plight, and fain would come out of it, but
dare not put themselves to any trouble or pain, so they lay themselves down
again to slumber. But conscience being once forcibly roused up, is not so
easily lulled asleep, but alarms them with fatal cries, and shows them the
guiltiness that lies upon them, and the mortiferous and dangerous state they
are in by reason of the certain punishment all sin draws along with it; thus
being affrighted they become Religious out of fear, and account Christianity as
a task and burdensome service, imposed upon them only to deprive them of their
liberty and abridge them of that freedom they before possessed, and still they
bear a love and liking to their lusts, and often visit them with dear embraces.
And while they are here, they carry a perpetual war within them between the
Law of sin, and the Law of the mind, sometime the one, and sometime the other
prevailing, the life of the body struggling against the mind or reason, and the
light endeavoring to chase away the darkness and night. And of this state are
to be understood these and such like places of Scripture, For that which I do,
I allow not; for what I would that do I not; Romans vii.
but what I hate that do I. So then with the mind I my self serve the law of
God; but with the flesh the law of sin. For the flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; Gal. v. 17.
and these are contrary one to the other; (...), that ye cannot do [or that ye
do not] the things that that ye would. Now the liberty of Man's will begins to
spread and enlarge it self under this Economy; for though men's strength be but
small: yet God whose Goodness both Earth and Sea and the whole community of
life partake of, cannot behold his own dear life contending with the Powers of
darkness and never countenance nor abet it, but will lead it victoriously
through the midst of hell, and secure it from all the Magical spells and
enchantments of the inferior World; and as this Divine life grows more potent
in the soul, so the liberty and freedom of the will arises to a greater
latitude and perfection. But if we prove false to the Divine light, and
notwithstanding the great helps and means vouchsafed us, pretend still our
disability and infirmity, we may easily lapse again into the brutish life, and
lie under the Power of the law of sin, out of which we began to be delivered;
and the freedom of our will which was in some measure enlarged, will be again
contracted into narrowness and exility, and our last state will be worse then
the first.

3. But he that makes good use of Gods gifts, and behaves himself as a good
Soldier of the Lord Christ, and conquers and subdues his rebellious lusts by
the power of his Spirit, descendihg into the grave with the holy Jesus by a
profound humility and mortification, and becoming perfectly (...), dead to all
the self-feeling and the luscious relishes of the corporeal life, he is arrived
to the highest dispensation of Christianity, which is to be under the (...),
Romans viii. 2.
Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. Such a man is wholly alive unto
God, and though he be encumbred with many hardships, afflictions and outward
calamities which threaten approaching ruin to his body of earth, yet his life
is holy, harmless and innocent, like the life of Christ upon Earth, and his
soul is so affected as his was, having but one only will in the World, which is
to annihilate himself that God may be all in him. And whoever is arrived to
this high pitch of Divine perfection has attained an enlarged and boundless
freedom, his life being melted into the Divine life, and his will fitted and
adapted to the comprehension of the Divine Will. For the true liberty of our
wills consists not in an uncertain indifferency and dubious fluctuation between
two different objects presented to our choice (For this arises out of the
darkness and imperfection of our understandings) but when our wills are
conformable to reason, and spontaneously elect that which the Intellect
propounds to them as best, and in it self most eligible.

Having thus declared the amplitude and extent of the liberty of man's Will in
all it is respective capacities, I shall now manifest and show how it is taken
away by asserting and maintaining of Inconditionate Decrees; which will be no
hard matter to evince, if we consider that both the Predestination of the Good
to life, and of the Reprobates to destruction, necessarily pervades and casts a
fatal influence upon their whole lives, I mean that that eternal decree
invincibly orders and disposes the actions of men to their respective ends, so
that he who is preordained to happiness shall certainly and necessarily be
good, and the other who is destined to perdition shall inevitably be wicked and
vicious. A cast of which Doctrine we have delivered to us by Zanchy in these
words, De Not. Dei cap. 2. in Resp. ad Sophism.
Non dubitamus itaque confiteri ex immutabili Reprobatione necessitatem
peccandi, and quidem sine resipiscentia ad mortem usque peccandi, eoque and
aeternas poenas dandi, reprobis incumbere: that is, We doubt not to profess
that from the immutable Decree of Reprobation there lies upon Reprobates a
necessity of sinning, and that without Repentance even unto death, and
consequently of suffering eternal punishments. Ad amicdupl. Vorst. p. 175.
Piscator likewise will aver the same, and more if you desire it; In summa se
tueri fatetur, Deum absolute decrevisse ab aeterno and efficaciter, ne quispiam
hominum plus bont faciat quam reipsa facit, aut plus mali omittat quam reipsa
omittit: that is, That he defends this conclusion, that God has efficaciously
from all eternity so predetermin'd the will of man to every individual action,
that none can do any more good than really he does; or omit any more evil then
ipso facto he omitteth. To these I shall add Szydlovius as the worst of the
three, Apud Curcellaeum de jure Dei in creaturas innocents, p. 25, 26.
Fateor and ipse ad communem sentiendi consuetadinem crudum nimis hoc videri;
Deum posse blasphemiam, perjurium, mendacium, etc. imperare: -- quod tamen
Verissimum est in se, etc. that is, I confess that according to common sense,
it seems very crude to assert that God can command blasphemy, perjury, lying,
etc. which yet is most true in it self. Now following these Principles, it is
impossible there should be any such things as Virtue and Vice existing in the
World; for all our acions, whether Good or Evil, are the necessary effects of
an external principle acting and overruling our wills, and we are but the
instruments which that invincible Power makes use of for the doing such and
such actions, and can no more withstand it, then the Sun cease to make day and
night. 1 Cor. iv. 5.
The Apostle speaks of men's receiving praise of God for their good deeds, which
reason cannot fathom, if their wills are necessarily determined ad unum (as
the Moralists speak) and acted by a supernatural and irresistible power. No man
ever praised the Sun for circling the Earth, or the Moon for keeping her
course, because it is impossible they should do otherwise, being destitute of
any spontaneous principle, and carried by the violent stream of matter: No more
can any one praise or dispraise the actions of Mankind, when they have no power
to do otherwise, but are inevitably determined to such and no other, and can no
more resist, than the Planets stop their constant gyres in the vast whirlpools
of heaven. He that merits praise for doing well, it is upon this account, that
he might have done otherwise: but when God by a Physical application of his
Power determines the soul to act thus, and leaves it not any power or ability
of resisting, all the praise of that action must be due to God himself, not to
Man who was but the instrument, and could not avoid it. Nemo peccat in eo quod
vitare non potest, says St. Austin. Neither can any action whatever be called
a sin in Man; because he is not left a free agent, but acts fatally and
unavoidably, and cannot be disobedient to that superior force that inacts his
will: so that Murder, Adultery, Oppression, contempt of Government, and
whatever brutish action there is else, cannot come under the denomination of
crimes, but he that commits them may justly plead that he could not avoid them,
his will being never undetermined, and it was not possible that his weak soul
should hinder the stronger and more powerful bent and resolution of heaven. How
then can God in justice punish any man for doing that which he could not help?
and, How can that be called a sin, which is the effect of a necessary cause?
The distinction between the act, and the pravity of the act the former of which
God wills (say they) and works in us, but not the latter, will stand them in no
stead; for in many actions the formality of sin consists in the very act it
self, as in Murder, Adultery, and such like: Thus the eating of the forbidden
fruit was a sin in it self, and we cannot distinguish between the act and the
vitiosity; for the very act was forbidden, and the formality of the crime
consisted not in Adam or Eve's eating after any undue manner: but simply and
barely in the very act of eating. And so in sins of Omission, this distinction
likewise fails, nor will it free Almighty God from the imputation of being the
Author of Iniquity and Vice. And it is no wonder to see this unworthy Doctrine
take such deep footing in some men's minds, when they are so obstinately set and
fixed upon it, that they will entertain any absurdity, rather then free and
unprejudice their understandings: Yea so hot was this Dispute grown at Geneva,
that Melanchton in an Epistle to Caspar Peucerus amongst other things relates
this, Scribit ad me Lelius de Stoico fato usque adeo litem Genevae moveri, ut
quidam in carcerem conjectus sit, propterea quod a Zenone differret. O misera
tempora! Doctrina salutis peregrinis quibusdam disputationibus obscuratur. And
truly if Men would leave off these dry reasonings and altercations about words,
and entertain Truth in the love and simplicity of it, and as it is in Jesus, in
that Divine and Meek Spirit, it is to be hoped that God would soon put an end
to the days of unrighteousness, of formal and outside profession; and the
glory of the Lord would cover the Earth, as the waters cover the Sea.

Chap. VI. An Explication of several Citations of Scripture suborned to attest
the Doctrine of Inconditionate Decrees; together with a brief examination of
some Positions of the Contra-Remonstrants.
I Have now finished the principal and most material Arguments I shall at this
time make use of, which I have not closely and Syllogistically connected, but
loosly propounded and discoursed of, as well for the delight and pleasure of
the Reader, as that he who is in a good measure prepared for the entertainment
of them, may light upon something agreeable to his own mind, which will appear
to his inward sense as Apodictical as a Mathematical Notion or the evidence of
his external sense. For there is something in us which will not fail to embrace
whatever it finds suitable and congruous to it is own nature; and ofttimes an
accidental hint proves more advantageous for the establishing and confirming a
Truth before but weakly impressed upon the mind, then a sapless argumentation
formed after the rules of mood and figure. But that I may yet give more light
to the precedent discourse, I shall bring into view the chief places and Texts
of holy Scripture which have been by some distorted and wrested to the
upholding a Doctrine they are not at all acquainted with, that this Obex being
removed by rendering the plain and genuine sense of them, there may be nothing
remaining to hinder men's free and full assent unto it.

John vi. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me -- From hence
some draw such an unexpected conclusion as this, Solent praeparationes ad fidem
patri tribui, (Mat. xvi. 17.) ut fidei operatio filio, obsignatio spiritui.
G^ot.
viz. That there are some particular persons known to God by name, whom he has
from all eternity given to Christ; and that all others are devoted to
destruction. For the explication therefore of this we must know that God once
promised the Lord Christ ( Psalm. 2.) that he would give him the Heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession; by which
we may discern, what kind of giving this is which is mentioned here, viz. the
giving for an inheritance or possession, That Christ may reign over them; which
God does by his Vital presence pervading their souls, and laying hold of every
disposition and capacity, and preparing their hearts by his softning and
preventing grace, for a benign reception of the Divine Image of the Lord Jesus:
And this Act of God in fitting and qualifying them, is called, His drawing,
Verse. 44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him; which attraction is no ways involuntary and irresistible, as if he who
knows all the secret recesses and intrigues of our Natures, were put to his
shifts, and had no other means to reduce men to righteousness, but by the
destruction of their powers and faculties: but his drawing is with the Cords of
a Man, Hos. xi. 4.
and the Bands of Love, with gentle and persuasive arguments, far different
from those unaccountable impulses and violent motions attributed to Gods Spirit
by the Calvinists, as Jer. xxxi. 3. and Cant. i. 4. (...). Clem. Strom. 4.
Now the persons given unto Christ must needs be such who are fitly disposed,
qualified and prepared to receive Christ being offered, such who are (...), set
in order and rankt to life, Act. xiii. 48. and (...), fitted and capacitated
for the Kingdom of God; Such as are like that subactum solum, Luke ix. 62.
good and mellow ground in the Parable which is fitted for the receiving the
seed of Gods Words. For if by Gods donation of men to Christ, were signified
his Electing a certain number to eternal life without any consideration of
their future obedience, it would follow:

1. That that number could never be diminished: but we read that one of those
who was given to Christ was lost, Joh. xvii. 12. Those that thou gave me I
have kept, and none of them is lost, (...), but the Son of Perdition.

2. It would follow, that those who are already elected to Eternal life, and in
the favor and love of God, are yet given to Christ, which is very crude and
improper; for to what purpose should they be given to Christ, when they are
already reconciled to God?

3. Christ here speaking to the incredulous Jews, if by this exclusive form of
Locution he had meant that only some few particular persons preordained from
eternity, should come to him (that is, Believe on him, Heb. xi. 6.) he would
not only have extenuated the sin of the Jews in not believing on him, but
wholly taken it away by rendering them an account and reason of this their
incredulity, viz. That they were destitute of that vital influence and grace
which streams from a particular Election, and is given only to some certain
persons known to God by Name from all eternity.

Acts xiii. 48. -- And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. Here
the Contra-Remonstrants, as their manner is, whenever they meet with any such
word as Ordained, Elected, or Predestined, presently fancy, that it concludes
their absolute Decrees; and so obstinately and wilfully blind are they, that
they cannot see any other sense but their own, and obtrude it upon Men as
Infallible and Authentic. Such is the Text here in hand, which they they
imagine makes much for their cause; but the word (...), has no such
signification or import that they should put upon it, but is a Military term,
and signifies to Marshal, to stand ready in rank and file; and accordingly
denotes here, those who are fitted and aptly disposed to eternal life: so it is
used 1 Cor. xvi. 15. (...) disposed or devoted themselves to the function of
ministering to the Saints. So the Greeks express a well-governed and disposed
life by (...), and those that live not so, the Apostle calls, (...), disorderly
persons, 1 Thessalonians. v. 14. The (...) therefore here, hold proportion with the
(...) in the forementioned place, Luke ix. 62. and denotes such who are fitted
by due preparations for the reception of the Gospel. And if the Text were to be
expounded of such an absolute Predestination of certain particular persons,
undoubtedly the words (...) or (...) would have been used (which had made more
for that purpose) and not such a Phrase which is no where in the whole
Scripture found to signify Gods eternal Decrce. For a further confirmation of
this, I will annex Grotius his Observations upon the place against the
Calvinistical Exposition: 1. Praedestinati omnes unius loci non eredunt eodem
tempore. 2. Neque and omnes qui credunt, sunt e^ sensu praedestinati. 3. Neque
id arcanum de singulis, qui ad salutem perventuri essent, qui non, Lucae erat
revelatum.

1 Pet. ii. 8. And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them
which stumble at the Word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed.

That which our Adversaries collect from hence is, That there are some ordained
and destined (...) to Infidelity, and consequently to Damnation, as the effect
of it; therefore there is such a Decree as Absolute Reprobation; referring
(...) to (...).

But the invalidity and absurdity of this Explication will appear:

1. That it is a manifest contradiction to say, that the persons here mentioned
were Predestined to Disobedience; for in that it was destinated and decreed
of God, it ceases to be disobedience, and is properly an acting according to
that immutable will and purpose of God, which is passed upon the inobedient
persons: if therefore God wills and determines that they shall reject and
contemn his precepts and commands, how are they criminal?

2. It makes God the Author of sin, by predestinating and forcing men to the
commission of it. These words therefore [(...), into which they were appointed]
must be referred to (...), those which stumble, fall, and bruise themselves at
the Word (...) disobeying and rejecting it when preached: So that the sense is,
that the (...) those which stand out obstinately against the Gospel, (...),
were decreed and appointed (See Joh. xv. 16. Act. xiii. 47. 1 Thessalonians. v. 9.) to
fall at that stumbling stone, and be destroyed, which is not that they should
be incredulous or disobedient; but that since they would not believe, they
should be most justly punished. Thus the Gospel is said to be the savor of
death to them that perish, 2 Cor. ii. 16. And Christ is said to be Set (...).
for the fall of many, that is, of these that believe not on him, Luke ii. 34.
not that God appointed Christ to come into the World and set on foot the Gospel
to destroy men, but that he primarily intended by that sacred Dispensation the
Salvation of all the World, and decreed that whoever would be disobedient and
contemn those means should perish by their contempt.

Prove. xvi. 4. The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked
for the day of evil.

That there is no mention here of an eternal Decree, appears:

1. That the Praeter-tense (...) is here put by an usual manner in Hebrew for
the Present, Works, Makes, or Provides.

2. There is no necessity it should be rendered impium the Wicked, in the
Accusative case; for the Text may very well be read by an Ellipsis, And the
wicked at the day of Evil, supply, shall fall by the just judgment of God.

3. The clause [for himself] may very well be translated (since the Hebrew
Version will bear it) according to his word; or as the Septuagint (...). The
sense therefore of the whole verse briefly is this, That God by his perpetual
Providence and Government of the world, not only takes notice of, and regards
good and holy men, that all things may tend to their welfare: but likewise
beholds and observes the actions of wicked persons; and that they may not think
they shall go unpunished, and say in their hearts, There is no God, most wisely
orders, that a just Nemesis shall overtake them for their sins and impieties,
and at last a final vengeance and destruction seize upon them.

John xii. 39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, because that Esayas said
again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should
not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and
I should heal them.

I cannot see how this Text makes any thing for the Calvinistical Reprobation;
but there are some men so subtle and acute, that they epsy something or other
for the patronizing and defending their self-chosen opinions almost in every
verse of the holy Scriptures. That which they most aim at and would enforce
from hence is, That this Excaecation and obduration is a Physical Action of God
upon the mind, arising from his peremprory Decree of Reprobation Sicut credere
nolunt Reprobi, ita certum est non posse velle credere, quia tenebrae in quilus
nati sunt, lucem comprehendere non possunt. Deus autem (inquit Paulus) quos
vult miseratur, and quos vult indurat. Beza in Annot. in Joh. xii. v. 39.
: then which nothing is more inconsistent with or unworthy of the Divine
Majesty: But the Excaecation here mentioned seems not to be an Act of Gods,
because it is said Excaecavit, he has blinded, in the third Person; and
presently subjoyned, Ne ego sanem, least I should heal them, in the first;
Excaecavit therefore may be taken impersonally for their eyes are blinded, by
whomsoever, or by what means soever it came to pass; as Act. xxviii. 24. Some
believed the things that were spoken, and some believed not. But we will
suppose it to be an action of Gods, yet that action can be no other then penal,
which by the just judgment of God is inflicted on them for their precedent
crimes, and not from any Absolute Decree; as is expressed verse. 37. But though
he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. And in
Mat. xiii. 13. their incredulity is put as the cause and reason of their
blindness, Because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not; which clears
the like expression in Mark iv. 12. That seeing they may see and not perceive;
as if their Excaecation were primarily intended by Christ; for whereas it is
said that seeing, it is a plain indication that they did either understand
those things which were propounded to them, or at least might, but would not
understand them. Whereas it is said likewise they could not believe, it is not
to be understood as if they wanted Power and ability, but that their minds and
inclinations were wholly averse to it, being addicted and carried after
self-interest, as it is said, verse. 43. Many did not confess Christ, because
they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God: For oft-times those
are said not to be able, whose mind is altogether averse to this or that,
although they might easily do it if they would. Thus a Candid and Ingenuous
person cannot Lie, a Liberal person cannot be sordid and base; and, he that is
born of God (...), cannot sin, 1 John iii. 9. and Christ himself once could do
no mighty work, Mark vi. 5. See 2 Cor. xiii. 8. Acts iv. 20. John viii. 43.

Jude ver. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation --

The great stress of the Calvinists Argumentation from hence lies in the words
(...), which we (though something improperly) render [of old ordained] but
might better have translated predicted, for so the word ought to be taken here,
for a prediction or description aforehand, by which these kind of men, and also
their Impostures and their (...) have been long ago described, denoted and
depainted out in their proper colors and lineaments. Such is the propriety of
(...), only here by the addition of (...) it signifies Prophecy, as is
intimated in ver. 17, 18. of this Epistle. [(...)] to this judgment, that since
they rejected the truth, and turned the grace of God into lasciviousness, and
denied the Lord Christ that bought them, they might be as instruments for the
exploration of Saints and true Believers; (as God is said to make use of false
Prophets to try his People, Deuteronomy. xiii. 3.) and after be destroyed with all
false Christians and Rebellious Jews.

Mark xiii. 22. For false Christ's and false Prophets shall rise and shall show
signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible even the Elect.

Hence the Contra-remonstrants collect an Absolute and peremptory Decree,
because it is utterly impossible to seduce or draw the Elect from the Faith: but
while they argue thus, they declare to the World, that they neither understand
the [impossibility] nor [Elect] here mentioned. For (...) in this place does
not denote an absolute impossibility (otherwise Christ's exhortation to them
ver. 23. to take heed, had been wholly useless and supervacaneous) but is used
to express the intent and design of the False-Christs and false-Prophets; as if
he should say, They will omit nothing nor leave any means untryed, whereby to
compass their pernicious and wicked purpose. The same form or speech we have,
Romans xii. 18. (...), If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceable
with all men: that is, do your endeavor, do what lies in you, (...), as much
as lies in your power, being an Exegesis of (...), if it be possible. But why
must the (...) be such as are absolutely and immutably Elected? Sure I am, the
word (...), is used where there is no denotation of any Election from all
eternity. To avoid multiplicity of quotations, we may instance in two or three
more remarkable passages: The Hebrew word to which this answers is (...) which
signifies, to approve, examine and choose; and accordingly Prove. vii. 3. the
Hebrew word is (...) and our English Version reads, The Lord tries the heart,
and the Septuagint (...), hearts elect before the Lord. And in Esaias xxviii. 16.
(...), is rendered a tried stone. To this purpose Eccles. xlix. 7. Jerusalem is
called (...), an elect City; that is, preferred and esteemed before others.
Sometimes the word (...) signifies the designing and choosing to some office and
peculiar employment, a sequestring some from others, Luke vi. 13. And when it
was day, he called unto him his Disciples, (...), and of them be chose twelve.
To add no more, Rufus is called by St. Paul, Romans xvi. 13. (...), Chosen in the
Lord, that is, a special Believer; for as to his particular person, what Decree
had passed on him was unknown to the Apostle, therefore it must be that he
receive this Elogium from his visible Christian deportment.

2 Thessalonians. ii. 13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you,
brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you
to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth.

That the Apostle treats of no such absolute and eternal Election as our
Antagonists imagine, appears:

1. In that this form of speech being directed to all the Thessalonians, it
would follow, that the whole visible Church of them were elected unto glory,
which were a very precarious Assertion.

2. This kind of Election being absolute and irreversible, it were impossible
that any of the Believers mentioned in the Text, should fall and desert the
faith of the Gospel, which is altogether inconsistent with that solicitous and
earnest Exhortation, twice inculcated in this Chapter, ver. 1, 2, and 15.
wherein he beseeches them by the coming of the Lord Jesus, that they be not
soon shaken in mind, or troubled; and again, That they stand fast, and hold the
traditions which they have heen taught by word or Epistle.

3. This Separation of them from the rest of the Heathen World, was grounded
upon their good conversation and belief of the Gospel, which directly thwarts
an Inconditionate Decree -- Through Sanctification of the Sprit and belief of
the truth.

(...), Chosen or separated you from the beginning] that is, from the beginning
of the Preaching of the Gospel: so that they were among the first of those that
gave up themselves to the obedience of the faith: This is all the import of
this phrase: the former part of it we have Deuteronomy. xxvi. 18. The Lord has
avouched thee this day to be his people; in the Septuagint (...), which
respected Temporal benefits: but here by the Apostle it is added (...), to
Eternal Salvation, which is reserved only for Christians. Now as the Jews by
their disobedience might become non populus; so Christians may disinherit
themselves, and frustrate by their evil ways, Gods intentions of bringing them
unto glory. As for the addition of (...), it no way extends it to an Eternal,
but Temporal Election or Separation, and is used in Scripture to denote the
beginning of the Preaching of the Gospel, as in 1 John ii. 7, 24. I write no
new Commandment to you, but an old Commandment which ye had (...), from the
beginning: the old Commandment is the word which ye have heard (...), from the
beginning. Again, Let that therefore abide in you which ye have heard (...),
from the beginning. See Joh. xv. 27. The old Latin translation reads it
Primitias, (...), that is, that they were set apart and consecrated to God as
first fruits by the Preaching of the Gospel; which phrase the Apostle likewise
uses, Romans xvi. 5. -- (...), Who is the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ.

Romans viii. 28, 29, 30. And we know that all things work together for good, to
them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. For
whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son, that he might be the firstborn amongst many brethren. Moreover, whom
he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also
justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Here (say the Calvinists) you may see the chain of Salvation, and behold how
the beloved of God are drawn by each golden link, till they are brought to
their appointed bliss and happiness. This is the sacred method of Gods
Predestination, in which he goes by certain steps and degrees, and in every one
of them magnifies the riches of his free and undeserved Grace to his chosen and
selected ones. But to leave these light and aerie fancies, I shall lay down
that which I judge to be the proper and genuine sense of the Apostles words. In
order to which we must know, That the scope and intent of almost this whole
Chapter is, to comfort the Afflicted and calamitous, and to exhort them to
continue steadfast and unmoved in the love of God, and obedience of his
commands, adding several weighty Reasons and Considerations to incite them to
it, amongst which these two have their strength and cogency. 1. That all the
troubles and molestations they suffer here, shall work together for their good,
ver. 28. 2. In that they are predestined to be conformed to the image of
Christ, who through many hardships and afflictions made his way unto glory,
ver. 20, 30. So that the Predestination here mentioned, is to be understood of
a destination to the Cross, and not of any ordination to Faith, Life and Glory.
The sum of all is this, That all afflictions and crosses however burdensome and
grievous they may be, shall work together for the good of those that love God,
and sincerely and cordially adhere and cleave unto him; and though now for the
present they may be exercised with many hardships, and environed with
calamitous accidents: yet the event should be glorious, and the Sun of comfort
at last arise and dispel those thick clouds of sorrow, and bring on a serene
and perpetual day of felicity and joy. For whom he did approve of as faithful,
he determined should arrive to their felicity by the same way that Christ did,
who by suffering entered into his Glory, to the intent that he might be the
firstborn among many brethren. Moreover, whom he did thus approve of, them he
intended to call to a conformity to his Son; and whom he thus calls, he will
likewise justify, that is, account them as righteous; and whom he thus
justifies, he will hereafter glorify, if they desert not the signs and tokens
of the Cross, as he said before, ver. 17. If so be that we suffer with him,
that we may be also glorified together. For though there be no condition
expressed, yet it is evidently employed in the nature and matter of the thing it
self. See Exposition of Ephesians. i. 3, 4. infra. That this is the scope of the Text
will be further evidenced from the use of the words and phrases in other places
of Scripture: (...).
That the (...), are no more then the real and unfeigned servants of God, is
manifest, in that (...) is in several places of the Old Testament used to
signify a Follower, Adherent or Servant, especially in an Army, as 1 Kings i.
41, 49. and (...), is all one with (...) Acts xi. 23. With full purpose of
heart, that is, willingly, unfeignedly and constantly. (...).
That (...) is of the same import with the simple Verb (...) and (...), and
signifies no more then an approbation and firm love of those who are thus
conformable to Christ, is evident from these and such like Texts of Scripture,
Romans xi. 2. God has not cast away his people (...), which he foreknew, that
is, which he owned for his. So 1 Cor. viii. 3. But if any man love God, (...),
the same is known of him, that is, him God approves and likes of. Hence it is
said, that God knows not wicked men, Mat. vii. 23. And our faith and obedience
of Gods commands is called our knowing of him, Joh. xvii. 3. and 1 John ii. 3.
By Gods calling here, is undoubtedly meant his Vocation to the Cross, to which
all Believers are destined, as appears from 1 Pet. ii. 20, 21. -- But if when
ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with
God, (...), for hereunto were ye called. And 1 Thessalonians. iii. 3. That no man
should be moved by these afflictions, for your selves know (...), that we are
appointed hereunto. And if it were understood of Gods Vocation to faith, it
would follow:

1. That he foreknew, that is, approved and delighted in sinners before he
called them to the faith, and so before they were in Christ.

2. That not only Vocation, but Justification and Glorification must belong to
those that are only foreknown or Elected: Which absurdities and insipid
illations are avoided by the former Exposition.

Ephesians. i. 3, 4, 5. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ:
According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy, and without blame before him in love: Having Predestined
us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the
good pleasure of his will.

The sense and scope of these Verses will be very easy and conspicuous by the
illustration of those two Phrases, (...), verse 4. and (...), verse 5. The
Election therefore spoken of here, seems to denote Vocation by the Gospel, not
simply so: but imports and includes the Decree of calling the Jews and Gentiles
by the Gospel; as 2 Timothy i. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, (...), but according to his own purpose,
and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. Now the
subject matter of this Election are Believers as such, and whoever actually
believes, comes under that grand Decree of Election to life and immortality,
designed and intended in the Lord Christ before the foundation of the World;
and whoever believes not, falls under the dint of the other Decree of death and
destruction. According as our Savior himself has delivered to us, Mark xvi.
16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes
not, shall be damned. And for a further elucidation of this, we may take
notice, that it is not said simply in the Text, that God has blessed us, but
[in Christ] and [as he has chosen us in him] therefore Blessing, v. 3. and
Chosen, v. 4. belong both to the same matter; for (...) a term of proportion
makes the connection thus, That God has blessed us in Christ, that is, His
actual present blessing them, at that point of time, was correspondent to what
God had decreed before the foundation of the World. Now what the blessing here
spoken of is, appears:

1. In general by the addition of (...) and (...), a spiritual blessing, or
blessing in things pertaining to heaven.

2. By the Predestination (in order of nature precedent to it) which is
specified to be (...), to Adoption.

3. By what is here added (...), all which specify the matter of Election here
spoken of, to be the same as of his blessing us, viz. our holy and blameless
conversation, a Spiritual and Christian obedience; and so it is said, Chap. ii.
10. that Good Works are the things to which God had before prepared (elected)
us that we should walk in them. So that from hence we may note, that the
subject of Gods Election is not Mankind simply considered as Creatures, nor yet
as fallen, but as actual and persevering Believers.

4. By (...), in Christ, specifying Christ to be the means of bringing all to a
holy life; which he did by coming into the World, and dying and rising again.
Where we may likewise observe, that our Election even as our Blessing, is in
Christ: but no man can be in Christ, unless he be considered as faithful: and
hence also we may likewise see the vanity of that Doctrine which makes Christ
only the executor of Gods absolute Will and Decree, but not the foundation of
Election, contrary to the Apostles assertion, that God has chosen us in Christ.

The other phrase remains, (...), Predestined us. By which we are given to
understand that the Apostle both here and elsewhere, makes it his business to
show that the temporal dispensation of things, was long before determined and
decreed upon; which antecedent constitution is called (...), to predetermine,
(...), purpose, and sometimes (...), foreknowledge. The first of these is used,
Acts iv. 28. (where Gods permission and provident direction of whatever happened
to the Lord Christ is denoted) To do whatever thy hand and thy counsel (...)
determined before to be done. See 1 Cor. ii. 7. The Verb of the second is used
Romans iii. 25. (...), whom God has set forth, or foreordained to be a
propitiation -- The Verb of the last we have, 1 Pet. i. 20. (...), who verily
was foreordained before the foundation of the World -- The Noun we have, Acts
ii. 23. where likewise Gods permission and provident direction is denoted,
(...), him being delivered (or given out) by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken -- So 1 Pet. i. 2. (...), According to the
foreknowledge of God the Father -- Now these antecedent Constitutions are
sometimes absolute, and sometimes conditional; and although the condition be
not always affixed, yet may it sufficiently be understood when it is employed, by
the nature of the matter it self, and oft-times by the preceding words, and
subsequent Admonitions and Exhortations. Thus the purpose and Decree of God to
send Christ into the World, is to be understood absolutely; but his Election of
men to salvation in Christ is hypothetical and conditional, viz. If they
believe and persevere in the faith. Of these conditional Constitutions we have
several instances; Romans i. 13. St. Paul says (...), I purposed to come unto
you, viz. if other important affairs did not hinder me. See Romans viii. 29. St.
Paul was separated of God to the Apostolical function, Gal. i. 15. but it was,
if he were not disobedient to the heavenly vision, Act. xxvi. 19. So here, the
Apostle declares to the Ephesians, that God had predetermined not only to make
them of enemies, friends; but to adopt them as his children, and to deal with
them as Sons, viz. if they obeyed their Vocation as they ought.

Romans ix. 11, 13, 16, 18, 22. For the children being not yet born, neither
having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election
might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls. As it is written, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated. So then, it is not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Therefore has he mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth. What if God willing
to show his wrath, and to make his Power known, endured with much
long-suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

Verse 11. This verse inserted in a Parenthesis, is only a proof of what the
Apostle declares to the Jews, viz. That the ground and foundation of Gods
Election of Jacob, and prelation of him before Esau (under the Persons of whom
are denoted the Jews and Gentiles, the one considered without any respect of
their Legal Services, the other of their Idolatries) was not upon consideration
of the future Goodness of the one, and stubborn Refractoriness of the other,
but merely an act of his own free will and pleasure, forasmuch as the choice
was pitched upon before either of them were born.

By the phrase (...), is meant no more then the design or purpose of God in
preferring one before the other; as Romans xi. 28. (...), Beloved as touching the
Election, i. e. In respect of the undeserved promises made to them of peculiar
favor for Abraham's sake. And the Hebrew (...) which for the most part is
rendered (...), is also denoted by (...), Deuteronomy. vii. 6. Prove. i. 29.

(...)] By [Calling] here, set in opposition to (...), doing any thing on
intuition of merit, is meant Gods peculiar favor and act of his special
Providence and Grace, in the dispensation of which he refers to himself a
freedom and liberty without respect tp any qualifications.

Verse 13. That the Text does not denote in it is proper extent and
signification the persons of Jacob and Esau, simply considered, but their
Posterity, appears:

1. From the Response of God to Rebecca, when she complained upon the childrens
struggling in her womb. Genesis xxv. 23. Two Nations are in thy womb, and two
manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels: and the one people shall
be stronger then the other: and the elder shall serve the younger. Now it is
plain, that the elder's subjection to the younger never had any completion in
their lifetime, but rather the contrary, as appears by their story.

2. This Expression [ Jacob have I loved, etc.] was not delivered or spoken
before the birth of Jacob and Esau, but some hundreds of years after; for it is
no where else to be found in Scripture, but in Mal. i. where the Prophet treats
not of the persons of Jacob and Esau, but of their Posterities, the Edumeans
and Israelites, it being no new thing to call whole Nations descending from the
same lineage, by the Brothers names from whom each sprung, as Numb. xx. 14. Thus
says thy Brother Israel -- and Deuteronomy. xxiii. 7. Thou shall not abhor an
Edomite, for he is thy Brother.

Again, Neither the love nor hatred of God in this place has any relation to a
peremptory Election to, or Reprobation from Eternal life and happiness: For

1. If this were loving from eternity, God could not afterward have given Jacob
and the people of Israel a Law, annexing a conditional benediction to it: For
that which God had decreed to them by an immutable and special Decree, could
not be promised to them under the condition of obedience; for it implies a
contradiction that a thing should be absolute and conditional at the same time,
and to the same persons.

2. If this love were absolute and eternal to Jacob and his Posterity, they
could not then have fallen from Gods grace and favor, which we find some of
them did, 1 Cor. x. 5. Heb. iii. 19.

As therefore the love here mentioned cannot signify an Election to eternal
life, so neither can the Hatred denote eternal Reprobation.

1. Because it is often taken otherwise in Scripture, comparatively for a less
degree of love, and therefore may admit of a more candid interpretation: Deuteronomy.
xxi. 15. If a man have two wives, one beloved and another hated, i. e. If he
have one that he loves less then the other; For it being lawful at that time to
divorce their wives, it would scarce ever happen, what the text implies, if
hating were taken properly: for who would retain a wife that he really and
truly hated, when he might put her away, and take another which he loved
better. So Genesis xxviii. 31. When the Lord saw that Leah was hated, i. e. as in
the precedent verse, loved with a less degree of affection then Rachel. After
the same manner must the words of Christ be expounded in the Gospel, Luke xiv.
26. If any man comes to me, (...), and hates not his Father and Mother -- i.
e. if he love not me more then them, he cannot be a true Christian.

2. That cannot be the object of such an eternal and implacable hatred, which
has no cause of hatred in it; but Esau had no cause in him, that God should
thus hate him: Before the children had done good or evil.

Verse. 16. (...)] we may here observe that they do very much misconstrue and
misapply the words of the Apostle, who make this the sense of them, as if it
were not at all requisite for obtaining life and eternal Salvation, that we
should live well, and diligently attend to the exercise and performance of
faith and good works: This I say, is a dangerous error and mistake, and every
holy man experiences the effects of the contrary to be most true. For 1 Cor.
ix. 24. all Christians are plainly and distinctly commanded (...), to run that
they may obtain the heavenly (...), and reward of their labors; (...) -- all
run, but one obtains the prize; (...), so run that ye may obtain. So likewise
Heb. xii. 1. -- (...), Let us run with patience -- And there is the same reason
of (...), Job. vii. 17. (...), If any man will do his will, he shall know of
the Doctrine -- And upon this account, incredulous and unbelieving persons are
reprehended for this very thing that they Will not come unto Christ, John v.
40. And Christ complains of Jerusalem (...), I would, but ye would not.
Wherefore when it is said here [It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runneth] we must not understand it of that Will whereby a man would do what God
commands him: But the sense is this, That it is not sufficient for the
acquisition of Divine favor and grace, that we seek it after any sort; but it
necessarily lies upon us, and stands us in stead to endeavor after it by that
way and means by which God has declared to us it may be acquired. And hence
the Apostle gives an indication of the fruitless attempts of the Jews in
contending with so much zeal and noise for the obedience of the Law, when God
required faith in his Son whom he had sent into the world of them, and had
openly declared that men should be accounted righteous, not by the works of the
Law, but by the faith of the Gospel.

Verse 18. The word (...) [hardens] is by many misunderstood, and therefore
will need some explication: That God hardened Pharaoh's heart the Scripture
testifies, but of the manner how it was done we are now to enquire. Some
understand this hardening of the heart to be a positive act of God, either by
conveying a new degree of obstinacy and refractoriness into it, or by intending
and corroborating that which was in it before: But this is neither agreeable to
the purity and simplicity of the Divine Nature, nor consentaneous to any
Economy which God has yet manifested to the World; for his Holiness is such
that he cannot be the cause or Author of any Impurity or Rebellion, which this
way of solution would certainly charge upon him. The Reverend and Learned Dr.
Hammond in his Annotations upon this place observes, That God is not said to
harden Pharaoh 's heart (although he predicted it before in Chap. iv. 21. and
vii. 3.) till after the sixth judgment, and the addition of a special warning
given him by Moses before that, and then it is said, Exodus ix. 12. as it were in
a new style, The Lord hardens Pharaoh's heart: By which computation of time
when God hardened Pharaoh's heart, he thinks it will appear what is the proper
intimation of hardening, viz. The total substraction of Gods grace of Repentance
from him, in the same manner as when one is cast into Hell, which Pharaoh at
that time had been, had it not been more for Gods Glory to continue him alive a
while in that desperate, irreversible condition, which sure was no whit worse
to him, but somewhat better and more desirable, then to have been adjudged to
those flames all that time. But methinks (with submission to more excellent
judgments) the main of this Explication is not so solid, so rational and
coherent as might be desired: For,

1. It may very well be questioned, Whether those plagues which were inflicted
on him after the immission of the sixth judgment, and consequently after God is
said to harden his heart, were not as efficacious for his amendment, and so
designed of God, as any of the former? That they were sufficiently convictive,
and of force and power enough to subdue and conquer his untamed spirit, if he
would have made a right use of them, is evident, as well from Gods upbraiding
the people of Israel of incredulity upon this very reason and account, that
they refused to be wrought upon by those many notable miracles and signs done
in the midst of them, Deuteronomy. xxix, 2, 3, 4. as from the temporarious penitence,
and sudden sensibility of his miscarriage which the actual and present
immission of judgment drew from him, Exodus ix. 27, 28. I have sinned this time
-- and so likewise Chap. x. 16, 17. That those after-judgments were also
intended of God for the emendation of this obstinate King is I think as clear
from the expostulation of Moses and Aaron with him, Exodus x. 3. 4. How long
will thou refuse to humble thy self? Let my people go -- which plainly
supposes, both that the designation of the Judgment was to humble him; and that
there was a possibility still of reducing him to that pliable and sequacious
temper. And if it were otherwise, these and the like menaces and threatenings
[If thou refuse to let my people go, I will do thus and thus unto thee] would
be wholly supervacaneous and ineffectual: Nay they would argue an unworthy
exprobration in God of his obstinate detention of the people, and refusal to
submit to his will, when he had not strength and power sufficient to attempt
the contrary.

2. It may well be doubted, Whether that Divine Goodness which is always ready
to breath upon the least spark of the life of God in every rational Being, and
assists every good motion and forwardness toward the formation of Gods holy
image in every man, would not likewise have been as urgent and efficacious in
Pharaoh, for the mollifying his obdurate spirit before he was taken out of the
world, had he rightly and duly managed those heavy punishments in order to his
melioration, i. e. if he would have complied with the will of God. The sum of
all therefore seems to be this, That Almighty God the ever-wise and benign
Creator of all things, being conscious to all the affections, intrigues and
hidden recesses of the spirit of Man, only knows how and when to apply a
sovereign remedy; and like a skilful Surgeon proportions his medicaments to
the nature and quality of the wound, and seldom makes use of those more
ungentle ways of cauterizing and excision, till necessity and the preservation
of the whole urge him to it. And even in this singular instance of Pharaoh, we
may trace the footsteps of Gods benignity and love, as that Holy and Pious
Father excellently well observes, Origin. Philocal. cap. 27.
(...) (...). Wherefore we may well interpret this hardening which is attributed
to God, to consist not in any positive act, nor yet in the total subtraction of
his grace: but to be an accidental effect of his kindness and mercy toward
Pharaoh, in removing that sharp and uneasy though salutary discipline, which
being not carefully and rightly made use of, became an occasion of a greater
hardness and obduracy; As, says the Father in the same Chapter, when a Master
forbears to punish a wicked servant, he says, (...), I have spoiled you, and I
have made you wicked, (...), i. e. In like manner those things which proceed
from Gods benignity and goodness, as if they had been the cause of Pharaoh 's
obduracy, are said to harden his heart. And the Philosopher spoke true when he
said, (...) That it is the greatest evil that possibly can befall a Criminal, to
be suffered to continue unpunished in wickedness.

Verse 22. (...)] To show his displeasure, i. e. The effect of his displeasure,
to punish by a notable and exemplary way, as he did Pharaoh; so the word is
used Luke xxi. 23. -- For there shall be great distress in the land, (...), i.
e. Punishment and Judgment the effect of Wrath upon this people. So likewise
Romans iii. 5. Is God unrighteous, (...), who punishes or takes vengeance? So
that this is far from what Beza and other Supralapsarians would infer, as if
this Demonstration of his anger were the prime and ultimate end which God
proposed in the eternal Reprobation of Men. For what can we imagine more
inconsistent and unsuitable with the Divine Nature, then to be eternally angry
with the innocent and undeserving? And what more contradicts the gracious
Revelation of God, whereby he declares himself propense to Mercy, and slow to
Anger against impenitent sinners, then this which makes him equally displeased
with the guiltless and criminal?

(...), i. e. Suffered with much patience and longanimity, punishing them not
so often, nor when he might justly do it: but letting them take as it were the
reins into their own hands, and break through all the fences and hedges whereby
the Divine Goodness sought to restrain them, into exorbitancy and impiety; and
so render themselves more incapable of a mild and gentle Economy. This being
the genuine sense, we can in no wise approve of their extravagant conjecture,
who take to themselves the liberty which they thanklessly give to God, of
making their wills and fancies the rule of their interpretations and actions,
that this (...), is only a bare (...) or forbearance of punishment complicated
and conjoined with a peremptory purpose of eternally excruciating and damning
those who were designed to destruction. For doubtless this longanimity of God
contains and runs upon the supposal of antecedent Exhortations, Threatenings and
Promises, as so many gracious methods to reduce men to Repentance; which cannot
without clear hypocrisy and dissimulation be affirmed of Reprobates in the
Supralapsarian sense.

(...), Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction] Here the Supralapsarians
endeavor to render (...) by Creari Vide Beza in hunc locum.
, whereby they would obtrude that God creates men vessels of wrath on purpose
to destroy them, without any consideration had to any qualifications whatever;
which being a Doctrine so absurd and unbecoming the Majesty of an Al-wise and
good God, it will be confutation enough to any rational person to rehearse it.
(...) therefore is an Hebraisme; for there being but few verbals in the Hebrew
tongue, a Particle is used for a Verbal, and signifies no more then fit or
ready, as Luke vi. 40. The Disciple is not above his Master; (...), but every
one that is perfect, shall be as his Master. For the Hebrew (...) which
signifies fit, and is usually rendered by (...), comes from the Verb (...),
which sometimes is rendered by (...), and sometimes by (...), Psalm. lxviii. 10.
and lxxiv. 16. and lxxxix. 38. By vessels of wrath, then are meant men who by
their own voluntary and heinous transgressions become so far liable to Gods
judgment, that his wrath may without any appearance of injustice be poured on
them, as vessels fit for no other use; and the adaptation or fitting of them
for a severe destruction, must be attributed to themselves, and to the
inflexibleness of their irreclaimable dispositions. Thus men are said in
Scripture (...), to fit themselves to destruction, in the same sense as they
are said to wrong their own souls, and to love death, Prove. viii. 36. to judge
themselves unworthy of everlasting life, Acts xiii. 46. To reject or render
ineffectual the Counsel of God against themselves, Luke vii. 30. Not that they
do directly and principally intend any such thing: but because they commit and
act those things, which do either naturally, or by virtue of the Divine
command, produce such an event and consequence. In like manner, on the
contrary, Men are said to work out their Salvation, Phil. ii. 12. To save
themselves, 1 Timothy iv. 16. To save their own souls, Luke ix. 24. because they
act and prosecute those things which have an indisputable tendency to such a
desired end.

For a Conclusion of this whole Discourse, I shall briefly examine these two
following Illations and Deductions of the Contra-Remonstrants, from the
Doctrine of Absolute and Irrespective Decrees.

1. That none can be a true believer or sincere Christian, who knows not when
nor how he was regenerated and born again by the Spirit; that is, (to speak in
their language) who cannot tell when he felt the mighty and efficacious power
of the Divine Spirit dashing asunder his strong heart, and gathering up the
broken shivers, and uniting them together, and changing them into a heart of
flesh, and infusing new qualities into the will, and raising the whole man from
death to life. See XI. and XII. Canons of the Dort. Synod, De homonis corrupt.
and convers^ ad Deau.

2. That every man who by those evidences, signs and marks of True Believers
prescribed to him, can collect himself to be such; that is, to be in a state of
Grace and Salvation, may assuredly believe, that he shall to the last Period of
his life, remain and (...) a living member of the Catholic Church, and
undoubtedly partake of everlasting bliss and glory. Attic. IX. and X. of the
Dort Synod. De Perseverantia Sanctorum.

Against the first of these I shall lay down these Conclusions:

1. That he is a true and sincere Believer, who has to his utmost endeavors
so mortified and subdued the body of sin, that he willingly harbors no vice,
nor takes any complacency in the impure motions of the brutish life: but
through a fixed belief in the Goodness of God displayed unto mankind through
the Lord Christ, resolutely presses forward to higher measures and degrees of
Christian perfection, and incessantly breaths after a fuller participation of
the Divine Nature. Such a man I look upon to be truly regenerate and born anew
of the Spirit of God, and to be affected, according to his proportion, as
Christ himself was affected, when he dwelt on earth, and conversed with men.
And though this Divine life, dispread and manifest it self by successive acts,
and shine not so full and bright as when it is near it is Center: yet it is as
truly a God-like Nature, as an Infant is a Man, though he be not so in growth
and stature. It is nothing but our selfwill which stands out against heaven,
and keeps such an impregnable fort against the grace of God; and whoever is
truly dead to it, and receives the gentle impressions of the Divine Spirit into
his soul, and acts correspondently to so holy a principle, he is certainly in
the Land of Life and Truth, and partakes of that blessed Nature, which cannot
rest among the dust and rubbish of this lower World: but separates whatever is
heterogeneous in the soul of man, and by perpetual and successful attempts,
restores again those Divine forms which shone gloriously in humane minds before
their unfortunate recession and retrogradation from the lucid fountain of their
everlasting joy and happiness.

2. The first actings of Grace in such a Man as I have above described, are
altogether undiscernible and imperceptible, being nothing else but the
preparatory Exertions of that Almighty Goodness, the Source and Father of all
things, for the fitting and adapting Men to receive the Divine Image and Form
of the Holy Jesus, according to the words of the Lord Christ, John vi. 44. No
man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him: and in
this the Nature of Man is wholly passive; and the only thing pertaining to him
is to see that he do not obstruct and hinder the progress of that efficacious
Love, by a cowardly submission to the importunate motions of iniquity and
unhallowed actions. Now the effluxes and operations of this Vital Principle,
are coeval with the first actings of Reason and discriminative Perception, and
extend themselves according to the dimensions of the intellectual Powers: but
no man is any more conscious of it is energy, then of the growth of his bones;
for so he that made the Nature of man and knows his frame, has told us, Luke
xvii. 20. The Kingdom of God, comes not with observation: And Mark iv. 26, 27.
So is the Kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and
should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up,
he knows not how. And when men are born again (...), of that incorrupible
seed, 1 Pet. i. 23.
sown in their hearts by the Eternal (...) (as Christ calls his Father, John
xv. 1.) it breaks through the clods and springs up, being cherished by the dew
of heaven, and the warmth of that immortal fire which passes through the
intellectual world, and melts and refines every lapsed Being from the
contracted filth of material concretions; and no man can say, Lo here I was
caught by the breath of God, or lo there was my resurrection from the
comfortless grave of sin and death; John. iii. 8.
For as the wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof,
but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that
is born of the Spirit. But this I would have understood of the ordinary way of
Gods dispensing his Grace, and not of that supernatural manner whereby he
converted Saul, casting him down to the Earth by a voice from heaven, nor of
the diffusion of the Spirit to the Heathens when first converted to the faith:
For such (as also notorious and gross sinners) may have some sensibility of
Divine Vegetation, and apprehension of some external circumstances attending
the New Birth unto righteousness. But for those who are born and educated under
Christian Parents, our Church has excellently well determined in the service
and office of Baptism, That they are Regenerated and born again, not only of
Water, but of the Spirit, by which their Natures are Sanctified; as we read of
the Prophet Jeremy, and John the Baptist, who received the spirit of holiness,
and were hallowed from their Mothers wombs; and for any man to enquire of such,
or for them curiously to search after some preternatural stirrings and motions
of the Divine Spirit in their souls, by which to discern the first dawnings of
the grace of God upon them, is as impertinent as it would be to demand of them
when first they heard or perceived the nutrition and augmentation of the parts
of their Natural bodies.

3. The usual way and method by which the first disseminators of the Gospel
implanted and begot the image of Christ in the minds of men was, by exhorting
them in the first place, to the plain and obvious duties and exercises of
Morality, such as Justice and Equity, Temperance and Chastity, great love and
compassion toward all men, relieving and comforting the necessitous and
calamitous according to their several wants and indigencies, and such like acts
of Virtue and Reason, which are the preparatory qualifications for the
introducing the Divine Spirit to attempt the formation of the living Image of
Jesus Christ; and between these and the Divine life, there is the same
cognation as between the blade and the full-ear'd corn. For it is utterly
impossible to conceive the life of God without them, or to imagine that he can
be really Baptized into the life and spirit of Jesus, who is unjust to his
Neighbor, and unpitiful and contemptive of the compassionate needs and sighs
of his poor Brother. It is sufficiently seen, and the sad experience of every
man will declare it to him, how deplorably Apostate our Natures are, when we
first come into the World; and how vitiously inclined our souls when they begin
to exert themselves in acts of Reason and Intellect: so that they appear almost
breathless and inactive to the concerns of Immortality, or whatever offers to
better their condition, and pull them out of the mire and clay wherein their
feet are held. And to think that God will forcibly draw them out, and hale them
like unwilling captives into a state to which they have no cognation or vital
congruity awakened in them; beside that it is derogatory to his spotless and
pure Nature, it is likewise inconsistent with the nature of the thing it self,
considering men's minds so vitiated, and totally discomposed by a long and
assiduous inflexion and distortion to degenerate Vice. For Divine generations
as well as Natural, require a suitable proportionateness, and as every matter is
not capable of conciliating and uniting with every formative principle: so
neither is every temper of humane souls congruously disposed for the inaction
of that Divine Spirit, which never falls to work, but where the subject is
rendered pliable and sequacious by timely preparations and fit dispositions and
capacities. And if it were otherwise, that mere Power, or the Naked Presence of
the Divine Essence dispreading it self through the whole Creation, were
sufficient to give us any hopeful expectation of our Spiritual Regeneration by
it, without any precedent assimilation or fitting dispositions, I do not see
how this boundless and compassionate Goodness can behold the World in so sad
and miserable a plight, the whole Earth being filled with Violence, and the
Habitations of cruelty and Oppression, and men's spirits so degenerated, that
saving their outward shape, and a little more cunning and craft in contriving
and executing self-designs and interests, they are hardly distinguishable from
the Beasts of the field; I do not see (I say) how that Love, which is the
inmost center of the Deity, and from whence flow all the perfective
irradiations of his blessed Nature, can behold the sons of men so unlike
himself, and yet not reform and change them, since the business lies wholly
upon the exertion of his Almighty Power. But we finding no such thing, we may
confidently averr, that there are some precedaneous qualifications required to
the perfection of the Divine birth, and these can be no other then Justice and
Righteousness, purity and abstracted affections from Mundane forms, Chastity
and moderation of bodily pleasures, and a dear and tender regard of the whole
Creation. Which things have so near an affinity with the Divine life, that the
one necessarily inferres the presence and existence of the other, these
requisites being the basis and foundation upon which the heavenly building is
framed: 1 King. vi. 7.
now as in the structure of the material Temple there was neither sound of ax
nor hammer; in like manner that heavenly edifice which the Eternal Architect
endeavors to erect in the soul of every man, is completed and perfected
without any sound or noise, the Holy Jesus neither crying nor lifting up his
voice in the streets, to give a sign of his approach when he renews and forms
his image in the sons of men. For that image which God shapes out in our
Natures, is not any thing different and distinct from our moral and inherent
Righteousness, or any new infused quality; but the exaltation and freeing of
that principle which though weak and depressed by a load of corruption; yet
being immortal and incorruptible, bears a Divine stamp, and exerts it self in
acts of Sobriety, Justice and Goodness, and being assisted and corroborated by
the powerful conduct of the Spirit of God, successively displayes it self, and
continually arises to greater measures, till the living efformation of Christ
be perfectly completed. An instance of this we have in Cornelius, Acts x. and
the more devout and religious Heathens, in whom the life of God was in a good
measure radicated, and discovered it self in his frequent Prayers and
Charitable actions; who when he was renewed and sanctified by the gracious
illapse and descent of the Holy Ghost, was not divested of those Moral
accomplishments of his Nature, or endued with any thing different from them;
but his Righteousness and perfections of his mind were increased and
sublimated, and fitted for the rellishing such delicate and tender impressions:
which things being seriously considered, it cannot be that any one should
perceive the beginning, or determine the time of the vegetation and increase of
the Divine Image and Nature.

2. The second illation which concludes the infallible certainty of his
Perseverance who is once in a state of Grace, and collects himself to be under
the immutable decree of life by those Characteristicks delivered from the mouth
of no mean Dictator of that pleasing Doctrine; as it is destructive of Piety
and casts a malevolent aspect upon true Religion and Virtue: so it has not the
least print or footstep in the Holy Scriptures, nor can allege any thing but
fancy and the prejudice of impotent affections to maintain it is credit in the
world, as will appear from these subsequent Propositions.

1. That the Decrees of God, whether of life or death, look upon men according
to the exigency and import of their present states and conditions, not of their
potential or future Beings. As suppose God foresee and discern, that this man
righteous at present, will hereafter forsake his righteousness, and apostatize
from the holy Commandment and do wickedly; yet so long as he continues
righteous, he is under the favorable eye of Heaven, and is treated as one
whose name is written in the Book of Life. Whosoever does righteousness, is
righteous: but he that commits sin, is of the Devil -- 1 John iii. 7, 8. And
more plainly yet, The righteousness of the righteous, shall not deliver him in
the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not
fall thereby in the day that he turns from his wickedness -- Ezekiel. xxxiii.
12, 13, 14, 15. The result of these places, is this, That particular men, or
the persons of men, from time to time, come under the Eternal Decrees of Love
or Hatred, according to their actual and present state of righteousness or
unrighteousness. For if God decreed life and death upon the consideration of
future sin and holiness, he may as well decree a reward and punishment
respectively for that which men would have been engaged in, had they lived in
this World to all eternity; which directly contradicts that Scripture wherein
we are said to give an account for the things which we have already done, not
which we should have done, had we continued longer in the body. And hence it is
that the righteous man, who is now in the love and favor of God, being hardened
again through his own negligence and the deceitfulness of sin, may relapse into
that state, which the Decree of death takes hold of: and of such a man is that
of St. Peter to be understood, 2 Peter ii. 21. It had been better for such a
man not to have known the way of righteousness; then after he has known it, to
turn from the holy commandment delivered to him. And when the righteous man
degenerates from his former faith, and the enemy takes advantage and oppresses
the Divine life through his carelessness and folly, God charges all his past
sins upon him, and recals his justification whereby he was before esteemed as
righteous in his sight; which is intimated in the Parable Matthew. xviii. where
he that had the debt forgiven him, because he dealt so harshly and ungently
with his Fellow Servants, was again called in question, and the whole sum
charged upon him; and Christ applies it to our present purpose, verse 35. So
likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not every one his Brother their trespasses. For we must know that God
pardons our iniquities by parts; and as we grow in Virtue and Holiness, so his
displeasure decreases and is taken off, and he that is justified becomes yet
more justified, and walks in the light, and the breath of God enkindles the
heavenly fire, and fans it into flames and ardors, and so long the man is safe:
but if he return to folly, the anger of God is renewed as at the beginning, and
the last state of that man is worse then the first.

2. That true and real Believers may relapse, and be confined and brought in
bondage to the strait and narrow laws of their own self-wills, and fall from
the life of God, and become settled and radicated in a life of self-seeking,
and guided by the parsimonious principles of Pleasure and Interest, is the
voice of Scripture and Reason; the former of which palpably and undeniably
concludes and determines the case; Heb. x. 38, 39. Now the just shall live by
faith; (...), but if he (not any man, as our Translation improperly supplies
it) i. e. (...), the just man, who before is said, to live by his faith; if he
draw back, Gods soul shall have no pleasure in him: and what this drawing back
is, we may collect from the subsequent words, But we are not of them who draw
back unto perdition -- So again, Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6. For it is impossible (i. e.
very difficult and hard) for the (...), those who were once enlightened (i.e.
Baptized; for Baptism was called by the Ancients (...), illumination) and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and
have tasted the good word of God, and the Powers of the world to come; if if
they shall fall away, to renew them again to repentance, seeing they crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. And if this
were to be understood of Hypocrites, what need the expression of (...)? For
unto what should they be renewed and reinstated, their former condition being
in it self so deep an unregeneracy? and from what is it they do (...), fall
away, when their distempered natures were never recovered by the practice of
any real and substantial holiness? Wherefore this must necessarily be meant of
those who had in a good measure subdued the motions of the inferior life, and
left (...), the principles and rudiments of Christianity, and were arising
(...), to perfection. For the tasting the heavenly gift, and the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come, are no more to be understood of a
slight touch and transient perception, then the same phrase when it is used of
the Lord Christ, that he tasted death for every man, Chap. ii. 9. But that as
he did really feel and experience the effects of death conquering his mortal
life; so these here spoken of, did truly relish and apprehend the sweetness of
Christianity from a clear discriminating sense of it is native excellency, and
felt the Divine Spirit destroying the irregular appetites of the inferior life,
and sanctifying their Natures by a blessed inhabitation. To these we may add,
Ezekiel. xviii. 24. But when the righteous turns away from his righteousness,
and commits Iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, shall he live? All his Righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned -- What can be more manifest than this, if men would clear up
their apprehensions and look upon things as things, and not content themselves
with bare names and shadows? For that the righteous man in the Text, should
signify an Hypocrite, and one seemingly righteous, is the most distorted gloss
that can be put upon it:

1. Because the righteous is here opposed to the wicked person: but if it were
to be expounded of one seemingly righteous, who is so much worse then an open
profane person, in that he acts impiety under the cover of Religion, the words
must run thus, When the righteous man (i. e. the Hypocrite) turns away from his
Hypocrisy, and acts according to the abominations of the wicked man: and if by
the [righteous] be meant an Hypocrite, what is to be understood by the [wicked]
to which it is opposed?

2. This righteous man, is said to live by his righteousness: but the Scripture
no where says, That the Hypocrite shall live by his counterfeit holiness; but
directly the contrary, The hope of the Hypocrite shall perish. And I must
confess, I do not at all understand the intent and purpose of God in inserting
so many Cautions and Exhortations to Watchfulness and Diligence in the Gospel,
if there be no possibility of a true Believer's desertion of the Faith; which
questionless the Illustrious Compilers of the Church of England's Confession of
Faith had an eye to, when in Artic. xvi. they express themselves thus, After we
have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from the grace given to us, and
fall into sin: and this is the dictate of Reason; for Habits as they are
acquired by assiduous and repeated acts, so they may likewise be lost by
inobservance and negligence, according to that of the Poet: Neglectis urenda
filex innascitur agris.
For the soul of man being a perpetual motion and activity, will be always
catching at something, and if once it cool and flag in the ways of
Righteousness, will undoubtedly be wrought off, and spend it is strength and
powers in the service of that other principle, which being not wholly
mortified, will certainly revive and confirm it is hold, when the Counsels and
Inspirations of the Divine life are in any measure rejected, and it left free
to regain the Dominion from whence it was most justly, by the powerful and
efficacious influence of Gods grace, detruded. And he that shall further
consider that long and confirmed degeneracy the soul lay under, before a new
and Divine principle began to act in it, and how agreeable the objects and
impressions of sense are to be our present state, and how eligible by us, will
perceive that the Nature of Man may often be overcome, and the Divine life driven
from it is rightful throne, till by a sharp and persevering contention it be
thoroughly settled and radicated in a quiet peace and tranquillity by putting
all it is enemies under it is feet.

But for a more clear inspection into this Doctrine of Perseverance, we must
recurr to what was said above Chap. V. concerning the Liberty of Man's Will, and
consider all true and sincere Believers under a threefold state; for the Divine
life arises gradually, and increases in due measures and proportions, till it
arrive to a full and complete perfection, and invest the soul of man with
immortality and glory.

1. The Scripture speaks of the (...), Infants, and (...), Newborn babes, who
are fed with the Milk of the Word, with the plain Doctrines and Principles of
Christianity, their Criterion being not yet purged enough to have a true sense
and relish of stronger meat, and the more sublime and Mysterious part of
Christianity: And these are those Lambs which the Lord Christ the great
Shepherd, when he was leaving the World, so affectionately bequeathed to the
care and conduct of St. Peter, redoubling his request in those passionate
terms, Feed my Lambs. And this is the sense of that Mystical Prophecy denoting
the compassionate care of Christ, Gathering the Lambs with his arm, and
carrying them in his bosom, and gently leading those that are with young, who
are pregnant with the Divine form and Image of the Holy Jesus. From this
infant-state of Grace the descent is easy, by reason of the strength and
powerfulness of the adverse principle, which has taken so firm and deep a
radication, and watches all opportunities to propagate and dispread it is
infectious Nature; that the man is perpetually within the confines of danger,
till by strong and continued habits of Virtue, he have totally mortified and
extirpated every lust, passion and inordinate desire which hinders and
obstructs his passage to that quiet and serene state, where all things are
plain, easy and delightsome: Hence is that admonition of St. Paul to Timothy,
1 Epist. c. iii. v. 6.
that he suffer not (...), a Novice, one newly converted and brought into the
faith of Christ, to take upon him the office of a Bishop; because that state of
Grace is subject to infinite hazards and dangers by reason of the potenr
opposition of the contrary life, and the prevalency of the Corporeal Nature,
which till it be perfectly subdued, will always breath a fuliginous steam, and
more or less obnubilate Reason, the eye and guide of the soul.

2. There are (...) young men which have overcome the wicked one, and which
have in a great measure brought low and weakened the power of the unrighteous
Nature; such who are (...), perfect men, and through a faithful and constant
exercise and uninterrupted habit of Holiness, have a true discriminating sense
of good and evil, and have purified and sublimated their intellectual powers,
by an assiduous mortification and eradication of every perverse desire and
motion of the inferior life. To these well-grown Christians true Religion
displayes it self, and appears in it is native beauty and excellency, and they
embrace it with delight and joy; and looking beyond the Horizon of time and
change, behold nothing but a bright and never-ceasing day: and this fills them
with a peaceful consolation, that the just Judge of Heaven and Earth will not
fail to crown his own life witn that glory and felicity which he himself
partakes of in the highest heavens. But though this state be so glorious and
lovely; yet it is not wholly out of the reach of danger, but needs often
admonitions, and great diligence, accompanied with frequent acts of Devotion,
which may fan and kindle the heavenly fire, lest the dying and perishing
principle of the contrary life revive and get the upper hand. This degree of
grace, although it be able to overcome many and great difficulties, and defeat
the latent stratagems of powerful enemies; yet it is sometimes, though not so
easily or frequently as the former, captivated by the undiscerned force of
Pride or Hypocrisy or some other refined sin. For it may so happen, that a
good man, who cannot be drawn to the commission or acting of a gross impiety by
any temptations in the world; yet may fall through the prevalency of an
intellectual Vice, and court the shadow and fantastic image of sin, and yet
never descend into the brutish and ferine life of action.

3. There are (...), Fathers, who are arrived to the highest perfection the
nature of Man is capable of in this life, and these a Plantonist would call
Heroically Good, although this Divine frame and God-like temper be infinitely
more precious and transcendent, then the highest reach and comprehension of
pure Platonisme, and not attainable by the exercise (...), of Paradigmatical
Virtues, which wholly extirpated the first motions of sin, and did in their
sense (...), Deifie a man, and transform them into Intellect, and place him out
of the noise and perturbations of the inferior life, in a quiet and serene
contemplation of the first and ever-blessed Author of all things. Here the
whole will and desires are so far conformable and resigned to the Will of God,
as the ordinary course of things and the earthly state will permit, and the Man
is perfectly dead to himself, and to every relish of bodily motions, and the
life of God triumphantly seated in the mind, from whence it rules and governs
every thought, word and action with unspeakable ease and pleasure, and
replenishes the soul with a confident and steadfast belief of her future
happiness and immortality; and though for the present she be clothed and
entombed in an earthly body, yet is she wholly and perfectly Divine, bearing
about with her the regenerated characters and impresses of the blessed Image of
the Son of God, an indissoluble union with whom she incessantly breaths after,
and being thus (...), a mortal God, she is no sooner disengaged and set free by
the Divine Providence from the weight and burden of terrestrial encumbrance:
but she passes secure through the caliginous fumes of this lower world, into
the flowery tracts of bliss and glory. And from this state there is only left a
possibility of lapsing, the Divine Life being so fully and completely settled,
and repossessed of it is ancient throne, that it will, maugre all the opposition
of the Powers of darkness, undoubtedly instate the soul in all that happiness
God made her for.

Some REFLECTIONS On a late Discourse of Mr. PARKERS, Concerning The Divine
Dominion and Goodness.
I Should now have concluded this Discourse, but that I thought my self obliged
to take notice of some Positions of this Ingenious Author, which seem to
interfere and clash with what I have written. In pursuance of which, I shall
lay down these subsequent Axioms, or Moral Truths, which will need no
Probation, but appear full of their own natural Light and Evidence to any sober
and unprejudiced mind; and by them I shall examine the main things contained in
his Discourse.

Axiom I. That there is something immutably and Eternally Good.
WHat I mean by Moral Good and Evil, I have declared elsewhere; and therefore
shall only in brief add, That Moral Goodness is nothing but an agreeableness,
harmony or convenience; so that things are then Morally Good, when they
correspond and unite with the inward sense of our souls, that is, with our
Intellectual or Rational Natures: which congruity when we feel in our selves we
call those things good. And whatever is really and truly Good, is immutably and
eternally so, not made so by any positive sanction of command: but the result
of Gods own Moral Being, which he can no more swarve from, then destroy
himself. This is called an Eternal Law, and is nothing but Right Reason; whence
God being the highest Reason, he is called by Aristotle, de Mundo, Cap. 6.
(...) And Tully, Phil. 1. says, Lex nihil aliud est quam recta and a numine
Deorum ratio, imperans honesta, prohibensque contrari. And by this there is an
affinity between God and all his Intellectual productions, forasmuch as Right
Reason is the same in us as in him, (and Tully intimates Lib. 1. de legibus) it
is that Eternal Law which is common to Gods and Men, and begets the similitude
between God and them: Quid est enim, non dicam in homine, sed in omni coelo
atque terra, Ratione divinius? quae cum adolevit atque perfecta est, nominatur
rite Sapientia. Est igitur (quoniam nihil est ratione melius, eaque est in
homine and in Deo) prima homini cum Deo Rationis societas. Quae cum sit lex,
lege quoque consociati homines cum Diis putandi sumus. This harmony therefore
and agreeableness of Moral Objects to our Intellectual parts, is antecedent to
the things themselves, so that they are not good because God for example
commands them, but therefore they are enjoined, because there is an innate
Goodness in them. As, that a Triangle has three Angles I learn indeed from
sense, but more perfectly from that innate Idea which I have in my own mind,
which would certainly have concluded so; though it had never been the object of
my senses.

Axiom II. That of that which is good, one is better then another.
THis is evident from the difference and gradual declension of lives from the
first root and center of all Beings. There is no life so languid and unactive,
but ought to be reckoned among those things that are good; because Being simply
considered, is better and more desirable then not Being, although the more
noble any Being is, so much the better it is accounted. And as there is this
difference in respect of Beings themselves; so likewise in reference to their
felicity, both in regard of it is magnitude and duration: Thus the felicity of
men is better then that of Brute Animals: for the Happiness of any creature
consists in the free enjoyment and exercise of it is natural faculties and
endowments, and the larger and more comprehensive the the faculties and
capacities of any Being are, the greater is it is felicity. As to duration, that
a longer is better than a shorter Duration, it is so palpable that it needs no
further mentioning. And this rule holds good in Moral qualities and affections:
Power it self is a Perfection; though as to it is exercise, it be indifferent
either to Good or Evil: but Wisdom is more excellent then Power, forasmuch
as it is able to direct, guide and steer the results of Power; otherwise Wisdom
and Knowledge would include no more perfection, then the force of a
Thunderbolt, or the furious agitation of a whirlwind. And Goodness is more
excellent and precious then Wisdom, for Wisdom without Goodness degenerates
into Craft and Subtlety: Moreover, the properties and effects of Goodness are
more diffusive and desirable then Knowledge, and more perfective of the subject
they reside in.

Axiom III. That the best or highest Quality, Mode, or Attribute in any Being,
will obtain the first place in operation.
FRom hence it came to pass, that the Platonists considering Goodness, Wisdom
and Power, as distinct qualities in created Beings, and discerning so great an
inequality between them, they grew confident they would likewise retain their
Essential differences when exalted into Substantial life; and therefore the
Supreme Deity, the first root and fountain of all things, Cyril. lib. 8.
advers. Julian.
they call (...), the second (...), and the last (...), each one abating
something of the perfection of the first, (...). But we need not ascend so high
for the Explication of this Axiom, for if we do but look into our selves we
may plainly discern the Truth of it. All the Powers of any Being are not alike,
some are more capacious and lively, others steril, narrow and contracted; but
that faculty which is the most precious and Sovereign, has always the first
and chiefest place in acting. Man (as Aristotle observes) consists of a double
Nature, Moral. Eudem. l. 7. c. 15.
according to which his whole life is governed and framed, (...). The (...), he
calls that which the Stoics express by (...), and (...), the Sovereign and
Imperatorial Powers of the Soul, and the (...), is the same with the (...), the
ferine and brutish part, with the Platonists. Now the Ruling part being more
Noble and better, then that part which was made to be subject and to obey;
hence it comes to pass, that in the true and natural state of the Soul, the
(...), obtains the chief place in operation, although possibly there may be
something in man's soul more precious then Reason, and is indeed (...), the
flower and summity of the mind, which we may term (...), that faculty of the
soul which perceives the relish, savor and goodness of Virtue, and naturally
embraces and joys in that which Right Reason approves as Good. For as there is
a kind of sense in the lower or Plastic Powers of the Soul, whereby they
dislike ungrateful and unsuitable objects, even when our will and perception has
nothing to do in it: so there is something in us that exults and triumphs, and
naturally joins it self with infinite satisfaction and delight, when our
Intellect and Reason only give a judgment of the Essence and Truth of moral
objects.

Axiom IV. That what is best in any Being, is the Rule and measure of all
other qualities.
HEnce Man having a double life within him, Intellectual and Animal, which the
Sacred Writings call Flesh and Spirit; and both these having different
inclinations and objects, the higher life ought to control the lower, and
reduce all it is appetites and motions to a conformity to it is severer Dictates
and Prescriptions; which in a moral sense is the meaning of Man's having
Dominion over the Fowls of the Air, and Fish of the Sea. In like manner, Will,
and Power, and Sovereignty, are all resolved into Goodness; and if at any time
they are exercised without it, they loose their Natures, and degenerate into
selfishness and Tyranny. And it is absolutely necessary that the Best, should
be the measure of all other faculties and modes in us; because our chief
happiness consisting in our conjunction with the most Absolute and Perfect
Good, and that which is Best in us uniting with it, it will infallibly follow,
that that which is the most Divine in us, should command and rule all other
Faculties whatever. And this holds good in the Moral Essence of God, for
Goodness being more precious and sovereign then any other Attribute, it must
needs be by the foregoing Axiom, the measure of all the rest.

Axiom V. That Being is no longer Eligible, then it is tolerably happy.
THat a Misery or Calamity exceeding the happiness of our Beings, is worse then
not Being, is plain at first sight; for bare Existence, though it be a term of
Perfection: yet when it is charged with a surplusage of misery above the
benefit that accrues by it, it destroys the Reasons of Being, which are
chiefly the conveniences and opportunities of acting according to the proper
faculties of any Being. And common experience shows us how unable and unfit we
are for the exercise of any functions of life, when a sharp and acute pain
seazes on us; and if this dolorous sense be fierce, vehement and durable, it is
a question, Whether it will not perfectly extinguish all Vital congruity, and
reduce us to a condition altogether the same with Nonentity? For to be, and
not to be conscious of, and perceive our own Beings, are one and the same
thing. And he that well considers this, will not be apt to pain and excruciate
any Being, howsoever vile and contemptible, unless upon good Reasons and
Causes. For certainly though in a moral sense we may piously say, That all
things were made for man; yet to say, There is no other Physical Reason of
their Beings, is too bold and presumptuous an Assertion, they being (so many I
mean as are capable of sense) endued with faculties in whose use they enjoy and
solace themselves.

Axiom VI. A present Evil that brings with it a Good greater then what that
Evil deprived us of, is to be looked upon as Good.
THus an untimely death is to be accounted an Evil in it self, but yet ought to
be looked upon as Good by him who is thereby raised to the participation of a
higher and more exalted life. This Consideration made Socrates say, That Death
would indeed be hard and sharp to him, (...) Such are all the Afflictions that
befall a man in this World, Evil for the present, forasmuch as they are
accompanied with trouble and pain; but yet are to be esteemed Good, because
they teach us the lubricity of all mundane joys, and inflame our Love of
Virtue, and fix our desires upon an immortal Good, which amidst all the
uncertain revolutions of this Region of death and misery, will never leave us,
but conduct us to the blessed mansions of life and peace. The constant belief
of this drew that Generous and Noble speech from Socrates, Epict. Enchirid. c.
79.
(...).

Having laid down these Moral Principles, which are nothing but the plain and
genuine productions of Right Reason, I shall now examine the Authors Discourse
by them, and show wherein his Arguments are weak and inconclusive in reference
to bis main design.

The first thing therefore that I shall take notice of is, his stating the true
ground and foundation of Gods Sovereignty and Dominion over man, page 20, 21,
etc. which he does by Arbitrating the Dispute between the Arminians and
Calvinists; the one assert, That it bottoms upon the Benefit of Creation; and
the other ground it upon the unlimitedness of Gods Power. The first of these (he
says) are evidently mistaken, because God was from all eternity invested with
a Power of doing any thing that was not misbecoming his Divine Perfections --
but God being always Infnitely Perfect, could not acquire any new Excellence
from the Worlds Creation, and therefore the Collation of Benefits cannot beget
any new Power in him; because the Power which he had antecedently to all his
benefits, was not capable of being made greater --

To which I Reply,

1. That Dominion and Power, as it signifies Sovereignty, are Relative terms,
and therefore if we could suppose or imagine any time wherein there were no
Creatures in Being, Dominion would then be improperly attributed to God;
because if he had Dominion, there must be some Subjects existent of his
Dominion: and therefore though God by creating the World, acquired no new
Excellence or Perfection; yet he had some new Mode or Qualification which he
had not before: as that he was the Father of the Intellectual, and Maker of the
Corporeal World; which would be improper terms before he had brought any thing
into Being. Thus although God know, and have as it were a perfect Scheme of all
future things possible to be known; yet his conception or knowledge of the same
thing when future and possible, and actually existent, is not the same; for
when it is actually brought into Being, he acquires a new manner of knowledge
of it; for it is impossible that the conception of futurity and actual
Existence should be the same. Therefore I say, though the Creation of an
Intellectual Being, do not formally beget any new Power in God, which was not
antecedently in him; yet it begets a new mode and qualification of his Power,
whereby the Creature may justly expect to be dealt withal according to the
Nature and capacities, which that Infinite Power placed in it.

2. The Collation of Benefits, invests the Creatures with a Right or Privilege
of justly hoping for all such fair and equitable dealings from God, as shall
best suit with those faculties he endued them withal. For Gods very Donation of
Being to the Creatures, is as it were, a silent contract or promise, That his
whole Economy toward them, shall be equal and righteous, and that he will
never take from them any the least degree of that felicity and beatitude he was
graciously pleased to conferr upon them at the first moment of their Existence
without their own sin and fault.

Upon these grounds our Author might with greater plausibility of Reason, have
founded Gods Dominion upon the Right of Creation, then upon Gods absolute and
unlimited Power, which he confesses page 24. to be bounded by an internal
Principle of Goodness, which may be said to tie and restrain God not to do any
thing repugnant to this Principle of Goodness. So that if the exercise of Power
be limited and confined by this precious Attribute of Goodness, this were a
more sure ground of Gods Dominion over the Creatures in my apprehension, then
that which he has pitched upon, as will appear from Axiom III. And to say,
that the Reason why God cannot do any thing repugnant to his Goodness, proceeds
from a circumscription set and choose by himself, which he cannot transgress
because he will not, is to introduce an Arbitrary Deity, and very much
Derogatory to his spotless Nature, whose Goodness, Justice and Holiness are as
necessary as his Existence; therefore that God cannot act any thing indecorous
and unbecoming himself, arises not from any Restraint or Confinement
arbitrarily imposed upon himself: but from the necessary Perfection of his
Nature, and from those Eternal and Immutable laws of Justice and Righteousness,
which are nothing but his own Moral Being. That I may therefore more fully
declare the weakness and invalidity of this conceit of our Author, viz. That
Arbitrary Power is the ground of Gods Sovereignty and Dominion over his
Creatures, I shall endeavor to enervate those Propositions, by which he would
strengthen and confirm it.

1. First then (says he page 5.) God has Power either utterly to destroy our
Beings, or to inflict upon us so many calamities as shall leave us in a
condition only preferable to that of Nonexistence --

When we speak of God, our conceptions of him ought to be Generous and Noble;
and we ought to look upon him as an Eternal Rectitude and Perfection, who never
acts any thing but in conformity to his own blessed and righteous Nature. Now
that pregnant Womb which brought forth the whole Creation, being Infinite
Goodness by Axiom III. it will follow, that the same Goodness is infinitely
concerned to keep in Being the productions of it is own fertile Nature; for
though it be true, that our very Beings, are the issues of Infinite Power: yet
it is as certain, that this Power is surrounded with Immense Goodness, which
from the Reasons of it is own Nature, will infallibly do all that Good which at
any time lies in it is Power to do, and is consistent with the Nature and
Capacities of the subject, about which it is exercised. Since then Being is
better then Not-being, and all Creatures capable of an Eternal Duration, as
well of continuing one day or year, Infinite Goodness is obliged to keep all
things in Being. The further proof of this shall be showed anon. I might here
likewise suggest to Mr. P. that Things are the blessed emanations of Gods
exuberant Goodness, and depend upon him as emanative effects upon their causes;
nor will this be invalidated by Objecting, That then God could not properly be
said to have Created the World; For besides that Aquinas himself defines
Creation by Actus Emanativus, there is no Incongruity (say they) to affirm,
that all things are the Emanative effects of Gods pregnant Goodness; because,
to Create is nothing but to give Being or Existence to things; and this is
true, though every thing be an Emanative effect of Gods Life and Essential
Vigor. This I look upon to be as Rational and Concinnous an Hypothesis, as
that wherein Mr. P. attributes such a Sovereignty and Dominion of God over his
Creatures (the basis of which is Unlimited Power) as that he may at any time
either annihilate them, or inflict upon them so many calamities as shall render
their conditions only preferable to Nonexistence.

2. His second Proposition is only a further Enlargement and Explication of his
first; For if God (says he) have an Absolute Power over an innocent Persons
life, and all it is appendant Privileges to take them away, he may certainly do
the same upon any occasion. Thus he visits the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children, by bringing their Posterity into those evil circumstances, into which
he might have brought them by virtue of his Supreme Dominion; though not only
themselves, but their Progenitors had been faultless.

To which I answer, That there is no instance in Scripture, wherein God
punishes an innocent Person by virtue of his Supreme Dominion. It Is true, when
God inflicts Calamities upon the Children for their Parents faults, the
Posterity are innocent of those particular Crimes of their Progenitors which
caused the Judgment or Calamity; but they were criminal otherwise, and
therefore if God take away their lives, it is upon this account, that they have
rendered themselves obnoxious by their Personal faults, and by that Economy,
serves other designs of his Providence. Wherefore when God takes away the life
of a Virtuous Son to punish a Wicked Father, it is not properly to be accounted
an Evil to the Son, because Gods righteous Providence compensates it with a
greater Good. See Axiom VI. From these particular instances, he descends to
the consideration of Original sin, which he places in nothing but in the evil
and irregular crasis and temperament of our bodies, which Punishment might have
been inflicted upon us, though Adam had never sinned: But

1. Can this suit with the eternal Righteousness of the just Governor of the
World, to Create Intellectual Beings, holy and good; and then without any fault
of theirs, to thrust them into such cadaverous bodies, where they shall be
almost necessitated to trade with Hell and Damnation, and it may be never
recover themselves from that Lethargick state of sin and vice, or regain their
ancient and virtuous freedom? And though Mr. P. shift this off upon Adam's
Prevarication and Transgression; yet he says, The Consideration of Gods
Sovereignty and Dominion, will warrant such an Act upon guiltless Persons. Sure
Mr. P. has a very mean conceit of Gods most Blessed Nature, if he think those
beautiful Daughters of Heaven, the souls of men, can be thus murdered by those
Benign Hands that first gave them life: Had he considered that glorious beauty,
wherewith the soul of Man was once possessed, and of which now that she is born
into the World she retains but a very slender memory, conversing with it as it
were in a Dream, and beholding a glimpse of it through the cranies of
Mortality, and had he beheld this Eternal Pulchritude thrown from it is
Celestial Mansion, and all those living rays of Virtue, and efflorescences of
Divinity plunged into an obscure and dull piece of Earth, and that by the
Blessed Author of all things, he could not but infinitely resent such an harsh
Act.

2. Are not all our faculties very much depraved and vitiated, insomuch that
there is in us a natural proclivity to Vice, and we daily make choice of
forbidden instances? Are not our Understandings very dark and blind, our Wills
refractory and stubborn, and our Affections violent and headstrong for the
most part in the prosecution of base and unworthy objects? And if this be our
Case as we come into the World, as certainly it is, and much worse, Original
sin must be a real depravity of our souls, and not an ill temperament of our
bodies.

The Author having determined the Measure and Extent of Gods Sovereignty and
Dominion, according to his own fancy and humor, he endeavors page 25. to
frame such an Idea of Divine Goodness as may correspond with the Notion he has
pitched upon of Gods Dominion, and therefore he tells us, That the Idea of God
consists mainly in his Dominion and Sovereignty, and that the Notion of him in
Scripture never refers to his Essence, but always to his Power and Empire --
But he must give me leave to take the same liberty in rejecting so bold an
Assertion, that he does in obtruding it upon the World; however, I shall be so
fair and candid to him, as not to contradict what he says, without showing him
a Reason for it: The most consistent Idea that we can frame of God is, That he
is a Being endued with Absolute Perfection; now there are no Perfections in the
Deity, but what may be referred to these three, Infinite Goodness, Wisdom and
Power, which being not of equal worth and excellency by Axiom II. it will
follow, That what is most precious, is likewise most active and energetical,
and therefore must be the standard and measure of all the rest, by Axiom III.
and IV. Wherefore, when we frame any Notion, or make any Representation of God,
Reason it self will tell us, That we ought to express him by that which is most
precious and Sovereign in him, which is not Will and Power, but Perfect
Goodness. And methinks the Scripture mightily favors this, 1 John iv. 16. God
is Love, says the Apostle; which Notion, if it refer not to Gods Moral
Essence, I am sure it has no relation to his Power and Empire. It is true,
when the Jews dwelt under a Theocracy, and God went forth as their Captain
against their Enemies, he owned the Title of the Lord of Hosts, and the
Expressions of his Sovereign Power, Majesty and Dominion, were more frequent:
but when the Evangelical Economy was set on foor, God laid aside these Titles,
and now he expresses himself by no other Attributes but what carry abundance of
sweetness along with them, and wholly refer and lead us to the consideration of
that which is the Flower and Summity of his Being, that is, Love. Therefore I
may subjoyn Mr. P's. own words with a little Transposition, Page 26.
That no Property which complies not with Goodness, can be attributed to God,
and consequently that that is a false Notion of his Dominion that interferes
with his Goodness.

Let us see now how he confutes the Platonists, with whom he is very angry for
asserting, That God being Infnite Goodness, will necessarily do that which is
best, page 27. His first Argument to prove the page 29, 30. etc. the sum of
which in brief is this, That the necessity of Infinite Wisdom doing that which
is best, takes away the liberty and freedom of the Divine Will. To which I
answer, That the liberty of the Divine Will consists not in an Arbitrary
Indifferency of acting or not acting; but in acting always sutably and
conformablely to his own Infinite Rectitude and Perfection: As the true
Excellency and Freedom of our wills consists not in an indifferency or dubious
suspension between Good and Evil (for this is a debility and imperfection in
us) but in a constant Election of that which Right Reason and Intellect
propound to them as Best: So that when once that Eternal Providence which sent
us down upon Earth, shall reinstate us in the Possession of our Native Glory,
our Wills which shall then obtain their freedom in it is greatest latitude and
dimensions, yet shall not be left to a bare Indifferency: but will as certainly
adhere to that which is Good, as a wise and prudent man will always give the
same judgment of the same thing in the same circumstances. Wherefore to answer
in short, I say, that Gods actions are not so fatal and necessary as the
motions of an Automaton or Engine, because he is endued with an Energetical
Power of Reason and Intellect; but are free and unconstrained by any external
Principle: but because his Nature is infinitely Good, it will always do that
which is Best, because Goodness is the chief and first active Principle in it.
The proof of this lies in Axiom II. III. IV.

That if the Divine Goodness or Beneficence be necessary, it would then destroy
it is own Nature, because it is absolutely necessary to the Nature of
Beneficence, that it proceed from a free and elective Principle, page 33.

I suppose this Argument is only cast in as a surplusage, and not with any
intent to convince any of his Readers, unless Mr. P. imagine them so unwary and
credulous as to be imposed upon by fallacies and sophisms; For if by Gods
Bounty and Beneficence, he mean his gracious Donations and Benefits above what
may render his Creatures happy in their several states and capacities; then, I
say, it is most free, because when any Beings have forfeited their Felicity,
God is not obliged to reinstate them in all the circumstances of it again: But
if we take Bounty or Goodness for the Eternal Perfection of Gods Blessed
Nature, whereby he communicates himself to all capable receptacles, this is as
necessary as his Being: and against this Mr. P. ought properly to have levelled
his Argument. Nor does this make the Divine Goodness ever a whit the less
Moral, because then none of Gods actions would be capable of Being Morally
Good; for this impossible and blasphemous to assert, That the Divine Will is
indifferent either to Good or Evil. God does necessarily Love himself as the
highest and most Absolute Good, and cannot but embrace every thing that is like
himself; nor is the Divine Will Indifferent either to Love or Hate it is own
Image and Similitude. And if the Communications of the Divine Goodness to such
Beings as bear his Impresses upon them, and never defiled themselves with the
least contagion of sin and vice be not necessary, then he is left free to
destroy them, and consequently he can destroy something of his own Life and
Nature, which no sober Person will affirm. And if this Hypothesis of his be
true, I know no ground Mankind can have (setting aside those Declarations God
has made of himself in Holy Scripture) to believe and trust in him, and depend
upon him for the advancement of their happiness after Death. But we find the
sober and wise Heathens, who believed the soul of man to be (...), and (...),
as Hermes and Plato speak, constantly relying upon the Almighty Goodness of
God, which they confidently believed did always that which was Best, and
thence became assured and raised a strong foundation for their hopes, that it
should go well with them in the other World, and that that Eternal Providence
would take their better parts into it is tutelage and care, when they laid down
their bodies in their beds of Earth.

I hasten now to dispatch his last Argument, which is this:

If the Exertions of the Divine Goodness be necessary, God can never act
otherwise; but that he frequently does, is manifest in all the Instances of his
Anger and Severity, which not only Reason, but Scripture opposes to Benignity
--

To which I return,

That Gods anger and severity are only several modifications of his Goodness,
which is not always displayed and manifested after the same manner, because of
the different capacities of the subjects upon which it is exercised, and have
no other distinction then that of diverse Modes of the same Subject between one
another. And when God makes use of those sharper dispensations, they are as
necessary results of his Goodness, as his milder and gentler Economy. So that
I cannot see what Mr. P. would evince from this.

I have now sufficiently tired my self in so prolix a Refutation, which yet is
not altogether unnecessary, considering that if those Positions be true which
Mr. P. has laid down, they will enervate all those Arguments I have made use
of, and render my design useless, which is no other then to beget in men's minds
the most noble and generous Conceptions of God, to promote real Piety and
Religion, by showing a true Idea of God, and declaring the real intent and
purpose of the Gospel, contrary to that Hypocritical and Artificial kind of
Religion which many frame to themselves, thereby to palliate their sin, and
stop the mouth of Right Reason and Conscience.

THE END.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. INconditionate Reprobation inconsistent with the Declarations of God
in Holy Scripture, page 1. CHAP. II. Absolute Reprobation repugnant to Right
Reason: wherein is set out, the Moral Nature of our Souls in reference to Good
and Evil, Truth and Falsehood. And this Second Argument made good in Four
Propositions, page 15. CHAP. III. The third Argument taken from the
Consideration of the Moral Nature of God; from whence are deduced such
legitimate Inferences and Conclusions as diametrally oppose the Doctrine of
Inconditionate Reprobation, page 64. CHAP. IV. A fourth Argument against the
Doctrine of Inconditionate Reprobation, taken from the Evangelical
Dispensation; wherein is shown the purport and design of the Gospel, which is
to reinstate all men into the Participation of the Divine Nature; and that that
Rigid Doctrine is destructive of so high and glorious an end, page 115. CHAP.
V. A fifth and last Argument; wherein is shown, that the Doctrine of
Irrespective Reprobation, takes away the liberty of Man's Will, and consequently
leaves no place for reward of Virtue, or punishment of Vice, page 171. CHAP.
VI. An Explication of several Citations of Scripture suborned to attest the
Doctrine of Inconditionate Decrees; together with a brief examination of some
Positions of the Contra-Remonstrants, page 189. Some Reflections on a late
Discourse of Mr. Parkers, concerning The Divine Dominion and Goodness, page
253.
FINIS.

