A SERMON Preached before HER MAJESTY THE Queen Dowager, In Her Chapel at
Somerset House, upon the Fifth Sunday after Easter, May 9. 1686.

By WILLIAM HALL, Preacher in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, for William Grantham in Cock-pit-Alley near
Wilde-Street. 1686.

A SERMON Preached before the Queen Dowager, On Rogation-Sunday, May 9. 1686.
Amen, Amen, dico vobis, Si quid petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis.
-- Petite and accipietis, ut gaudium vestrum sit plenum.

Joh. 16.23, 24. Amen, Amen, I say to you, If you shall ask the Father any
thing in my Name, he will give it you. -- Ask, and you shall receive, that your
joy may be full.


OUR Blessed Savior, in that incomparable Sermon at his last Supper, (of which
his Beloved Disciple St. John has given us a Copy, from his thirteenth to his
seventeenth Chapter) reads a Lesson to his Apostles, of the highest importance
to their future Conduct and Comportment. He exhorts them with an Eloquence
Divine in its Original, an Eloquence Divine in its Force and Energy, to the
performance of many things, as hard and difficult, as they were necessary to be
put in practice. Besides the Command he gave them of loving one another, Jo.
13.34.
and that according to the measures of the Love he bore them; Sicut dilexi vos:
He gave them a clear and ample View, a full Prospect of all those Pains and
Afflictions, of all those Torments, of that Death they were to undergo for his
sake. He acquainted them with the nature of their Sufferings, with what they
were to endure from the Jews and Gentiles, who would both combine, (like as
Herod and Pilate to the Death of our Savior,) in the Contrivance of such
exquisite Torments, as should put a period to the Lives of the Apostles, with
the most intolerable Pains, that could possibly be invented. The Jews would
think themselves obliged to destroy them, as Impostors, as Preachers of a false
and pernicious Doctrine, a Doctrine so opposite to the Tenor of their Belief,
as that was, of their Messiah being already come, whom they, obstinately blind
through Ignorance, as gross as criminal, expect even to this day. The Gentiles
would perform their utmost Endeavors, to offer up these Men a most acceptable
Sacrifice to the Divinities they adored, inasmuch as the Apostles were to wage
War against them, to become their professed and irreconcilable Enemies. I need
not mention with St. Chrysostom upon this place, the rest of the Contents of
this great Sermon of our B. Savior: I need not give you a more copious Account
of his farther Orders or Commands. You know how he encouraged them, to raise
themselves above the Concerns or Cares of this World; He pressed them to an
assimilation or likeness in Holiness, to his Heavenly Father: He did not bid
them aspire only to the Sanctity of Angels, Cherubins or Seraphins, of any of
the seven ministering Spirits that stand before God; they were to bear up to the
Eternal Father, and from thence to take a pattern of Perfection. You know how
he enjoined them, not only to acquire such Virtues as were to adorn or
embellish themselves, but to plant them in the Souls of others, to prescribe
Rules and Methods of a new Life, of a new Belief, to preach Penance,
Afflictions, Crosses, Persecutions even to death, to Men indulging themselves
all sorts of inordinate Pleasures: to preach Poverty of spirit at least, as
absolutely necessary to Salvation, to Men boundless in their Riches, boundless
in their Desires of scraping them together, by all means possible, good or bad;
to preach Humility to the Proud, Patience to those that brook not Affronts,
Chastity to the Impure, Temperance to the Glutton; to control lawless
Usurpation and Tyranny; to level immoderate Flights of Ambition; to transform
the Idolaters of Vice, into the Admirers and Proselytes of Virtue; In a word,
to transplant Men from Sin to Grace, from Grace to Glory. It was very hard for
the Apostles, before whose clear view was placed such a Scene or Landscape of
future Events, so disagreeable to Sense and corrupted Nature, not to be
discouraged, not to shrink back, not to cry out as upon another occasion, Matthew
19.25.
Quis ergo poterit salvus esse? Who is it then that can be saved? Our B.
Savior therefore, who well knew how easily Men are deterred from doing good,
even at the distant view of ensuing Dangers, to animate and encourage his
Disciples to an Enterprise, so highly conducing to their own Advantage; that
they might not be disheartened or dismayed at the mighty Task, after he had
convinced them in his precedent Discourse, that there was nothing that lay
under his Commands, but what was so far from being not feasible, that it was
easy, confers upon them more sensible Encouragement in the Verse foregoing
that of my Text. In which he promises to give them unconceivable Comfort and
Consolation in the midst of all their Troubles and Afflictions; and then for
the obtaining of it, in the words of my Text advises, exhorts, nay commands
them to have recourse to Prayer, as the necessary Means to render all Burdens
light, all Yokes sweet, all Labors and Pains easy. Amen, Amen, dico vobis; si
quid petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis. -- Petite and accipietis, ut
gaudium vestrum sit plenum. Amen, Amen, I say to you, if you shall ask the
Father any thing in my Name, he will give it you. Ask, and you shall receive,
that your joy may be full. As if he had said (as St. Chrysostom remarks),
Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Matthew.
You must not think you must rely upon your own strength, to surmount the
Difficulties you are to encounter with: You must implore in your daily Prayers
the Assistance of Heaven, and you will never fail of its Protection. Petite and
accipietis, Ask and you shall receive, offer up your Petitions to the Father in
my Name, and he will bless your Endeavors, he will strengthen them with his
all-surmounting Grace, he will enable you to withstand and overcome whatsoever
would obstruct your Proceedings. Petite and accipietis, etc. Ask and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full. Since therefore our Holy Mother the Church,
in a Season sacred to Prayer, does propose to her Children the Gospel, wherein
our Savior encourages his beloved Disciples, to addict themselves to that holy
Exercise, as being the only Sourse or Origin from whence flows the fullness of
joy in this World, and the assurance of the ineffable Bliss of the World to
come; I think it will not be unseasonable from the words of my Text, to exhort
you likewise (D. Christians) to apply your selves with joint consent, with
united affection and fervor, to the devout and holy Exercise of Prayer; and
that, not for these ensuing Days only, wherein we are more strictly engaged by
the Church to pay our respective Duties to Almighty God, the better to dispose
us on Thursday next to ascend with Christ in Spirit into Heaven, and prepare us
to entertain that supreme Author of all Sanctity and Grace, the Third Person of
the ever Blessed Trinity, who descended upon the Apostles in fiery Tongues, and
will come to inflame our Souls with the fire of Love; but during also the
series or continuance of your Days; to the end, that by addicting your selves
to an Employment, as necessary as advantageous to a Christian, your joy may be
full, Vt gaudium vestrum sit plenum. To this purpose I design, God willing,
this day to set before you in the First Part of my Discourse, the Excellency of
Prayer, together with the Advantages you may reap from it. In the Second, the
absolute Necessity of Prayer, with a short Method how to Pray as we ought.
Amen, Amen, si quid petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis, etc. Amen,
Amen, I say to you, if you shall ask the Father any thing in my Name, he will
give it you. Ask, and you shall receive, that your joy may be full. But that
God may bless and crown my Endeavors, that he may seal this solemn Promise of
granting what we ask, and make it good in My behalf, I must desire you to join
your Prayers with mine, that what I shall say, may be to his Honor and Glory,
to the good of all our Souls. And to this end let us with our best Devotion
implore his Divine Assistance, by the Intercession of the most Holy
Virgin Mother, AVE MARIA, etc.

I Am thoroughly persuaded (D.A.) that there cannot be given a more elevated
Idea of the Excellency of Prayer, then by showing, I. Part.
1. That it came from Heaven. 2. That it conducts us to Heaven. 3. That it
makes us find Heaven upon Earth.

1. It came from Heaven, where it was even before the Heavens, before those
material Orbs, that now roll over us, were called from the dark, and profound
Abyss of unessential Nothing: Before the Angels were established in Glory, God
himself was taken up with Prayer; not as the word commonly signifies with us,
Petition or Impetration, in as much as that Supreme and Independent Being could
neither Pray in this Sense to others, or make such Addresses to it self. His
Prayer was the Contemplation of his own Divine Essence: His Prayer was that
Expression or Consubstantial Word, which from all Eternity, as an Eternal,
Coeternal Beam shone from the Father: His Prayer was and is a Reflection upon
his own unlimited Perfections, in that complete Resemblance of himself, his Son.

When this Word descended from the Bosom of his Eternal Father without either
Change or Separation, to cloth himself with our Flesh in the chaste Womb of the
Virgin Mother, I find he came among us to teach us what he put in practice
himself, the holy Exercise of Prayer. It is written of his House, that it is to
be Consecrated to Divine Service or Prayer: Matthew. 21.18.
Domus mea Domus Orationis vocabitur. And which was his first House, but the
Womb of his Virgin Mother, where he dwelt nine Months in that divine
Employment? The first Chapter of his Prayer Book, or first Lesson he read, was
to comply with the sacred Decrees, with the holy Will of his Eternal Father, as
the Royal Prophet says of him, Psalm. 40.10. In capite Libri scriptum est de me,
etc. In the beginning of the Book it is written of me, that I should do thy
will. I Will follow thy Orders, my God, I Will engrave thy Law in the middle of my
Heart.

When he came into the World at the appointed time, he employed in that holy
Exercise of Prayer, the space of Thirty Years. This Light of the World shed not
a Beam upon benighted Man, he broke not from the sacred Cloud whereinto he had
retired, Job 22 14.
Nubes latibulum ejus, till the Revolution of that time was ended. And as if he
thought it not enough to spend whole Thirty Years under the Roof of Mary, he
repairs to a Desert, a lonely and melancholy Desert, where for Forty Days and
Forty Nights, not granting his Body the satisfaction of the least Repast, free
from the noise and bustle of the World, he is totally addicted to
Contemplation. Our B. Savior was as well God as Man; he needed not, by
consequence, a private House or Desert to become more recollected, more
retired; 'twas to give us an Example, to teach us where we ought to Pray, that
he chose those solitary Places; 'twas to encourage us to an imitation of his
holy Life, to render our Prayers more efficacious, more meritorious, he
selected such Conveniences as might be an help to our Prayers. Joan. 13.15.
Methinks he acquaints us with his divine Intentions from the Desert, with an
Exemplum dedi vobis; I have given you an Example, that you do as I have done.
Ah! my Lord, it is too much honor for such poor Creatures as we are, to be
permitted to address our Prayers to thee; but what a happiness is it to be
invited to Pray in Company with our God?

When he left the Desert, he left not the practice of Prayer; he quitted not
this sacred Employment in the midst of the most pressing Concerns of his
Mission: And although he equally Prayed in all Places, and at all Times, the
Evangelists have taken a particular care to acquaint us, that after he had
labored and toiled all the Day in Preaching, Teaching, and inviting Sinners to
a sincere Repentance, he employed the most part of the Night in the Practice of
Prayer; Luc. 6.12.
Erat pernoctans in oratione Dei.

As he lived in a continual Exercise of Prayer, he expired upon the Cross (as
we may say) in the Arms of Prayer; he consecrated to that purpose the three
last hours of his Life; he drew the Curtains of the Night upon the face of this
World, he shrouded it with darkness more seasonable, more proper for Prayer.
Ah, what comfort must a serious Meditation upon those three last mysterious
Hours our B. Savior was dying in upon the Cross, bring to the Soul of a
repenting Sinner! He made there an Application of his most bitter Passion, of
his most dolorous Crucifixion, of his most painful Death to the Distempers of
our diseased Hearts. He Prayed then, that as the whole Series of his Life was
spun out for our Good, for our Instruction; so his Death for our sakes might
conduce to the entire Remission of our Sins. He offered the infinite Price of
his inestimable Blood for the Redemption of Mankind. He begged of his Eternal
Father to cancel the Debts we had contracted, to blot out of his remembrance
our Transgressions, at the same time that he interceded at the Throne of his
Mercy for the blind and ungrateful Jews. Pater ignosce illis quia nesciunt quid
faciunt. Luc. 23.34.
Nor may we doubt, but as he poured forth his Soul in Prayer with his last
Breath, saying to his Eternal Father, Luc. 23.46.
Into thy hands I commend my spirit, so he bequeathed the Spirit of Prayer as a
Legacy to us, both to accompany and secure our Exit out of this Life; and the
bowing of his Head to us at that time, is an Invitation to us to lift up our
Hearts to him; Inclinato capite emisit spiritum. Ah my dearest Savior, I
receive with the most profound Submission possible, with the greatest
Veneration, thy Holy, thy Divine Spirit; I embrace it as bequeathed me by my
most tender Master; I Will cherish this sacred Depositum, this divine Pledge of
an infinite Love; I Will carefully preserve it to the end of my days; for it is
then I desire to die, when I cease to Pray.

2. If Prayer came from Heaven, as we must needs allow, since it was brought us
from thence by the Worlds Redeemer, it glories in a Prerogative more to our
advantage; that is, it leads and conducts to us Heaven. It Is the property of
Water, to remount to a Level with its Sourse or Origin. Prayer therefore taking
its rise in Heaven, we must attribute to it an Excellency common to it and
Grace; Omnis qui bibit ex aqua hac, Joan. 4.14.
fiet in eo fons aquae salientis in vitam aeternam. If any one drink of that
delicious Spring, which pious and religious Souls so frequently refresh
themselves with in the holy Exercise of Prayer, it shall become in him a
Fountain, whose Waters shall reascend as high as their Origin, as high as
Heaven, to that inexhaustible Ocean of ever-living Waters. Quid est oration,
(says to this purpose the great St. Augustine,) nisi ascensio animae de
terrestribus ad coelestia, inquisitio supernorum, invisibilium desiderium? For
what is Prayer, but an elevation of the Soul from terrestrial to celestial
Cogitations, an inquisition or search into supernatural Concerns, a fervent
desire of purchasing that Happiness, which is as yet out of sight. It Is for
this Reason that Prayer is compared to the Ladder Jacob the Patriarch saw in a
Vision: As that gave an ascent from Earth to Heaven, as those mysterious Rounds
bore the mounting Angels to their Sovereign Lord; so Prayer wings our earthly
lumpish Nature, that we can soar aloft to the Region of Spirits; and to this
purpose it refines our Humanity from all dregs of Mortality. As our Lord was
seen leaning upon the utmost Rounds of this mystic Ladder, or rather (as the
Septuagint give a more congruous Construction) as the Ladder was seen leaning
upon our Lord that supported it; so Prayer derives its efficacy, its vigor and
force from the gracious assistance of an all-powerful God, who both raises and
draws its Votaries to himself. Finally, as there were in Jacob's Vision seen
ascending and descending Angels, they are yet upon the same Concern for
Christians devoted to Prayer. They carry our Petitions (as St. Hilary says) to
the Throne of Glory, they return to minister for us in the great work of our
Salvation. The Soul likewise upon the Wings of Prayer takes her flight to
Heaven; she enters into the Palace of her Lord without control or disturbance,
(Prayer being the Key of Paradise (says S. Augustine) which gives her
admittance into the Royal Bedchamber, where she freely entertains her self
with an infinite Majesty) she becomes familiar with her God, she not only
obtains his Blessing as her Father, disarms his just Indignation against her
own, and the Worlds Offenses, atones for her self and others, but addresses her
self to him as her dearest Friend, appropriates him to her as her Beloved, with
the Spouse in the Canticles; Dilectus meus mihi, Cant. 2.16.
and ego illi. Insomuch that our Sovereign infinitely delighted with such
familiar Addresses, invites, encourages, and engages the Soul to continue her
languishing Desires. Fac me audire vocem tuam; 8.13.
Let me hear thee speak. Vox enim tua dulcis; Cant. 2.14.4.3.
For thy Voice is sweet and charming. Labia tua sicut vitta coccinea, and
Eloquium tuum dulce; Thy Lips are like a Thread of Scarlet, thy Speech is sweet
and grateful. Such was the Prayer of Moses upon the Mount, where he made up to
God as to his best of Friends, Discoursed with him face to face, so much to the
advantage of the glorious Saint, that one would have thought the Almighty had
interchanged Properties with him; for he seems to tie the Hands of an
Omnipotent God, that was ready to dart his revenging Thunder at the criminal
Heads of the rebellious Jews. Dimitte me, Exodus 32.10.
(says the Almighty) ut irascatur furor meus; Let me alone, that I may give
way to my anger. As if he were unable to resist the Influence of the Prayers of
Moses.

3. But we have not only the advantage of being conducted to Heaven by Prayer;
it is also blessed with a singular Privilege, that it makes us find Heaven upon
Earth. To evidence this Truth, let us settle our serious Consideration, let us
fix our Regards upon such devout Christians, as are given to Prayer. We see
they are disencumbred from the Bustle, or troublesome Concerns of this World; we
see they are entirely divorced from the Creature, totally united to the
Creator; we see they are dead to the Life of the World, living a divine or
supernatural Life; dead to themselves, animated with the Life of God. Ah happy
Death! Happy end of a Life well lost! Thrice happy beginning of a Life, that
must never end! The union of Body and Soul is the Life of a Man, the separation
of the Body and Soul is the Death of a Man; The union of the Body and Soul with
the World, is the Life of a Worldly Man, the Death of a Christian; The
separation of the Body and Soul from the World is the Death of a Man as to the
present World, but the Life of a Man in reference to the World to come. Men
living with the Life of the World, are dead to Heaven; Men living or leading
their Lives in Prayer, find Heaven even in this World, inasmuch as they are
dead to the World, to live with God, to live with the Angels with the Life of
God: they are penetrated with God, they are absorpt in God; they are changed by
a thrice happy Transformation into God himself. But this Death to the World,
ought rather to be styled a Resurrection then a Death: A Resurrection with
their divine Original Christ Jesus, from the Grave of this World. Those that
are risen with Christ, have their Affections taken off from the things here
below, they savor nothing but what is above. Those by consequence that are
devoted to Prayer, are risen with Christ; have a Heaven upon Earth with Christ
not yet ascended, will mount with Christ from Earth to Heaven.

If the Angels, our Guardian-Angels, to whose care and custody Man, as yet a
Traveller, is recommended by God; if they that keep us in all our ways, that
direct our steps through the Mazes of this World; if they that are so much
taken up with our Concerns, as that they are continually upon the Watch, upon
the Guard, to secure us from that roaring Lion the Devil, seeking to devour us;
if they notwithstanding are at the same time blessed with the beatifical
Vision, if they see God, enjoy Heaven upon Earth, certainly there is some
proportion between Souls in Prayer, and Spirits upon Duty; betwixt Souls raised
above themselves upon the Wings of Devotion, and Spirits below themselves upon
Matters of Obedience: if we have regard to the Concern they are engaged in,
their Heaven must be upon Earth. If we look upon the Soul as confined to the
Body, she has at least an Antipast of that Bliss these Spirits are perfectly
possessed with, since she commences here an Exercise, that must never end: She
beholds the face of God, by Prayer, who is to be the Object of her Happiness
for all Eternity. Do not we thus enjoy Heaven upon Earth? do not we thus
partake of the Happiness of Angels? Prayer comes from Heaven, Prayer leads to
Heaven, Prayer makes us happy with Heaven upon Earth. O quam suavis est,
Domine, Spiritus tuus in nobis; O my Lord and Savior Christ, how sweet is thy
Spirit? How beneficial is the Spirit thou have left us, the Spirit of Prayer
which thou have recommended to us?

From the Excellency of Prayer, and the Advantages we reap by it, 'twere easy
to conclude the Obligation incumbent on us, as we tender our eternal Welfare,
of having a constant recourse to so Religious an Employment: But because among
variety of Motives, it may so fall out by the Order of Providence, that some of
them at least may conduce, as well to stir up those that will not yet grant
themselves so much leisure, even as to think of future Happiness, as to
encourage those that are already bent upon the Inquiry, I shall now proceed to
show the Necessity we have, and the Manner how we are to Pray; which is the
Subject of my Second Part.

Saint John Damascen defines Prayer to be an Elevation of the Mind to God; II.
Part.
in which we either beg to be delivered from Evil, or invoke his assistance
upon our selves or Neighbors, to embrace what is Good; or pay to him our Homage
as our Supreme Lord, our Sovereign King. It Is evident from the First Part of
the Discourse, that the Mind is elevated to God by Prayer: the Explication
therefore of the Sequel of this Definition shall be a pregnant proof of the
Necessity we are in, of making such Addresses to him, as that we may alleviate
the Burden of our Troubles in this World, we may invite the celestial Influence
of his Grace upon our selves and Neighbors, we may acknowledge him as we
ought, as we are obliged, to be our chief Good, our ultimate or last End.

We are not, I am fully persuaded, unacquainted with the Miseries we, as mortal
Men, are liable or subject to. Job 14.1.
Homo brevi vivens tempore repletur multis miseriis, (said Job, who had found
the truth of his Assertion by experience); Man living but a short time, is full
of many miseries. We know there are Miseries that oppress the Soul, Miseries
that afflict and torment the Body. The Miseries of the Soul are many: She is
blind, erroneous, ignorant in the Operations of her Understanding; she is
depraved in her Will, which is bent upon Evil, which is obstinate, perverse,
malicious; at the best, more prone to acquiesce to the Suggestions of Sin, then
comply with the previous Motions of Grace: She is corrupted in her Judgment,
decayed in her Memory; she is weak and feeble in all her Faculties. Add to
these domestic Evils, these in-born Miseries, those she suffers from abroad,
those she suffers from the World, from the Allurements of the Flesh, from the
Suggestions of the Devil. She is betrayed to the World, by the Concupiscence of
the Eyes; she is a Slave to Sensuality, by the Concupiscence of the Flesh: The
Devil Lords it over her, by engaging her, through his Wiles, into Pride of
Life. What must she do to be delivered from this intolerable Oppression? Whose
assistance must she call upon? Whose help? She is closely besieged by her
Enemies without, she is treacherously betrayed by her Domestics within: Matthew.
10.36.
Inimici hominis domestici ejus. To whom shall she have recourse for Succor or
Relief? To whom but to the King, her Supreme Lord, her Sovereign, her God? To
whom shall she send her devout Sighs, her penitential Tears, her assiduous and
fervent Prayers? The Almighty gave her Orders, to call upon him in the day of
Affliction; He promised her his Aid and Assistance, upon Condition she would
attribute to him the Glory of the Victory, she would return him her
Acknowledgments and Homage: Psalm. 49.15.
Invoca me in die tribulationis, eruam te, and Honorificabis me. The Apostle
grievously infested with an intestine War from the Concupiscence of the Flesh,
cries out for help to crush the Rebel: Infaelix homo, Romans 7.24.
quis me liberabit de corpore mortis hujus? Unhappy, unfortunate Man! what
Friend will deliver me from the Body of this Death? He does not desire here, as
in another place, a separation betwixt Body and Soul; he begs to be freed from
the vicious Inclination of a depraved Appetite, Romans 6.6.
which he calls Corpus peccati, the Body of Sin, from whence, as from a noxious
and pernicious Root, spring up so many destructive Branches of inordinate
Desires. Quis me liberabit? Who is it that will destroy this Body, this Body of
Sin? Corpus peccati. He calls to mind the Promise of his Lord, and expects
relief from the Grace of Jesus. Gratia Domini Jesu Christi. Invoke his
Assistance therefore, 2 Cor. 12.7.
beg he would extinguish the Rebellion of the Flesh. Ter Dominum rogavi. I have
Petitioned thrice, replies the afflicted Soul, Vt auferretur a me stimulus
carnis meoe. Neither were his Petitions unregarded; the Grace he received at
the Instance of his Prayers, enabled him courageously to withstand all
Assaults, repel all Temptations, to triumph over the Enemies that aimed at his
Ruin. Sufficit tibi, Paul, gratia mea.

If Prayer prove so necessary to the relief of the Soul, in the midst of
Troubles, encompassed, or rather oppressed with the intolerable weight of
Miseries and Afflictions; it is as absolutely requisite against the Miseries
that fall upon the Body; the Miseries of the Body being as grievous, as
afflicting in some proportion, as those of the Soul. I need not call upon any
other Witness then our own Experience, to manifest the truth of this Assertion.
Since that Sin that was unfortunately hatched in the Garden of Eden, Man that
was before Lord of this Universe, the Master of the World, has now the
Universe, the whole World against him. Nature shook him off, as no longer her
Darling, when once he had revolted from the Allegiance due to her Sovereign and
Creator. The Heavens ever since have proved his Bane, in their malignant
Influence. The Elements, that jarr and wrangle with one another, meet in the
Composition of disloyal Man, not to end, but to continue their Quarrel; that
they, like Samson, may draw after their own, the Ruin of this Philistine. The
Beasts, created for his use and service, over whom he was appointed Lord and
Master, revolt by a joint Instinct, that seems to transcend the reach of a
Creature, guided only by the blind Impulse of Sense. The Beasts revolt, the
Beasts rebel against him; those that have not Strength in proportion to their
Hatred, do all they can to shun the detestable Object; those that are able to
master this common Enemy, never meet him but they devour him.

Were this the Non plus ultra of his Misery, it might be said, his Enemies were
only such as were void of Reason: But ah! unfortunate Man! thou art an Enemy to
thy self, thou have Man thy Enemy. One levels his Endeavors at the destruction
of another. In i^ineribus saepe. Often upon the Road (says St. Paul) Periculis
Latronum, 2 Cor. 11.26.
thy Life's in danger: Periculis in Civitate, as often in the City. If thou
fliest to the Deserts, Periculis in solitudine, the wild and unhospitable
Groves harbor thy Enemies. Put to Sea, Periculis in mari, thou have Enemies at
Sea. If thou return to thy Friends, thy Friends are false, thy Friends are
Flatterers, thou art likewise in danger there, Periculis in falsis fratribus.
Devil with Devil firm Concord holds; Men only disagree of Creatures rational:
As if they were not assailed by Enemies enough besides, they do their utmost to
ruin one another. Where therefore must Man, miserable, unfortunate Man, seek
for refuge against the united force of so many pernicious and malignant
Enemies? Where shall he find a shelter from a Storm, that menaces his
Destruction on all sides? Whither shall he run for succor? To God (says St.
Chrysostom) born up upon the Wings of Prayer: Let him fly to the Throne of the
Almighty, far above these material Orbs, that surround us, far above the reach
of an Invasion, either from the Heavens, Elements, Beasts, or Men. Psalm. 41.5.
Let him enter In locum tabernaculi admirabilis, usque ad domum Dei; Let him
enter into the place of the admirable Tabernacle, let him enter into the House
of God, Vsque ad domum Dei. Oration humiliantis se penetrat nubes, Eccl. 35.
and non discedet donec altissimus aspiciat; The Prayer of the humble
penetrates the Clouds, and it shall not depart till the Almighty has granted
the Petition. Do the Heavens molest him? Chrysostom. Hom. 5. de Incompr. Dei
Natura.
Prayer (says St. Chrysostom) has been a sure Fence against their malignant
Influence; Plagas coeli irruentis delevit Oration. Prayer has appeased the anger
of the Elements; Tempestates sustulit. Prayer has tamed the savage Beasts;
Impetum Leonum cohibuit. Prayer has composed the Differences of Men; Bella
composuit, praelia removit. Prayer has discovered the Snares Men have laid to
entrap one another; Insidias hominum, mala denique omnia delevit Oration.

But now again, as our Prayers are beneficial to our selves, so also are they
to others. As they are a powerful Engine, by which we draw down Blessings upon
the Soul, against the Miseries of the Soul; upon the Body, against the Miseries
of the Body; they likewise are efficacious for the good of our Neighbors,
whether Enemies or Friends. To instance in the First, as a more pregnant
assurance of the efficacy of Prayer. Who was a greater Enemy to Christians then
St. Paul, before his Conversion? You are not, I suppose, ignorant of the
Persecutions he raised against the Church in its Infancy, when he bore the Name
of Saul, with the Nature of a greedy and ravenous Wolf, that thirsted after the
Blood of the Lambs and Sheep, of that tender and loving Pastor Christ Jesus.
You know the bloody Designs he was bent upon, when our B. Savior appeared to
him in the Way, with a Saul, Saul, Quid me persequeris? Saul, Saul, Acts 9.4.
why do thou persecute me? Never Tyrant, the most inhumane Tyrant, was more
violent against Christians, then Saul. The Fury he was animated with, answered
the Cruelty of his Intentions: He was full of Menaces in his Mouth, of Rancour
in his Heart, of Fire in his Eyes, of Weapons in his Hands. Saulus spirans
minarum and caedis. Acts 9.1.
He traveled from one City to another, to seize upon Christians, whom he
loaded with Irons, whom he dragged before the Magistrates, whom he cast into
Prisons; against whom he became as well Executioner as Witness. Rapiebat,
vastabat, saeviebat, says the great St. Augustine. I do not exaggerate or
enhance his Crimes, when I affirm they were without Bounds or Limits. Saul
waged a bloody War, not against Christians only, but against Christ himself. As
Herod sought his Death amongst thousands of Innocents, Saul aimed at Christ
amongst thousands of Christians; though neither could meet with the Savior of
the World. He escaped Herod by his flight into Egypt: He could not be assaulted
in Person by Saul, as being now risen from the Dead, as being at this time
ascended into Heaven. And yet, O Crime never to be paralelled! Saul, not
satisfied with that ignominious, that painful Death the Jews had lately put our
Savior to, extends his furious Rage even beyond the Grave; insomuch that our
Savior not brooking the Outrage, breaks even from Heaven into unusual
Complaints, and dispensing no longer with that sacred Silence he had so
strictly observed in this World, in the midst of his greatest Afflictions,
reproaches Readiness unheard of Cruelty, from the Throne of his Glory, Saul, Saul,
Quid me persequeris? Thus stands Saul a Criminal before us, a Criminal of the
blackest die. Thus I have represented him which these Iniquities about him, to
make a deeper Impression in your Souls of the prodigious Efficacy of Prayer,
and by consequence of the great Obligation we have of Praying, as well for our
Neighbors as our selves, as well for our Enemies as Friends. Saul, however
here so black with Crimes, is for all this a glorious Saint, is in full
possession of an eternal Kingdom, is reigning with Christ, is an illustrious
Member of the Church Triumphant, is an Honor to the Church Militant. Whence
proceeds so miraculous a Change, a Change of Name, a Change of Nature? A Change
from Saul to Paul, from an extraordinary Sinner to an extraordinary Saint? From
the Prayers of a Christian, from the Sighs, Tears, and Prayers of a persecuted
Christian, a Christian persecuted by Saul himself, a Christian expiring under a
Mountain of Stones thrown at him at the Instance of Saul; To the Prayers of St.
Stephen we owe this prodigious Conversion. While the Jews animated and
encouraged by Saul, who stoned St. Stephen with all their Hands, by taking care
of all their Clothes, were answering to the cruelty of his intentions, the
Saint lifted up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, raised his dying Voice in a
lamentable, but engaging Accent, and as if he had been the Echo of his Lord
upon the Cross, cried out to Him, as he did to his eternal Father, Ignosce
illis quia nesciunt quid faciunt. His Prayers were heard in Heaven, Jesus saw
the Supplicant, Jesus stood visible to the Saint, attentive to his Prayers, and
granting his Petition. The Prayers of St. Stephen wrought the entire Conversion
of St. Paul.

St. Augustine, whom we likewise must needs acknowledge a perfect Convert, at
the Prayers and Tears of Monica his holy Mother; St. Augustine, I say, once the
labor of her Womb, now the delight of her Soul, whom she brought forth a
Sinner, and made a Saint, introduces our B. Savior addressing himself thus to
the great St. Paul before his Conversion: O Saul, Aug. Ser. 1. de Sanctis. 4.
olim quidem te perdere debui, sed Stephanus meus oravit pro te. Saul, I should
have destroyed thee long ago, had not my Stephen's Prayers prevailed so far, as
to disarm my Anger against thee. O Saul, why do thou persecute me? Thou art
blindly bent against me and mine, and yet at the Intercession of Stephen, I Will
create thee my Servant. O Saul, lupe rapax; O Saul, thou ravenous Wolf, thou
have devoured my Sheep: Expecta paulisper, and digeres; Stay a while, and thou
shall digest what as yet over-loads thy Conscience. Dicam plane, (continues the
great S. August. S. Augustine, a most delicious Flower sprung likewise from the
Root of Prayer) Elisus est filius perditionis, and erectus est vas electionis;
The Son of perdition is thrown down, to rise up a Vessel of Election. Nam si
Stephanus sic non orasset, Ecclesia Paulum non haberet; For if Stephen had not
Prayed in this manner, the Church had never been honored with the Merits of
Paul. Sed ideo erectus est Paulus; But Paul was thus raised to that sublime
Sanctity and Perfection, Quia in terra inclinatus exauditus est Stephanus;
Because St. Stephen with bended Knees called not for Vengeance, but Mercy for
Paul. Sic auditus est Stephanus ut ejus oratione deleretur peccatum, quod
commisit Saulus; Heaven so far condescended to the Intercession of Stephen,
that it granted an ample Pardon to the Crimes which Saul had committed.

I think, after such an Example, none ought to doubt of the absolute Necessity
of Prayer; of Praying for our selves, of Praying for the good of others.
Heaven, that acquiesc'd to the Prayers of S. Stephen for St. Paul's Conversion,
we may justly hope will never deny any thing, that conduces to the good of our
own, or Neighbors Souls. Petite and accipietis; Ask, and you shall receive. Si
quid petieritis Patrem in nomine meo dabit vobis; If you shall ask any thing of
the Father in my Name (says the Son), he will grant it to your Prayers. But since
he intimates here a Method of Prayer, to be true to my Promise, and to render
this Discourse as prosicuous as my Time will permit, I Will supersede a farther
Explication of St. John Damascen's Definition, to leave you in a few words the
Manner how to Pray. Si quid petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis; If
you ask the Father any thing in my Name, he will grant it you.

Many Christians, notwithstanding the several Admonitions, the several
Incitements they have received, to addict themselves to this devout, this holy
Exercise of Prayer, notwithstanding that they are well instructed in the
Manner, are still plunged so far in the Cares and Concerns of this World, that
they will not so much as afford themselves a Moment of their Time, though they
steal whole Hours for Pleasure or Pastime, for an Employment as obligatory as
proficuous. As many, if not more, (so predominant is Ignorance now adays over
Spiritual Concerns) fall short of the Method, know not how to Pray: the most
that do, find not Heaven to answer their Expectations, because they correspond
not with their Prayers to its Desires. That I may not be wanting to the
Necessities of all upon so great an Exigency, I shall in the Conclusion of this
Discourse, Excite those to Pray, that do not; I shall inform those of the
Manner, that know not how; I shall, to the best of my Endeavors, rectify the
false Measures others have taken of Praying amiss.

To this purpose, you flaming Seraphins, that veil your Eyes with your Wings,
as not being able to bear that inaccessible Brightness, that is darted from the
Countenance of an infinite Majesty; That shroud with Wings your Feet, in awe
and acknowledgement of the Greatness of God; That have two Wings more to be
ready upon Command; That cover your Eyes with two, your Feet with two, that Fly
with two: Give me leave to adapt your Wings to Prayer, to fit it for its
appearance before the Throne of the God you adore. Let Prayer be a Seraphin
amongst you, place her in your Quire, when her Wings likewise are fitted to
her, when she burns with that Love you are inflamed with Seraphins by Nature
are all in Love, in Love with God; their Love is incompatible, is inconsistent
with Sin. That Prayer therefore admit not of Sin, is the first Condition.
Seraphins veil their Faces, veil their Feet, in Consideration of Gods infinite
Greatness; of their own infinite Littleness or Lowness, in respect of his
infinite Height, which is the Second Condition necessary to Seraphical Prayer.
Seraphins ask nothing for us, but what conduces to the Honor and Glory of God;
what tends to the Salvation of our Souls, the Third Condition. Seraphins
Present their Petitions in the Name, through the Merits of Jesus, the Fourth
Condition. Seraphins are always upon the Wing; Duabus volabant, the Fifth and
Last Condition to make Prayer a Seraphin.

First then, I. Condition.
that Prayer may fit it self for a Seraphin, Sin must be banished out of the
Soul. Si cor nostrum (says St. John, a Seraphin for Love, 1 Joan. 3.21.
for the Love of Jesus) non reprehenderit nos, fiduciam habemus ad Deum, and
quicquid petierimus accipiemus ab eo; If our Hearts or Consciences do not check
or accuse us, if our Souls are not defiled with Sin, Fiduciam babemus, we may
have Confidence, we need not fear; our Petitions shall be granted, our Desires
crowned, our Prayers heard; we shall obtain whatever we ask. Our Consciences
reprehend us (says St. Gregory) as often as we Sin, S. Greg. Mor. l. 17. c. 11.
as often as we swerve from the Commandments of God. Our B. Savior states the
Condition for the Advantage of Prayer, Si manseritis in me, If you dwell in me;
Joan. 15.7.
If you live by Grace or Charity a Member of my Body, Quodcunque volueritis,
petetis and fiet vobis; Ask what you please, you shall obtain it. Do not
therefore (D. Christians) rely upon your Prayers, if your Prayers are not
grounded on the Innocence of your Lives. Ne offeratis ultra sacrificium
frustra; Isa. 1.13.
Offer not up any more your Sacrifice in vain, (said God to the Jews, by the
Mouth of his Prophet Isaiah;) Your Incense is an abomination to me: If you lift
up your Hands to Heaven, I Will turn away my Face, because your Hands are full of
Blood. Lavamini, mundi estote auferte malum cogitationum vestrarum; Wash,
purge, and cleanse your selves from the Defilements of Sin; take from my sight
your evil Cogitations. S. August. Conc. 3. in Psalm. 30.
The great St. Augustine to this purpose addresses himself thus to a Sinner in
Prayer; If God should say to a Sinner, Behold, you have called upon me, I come,
but whither? Where will you provide a place fit to entertain me? Do you think I
can brook Tantas sordes conscientiae tuae? such an unclean, such an
unsanctifi'd Soul? Should you invite a Servant of mine to your House, would not
you, to save your Credit, take care to remove whatsoever is disgustful out of
his sight? Would not you make it clean, set it in order? Certainly you would.
Yet you have the confidence to invite me to your Soul, in the manner I now
behold it, full of Rancour and Malice, full of Fraud and Rapine, full of Pride
and Ambition, full of Anger, Lust, and Blasphemy; to your Soul, the Center of
Iniquities. If you have a mind God should enter to inhabit there, provide for
his coming, cease to offend, implore his Pardon for your past Transgressions,
begin to love him as the Seraphins do. Love is the Soul of a Seraphin; Love
ought to be the Soul of your Prayer.

II Condition.
Secondly, Consider the Grandeur, the Majesty of God; Consider your self, how
little, how like to nothing; Consider what God is, Consider what you are. The
Wings before the Face and Feet of a Seraphin, are these or the like
Considerations. That Seraphin upon Earth St. Francis, Prayed in this manner;
Quid es tu dulcissime Domine Deus meus, quid ego vermiculus and pauper servus
tuus? What art thou, my Lord my God! What am I! A worm, thy poor and wretched
Servant. With what Patience, with what Humility, does an innocent and poor
Wretch wait at the rich Man's Door? With what Submission does he appear before
him? With far more Respect, with greater Awe should we beg an Alms at the Gates
of God's Mercy. As the Eyes of a Handmaid or Slave are fixed upon the Hands of
her Mistress, as she reads from thence her Instructions what to do; Psalm. 122.2.
Sicut oculi ancillae in manibus Dominae suae: So should our Eyes steadfastly
regard the Grandeurs of the Almighty, and from thence take an occasion to plead
for our selves, till he is graciously pleased to condescend to the relief of
our Infirmities.

Thirdly, III. Condition.
The Seraphins never Intercede for us at the Throne of Mercy, but in Matters
that redound to their Maker's Honor, and the Good of us. Happy were the
Christian Soul, that would thus state her Petitions; Ah unfortunate mistake of
many, that with the Sons of Zebedee, know not what they ask! Some desire
Health, some Riches, others to be disencumber'd from the Burden of their
Afflictions, some Preferments, Dignities or Honors; But never consider, with
profound Submission to the inscrutable Secrets of Divine Providence, whether
the Sickness they labor under, the Poverty they are in, the Troubles they are
oppressed with, their low or mean Condition, be not more suitable to the Will
of God, more conducing to the Salvation of their Souls. How many now are
tortured with unquenchable Flames, for the abuse of that Health the Almighty in
anger conferred upon them? (For through a just Indignation he grants many
Petitions, which he, according to the Dictates of his infinite Mercy, had most
graciously denied)? How many with Dives, want Water to cool their burning
Tongues, who, had they been contented with a less sensible Poverty then that of
Lazarus, would now have been Lodged in the Bosom of Abraham? How many have fallen
headlong, like those Morning Stars, Lucifer and his Associates; have set in an
eternal Night, because with the Pinions of an irregular Ambition, they
endeavored to mount above their native Sphere? How many had exchanged the
Burden of their temporal Miseries or Afflictions, had they born them with
Resignation and Patience, for an Eternal Weight of Glory? Many times the
everlasting Happiness or Misery of a Soul is annexed to a Good or Bad Petition.
We ought not therefore to square our Requests according to the Dictates of our
own inordinate Appetites, we ought to render them conformable to the Will of
Heaven. But whatsoever we importune the Almighty for, let it be desired with
profound Submission, in the Name, through the Merits of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus.

Fourthly, IV. Condition.
Si quid petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis.; If you ask the Father
any thing in my Name, he will grant it you. He says we can do nothing without
him; Joan. 15.5.
Sine me nihil potestis facere. We can expect Salvation upon no other Account
then his: Our own Merits avail us nothing, but by virtue of his Passion, and
precious Blood shed for us upon the Cross. August. in Manual. cap. 21.
Quicquid ex me mihi deest (says St. Augustine) usurpo ex visceribus Domini mei
Jesu Christi, quoniam misericordiae affluunt, nec desunt foramina per quae
Effluant. Whatsoever is defective in me, is supplied from the Bowels of my
Savior's Mercy; His Blood wants not Channels to convey it self to my Soul: It
streams yet in greater abundance through his Wounds upon the Cross, then
through his Pores in the Garden. Hence it is that our Holy, our Unerring Mother
the Church, concludes her Prayers, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. 'Twas he that
Redeemed us from the Slavery of Sin, He is the Door of Heaven, through Him we
must enter, which we shall certainly do, if Perseverance crowns our Prayers.

V. Condition.
Lastly, Perseverance, represented in those Wings of a Seraphin, with which he
is constantly upon Duty. Christ many times grants to our Perseverance, what he
denies to our Prayers. The Apostles ran to the Sepulcher of our Lord, as well
as Magdalen; but She only had the honor and happiness of seeing him in Person,
because She stayed. Had the Cananean left our Blessed Savior at that sharp
Repulse she first received, her Daughter had never been Dispossessed: Neither
had Jacob the Patriarch been blessed by the Angel, had not he struggled with
him till the dawning of the Day. God denies us many times, or seems not to hear
us, to try our Patience, to make proof of our Constancy and Perseverance, to
experience the Faith we have in him. He seems not to hear us at all Times, or
upon all Occasions, to convince us of our own Misery, of what we are our
selves, if left to our selves. Grace would lose its estimate or value, Heaven
would sink beneath our Care or Consideration, if every Sigh or Tear, if a few
Words, although the faithful Interpreters of a sincere Intention, could obtain
what they ask at every turn. Matthew. 11.12,
Coelum vim patitur and violenti rapiunt illud; We must storm the Empyreum, if
we have a mind to gain it; We must endeavor to take Happiness by force, by
force of a constant Prayer. None will ever have their Temples empal'd with a
Crown of Glory, that have not persever'd in the Combat. 2 Timothy 2.5.
Nemo coronabitur, nisi qui legitime certaverit.

We have had an Idea (D. Christians) of the Excellency of Prayer, of the
Advantages we may reap from the constant Exercise of Prayer. We are convinced,
I suppose, of the Necessity of Prayer; We have been furnished with the
Conditions requisite for Prayer. If we admire it for its Excellency, we should
embrace it as an Advantage; Nay, we ought to comply with so necessary an
Obligation, since we are not ignorant of the Manner how to discharge our
selves. I was not Master of Ceremonies my self, when I placed Prayer amongst
the Seraphins. A Learned Author tells us, That a Person constantly addicted to
so pious an Employment, has not only the Love of a Seraphin, but likewise
enjoys the Perfection of each Hierarchy of every Quire. He is a Cherubin in his
Knowledge; a Throne, inasmuch as his Soul is the Seat or Residence of God, the
Temple of the Holy Ghost; A Domination, in the Government of his Passions; A
Power, in the Dominion over the Infernal Spirits; A Virtue, in his miraculous
Life, in his Life of Miracles; An Archangel, in his Heroic Enterprises; An
Angel, in his Prompt Obedience to the Commands of his Sovereign; A Person, in
fine, devoted to Prayer, is a wonderful Epitome of all Heaven. Who would not
after this addict themselves to Prayer? That holy Bishop of Geneva, St. Francis
Sales, taxes those that will not, of the want of common Sense. But the foolish
and unwise shall perish, (says the Psalmist); Psalm. 43.11.
Simul insipi ens and stultus peribunt. Men may be ashamed of their supine
Neglect, in a Business of such Moment and Concern, while they show themselves
so eager in the pursuit of Toys and Trifles. If its charming Excellency does
not invite us, let its Advantages engage us, let its Necessity oblige us. For
its Advantages (says St. Ambrose) Vberior est gratia quam precatio, semper
enim Dominus plus tribuit quam rogatur; God is more liberal of his Grace, then
we of our Prayers; he always confers more upon us, then we require, then we
look for or expect. Abraham desired a Son, and obtained over and above the
Measure of his Petition, a numerous Progeny from his Loins, a Progeny as
numerous as the Stars; Obtained a Blessing never to be mentioned but with Joy:
The Redeemer of the World came from the propagation of his Seed. Jacob the
Patriarch begged God would be pleased to furnish him with Necessaries, with
Aliments for the Body, and was stored with Riches in abundance, was honored
with the Company of Ascending and Descending Angels. Solomon Prayed for Wisdom,
and received Omnia bona pariter cum ea, An affluence of all good things with
it. Ezechias Prayed for his own Recovery, when sick to death, which was
granted, with an addition of Fifteen Years, and the Promise of a glorious
Victory over his Enemies. The Samaritan desired Water, but obtained Grace. The
Centurion begged of our Blessed Savior to restore his Servant's Health; Our
Lord cured the Body of the Servant, and the Soul of the Master. The Thief upon
the Cross desired only to be remembered when our Savior came to his eternal
Kingdom, whereas our most gracious Lord promised him on that very Day to place
him in Paradise.

Add now to these Advantages, with those above mentioned, the strict
Obligation, the pressing Necessity. A Soul without Prayer, is like a City in
time of War without Guards, without Walls, without either Food or Ammunition,
which the Enemies may take and Plunder as they please. S. Augustine and St.
Ambrose, the greatest and Learned Doctors of the Church, both center in this
Opinion, That a Person stands in as much need of Prayer as of Grace, to attain
Salvation. St. Ambrose farther assures us, That Prayer is as much the Life of
the Soul, as the Soul is the Life of the Body. Hence I rationally and evidently
conclude, That as the Soul is essential to the Life of the Body, Prayer is as
essential to the Life of the Soul. The Body without a Soul, is but a foul and
ugly Carcass, the Leavings of a Man, the Food of Worms and the Grave. The Soul
without Prayer is dead, detestable in the sight of God and his Angels, whose
Grave will be the nether Hell, whose Worms those Stings of Conscience which
shall never die. As we take all Care possible therefore to preserve Nature, the
union of the Soul and Body; since we are not ignorant of the Means, we ought to
take all Care possible to preserve Grace, by a constant Exercise of Prayer.
Should you deny your Body its necessary Food, the Soul takes Wing, and leaves
the Skeleton; Should you deprive your Soul of the Sustenance of Prayer, Grace
quits the barren, the unhospitable Soil; the roaring Lion, the ravenous Wolf,
the infernal Serpent, each from Hell, every Beast of Prey, Omnes bestiae
sylvae, do not pass through only, but inhabit there. Let us Pray therefore
always (D. Christians) as our Blessed Savior has enjoined us, Luc. 18.1.
Sempe rorare; not always upon our Knees, with Hands erected, with Eyes lifted
up to Heaven, that Ceremony at all times is neither necessary nor convenient:
Let us Pray always, by a constant union of our Souls always with God: Let us
Pray always, by doing what we do, for the sake of God: Let us Pray always, by
bearing our Sufferings for God: Let us Pray always, by desiring what we desire,
may redound to the Honor of God: Let us Pray always, by loving what we love
for the love of God: Let us Pray always, in fine, by rendering our Thoughts,
Words, and Works, constant Effects of Faith, Hope, and Charity. Prayer then and
Grace will be individual Companions: Grace will be acquired at the Instances of
our Prayers; Glory will be the due Reward of Grace. Psalm. 18.1.
Gratiam enim and Gloriam dabit Dominus; For the Lord (says the Psalmist) will
give Grace and Glory.

Which God of his infinite Mercy grant to the Prayers of your most Sacred
Majesty, to my Prayers, and to the Prayers of all that hear me, In Nomine
Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

FINIS.

