A DISCOURSE OF THE EXCELLENCY OF Christianity.

I. THESE. v. 21. (...).

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1671.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
THese Papers having lain by me for some years in scattered Parcels, I was at
last persuaded to unite in this small Discourse; the Subject is great and
glorious, viz. To set forth Christianity in all its native Beauty and Luster,
which has been too much sullied by the Atheistically given: for whilst the
speculative Infidel soars aloft, and thinks to dispute God out of the World,
and laughs at Religion by Pretenses and Shows of Reason, (though indeed he
declares the greatest and vilest Folly) the Practical Atheist sits beneath in a
Crowd of Lusts and Passions, Profits and Interests, and though he believe there
is a God and such a thing as Religion, yet by reason of that firm bold Sin and
the Devil have upon his mind, he acts in Repugnancy to his Faith, and frames
wrong notions of God and Religion, and if he may sleep securely in those sins
he most delights in, he is well contented and at ease. And to reduce both these
sorts of Persons to a sober and fixed Love of Religion, and to the Prosecution
of whatever is virtuous and excellent, that Christianity might not be an idle
and fruitless Notion, but an inward Principle of Life, daily perfecting the
Souls of Men, till it bring them to their highest and most complete Happiness,
is the Aim and only Design of this present Discourse.

A DISCOURSE OF THE EXCELLENCY OF Christianity.
1. REligion in its usual and obvious sense is a Devoting ourselves to the
Worship and Service of the Deity. For God, when he first made Man, wrote this
Truth on his heart, That he was a Creature, and beholden to something without
him for his Life and Being, and therefore ought to worship and adore God as his
only Happiness, and by whose ever-present Power he is as it were daily created
anew, and kept and preserved in Being. And indeed there is no man who searches
into the Perfections of Human Nature, that can find any Principle or Power in
Man of conserving and maintaining his own Existence; wherefore his Existence
being drawn through all the parts of time (which have no Connection or
Dependence one upon another) by some other more perfect Essence, he must
necessarily acknowledge that to be self-existent and sufficient, and
consequently adore it as the Author and Conservator of his present and
particular Subsistence.

2. Hence it is that Religion is not a thing which is merely instilled into us
by Instruction and Education: For let us be never so impiously diligent in
rasing the venerable Name of the Deity out of his Temple, and blotting his
Inscription out of our Souls, it is manifest to all, that we can never totally
rid our Minds of the Apprehensions and Fears of a supreme Numen: And that some
men have so far debauched their Minds, and stifled the Sentiments of Reason,
that they can swallow down the grossest Impieties, as Sacrilege, Rebellion,
Murder, and Adultery without the least Regret; proves no more that Religion is
not a Principle of Nature, than it does of the Nonexistence of the Sun, that
some men wilfully live in Darkness, and shut up themselves, that they may not
see his Beams; for it is evident, that such Persons have put themselves into a
preternatural State, and forced their Minds and Reasons to a Constitution far
different from the Universal Nature or Reason of Mankind. Nor can it be eluded
by fancying Religion to be a piece of State Policy invented only to keep People
in awe, and for the better cementing Governments together, and so derived from
one Generation to another by the Custom and Example of their Progenitors. For
if there were no such Faculty inherent in us, and contemporary with our very
Beings, which had a Natural Propensity and Inclination to a Religious
Veneration and Worship, it could not be but that in time Nature would return
and cast off whatever is contrary to it. As a Spring has always a Conatus to
unbend it self, and if at any time the Impediment be removed, will infallibly
reduce itself to its proper state; So our Faculties, though they may be long
distorted and forced out of their due Position, yet they have still an
Endeavor to free themselves and cast off that uneasy Load which constrains
and oppresses them, and will undoubtedly upon any due occasion offered return
to their first and true state. And if there were no such Being as God, the
wiser Ages of the World would soon discover the Falsehood and Imposture, and
chalk out a fair Way and Method for the Natures of men to recover from that
Error and Prejudice they lay under, and by their own genuine Effort and
Strength reassert themselves into their ancient Liberty. But besides this, the
Peace and Tranquillity of Kingdoms and States Politic might sufficiently be
conserved without the invention of Religion, by severe Laws and Penalties. For
although there were no immaterial Being in the World, yet every Person being so
well satisfied with himself, and contented with the exercise of those Faculties
he finds in himself, no man would seek his own Ruin and Torment; and therefore
there would be little or no need of instilling into the minds of men such a
Notion as Religion.

3. In the first Times and Ages of the World, the Law of Nature, which God has
equally implanted in all men (and by which I mean nothing but Reason, or that
Power in man which teaches him to distinguish and put a difference between Good
and Evil, Beauty and Deformity, Purity and Impurity) was the only Rule and
Guide to direct them, and by the help of this they knew God and served him. For
God being in himself an infinite Rectitude and Perfection, delineated himself
and copied out his own Nature in all moral Agents so far as they were capable
of receiving it. And herein God left not himself without witness, in that all
Mankind had Means and Helps sufficient to come to the knowledge of a Deity by
an inspection into the Book of Nature, wherein God has displaid himself in
plain and legible Characters, so that they were wholly without excuse. For if
the Law written in their hearts and discriminating between Good and Evil,
together with the obvious Reflections from the Natures and Proprieties of
things, had not been enough to demonstrate and point out the Existence of a
God, men could not have been accountable, nor rendered obnoxious to Punishment.
But although this Law sealed on the Tables of men's Hearts were sufficient to
teach them (...), that which might be known of God, if they would have given
heed to it; yet in process of time it so came to pass, that through the
Iniquity and Perverseness of men's minds, whereby they gave themselves wholly up
to their own Lusts and Passions, this Light of Nature became dull, faint, and
obscure, and men were governed only by the Dictates of their corrupt and
lawless Wills, and the whole Earth was filled with Violence and Oppression, and
the greatest part of Mankind became so brutish in their Imaginations, that they
made themselves Gods of Gold and Silver, Wood and Stone, and served the
Creature (...), beside the Creator, who is God blessed for ever.

4. Wherefore when this way proved unserviceable and ineffectual for Man's
Restoration, God entered upon a new Dispensation, and revealed himself more
plainly to the Jews, choosing Jacob for his Portion, and Israel for the Lot of
his Inheritance, and communicated to them Laws and Statutes and Judgments,
fencing and hedging in the impure Eruptions of their Natures by Judicial
Decrees, and besieging Vice and Iniquity by the actual Promulgation of a Law.
But this Religion of the Jews lying altogether in the Performance of external
Duties, in Types and outward Rites and Ceremonies, was not able to perfect the
Nature of Man, and bring him to that happy state he was possessed of before his
Fall, (for as the Apostle tells us, Romans xiv. 17. the Kingdom of God consists
not in meat and drink, but (which is far more valuable) in true Righteousness
and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and Man being a Man by his Soul, and not
by his Body, it is plain, both that the Religion whose grand Purpose and Intent
is to instruct and perfect the Mind, is much superior to that which concerns
the Body, and also that there is some degree of Perfection that the Nature of
Man is capable of which is not attainable by the observation of the Law of
Moses) therefore it is necessary that there be some other way sound out to
recover all Mankind from that sad and calamitous condition of Vice and Sin they
now lie under. For we must know that the Soul of Man consists of a perceptive
and plastic Part, which is the same with St. Paul's (...) and (...), the inner
and outward man, and the Judaical Economy being wholly fitted for the
gratification of the Plastical or Animal Life, it is impossible it should
refine and purify that more spiritual part of Man, or in the Scripture Phrase
(...), make him perfect that did the service.

5. Wherefore when the fullness of time came, and men's minds were in some
measure prepared for the reception of so heavenly a Doctrine, Almighty God
resolved to put in execution his last and most perfect Determination, which was
to send down his beloved Son into the World, who should by a plain and familiar
way teach and instruct Mankind, and recover the lapsed World to a state of
Righteousness and Truth. Now then, God walks no more at a Distance, nor hides
himself any longer under the obscurity of Types and Shadows, but has dispelled
the Clouds and Adumbrations of the legal Services, by the full and bright
approach of the Sun of Righteousness, who has pitched his Tabernacle amongst
us, and teaches us his Will by a way of condescending Wisdom, suiting and
proportioning himself to the most shallow Capacities. This is that which the
Apostle 1 Cor. i. 21. calls the Foolishness of Preaching, wherein God has
stooped down to us, clothing himself in the frailties of human Nature, and
adapting the results of his Will to our narrow and weak Apprehensions. And this
is that Economy which in Dan. ix. 24. is called an everlasting Righteousness,
which the Messiah should bring into the world: For when the (...), those
various Schemes and exterior Dispensations of Religion wax old, pass away, and
vanish, this shall remain for ever, and never be abolished, as being nothing
else but the essential Prescriptions of Holiness, those eternal Rules of
Righteousness and Goodness that are founded in the very Nature and Being of God.

6. The Gospel then being of so great Consequence and inestimable Benefit to
Mankind, it will be necessary for every man to know and enquire into the
Reasons of his Belief, upon what Grounds he gives credit to the Christian
Religion, that his Faith being built upon a solid and sure Foundation, he may
not be ashamed of his Profession, but according to the holy Apostles Advice,
ready at all times and upon every occasion to give an Answer to every man that
asks him a Reason of the Hope that is in him, 1 Pet. iii. 15.

Now the Excellency of the Christian Religion appears, I. That it is
intelligible. II. That it is true. III. That it contains nothing light and
trivial, but grave and sober Truths, delivered in that decorous and becoming
Majesty, as well suited with that Blessed Spirit which inspired the Prophets
and Apostles. IV. That it is every way fitted and accommodated for an effectual
Recovery of lapsed and degenerated Mankind.


CHAP. I.
THat the Gospel is intelligible, cannot but appear to every one that is
acquainted with it; for though there may be some things wrapped in Clouds and
Difficulties, yet they are such as do not so nearly relate to Practice, but are
of a more speculative Consideration: But as for the whole Duty of Man in order
to Holiness, and a good and pious Life, it is laid down in such easy and plain
terms, that no man can have any reasonable excuse for himself, if he do not
know and practice the Will of God. For the Divine Wisdom foreseeing that the
greater number of Believers throughout the World would not be men of deep
Reason, but rather of great Love and Faith, and such as would cordially adhere
to their Savior against all Oppositions, though they could not syllogistically
maintain the Reasonableness of every part of the Doctrine they professed; God, I
say, foreseeing this, has suited the Gospel to the meanest Capacity, and there
needs no great Skill to be a good Christian, but rather an hearty and sincere
applying ourselves to the Practice of what is so fully discovered to us. The
Goodness of Almighty God is such, that he considers the several States and
Conditions of men in the World, and makes allowance for those whom his
Providence has so placed, as that they are not in a capacity of attaining to
any great measures of Knowledge, and accepts of the constant and sincere
Inclination and Bent of their Wills in practicing what they know, and they
shall never be called to an account for what they had no opportunity of
gaining. And although he that knows much and apprehends the Reasons of things,
and makes this Knowledge instrumental to the purifying and purging his Soul
from Vice, be far more excellent than he whom Nature has made of a slower
Apprehension, yet this man is in no wise contemptible, but dear and acceptable
in the sight of God, who never fails to reward honest Simplicity and Innocence,
and to recompense every degree of hearty Love with a suitable proportion of
Glory.

But that we may see before our eyes the Plainness and Perspicuity of the
Gospel in all matters that concern the Salvation and future Happiness of a
Christian, we may take a brief Abstract or Sum of our Duty, which is this; To
love the Lord our God with all our hearts, and to have a firm and radicated
Faith in his Goodness declared to the World by his only begotten Son Jesus
Christ; an universal Abstinence from all Wrong and Injustice; a hearty Love and
Good Will to all men whatever; to hold fast that which is Good, and to abstain
from all appearance of Evil; to be of a compassionate and forgiving Spirit, and
if we have received an Injury, not to recompense it again in any kind; to
abstract and withdraw our hearts and minds from earthly Goods, and make
Treasures for ourselves in Heaven, and to be no more solicitous for worldly
concernments than the Lilies of the field or the Fowls of the air, but that
having food and raiment therewith to be content; to keep ourselves pure and
undefiled, not only from outward and grosser, but inward and more refined
Pollutions; to be ready to do good and distribute to the Necessities of our
Brethren; to live peaceably, if it be possible, with all men; In a word,
whatever things are true, whatever things are honest, just, lovely, and of good
report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, to think on such
things. What can be plainer and easier than this? Nor is the Simplicity of the
Gospel any derogation from it, though that impious Epicurean Celsus deride it
upon that account, extolling the Writings of Plato above the Scriptures: For,
as Origin acutely enough replies, Lib. 7. contra Celsum.
the Design of God in the Gospel being to make men good and virtuous, it was
necessary the Precepts tending to that end should be delivered plainly and
perspicuously, suitable to the Capacities of the illiterate Vulgar, who are
better allured and won by a common and usual form of Speech, than by the
artificial Deckings and gay Schemes of Rhetoric: (...). And therefore Christ
and his Apostles did much more advance that which was their chief aim, the Life
and Nature of God in the World by that (as Celsus calls it) rude and rustical
manner of speaking, than all the elegant Writings of Plato, which if they ever
were advantageous for the rectifying and amending the Lives of men, it was only
to such whose Intellectual Faculties were raised and elevated above the
Plebeian Strain. Therefore did the Holy Jesus on purpose make choice of
ignorant and illiterate Persons, that it might appear that the things which
they spoke were not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. and
1.27.
but which the Holy Ghost teaches, and that by the foolish things of the world
God might confound the wise, and by the weak destroy the things that are mighty.

Object. But you will say, To what purpose is that Intricacy and Perplexity
which is found in many Places of Holy Scripture, and wherefore are many of the
chiefest of its Doctrines involved in such Darkness and Obscurity?

Answ. 1. It was in some measure requisite that the Scripture should be obscure
to conciliate Reverence, and to beget a greater Esteem of its Worth and
Dignity. For the Gospel is often called a Mystery, which supposes something
venerable and secret, and hidden from the eyes of vulgar Persons. And God as in
Nature, he has hid many precious things in the Bowels of the Earth, which
cannot be obtained without great Labor and Diligence; in like manner has he
veiled many inestimable Treasures in the Christian Mystery, which are only
attainable by the diligent Search and sincere Endeavors of pious men: For
should the Divine Wisdom have displayed at once all the Glories and Beauty of
this sacred and recondite Method of recovering Souls, it would appear
contemptible and worthless, as being the easy purchase of every profane and
impious Person.

2. The Reason of the Obscurity of Christianity lies not so much in the Nature
of the thing itself, as in the incongruity of men's Minds and Understandings
with so high and raised an Object. The Eye cannot behold the Sun unless it have
some Resemblance and Similitude of it within itself; for like is known by its
like, and if men's Minds be not purified and brought into some Cognation and
Likeness with the Truths offered to them, it is impossible they should ever
have any true and genuine Apprehension of them. There is a Learning and Knowing
the Truth as it is in Jesus, in that God-like, meek, and resigned Spirit, and
till men's Tempers be plained and smoothed from the ruggedness of their
Passions, and the stubborn Asperities of their Lusts, and won to the embracing
of the Truth in the love of it, in that Christ-like Nature of Humility and
Self-Denial, they may fill their heads with sapless and lean Notions, windy and
turgent Fancies, but never nourish up their Souls with solid and substantial
Knowledge. The true sense of Religion and Christianity arises out of a mind
devoid of Passion, and in which the Life of God has taken deep root and
flourishes and spreads itself throughout all the powers of the Soul, giving a
tincture, relish and savor of itself to every Thought, Word, and Deed in the
whole course of a man's Life. And without this purified sense, we feed upon
nothing but the Husks and Shells of Religion, and fall in love with Shadows
instead of lasting and durable Substances. And this is no more than what the
Scripture speaks of itself. 1 Cor. ii. 14. The natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. There is required a
spiritual Sense, a Life of Holiness and Justice, of Benignity and
Righteousness, to the true discrimination of Good and Evil. And further, to the
Knowledge and Understanding of Divine Mysteries, there is necessarily required
the Aid and Assistance of that Almighty and Omnipresent Spirit, who by his
fostering Incubation brought into Being the goodly frame of Heaven and Earth,
and that this Holy Spirit of Truth may begin the Efformation of the new and
heavenly Nature (a considerable part of which is Divine and Spiritual Wisdom)
there must be some previous Preparations, and men must be morally good and
virtuous, or else they will be perfectly incapable of the illapse of his
Celestial Influence. And therefore it is no marvel, if to brutish and immoral
Persons the Mystery of Godliness be hid and obscure.

3. That there might be something still reserved for the gratification of all
degrees of Christians in all Ages of the World. There are both weak and strong
Christians; some that are Babes in Christ and are fed with Milk, others that
are of full Age, and have a discriminating sense of Good and Evil. For the one
there was (...), a rudimental way of instruction, whereby men were led, as it
were, by the hand through the Principles of Religion, as the Author to the
Hebrews intimates, Heb. vi. where the first thing required of them that
embraced Christianity, was Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God,
and upon this followed Baptism, then (...) which I take to be Catechizing, and
after that Confirmation by the Bishop; agreeable to this Apostolical Custom is
the Practice of the Church of England, who after Baptism appoints Children to
be instructed in the Church-Catechism, and then brought to the Bishop to
receive Confirmation: For others whose intellectual Capacities were fit for the
reception of higher Mysteries, there was (...), a full and rational Explication
of the several Dogmata of Christianity; and of these St. Paul is to be
understood when he says, We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, even the
wisdom of God in the Mystery of the Gospel. And St. John distinguishes the
several Ages and Growths of Christians; I write unto you little Children, 1
John 2.12, etc.
because your Sins are forgiven you for his names sake: I write unto you young
men, because ye have overcome the wicked one: I write unto you fathers, because
ye have known him that is from the beginning. Now that the Stewards of the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven may give every one his meat in due season,
it is necessary there should be a diversity in the Gospel, that every
proportion and degree in Grace may receive something which may both strengthen
and gratify the knower. A man is not satisfied with that which will nourish and
content an Infant, and and he that is well grown in Piety and Holiness, leaving
the Rudiments and Principles of Christianity ascends to higher Notions, and is
infinitely satisfied and ravished with the Contemplation of the Works of Nature
and Providence, in beholding the Divine Goodness and Wisdom in the
Manifestation of that Mystery which lay hid from Ages and Generations, and
whose only Design being revealed, is the complete Restoration and Perfection
of Human Nature. And in this is the Saying of the wise man verified, Eccles.
2.26. God gives to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge and
joy.

CHAP. II.
Of the Truth of Christianity.
THe second Illustration of the Excellency of Christian Religion is, That it is
true; which will best be evidenced by these Gradations:

1. It is certain that there was such a Man as Jesus in the World: And here I
would desire the Enemies of this Truth, whether Jews or Heathens, to give me
liberty to make use of the same Arguments they themselves do in proving the
Truth of their Histories; For how are they assured that there were any such men
in the World as Moses and Aristotle? If they say they have it from a constant
and unquestionable Tradition, we can bring the same proof for the Christian
Religion, the Truth of which has been delivered successively from one
Generation to another for above these sixteen hundred years. If they appeal to
the Writings of those who were contemporary with them, the Christians have the
same Plea: For the very Enemies of Jesus, such as Celsus the Epicurean, and
Julian the Apostate never questioned his Existence and Being upon Earth. The
words of Celsus we have in the second Book of Origin, (...). And Julian
confesses as much, as we find by Cyril in his sixth Book, (...). I might here
bring in the Testimony of Tacitus, Pliny, and Numenius the Pythagorean who in
his third Book (...) (as Origin tells us) relates a certain piece of the
History of Jesus, which he afterward allegorizes; Lib. 4 contra Celsum.
but I need not be copious in this, the Jews themselves who never thought they
could sufficiently detest and hate the Name of the Holy Jesus, yet could not
deny but he once lived among them, and therefore call him (...) as Lucian in
derision (...), him that was hanged on a Tree.

2. It is likewise as unquestionable that Jesus wrought many notable Miracles
while he conversed with men; and they are such, as if we look into the Quality
and Design of them, do evidently prove his Mission from Heaven, and therefore
that all men ought to believe on him. And this miraculous Power ought to have
convinced the Jews by their own Law, for this was the Sign or Token left by
Moses to discern between the true and false Prophet, Deuteronomy. xviii. 21, 22. And
if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord has not
spoken? When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not
nor come to pass, i. e. if he do no Miracles, that is the thing which the Lord
has not spoken: And consequently, if there shall come one whose Doctrine tends
to the establishing the pure Worship of the true God, and delivers nothing but
what is for the promotion of Piety and Holiness, and shall confirm this his
Doctrine by Miracles, both Jews and Gentiles ought to believe in him. But if
any one come and seek to draw men from real and substantial Holiness and the
Worship of the true God, and to gain credit to his pernicious Design, shall
work a Miracle, we are not to believe him, because God sometimes permits such
things to be done to try the Constancy and Stedfastness of men. Deuteronomy. xiii. 1,
2, 3. To this the Jews object and say, that our blessed Savior performed his
Miracles by magical and diabolical Arts, for so they tell him, that he cast out
Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. To this impious Cavil we may return
(1.) the Answer which our Savior made them, Mat. xii. 25, 26. Every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation; and if Satan cast out Satan,
he is divided against himself, how shall then his kingdom stand? For the
Doctrine of Christ being so exactly opposite and destructive of the kingdom of
Unrighteousness and Darkness (as Porphyry himself acknowledged, (...). Eusebius.
Praepar. lib. 5.
) If the Head and Prince of this wicked Polity should abet the Lord Christ so
far as to empower him to cast out his associates from their usurped
Habitations, it would undoubtedly beget an intestine War, and the Powers of
Hell would be at an eternal Variance and Dissension with one another, which at
last would be the cause of the ruin of their Kingdom. (2.) This were an
invincible Tentation put upon Mankind, for there can be no surer manifestation
of the Presence and Approbation of the Deity, than when a man is enabled to
work Miracles: And it were irreconcilable with the Goodness and Wisdom of
Almighty God to suffer the most innocent and harmless Persons in the world to
be fatally and inevitably deluded. (3.) The great Synedrium consisting of the
Highpriests, the Elders of the People, and the Scribes or Lawyers as their
Assistants, whose Office and Right it was to try the Prophets, are said by the
Jews to be skilled in Magic Rites for the better and surer Exploration of
those who pretended to be true Prophets, but wrought their Wonders by the help
of Apostate Spirits; which, if it were so, is a very pregnant Testimony that
Jesus performed his Miracles by the Divine Power and Approbation; for otherwise
his Fraud would soon have been detected by that great Council. (4.) That there
are prestigious and Satanical Miracles, is an Evidence that there are likewise
True and Divine, as in Nature the being of Worse argues the existence of
Better, Sophisms and Falsehood the reality of Truth, and the operations of
Second Causes lead us to the knowledge and being of a First; wherefore if it be
granted that evil and lapsed Genii can work Miracles, it is apparent that the
first and best Cause of all things may and does produce Effects of a Divine
Power and Virtue; and that the Miracles of the blessed Jesus were such, appears
partly from the Holiness and Purity of his Life and Manners, in all parts of
them blameless and irreprehensible, and partly from the Design and Intention of
his Miracles, namely to confirm and give credit to that sublime and heavenly
Doctrine he brought into the World, whose End was to correct and reform the
Lives of men, and disseminate the blessed Life and Nature of God upon Earth;
which Considerations are sufficient to beget a firm and undoubted Persuasion
that the immaculate Soul of Jesus was extraordinarily assisted and acted by a
Divine Power and Efficacy which enabled him to perform those stupendous
Operations that are recorded in the Gospels.

3. We have reason to believe that there was a timely History of the Life and
Transactions of Jesus compiled. For we can no ways doubt but that the Disciples
of our blessed Lord, bearing so tender and dear a Love to their Savior, and
being so fully convinced and satisfied in their Minds that he was the promised
Messiah, who should regenerate and renew the World, did compose and draw up an
Abstract or Compendium of his Life: And if we consider likewise how much it
would conduce to the carrying on the Design they were setting on foot in the
World, that all men should believe in the Holy Jesus, and imitate his
immaculate and faultless Example, we cannot readily believe that they were so
stupid as to neglect such an effectual Instrument for the promoting their
purpose, or so uncharitable as to envy Mankind so great a Good.

4. That the Histories of the Gospel were compiled by those whose Names they
bear in the forefront. And for this we have no greater Reason to doubt, than we
have to question whether the Pentateuch or five first Books of the Bible were
written by Moses, or whether those Writings which bear the Names of Cicero and
Virgil as their Authors, were ever composed by them. Suppose now we would know
who was the Author of some very ancient Writing; to prove this, one Testimony
must be taken from those who were contemporary with the Author, or at least
very little distant from him, and from the perpetual Consent of wise and
learned men; and in this the sacred Volumes have infinitely the advantage above
any other Writing whatever. Tertullian affirms that the Archetypal Copies
written with the Apostles own hands were extant in several Churches in his
time. Age jam, qui voles curiositatem melius exercere in negotio salutis tuae,
De Praesc. adv. Haereticos.
percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum
suis locis praesident, apud quas ipsae Authenticae Literae little recitantur.
And is it any more incredible that the very Autographa of the Apostler should
be seen in Tertullian's time, than that Cicero's hand should be shown in
Quintilian's or Virgil's in Gellius his age? But beside that, we have the
concurrent Testimony of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and Clemens Alexandrinus, all
of which were the very next to the Apostolical Age, we never find any
Controversy moved either by Jews or Pagans whether those Writings were theirs
whose Names they bear. Julian in Cyril acknowledges that the Epistles of Peter
and Paul, the Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke are the very Writings of those
Persons with whose Names they are adorned. Add to this further, that amidst the
early Differences and Dissensions amongst Christians, we never find any sober
and grave Person questioning this Truth: Indeed we read of the Ebionites, a
sort of Judaizing Christians who rejected the Epistles of St. Paul, but yet
they denied not that he was the Author of them, but refused them because they
thought St. Paul an Undervaluer of and Apostate from the Law of Moses. But
suppose the Author of any of the Books of the New Testament be to us unknown,
as it is of the Epistle to the Hebrews, yet ought it not to be of any less
Credit and Authority with us for either the Doctrine or History contained in it,
because the Matter and Substance of the Book is more to be regarded than the
Name of the Author; and therefore because for example we find nothing in the
Epistle to the Hebrews which may rationally invalidate our Belief of the things
contained in it, and over and above have sufficient evidence that it was never
repudiated by the Christians who succeeded the Apostles, we deservedly receive
it as Canonical Scripture.

5. That we have all imaginable Reason to ground our Faith upon those Histories
of the Gospel delivered to us. And this appears, 1. Because it is not likely
those who wrote them should be deceived. 2. Neither is it probable they would
deceive others.

There is no likelihood they should be deceived, because they were either
Eyewitnesses of the things they delivered to Posterity, or else wrote them
from the mouths of those who were Spectators of them; and we never find a
Miracle recorded which Christ did alone, without the Company of two or three of
his Disciples; When he was transfigured, he took with him Peter, James, and
John; when he raised the Ruler of the Synagogues Daughter, he carried the same
three with him. Matthew was one of them who perpetually accompanied our blessed
Lord, and saw the greatest part of those things which he wrote. Mark, it is
thought, was an Associate of St. Peter, and wrote his Gospel from his mouth.
And Luke, beside that he was one of those who traveled about with St. Paul,
who had his Commission and Revelation from Heaven, he also in his Dedicatory
Preface to his Gospel, professes himself to have had perfect Understanding of
all things from the very first, as they were delivered to him from those who
were Eyewitnesses of them. St. John was the beloved Disciple, and always
followed the Lord Christ wherever he went, and setting aside the Metaphysical
Sermons recorded in his Gospel, he relates very few miracles or new things, but
what are confirmed by the Testimony of some one of the other three. As for that
notable Miracle of raising Lazarus from the dead after four days burial,
omitted by all the rest, it is capable of this account; St. John lived long
after all the rest of the Apostles and Evangelists, even to the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and Lazarus being then alive when the others wrote their Gospels,
they purposely omitted it, lest the reciting and recording so eximious and
convictive a Miracle, might exasperate the Jews against him, and bring him to
ruin, but being dead, St. John might safely transmit it to Posterity in his
Gospel.

Again, It is very improbable they would deceive others; For, Cui bono, to what
end or purpose, or what Design could they aim at in deceiving the World?
Honors and Preferments they could not expect, they being all in the hands of
the Pagans or of the Jews their bitter Enemies, who hated the holy Jesus with
an implacable hatred, and for that very reason persecuted all his Adherents;
nor could they hope for Riches, when the Profession of Christianity exposed
them to the Loss of all temporal Goods, neither could the Gospel be preached
without the neglect of mundane affairs. But perhaps some will say, they imposed
upon the World, that they might be the Authors of a new Sect; But (1.) either
they believed the Doctrins which they taught to be true, or they did not; if
they did not believe them, we cannot easily imagine they should so far forth
put off all Humanity and good Nature, which they so seriously and frequently
inculcate in their Writings, as to expose so many thousand innocent Persons to
Death upon their Assertion of a Falsehood: yet if they could be so prodigiously
cruel to others, would they be so prodigal of their own Blood as to throw it
away upon an uncertain Delusion? If they thought them to be true, as it is most
likely they did, their Writings showing that they were in good earnest, then
it is certain that it was not the poor and trifling Glory of being the Authors
of a new and unheard of Sect, but the real Good and Advantage of Mankind which
animated and encouraged them to such an Undertaking. (2.) It is not the manner
of Cheaters to provoke to so many Witnesses, as we find the Apostles did. St.
Paul asserting the Resurrection of our blessed Lord, beside the Testimony of
the twelve Apostles, brings in five hundred upon the Stage at once to confirm
the same Truth, the major part of which were then alive when he wrote that
Epistle. 1 Cor. xv. Add to this that a Lie is strictly forbidden by their
Writings, and those that delight in it menaced with eternal Destruction. Ephesians.
4.25. Col. 3.9. Rev. 21.8.3. (3.) Suppose men could be so wicked, yet would the
Goodness of God suffer such a Cheat to be put upon the World? If we look upon
the whole frame of the Christian Religion, it is such, that the more good any
man is, the more likely to adhere to it, and the most harmless and innocent
Persons in the world are most apt to be charmed and overcome by it: But surely
to them that believe a just and righteous Providence governing the affairs of
the World, it is apparent that God would not have suffered an Error so
universally to prevail, nor those who most of all resemble his blessed Nature
in Justice, Mercy, and Compassion, to be involved in Obscurity and Ignorance,
and eternally to perish in a Delusion; since he may, and acting according to
his Nature must, necessarily detect it.

Now because the glorious Resurrection of Jesus Christ the Son of God,
dismantling the Prisons of Death, and freeing himself from the Chains and
Fetters of the Grave, is the great Pillar and Foundation of the Christian
Doctrine; therefore it will be requisite to wipe off those Spots the mouth of
Envy and Detraction has cast upon it. To this end I shall examine that
Objection of the Jews, who seeing the clear and evident Proofs of the
Resurrection of Jesus, invented this Elusion of it, That his Disciples came by
night, and stole him away while the watch slept. To which, the many improbable
and unlikely Circumstances it is attended withal will be a sufficient Answer
and Reply: As (1.) how unlikely is it that his Disciples, who just before fled
every one from him, should now resume such Courage as to venture to steal his
Body from a Guard of Soldiers? (2.) It is not likely that all the Watch should
be asleep at one time. (3.) If they were, yet it is hard to imagine that his
Disciples should come just at that time. (4.) How could they roll away the
Stone and take out the Body (which surely would have made no small noise) and
yet none of the Guard hear them? (5.) Suppose they had taken away the Body,
Quid ex cadavere emolumenti? what benefit could they have expected from a dead
Carcass? would the dead and infamous Body of an Impostor be a sufficient Motive
to induce them to deny Friends and Relatives, worldly Interests and Profits,
yea, Life itself to maintain his Credit by telling the World a fair Story of
his Resurrection, if indeed there were no such thing.

This being then sufficiently evidenced, that Christ rose from the dead, it is
an undeniable Confirmation that all his other Miracles were true: And indeed it
could not suit with the Justice of God to leave his Soul in Hell, or suffer his
Flesh to see Corruption: For the Innocence of the Lord Christ was bright as the
noonday, and all his Sufferings being undergone upon our account, and having
made a full and perfect atonement for Sin, the righteous Providence of God was
engaged to raise him up, and instate him in that blessedness which he merited
for himself by his voluntary Humiliation and Condescent. According to what the
Apostle affirms of him, Acts ii. 24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the
pains of death, (...), because it was not possible, i.e. it was not meet,
suitable or agreeable to the Justice of God, that he should be holden of it.

We have seen the Objection of the Jew, and I shall now conclude this
Particular by considering what the Heathen and Atheist has to say against the
Resurrection of Jesus; and he brings his Exception after this manner; If Jesus
did really rise from the dead, why did he not then show himself alive to all,
or at least to the chief Priests and Rulers of the Jews who condemned him to be
crucified, and not only to his own company, and that not constantly to them,
but like a Spectrum or Ghost appearing and then vanishing away?

But it is no wonder if impure and Atheistical men do not apprehend the Divine
Dispensation of Jesus in the Flesh, since there is a perpetual Antipathy
between their gross and feculent Souls and the Holy Spirit of heavenly Wisdom:
but to them that are sincere there is nothing in this instance but may admit of
a fair Apology: We must know then that the Soul of the Holy Jesus being vitally
united to the eternal Logos, and never lapsed from the pure and immaculate
Regions of Blessedness with the rest of Mankind, but so qualifying his Glory as
to fit himself for an Union with a terrestrial Body, must have even in these
earthly Habitations a very efficacious Principle of Life and Virtue within him,
which though shut up and constrained by the encumbrances of Flesh and Blood,
yet shone through the Veil, and sometimes broke forth into pure Light and
Glory; wherefore through the Plenitude and Perfection of this high and exalted
Life, it so came to pass that in the time of his converse with Mortals before
his Death, he was not seen alike and after the same manner by all, but
according to the Measure and Model of their frail Capacities: And some such
thing Judas, who betrayed him, seems to intimate by giving a Sign to the
Apprehenders of Jesus to know him, when yet it was true what Christ said, that
he was daily with them teaching in the Temple. And certainly, we cannot but
think something extraordinary to be in the blessed Jesus, when the Scripture
tells us that the children of Israel were not able to behold the glorious
Visage even of Moses when he descended from his converse with God in the Mount.
Although then in the frailties of his Flesh, when he was a Man of Sorrows, and
had not yet spoiled Principalities and Powers, nor died for Sin, he suffered
himself to be seen of all, yet when he had broken the Powers of Hell, and rose
as a triumphant Conqueror from his Bed of Darkness, the Grave; he was not then
the Object of every man's sight, his Divinity being more refulgent when the
Economy he undertook in the Flesh was finished; but to those who were capable
of his Presence he appeared and showed himself alive to confirm and strengthen
their Faith, and yet spared their Imbecility and Imperfection by staying but a
little with them at a time. For even his Apostles were not all capable of
beholding him at all times, and therefore he selected Peter, James and John,
who alone were able to bear that glorious Spectacle of his Transfiguration, and
behold Moses and Elias in their celestial Robes, and hear not only their
Discourse, but the voice which came to them from the clouds. And hence we
gather that he would not appear to those who insulted over him in his misery,
and were the Authors of his ignominious Death, out of compassion toward them,
lest they should be struck with Blindness, as the wicked Sodomites who sought
to abuse those Angelical Personages that were hospitably received into the
House of Lot: And thus we read that Saul in his Journey to Damascus, was struck
blind by that excellent Glory, which yet became an innocuous and recreating
Splendour to St. Stephen a little before his Death.

CHAP. III. That Christianity contains nothing light and trivial, but grave and
sober Truths, delivered in that decorous and becoming Majesty as well suited
with that Blessed Spirit, which inspired the Prophets and Apostles.
THe third Particular to be proved in order to the Declaration of the
Excellency of Christianity is, that it treats of no small and trifling things,
but such as are of the greatest importance in the world. For what is more noble
and generous than that which concerns the Happiness and Welfare of the whole
Creation? What more sublime and excellent than that which tends to the
unmasking the cloudy and obscure face of Providence, and discovering the
unsearchable Wisdom of God in the harmonious Order and Symmetry of the World?
But to descend more particularly.

1. The Gospel teaches us, that the true and genuine Felicity of Mankind is the
Participation of the Nature of God. That the Souls of men are in an undue and
wrong estate in this World, that is, that their Natures are by some means or
other corrupted and vitiated and forced from their proper Bent and
Inclinations; needs no other confirmation than the great Inquietude and
Dissatisfaction they find in the best terrestrial Joys and Delights, and their
diligent and indefatigable Inquisition after some noble and permanent Good,
which may be commensurate with the vastness of their Capacities and Desires.
And although as men come into the World, their Animal Powers and Faculties
(whose proper Objects are the Results of Sense and corporeal Motion) are fully
awake, and usurp the Throne of Reason and Intellect, yet those Lordly Powers
like an oppressed Prince still lay claim to the Sovereignty and Dominion, and
whenever any due occasion is offered, give an evident proof of their heavenly
Birth and Extraction, and strive to free themselves from their unjust
Captivity, and regain their native Liberty and Command. And if by a favorable
Assistance and timely Aid the Minds of men conquer and suppress the rebellious
Passions and Desires of the mortal Body, and become in any measure healthy and
strong to relish their proper Food and Nourishment, and amidst all the
flattering Appearances and fine Shows presented to them from this outward
World, discriminate between real Good and Evil, and select true and substantial
from false and adulterate Joys, they behold with Pleasure and Enravishment a
perfect Union and Harmony between whatever Truths shall duly be propounded to
them and their rational Natures. For the Souls of men being in their general
Strictures and Lineaments Intellectual, it cannot be but that their highest
Felicity and truest Accomplishments must flow from the exercise of their higher
and more immaterial Powers, and the more spiritualized and refined they are
from baser Alloy, the more tender and apprehensive are they of whatever is
Noble and Excellent, and agreeable to the Purity of their Natures. Albeit
therefore our Faculties be depraved and debased as we appear upon the Stage of
this World, yet there being in us a strong Propension to return to our first
and primitive state, out of which we were forced by the unjust Usurpation of
Iniquity and Sin, Truth and Goodness, and all those beautiful Forms and Ideas
which shone in our Souls before their unhappy Lapse and Revolt from the blessed
Laws and Government of Gods own Life, will upon a congruous Proposal renew
their ancient League and Friendship, and conspire the utter Subversion of all
irregular Appetites and Desires, and reduce the whole Man into a strict
Obedience and Observance of the Dictates and Prescriptions of that holy and
exalted Principle of Life, which being once fully seated and radicated in our
Minds and Spirits, is alone able to make us perfectly happy and blessed. For
the Souls of men are not devoid of innate Knowledge, but are essentially stored
through the gracious Bounty and Liberality of the first and blessed Author of
all things, with the Principles of all manner of Science and Wisdom whatever,
and hence cannot but embrace and receive every thing that has any Cognation
and Affinity with those first Inscriptions on their Natures. Now the great
Happiness, Delight, and Satisfaction of every degree of Life in the World
consisting in and arising from the kindly and agreeable Actings of its chiefest
and best Faculties and Capacities, and the Nature of Man so far forth as it is
capable of moral Good and Evil, being made up of such Principles as are wholly
Intellectual, he will not only esteem the Effluxes and Emanations of the
Rational Life to be the Foundations of his Felicity, but seek the Amplification
and Diffusion of it, and reduce all exorbitant Motions to its Rules and
Determinations. And if we will not impose upon ourselves, nor degrade our Minds
below the Folly and Triflingness of Children, but act like Men who prefer
Things before empty Sounds and Names, the eternal Rules of Justice,
Righteousness, and Goodness, will appear infinitely more eligible than any
thing else in the World beside; for let a man be possessed of the most glorious
and splendid Advantages and Satisfactions that possibly can grow out of the
Earth, and let him extract the Flower and Quintessence of Sublunary Delights,
and he will find them at the best very dilute and flashy, and too base and
disproportionate Objects of a pure, active and indefatigable Mind. And were it
not that men are cheated into an Esteem and Approbation of them, partly from
the Example of others, who daily run the greatest Hazards and Labors in their
Acquisition and Purchase, and partly, from the innate Pravity and Iniquity of
their own Spirits, which being preingag'd in an early Contention after the
things of Sense, are more forcibly struck and moved by the Emissions and
Radiations of the Corporeal World; it were exceeding improbable they should
forego such valuable and excellent Pleasures as those of Virtue and Holiness,
for the small and inconsiderable, though the most refined Joys of this Region
of Mutability, especially when they are perpetually attended with such instant
Satieties and afflictive Circumstances. That blessed Author of our Felicity the
Lord Christ, who both knew the Sovereign Good of our Spirits, and designed the
Cementing and Restoration of the broken and distracted World by entering into
it, makes it his first care and business to purge and refine our Minds from the
Dross and Pollution of material Concretions, by bringing down the Price of
terrestrial Love, and setting a low Estimate upon what the World calls
Happiness, Riches and Honors and all the choicest Gratifications of the
inferior Life, and propounding not only such Precepts as in their own nature
tended to the raising and elevating the Powers and Faculties of our Souls to
their highest and most enlarged Perfection, and which by our Conformity to them
should fully satisfy all our rational Thirsts and Appetites, but likewise
revives our languishing Resolutions, and reinspirits our Minds with new
Strength and Vigor by his own Example, as the most attractive and powerful
Means that possibly can be offered to an ingenuous Nature. All the time that he
conversed upon Earth, he went about doing good, transcribing the fairest and
most amiable Perfections and Attributes of the moral Essence of God for our
Imitation, redressing and healing the Imperfections of Mankind, and casting a
benign and auspicious Influence upon the distempered World, by propagating and
diffusing the holy Life of God into all capable Receptacles. And that he might
show us what a small and mean Valuation he puts upon mundane and temporal
Felicities, and how little they contribute to the Advancement of that which is
the Flower and Summity of our Souls, he commands great Temperance and
Moderation both in the Prosecution and Use of them, and declares a high Dislike
against all Exorbitancy and Excess, condemning all anxious and solicitous
Thoughts about these momentany Concernments as criminous and faulty. And what
he enjoined upon his Disciples and Followers, he himself always observed and
practiced, never disquieting his holy Breast with doubtful and corroding Cares,
nor charging Heaven with Partiality and Unkindness, though he became so poor
for our sakes that he was forced by a Miracle to pay his Tribute-penny to the
Roman Governor. His blameless and immaculate Soul no impure touch of Pleasure
ever defiled, nor unjust and unhallowed Action ever stained and sullied its
native Brightness, but remained to his dying upon the Cross a spotless Temple
eternally consecrated to the Divinity residing in it. But that which did most
of all allure and attract the Hearts and Spirits of men, was his exceeding and
superlative Charity, which not only burnt bright within its own Orb, but by a
sacred Influence and Communication melted and thawed the benumbed and frozen
World into a soft, pliable, and sequacious temper, and set abroad a Godlike
Spirit of universal Tenderness, Pity, and Compassion upon the Earth. And that
so illustrious a Person might want nothing to recommend his Life to Mankind as
the most complete Pattern of the Divine Nature, his Patience exhibited in a
noble sufferance of all those Ignominies and Disgraces put upon him, made him
no less conspicuous than those other radiant Virtues rendered him acceptable to
God and Man. And if there be any thing more that is worthy and decorous, and
perfective of the Nature of Man, it was eminently contained in the Lord Christ,
whose glorious Mind was too large and great to bring forth any poor and abject
Design, but took the whole World into his Care, and folded the Creation within
the Arms of dear Compassion. By all this and much more we are taught wherein
consists the greatest Excellency, Beauty and Dignity of our Souls; namely, in
the Acts of Goodness, Righteousness, and Mercy, in profound Humility, and
Self-Denial, in Patience, Longanimity, and uncorrupted Purity of Body and
Spirit. For these and such like Heroical Exertions of our Minds bring not only
a present Delight and Gratefulness with them, but pervade by a secret and
insensible Influence all our Animal Powers, and diffuse a certain Savor and
Relish of themselves throughout our inferior Faculties. As it is with Vice and
Sin, every pitiful and degenerate Production of which spreads its contagious
Nature, and leavens our whole Man with its poisonous and infectious
Inspirations: so much more will Truth and Righteousness disseminate a healthful
Efflux, and hallow our vital Capacities, as being the most congenerous and
agreeable Objects of our intellectual Parts. The Life of God which alone ought
to have the Sovereign Command over the whole rational Creation, and which will
in due time conquer and triumph over the dark and apostate Principality; that
Life, I say, of universal Sanctity and Righteousness is an immortal thing like
its great Source and Parent, and is always passing through the World, and will
not rest any where but in such a fit and congruous Subject, as bears some
Analogy and Similitude with itself: And being once seated there (unless it be
forcibly driven out by rebellious Lusts, to which it proclaims an
irreconcilable War) it will continually dispread its lovely Nature, and
enlarge its Kingdom by the total Consumption or Conversion into its own
Likeness and Quality, whatever resists and hinders its Progress, and at last,
when freed from the sluggish weight of Mortality, like a quick and active Flame
carry up the Soul with Joy and Triumph into Heaven, to which it always breaths
and aspires. Heaven itself is nothing but the blessed Mansion of Righteousness,
a State of pure and undefiled Light, whose happy and glorious Inhabitants are
perfectly delivered from the Bondage and Servility of Corruption, and Goodness,
and Justice, and all the Moral Excellencies of Divinity enthroned within their
sacred Breasts. And every good Man does not only presage, but really possesses
in this Life a part of his future Happiness, when the Divine Nature thoroughly
informs, possesses, and actuates the Powers and Faculties of his Mind, and he
faithfully attends to, and is guided and governed by its Laws and Suggestions.
And he whose Soul and Spirit, thus becomes an Habitation of Righteousness, is
in a sense Deified, and God dwells in him, and he is united to that Omnipresent
Spirit of Love and Purity. For that Divine Nature, the Participation of which
is the End and Design of the whole Gospel, is not Power and Wisdom, but
something more precious and sovereign: for if a man had all Power, that he
could remove Mountains, and with his breath stop the constant Gyres and
Circulations of the Earth; and if he had all Wisdom and Knowledge, to
understand the abstrusest Theory in Nature and Providence, and could persuade
with the Rhetoric and Oratory of an Angel; yet if he had not Charity, the Bond
of Perfection which not only consolidates and holds together the great Body
Politic of Heaven and Earth, but is the Root and Center in which all the lines
of Beauty and Excellence in Human Souls unite and meet; he would have no more
of the true Life and Spirit of Christianity in him, than a tinkling and
sounding Piece of Brass. Love is the Joy of Men and Angels, the Glory of
Heaven, and the first pregnant Spring and Source from whence issued all the
numerous Productions of the Spiritual and Corporeal Life. For God is Love, and
Love is that (to speak with Reverence) makes the Divinity a Uniform Being, all
other Modes and Attributes being too fluctuating, arbitrary, and unsettled to be
the Basis and Foundation of that ever-to-be-adored Author of all things. And as
Goodness is the most precious thing in the Deity, and for that reason alone
obtains the first place in acting, so is it that which consummates and
completes all moral Agents that derive from him; Power and Wisdom and all other
Modes being nothing but the several Explications and Diffusions of absolute
Goodness. But that we may not mistake ourselves, the Philosopher tells us of a
(...), a Harlotry as well as a Heavenly Venus, whereby the Soul is enamored
with these fading Beauties, and ensnared by the powerful Inescations of Sense
and Corporeity, and this weakens and destroys the Soul; but it is the celestial
Venus that is the beautiful and perfective Object of Human Minds, and by its
Union with it changes and transforms the Soul into its glorious Image. And what
we have hitherto said, is no more than what the natural Sentiments of our own
Souls bear witness to, and all the moral part of Ethnic Philosophy attests,
which was wholly employed in laying down Rules and Precepts for the regulating
men's Lives, and putting a stop to the bold Intrusion of Vice; and this was
universally acknowledged the only way to acquire a Cognation and Affinity with
God: And what was judged laudable and decorous then, and approved as most
excellent, is made much more so by the Christian Economy, which sets the
Seize of a rational Soul at a higher pitch, than the secular Wisdom and
Philosophy of the Gentiles could arrive to. For what more ennobles and
inspirits the Mind of Man with true Glory and Magnanimity, than the captivating
his irrational Desires, and suppressing all inordinate Lusts and Appetites, and
the introducing a Spirit of Love, Meekness, Temperance, and Sobriety? What more
Divine and Godlike than Charity? to bind up an aching head, and dry up watery
eyes, and relieve him who was fighting with the Pressures of Want and Poverty?
What greater Pleasure can we reasonably imagine, than that which results from
an Act of Goodness and Bounty, whether it respect the Souls or Bodies of our
Fellow Creatures; in extricating him who was involved in a Labyrinth of Misery,
and bringing the cheerful Day to him who sat in a Night of Ignorance and
Error? Which things, if duly considered, as they are very agreeable and
proportionate to our higher and rational Soul, so they depretiate the grosser
Satisfactions of our viler parts, and make good this first Proposition, That
the true Felicity of Human Souls, results from their Participation of the
Divine Nature.

2. The Gospel shows us the true way to obtain this complete Perfection of our
Spirits, that it is by an universal Purification of our Minds from all
Pollution whatever, and an entire Resignation of ourselves to the Conduct of
the Divine Life and Light. But it will be said that Philosophy teaches as much
as this, and the Pythagoreans, Platonists, and Stoics asserted the highest
Perfection of the Soul to consist in her Union with God, which is obtained by a
perfect Extirpation of all irregular Motions, and an abstraction of the Soul
from her Love and Sympathy with the Body, and transforming her wholly into
Intellect; For the Passions and sensual Affections being once subdued, and the
Rational Life excited, the Soul becomes presently like unto God, as Porphyry
speaks, (...). Lib. 3. (...).
And Hierocles shows us the Scope and End of this (...) or Purgation of the
Mind, namely, (...). Wherefore although the Heathens by the Light of Nature
proceeded to the eradication of Vice out of their Minds, yet they retained
still an arrogative Life, ascribing the Seize and Perfections of their
Souls, and their whole Progress in Virtue to their own solitary Endeavors, and
this their Spiritual and subtle Pride tainted and infected the best of their
other Performances; So that though they were glorious Lights in their
Generations, yet they fell short of the Character of a true Christian, which is
an entire Subjection of a Man's self to the Government and Command of the Life
of God, being perfectly dead to all Self-seeking and Interest, and no otherwise
affected to ourselves than if we were not: And this heavenly Temper the Divine
Providence reserved for the meek and humble Soul of the Messiah to bring into
the World, who has resumed that as the most compendious way to Blessedness,
which was rejected by the wise men of the World.

3. He that shall impartially and without Prejudice peruse the Evangelical
Histories, shall find that there is not any thing recorded in them vain and
trivial, but such as is of the highest moment and importance, and some way or
other useful and advantageous for the Propagation of Christianity in the World:
and for those things which seem most liable to the Exceptions and Cavils of
vile and profane Persons, I shall endeavor to show their Reasonableness, and
how becoming and decorous it was to insert them in the Histories of the Gospel.
It is too well known that there are a sort of Men in the World, whose Minds are
so deeply tinctured with Sadducean and Atheistical Principles, that, being
otherwise furnished with a quaint Volubility of Speech, and some Smatterings of
Philosophy in this knowing Age, deem it the highest Improvement of their Wit to
laugh and jeer at that profound Wisdom which is found in Christianity, now
accusing its Dogmata of Impossibilities and Contradictions, and then scoffing
at the Historical Part as Fabulous and Romantic, clearly discovering that
their grand Drift is to leaven the Minds of men with that pernicious and
venomous Doctrine, That there is nothing but Matter in the World.

To begin therefore with the Birth of the blessed Jesus and the Circumstances
attending of it, as of the Star which led the Wise Men to him, and of their
Adoration of him, that these things are not indecorous and ridiculous, nor
impertinently recorded, but suitable and agreeable to the Nativity of so great a
Person. That a Virgin should conceive and bring forth a Child, Christ why born
of a Virgin.
ought to be no such strange thing to the Jew, since their Prophets have
foretold that it should so come to pass, particularly in Isa. vii. 14. Behold a
Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. And if
this were not to be understood of a pure and immaculate Virgin, where were that
Sign which God by his Prophet ushers in with such Solemnity; Ask thee a sign of
the Lord thy God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height above: for
nothing is more ordinary in the World than that a young Woman should bring
forth a Child: Add to this, that the Jewish Rabbis teach, that the Generation
and Nativity of the Messiah shall not be after the manner of other Creatures by
carnal Copulation, but after an extraordinary manner, and his Father shall be
unknown till he himself reveal him. Nor ought it to be thought a thing
impossible by the Gentiles, since they affirm many of their Heroes to be the
Sons of the Gods; and Plato is said to be begotten on Perictione by Apollo, who
forbad Aristo to have any familiarity with his Wife, till Plato was born. But
to them that believe a just and righteous Providence governing all the Affairs
of the Universe, it is obvious to conceive, that all Souls are sent into the
World according to their Demerits in a former Life; and therefore as a deeply
lapsed Soul descends into an inequal and monstrous Body, from which Adunation
can result no other than a brutish, cruel, and intemperate Life, and a Pronity
to all other Vices arising from such an Asymmetral and inhospitable Society; so
the pure and immaculate Soul of Jesus, must assume a terrestrial Body after an
unusual manner, more pure than the rest, that it might be free from Sin and
Pollution as well as fitted to converse with Men, and that he might in it teach
an extraordinary Temperance, Justice, and Goodness, and all other Virtues by
his Life as by his Doctrine. For neither would the Justice of God precipitate so
great a Soul into an unfit and incongruous Habitation, nor its eximious Purity
admit of an Union with an inquinated and filthy Body.

Of the Star.
Nor is it any whit incongruous that an unusual Star should attend the Rising of
the glorious Sun of Righteousness; for though it be commonly said of Comets,
(...), that no one appears to the World but portends some Mischief, which
Historians plentifully observe, and hence is that of Claudian, Nunquam
futilibus excanduit ignibus Ether,
Et nunquam coelo spectatum impune Cometen.
Yet Origin in his first Book against Celsus affirms, that Chaeremon the Stoic
in his Treatise of Comets proves by several Instances out of Histories that
Comets sometimes presage the Approach of good things The same the College of
Priests affirmed of the Comet that appeared at the Ludi Veneris Genet^icis
instituted by Augustus. Plin. l. 2 c. 25. And Virg. Ecl 4. Ecce Dionaei
processit Caesaris Astrum.
. If then those great and wandering Globes be looked upon as the
Presignificators of great Changes and Alterations in the World, what wonder is
it that the Birth of Jesus who should work so mighty a Mutation upon Earth, and
introduce a Religion universal and common to all Mankind, should be declared by
a new and stranger Star? And if it be said, that it is impossible for a Star in
the Heavenly Regions, to design punctually so small a place as a particular
House upon Earth; I answer, that the Magi found the House wherein Jesus was,
not only by the disappearing and vanishing of the Star over it, but (...), by a
diligent Search and Inquisition after the Child, perhaps of the Shepherds who
were not far distant keeping watch over their Flocks.

It remains now, that we Apologize for the other part of the History, viz. Of
the Wise Men.
The coming of the Wise Men from the East to Jerusalem; to which purpose it
will be requisite to consider the Quality of these Magi, who probably were none
of these grosser sort of Sorcerers that make an express Compact with the Devil,
but such as receiving from others certain forms and mysterious Conjurations,
use them as they were delivered to them, without enquiring further into their
Nature: And perhaps the black Society may oblige themselves to attend such dark
and hidden Mysteries, whether the Transactors of them know them to be theirs or
not. But whether these Magi were such, or had a more open and visible Commerce
with evil Spirits, it matters not, since this is certain, that the airy
Principality can act no further, where a more divine and excellent Power
intervenes. Wherefore through the mighty Virtue of the Divinity residing in the
Soul of Jesus, and the unexpected descent of a glorious Host of Angels to these
terrestrial Regions, singing an Anthem of Praise at the Birth of Jesus, it came
to pass that the Power of the airy Principality was on a sudden restrained, and
an universal Chilness and Horror ran through the dark Kingdom, so that they
were unable to attend their own Hellish Mysteries, which the Magi perceiving,
their usual Incantations not succeeding, nor the accustomed Effects following
their secret Rites and Ceremonies, they began to think the Cause of this
unexpected Accident to be extraordinary, and knowing the Prophecy of Balaam,
that a star should come out of Jacob, and a scepter rise out of Israel,
conjectured that the Man foretold to come with the Apparition of a Star, was
now born into the World, and believing him to have a transcendent Power over
the aereal Agents, resolved to come and worship him, presenting him with the
choicest Gifts of Arabia, Gold and Myrrh and Frankincense, as to a King, a Man,
and a God. And if any man desire a further Mystery, he may take the learned
Grotius his Observation, that by these three are denoted those three
Evangelical Sacrifices which through Christ we offer unto God, viz. Works of
Charity and Mercy, Phil. iv. 18. Incorrupted Purity of Body, Romans xii. 1. and
Prayers, Psalm. cxli. 2.

We that are Christians are taught in the Gospel, that Jesus Christ, the
Savior of Mankind, is God as well as Man; Christ God and Man.
and this Truth being of so high and great concern, we not only believe, but
are ready to give all possible Satisfaction to the Jew and Heathen: To the Jew
we say, that it was long ago declared by their own Prophets, Isa. ix. 6. For
unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulder; and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. This the more ancient
Rabbis always interpreted of the Messiah, and it is but a groundless Conceit of
R. Solomon's to transfer it to Hezekiah; for who sees not that these
Appellations of the mighty God, and the everlasting Father, cannot possibly
agree to Hezekiah? Again Chap. vii. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear
a son, and shall call his name Immanuel: i. e. God with us, God dwelling and
conversing in Human Nature. And by the Heathens this Mystery was not thought
impossible, since Julian believes that Aesculapius the Son of Jupiter descended
from Heaven and was incarnate, appearing first at Epidaurum, then in many other
places, that he might cure the Bodies and restore the Souls of men to their
pristine Rectitude and Perfection. And is there any greater Difficulty in
believing that the Word, the blessed Son of God, was once incarnate and dwelt
among us? But further to make out this great Truth to those that already
believe the Histories of the Gospel to be true: 1. We may take a view of those
many Operations Jesus performed in the Nature he assumed, some of which were
incommunicable and only proper to the Deity, such are, to work a true and real
Miracle, to forgive Sins, and to institute true and religious Worship. He was
hungry, which showed him to be a man, and yet fed above five thousand with five
loaves and two fishes, whereby he manifested his Divinity. He thirsted, yet to
others he gave rivers of living waters to fertilize their Souls, and quench and
allay their Thirst. He was weary, yet he calls to him all those that are weary
and heavy laden, and promises Refreshment: though he were dumb and opened not
his mouth, yet was he that Word by which all things were made: He lays down his
Life, yet had he Power to take it up again. 2. There is nothing in the Divine
Nature to contradict or prejudice this Union, but very much to be drawn from
thence for it. For Divine Goodness willing universally to communicate itself in
measures and degrees, assisted by an eternal Wisdom, found out this way of
Union with Human Nature, as most fit for an Universal Communication, wherein
the Divine Life is perfectly exhibited, and all Perfection is as it were
epitomized. 3. There is a mighty Congruity and Sutableness in this Mystery with
the Design of perfecting and restoring lapsed Souls. For the eternal Logos
bringing out of his Ideal Fecundity into actual Existence the whole Rational
Creation, it is highly agreeable with Divine Wisdom, that by the same Word all
fallen Beings should be again restored; that the first and blessed Cause of
their Existence should also be the Author of their Recovery and Return to the
perfect Law of Gods own Nature. And if beside we consider that all the
Creatures are but the Effects and Emanations of that mighty and potent Word,
outwardly produced and brought into actual Life and Being; the Conjunction and
Union of the eternal Mind with Human Nature will appear exceeding congruous. 4.
No Dishonor can accrue to the blessed Nature of God by such a state in which
there is no Evil, Turpitude, or Defilement. The Brightness of the Divine Sun is
no whit obscured by the adjunction of the Humanity, but the Humanity is made
more glorious and transcendent by being exalted into the Fellowship of the
Divinity. 5. The Obscurity and Incomprehensibleness of this Mystery ought not
to prejudice our Belief of it, since that many things in Nature are in the dark
to us, and that faint and glimmering Knowledge which we have of them is only
cojnectural, not demonstrative; we know there is an Union between Soul and
Body, but the manner of it is unknown and hid from us, and if we believe no
further than we can comprehend, we must be Scepticks in Religion as well as
Philosophy. Yet something we may collect from the Union of Soul and Body, as
also of other Natural Compositions, that forasmuch as they are extremely
distant and unlike in their Nature and Proprieties, and yet united to the
making of one Compositum; therefore the Immensity of the Divinity can be no
hindrance from taking Humanity into an Union and Association with it. 6 We
cannot doubt, but that God who is immense and omnipresent, may manifest a
peculiar Presence in this or the other particular place, as seems best to
himself. That infinite Nature which pervades and is extended through the vast
Capacities of immense Space, can as easily actuate, inhabit and fill a Human
Soul and Body; nor is the Divinity contracted or diminished by being united to
a Creature, but being diffused through all places, manifests itself by a more
special Inhabitation in the sacred Temple of the Soul of Jesus. We see the Soul
of Man dilating itself through our corporeal Fabric, expressing its Activity
and Presence by the exceeding quick Sensibility of every part, and yet has its
peculiar Center and Residence in the Brain; and cannot God, in whom are found
all possible Perfections, manifest his peculiar and Divine Presence to the ever
faithful and obedient Soul of the Messiah?

Hitherto I have declared the great Excellency and Becomingness of the Truths
of the Gospel, and shall conclude this general Head with the Recitation of two
or three Objections more, made by the Jews against our Savior, and recorded in
the Histories of the Gospel.

Object. 1. The first we find in John vii. 48. Have any of the Rulers, or of
the Pharisees believed on him? But this People who knows not the Law are
cursed.

Answ. 1. To this I return, that inasmuch as the great Synagogue and Rulers of
the Jews rejected Jesus, and would not acknowledge him to be the expected
Messiah, the more reason had others to believe in him: for their own Prophets
long ago predicted the Rejection of the Messiah by the Jewish Nation, who
should be so obstinately blind, that they should not know him when he came into
the world; as we read in Psalm. cxviii. 22. The stone which the builders refused
is become the head stone of the corner: so likewise in Isa. vi. 10. Make the
heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and convert and be healed. To which purpose is that Saying of R. Judas
in the Talmud, That when the Son of David shall come, there shall be few wise
men in Israel, and the wisdom of the Scribes shall stink, and the Schools of
the Prophets shall become Brothel-houses.

2. The holy Jesus wanted not Disciples even among the wise men of the Jews;
such was Simeon the Just, the Scholar of Hillel, who was filled with the Holy
Ghost, and after whose Death, that Divine Spirit which inspired the great
Synagogue, departed from them. John the Baptist who not only acknowledged
Christ himself, but sent his Disciples to him, as to that Lamb of God, who came
to take away the sins of the world: and Gamaliel is said to have followed the
Apostles, and to have been Simeon's Scholar: And St. Paul who was a man of
great Repute and Esteem with the Jews, and sat at the feet of Gamaliel, yet
was afterward an Apostle of the holy Jesus: and Josephus further informs us,
that the more sober and serious Jews, who were Lovers of the Truth, were such
as followed Jesus, and those that were studious and zealous for the Law,
sharply rebuked Ananus the High Priest for commanding the Disciples of Jesus to
be stoned.

Object. 2. Acts i. 6. Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom
to Israel? It was a current Opinion among the Jews in our Saviors time, that
the Messiah should be a Temporal Monarch, and redeem them from the yoke of the
Romans; as appears from this Question of the Disciples, who doubtless spoke the
general sense of the Jews; but they finding nothing in the Attempts and Actions
of Jesus tending that way, hence they could not believe him to be the promised
Messiah.

Answ. Christ came into the World, such as he was foretold to be, that is,
humble and meek, not with the Splendour and Glory of an earthly Prince, but poor
and despicable, a man of sorrows, and without form and comeliness; as it is
predicted by Zechariah the Prophet, Zech. ix. 9. and Isa. liii. The End and
Design of his coming was to appease the Anger of God, by devoting himself for
the Sins of men; to destroy the Kingdom of the Devil, and to make one body of
Jews and Gentiles, of which he himself should be the Head. And it is no way fit
and agreeable for such an Undertaking to appear in earthly Splendour and Glory,
filling the World with Blood and Slaughter like another Alexander or Caesar, by
the Puissance of mighty Armies. Wherefore the holy Jesus being to disseminate
and promote the blessed Life of God upon Earth, showed his Divinity more
refulgent by Vileness and Contempt, his Power by Weakness and Infirmity, his
Glory by the Scorns of men, and his Almighty Life and Virtue by Death and the
Grave. And if he had otherwise descended from the celestial Mansions, than the
Scriptures relate, Man had entitled himself to part of the Glory of his
Undertaking, and the more splendid the Divine Life had appeared to outward
view, with the fainter Luster had it shone in itself. Besides that that Doctrine
which Christ was to bring into the World, and render acceptable to men by his
own Example, was quite contrary to the Gratifications of the Animal Life, and
too vile and base to be essential to the Perfection of Human Nature.

Object. 3. Mat. xxvii. 40. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross.

Answ. He that came into the World clothed with human Flesh, and in the several
Actions of his Life manifested himself to be a true Man, would now in this last
Act keep a Decorum; that as he was born into the world like other men,
partaking really of Flesh and Blood, and all the Frailties and Infirmities of
Mankind, Sin only excepted; so he would die like other men, and suffer a real
Separation of his Soul from his Body, that we might be conformable to him in
his Death, and die unto Sin, crucifying all our inordinate Lusts and
Affections, and descending into the Grave with him by a profound Humility and
Mortification; which is a sufficient Answer to this insulting Cavil of the
Jews, that if Jesus were the Son of God, he must needs demonstrate it by a
miraculous Descent from the Cross.

CHAP. IV. That-Christianity is every way fitted and accommodated for an
effectual Recovery of lapsed and degenerated Mankind.
TO this purpose we must consider Man as a rational Being, endued with Liberty
of Will, and a Lord of his own Actions, and consequently must be treated
according to those Faculties and Qualifications bestowed upon him by the
gracious Bounty of his Creator. And this being the Nature of Man, he is not to
be dealt withal like a Stock or Stone, that is wholly inert and sluggish; nor
like a Beast that is acted and led only by the impulse of Sense; but as endued
with Reason and Intellect, and capable of discriminating between real Good and
Evil; and this Principle in Man cannot be forced without the Destruction of his
Nature, but is allured and drawn by moral Arguments. Wherefore the Design of
God in the Gospel being to wind men off from Sin to a serious pursuit of Virtue
and Goodness, he makes use of such Arguments as are most powerful and
efficacious for that end, and most suitable to the Nature of Man: As

1. What can more deter men from Wickedness and Vice, than the sober pressing
upon them the Consideration of a future day of Judgment, wherein the just Judge
of Heaven and Earth will impartially look into their Lives, and dispose of them
according to the moral Frame and Disposition of their Spirits? To them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality,
eternal Life: But to them who do not obey the Gospel, he will recompense
Tribulation and Wrath. He that is convinced that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, must likewise believe, that though God be patient and long-suffering, not
willing that any should perish; yet he is likewise just, and hates all Sin
whatever; and to convince all unbelieving and Atheistical Persons of his
Displeasure against Wickedness and Vice, he has appointed a Day wherein he will
judge the World; a Day wherein Jesus Christ the blessed Son of God shall
visibly descend from Heaven, accompanied with innumerable Legions of mighty
Angels, before whose Throne all wicked Men and Devils shall stand with Paleness
and Horror, expecting the Pronuntiation of that dreadful Sentence, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire; which final Doom and Sentence shall presently be
executed upon them; for through the stupendous Operation of the Son of God,
the infernal Treasures of Fire shall be opened, and an universal Deluge of
Flame shall spread itself over the Face of the aged Earth, which shall be cleft
and riven by terrible Eruptions of sulphurous Matter, breaking forth with
horrible Rage and Fury from the lower Regions, and this together with Showers
of Fire raining down from thick and pitchy Clouds, shall wrap Universal Nature
in a sheet of Flame, and complete an external Hell, where the Worm dies not,
and the Fire is not quenched. Tell me then, O Man, thou that think
Righteousness but an idle Name, on whose hard and stubborn soul a Discourse of
another Life can make no Impression; where will be the Objects of thy Love and
Joy, when the Heavens shall be dissolved, the Elements melt with fervent Heat,
and the Earth with all the works therein be burnt up? What shall support and
bear up thy dying Hopes, when all sensible things shall perish in this dreadful
Conflagration? Think thou that the Holes of the Rocks, or the secret Caverns
of the Mountains can hide thee from his Eye which pierces through Obscurity;
who is every where present by his mighty Power, and to whom the Night is as
bright as Noonday? Or will that just Judge, who sits upon the Life and Death
of all the Sons of Adam, be bribed with thy Gold and Silver, when the whole
World is his, and the Fullness thereof? Surely nothing but Righteousness will
then deliver from Death, nothing but Innocence and Purity, white as the Beams
of Light, can save the Souls of men from eternal Destruction: Wickedness and
Sin like a Talent of Lead shall sink down those Souls that have delighted in
it, into that sulphurous Lake where a most acute and searching Pain shall
stick close to them, and unspeakable Torments weary their restless Ghosts for
ever. A sad and pitiable Calamity! but as just as great; for the blessed Author
of all things does not make Laws to ensnare the Creation, nor does he directly
and primarily intend Punishment, but has entailed that upon Disobedience, that
men might consider and beware, and in time provide for their Reception into all
that Happiness God made them for, and which he by threatening Punishment, so
affectionately desires they should enjoy.

2. That there might be nothing wanting to enforce the foregoing Consideration,
the Scripture manifestly resolves our good or ill Being in the other Life to
depend upon our Deportment in this. It is in this life that we lay the trains
of our future Happiness or Misery, and every moral Action has an Influence
either good or bad upon Eternity; and here it is that we have a vital Union and
Conjunction either with Hell or Heaven. To be born into this World, is not only
a Punishment, but a state of Probation to us Mortals, wherein he that acquits
himself generously and nobly, fighting manfully against the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil, and returns with the Spoils and Trophies of his conquered
Enemies to his beloved Lord, shall be crowned with an eternal weight of Glory;
but he that through faint-heartedness and cowardice yields himself a willing
Captive to his Lusts and Corruptions, sparing those rebellious Sins and
Affections, with whom the Captain of our Salvation has sworn War for ever, he
combines and unites himself to a living Hell; and no sooner is his Soul
dislodged from its earthly Fabric, but it descends into those Regions of
Bitterness and Sorrow, with which it so wilfully sought a Cognation and
Affinity in this Life. And he that will but patiently lend an ear to this,
cannot so obstinately forsake his own good, nor delay and put off his
Repentance by imagining the day of Judgment a great way off, and not likely to
overtake him: For no sooner has Death disseized him of his terrestrial
Tenement, but that universal Nemesis which pervades the whole World, will
fatally convey him to such a Place and Society, as he had prepared and
accommodated himself for here on Earth. And he that obstinately rejects the
Counsel of God, and sets at naught all his Reproofs, will find that the Wrath
of the Lord can reach him, and he will have little or no Possibility left to
better himself in the other World.

3. For the more ingenuous sort, who are rather attracted and won by the
Expressions of Kindness and Love, than the Fear of external Punishment; what
can more prevail with them, than to behold the ever-blessed Son of God, who
lived in the boundless Tracts of Truth and Righteousness, forsake those
celestial Mansions, and come down and take a Body of Flesh and Blood, and here
lead an obscure and evanid Life, persecuted and afflicted, never seeing good
days, but always carrying an heart full of Pensiveness and Sorrow, and at last
die a painful and ignominious Death upon the Cross; and all this to recover and
free the race of Mankind from the Tyranny and Slavery of Sin? What can this but
beget a suitable return of Love in every ingenuous Soul? What kind heart is
there that this Spectacle will not fill with Tears of Love and Joy, and with
the most endearing Expressions devote itself to a faithful Obedience of so
compassionate a Savior?

4. The Promises of the Gospel are most suitable means for the reinstating men
in the Possession of Gods own Life, that possibly can be offered to the World.
For he that considers how deeply Vice and Iniquity are radicated in our very
Natures; and what great Diligence and Care is required to extirpate even a
single Habit, which of a long time has gotten an entire and full possession of
our minds; and withal reflects on the crazy and sickly state of our most
generous and manly Faculties, how bedwarfed and unable they are to resist,
through a continued imbibition of a sweet Poison from Sense; cannot but
conclude the Evangelical Economy would be very lame and imperfect, were it not
instructed and furnished with Arguments sufficient to countermand and
outbalance the importunate Solicitations of the degenerate Principles of
Unrighteousness and Sin. And indeed were not a Crown of Glory the great (...)
of our holy Faith, were not Virtue countenanced with an appendent Felicity, the
Face of the World would now appear as squalid and deformed, as in its first and
greatest Brutishness and Barbarity: For who would seek the Renovation of
decayed Righteousness, or who would entertain afflicted and oppressed Holiness,
if its Reward did not fully answer and compensate whatever Troubles,
Difficulties, and Molestations do attend it? Who would buy Religion with the
Expense of all his temporal Interests, nay of his Life itself, if he were not
assured the Happiness laid up for holy and incorrupt Souls, did infinitely
transcend and exceed the choicest Pleasures and Gratifications that are to be
met withal in this Region of Mutability? And that such a Course and Order of
things should be taken, is not only a merciful Provision of the good and wise
Creator of all things toward us Sons of Sense, but gives us a full Evidence
and Assurance that his Intentions for the Recovery of the World are real and
sincere, and renders unsuspected the grand Dispensation of Christianity. For
had the Gospel propounded only intellectual Notions, and solicited our choice
by things most remote from Sense, while we were so fatally entangled and
oppressed with the Encumbrances of dull Mortality; such a Design would rather
confound and amaze the Faculties and Capacities of men, than prove any whit
serviceable for the regaining their ancient Liberty and Command; like a potent
and vigorous Light set before weak and distempered Eyes, which rather blinds
than affords them a true and faithful discrimination of Objects. Wherefore
Divine Wisdom has treated the Sons of men after a sensible manner, and engaged
them by Arguments that more forcibly strike their Fancies and Imaginations, and
have a greater Influence for the promoting the indispensable Duties of Sanctity
and Truth, than any terrestrial Pleasure can possibly be allective to the
contrary. It Is true, if Religion could consist with Avarice, Vainglory, and
Ambition, the covetous Miser who rips up the Bowels of the Earth for Treasure,
and spins out his Life in a golden Thread, would become a Proselyte; and he who
seeks to ride upon the shoulders of the Multitude, and lives upon the Air and
Breath of Popular Applause, would need no Inducements to turn Christian: But
when things go directly contrary, and he that will be a sincere Disciple of the
Son of God, must crucify his rebellious Lusts, and descend into the Grave of
Mortification, and cashier every inordinate Motion and Desire that hinders or
any way obstructs his approach to so inestimable a good, as the Possession of
the blessed Life of God; and this not to be done without indefatigable Industry
and Care, and as it were a Dilaceration of himself from himself, that is, a
forcible Subjection of that grand Principle of our Apostasy and Deviation from
God, which is so mischievously powerful, to the Commands and Laws of our
superior Life; there is no man can doubt, but that the Promises of the Gospel
are infinitely necessary, in order to that weighty Design eternal Wisdom seeks
to carry on by the Promulgation of them to the World.

Which Promises we may refer to these three general Heads, 1. Pardon of all our
Sins upon a true Repentance and sincere Conformity of our Minds and Spirits to
the Will of God. And this was the great End of Christ's coming into the World,
that he might reconcile it unto God, and assure guilty Sinners who had made
themselves obnoxious to Divine Wrath and Displeasure, that if they will return
to their Loyalty and Obedience, and express an unfeigned Repentance by sincere
Purposes and Resolutions of a new Life, God will forgive their past Trespasses,
and remember their Iniquities no more. The whole Gospel, what else is it, but a
free and gracious Declaration of Pardon and Forgiveness to the World? which, as
it takes away all direful and jealous Thoughts, which criminal Persons through
a Conscience of their own Guiltiness and Sin, and frequent Presages of Divine
Vengeance, are apt to retain of God; so it gives them a true and faithful
Representation of his Nature, that he is no dreadful and hurtful Being
encircled with Tempests and devouring Flames, no Tyrant whose arbitrary Love or
Hate are the Rules and Laws of his Government; but an Almighty Goodness whose
pregnant Fecundity gave Life and Being to the whole Creation, and studiously
endeavors the Conservation of all things in all that Happiness their Natures
are capable of. This was it to which the holy Jesus bare witness, and published
to the Sons of men by going about doing good, and diffusing a Spirit of real
Righteousness throughout the World: He took it upon his Death that this was
true, that God did infinitely desire the Reconciliation of the World to
himself, and that not for any Self Ends or Designs (for what can accrue to him
who is infinite Life, and eternally possessed of whatever speaks Perfection?)
but for the sole Good and Welfare of things themselves, that every Being might
obtain that Place and Order in the Universe, and enjoy all that Felicity to
which it was at first intended, and from which nothing but its own wilful
Wretchedness could degrade it. For Gods Justice is nothing but his Goodness,
Power, and Wisdom employed for the Maintenance and Conservation of what is
eternally just and right; and if this may be done without Extremity and Rigor,
his Goodness does as much oblige him to take the gentlest and mildest Course,
as any man can pretend his Justice for exact Punishment and Severity. But that
all the Attributes of the Deity might be at once secured, and fallen Man
restored to a Capacity of being made happy again, Christ appearing in human
Nature has undertaken the Cause of Man, and given himself a Ransom for all,
the Punishment due to us being transferred on him, and through the Sacrifice
and Death of Jesus, God is upon terms of Peace and Friendship with the World,
and proclaims a free Indulgence to all who will lay down their Hostility and
Rebellion, and become obedient Subjects to his Kingdom. God takes no advantage
against any man to destroy him, and it is a horrid Impiety in us, to suspect him
of Treachery and Deceit; and to represent God to our minds in such a fearful
Garb and Image, as eternally wishing the Destruction of the greatest part of
his Creatures, is no less Idolatry, than to fall down and worship the Works of
our own hands.

2. The powerful Assistance of Gods Spirit to enable us to perform his
Commands. When the great Love the holy Apostles bare to the Lord Christ, made
them sorrowful for his Departure, they supposing he would then leave them to
the Mercies of a faithless and perverse Generation; he takes Compassion on his
Charge, and assures them that when the time comes that his bodily Presence
should be withdrawn from them, he would not leave them destitute and forsaken;
but send the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth unto them, who should not only
perform the Office of an Advocate, in pleading and maintaining the Justice of
his Cause against the unrighteous World, but be a Principle of Love and Purity
in their hearts, and conduct them through the various Windings and Obliquities
of Error and Falsehood into the plain and easy Paths of Truth and
Righteousness. And for a Confirmation of this Promise, he appeals to common
Sense and the Evidence of all Mankind; If ye who are evil know how to give good
gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father (from whom all
Creatures proceed, and upon whom they depend more intimately, than Faculties
and Actions upon the Principles from whence they flow) bestow his Holy Spirit
upon them that ask it of him? Wherefore that no man might despair, and count it
an impossible thing to atchieve a perfect Victory and Conquest over his Lusts
and Corruptions; God has promised, that the Business shall not be transacted by
our own single Effort and solitary Endeavors; but that we shall have the
powerful Aid of his blessed Spirit, than which nothing can be a more vigorous
Encouragement. For what can resist his Almighty Energy and Virtue? or what can
be so stubborn and refractory, that he cannot render sequacious and obedient,
who at first brought all things out of nothing? Be our Lusts never so mighty
and gigantick, and the Powers of Darkness never so resolutely armed against us,
yet the Strength and Assistance derived to us from Heaven, is able to put to
flight all our Enemies, and make us perfectly victorious. The Spirit of God is
no dull and sluggish Principle, but a quick and active Life; and into whatever
Soul it enters, it is perpetually cleansing, and purifying, and refining it,
till it have wholly extirpated and destroyed whatever beats no similitude with
itself, and rendered the whole Man an immaculate Temple for the Manifestation of
its own glorious Presence. Let no man then pretend an invincible Infirmity, or
that he is fatally bound and enslaved to Sin and Vice; for if we would but
excite those Powers God has given us, and by ardent Breathings invocate the
gracious Auxiliaries of Heaven, there would be Wonders wrought upon our Souls,
the Strength of our Corruptions would abate, and our furious Passions be
restrained and reduced into Discipline and Order.

3. The last general Head is the Promise of a future and blessed Immortality in
Heaven, when this present Life is ended. The blessed Jesus, while he lived upon
Earth, did not wholly obscure his Glory in the mantle of Flesh and Blood, but
gave a notable Specimen of that efficacious Life and Power, which as he himself
was already possessed of, so all those that believe in his Name should
hereafter be endued withal, which should melt their Corruptible into
Incorruption, and translate them to the quiet and peaceful Regions of
Immortality; in his Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor, which was enough to call
off the Thoughts and Cares of men from the trifling Concerns of this World, and
teach them, that there was a better Portion to be expected for all the Sons of
God and Virtue in the pure and undefiled Mansions of Heaven, where dwells
nothing but Truth and Goodness: But the most lively and pregnant Evidence of
the future Subsistence of our Souls, was his glorious Resurrection from the
dead, whereby as he was declared to be the Son of God with Power; so it gives
us a full Assurance and convictive Demonstration, even to outward Sense, that
the comfortless Chambers of the Grave shall not for ever detein us; but that
when he who is our Life, shall appear and summon Earth and Sea to deliver up
their dead, and open the secret Receptacles of Souls; then shall all holy and
righteous Persons appear with him in Glory, and take possession of their long
expected Joy, and receive the just Recompense of all their Pains and Labors;
an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved by
a gracious Providence in the Heavens for them. All Power is committed into the
hands of Christ, who has vanquished Death and Hell, and captivated all the
Powers of Darkness, and begotten us to a lively Hope, that when we shall put
off our Mortality, and be released from all terrestrial Pressures and
Encumbrances, he will cloth us with an heavenly Body like unto his own Body of
Light and Glory. But lest we should undo ourselves with fruitless Expectations,
and fly to Heaven in our vain Dreams of Salvation, before our sincere
Conformity to Gods blessed Will and Commands has rendered us capable of that
pure and holy State, fancying we can read our Names written among the Stars,
before we have learnt the Precepts of a holy Life, God has annexed Conditions
of Obedience to all his Promises, and resolved that no man shall be crowned,
but he that with Courage and Perseverance maintains the War against Sin and
Hell. And indeed the Reward that is promised to all virtuous Persons in the
Gospel, has so great Affinity and Agreement with Holiness, the Condition of
it, that in the Nature of the thing itself, he cannot be capable of the one,
who is not aforehand invested with the other: For what is Heaven, but a state
of spotless Love and Purity, where no Envy nor Malice straitens and contracts
the boundless and enlarged, no clouds of Passion or disordered Lust obscure the
Brightness of that eternal Day, where the Sun of Righteousness neither rises
nor sets upon the Horizon of Time, but remains Vertical for ever? And now what
Concord can possibly be imagined between such transcendent Beauty and Glory,
and the Deformity and Ugliness of the Frame and Temper of an unrighteous man's
Spirit, where every thing lies cross and untoward; and his unruly Desires, like
the boisterous Waves enraged by a sudden Storm, sweep the bottom of his
polluted Soul, and throw up so much Mire and Dirt, that it defaces whatever is
comely, and leaves not the least Emblem of Heaven to be discerned in it?

This is the grand importance of the Promises of the Gospel, which is enough to
demonstrate the prudent Care and dear Affection of the Son of God to the
Children of Men, and a sufficient Manifestation of the great Ingratitude and
Unworthiness of those who do not believe in him, that it is not the Want of
Reasons or convictive Arguments, but their own careless and wretchless Neglect
of Consideration, that makes them deaf to such Charms of Love, and stupid and
unmindful of so important Interests.

But men seldom want Objections against that which they have no mind to
believe; against this therefore it is said, That if the Promises of that eternal
Reward, Christ has made to us in the Gospel, be so framed as to be inevident to
men, and leave them place of doubting; it will be no such great Crime in wicked
Persons, not to believe those Promises, and so not to embrace them.

To this I say, (1.) That the Gospel leaves no such place of doubting, as to
make Infidelity or a Disbelief of it excusable. For Unbelief can then only be
excusable, when there are really wanting such Arguments, as may beget Faith in
a rational and unprejudiced Person: But the Gospel and the Promises thereof
being sufficiently confirmed by such prevalent Reasons, as are apt to acquire
Belief and Credence from an unbias'd Nature, the pretended Inevidence, where
there is no just Cause or Suspicion of Doubting, cannot at all patronize
Infidelity, nor be a reasonable ground to act contrary to what Belief would
otherwise incite them. Its true, were the Arguments for the Disbelief of the
Promises of Life and Salvation equal to, and strong as those that persuade us
to the Belief of them, there would be some Color and Appearance of Reason for
rejecting them; but when there can be no such Doubting or Fluctuation of
Judgment, as proceeds from an Equilibration of Arguments on both sides, it is
impossible that Infidelity should have any rational Apology. For what can be
more convictive, than to have some holy and divine Person come into the World,
who should by many infallible Miracles, Wonders, and Signs, give an evident
Proof that he came from God; and for a full Confirmation of his Doctrine, rise
from the dead the third day after the suffering a painful and ignominious
Death; and to show that he was no Spectrum or illusive Phantasm, conversing
with his Disciples for the space of forty days, and afterward ascending in
their Presence into the highest Heavens, there to rule and govern his Church
till the End of the World; to testify which his Apotheosis, he sends down his
holy Spirit upon his Apostles, and enables them to speak with Tongues and do
Miracles: which Scheme of Providence does so palpably evince the Interposition
and Efficiency of a Deity, and that all these things happened by his actual
concurrence, that he must on purpose blind his eyes, who will not see it.

2. All the place of doubting, which is left to us in the Belief of the
Promises of the Gospel, is no other than what may be in the highest moral
Certainty imaginable. It only leaves a Possibility that, notwithstanding all
the Arguments brought to confirm it, it may yet be otherwise. Every thing is
not capable of a Mathematical Demonstration, but the ways of Probation are
different according to the Diversity of Subjects. And certainly, he will be a
very imprudent man, that will neglect an important Affair, to the Undertaking
of which he has highly probable Reasons, only because it is possible it may be
otherwise.

3. It was a great piece of Divine Wisdom, so to order the Gospel that the
Promises of Life and Salvation should not be so evident, as those things that
are known by Sense or Demonstration; but only so far as might conciliate Faith
in a rational Person, that thereby the wicked Tempers and Dispositions of men
might the more plainly be discovered. If the Gospel had been so demonstratively
certain, so as to exclude all Doubting, i. e. Possibility to the contrary, all
men would have been forced and necessarily good, and all that Praise which is
due to the embracing of Virtue, would have been lost; but now that men believe,
when notwithstanding there is a Possibility to the contrary, the Trial of their
Faith will be found unto Praise and Honor and Glory at the appearing of Jesus
Christ. For what Praise is due unto him, that believes not out of Choice, but
from the necessary and demonstrative Truth of the Thing itself? Let not any man
therefore flatter himself with hopes, that this will patronize and defend his
Infidelity, that it was possible the Evangelical Promises might be uncertain;
but let him consider, upon what account his Faith induces him to act in the
Affairs of the World. Will a human Faith be sufficient to persuade the Merchant
to commit his Life and Fortunes to the flattering Waves, when he knows not but
a merciless Pyrat or the next succeeding Storm may bereave him of both? Will
the Soldier march all day scalded with Heat, or pinched with the Northern
Cold, and expose his Body to a Storm of Bullets and Swords drunk with his
Companions Blood, and all for the Spoils of an uncertain Conquest? Shall this
be able to put us upon Action, and shall not the Belief of the Gospel, which is
not half so uncertain or inevident as this? We need no such firm ground to
build our Faith upon in matters of the World, and therefore we are utterly
inexcusable, if we do not believe in the Son of God, who has brought Life and
Immortality to light.

FINIS.

