A SERMON Preached at the CASTLE of YORK, TO THE CONDEMNED PRISONERS On Monday
the 30th of March, 1691.

Being the Day before their Execution.

With an APPENDIX, which gives some Account of them All; but more particularly
of Mr. Edmund Robinson Clerk, who was Condemned and Executed for High Treason
in counterfeiting the King's Coin.

By GEORGE HALLEY, M. A. Succentor of the Vicars Choral of the Cathedral, and
Rector of St. Cuthbert's in York.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard:
And are to be sold by Christopher Welburn, Bookseller in York, MDCXCI.

Licensed,

April 11. 1691. Z. Isham.

Deuteronomy XXXII.xxix. Oh that they were Wise, that they understood this,
that they would consider their Later End!
THIS Chapter the Hebrews call the Summary, or an Abridgment of the whole Law;
it is the Song of Moses, which he composed for, and sung to the Children of
Israel before his Death: He was highly sensible what a rebellious and
stiff-necked People he had had the Conduct and Government of, and by Divine
Instinct or Inspiration foresaw their greater Rebellion after his Departure
from them, and the Dreadful Judgments that would fall down upon them; plainly
foretold, that after his Death God would pour down upon them the fiercest
Instances of his Anger and heavy Displeasure, for their Violation of his
Commandments, for their Nonconformity to his Divine Laws and Prescriptions: We
find him therefore, in the Close of the foregoing Chapter, summoning the Elders
of their Tribes, and their Officers, to whom he communicated his Prescience or
Foreknowledge of their utterly corrupting themselves after his Death, and of
the Evil which would befall them in the latter days for their doing Evil in the
sight of the Lord, for their provoking him to Anger through the work of their
hands, verse. 27, 28, 29.

And indeed, what Moses thus foretold, exactly came to pass; for when they were
come into the Promised Land, and had received particular Command utterly to
destroy all the Idolatrous Inhabitants thereof, for fear they should be
inveigled by them, and drawn away to their Idol-Worship, and those Abominable
Pollutions they were infamously guilty of; yet, contrary to the express Command
of God, they executed not this Severity, they destroyed not the Nations, but
mingled among the Heathen, and learned their Works; they went a whoring with
their own inventions, they served their Idols, and sacrificed their Sons and
Daughters unto Devils. Thus to their Idolatry they added Blood-guiltiness, of
the highest degree, the deepest Dye, even the most barbarous and unnatural, the
Blood of their dearest and innocent Children. These, Moses told them, would be
such Provocations, as would most justly inflame the vehement Anger and
Displeasure of God, as would enforce the Almighty to withdraw his Favor and
Protection from them; so to abhor them, tho his own peculiar People, that he
would give them over into the hands of the Heathen, and suffer such as hated
them, to Rule and Lord it over them. All this Moses faithfully represented to
the Elders of their Tribes, and to their Officers, but withal prescribed them
an effectual way to Peace and Reconciliation with their God, to render him
propitious and favorable to them, and that was, a turning unto him with true
and faithful Repentance: This, he told them, would be the only way to oblige
the Lord to Pity and Commiseration: If they sincerely repented, their sins
then, tho of so high and provoking a Nature, would be blotted out, and the
times of refreshing would come; God then would hear their Complaint, God then
would make his Arrows drunk with their Enemies Blood, verse. 42. and Crown them,
his People, with Victory and good Success. But alas! Moses had fearful
Apprehensions of their Obdurateness and Impenitency, of their Blindness and
Stupidity, that they would lose all their true Judgment, that for want of
understanding, they would despise his wholesome Counsels and Instruction;
therefore he very pathetically and Affectionately prays for them in the Words
of my Text, Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end!

From which Words I will endeavor to show you, I. What it is to consider. II.
The Benefit of Consideration. III. What is meant by the latter End, the Object
of Consideration. IV. The great Advantage of considering the latter End. V.
That to consider our latter End is an Argument of our Wisdom and Understanding.
VI. I shall make a particular Application, and then a'done.


Oh that they were wise, etc.

But First, In the first place, What it is to consider.

And here, to consider, is to make a proper Use of the rational Faculty which
God has implanted in every one of us, to exercise the several Capacities of
the Soul, to reflect upon our selves, to measure our Motions, our Actions, by
the Standard of Reason. Whoever, through a manly and serious Application of his
Mind, takes a just and an impartial View of himself, of all such things as
relate to and concern him, and accordingly governs his Will and Affections,
determins his Behavior and Deportment; such an one is a considerative Man.
When a Man suffers not his Passions to tumultuate and ferment into a Storm, nor
himself to be carried away with Exorbitant Lusts, but embraces in his Mind the
whole Nature, Tendency, and all the Circumstances of things; when he weighs
them in the Scale of Reason, and diligently examins, carefully observes which
way the Scale turns, and proportions his Course, his Actions to such a diligent
Observance and careful Examination; such a Man is a wise and serious, a
thinking and considerative Person: And this it is, in short, to consider; which
brings me to the second observable, namely,

The Benefit of consideration.

It is a great Art and an Excellence in Man to know how to think, how to
consider; it is a thing that requires some time for its Accomplishment and
Perfection, some Pains, some Industry for its Acquisition; and whoever would
but take the Pains, will but be at the expense of some Labor to seek it, will
certainly find it; and when he has found it, nothing will be more useful and
necessary, more beneficial and Advantageous to him; nothing will more avail to
the good Conduct and well-government of his Life and Conversation: For then he
will be able to look into the Nature of Humane Actions, to weigh well the
Causes, and compare the Consequence of things, and to exercise that Sense and
Reason which God has plentifully enriched and endowed him with: And what can
better contribute to his Peace and Happiness, to his Security and Preservation?
If he communeth but with his own Heart, and acts according to the Illumination
of his Understanding, to the Dictates of Reason and Convictions of Conscience,
if he seriously revolves in his Mind the Reward of Virtue and the Danger of
Vice; in all probability he will stand in Awe, and not sin; he will have a care
of affronting his God by wickedness and impiety; and this is the Benefit, this
is the Advantage of Consideration. Alas! if we sail without Chart, without
Compass, without a Pilot, what can we expect but a fatal Shipwreck? If Men will
not endeavor to dispose themselves to a serious Consideration and Reflection
upon what they are a going to do; but, as the Horse into the Battle, rush upon
things with Indiscretion and Precipitancy; what can be the consequence of such
their Folly, but Ruin and Destruction? It is the worthy Observation of Philo,
That the first reason of all the dangers and miscarriages of Men lies in their
running on with the boistrous Tide of Passion; and that the first hopes of
safety flow from a sober reasoning of the matter. But behold a greater than
Philo is here: God himself lays the blame of all Men's Misery upon
Inconsideration. Thus God complains of his People, Isa. 1.4. Ah sinful Nation,
a people laden with Iniquity! And why were they so? Why forsook they the Lord,
and provoked him to Anger? It was because of their heedlesness and
Inadvertency: Israel does not know, my People does not consider, verse 3. Thus
Ezekiel 18.27, 28. Who is he that turns away from his Wickedness, and does
that which is lawful and right? The Considerative Person, He repents because he
considers: So that Inconsideration is the chief Impediment, the principal
Obstruction of Repentance, which is the Reason why God, according to Solomon's
Assertion, will severely punish Men for it at the Day of Judgment, Eccles.
12.14. God will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing, i. e.
say the generality of Latinists, Pro omni Errato, with every Error or
Miscarriage; i. e. He will bring into Judgment the inconsiderateness of Men:
And this Translation the Seventy seem to approve of, Every secret thing, i. e.
(...), now (...), est iucuriose aspicere, vel per incuriam mentis minus
attentis oculis and praeterire, To behold or look upon a thing with a negligent
or careless Eye. This Heedlesness and Neglect, this Remissness and
Inconsideration in our Actions God will punish at the Day of Judgment; and
there is all the Reason and Justice imaginable in so doing, because from
Inconsideration flow all Vicious and Immmoral Actions.

But this by the By.

Thus Psalm 4.4. What curbs and restrains a Man from the Commission of any
wicked Act? A withdrawing into his Chamber, and there communing with his own
Heart; such a Solitude, such a private Retirement and Communing, darts the most
powerful and auspicious Influence upon the Hearts of Men: Stand in awe and sin
not; commune with your own Hearts upon your Beds, and be still. Thus in the
Gospel; Who were they that heard the Word of God, and were no better for it?
Such as heard it slightly and superficially, such as suffered it not to enter
into their Mind and Consideration: Without Consideration it was impossible for
it to take root and grow, or to digest into Principles of Action; some Seed,
indeed, there was, which arrived to maturity and perfection, which was
prosperous and fruitful; but the reason was, because it was sown in an honest
and a good Heart; such heard the Word and kept it, i. e. Retained it in their
Thoughts and Consideration, and so brought forth Fruit with patience, Luke
8.12, 13, 14, 15.

But thus much of the Benefit of Consideration: I come now to the third
Observable, Namely, To show you what is meant by the Latter End, which is the
Object of the Consideration here in the Text: Oh that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end! That is, as if he
should have said, Oh that they would see the things which belong unto their
Peace! Oh that the Evil I forewarn them of, may deter them from avowed
Wickedness and Impiety, may oblige them to a constant Living up to the Precepts
and Obligations of the Divine Laws! If not, Oh that the Judgments of God may
convince them of their Errors, and reclaim their Sins, that they would
stimulate and excite them to Repentance, to a due sense* and consideration what
it is to sin against God, to an understanding what will be the Event of
persisting in Wickedness, what will be the Reward of their Impenitence, both in
this Life and the Life to come; so that by the Latter End is to be understood
not only Death, but, what follows after Death, the Judgment, an Appearance
before the dreadful Tribunal of Almighty God, there to receive a Reward or a
Punishment proportionable to what we have transacted upon the Stage of this
World. Oh that all you, who hear me this day, would understand and consider
this great and certain Truth! That it is not only appointed unto all men once
to die, but after this the Judgment. This is the import, this is the
signification of the Latter End; Death is our Latter End, but the Resurrection,
the future Judgment is a Latter End beyond it. The Soul is of an immortal
Nature, incapable of any Cessation, can never cease to be; the Body must
naturally die, it is noble Frame and admirable Contexture must be dissolved and
taken in Pieces, it must return to its original Dust and Corruption; tho this
is but a transitory and temporal Death, this is reparable by a Resurrection; it
must certainly be raised again, and be reunited to the Soul, and share with it
in whatever state or Condition it shall be sentenced unto; if it has not
served God, but the Devil, it shall then suffer a second Death, after its
reunition to the Soul, they shall both be depressed into a state of Misery, a
State where are endless and easeless Torments; a Misery, which is not Temporal
or Transitory, but durable and permanent to all Eternity, and who can dwell
with everlasting burnings? Whosoever is wise will consider this.

Men and Brethren, let me use the Strain of the Holy Apostle to King Agrippa,
Acts 26.27. Do you believe the Scriptures? Do you believe a Resurrection, a
Judgment to come? I know you believe it: May I say, I know you remember it?
This I dare say, that if you do not, I know you have no cause not to remember
it: A thing of the highest Importance, a thing of the greatest Concernment that
ever will befall you, a thing that is most sure and certain, a thing that you
can as little avoid, as you can avoid Death, and a thing that must determine of
your Eternal State, and do you not remember it? I am sure we have all cause to
remember it, we have all the reason imaginable to understand and consider our
Latter End.

If there be any here of a Sadducean Temper, that deny the Resurrection; or,
with the Corinthian Naturalist, question How are the Dead raised up? And with
what Body do they come? Such are foolish and inconsiderate; such Questions flow
from Incogitancy and Indiscretion, such are horribly deceived; and they will
find themselves grossly mistaken, for there will be a Resurrection from the
Dead: God has certainly appointed a day in the which he will judge the World
in righteousness, by that Man whom he he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the Dead Acts 17.31.
How strangely then will such Sadducees, or any, who are mindless of a future
state, be surpised at the Resurrection of the Dead? Oh! that we had been wise
and considered this. Oh! let us lie still in the Dust, will they then cry, let
the Earth cover us, Let the Mountains and the Rocks fall upon us. Alas! the
Trumpet will sound, and they shall be raised from the Dead, they shall hear
this terrible Voice, Arise you Wretches and come to Judgment; they will then
find that, which Solomon has asserted, to be infallibly true, Eccles. 11.9.
Know that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment.

And this leads me to the fourth Observable, namely,

The great Advantage of considering the latter End. Oh that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter End!

It is the Saying of the Wise Man, Ecclus. 7.36. Whatsoever thou take in
hand, remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. The Latinist reads it,
In omnibus Operibus vel Sermonibus tuis memorare Novissima and in aeternum non
peccabis, In all thy Works or Words remember the last things, and thou will
never commit a Sin unto Death; such a Remembrance would make it morally
impossible for thee to commit a presumptuous Sin, a wilful and deliberate
Transgression. Now the Four last things to be continually remembered, are,
Death, a Judgment to come, Hell, and Celestial Glory. And what more horrible
than Death? What more terrible than such a Judgment? What more intolerable than
Eternal Fire? And what worthier Object can there be for us to exert our
Faculties upon, than God and the Mansions of everlasting Felicity? How many
Sins might we have avoided in the course of our Lives, if we had had the
serious remembrance and apprehension of these things? And how many Sins might
we yet avoid, if we would but endeavor to have these things, as Belshazzar's
Handwriting upon the Wall, constantly in our Eye? These things, as the Pilot
the Ship, would direct and influence our whole Life and Conversation, would
help us to steer our Course, and safely bring us to the Haven of Bliss and
Happiness. Such would be the great Advantage of considering our latter End: If
Men would but thus consider, no Temptation would then take hold of them,
nothing would ruffle and discompose their Conscience, it would be void of
Offense both toward God and toward Men. But alas! In this lapsed and
degenerate Age, in this miserable and naughty World, how many are there that
have languid, lukewarm and feeble Opinions of Religion? If Judgment may be
formed according to their Vicious and immoral Conversation, what a Deluge of
Profaneness and Impiety, Atheism and Infidelity overflows this Sinful Land,
this poor Nation? How many live, as tho they believed that Virtue and Vice,
that God and the Devil were Words signifying nothing, as if they were the
Extract of some melancholy and pregnant Brain, as if they were invented merely
for Men's Terror and Affrightment? The Halter, the Gibbet, and the most terrible
of Temporal Punishments too, have as little Influence upon Men's Lives, makes as
small an Impression upon the Minds of Men, as those which are Eternal: How many
have suffered as Murderers, as Thieves, as Evildoers? And yet Men will not
take Warning and Example; Men will not be deterred from committing the like
abominable, Vile and Enormous Offenses. Every Assize gives us too many fresh
and sad Instances of this Truth. Oh that Men would become wise, and consider
not only Temporal, but Eternal Punishments! Such a Consideration would, if any
thing, oblige them to follow the important business of Religion, To hurt no
body by Word or Deed, to keep their hands from picking and stealing: Such a
Consideration would enforce them to labor truly to get their own living, and
to do their Duty in that Station which Divine Providence has allotted to them.

There is not certainly a more effectual way to revive the drooping Spirit of
Christian Religion in the World, than seriously to contemplate upon, and
consider our Latter End, That we must shortly die, and come to Judgment, and
there receive a Reward according to our Deeds. If we were but possessed with a
warm and constant Sense of these things, we should, in all probability,
endeavor to walk, circumspectly, not as Foools, but as wise, to be holy in all
manner of Conversation.

Such is the advantage of a Religious Consideration. Alas! were there but
mature Thoughts, would but Men be wrought upon to act as reasonable Creatures;
would they but judiciously and soberly weigh things in the Balance of their
Understanding, they would seldom or never be found wanting in their Duty and
Obligation: If Men would once entertain serious Thoughts of Religion, they
would soon set open their Ears to its sweet and charming Language; if they
would but fix their Eyes upon it, they would soon be captivated with its
incomparable Beauty, it would presently attract their love and admiration, and
enforce them to embrace it with all profound respect and affection: A
consideration of our latter end, a serious reflection upon Eternity, this would
put the Soul into such a frame and posture, as would make it restless and
uneasy, wracked and impatient, till it had made its Peace with an incensed
Judge, by Repentance not to be repented of; till it had prepared it self for a
comfortable Appearance at his Bar, for a glorious advancement into an endless
state of Bliss and Immortality: Such is the great advantage of considering our
latter end. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end!

And this leads me to the fifth and last Observable, Namely, That to consider
our latter end, is an Argument of our Wisdom and Understanding.

And here, if we consider our latter end as we ought, it we seriously meditate
upon Death and a Judgment to come, then we shall prepare our selves, and make
ready for it by purity of Life, and holiness of Conversation; such a
Consideration will create in our Minds an abhorrency and detestation of Sin,
and plant in us Virtue and Goodness, a perfect and sincere love of God and
Religion; and this, I am sure, is the greatest Wisdom, the noblest
Understanding.

The fear of the Lord, says the Royal Psalmist, is the beginning of Wisdom: a
good Understanding have all they that do thereafter, Psalm 110.10. i. e. There
is no such excellent and prudential course, as the preserving in our Breasts a
just and due reverence of God, an awe to his Laws, and a dread to his
Judgments; and all this is the happy effect of considering our latter end. So
teach us to number our Days, is the fervent Prayer of Moses, Psalm. 90.12. So
teach us to consider our latter end, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom,
i. e. to the important business of Religion; thus shall we lay up in store for
our selves a good foundation against the time to come; thus shall we lay hold
on Eternal Life: And this if we do, it will be a demonstrative argument of our
Wisdom and Understanding. And that you may be persuaded to incline your Ear
unto Wisdom, and apply your Hearts to Understanding, I shall set before you the
happiness of a Religious, and the folly of a vicious and an Immoral
Conversation; and this I cannot better do, than by referring you to the third
Chapter of the Proverbs: You will see there, how the Wise Man sets off Religion
in the most beautiful and glorious Dress, enumerates there its peculiar
excellencies, and particular advantages; ver. 16. He represents her as a great
and generous Princess, distributing Gifts to her Subjects, length of Days is in
her right hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honor: and ver. 17. Her ways
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; i. e. They procure a
blessed Tranquillity in a Man's Mind and Conscience, Prosperity in all his
enterprises, and Eternal Rest with God in Glory. The Religious Man has Peace
and an Heaven in his Bosom; the greatest transports of Joy possess and surround
his Breast, and his last end is sweet and comfortable, he dies the Death of the
Righteous; his Conscience then, as a Glass, represents to his sight the
Beatific Vision and the Joys of Eternity. And this it is to consider our latter
end, this is the blessed effect of a righteous Life; whosoever then thus
considers his latter end, it is certainly an Argument of his Wisdom and
Understanding.

But Secondly, Consider we the folly of a Vicious Life, and an Immoral
Conversation; Alas! what is Vice and Immorality, but a sort of practice that
debaseth and disparageth a Man? Such a sad course of Life generally plunges a
Man into the most grievous and intolerable Evils, as a distemper both of Body
and Soul, the greatest distress of Fortune, Poverty and Disgrace, a low and
contemptible condition, reproach and the loss of Reputation, Affliction and
Discomposure of Mind, the torments of a troubled Conscience, (for there is no
Peace, says my God, to the Wicked,) the danger of a Deathbed Repentance, and
frequently brings him to a violent and an unnatural Death: Add to this Misery,
the loss of Gods favor and loving kindness; such treasure up unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath. Oh the perplexity and consternation such are in
when they come to dye! when their Conscience presents to their sight the
dreadful Scenes of a Judgment to come; their evil Conscience then flashes in
their Face, casts abroad its Thunder, and strikes them with the greatest
Terror and Affrightment. All these are the lamentable effects of a vicious
Life, and an immoral Conversation; which sufficiently demonstrates the folly of
such as prefer Wickedness above Religion; such do truly wander out of the way
of Understanding: But this is not all, the Man that wandereth out of the way of
Understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead, (...), according
to the version of the LXX, Prove. 21.16. i. e. The Man that leaves the beautiful
Paths of Virtue, which directly lead to Happiness, and takes the Bypath, the
rough and unpleasant Road of Iniquity, which conducts him to Eternal Death,
such a Man does not only dethrone his Reason, is not only void of
Understanding, but he shall remain in the Company of the Giants, of whom we
read, Genesis 6.4. They were Men of a monstrous Stature, and whose wickedness too
was proportionable to their large Size; these Men, as they were singularly
eminent for their height and bigness, so were they horribly infamous for Acts
of Injustice, for Wrong and Robbery, for Tyranny and Oppression; these were the
Men, for whom it repented the Lord that he had made Man on the Earth; these
were the Men, whose Sins opened the Cataracts, the Windows of Heaven, and
brought down a deluge of Wrath and Indignation; and the Man, who works
Wickedness, is not only without Understanding, but shall be incorporated into
the wretched Society and Converse of those Giants and Rebels against God, shall
be condemned to keep them company, shall be sentenced to that accursed place,
which they had assigned them, when the Flood came and destroyed them all; a
Place where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.

Thus I have shown you, I. What it is to consider. II. The benefit of
Consideration. III. What is meant by the latter end, the object of
Consideration. IV. The great advantage of considering the latter end. V. That
to consider our latter end, is an argument of our Wisdom and Understanding.


I come now in the Sixth and last place to make an Application, and then I
a'done.

And here, suffer a Word of Exhortation, you, who worthily deserve to be
punished; you, who for your Evil Deeds are condemned to die; let me beseech you
and prevail with you to consider your Latter End; it behooves you consider it:
Eternal Bliss and Happiness sure, is a thing of the greatest and most weighty
Consideration, a thing of such vast moment, that for you to put off the
Thoughts of it, and neglect the Provision for it, is certainly the most
unaccountable Indiscretion, the greatest Folly and Madness.

You have but this, and part of the Day following, to make your Peace with an
Offended God, to make Provision for your Future Happiness. To day then hear the
Voice of God, who calls upon you to consider your latter End. I do not doubt
your Consideration of it in one Sense, i. e. That you have terrible
Apprehensions of your Temporal Punishment, of the violent and unnatural End you
have brought your selves unto; but this ought to be the least of your
Consideration; nothing ought to disturb you now, but the apprehension of your
having offended God: And if you now do truly* fear God, (as you have all
imaginable reason to fear him, who is able to cast both Body and Soul into
Hell) that will raise you above all other Depressions, that will exalt you
above all base and dispiriting Fears. You are to consider, that after your
departure hence there will be a Judgment; and to make ready and prepare your
selves for a comfortable appearance at that tremendous Tribunal, you have
received Sentence of Death from an Earthly Judge, which Death is only Temporal
and Transitory; and it was passed upon you with all possible Regret and
Reluctance, with the greatest unwillingness; but if you repent not of the Evils
you have done, a more terrible Sentence will be pronounced upon you by the
Righteous Judge of the World, Go you Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Will you not then consider your latter end, so as to
prepare for it by true and faithful Repentance? Surely if you be wise, you will
so consider it, and let not your punishment here, but the consideration, that
you have offended a good and gracious God by your Wickedness, be the motive to
such a Repentance.

And here, let me a little touch upon, let me reprove the Wickedness, and set
before you the evil things that you have done.

Two of you are Condemned for Murder, and that of a most cruel and barbarous
sort; the one, for the Wife of his own Bosom, the other, of her harmless and
innocent Babe; Murders, monstrous and unnatural: How Diametrically opposite are
such horrid Acts to the Laws of the Christian Religion? They command the
Husband to dwell with his Wife according to Knowledge, i. e. with all Conjugal
Love and Affection, to give honor to the Wife, as unto the weaker Vessel; How
then does he violate this Command, who breaks the Bone of his Bone, who wounds
the Flesh of his Flesh? Christianity obliges Husbands to love their Wives as
their own Bodies, charges every Man to love his Wife even as himself, Ephesians.
5.28.33. Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter against them, Col. 3.19.

Secondly, We have before us a Woman who has Murdered her own Child, an Infant
born of Fornication; Fornication of it self is an heinous Sin, a Sin, that
without Repentance excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. Fornicators
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: And it is a Sin much more heinous, when
it is productive of a greater, when Murder is the sad effect and lamentable
consequence of it; to destroy the Fruit of one's own Womb, to send it out of
the World too unbaptized, before it was washed in the Laver of Regeneration; to
give it a Bloody Baptism! I want Words to express the unnaturalness and
barbarity of such an Action. Alas! How does the Commission of one Sin make way
for another? How does one Wickedness tread upon the heels of another? The Devil
tempted to Fornication, and then to hide the Shame, tempted to murder the
Infant; though that was the most effectual way to be exposed to the greater
Ignominy and Disgrace. Thus the Devil did with David, as soon as ever he
succeeded in his Temptation to commit Adultery with the Wife of Vriah, he
presently took the advantage, and tempted him to add to his Adultery, the
crying Sin of Murder.

Blood-guiltiness! A Sin which defiles the Land, a Sin which cries to Heaven
for Vengeance, which importunes the Justice, and wearies the Ears of the
Almighty, till it be avenged; a Sin for which God has not only ordained a
Temporal, but an Eternal Death to be the punishment of it, unless his Wrath be
atton'd with an hearty and an unfeigned Repentance: Pardon for Sins of such an
horrid nature, must be sought carefully with Tears.

Others of you are to be cut off with the Sword of Justice for Theft, for Wrong
and Robbery, Acts altogether repugnant to the Laws of the Land, and
contradictory to the Laws of God, who has commanded us not to Steal, Thou
shall not Steal; had you sought the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, had
you not neglected his Divine Service and Worship, had you wrought honestly with
your hands, and been industrious in your respective Vocations, God would never
have suffered you to have wanted the Comforts and Necessaries of this Life, but
Idleness is the grand Snare of the DEVIL; had you trusted upon your Heavenly
Father, who Clothes the Grass and Lillies of the Field, He would have provided
for you, He would have much more clothed you, O ye of little Faith.

It is Excellent Advice which the Royal Psalmist gives, 62.10. O trust not in
Wrong and Robbery: He, that thinks to support himself by such Means, trusts
to a broken Reed, he will be sure to be disappointed, to find his Folly, when
he expects the Fruit of his Contrivances; Riches innocently gotten are not to
be relied on, much less such Gain as is got by Injury and Oppression; Acts of
Injustice make Men odious to God, render them unfit for humane Society: There
are few that follow this wicked Employment, but at the last reap up the Wages
which are appointed by the Law to be the Reward of it; and whosoever of them
escapes Vengeance in this World, shall not, without Repentance, escape
Vengeance in the World to come: Nothing but the Execution of such Men can give
Check to their Wickedness, nothing can put a Stop to them, and prevent the
Mischief that such Men do in the World, but a cutting them off, this is the
Reason of Capital Punishments among Men; it is all imaginable Justice and
Equity, to remove such Men out of the World, as will be a Plague to Mankind,
while they live in it.

Another of you suffers Death for Burning a Barn, for consuming with Fire the
Fruits of the Earth, which had been with Labor and Charge sown and reaped by
one, who had formerly been to him a kind and an indulgent Master; An Act of
Ingratitude as well as Impiety, and an Argument of a most Malicious and
Diabolical Spirit, an Act that is contrary to the Golden Rule of the Christian
Religion, which commands all its Professors, not to do that to others, which
they would not have others to do unto them; to put away all Hatred and Strife,
all Envy, Malice and Revenge, such being the Suggestions of the Devil.

Others of you are Condemned for Coining, for Counterfeiting the King's Coin,
which, with Clipping of it, is one of the most growing Mischiefs in the
Kingdom; How Excellent is the Coin of this Nation, both for intrinsic Value
and Comeliness? and never was Money so spoiled and abused as ours: If the same
Question were to be put in this Age, as of old, Whose is this Image and
Superscription? Part we might, but we could not answer the whole; we may indeed
guess at the Image upon a piece of Money, but we cannot tell whose it is by the
Superscription, for that is all gone; but mark the End of such Men.

Such Criminals rob the King of his Due, invade his Right and Propriety, and
entrench upon his Royal Prerogative, for it is the KING alone who has Power to
Coin, it is He alone who has an indisputable Right to set the Value upon
Money, and to make it current within his Sovereignty and Dominion; and our
Religion obliges us to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; such
therefore as Counterfeit or Clip the King's Coin, the same are Thieves and
Robbers, and it is an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge.

From those Base and Vicious Practices, What a Loss flows to the Subject? What
a Scandal to the Nation? A Tradesman, that takes up these dishonest ways of
living, what Injury may he bring upon such as are of the same Trade with
himself? By under-selling them, by affording his Commodities at a Cheaper Rate
than he bought them, because of the unlawful Profit and Advantage he can make
of the large or broad Money, that he sees laid down upon the Nail for them:
But, Profit and Advantage did I say? Alas! This is not a way for a Man to
enrich himself, there is a secret Curse goes along with such Gains, whereas a
Penny honestly got wears like Iron, but Estates acquired by Coining and
Clipping are never of any long Duration, there is a strange Improsperousness
that attends them; Riches so attained have Wings and fly away, turn to the
Owners Hurt, bring them at the last to an Ignominious and a Shameful End.

I am heartily sorry that one who had taken Holy Orders upon him, (though it is
a considerable time since he pretended to an Ecclesiastical Office or
Administration) should prove a Malefactor in this kind, and that some should
dare to improve this Crime to a general Reflection, such as do so, are base and
ill-natured, censorious and unthinking People: Alas! Offenses will come, there
will be some bad in all Societies and Communities of Men, there was a Judas
among the very Apostles, the best Body has some bad Blood in it, the finest
Silver has some Allay, the brightest Days have some Clouds.

The Clergy, I must confess, are under the greatest Obligation to follow that
which is good, to abstain from all Appearance of Evil; they are obliged to live
with especial Regularity and strictness of Conversation, with all imaginable
Care and Circumspection: The Ministers of God! They are the Lights of the
World, they, above all others, ought to let their Light so shine before Men,
that they seeing their good Works, may Glorify their Father which is in
Heaven; they are particularly obliged to enlighten the Glorious Spheres,
wherein they move, with the bright Luster of an exact and an Exemplary
Conversation; for let Wit and Learning, let the bravest Parts and the best
Accomplishments stand in the Front, yet if ill Morals, if an ungodly Life
brings up the Rear, the Satyr soon devours the Panegyric, their Vice will be
reflected upon, it will be such an Interposition as will Eclipse the Beauty and
Glory of the rest; it is true, Learning and Excellent Parts may strike the
Tympane, may make the Drum of the Ear to sound, but, if there be not an honest
and a sober conversation, they will never Touch the Fibers of the heart; if the
light, that is in them, be darkness, how great is that darkness! they are
placed as Stars in the Firmament, and if they Dart nothing but malignant, and
improsperous influences, what can follow but an Universal Plague, and
Epidemical Distemper?

But, Alas! They are Flesh and Blood as well as other men are, they are not
Exempted from Temptation; it is not Absolutely impossible for them to fall into
the Snare of the Devil; though it is matter of sad consideration, that he, who
Taught others not to Steal, should Steal Himself; that he, who Preached to
others, should himself be a Castaway; that he, who was obliged to teach, and
exhort Parents too to train up their Children in the fear of the Lord, to dye
them with virtue and goodness in the very wool of their infancy, that they
might the better keep the color as long as they live; that such an one should
Teach his only Son a Treasonable Trade, should Chalk him out such Wicked, and
unlawful ways of living, as have brought upon him shame and confusion, as have
thrown him into the most Deplorable Circumstances; that he, who, at his
initiation into the Christian Church by Baptism, called him Benjamin, i. e. the
Son of his Right Hand, a Son as dear and Precious to him as his Right Hand,
should bring him up to be a Benoni, i. e. a Son of Sorrow; this is matter of
the saddest consideration.

But let him, that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

We have instances in Holy Scripture of such as have not answered their
Character, as have Preached to others, and themselves been Reprobate, as have
Corrupted their Morals and Religion, as have by Covetousness fallen into the
snare of the Devil:

Covetousness is the Root of all Evil, and indeed such an Evil as the Crime of
this Condemned person had it is Rise from; they that will be rich, that set
their minds on the getting of riches, fall into a Temptation and a snare, into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which ingulph or drown them in Destruction and
Perdition; the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some have
coveted after, they have Erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows, have brought themselves to a sad and most Wretched
Condition; And the Man of God should flee these things; this was the Charge,
which St. Paul gave to his Scholar, and Spiritual Son Timothy, at his
Embarquement into the Episcopal Office; 1 Timothy 6.9, 10, 11.

We have, I say, instances in Holy Scripture of such as have not answered their
Sacred Character, as have Preached to others, and themselves been Reprobate, as
have by Covetousness fallen into the snare of the Devil; thus Judas was
possessed with a base and unworthy Spirit of Covetousness, he sold the very Son
of God for Money; when he saw indeed, the matter was to End in the death of his
Lord, he Repented, but Alas! He acted his own Tragedy with a sad, and and
ignoble death, he hanged himself, a Crime which there could be no Repentance
for.

Thus Balaam for Money sold to Destruction, 24000 Men of Israel, Numbers,
Twenty Fifth, he loved the Rewards of Divination; and though he was Restrained
by the Divine prohibition to go at the first, yet a second Message carried by
more Honorable Persons, and enforced with a Charming promise of promotion, and
Advancement to Honor; This Lulled the Prophet Asleep, this was a bait, which he
could not but swallow, the silver and gold, the Honors, that Balak promised,
run so in his mind, that he could not but hanker after them; though at the last
this proved his destruction, for he Associated with the Midianites, was found
with them; and was Slain in the Battle, Numb. 31.8. God particularly turned the
course of his wrath upon him, as he will do upon all such as forsake the right
way, as go Astray by following the way of Balaam the Son of Bosor, who loved
the wages of unrighteousness.

Thus have I set before you the evil things that you have done, and for which
you are appointed to dye.

What remains, but that, as an Ambassador of God, I pray you in Christ's stead
to be Reconciled to God, to consider your latter end, to seek the Lord your God
with an hearty, and Sincere Repentance; Repentance is a Turning of the whole
Heart from Sin and the Devil, to serve God in Newness of Life, a purging of the
Conscience from Dead Works to serve the living God, a dying unto sin; such a
Compunction of the Heart for sin, as is joined with a full purpose, and a
steady Resolution to leave, and forsake it; God has promised to pardon, and
has Actually pardoned the greatest Sin upon such a Repentance; Even Murder it
self, that Execrable and Crying Sin; though the innocent blood, you have shed,
Cries to Heaven for Vengeance, yet the blood of the ever Blessed Jesus cries as
loud for your pardon and forgiveness, if you be but deeply touched, and
affected with a sense of your abominable wickedness.

Your Repentance, It Is True, is late, you have been exceeding sinful, you have
put off your Duty toward God and your Neighbor; till the very last Minute of
your Life; and the Holy Gospel requires not only Sorrow and Remorse for Sin;
but an Holy Life to demonstrate the Sincerity of Repentance; But Alas! You have
little or no time to amend your Life in, your glass is well nigh run, you have
not many hours for the Consideration of your latter End; Well! but there is
mercy with God, his Nature and Property is ever to have mercy and to forgive,
his mercy is as infinite as himself; and therefore none must pretend to Limit
or Confine it; though you have hitherto lived in Profaneness, in the contempt
of God and Religion; yet if you make a True and Ample Confession of all your
Wickednesses; if you humbly beg pardon, and, with the Publican in the Gospel,
smite upon your breast, and say, God be Merciful to me a Sinner, if you promise
and resolve Amendment, and if God foresee that such your resolution would be
inviolable, that you would Pay your Vows, if more time were given you; I hope,
He will accept your Repentance.

I Leave you therefore to the goodness and pity, to the Gracious compassion of
a merciful God; I pray you to consider your Latter End, that after Death, there
will be a Judgment; I beg of you to Employ the small Moment, you have to live,
to your Eternal interest and Advantage, to work out your Salvation with fear
and Trembling, to be doubly diligent and industrious, to redeem the time,
seeing you are but come into the Vineyard at the Eleventh hour.

May you receive Equal Wages with those, that came in at the first, with those
that have born the burden and heat of the day; may you be saved with the Thief
upon the Cross; though his Case, as well as the Laborers, is vastly different
from yours, yet you have a general refuge in the Merits of Christ, and in the
Mercys of God.

And here, may all you, who have escaped the Sentence of Death, who have been
but slightly punished for your offenses, follow the salutary advice of our
Blessed Savior, which He gave to the Adulterous Woman, and the impotent Man in
the Gospel, Go and Sin no more, Jo. 5.14. Jo. 8.11. Lest a worse thing come
unto you.

Lastly, May all you, who hear me this day, be persuaded, by the Exemplary
punishment of these Persons, to the Excellent and rewardable service of God, to
keep your vessels in Sanctification and Honor, to the practice of Temperance
and Chastity, to do always that which is just and honest, Lawful and Right, to
a constant performance of your duty both toward God and Men, to an early and
sincere Repentance, to bring up your Children in the fear of the Lord, to
season them betimes with the salt of piety and Holy Religion.

I Pray for you all in the Pathetick and Affectionate words of my Text.

Oh that you may be Wise, Oh that you may understand this, O that you would
consider your Latter End!

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and to God the Holy Ghost be Ascribed, as
is most due, all Honor, Glory, Power, Might, Majesty, Dominion and Faithful
service from Henceforth and for Evermore, Amen.

A Short ACCOUNT of Mr. Edmund Robinson, who was Condemned for High Treason, in
Counterfeiting the KING's Coin, on Monday the 23. of March, 1690/1. and
Executed on Tuesday the 31st. of March, 1691.
THe place of this Unhappy Man's birth was Colne Parish in the County of
Lancaster; His Father was a Considerable Husbandman, who sent him to School,
as soon as he was Capable of Institution; where he made a great proficiency in
something else as well as his Book; for (as I am credibly informed by an honest
Gentleman who was his School-Fellow) those base practices, which have since
brought him to the Gallows, began then to appear, and show themselves in him;
he had there contracted an intimate friendship, and acquaintance with a Young
Man, whose name was Greggson, with whom, amongst many other Roguish Pranks, he
frequently imposed upon, and cheated the ignorant, and unskilful with Pewter
Shillings; and of whom it is probable, he learned his Art; for this Greggson's
Father had the Scandalous Character, and Reputation of a Coyner; and Greggson
himself, who had likewise taken Holy Orders upon him, was, about 10. or 12.
Years ago, for Coining, Executed at Lancaster; thus as they had both equally
abused, and Scandalized their sacred function, as they were Brethren together
in iniquity, so in the shameful manner of their deaths they were not divided.

From this School, I suppose, he went to the University, where, according to
his own information, he was admitted, though he made but a very short stay
there, not residing in the College above six weeks, when he returned into the
Country, but whether or no he ever visited the University again to take a
degree, he would not give me any satisfaction as to that particular.

However, he got into orders, being ordained both Deacon and Priest, as he told
me, by the Right Reverend Father in God Dr. Hacket late Bishop of Lichfield and
Coventry, which qualified him for a Benefice; a place called Holmforth, under
the Vicaridge of Kirk-Burton in Yorkshire, which Curacy, in value about 25, or
30 l. per Annum, he served about Eleaven years, and then pretended to leave it
through some Bodily indisposition; he preached likewise for the space of a year
at a place called Haworth in the Parish of Bradford; this was all the promotion
he had in the Church, and from which, if he had been honest and industrious, he
might have had a comfortable subsistence; having the Addition of 12 l. per
Annum of a Temporal Estate, which he got by the marriage of one Anthony
Armitage's daughter, a considerable Yeoman of Thick Hollins, in the parish of
Almon-bury; His Life, when a Curate, was by no means suitable to his
profession; for he would Forge Licenses, and Clandestinely Marry, and was
guilty of many other immoralities, which, to mention, would swell this
Narrative too much; By these Vicious practices he made himself Obnoxious to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, being Suspended and Excommunicated, and at the last
imprisoned upon a writ de Excommunicato Capiendo: Such was his Deportment, such
was his behavior, when concerned in the Church: But the Devil had put, into
the heart of this Judas Iscariot, another-guess, and as he Tempted him to
Believe, a more Profitable and advantageous way of living in the world, which
was by imparing and Counterfeiting the King's Coin, this was the Employ he
Closely followed, when at Bank End, in the aforesaid Parish of Kirk-Burton, as
he himself informed me, telling me all the Tricks of his Black Art, and what
difference there was, as to advantage, in Clipping and Coining, and how the one
was easier, and less troublesome than the other; that he melted down his
Clippings, and what saved of them in Coining, he Transmitted to the
Goldsmiths, of whom he received frequently very considerable Sums of Money; I
shall spare their Names now through hopes of their Reformation and Amendment,
that they will for the future (as it is very much in their power to do) put a
stop to such mischiefs by an honest and an ingenuous discovery of the Bullion
Bringers; but Alas! What will not men do when blinded by interest; when Mammon is
their God?

This was the way Mr. Robinson took to Raise his Fortunes in the world, though
at the last it brought upon him a Fatal Catastrophe; He was several times
Apprehended, and Tried for his Life; for at the Assizes holden at York the 4th
of March, and in the 30th year, of King Charles the 2d, 1678. He was Tried for
Clipping, but Acquitted, though at the same time Convicted for uttering false
Money, and Fined 20 l. At the Assizes also holden at York the 17. of March,
1679. and in the 31. Year of King Charles the 2d. he was again Convicted for
Uttering False Money, and Fined 500 l. At the Assizes holden likewise at York
the first of August in the first year of King James the 2d 1685, he was Tried
for Coining, and acquitted; such was the Risk he Run, such was the danger he
frequently and narrowly escaped; but all this would not deter him from, would
not oblige and enforce him to give over such a dangerous employment, as so
often brought him to the very brink of destruction, as so often gave him a
dismal prospect of an infamous death.

But though the Pitcher goes often to the water, it comes home broken at last.

For at the Assizes holden at York the 14. of March 1691, he was Tried for his
old Treason in Coining, found guilty, and deservedly Executed for the same; he
was very unwilling to come to his Trial, having Peremptorily Challenged 35
which were all the Law allowed him to Except against, without showing cause;
never Man had a fairer Trial, never Man of his Quality, had a more substantial
and intelligent Jury, and never Man had the Happiness to come before a more
Patient and Merciful, a more learned and impartial Judge.

He did indeed, Voluntarily Surrender himself, but if he had not done so, he
must a Fled his Country, for warrants were issued out for his Apprehension:
His only Son Benjamin, and his wife, were brought to the Castle some Months
before; his bowels, I fancy, yearn'd upon them, and the Scheme he had drawn,
the projects he had, as he thought, Cunningly formed and Contrived for his own
and their deliverance, this might oblige him to a Voluntary surrender of
himself into the Hands of Justice; and indeed never Man produced more Witnesses
to invalidate a single Testimony, and some of them did very wonderfully agree
together, for a Man and a Woman, told a long Story Ipsissimis Verbis, their
words were the very self same, there was not one tittle Difference or
Variation, by which and some Cross questions it plainly appeared they had
conn'd their Lesson Together; besides, all the Evidence, they gave in his
behalf, was built upon a Rotten Foundation, namely a bond, which was in a
manner demonstrated to be forged, by very clear Circumstances, and particularly
by an Oath of a Gentleman, then accidentally in Court, who deposed, that he was
very well acquainted with the Handwriting of Mr. Anthony Preston Late Minister
at Barnsley, and that the Hand in the Bond was nothing like it; and indeed for
mine own Satisfaction, and that I might the better press him to a Confession of
the Forgery, I procured a Letter, which Mr. Anthony Preston had writ to one,
who is concerned in the management of the Prerogative Office in York, which I
showed to Mr. Robinson after his Condemnation, and desired to compare the
Hands, but the Bond, he pretended, was not in his possession; though upon sight
of the Letter he acknowledged to me, That the Hands did not very well agree
together; and yet at his Death declared, the Bond was legally obtained.

Another thing that might oblige him to a Voluntary Surrender, was the Belief
that Two positive Witnesses were necessarily required by the Law, to the taking
away his Life; and he was morally certain, that only One would Swear against
him; but alas! he was grossly mistaken; for the Judge (Mr. Baron Turton) told
him, That Counterfeiting Money was High Treason at Common Law, but Clipping was
not; and by Common Law one Witness in Treason, as well as other Offenses, was
deemed Sufficient. By the Statutes indeed ( primo Edw. 6. cap. 12. and 5, and
6. of Edward 6. cap. 11.) Two Witnesses are required in all sorts of Treasons:
But afterward the Statute, in 1. and 2. of Philip and Mary, cap. 11. reduces
the Way of Trial for Impairing and Counterfeiting the King's Coin, to the form
accustomed before 1 of Edward the 6th. So that now the difference between
Evidence for Counterfeiting, and Evidence for Impairing, is this: The first
being High Treason by Conmon Law, no more One Witness is required: The latter
being made High Treason by Act of Parliament, that Act requires Two Witnesses.
I shall not trouble you with any Transcript, it is but having Recourse to the
Statute-Book, and there you may receive further satisfaction.

That one Witness therefore will do for Counterfeiting, because it is
High Treason by Common Law, the Judge was pleased to declare it not only to be
his own, but his Learned Brethren's considerative Opinion; and likewise
produced Judge Hales's Pleas of the Crown to the Jury, which showed, That that
Incomparable Judge gave the same Sense and Opinion in the Case, who was a most
Eminent Lawyer, as well as a Great Divine.

This voluntary Surrender of himself he often urged to me, as a plain
Indication, as an undeniable Argument of his Innocence; but having confessed to
me (and which Confession he, when interrupted by me, confirmed at the Gallows)
his guiltiness in Clipping and Coining, both before and after his frequent
Deliverances, I told him, that the ill use he made of them had provoked the
Lord, that the Sins of this and of another nature, being impenitently persisted
in, had made them ripe for Punishment in this World, and that it was the Divine
Justice which would not permit him to live any longer upon Earth, and which had
blinded and infatuated his Understanding; and that God would certainly overtake
him with infinitely more fearful Storms of Vengeance in the World to come, if
he labored not earnestly to reconcile himself unto Him before his departure,
by a free and an entire confession of his Sins, and a true and faithful
Repentance for them. I desired him, that (as he had been concerned in an
Honorary and Public Office, but had in no wise answered the Character of it,
his Life having all along been a contradiction to the Sacred Design and Holy
End of its Institution) he would leave something in Writing behind him as a
Monument of his hearty Sorrow and Repentance for the same; and that others
might by him take an Example, and flee such Vices as had brought him to such a
shameful End. This, I told him, was a very reasonable request, and nothing but
what became a sincere Penitent to do; but I could not persuade him to any thing
of this nature; he only desired me, that, if I thought it expedient, I might
disclose to the World (and which is the reason of this Relation) what he had
confessed to me, and seemed to wish heartily, that what he had done, and the
Punishment he was like to undergo, might be of such use to those of the same
Function with himself, and to all others, as might influence them to the
constant conservation of Innocence, to be holy and righteous in all manner of
Conversation. I duly attended upon him, from his Condemnation to his Death, and
always, both before and after Divine Service, exhorted him (for alas! I could
not extort one) to a through Confession of all his Sins, and particularly of the
Fact which he was to dye for, but he denied it then, and persisted in his
Denial to the very last moment, That ever Roger Preston coined for him 1300 l.
in half a Years time (as he had sworn) or that ever he was Privy either to his
Clipping or Coining.

Alas! he was horribly abused and imposed upon by some, who for filthy Lucre's
sake, promised him, and gave him the greatest Assurances of procuring him a
Reprieve, so strangely and unreasonably, to the very moment of his going to
Execution; did he buoy up himself with hopes of Life, upon the consideration of
such Vain Promises, and the Discovery he himself had made, that the Powers of
Religion did, I Am afraid, very little operate upon him. When he came indeed to
the place of Execution, and saw a Terrible Death stare him in the Face, he was,
I believe, under the greatest Trouble and Confusion, and spoke to me more
passionately than ever he had done before, to pray for and with him. I told him
nothing would make the Sacrifice of Prayer acceptable to God, but a confession
of all his Sins, and particularly of the Fact he died for; an abhorrency and
detestation of them; an hearty acknowledgment of the Divine Justice; a cheerful
resignation of himself to God, and a being in Love and Charity with all the
World. But, alas! after he had taken a solemn Leave of his Son, (the Sheriff
having immediately before his Execution acquainted him with his Reprieve) and
given him a Charge to be dutiful to his Mother, and the like, when he ascended
the Ladder, instead of performing the Religious Duty I pressed him to, instead
of imploring the Mercy and Forgiveness of God for his great and manifold
Transgressions of the Laws, both Humane and Divine, and particularly for the
Scandalous Life he had led, when being under the highest Obligations to the
contrary, as having taken Holy Orders upon him; instead of expressing an
Universal Love and a Catholic Charity, he did nothing but bitterly inveigh
against the Law, the Judge, the Jury, the Witness, and against the Clerk of
Assize, for producing the Records of his former Trials against him. Thus he
died in the Pett; thus he expired rather in a Tramport of Rage and Fury, than
with a Christian Temper and Disposition: But as he lived, so he was resolved to
dye; which showed a seared and an insensate Conscience, that through the long
and customary practice of Wickedness and Vice, he was grown numbed, or past
feeling, that Darkness had veiled his Understanding, and that God had justly
given him the Spirit of Slumber.

I Am heartily sorry I can give no better an account, nor a more comfortable
relation of him, though Charity commands to think the best, obliges to the most
candid and favorable construction.

I pray GOD, that every one by his exemplary Punishment may be influenced and
persuaded to follow always that which is Good, so to exercise themselves, as to
have always a Conscience void of Offense both toward God and men; and
particularly all such as are called to any Ecclesiastical Office or
Administration, that they may take heed to do the thing which is Right, that
they may do all to the Glory of God, to the Honor of the Christian Religion,
and to the Reputation of their Holy Function, by constantly living a Life of
Holiness and Purity: In doing this, they will save themselves and them that
hear them. Amen.

There were Ten Persons more executed with him, Two for the same Treason, who
were both convicted by one and the same Witness R. P. They were Mr. Nicholas
Battersby of the City of York, and Robert Cokeson of Wakefield Woodside in the
Parish of Wakefield in the County of York, who both denied the Fact they were
condemned for. Cokeson indeed seemed to have some sense of God and Religion,
and I am confident, if he were to have lived, would have become a new man: And
though he absolutely, to the last moment of his Life, denied the Fact which
Preston laid to his Charge, yet he did not deny, that he had been a great
Clipper; but who accommodated or furnished him with Money, that he would never
in the least declare.

The other Malefactors were; Joanna Moat, for the Murder of her Child. Tho.
Langhorn, for the Murder of his Wife. Edward Smith, for Burglary. Ottowell
Bocking, for Burglary. Christopher Geldart, for Cloth off the Tenters, and
Horse-stealing. Robert Spark, for Horse-stealing. Chr. Jewitt, for
Horse-stealing. John Crosland, for burning a Barn.


All of whom, except Two, namely, Langhorn and Bocking, confessed themselves
guilty of the respective Crimes they died for, and I hope they were penitent:
They particularly recommended to the numerous Spectators the strict and holy
Observation of the Lord's Day, for they attributed all the Mischief and Misery
that befell them to the breaking of the Sabbath, and told the People, That when
they should have been at Church, offering up to God the Sacrifice of Prayer and
Thanksgiving; when they should have been hearing the Doctrines of Religion
explained, and the Sins against the Laws of it reprehended, they then were
spending their precious Time in Rioting and Drunkenness, in Chambering and
Wantonness, and therefore God had very justly suffered them to fall into the
Temptation of the Devil, and to come to such a shameful and ignominious End. I
pray God that the Great Execution at this last Assizes, that their Sufferings
may excite and oblige all People to the constant Practice of Justice and
Honesty, to a religious and strict Observance of the Lord's Day, to resort to
the Temple of the Lord at the Canonical hours of Prayer, there to present their
Bodies, a Living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is their
reasonable Service. Amen.

FINIS.

