An ACCOUNT of FAMILISM As it is Revived and Propagated BY THE QUAKERS.

SHOWING The Dangerousness of their Tenets, and their Inconsistency with the
Principles of common Reason and the Declarations of Holy Scripture.

By Henry Hallywell.

2 Pet. ii. 1. -- There shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1673.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Covert, Of Slaugham in the County of Sussex,
Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
THe daily and numerous Increase of the Heretical Generation of Quakers in
these Parts made me a little more than ordinarily inquisitive into their
Doctrins and Persuasions, which I found not only destructive of all Civil
Polity and Government, but of Religion itself and the Worship of Almighty God
established amongst us: For what else can be expected from them who deny the
Scripture to be the Word of God, and our Rule and Guide in matters of
Salvation? And they being so well known to you, as having had frequent
Experience of their obstinate and perverse Humor, in the Discharge and
Execution of those Trusts and Employments committed to you under His most
Sacred Majesty, I could do no less than present you with this small Treatise,
that going under the Name and Protection of so worthy and accomplished a Person
as your self, it may in some measure obtein its desired Effect, by putting a
stop to the growing Evil, and confirming those who are not yet seduced in the
Truth of their Profession; and may testify to the World, how much I am

Honored Sir, Your most Obliged and Affectionate Servant Henry Hallywell.

An Account of FAMILISM, As it is Revived and Propagated BY THE QUAKERS.
CHAP. I. The Cognation and Agreement between the Quakers and other Ancient and
Modern Heretics.
OUr blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ came from Heaven, and took upon him
our human flesh and blood, and by his sufferings and death upon the Cross,
redeemed and purchased a Church with his own blood; and of this he took a
singular care after his glorious ascension into Heaven, and fully instructed
and empowered his chosen Apostles to gather it from all parts and quarters of
the world, and they communicated to men the Word of Reconciliation and the
Doctrine of eternal Salvation. But the Devil who looked with an evil eye upon
the Happiness of our first Parents in Paradise, now envied mankind so great a
Good, and stirred up Persecutions against the Church of God round about. And
when it pleased the watchful Providence of God to give Peace to his Church by
the Conversion of Emperors and Kings to the Faith of Christ; the Devil then
quickly shifted the Scene, and what he could not do by open violence he
endeavored to effect by Subtilty, and sought to undermine the Church by
Schisms and Heresies; and to destroy her by those who pretended to be her own
children. And this Course he holds on still; and to come nearer to my present
design, it is the envy and hate the Devil bears against true Christianity, that
has stirred up here in England an Heretical sort of People, called Quakers, to
draw away and seduce men from the true Profession of Religion into damnable and
pernicious Errors. And because they borrow something of many Heresies, which
have been already in the world; it will not be amiss, to show briefly in some
particulars, the Agreement that is between them.

Simon Magus of old gave out, That he was God the Father: And how much I pray
did George Fox come behind that great Magician, when before the Justices of the
Peace at Lancaster, he affirmed, That he was equal with God? And James Nailor
was no bad Proficient in that cursed School, when he said, That he did witness,
that he himself was as holy, just and good as God.

Menander affirmed himself to be sent from the invisible Regions to be the
Savior of Mankind: And it is well known to the world, that James Nailor
asserted himself to be Christ; For though his followers would mince the matter,
as being ashamed of his Blasphemy; yet it is certain, that he accepted of
Hosanna and Divine Worship in the Streets of Bristol; and when he was charged
with it, would return no other answer, but in the words of our Savior Christ,
Thou say it, which is as much as, I assent to it or acknowledge it.

Photinus denied the Trinity, acknowledging only the Father, and excluding the
Son and the Holy Ghost: And George Fox in the Book called, Readiness Errand to
Damascus, affirms that there is no distinction of Persons in the Godhead. And
if at any time they are forced to a Confession of it, they deliver it so
ambiguously that it amounts to no more than what Arius himself affirmed as his
Faith, who when he was commanded by the Emperor Constantine to give a
Confession of it, delivered a Creed in words ours, but in sense his own.

Socinus denied the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and looked upon his Death and
Passion only as an Example: And this is expressly found in their Book called,
Readiness Errand to Damascus: And James Nailor in his Love to the Lost, p. 56.
says, That the end for which Christ did suffer was to be a living Example to
all Generations.

The Valentinians arrogated to themselves a knowledge beyond Christ and his
Apostles: And what else do the Quakers when they so impudently throw away the
written Word of God, and, by a false application of the Spirit of God to
themselves, blind and delude the easy and credulous Vulgar with newfangled
Revelations? Thomas Holbrow a Quaker, to one that urged Scripture answered,
What do thou tell me of the Scriptures, which are no better to me than an old
Almanac. Fox and Hubber thorn in a Book called Truth's Defense, say, The
Scriptures are no standing Rule, and it is dangerous for ignorant people to read
them. Are not these as impudent Heretics when they shall slight and contemn the
Dispensation of Jesus upon Earth as an empty, insignificant thing, and reject
the Ordinances of Christ as childish, being themselves under an higher
Economy, even the Rule of the Spirit? And no question but they are under the
Rule and Power of the Spirit, but it is of that Spirit which works in the
children of Disobedience, even the Prince of the Power of the Air.

The forementioned Heretics the Valentinians, boasted of themselves as the
only Spiritual Persons, calling themselves Perfect; and all others who in the
humility of their souls profess themselves sinners, and study to serve God with
fear, Idiots and Ignorant People. And does not the same Spirit still possess
the Quakers, who in an extravagant and proud humor affect the Title and
Appellation of Perfection? When God knows the very boasting of a thing they
have so little of, argues their weakness and folly; and those that talk and
vaunt highest of this Perfection among them, are as perfect slaves to their
Pride, Hatred, Malice, Covetousness and Lust as any people in the World. One of
these perfect Creatures was accused lately for getting his Maid with Child: And
when R. B. a Quaker advised with Lacock concerning a Marriage intended by him
with a rich Woman, Lacock told him, it was not fit for him having begun in the
Spirit to end in the Flesh, and no sooner had R. B. desisted in his Suit, but
Lacock takes the woman and marries her. Was not this a perfect Cheat?

The Quakers pretend very much to Inspiration and Prophecy, and so did Marcus
an old Heretic, who abused many silly women under color of conferring on them
the gift of Prophesying.

The same Marcus had a (...), a familiar Spirit, by which he brought himself
into credit with his deluded Followers: and I have had it confidently affirmed,
that about the first rise of the Quakers in the North of England, several
persons by Gloves and Ribbands and diverse Charms and Incantations were really
bewitched by them. And doubtless many of their Quaking Fits, wherein they fomed
at the mouth, trembled throughout all parts of their bodies, hideously groaned,
their visages distorted, and tumbling upon the ground, were real possessions by
the Devil.

It were easy to draw out the Parallel between them into a greater length, but
that I think it would be too burdensome and tedious to the Reader; forasmuch as
it is true of them what Irenaeus said of the Heretics of his time, Lib. 1. c.
18.
Per singulos dies affectant novum aliquid adinvenire; That every day they
affect to bring in some novelty and dangerous Opinion. I shall rather choose now
to represent them under the Notion of Familists.

CHAP. II. Of the Authors of Familism, and the Quakers Agreement with them in
their Doctrine.
IT was not long after David George had disseminated and spread abroad his
pernicious Errors, but they were greedily sucked in and embraced by Henry
Nicholas; who being of a crafty and subtle Temper, a plausible and winning
Deportment, as if the Stars had pointed him out for a grand Impostor, carefully
concealed his Doctrine at Munster in Westphalia where he was born, and in the
mean time diffused it by Letters and Emissaries instructed by him, in many
places of Germany forty miles distant from him; so that the Sect of Familists
grew and increased for a good while before it was known who was the Fomenter of
it. At last he removes to Amsterdam, sets up the Trade of a Mercer and
professes his Doctrine, calling his Fraternity and Society, The Family of Love,
and in his Writings gave a Symbol or Cognizance, Charitas extorsit per H. N. as
may be seen at the end of every Epistle or Treatise of his. For his Person, he
was corpulent, of a good Presence and Sanguine Temper, shrewdly suspected of
Incontinence with some Women in his house; and it is no wonder if he should not
bathe his begodded Humanity (as he phrases it of himself) in carnal and sensual
Pleasures; when the great Arcanum and Mystery of his Doctrine was mere
Sadducism, that is, A Denial of the Immortality of the Soul and a Life to come.
From Amsterdam he sails over into England, and here divulges and communicates
his destructive Errors among a company of Artificers and silly Women, who being
unstable and not well principled in the Rudiments of Christian Religion became
an easy Prey to this white Wolf. He wrote an Epistle to two Daughters of
Warwick, dissuading them from Regeneration by the Word of God read or preached,
calling it ceremonial, elementish and false, and labored to persuade the Maids
to a spiritual new birth through his Doctrine. His Errors were afterward
discovered and refuted by J. Knewstub in a Book dedicated to Ambrose Earl of
Warwick and printed at London by Order from the Queen, 1579. He pretended a
Revelation from the Angel Gabriel. He affirmed, that Christ was neither God nor
Man, but the State of his Doctrine, and that every one of his illuminate Elders
was Christ. He held a Perfection without sin; and that the whole History of
Jesus Christ was not to be understood in a literal, but Mystical and
Allegorical sense; that there is no Heaven, Hell nor Judgment but what is in
this Life; and that all outward Ordinances in Religion are foolish and trifling
things But I shall trouble my self no further to collect the Heads of his
Doctrine, since I shall take a general view of it by comparing the Doctrine of
the Quakers and that of H. N. together.

SECT. I.
H. N. says, that not only the Law of Moses, but the Ministration of Christ and
his Apostles, were only temporary things instituted to bring men to the full
and perfect Reige of the Spirit, and as Children, when they arrive to a good
competency of understanding and can read well, they throw away their Horn-books
and Primers; so the Pedagogy of the Law and Gospel are to be cast aside when
men come to the Spirit, and this Dispensation of the Spirit is only in the
Familists and in their doctrine.

And that this is the full sense of the Quakers, appears from their own Books
which they cunningly spread abroad to infect and poison the minds of weak and
ignorant People. In the Book called, A Declaration of the Faith of Quakers,
penned by four of that Gang, John Crook says thus, We believe by the same gift
of Grace, that there are several Ministrations, and several Operations;
according to 1 Cor. 12. and all by the same. Spirit; as before and after the
Law by Moses, and after by John the Baptist and Christ and his Apostles, and in
all those the Ministration had acceptance with God through the management of
the Spirit, and its rejection and dislike of God for the want thereof. And by
this Spirit were the Scriptures given forth, and the Holy men of God did speak,
prophecy, preach and pray as they were moved; and for want of it the Letter
did and does kill. And for the further appearance and pouring out of this
Spirit, answerable unto the work and service that God had for them to do, they
were to wait, as Christ commanded his Disciples to do at Jerusalem, to receive
the promise of the Father, for by this Spirit he that speaks, speaks as the
Oracles of God. And therefore as it was the practice of the People of God in
old time to wait for the moving and stirring of this Spirit, that they might
speak as it gave them utterance, in the evidence and demonstration thereof; so
do this People (called Quakers) now: and according to its moving in their
hearts they minister, according to the signification of the Spirit, whereby
they understand both what and when to speak, and when to be silent.

Although this sweet sugared speech seem to be without deceit, yet there is
gall and wormwood mixed with it, and in this new wine drawn from their own
Cellar which lies deep in the lowest Region of the Body, there is a great deal
of poison. I shall therefore for the sake of the Ignorant and such as lie most
obnoxious to their snares discover the Cheat. To omit that this Expression
[Several Ministrations before and after the Law by Moses, and after by John
Baptist and Christ and his Apostles] can scarce be made tolerable sense, a
fault pardonable enough in Mechanics and the Brethren of the Family; but a
notorious instance of their Hypocrisy in pretending immediate Inspiration from
the Spirit when they write nonsense. In the Discourse, such as it is, we learn
these three things. (1.) That the Ministration of Christ was but a temporary
Ministration to continue only till the Dispensation of the Spirit came, and
therefore was disliked and rejected of God, as wanting that full Measure, Rule
and Power of the Spirit, which should afterward come into the world. Whereas
the Ministration of Christ was indeed the Ministration of the Spirit, and
therefore to set up a Dispensation of the Spirit above and in opposition to
that of the Lord Jesus in the Gospel, is a blasphemous derogation from the
honor of our blessed Savior, who said to his Apostles, Joh. 16. 14. He shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. (2.) It follows from the
forementioned passage, that the Spirit of God equally moves and acts in them as
it did in the Apostles; therefore say they, As the Apostles were commanded to
wait at Jerusalem for the gracious illapse and descent of the Holy Spirit; so
they -- and this signifies to them both what and when to speak. But will any
sober person believe, that a Quaking Speaker is divinely inspired, when he
commits endless Tautologies and vain repetitions, and makes inconsequent
illations, and especially when the greatest part of his Harangue shall be
downright railing? Shall the eternal Spirit of Wisdom and Reason be guilty of
nonsense and absurdities? (3.) It will follow, that what they speak or write
must be as good Canonical Scripture as the Bible, and we are as much bound to
believe George Fox and James Nailor as S. Paul and S. Peter.

I shall instance but in one Quaker more to prove this first part of their
Doctrine all one with Familism, and that shall be out of Humphrey Smith's
Discourse of the three Ministrations of Moses, Christ, and the Spirit. If Moses
(says he) with all his Priests, Tithes and long Prayers were now upon earth,
and Christ in his own body with his Miracles, Baptism and Supper: then whether
those obey not Moses who leave the Priests and come to Christ? And whether such
when they are come to Christ, should always be looking and following after his
Body, Miracles, Baptism or Supper without them, or tarry and wait to receive
the Spirit within them. And then which of these now should all people that
profess Christ be led by in these days, either Moses or the Person of Christ or
the Spirit of Truth? There is no sober Christian that can read this passage
without anger and disdain, to see such wicked wretches scoff and flearingly
insult upon the sacred Person of our Lord Jesus, the whole History of whose
blessed Life and Death in the Letter of it they esteem no better than one of
Esop's Fables.

Again, the same Person has this, Whether they be not compassed about with a
cloud of error, who are upholding that Ministry of the Law which Christ is the
end of; and likewise such as are upholding and keeping up that which Christ
said, he had finished? And being that Moses, nor indeed his true Ministers of
the Law are upon Earth, neither the body of Christ (which by the Professors was
murdered at Jerusalem) visibly to be seen upon earth, then what was it these
have to follow who have not received the Spirit to be led by? Here again the
Personal Offices of the blessed Jesus are laid aside.

SECT. II.
The second thing wherein the Familists and Quakers are all one, is the
Pretense of immediate Revelation. David George and H. N. both pretended to
receive their Doctrine from the Angel Gabriel. And Will. Gibson the Quaker, says,
that the Gospel which they preach, they have not received it from men, nor from
books, nor from writings, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in them, and
then he goes on and denies the Scriptures of the old and new Testament to be
the revealed Will of God.

There are two things especially by which our Savior Jesus Christ and his
Apostles demonstrated the Truth of their Doctrine. (1.) The Miracles which they
did: And these were so many infallible Seals and Marks of the Divinity of the
Doctrine they communicated to the World, that God was the Author of it. For
there can be no surer evidence of any thing being delivered from heaven, than
when a man in favor of it is enabled to work Miracles. And this was the sign
which Moses gave the children of Israel, when they asked how they should know
the word which God has not spoken, Deuteronomy. 18. 22. When a Prophet speaks in the
name of the Lord, if the thing follow not nor come to pass [that is, if he do
no Miracle,] that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken. -- (2.) The
Reasonableness of the Doctrine which they delivered: To this S. Peter seems to
appeal, 2 Pet. 3. 15. when he bids us be ready [(...)] always to give an answer
to every man that asks us a reason of the hope that is in us.

Now let us examine a little the Doctrine of these Modern Familists or Quakers by
these two foregoing Rules: they pretend Divine Revelation, and would fain have
the World believe that they are divinely inspired; but is any man so simple as
to believe they are so, merely because they say it? so a man may believe all
the Cheats and Impostors in the World. What sign do they show or what evidence
do they bring that they have received their Doctrine immediately from God? If
they can work any Miracles to confirm it, we will believe them, otherwise we
have no more faith to believe them, than we have to believe, that Mahomet
discoursed with the Angel Gabriel and received his Alchoran from him.

As for the Reasonableness of their Doctrine, a very easy and mean capacity can
find none in it; for how should there be any Reason in what they teach, when
they themselves deny the use of Reason, and tell the world they are guided by a
Light within them that is neither Reason nor Conscience, which yet is but like
a dark Lanthorn, that gives light to none but themselves. And besides, by this
Principle it is impossible they should ever convince any man that is not merely
besotted: As for Example, the Quakers Light says, that the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper is needless; but the Light within me tells me, it is not. And is
not my Light as good as his? nay, much better, for I have the warrant of Christ
and his Apostles; but he has only his own bare, blind Fancy. And the man
looked for better satisfaction for his money, when the Quaker upon demand of it
replied, That the Light within him told him, that he owed him nothing.

SECT. III.
A third Manifestation of the Familists and Quakers being one and the same
Sect, is their abrogating and disanulling all outward Ordinances and
Institutions of Religion: That this was the Opinion of David George and H. N.
cannot be unknown to any who have but heard or read any thing of them and their
Persuasions. See H. N.'s Epistle to the two Daughters of Warwick, Sect. 5. 7.
10. And that those highflown Spiritualists the Quakers are of the same mind
needs no proof, but is evident from their Practice in condemning and censuring
men for using a Form of Prayer, for baptizing their children, for receiving the
Sacrament, for paying their Tithes and honoring God with their Substance,
setting apart a place and time for the Worship of God, and indeed the whole
Duty of Religion, if there be any thing outward and of the body in it.

But that God who has commanded us to worship him in Spirit and in Truth, has
likewise commanded us to do it with our bodies as well as with our souls, (1
Cor. 6. 20.) and that bodily expressions by Gestures and Postures are to be
used in Christian Religion, as kneeling, bowing and the like, is apparent from
the examples of Christ and his Apostles. The Holy Jesus himself lift up his
sacred Eyes to Heaven when he prayed for Lazarus; fell on his face when he
prayed in his Agony. And St. Paul (as himself says, Ephesians. 3. 14.) bowed his
knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. He and St. Peter and the rest of
the believers do the like more than once in the Acts of the Apostles. Besides,
confessing, praising and glorifying God by the Voice is as much an outward and
bodily Worship as any other, and therefore if God be not to be honored and
worshipped with bodily Worship, we must not pray nor praise him with the Voice.

Again, the very Frame of Christian an Religion presupposes a bodily and
outward Worship of God: for the Christian Religion is given to men who consist
of Body as well as Soul, and not to Angels: and while we are in these bodies,
it is impossible but that they must partake in our worship of God, yea when it
is performed in the most spiritual manner of all.

Lastly, if bodily Worship be not a part of Gods Service, there can be no such
thing as Idolatry when a man worships an Image. As for Example, Idolatry is the
giving of that Worship to a Creature which is incommunicably proper to God: now
when a man bows his body to an Image as to an Object of Religious Worship, he
gives that honor to the Image which is proper to God; therefore bowing the
body is proper to God and a part of his Worship.

By this it is evident what a loss these foolish people are at when they so
impudently cry down bodily Worship; they run hand over head and never consider
the Conclusions that must be drawn from such dangerous Premises; for their
very praying together is bodily Worship.

SECT. IV.
Concerning a form of Prayer.
With a like silly and weak confidence they exclame against Forms of Prayer,
whenas our Blessed Savior taught his Disciples a Form, Matt. 6. 9. Thus
therefore pray ye: and lest we should think that this was only a Pattern, as if
Christ had said, Pray after this pattern or to this sense; St. Luke Chap. 11.
expresses it, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. that is, do it in haec verba.

Moreover, that this is a Form of Prayer to be used in the very words it was
delivered, appears sufficiently from the Occasion of it. It came to pass (says
St. Luke) as Jesus was praying in a certain place, that when he ceased, one of
his Disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray as John also taught his
Disciples: where we are told first, that John delivered a certain Form of
Prayer to his Disciples. Secondly, that the Disciples of our Savior besought
him, that he also would give them in like manner some Form of his making, that
they might also pray with their Masters Spirit, as John's Disciples did with
theirs. For it is ridiculous to think that either John's or our Saviors
Disciples knew not how to pray before, whenas they were Jews, and had their
constant hours of Prayer, as the third, sixth and nineth.

But besides all this, I shall come nearer to themselves, when an Enthusiastic
Quaker at a meeting starts up and begins to pray, I would fain know whether the
rest of the Company join with him and go along with him in this Prayer or not:
If they do not, to what purpose does he pray in a vocal and audible manner? for
he might as well have prayed to himself as to speak aloud, if it be not for
Edification that others may join with him. If they do join with him in that his
Prayer, is it not then a Form to all them that hear it? and are not they bound
to pray in those very words and expressions which he utters? And though he be
never so much over-flowed with the Spirit of the Lord (as they talk) yet the
hearers are limited and confined to those very expressions which the inspired
Prophet utters. With what confidence then can men separate from the Church of
God and run after these Whifflers, when the case is so plain against them?
certainly any man that has but half an eye may see that they are mere cheats in
these things. Let it not be said then that men who can use their Reasons well
enough in other things, should be so far to seek in these, as to be carried
away against Scripture, Sense and Reason and the Experience of every man, only
by the prate and talk of an ignorant sottish fellow.

Object. But here they object, that St. Paul in Romans 8. 26. says, That the
Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as
we ought; but the Spirit itself makes intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered. Therefore we ought not to put up our petitions to God in a
Form of Prayer.

Answ. Here we may see those very persons who deny the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, yet, like the Devil, make use of them for their own advantage. But
if it shall be manifested that the Text alleged has not one syllable in it
that proves an immediate Inspiration of God both for the words and matter of
Prayer, their boasting will be found to be ridiculous and vain. May not this
then be St. Paul's meaning who all along before was discoursing of bearing the
Cross, that the Holy Spirit helps the weakness of our natures, lifting and
bearing up as it were a part of the burden of the Cross for us; for that we
know not which part to choose or to pray for, either a perfect deliverance from
it, or that we should continue longer under the burden of it. But what is this
to immediate infusions and inspirations in Prayer?

SECT. V.
Of Baptism.
Now as for Baptism, it is no wonder if they throw that by as a useless carnal
Ordinance, for they rejecting the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and pretending one of
their own by immediate Revelation, do but follow the conduct and guide of their
own Opinions in denying Obedience to a positive Command of that Lord whose Rule
and Dominion they have cast off and disallow. They that refuse and despise the
Governor, will not stick to slight his Laws; and these men undervaluing and
contemning the Person of Jesus Christ the Son of God and Judge of Men and
Angels, will easily contemn and vilify his Commands, as things of no value and
moment.

But the Christian Church has always looked upon Baptism as a rite of
Initiation into a Religion, and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ finding it in
use among the Jews adopted it into his Religion, and made it subservient to
holy and blessed purposes under the Gospel. And being a Ceremony neither
burdensome nor offensive, he has commanded it to be used by every one that
professes Christianity, whereby we enter and are admitted into the Church of
Christ, and we know of no other door set open under the Gospel for Salvation
but this. Matthew. 28. 19. Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. So Saint Mark, Chap. 16.
15, 16. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature; he
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned. And Christ says expressly Joh. 3. 5. That Except a man be born of Water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

When therefore the Apostles had received this Commission from the Lord Jesus,
they baptized every one that desired to enter into Christ's Religion; and lest
these Deceivers should apply this Baptism to a mystical sense, the Acts of the
Apostles will furnish us with Examples enough, that the Apostles baptized with
the outward element of Water. Acts 2. 41. They that gladly received his word
were baptized. -- Acts 10. 47. 48. Can any man forbid water, that these should
not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Mark here,
they were baptized with the Spirit, and yet needed the Baptism of Water; And he
commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. Acts 8. 36. See here is
Water (says the Eunuch to Philip) what hinders me to be baptized? And v. 38.
They went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized
him.

And this Custom of admitting men into Christ's Family and Religion by Baptism,
has been used successively in the Church of Christ, in obedience to his
Command and conformity to the Apostles Practice, without any Interruption from
their time to this very day. And because it is likewise necessary, that every
good Christian be furnished with knowledge to defend his Religion against the
Adversary, I shall answer what they bring to seduce the ignorant People from
this Institution of our Savior Jesus Christ. And though what the Quaker urges
for himself be nothing to this purpose, yet because it will manifest to the
world, that there is nothing in Quakery but Folly and Cavils, I will produce
it. He says therefore that Baptism is a Figure or Type, and therefore now not
to be used; and for this he brings 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto,
even Baptism, also does now save us. -- Which place does very much confirm the
use and practice of Baptism; for the Apostle speaking of Noah and his Family
being saved in the Ark from perishing by Water, answerable to which, Baptism
(says he) now saves us; not only the external sign or washing with water, but
the answer of a good Conscience, the being baptized into the Death of Christ,
and rising with him to newness of life. Now if the washing with water together
with the answer of a good Conscience save us, then it ought still to be used.
For if the Apostle had here denied the baptizing with water, there had been no
Analogy or correspondence in his speech; but he expressly says, that as Noah was
saved by Water, so answerable to that are Christians by Baptism. But these
Heretics would fain separate the sign and the thing signified, which the
Apostle does not.

SECT. VI.
Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
By the same Diabolical Spirit wherewith they are possessed, they lay aside the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as a thing too carnal for such high flown and
conceited Spiritualists as they are. But I desire those that are not yet taken
in their snares, nor bewitched with their enticing and subtle words, to look
back to Christ's own Institution, and if they have any fear of God or love to
that Savior who redeemed them, to consider seriously with what confidence they
can deny so plain a Command, and cast off a Duty to the practice o which not
only Christ Jesus the great Lawgiver, but their own particular needs and
necessities bind and oblige them.

In Matthew. 26. v. 26. 27. we have Christ's Institution of this holy Sacrament,
how that He took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the
Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body: Then he took the Cup, and gave
thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. St. Mark Chap. 14.
repeats the very same, and says, They all drank of it. But St. Luke Chap. 22.
19. and St. Paul 1 Cor. 11. 24. add these words [Do this in remembrance of me;]
the full importance of which words is; First, a Commission given by our Lord
Jesus to his Apostles to continue this Ceremony (now used by him) as an holy
Ceremony or Sacrament in the Church for ever. Secondly, a Direction, that (for
the manner of observing it) they should do to other Christians as he had now
done to them, i. e. Take, bless, break this Bread; take and bless this Cup, and
then distribute it to others; (settling this on them as a part of their Office,
a branch of that Power left them by him, and by them communicable to whom they
should think fit after them.) Thirdly, a specifying the end to which this was
designed, a commemoration of the Death of Christ, a representing his Passion to
God, and a coming before him in his Name, first, to offer our Sacrifices of
Supplications and Praises in the name of the crucified Jesus (as of old both
among Jews and Heathens, all their Sacrifices were rites in and by which they
supplicated God.) And secondly, to commemorate that his daily continual
Sacrifice or Intercession for us at the right hand of his Father now in heaven.

It is not my purpose to make here a Discourse of the Sacrament, but to show
that Christ by his Institution of it, intended it to continue in his Church,
till his coming again to Judgment, and that this Office of Administering it was
by our Lord Jesus bestowed and settled upon his Apostles, and that they
(planting of a Church which should continue after their Death) should appoint
and ordain Successors to themselves to preside and officiate in that Church,
and particularly to administer this Sacrament to the People, by way of Office,
to do as here Christ did. And this not in a Mystical and Allegorical, but
Literal Sense; so that though it be true, that he that eats not Christ's
Flesh, and drinks not his Blood has no Life in him, yet is this to be done by
the partaking of the outward Bread and Wine, and by our communicating of that
according to Christ's Institution, we partake of his Body and Blood in a
Spiritual manner and all other benefits of his Death and Passion.

So that these Apostates and Heretical Persons by their Allegories and Mystical
meanings would bereave the Christian World of the choicest Mystery of Religion,
in which we are confirmed and assured of the Pardon of our Sins, and by Gods
free remission the burdned and distressed Soul is refreshed; and we receive
further supplies and increase of Grace and the Spirit of God, to enable us to
do that which he will graciously in Christ accept at our hands, i. e. to serve
him in holiness and renewed Righteousness; and to empower us (if we be not
wanting to our selves and to our own best hopes and Interests) to continue and
persevere thus to our lives end. And now let all men consider seriously how
heinous a thing it is Schismatically to separate from the Church; and how
grossly they are cheated and abused by these deceitful Quakers, and imposed upon
against the plain Sense and Current of the Holy Scripture; and how they hope to
look that Jesus with comfort in the Face, at the dreadful Day of Judgment,
whose sacred Institutions they now vilify and contemn. Christ says, Eat this
bread, and drink this wine in remembrance of me; and Saint Paul says, that as
often as we shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, we do one to another
annuntiate or proclaim the death of the Lord, till he come again to judge us.
But these Fanatic Spiritualists would persuade us, that this Communion is
Heathenish and Abomination. Now judge whom we are to follow in this matter,
whether Christ and his Apostles, or these deceitful Whifflers. For Christ and
his Apostles did corporally eat and drink the material Bread and Wine, and left
command to his Church, that it should so be done; and that this Order was
observed, Saint Paul plainly shows, 1 Cor. 11. where he sets down the manner of
Christ's Institution of this Holy Sacrament, and rectifies some abuses the
Corinthians were guilty of.

CHAP. III. Of the Holiness of Times, Things and Persons under the Gospel.
BEcause the Church of God has ever set apart some Times, Things and Persons
in a more immediate relation to God and his Service; and that these seducing
Familists persuade the People, that all these are equally common with others,
and so no difference to be put between one day and another, one thing and
another, or one person and another, though in the nearest relation to God and
his Service; but that the Christian Sabbath is no more than another day, the
Church no more than a Stable or Barn, nor a Minister or Euangelical Priest than
another man; as appears by their following many times their usual Employments
and Trades on a Sunday; their despite and scorn cast upon the material
Edifices or Churches wherein Divine Service is celebrated, calling them
Steeple Houses in derision, and the reviling Gods Ministers by the names of
Baals Priests, Hirelings, Serpents, and whatever their black and impure Hearts
and Mouths can think and utter: I shall therefore for the sake of those
ignorant People who are not yet drawn away, nor bewitched with their Sorceries
and Enchantments, show plainly and distinctly the Reasonableness of these
things.

When God created Man, he wrote this Truth on his heart, that he was a
Creature, and therefore acknowledging Gods Sovereignty and Dominion over all
the Works of his hands; he must likewise confess, that God has a Right and
Propriety in every thing from his Sovereign Majesty and Dominion which can
never be alienated from him, or he ever dispossessed of. Since then God by
Royal Bounty has not only given Man his Being, but likewise draws out this
Existence, which is the Time and Duration of it, and enriched him with various
Gifts and Benefits, such as the free Use and Enjoyment of all earthly
Creatures, he is obliged and bound to pay some Service, Duty and Fealty to this
great Lord of the World, and must return him back something of all that he has
given him.

But lest this should be left to the frail and mutable will of Man, who being
possessed of these Benefits might forget the Lord, therefore God has expressly
declared how and in what sort he shall hold and enjoy all these Blessings, that
is, So that God the great Lord have a Rent or Portion reserved out of them to
himself, that thereby Man might still acknowledge Gods Sovereignty and his own
Dependency upon him.

Now the Benefits God has conferred upon Man, they are 1. The Time or Duration
of his Life. 2. The Place of his Habitation. 3. The Means of susteining his
bodily Life upon Earth. Out of all these God must have his Honorary Part: That
is, since God has given us our Beings, and draws them out in length and
continues our Life to us, we owe in Justice some portion of this time to God:
So likewise since God has given Man so wide a place for his dwelling as the
whole Earth, he must allot some place, some part of this great space for God.
And lastly since all Creatures are given Man for his own Use and Benefit, it is
fit that God likewise have his Rent out of what we possess and enjoy.

SECT. I.
Of the Time allotted for the Service of God.
In the fourth Commandment, God designed the seventh day for his Service and
Worship. For the Worship of Almighty God being once settled in all the Parts and
Duties of it, it necessarily follows, that some time should be set apart for
the more special performance of it. Exodus 20. 8.
And this Commandment being Moral, as all the rest of the Decalogue are (a
Symbol of which was their being written by the finger of God in Tables of
Stone, to denote their eternal Permanency and Morality) we are as much bound to
the Observation of it, as to its main Importance, as to the sixth or seventh. I
say, we are bound to the Observation of it, as to the Equity and Morality of
it. And from this we conclude

1. That it is reasonable there should be a time set apart for Gods Worship:
For we being commanded to worship, honor and serve God, it is impossible to do
it but within the Comprehension of some time or other.

2. One day in seven is time little enough to be allotted for the more special
Service of God. Had God commanded every day of our Lives to be wholly devoted
to him, it had been but Reason and Equity; and since that out of regard to our
Weakness, and that condition of Mortality wherein he has placed us, he requires
but one day in a week to be more especially set apart for his Service, it were
most irrational not to give him that. Besides, our merciful Lord has a regard
in this Commandment even to the Beasts themselves as a part of his Creation,
which surely are not to be worse used now under the Gospel than under the Law,
but have as much reason to be rested on the Sabbath day now as they had then.

3. Since that this is reasonable, what fitter day can we pitch upon, than the
first day of the week, on which our blessed Savior Jesus arose from the dead?
For if the Jews, together with the Commemoration of the Creation of the World,
wherein God having perfected all his works, rested on the seventh day, did
likewise keep holy that day with respect to their deliverance from the Tyranny
of Pharaoh: How much greater reason have we to solemnize the Christian Sabbath
(with them indeed to celebrate the Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God in making
of all things,) in remembering the glorious Resurrection of the Son of God,
wherein he rose as a triumphant Conqueror from his bed of Darkness, after he
had dis-mantled the Prisons of Hell and the Grave, and wrought a mighty
Salvation for Mankind?

4. That as God did then, so (Christ having transmitted his Power to them) the
Apostles and succeeding Church of God now may very reasonably dispose of us in
matters of this nature, and direct all its Members into some uniform way, at
such set times of the Worship of God: And that they have done so, appears both
by some mentions of the Lords day in the Holy Scriptures, and by the constant
suffrage of the Fathers of the Church since that time; which is a sufficient
Obligation on all Christians to a due, constant and diligent Observation of the
Christian Sabbath. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day.

And lest any man shall say, that this Command was given by Moses and so at an
end, and therefore that Christians are not bound by it: Let him take this for
an Answer and consider it well, and then he will see there is no weight in the
Objection, and so will not be moved, when by impertinent cavilling Fellows it is
urged upon him: I say therefore, first, That every one of the ten Commandments
is moral, and for that very reason binds all Christians still, and therefore
the Church of England, (though these rebellious Quakers disown their Mother,)
has made them a part of her Liturgy, and all good people teach them to their
Children in their Catechisms, as knowing that all Christians are to give
obedience to them under the Gospel. Secondly, our blessed Savior says, Matthew.
5. 17. that he came not to dissolve the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill.
Think not (says he) that I am come to dissolve the Law and the Prophets [that
is to take away the Obligation of that Rule of the Duty of Man to God and his
Neighbor, given first by Moses and afterward repeated and inculcated by the
Prophets,] but to fulfill them, that is, to supply, accomplish and perfect those
Rules and Doctrins of just and unjust contained in them, by a more ample
Interpretation and other Improvement befitting the state of the Gospel. And if
(as these Familists persuade their unwary Proselytes) to fulfill were to put an
end to a thing; the sense must be thus, that Christ came not to destroy, that
is, to put an end to the Law, but to put an end to it. But who can imagine
without Blasphemy, our blessed Savior would be guilty of such an absurd speech?

Now if it shall be asked, why then Christ did not improve the fourth
Commandment touching the keeping holy of the Sabbath? it is answered, That this
was already strictly observed among the Jews, even unto Superstition; and
therefore there needed rather a Relaxation than an Addition to this
Commandment. For whereas the Jews on that day would not so much as kindle a
Fire, or dress the Meat they should eat, or carry any Burden, or take a
Journey; and hence accuse our Savior for healing on the Sabbath, and his
Disciples for plucking the ears of Corn, Jesus tells them, that The Sabbath was
made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath: intimating, that Works of Necessity
and Mercy may lawfully be done on the Sabbath, though not the Works of a man's
ordinary Trade and Employment.

SECT. II.
Of the Place of Gods Worship.
Almighty God having given the whole Earth to Man for his Habitation, common
Reason and Justice require that Man should sanctisie and separate some peculiar
place for the Service and Worship of his great Creator. And accordingly we find
in all Ages of the world and by all Persons professing any Religion at all,
some particular and set places appointed to invocate and worship the supreme
Deity. Among the Jews God had his Temple whither all the Tribes went up to
worship: And in Profane Histories we read of Temples dedicated to the Use and
Service of some Supreme Deity. From whence it appears that the very Law of
Nature commands to fix and set apart a place for the Service of God. And God
will have this of us too, that as he has reserved a portion of the Time of our
Life for the celebration of his Honor, so has he also reserved a Portion out
of the Place of our Residence. Therefore in Ezekiel. 45. God commands the children
of Israel, and in them all the Nations of the World, that when they come to
inhabit the Land he gives them, they must divide it into three Parts, one for
the People, another for the King, but the first for God himself.

But and if it shall be said, that this was a Command under the Levitical Law,
and so not obligatory to us Christians who live not under that Law. It must be
remembered, that though God commanded a House and Place for his Service to be
built and set apart; yet all Mankind were tied to the same Duty by a Law more
Ancient than that of Moses, even by the very Law of Nature, which lays a
perpetual and indispensable Injunction upon all men, that God have his Place of
Worship and, as it were, Residence among them; that they might live in a
continual Dependence upon him, and remember that that they receive the very
Places of their Abode and Habitation from his Gift and Benevolence. And it was
some hundreds of years before the Law of Moses was given, that Jacob when he
was poor and had not wherewithal to build God an House, yet consecrated a
Portion of Ground by erecting a Stone and pouring oil on the head thereof,
calling the Place Bethel, that is, The House of God, and vowed to build it,
when God should bless and make him able to do it. Genesis 28. 22.

So that the very secret instinct and working of Nature leads men to the
Practice of this Duty, and hence likewise it was that the Jews (though never
commanded of God) had two sorts of Places for Religious Duties besides their
Tabernacle or Temple: the one called Proseuchae, Oratories, and the other
Synagogues. The Oratory or Place of Prayer was a Plot of Ground encompassed
with a Wall or some other like Mound or Enclosure, and open above, and the use
was properly for Prayer, and this stood without the City. But the Synagogue was
a covered Edifice, as our Houses and Churches are, where the Law and the
Prophets were read and expounded, and the People instructed in Divine Matters,
according to that, Acts 15. 21. Moses of old time has in every City them that
preach him being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; and this stood
within the City.

The Oratory or Place of Prayer is sometimes mentioned in the New Testament, as
in Luke 6. 12. where it is said, that our Savior went out into a mountain to
pray, and continued all night [(...)] in an Oratory or Prayer-house of God.

And in Acts 16. 13. St. Luke tells us, that St. Paul being come to Philippi in
Macedonia, On the Sabbath day they went out of the City to a river side [(...)]
where there was famed or reported to be an Oratory: yet if we render it, Where
Prayer was wont to be made; it will follow, that here was a place set apart and
used for Prayer, and there St. Paul sat down and spoke to the women that were
come together there.

From what has been said it follows, that to set apart a Place for the Worship
of Almighty God is the common Voice and Dictate of Reason and Nature, inasmuch
as the Jews had set Places in and about every City and Town, where the Word of
God was preached, and to which they assembled to pray unto him; which Places
God never commanded them to erect and build, and yet both these sorts of Places
were sanctified with Christ's own presence in them. And what they did, all other
Nations equally thought themselves obliged to do, as I have above instanced in
the Heathens, yea the very Turcs have their Moschs or Places to pray in and to
worship God. Only these Familistical Heretics, because they deny the Lord Jesus
Christ, do likewise despise his Religion and the Place wherein he is worshipped.

And because the Familistical Generation do at this time befool ignorant,
though many honest and conscientious People, and draw them off from the Truth
which their Forefathers peaceably and harmlesly maintained by telling them,
that to call a Material Building, a Church, is Popery and Antichristianism, I
shall show 1. That it is so called and used in the Holy Scripture. 2. That
there were such Places in the Apostles times.

That the word Church [Ecclesia] is used for the Material Building, as well as
to signify the People or Congregation, let any man that doubts consult 1 Cor.
11. 22. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God?

That by Church here is not meant the Assembly or Congregation but the Place,
appears (1.) By comparing the 18. and 20. verses before-going, (...).
When ye come together in the Church; and the Apostle in the 20. verse,
continuing his speech upon the same subject, goes on thus, When ye come
together therefore into one place: so that now it is determined what the word
Church signifies, namely, the Place whither they came together. (2.) The
Apostle opposes the Church to their own Houses, Have ye not Houses to eat and
drink in? As if he had said, Your houses are the places to eat and drink in,
but the Church is the Place of Prayer, and to commit such a Disorder there is
to vilify and contemn the Place which is set apart for Gods Worship. And
therefore in the last verse, the Apostle says, If any man hunger, let him eat
at home; by which it is plain, the Church and their Houses were different
Places. (3.) The very Etymology of our English word Church denotes the Place,
for that comes from the German word Burken, and that of the Greek word (...),
which signifies Dominicum, the Lords House, or the Place where the Lord is
worshipped.

But if such Whifflers did not despise all Learning as well as the Church of
God, they might from an ordinary Schoolboy be furnished with Examples enough,
where one and the same word signifies both the Persons and the Place; as he
would tell them, that Civitas signifies both the Citizens and the City,
Collegium the Society and the House, Senatus the Senators and the Senate House,
Synagoga the Assembly and the Place of the Assembly, and so Ecclesia, Church,
signifies both the People and the Material Building.

For the second thing, that there were Churches, that is, Oratories or Places
set apart for Divine Worship in the Apostles times, and that they did not
assemble promiscuously and uncertainly here and there as they pleased, and in
places of common use; appears not only from those Records which make mention of
their Times, but from some places in the New Testament. We read in Acts 2. 46.
of the first Christian Society at Jerusalem, That they continued daily in the
Temple, and breaking bread [(...)] in the house, (...) pro (...).
ate their meat with gladness and singleness of heart. That which I observe
from hence is this, that the Disciples at Jerusalem met together in a certain
House which was dedicated and set apart from common use for the peculiar
Worship of God, and therefore ought to be read So (...) is found to signify in
Homer. So Herod. in Erato. (...). Et apud Euripi^dem Helena, (...).
in the House, and not as we translate it from house to house. And so it is used
elsewhere in the New Testament, as Romans 16. 3, 5. Greet Priscilla and Aquila
and the Church that is in their house. And again sending salutation from them,
1 Cor. 16. 19. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the
Church in their house. Now that by the Church in their house is not to be
understood their Family is evident, in that St. Paul uses it only to some
persons and not to others who questionless were Masters of Families likewise.
Thus St. Paul salutes Philemon and v. 2. the Church in his house: from which I
gather that Philemon's House was the Church in which the believers met to serve
God in Laodicea. And I have these two reasons to think it to be so: (1.) That
if by the Church in Philemon's house were meant his Family, it should properly
and regularly have been joined immediately after the greeting of Philemon,
whereas St. Paul salutes Apphia and Archippus between. (2.) It were very
strange he should not salute the Family of Archippus, who was then Bishop of
Laodicea, as well as the Family of Philemon. By the Church therefore at such a
man's house must be the whole Congregation of the Saints which assembled at such
a house, which House was set apart and dedicated to the Service of God, and
this House so dedicated and consecrated to a holy use, the Christians called a
Church: Thus Nymphas gave his House at Coloss for a Church to serve God in;
Philemon turned his House into a Church at Laodicea, and Aquila and Priscilla
theirs at Rome. Whereby it is plain, that the believers in the Apostles time
did not perform their holy Mysteries in common Houses, but in consecrated
Places; and these Houses which were thus dedicated to the Service of God they
called Churches.

SECT. III.
Of the Ministers Maintenance.
As God will have a Portion of our Time for himself, and a part of the Place of
our Habitation appropriated to his Use and Service, so he will likewise have a
Rent or Tribute paid him out of our Estates to acknowledge his Sovereignty and
Dominion, and his Interest in us and all that we possess. And this was Gods
Method and Process in the very first beginning of the World, for in Paradise
itself he had his Honorary Rights in all these three kinds. As touching the
Place, God had the chiefest and the best, the midst of the Garden; for the
Time, the cool of the Day; and for the Fruit, when he had given all the rest to
Adam, he reserved the Tree of Knowledge, as most justly and properly belonging
to himself. This now God challenges to himself, and for any man to deny or
detein these just Rights, is to cast off and disown the Sovereignty and
Dominion of God over him.

When God brought his People into the Land of Canaan, he reserved the Tithe to
himself as his Rent out of it, and this Rent he assigned over to the Levites
for their maintenance; and because the People held all things of God, therefore
they were to pay him Tithe of all. Levit. 27. 30. All the Tithe of the land, of
the seed of the land and fruit of the tree is the Lords, it is holy unto the
Lord. And Deuteronomy. 14. 22. Thou shall truly tithe all the increase of thy seed,
that the field brings forth year by year. And in 2 Chronicles. 31. 4, 5. it is said,
that the Children of Israel brought in abundance the first fruits of corn,
wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field, and the tithe
of all things brought they in abundantly. You see then that God was to have
Tithe of all, and this Tithe he gave to his Servants the Priests and Levites,
who beside these had several other Tithes, Oblations and Duties paid, not
deducting or accounting the charges and labor of the Husbandman. They had
likewise the Ransoms of the Firstborn both of man and beast, and further, they
had forty eight Cities set out by Joshua for their Habitations, and two
thousand Cubits about them, [each Cubit being a full Yard,] besides one
thousand next the Walls for their Cattle; whereunto were added twenty Cities
more in process of time, when the number of the Tribe was greatly increased.
And all this they had, though the Tribe of Levi was not near a tenth part of
the People.

But least the Cheats and Mountebanks of the times should persuade the People,
that this nothing concerns them, let us see what the Gospel says in the Case.

St. Paul in 1 Cor. 9. 14. speaks thus, Even so has the Lord ordained, that
they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, (...).
i. e. of those things which in the Gospel are consecrated to God, and due for
the message of the glad tidings of salvation; and it is as much as if the
Apostle had said, As the Priests and Levites had their maintenance out of that
which was offered and dedicated to God in the Law; so God had ordained that the
Ministers of the Gospel should be maintained of that which is consecrate to him
in the Gospel. Very good, Now have not Christian Kings, Emperors, Princes and
other Noble Persons given and consecrated to God, and several Christian
Councils pronounced an Anathema or Curse to him that should alienate them,
Houses, Lands and Tithes for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel?
ought they not then to live of them? and does not the Apostle say it?

Again in Gal. 6. 6. the Apostle commands, Let him that is taught the Word,
communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things. What can be plainer
than this? God has transferred his Right over to his Ministers, and enjoined
all men to be liberal to them, and to give them a share of all the good things
they possess. The bad ones God asks not (though men are too ready to give him
the blind, the halt and the lame,) but he requires a part for his Ministers out
of all the good things we enjoy.

It is most certain then, that there is a Maintenance due to those that preach
the Gospel; and this none can deny, but such as neither acknowledge Gods
Dominion over them, nor the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. For, show where
and when God has released and given back his right to a portion of all men's
Estates to them again? Or can any man say, that he holds his Estate by such a
Tenure in Capite, as that God has not a Rent due out of it? The Question
therefore is, What manner of Maintenance this must be? The Apostle says in
general, that it must be a part out of all good things, and to this all men are
bound, by which it appears, that the Maintenance of a Minister is not to be
looked upon as a free Gift from the People or in nature of an Alms, but as a
Rent which God has reserved and claims out of all men's Estates, and which he
has given to his Servants the Ministers.

For the better Illustration of this, I shall add these two Considerations. 1.
That the Maintenance of the Ministers under the Gospel ought to exceed that of
the Priests and Levites under the Law. For the Dispensation of the Law was much
inferior to that of the Gospel, and if a tenth of all manner of increase was
due to God under the Ministration of Condemnation and Death; surely a more
ample portion belongs to the most sacred Majesty of Heaven and Earth under the
Gospel, which is the Ministration of Life and Immortality. For as the Apostle
reasons, 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
matter if we shall reap your carnal things? Intimating that there is no
comparison between them, and that the best carnal things can never bear any
proportion to those rich Treasures that are communicated to men by the Stewards
of the Gospel. And this was the Practice of the Apostolic Church, they brought
not the Tenth, but their whole Estates, and laid them down at the Apostles
feet; and the reason is given by Irenaeus (who conversed with them that had
seen the Apostles,) they gave cheerfully and largely, utpote majorem spem
habentes, forasmuch as the Promises and their Hopes were bigger under the
Gospel than under the Law. It remains then an undoubted Truth, that if the
Priesthood of Jesus be more excellent than that of Aaron, and the Ministry of
the Gospel a more honorable and excellent Function, than that of the Levites
under the Law, then ought the Maintenance of the Euangelical Ministers to be
more large and honorable than theirs under the Law.

Secondly, The Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 2. commands that the Ministers of the Gospel
be [(...)] good Housekeepers, and how should they be so, if they have not
Provision and Means to maintein it, and that in a certain manner? For if
themselves be fed at the Trenchers of Benevolence, what assurance have they of
a dish of meat for their poor Brethren? The Heavens themselves are unstable;
now it rains and we have abundance, then comes drought and all is in scarcity.
The humor of Man is as variable; the People of Lystra that made a God of St.
Paul on the one day, stoned him on the other, Acts 14. And in the fiery time
itself, when Zeal was most inflamed, our Savior as it seems found even then
a cooling blast, when for want of ordinary supply, he was fain to fetch Twenty
pence by a Miracle out of a Fishes mouth to serve his need withal. Matthew. 17.
27.

Unless therefore the Zeal and Piety of men toward God did now burn as bright
as in the Apostles time, when they thought nothing too much or too good for
their Spiritual Fathers; it were the most wicked and unseemly thing in the
World, to put the Ministers of Jesus either to labor like Mechanics with their
hands for their bread, or to live upon the uncertain benevolence of the People.

Wherefore when the great Love of the first Ages to Christ and his Ministers by
degrees cooled and was abated, and men grew to be lovers of themselves more
than lovers of God; it pleased that All-wise Providence which always watches
over the Church, so to inspire the hearts of Christian Kings and Princes to
secure his provisions, that though men should so far forget and deny God, from
whom they receive all that they have, as to detain sacrilegiously his right;
yet they might be compelled by Laws and external Discipline to pay him this his
Rent or Tribute, which they would not do of their own accord. For all the
Tithes are the Lords, and the Ministers claim them not as a duty of the people
unto them, but as the Lords portion which he gives to his Ministers: and so the
Scripture speaks, Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, says
the Lord. Mark well, God does not say they had robbed his Ministers, though he
gave the Tithe to them, but they had robbed him. And whoever sacrilegiously
detains and keeps back his Tithe, robs God, and must expect to be cursed
with a curse.

Almighty God therefore reserving a portion out of every man's Estate as his
Rent or Tribute, to the end that every one may acknowledge his Sovereignty and
Dominion over all that he possesses, questionless the Civil Magistrate may and
ought to make Laws whereby men may be forced to give God his due, when they
shall grow so wicked and Atheistical as to rob him of it. And if it be lawful
for a man to appeal to the secular Powers to secure his own Estate, it is much
more lawful to use them to preserve Gods Revenue. And if it were not some more
mischievous design these abominable wretches drive at, they may as well quarrel
at the Laws that are made for the maintenance of the Poor, as at those that are
made to constrain them to pay their Tithes, since the Poor are likewise Christ's
charge as well as the Ministers; and yet none but some covetous Worlding would
say that it were better they should be left to the free benevolence of every
one: if they were, it is doubtful whether a great many would not starve. But
would you know what design it is the Devil drives at by setting these people to
cry out against the maintenance of the Ministers? It is briefly this, to bring
men back from the true knowledge of Christ, and the liberty of the Gospel, into
their ancient bondage of Pagan Superstition and Idolatry: and to compass this,
he makes these wild people his Instruments. For he well knows, that it is the
Ministers that lay open his plots, and warn men to take heed of falling into
his snares and traps, and they daily encourage men in virtue, and instruct them
in the knowledge of God: Now if he could take these enemies of his Kingdom
away, he is then sure the people will perish through ignorance, and become his
own easy prey. And there is no better way to make sure work with the
Shepherds, than to encourage the flock to withdraw, and detain (though it be
with the greatest injury to God and their own souls) that portion and
maintenance God has commanded to give him, and assigned over to his Ministers.
For Faith comes by hearing, and how should people believe except the Word of
God be preached to them?

I shall now take away, as briefly as I can, those Objections which these bold
Enthusiasts make against the present maintenance of the Ministers. Object. I.
And first, they endeavor to persuade men that Tithes are Levitical, and
consequently when Christ came they were abolished with the Law of Moses. But to
this impious cavil I answer,

1. That there is nothing of the Law of Moses abolished or taken away by
Christ, but what did adumbrate, prefigure and shadow out his coming in the
flesh: for whatever was natural and moral, obliges us still, and will do so to
the end of the world: therefore Christ says, Mat. 5. 17. that be came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill it, i. e. to make it more
perfect than it was before. But it is apparent that Tithes were no Types of any
thing, nor did they shadow out any thing to come, that when that substance was
come, they should be taken away: and we may as well say that Prayer to God was
taken away by the coming of Christ, as that the Revenue due to God was taken
away: for we are as much bound to honor God with our substance, as with our
lips.

2. Tithes were due to God, and paid before ever the Law of Moses began, and
therefore cannot be said to be proper and natural to that. In Genesis 14. it is
said, that whilst Abraham dwelt at Hebron in the Plain of Mamre, his Brother
Lot was carried away Prisoner by the four (Assyrian or Babylonian) Kings, with
all that he had, and that Abraham, confederate with Mamre the Amorite, and his
brethren Escol and Aner, armed his household, three hundred and eighteen in all,
and pursued them unto Dan, where he smote them in the night, and recovered Lot
and the prey; and that as he returned, Melchisedek King of Salem Priest of the
most high God, met him, and gave him Bread and Wine, and blessed him, and
prayed and praised God for him, and that Abraham did thereupon give him the
tithe of all. Now look in the seventh of the Hebrews, where this story is
repeated, you shall find that Melchisedek was a Type of Christ, and hence
Christ's Priesthood is said to be after the order of Melchisedek: and it is said
that Melchisedek, in the Person of Christ, received Tithes of Abraham:
therefore Tithes are now due to Christ, for as much as he is still a Priest
after the order of Melchisedek, and consequently they are the right and portion
of his Ministers.

The next place of Scripture mentioning Tithes before the Law, is in Genesis 28.
v. 22. Jacob going upon his adventure, voweth, that if God will be with him in
his journey, and give him meat and cloth, and so that he return safe, then
(says he) the Lord shall be my God, and this stone which I here set up shall
be Gods house, and of all that thou shall give me, will I give the tenth unto
thee.

3. If the payment of Tithes under the Gospel were merely Judaical, then should
the Ministers of the Gospel receive much more than a tenth part, which they do
not; nor is there hardly a Parish in England where the Minister is paid the
full tenth, without purloining and snipping by some sacrilegious hand or other.
Now though Christ's Ministers ought to have a more honorable maintenance than
the Priests and Levites, yet such is the iniquity of men, that they have not
the tenth, whereas the Israelites paid out of their increase of Corn almost a
fifth part for several Tithes and Duties commanded to them. And by what is
said, I have manifested the frivolousness of this Objection, That Tithes are
Levitical; and if there were not some sweetness which the covetous and
sacrilegious man reaped by pinching the Parson, he could never deny the payment
of his Tithes upon such a silly pretense.

Object. 2. They say that Christ told his Disciples, Freely they had received,
therefore they should freely give, Mat. 10. 8. and the Apostles Paul and
Barnabas preached freely, working with their own hands that they might not be
chargeable to any: therefore Ministers should not grieve the people by taking
Tithes.

Answ. That of our Savior to his Disciples, Freely ye have received, freely
give, belongs not to the case of Tithes, as any one that reads the foregoing
words may see: the gifts which Christ gave to his Apostles, were to heal the
sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, and to cast out Devils; which
miraculous gifts (if it had been lawful) would have been a way to bring in gain
enough: for what would not a Parent give to have his dead Child raised to life?
or a man to have his dear and sick Friend recovered, or dispossessed of an evil
spirit? Therefore our blessed Lord, that he might declare his own Mission, that
he was sent for the good and common benefit of all men, charges his Disciples,
that they should not think of appropriating these extraordinary gifts to their
private interest and advantage, but that as God, without any merit of theirs,
had graciously conferred these Powers upon them, so they should as freely make
use of them for the benefit of others: Neither do the Ministers sell the Holy
Ghost or the Gospel for money, but preach it freely, being maintained at Gods
charges: for there is a Rent or Portion of every man's Estate due to God, as an
acknowledgment they hold all they have of him; and God being self-sufficient,
and standing in need of nothing of ours, has assigned and given this Portion of
his for the maintenance of his Ministers: And as the Apostles were never
charged with this sin of selling their gifts, when they lived at the costs of
those to whom they preached the Gospel; so neither are the Ministers now guilty
of this sin, when for their Preaching they are maintained at Gods charges, and
live upon his Revenue; for the Lord himself said, Dignus est operarius Mercede
sua.

Then for the Apostles Paul and Barnabas preaching the Gospel freely, it rather
makes against than for them that object it: for this was no binding Commandment
to them, nor had Christ any where said to them, Ye shall not take Tithes; but
it was a Charter of Liberty and Power granted to them, they might both use and
exact Maintenance if they would, or they might discedere de jure, leave it if
they listed. 1 Cor. 9. 6. I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear
working? Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats
not of the milk of the flock? As if he had said, May the other Apostles eat and
drink upon the expense of the Church, and keep their Wives also and Family by
the Revenue dedicated to God by their Children whom they beget in the Gospel;
and must I only and Barnabas not live but by the works of our hands? And that
he may not in the least reprove the Apostles who were maintained by the Church,
he shows that it was just and lawful for them to live as they did of the
Churches Allowance, by an Argument of Comparison, seeing Soldiers live by their
Wages, and Husbandmen by the Fruit of their Labors, and Shepherds of that
which comes of the Flock. It is plain then, that St. Paul might have lawfully
demanded and received Tithes if he would, but he did not use that Power which
he might have done, because he would not have them think he was burdensome to
them. But if a man will recede from his right and not take what he lawfully
may, does that prove that he has no right nor due to it?

I have now made it manifest and evident, that Tithes as they are now the
stated and set Maintenance of the Ministers are due by Divine Right, which also
the very Text and Body of the Common Law of England holds them to be as Judge
Coke says in the second Part of his Reports, Dismes sont chooses spirituels, and
due, de jure Divino. But suppose they were not, what advantage can a hungry
Familist reap by it? surely very little. It is said, Nehem. 10. 32. that
Nehemiah and the Jews made Statutes for themselves to give every year the third
part of a Shekel for the service of the House of God. It was in their power
before to give what they pleased, but they by a joint consent fix upon the
third part of a Shekel every year, and by this Ordinance and Statute they were
bound to make good their Grant. The Case is the same with us; our Forefathers
made Laws among themselves to give a portion of their Land, and the tenth part
of their Substance, that is, these Parsonages for the Service of the House of
God. Now suppose that Tithes were not due before, yet now being voluntarily
given, and this Grant confirmed by so many Acts of Parliament, they are now
become due, and the Ministers have as just a claim to them, as any man has to
his own Freehold Estate. I am sure their title to Tithes is much more ancient
than any man's title to his Temporal Inheritance; and no one thing has been
oftener confirmed and ratified by the Acts and Statutes of this Kingdom, than
the Possessions, Tithes and Rights of the Clergy.

SECT. IV.
Of the Ministers of the Gospel.
Having proved by undeniable Arguments, that God is to have a portion out of our
Lands and Goods, and that no man, unless he be impiously profane and
Atheistical, can deny the just payment of these Dues, much less plead
Conscience to excuse Sacrilege; It remains only now to show the grounds upon
which the present Ministers of England claim these devoted Lands and Profits as
their Inheritance. The Foundation of their claim is this, That they are true
Ministers of the Lord Jesus, or true Pastors under that great Shepherd and
Bishop of all our souls. Now it is required in every true Minister of the
Gospel, that he be rightly and duly called to the executing of this his
Function. According to these express Scriptures, Heb. 5. 4. No man takes this
Honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron. And Romans 10.
15. How shall they preach, except they be sent? Yea, our Blessed Savior
himself did not take upon him publicly to preach the Gospel till he was
solemnly inaugurated and installed in his Office by the descent of the Holy
Ghost, and a voice from heaven which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased, Matthew. 3. 16, 17. And when the Lord Jesus was risen from the
dead, before he ascended into heaven, he gives a Commission to his Disciples,
John 20. 21. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you (Christ here
rehearses his own Commission, and then gives the Apostles theirs,) and when he
had said this, he breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost. And lastly, v. 23. he declares to them the Power that he had invested
them withal, Whose soever sins ye remit; they are remitted unto them; and whose
soever sins ye retain, they are retained: and this Power was not only inherent
in them, but is derived to all the succeeding Ministers of the Gospel to the
end of the World. But the most solemn and public Inauguration of the Apostles
in their Office was by a bright and shining glorious Descent of the Holy Ghost
upon them, by this, visibly ratifying and confirming the Commission that Christ
had before given to them.

This being certain then, that no man ought to execute that sacred Function of
a Minister of the Gospel but he that is called thereto, I shall now show the
manner of the Designation or Authorizing of any man to execute this holy
Employment; and that was by Imposition of hands, according as it was used by
the Apostles, and commanded by them to their Successors, and continued from
thence in the Church unto this very day. Insomuch that the great Apostle of the
Gentiles St. Paul, though he were honored by a singular Prerogative and Call
from Heaven by Christ himself, yet was to stay till he had the ordinary Call of
the Church too, and was consecrated by the Imposition of hands, Acts 13. 2, 3.
As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have ^alled them: and when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. And these
same very persons having in their travels converted whole Cities and Towns to
the Gospel of Christ, they leave them not as sheep without a Shepherd, but they
ordain them Elders in every Church. Acts 14. 23. And St. Paul leaves the
Ordination of Timothy upon record together with the manner of it, that it was
by the Imposition of his hands and the hands of the Presbytery, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
and 1 Timothy 4. 14. And because the Apostles could not live always, they
transmitted their Power to others, and those likewise to their Successors: As
the Scripture informs us, Tit. 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, --
that thou should ordain Elders [i. e. Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel,]
in every City as I had given thee order.

These things being so, it follows, First, that the present Ministers of the
Gospel in the Church of England are true Ministers of Jesus Christ, and
therefore have right to Tithes, forasmuch as they have both an inward and
outward call: The inward call is the Testimony of their own Consciences in that
they believe themselves furnished in a good measure with gifts for the
discharge of their Office, and desire to employ them for the advantage of men's
souls: And then they have the outward call of the Church, being consecrated and
set apart for that Office by Imposition of hands and Prayers. Secondly, it
follows that no man (though he have the inward call, that is, find himself
gifted) ought to take upon him the Office of a Priest or Minister of the Gospel
without the outward call likewise. And therefore it is an intolerable
presumption for illiterate Mechanics and Tradesmen to take upon them the Office
of a Minister of the Gospel; and for this their boldness they may justly expect
(if not the same, yet, as great Judgments as befell Korah, Vzzah and Vzziah, for
invading of and intermeddling with the Priests Function. And it were easy to
imagine the Idolatry and Heresy that must needs overspread a Nation, where the
Russet-Rabbies and Apron-Levites are the Instructers of the People.

CHAP. IV. That Quakery, though it pretend high, is mere Sadducism at the
Bottom.
IT is well known, that the Immortality of the Soul by the Doctrine of H. N. was
nothing but the Perpetuation or Continuance of the Succession of the Family of
Love, and the Resurrection was nothing but a Mystical Rising into his Doctrine,
that the day of Judgment was then in being, the Nations of the Earth being
judged by him, as by the Man whom God had appointed, as he sacrilegiously
arrogates that place which was spoken of Christ to himself, Acts 17. 31. Now
according to this Doctrine if there be no other but a Mystical Resurrection, and
that Immortal Life be but the Continuance of H. N.'s Doctrine among his
Followers for ever, and that the day of Judgment be already past; then it is
certain, that men have no Souls, nor any thing to answer for in another world,
but die like beasts. The full sense of H. N. concerning these things is
expressed in his Euangel. c. 34. Behold and consider, my beloved, how
wonderfully God works in his holy ones: and how that now in this day or light
of the love, the Judgment Seat of Christ is revealed and declared unto us, out
of heaven, to a righteous Judgment upon Earth, from the right hand of God: and
how that on the same Judgment Seat of Christ (that the Scripture might be
fulfilled) there sits one now in Truth in the habitation of David: which
judges uprightly, thinks upon Equity and requires righteousness. Through
him God will now in this day which he himself has appointed or ordained
thereunto, judge the compass of the Earth with righteousness.

Again, Chap. 35 he speaks thus, Behold, in this present day is this Scripture
fulfilled, and according to the testimony of the Scripture, the raising up and
the Resurrection of the Lords dead comes also to pass presently in this same
day, through the appearing of the coming of Christ in his Majesty. Which
Resurrection of the dead, seeing that the same is come unto us from Gods grace,
we do likewise in this present day, to an Evangelie or joyful message of the
Kingdom of God and Christ, publish in all the world, under the obedience of the
love: in which Resurrection of the dead, God shows unto us, that the time is
now fulfilled, that his dead, or the dead which are fallen asleep in the Lord,
rise up in this day of his Judgment, and appear unto us in godly glory. -- It
is plain from hence, that both the day of Judgment, and the Resurrection of the
Dead, are in this life, and that H. N. does both raise them up, and judge them
by his Doctrine.

And because the Reader shall be sully satisfied, and see that it is not
without cause that I lay this charge upon this beastly Generation of Quakers, I
shall produce some Testimonies from their Writings, wherein they deliver
themselves after the same manner with H. N.

Thomas Forster, in a certain Pamphlet which he calls A Guide to the Blind,
(when the blind lead the blind the consequence is apparent) speaks thus:
Christ's first appearance to the world was in flesh, and the fleshly eye saw
him: but his second appearance is in spirit, which no fleshly eye can behold
and live: for as the Lightning comes from one part of Heaven to lighten
another part under Heaven, so shall the coming of the Son of man be; and
blessed are all they who wait for his second coming, to wit, without sin unto
salvation: for his second coming is to put an end to sin, to finish
transgression, and to bring in everlasting righteousness. He that has an ear
to hear let him hear.

From hence it appears, that Christ's second coming is made only his spiritual
coming into men's hearts, to make them without sin, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness; and that when he thus comes, no fleshly eye can see him: all
which make Christ's coming to Judgment to be nothing but his appearing in the
Generation of Quakers. But the Scripture is express, that Christ shall at the
end of the world descend from Heaven as he went thither, Act. 1. 11. that is,
visibly and bodily, for so he ascended. And in Revel. 1. 7. it is said, Behold,
he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him. -- Therefore his second coming to Judgment is not his coming into men's
hearts by his Spirit, but his coming with thousands of Angels to give sentence
upon all men, and this by a visible descent from Heaven, to be seen by the
wicked as well as the righteous.

The same person in another place expressly denies the second coming of our Lord
and Savior to Judgment in the plain and literal sense: The Children of the
Light (says he, that is, the Quakers) can tell you, that as Christ's first
appearance to the world was in the flesh, and the fleshly eye saw him, so his
second appearance is in spirit, and no fleshly eye can behold him, he being a
spirit. Is not this a denial of Christ's coming to Judgment, besides a manifest
falsehood? For Christ is no more a Spirit now, than he was in the days of his
flesh, but sits in his Body at the right hand of God; and in the same Body that
now he has in Heaven shall he come to Judgment, and be seen of all by their
natural sight as we behold one another.

Now for the glorious Immortality and blessed Rest that every holy Soul expects
in the life to come, it is perfectly allegorized away, and made nothing but a
certain condition and state of mind in this life: So that Sadducee Forster in
the Book before-named, page 45. declares, Our Captain (says he) is able to make
War with the Enemy, and not only give us Victory, but also an entrance into the
Holy of Holies within the Veil here. By which it appears, that if we enter into
the Holy of Holies here, (that is, into Heaven in this life) then there is no
Heaven nor happiness to be expected in the life to come.

But to make all sure and complete, the Quaker, a perfect Sadducee, George Fox,
in his Great Mystery, affirms, That the Soul is a part of the Essence and Being
of God. This was the very thing which caused such an irreconcilable hatred
between the Pharisees and Sadducees in our Savior Christ's time. But the Fox
was not so cunning here as he might have been, nor did he well weigh the
monstrous and wicked consequences of this his Assertion: For if the Soul be a
part of the Essence of God, it will follow,

1. That the Essence and Being of God is discerpible, and may be shred and
divided into millions of pieces, which is a notorious Blasphemy against the
sacred Majesty and Perfection of God.

2. It will follow, That God must reward and punish himself, because every man's
Soul after death returns (according to this opinion) and is joined to, and lost
in the Essence of God; and there being nothing but God, if he reward and punish
any thing, it must be himself.

3. It will follow, that a part of God must be sinful: for every man's Soul
being fallen into sin, and yet is a part of Gods Essence, it follows of
necessity that a part of God must be sinful. A prodigious Blasphemy!

I forbear any further Citations, because the thing it self is so obvious to
every man that understands but the drift and purpose of Familism, wherein the
chiefest Articles of a Christians Faith are made but a Fable, whose (...), or
Moral, is the mystical meaning which they put upon it. And are not these brave
Guides (think you) of the Gospel, when they frustrate and make void the
greatest Arguments that Christ Jesus has thought fit to excite and stir men up
to holiness withal? that is, the consideration of a Judgment to come, and a
blessed Immortality in the Kingdom of Heaven.

I grant that there is to be a Resurrection from sin, and all men are to be
conformable to the Resurrection of Jesus by their rising to a new and holy
life, and placing their affections upon heavenly and divine Objects, according
as the Apostle speaks, Col. 3. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things that are above. But besides this, there is likewise a Resurrection of
the natural body to be expected at the end of the world, which St. Paul charges
those Heretics Hymeneus and Philetus with the denial of, 2 Timothy 2. 17. Who
concerning the truth have erred, saying that the Resurrection is past already,
and overthrow the Faith of some.

We therefore who are taught and believe the written Word of God, and make that
the Rule of our Faith and Manners, do own and profess a Resurrection of our
mortal bodies at the last day, when Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, whom
the Heavens shall contain till in his own good time he shall think fit to put
an end to the Generations of men, and the frame of this visible World, shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
Trump of God, and having called the dead from their graves, shall visibly
distinguish the righteous from the wicked, taking them up with him into Heaven,
to join with his glorious Host of Light, and sentencing these into everlasting
fire; which heavy doom and vengeance shall presently be executed upon them: for
through the stupendous Operation of the Son of God, the Earth that now is,
with all the works therein, shall be on fire, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, and all wicked men and devils shall be plunged into that Lake
that burns for ever. Knowing therefore these terrors of the Lord, the
Ministers of the Gospel persuade men by a speedy repentance to turn unto God,
to mortify and subdue all their carnal lusts and corruptions, and to be
regenerated and born again in the spirit of their minds, to cast off the old
man with his deeds, and to put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and holiness, because God will bring every man into judgment, and
they must look to give an account after they are dead of all that they have
done in the body, whether good or bad.

But it is a very great argument to me that these Familistical Quakers believe
none of these things in good earnest, because I find these arguments of the
Immortality and future subsistence of every man's Soul, of the satisfaction and
death of Jesus for the sins of men upon the Cross, and his intercession for us
now in Heaven, of the Resurrection of the Body, and the general day of Judgment
at the end of the World, either not at all made use of by them, or but lightly
touched, and that in a mystical and allegorical way. Whereas the holy Apostles
did in their Sermons most commonly make use of some or more of these general
heads, according to the capacities, or needs and necessities of their Auditors.
As for example, what can be more effectual for the begetting sincere holiness
in men, than to press upon them the consideration of the Death and Passion of
Jesus Christ? who out of mere good will gave his life a ransom for the sins of
all the world, and that he is now an Advocate and Intercessor in Heaven for
those that believe on his Name. And if they will not be moved by love and
kindness, then to advise them to look to their Interest and Advantage,
forasmuch as all men must give an Account to God at the general Day of Judgment
for all their Actions, and shall receive either Reward or Punishment as they
have been either good or evil; and therefore since their Souls are immortal and
live after their Bodies are dead, it behooves them to provide for them in time
and secure them a happy Entrance and Admission into the other world. Would not
this be much better than to make a long Harangue and nonsensical Story of the
Light within, and coming to the Witness within, which their Auditors understand
nothing of in the way they propound it, and at last concluding like mad People
with downright railing against every man that is not of their mind: which way
of Preaching the Gospel, is very much different from the manner of the
Apostles, and such as the true Ministers of God in England desire never to be
guilty of Learning.

I have now made it more than a probable Conjecture, that although these modern
Familists, the Quakers, make a great noise about Christ within them and the
Light of God; yet they are mere Sadduces, really denying the Immortality and
Life of the Soul after the death of the Body, and therefore so much more
carefully to be avoided by every man that tenders his Happiness in the other
world; for though they beguile the simple and unwary, yet the more prudent and
understanding person who is able to dive into the bottom of their Errors and
Heresies will undoubtedly confess it to be a piece of beastly sottishness,
undermining the very foundation of all Religion in the World.

CHAP. V. That the Quakers are dangerous Enemies of the Civil Magistrate.
WE have seen their Opposition to the Church, and their Disaffection to the
Ministry of the Gospel, let us now see if they are any better-natur'd to the
Civil Magistrate: And here you shall find them dissembling their Opinions, and
because something must be said, as well to satisfy the minds of the common
People whom they delude, as to keep themselves out of the reach and cognizance
of the Laws of the Land; they pretend a kind of a partial subjection and
obedience, which when strictly examined is indeed no obedience at all. And
herein they show themselves (as in all other things) excellent Proficients in
the School of H. N. who in his Exhortat. speaks thus, That his Instructions of
the upright, and Christian Baptism, his crying voice, etc. These may be
confessed among the adulterous and sinful Generation, and the false hearts of
the Scripture-learned (for so he calls all that are not of his way,) but (says
he) ye shall not talk of your secrets or utter your Mysteries openly or nakedly
in the hearing of your young Children or Disciples, but spare them not in the
ears of your Elders which can understand the same, or are able to bear or away
with the sound thereof. In like manner, the Quakers conceal the Depth and
Mystery of their way from their new-made Proselytes, and when they must say
something for satisfaction of the world, they speak so doubtfully that their
Expressions seem not to mean what they carry in them. But to descend to some
Particulars: They are dangerous Enemies to the Civil Magistrate,

1. Because their Principles tend to the exciting of Sedition and Rebellion. In
the Book called, The Principles of Truth, p. 58. they say thus, Such
Magistrates who be proud and lofty, who rule not for God, but for themselves,
who love the praise of men, etc. such Magistrates they deny and testify
against.

This at the first looks very innocently and harmlesly, but let the Reader
beware how he swallows it, for there is Death in the Pot. The Apostle 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14. commands thus, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors as unto
them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. By which we are taught Obedience and Submission to all
lawful Powers, as the Christians to whom St. Peter wrote, were to yield
Obedience to the then Roman Emperor though a Heathen. And St. Paul likewise
from God enjoins, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers,
for there is no Power but of God. But these men disown and deny every
Magistrate that is not according to their own Description, which is all one as
if the Christians should have rebelled against the Government of Caesar,
because he was an Heathen. So that if a Magistrate shall speak or act any thing
contrary to their Humor, he is so far from having Obedience, that he is denied
and disowned, and after this, (if it lie in their power) it is easy to imagine
what will become of him. If a Magistrate be wicked, there is still an Obedience
due to him, not out of Constraint but out of Conscience; (...), said the
Tragedian Sophocles, but Saint Paul with an Apostolical Gravity, They are Gods
Ministers. But when men shall profess they will own none but such as are holy
and righteous in their esteem, how is any Magistrate secure in his place, but
when they shall get an opportunity into their hands, he may presently be
accounted wicked, and fit for nothing, but to be disowned and testified
against? Is not this now a Doctrine fitted to stir up Sedition and Rebellion? If
the Parent be never so harsh or severe, there is still a duty of Honor and
Obedience to be used to him by the child: how much more to Magistrates who are
Gods Vicegerents and his Ministers?

2. They exauctorate and disclame the Civil Magistrates Right and Power in
ordering the affairs of Religion, and confine his Authority only to matters of
right and wrong in Temporal concerns. For such they declare their Judgment to
be in the fore named Book, p. 52. We believe that the outward Laws and Powers
of the Earth are only to preserve men's Persons and Estates, and not to preserve
men in Opinions: neither ought the Laws of the Nation to be laid upon men's
Consciences to bind them to, or from such a Judgment or Practice in Religion.

I cannot tell what can be spoken more plainly to take away from the King all
Power and Authority in matters of Religion and the Service of God; and if any
of his Majesty's Subjects will turn Turcs or Jews, it seems he has nothing to
do to meddle with them, or punish them, or to make Laws to the contrary. A very
fine Prerogative! that the King shall have power to secure men's Estates from
spoil and rapin, but none to make Laws to secure their Souls from the Devil.
The Donatists of old taught this, as Petilian in St. Austin, Quid vobis, etc.
What have you to do with worldly Emperors? And as that other in Optatus, Quid
Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do with the Church? And our
Brownists learned the same ditty, and the Quaker he comes on with the third
Part to the same Tune. Belike they cannot think themselves good Christians
except they be Rebels. But certainly his Majesty as a Christian Prince may and
ought to have the same Power that the Kings of Israel and Judah enjoyed, who
were commended by the Spirit of God or condemned, according as either they
established or neglected Religion and the Service of God among their People. So
that certainly he must by his Authority preserve and secure Religion as well as
men's Estates. And, God be thanked, the Church and its Rights are the Care of
his Majesty, and his thoughts are daily for the promoting the Interest and
Welfare of it.

3. P. 50. of the forenamed Principles of Truth, (mis-called for Heresy) they
say, We believe that all Governors and Rulers ought to be accountable to the
People, and to the next succeeding Rulers, for all their actions, which may be
enquired into upon Occasion, and that the chiefest of the Rulers be subject
under the Law and punishable by it, if they be transgressors, as well as the
poorest of the People.

We know, that his Majesty, the King, is the chiefest of the Rulers or chief
Ruler in the Kingdom of England and all other his Majesty's Dominions; but by
this wicked Principle of Quakers, he is to be accountable to the People, and
punishable by them. How near this borders upon Treason I leave the Civil
Magistrate to judge. And if it were possible to make a more favorable
Interpretation of their words, yet when they express their Loyalty in such
doubtful terms, and their obedience grounded upon such a ticklish hold, it is
easy to imagine what sense they themselves own; and considering withal how
obstinate and deaf they are to all good Principles and Instructions, and how
numerous in many Counties of England, it must needs be an Act worthy the
supreme Power to suppress the growing Evil, that those who are yet good
Christians and Subjects may not be seduced and corrupted by such dangerous
Doctrins.

The Lawfulness of taking an Oath.
4. They affirm, that the taking of an Oath in any case whatever (though before
a lawful Magistrate) is unlawful and contrary to the Word of God. Which whether
it were at first instilled into them by the Jesuit to avoid the Oath of
Supremacy, or taken up to give themselves a greater Latitude and Liberty to the
commission of all that Villainy and Wickedness which in many cases the
Imposition of an Oath may and does frequently obstruct and hinder, I know not:
But this I know, that to deny the Lawfulness of taking an Oath is to throw away
the greatest Tie and Security that any King has upon his public Officers,
Ministers and Subjects, and by which all men's Titles are cleared in Civil
Causes, and Justice executed in Causes Criminal, and indeed that by which all
human Society is preserved. And in all these cases the taking of an Oath has
been and is still used by all nations under the heavens. In the Old Testament
it is commanded as a thing that is lawful and necessary in the forementioned
Instances. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him and
swear by his Name. So Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Jer. 4. 2. Thou shall swear, the Lord
lives in Truth, in Judgment and in Righteousness. And to such as swear in such
a holy and religious manner, God promises a blessing: Jer. 12. 16. If they will
diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my Name, then shall they be
built in the midst of my people.

And if the Quaking Generation shall object and say, that this was under the
Law, therefore now not to be used; they may remember that the exacting and
taking of an Oath was used long before the Law of Moses; thus Abraham swear to
Abimelech, Genesis 21. and he requires an Oath of his Servant. Genesis 24. And Jacob
requires an Oath of his Son Joseph. Genesis 47. 31. But what, if a Duty be
commanded under the Law of Moses, is it therefore presently to be thrown by and
neglected? So a man may excuse himself from all Religion, and be a worse
heathen than any that ever yet lived in the World. And if this be good
reasoning, a man may upon the same score deny to fear God under the Gospel, as
refuse to swear by him, since serving him and swearing by him are both joined
together in Deuteronomy. 6. 13.

But the taking of an Oath either to be true to a Trust committed, or for the
decision of such things where nothing but an Oath can be available, was never
thought unlawful or sinful amongst Christians, nor are they any where forbid to
swear in such a sort in the New Testament, but the use of it is rather declared
and confirmed. St. Paul asserting the Sovereignty of Jesus Christ, and
Subjection of all things to him, brings a place out of the Prophecy of Isaiah,
Romans 14. 11.
As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God: But in Isa. 45. 23. it is said Every tongue shall swear, that
is, shall confess and acknowledge Gods Omniscience and his sure avenging
Justice; which is the true meaning of, and is done in every lawful Oath. So
that if the taking an Oath were a part of Gods worship under the Law, St. Paul
makes it to be so likewise under the Gospel. Again Heb. 6. 16. For men verily
swear by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all
strife. For if an Oath had been simply unlawful, the Apostle would never have
made use of a sinful Practice to assure us of the Immutability of Gods Promise;
but that as an Oath is a final determination of all businesses and
Controversies, and puts things beyond all further doubts and exceptions, God,
willing to manifest to us the Immutability of his Promise, confirmed it by an
Oath that there might be no possibility left of doubting the Truth of it.

There remains only an Objection to be dispatched wherewith the Heretics
endeavor to fight against the Lawfulness of taking an Oath: And here two Texts
are alleged: Matthew. 5. 34. But I say unto you, swear not at all. And Jam. 5.
12. But above all things, my Brethren, swear not.

That neither our Savior nor his Apostle do condemn or disallow the taking of
an Oath administered by those who are in Authority, is evident from v. 37. But
let your communication, -- whereby we are given to understand, that to swear in
ordinary Communication or Discourse or Conversation is utterly unlawful, and a
disparagement and dishonor to the sacred Majesty of God to bring his Name in
question for every petty trifle. To which we may add, that Christ likewise
condemns all swearing by the Creatures, as the manner of the Jews was, to swear
by Heaven, or Earth, by Jerusalem, or by their Head, as the Heathens used to
swear by the Fortunes of their Emperors: So he in Lucan, lib. 1. -- Per signa
december felicia castris,
Perque tuos juro quocunque ex host triumph^s.
And that the Precept of St. James is to the same purpose, appears by the
Expression, Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, i. e. Let your Promises and
Performances be all one; by which likewise we learn this Lesson, That all
voluntary (that is, all such Oaths as have no other motive but a man's self or
his own gain or interest,) but especially promissory Oaths are unlawful for a
Christian, for he that is so just in performing his Word, there will be no need
of his Oath; and he that perpetually swears to every thing he speaks or
promises, will be in danger to fall into Lying and Deceit, for that is the
meaning of Lest ye fall into condemnation, (...). v. Job. 34. 30. and Mat. 24.
51.
that is, Lest ye be found deceitful.

Thus I have made it appear, that the Quakers are Enemies to all Magistrates
and particularly such as do condemn and disallow of their ways and practices:
which Contempt and undervaluing of Authority must needs at last end in disorder
and confusion, and therefore so much the more to be abhorred by every one
professing the peaceable Gospel of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. VI. Of the Light within.
THe first Principle that the Quakers so earnestly inculcate and strive to
impress upon those whom they seduce is, To come to the Light and to the witness
within; therefore it will be necessary to know and enquire what this Light
within is, and what they mean by it, which must (if any where) be had out of
their own Writings. For surely no man can think that they will so constantly
call upon men to hearken to, and come to the Light within them, but they will
at the same time tell them what it is, and how they shall know it. But so
unhappily it falls out, that though this Light be within every one of them, yet
they are not agreed among themselves what it is.

Thomas Forster in his Guide to the Blind, printed 1659. page 1. says, That God
is the Light: but then, page 7. as if he had forgotten himself, he tells us,
That Christ within is man's true Light to walk by. But yet doubting whether this
will hold water or not, in page 9. he concludes, That the Spirit of Christ in
man is the true Light and Guide, and this Light enlightens every man that comes
into the World. And since this is so, a man would wonder who those blind people
are to whom this Blind Guide writes. But if James Naylor may be Judge, our
friend Thomas is very much mistaken, for in his Book called, A Door opened to
the imprisoned Seed, printed 1659. page 2, 3. he says, That the Light of the
World is Gods Love to the World, and this Light is not given to any till they
come out of the World. George Whitehead in the Seed of Isreal's Redemption, page
20. says, That the Light within is a measure of the Lords Life and Light.

Well, something it must be, though this is certain, that if their Writings
were given forth by immediate Revelation from the Spirit of God, they would not
have contradicted one another in their Testimony. But since they differ so much
in their Opinions, I will take that which is most common amongst them, that the
Light within them is Christ: and here I shall help them out a little from their
Master H. N. whose Scholars they have hitherto proved themselves to be. H. N.
therefore affirms thus: Every godly man partaker of the Being of God and Spirit
of Love, is God incarnate, and Christ incarnate, and Christ is not any one man
the Son of the Virgin Mary: but every man is Godded with God, and Christed with
Christ that comes to the Perfection of the Doctrine of H. N.

Christ therefore within, is that state in man which leaves the written Word or
Letter, and hearkens wholly to the Revelation of the Spirit; and this is the
true Light, and the Regeneration or Birth, into this state is Jesus Christ, and
he is no where else. H. N. first Exhort. Sect. 13.

And that this is the very Doctrine of the Quakers, I prove, 1. Because Tho.
Forster in the abovementioned Treatise, p. 13. says, That the Light which is
Christ within is not natural, but it is sufficient to Salvation. But we know
that Reason and Conscience are natural and insufficient in themselves to
Salvation, by which it is plain they are excluded from having any thing to do
in this Light. 2. G. Fox in his Great Mystery, page 207. 210. says, That
Christ is not distinct from the Saints, and he that eats the flesh of Christ
has it within him. And in page 206. he declares, That if there be any Christ
but he that was crucified within, he is a false Christ; and he that has not
this Christ that was crucified within, is a Reprobate. To this purpose is that
of Richard Stubbs a Quaker, who asking Elizabeth Whetherly, How she expected to
be saved? she answered, By that Jesus who was born of a Virgin, and died at
Jerusalem. Stubbs told her, that was the false Christ, and an Antichrist.
Whereby it is plain, that the Quakers lay aside the Person of Christ as he is
God and Man without us. What then can this Light within, which they say is
Christ, be, but the coming into the way or dispensation of Quakers? which is
such a state wherein a man leaves the written Word of God, and hearkens wholly
to inward Revelations.

And if any man shall object and say, That the Quakers speak of Christ, and say
that he was born of the Virgin, and crucified upon the Cross, and therefore
shall think that they acknowledge a Christ without them: Let him not be gulled
and cheated into a good opinion of them for this, for H. N. says as much, and
repeats the very words of most of the Articles of the Apostles Creed as the
Christian Church has them, and yet turns them all into a mystical and
allegorical sense. And I have above cited the Testimony of G. Fox, a prime
Quaker, that if there be any Christ but he that was crucified within, he is a
false Christ; and James Naylor wrote a Letter to one in Lancashire, that he
that expected to be saved by him that died at Jerusalem, should be deceived.
Therefore it is undoubted that they account the Conception, Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord Jesus, as they were in the History and
Letter transacted in Judea to be a mere Fable. So that this may serve as a
Caution once for all to every one that reads their Writings, that when they
meet with any thing about our Savior Jesus Christ, or Heaven or Hell or the
day of Judgment, they may know the Quakers understand it in a Mystical sense.

There is no Rational Person but will at first sight discover the horrid and
wicked Blasphemy of the Quakers in asserting their Light within, and that
whoever follows them must deny the Lord Jesus as a Person without them, beside
whom there is no name given under heaven whereby any man can be saved. And is
not this a very sad Light that shall lead a man down to Hell and the Devil?
that shall carry a man like an Ignis fatuus from his right way into Bogs and
Ditches, and cause him at last to fall into the pit of everlasting Destruction?

CHAP. VII. The Quakers Pretense of Immediate Revelations.
BEcause the true Religion justly entitles God to be its Author who immediately
inspired the Prophets and Apostles; therefore the Devil (who was always Gods
Ape) countenances the Impostures and Deceits he sets abroad by his servants,
with the false Pretense of Divine Inspiration. And herein these Seducers have a
double advantage, first, by amusing the common People and telling them, that
what they speak comes from God: And then, secondly, they hope to secure
themselves from any Disputes and Examination of their Doctrine; for none are so
bold as to question any thing that truly comes from God.

Now all such People as these are called Enthusiasts, that is, such as falsely
conceit themselves to be inspired; now to be inspired is to be moved in an
extraordinary manner by the Power or Spirit of God to act, speak or think what
is holy, just, and true; from whence it follows, that Enthusiasm is a full but
false Persuasion in a man that he is inspired.

And this false Persuasion in the Quakers of being immediately inspired, arises
from the Melancholiness of their Temper; for the Dejectedness of their
Countenances and the alteration of their Visages from that cheerfulness that is
in other men, show them to be the most Melancholic Sect that ever came into the
World.

When therefore the Melancholic and Hypochondriacal Humor (which is
extraordinarily predominant in them) mixing with the Blood and Spirits is
somewhat refined in the Heart, and being warmed there, ascends copiously into
the Brain, it affects the mind with varieties of Imaginations, and intoxicates
and makes the man as it were drunk for the present, till by stretching his
Voice, and the Earnestness and Motion of his body, it becomes in some degree
evaporated. And all that time that his brains are turgid and full of this
Humor, he is wonderful eloquent and bewitchingly taking, and the poor ignorant
People loook upon him as a Prophet sent immediately from God, and admire the
Overflowings of the Lord (as the Quakers phrase it) in the man, who is so sweet
and affectionate, as if he would pour his whole Soul into the good women's
Mouths. Whereas all this is only an effect of his Melancholic Temper, the
Hypochondria rising into the Region of the Brain: which is ordinary in Poets
and Orators, according to that

Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo. But lest these Juglers should
say, that they are scandalized, and that they pretend to no such thing as an
immediate Inspiration from God, I think it not amiss to give the Reader a brief
Account of some of them. That it is their Judgment and Opinion I prove from
their Writings.

William Gibson in a Pamphlet of his, says expressly thus, The Gospel which we
preach, we have not received it from Man, nor from Books, nor from Writings,
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in us.

Thomas Forster in the often above mentioned piece says, That immediate
Revelation is not ceased, but that the Saints must now expect as glorious
Manifestations as were in the Primitive times.

I shall add to these that famous Commission of Edward Buroughs, whom the
Quakers style, A worthy and true Prophet, and a Martyr for the Testimony of
Jesus, because he died sottishly in the Goal at London for his Rebellion
against, and contempt of the known Laws of the Land, and over whom Francis
Howgil laments with the lamentation of David over Saul and Jonathan, I am
greatly distressed for thee, my brother Edward, etc. then that of David over
Abner, Died Ed. Buroughs as a fool dies? Ah no. His Commission then is this,
as I find it in the Collection of his Scribble lately printed in Folio:

By Order and Authority given unto me by the Spirit of the living God, King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, the 31 day of the 10 month, in the year of the Worlds
account 1655. about the fourth hour in the morning, when my Meditations were on
my God upon my Bed in Kilkenny City in the Nation of Ireland, at that time the
Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Write my Controversy with all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, unto all sorts of people as I will show thee. --
Given under my hand, and sealed by the Spirit of the Eternal God who lives for
ever, E. B.

Then follows, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord. After this he
lays about him on all sides as if he were mad, and like a ravening Wolf worries
every thing that comes in his way, threatening Plagues and Vengeance to all that
are not Quakers. But I must not forget his Prophetical Epistle to the Pope, in
the conclusion of which he tells him, That he has many more things to write to
him, when he receives his answer; and if the Pope will give him ground to
accuse him, he will thresh him, and lay it to his charge by the Authority and
Spirit of the Lord.

Then this Postscript, Return your Answer to me, or any of the people called
Quakers, for me in London, from whence this is sent, being written the 24 of
the 8 month, 1658.

A pretty way of prophesying, to threaten destruction from the Lord against the
Pope, and then to desire an Answer (I suppose) how he liked of it. The man it
seems had a strong faith; and if he did believe that his Prophetical Letter
should come to the Popes hands, yet he was but a fool if he thought either that
would convert him, or that the Pope would trouble himself to answer it.

Having discovered from their Writings that they conceit themselves to be
divinely inspired, which is a thing common to all Enthusiastical Heretics, I
shall give two or three Examples of the folly and ridiculousness of their
Inspirations.

A Gentleman of Newcastle affirmed that some Quakers came to Kendale Church,
and said, They had a Commission from the Lord to pull down the Steeple.

One Thomas Castley a Quaker came to Kendale Church in the time of the Sermon,
and said, That he was commanded from God to pull down the Hourglass: And the
same man went a long mile with no other Message from God (as he pretended) but
this, to tell one of the Ministers of Newcastle, Thou art an High Priest; which
words having spoken, he went his way.

A certain Quaking Woman at Cambridge stripped her self of her Cloths by the
River side, and went stark naked through the midst of the Town; and being asked
the reason of such a shameful action, she answered, That she was commanded in
that manner to go to the House of the Mayor of the Town, and deliver a Message
from God unto him. But so unhappily it fell out, that the Mayor was gone a
Journey, and came not home till some days after. Either such Revelations as
these must be mere Cheats, or else it must be said, that the Spirit of God took
no notice whether the Mayor were at home or not.

One Williamson's Wife coming to Appleby to see James Milner a Disciple of
Foxes, said in the hearing of diverse there, That she was the Eternal Son of
God: and when the men that heard her, told her that she was a woman, and
therefore could not be the Son of God, she said, No, you are women, but I am a
man. This I mention, that the Reader may see to what absurd Impieties these
Enthusiastic people are lead by their own Dreams.

At Weighton, a little Town in Yorkshire, a woman of this Goatish Herd came
naked from her own Bed to another woman's husband, a companion of hers it seems
of the same Sect, and bid him, Open his Bed to her, for the Father had sent her
to him: the man had at that time another man lying in Bed with him, who rose to
give place to this woman, and left this honest couple to lie together,
according to the woman's Revelation.

By this taste which I have here given, there is no rational person but will
conclude the Quakers to be a simple deluded people, taking their own Dreams and
Melancholic Fancies for Divine Inspirations; and having cast off the use of
Reason and the written Word of God, are made obnoxious to all the Impostures
and Injections of the Devil; and till they return to that Guide (I mean the
voice of Reason and Scripture) which they have so wilfully abandoned and
forsaken, must inevitably lie under everlasting Errors and Deceits.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Quakers Perfection.
THe Quakers talk much of Perfection and Freedom from sin in this life, and
that they have already attained to it: but he that shall look into the Manners
and Conversations of the most of them, shall find their Pretensions to this
high state no greater than for a common Strumpet to brag of her honesty: for
the very boasting of a thing they have so little of, does evidently declare
their enormous and monstrous pride; and those to whom they upbraid the want of
it, do better deserve the name than they, in that their lives are indeed not
worse, but their spirits in not pretending to it, far more humble and modest.
For if the Pharisees Litany, God I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
stand upon record as a mark of the Pharisaical arrogance and pride, I know not
how these high-flown Enthusiasts can justify themselves. And certainly for
them to arrogate to themselves a freedom from sin, and perfection above all
other men, when yet the vulgar and common people discern and take them tripping
in daily faults and miscarriages, even in their ordinary converse with the
world, it must needs appear that either they do the most unjustly challenge
this state of perfection, or else by an Antinomian liberty they conceive
themselves to have a freedom to act any thing; and that after they are arrived
to such a way and dispensation, they are no longer obliged by any Law, nor can
any thing they do be called a sin. And as hitherto I have proved by undeniable
Instances, that the Familists and Quakers are one and the same in their
Opinions and Judgments, so in this boast of their perfection and freedom from
sin, they both walk in the same Path. And in them is that of the Apostle St.
Peter verified, 2 Pet 2. 18, 9. When they speak great swelling words of vanity,
(such as perfection and freedom from sin) they allure through the lusts of the
flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who
live in error. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage. I do not find that any of the holy Apostles ever claimed
such a perfection in this life as not to sin at all; and if there be any that
are arrived to such a vast measure of Holiness, Almighty God keeps them hid as
his own Jewels from the eyes of the world: And if we could speak with any of
them, I dare be confident they would own no such thing in themselves. And I
must needs say from the Testimony of our Lord and Savior, that the Publican
who prayed, God be merciful to me a sinner, was of a more Christian-like temper
than these proud censorious Quakers, who are indeed the Devils Slaves, when yet
they pretend a freedom from sin. It is evident therefore to me by what Spirit
they are guided, and from whence it is they assert themselves to be free from
sin, namely, because they are above all Law, and have no other Rule for their
Actions but their own wills and fancies, and to them nothing is a sin if they
please not to call it so. This was of old the perfection of H. N. and his
illuminate Elders; and this was the Doctrine of Dell, Saltmarsh, Town, and all
Antinomians and Familists, and this is the ground likewise of the Quakers
Pretense of Perfection. For can any man think, that takes the Word of God for
his Rule, that bitter Envy and Malice, Railing and Censoriousness, which make
up perpetually the greatest part of their Speakings to the People, should be no
sins? And if they be confessed to be sins, it must needs follow, that these
Illuminado's release and set themselves at liberty from the Rule of Gods Word,
and that what are accounted sins by us and all Christians, are not so to them;
but that let them wallow and tumble in sensual Delights and Pleasures, and
indulge their earthly and Animal Faculties to the full, yet they have no Sin,
but are as bright and pure as the Sun beams, and their Souls as white and clear
as in the day of Innocence. But let every man take heed of giving himself up to
such a dangerous Principle; for when once his Criterion and Discriminative
Faculty shall be so vitiated, as to put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter;
and so dull, as not to distinguish between Darkness and Light; he is then in
the most deplorable condition and worst state that can befall a man in this
Life. For he sins and esteems it not, but makes all Actions, good and evil
alike; from which desperate course God of his mercy reclame these deluded
People.

CHAP. IX. The Ways and Arts which the Quakers use in gaining Proselytes.
THere is scarce any Error but endeavors to maintein and support its Credit in
the world by some Truth or other, and Error being so odious and ugly a thing in
itself, it has always been and is still the Practice and Custom of Heretics to
disguise and shape their Errors into the appearance and visage of Truth; and
therefore the first thing that they take care of in their making Proselytes,
and gaining upon the rude and unlearned Vulgar, is

1. To utter and promote some known Truths, that they may more easily instill
their Poison.

Our blessed Savior foretold, that there should come some in sheeps clothing,
who inwardly were ravening wolves. Matthew. 7. 15. Now what is that sheeps
clothing, but only the Innocence and Purity of the Christian Doctrine;
pretending nothing less than the Peace and eternal Welfare of men's Souls, and
that by the true Religion derived from Jesus and his Apostles, whenas their
main purpose is to ensnare and devour credulous Souls, making a Prey of them by
their dangerous Errors, and leading them out of the known way into bypaths to
their utter Ruin and Destruction. Thus because the first Principle of
Christianity is Faith in Jesus Christ, and those who are baptized and bred up
in the Christian Religion from their Infancy, being not easily seduced from a
thing so known and common to them, therefore the Quaking Heretics will not at
first plainly and bluntly tell them, that there is no such Person in being as
Jesus Christ, but craftily insinuate their dangerous Doctrine by saying, that it
is true, they expect to be saved by Jesus Christ, but that it is a Christ
within them, a Christ which is not distinct from the Saints, and a Christ which
dwells not in heaven, but in every one that believes as they do. So that they
build their Errors upon something, though but a bare Notion of the old
Foundation of Truth. In like manner they deal with men concerning a Judgment to
come and the Resurrection of the Body, by persuading their Proselytes, that
indeed there is a Day of Judgment, but that it is in this Life, and the wicked
are judged by their Doctrine, and declaring and testifying against them, and
that the Resurrection is only performed within them by a Mystical Rising from
sin. And their Auditors being not aware of this, but believing that all that
these Inspirado's speak is Gospel, they are easily captivated from the
Apostolical Faith once delivered to the Saints. Which way and manner of
disguising and transforming the Truths of the Gospel from their genuine nature
and simplicity is far more apt to take with the inconsiderate and unwary, than
a plain and downright Denial of them.

2. The second way by which the Heretics proceed in seducing People is to bring
them out of love with the Pastors and Ministers who have the Care and Overfight
of them.

And in this business they use all the Arts and Invectives that Malice and
Hatred can furnish them withal, sometimes vilifying their Persons by odious
Comparisons, assimilating and likening them to Baals Priests, to dumb Dogs, to
Serpents, to Hirelings and what not; sometimes declaming against them for their
Maintenance, and persuading the People that to pay Tithe is Popish and
Antichristian, and that both he that receives and he that gives are yet in
blindness and darkness and not come to the Light; that is, (as I suppose) those
who pay their due, are not yet come to the Art and Perfection of cheating and
defrauding. At another time you shall have them taxing the Ministers with Lies
and false Doctrine, as if they taught not their Charge the true and saving
Gospel of Jesus Christ, but poisoned them with Errors and Delusions. And in
this Disgrace and Defamation of their Adversaries, they craftily insinuate
their own Praise and Commendation, that they prate freely, and good reason they
have to say it, for a Quakers speech, though of three hours long was never
worth a farthing: That they never study for what they speak, and I dare believe
them; for if they did, they would certainly be ashamed to vent so much nonsense
and ridiculous stuff as they do: That they are induced to declare out of pure
Love and Compassion, I suppose to themselves and their hungry stomachs; for
oft-times the leathern Speakers guts pick a quarrel with his throat for a
speedy supply. However it be, the Ministers are the subject of half an hours
railing discourse, and their Auditors are such fools as to believe them in
whatever they say.

3. A third way which they make use of is, to decry all Human Learning and the
use of Reason. And hence it comes to pass, that the Atheist and Enthusiast
mutually confirm one another in their Errors; the Atheist laughs at the
Enthusiast for denying his Reason, and the Enthusiast thinks the Atheist a fool
for relying wholly upon it. But though it be common to all Enthusiasts to
despise Human Learning and reject the Improvement of Reason, yet the Quaker
makes the loudest outery against it, and thinks it his interest to exclame
against Learning, because he himself has none, being the most ignorant and
sottish Sect that has yet appeared in the world. Whereas since the
extraordinary gifts of Prophecy and Languages have ceased in the Church,
Secular Learning has been of the greatest use and benefit to Religion of any
thing in the World. And although these impudent Heretics be the open enemies of
Learning and learned men, yet when they hope to make an advantage by it, they
will be nibling at it; witness George Whitehead, who would prove the breach of
the Sabbath lawful from a moth-eaten Manuscript cited by Beza in his Annotat.
on Luke 6. And the cause of this their Enmity against Learning is apparent
enough, forasmuch as by it men discover their Cheats and Impostures, and their
Visions and Inspirations are found but Dreams and Melancholic Fancies, and
their Folly and Ignorance laid open to the World. But if we consider it well,
we shall find, that it is set in Scripture as the Commendation of Moses, that
he was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, and St. Paul cites Aratus,
Menander and Epimenides three heathen Poets; but I need not stand long on this,
for if learned men had not translated the Bible, I very much question whether
Quakers would have had any knowledge of it, notwithstanding their pretended
Revelations. And if God did once open the mouth of an Ass to forbid the madness
of the Prophet, yet the Quakers cannot prove from that one instance, that he
now speaks to the World by them. And therefore for men to throw aside their
Reason, and the Knowledge of Arts and Sciences, which are now the Supporters of
Religion, is all one as if they should put out their eyes, and call to the
blind to lead them.

4. Their way is to deceive and associate themselves first with the Women. And
herein they imitate the Devil, who first tampered with the weaker Vessel and
seduced Eve; as well knowing that the Masculine Temper of Adam would contemn
and slight the Bait, till presented by the fair hands of his Virgin Bride. And
this is no new thing, for many Heretics have diffused and spread their
desperate Errors by insinuating them first into the Women; yea, so far had
Mareus the Valentinian proceeded in this Art, that he not only vitiated the
Souls, but abused the Bodies of many of that yielding Sex: And such was the
Temper of the Quakers great Master H. N. when he came over into England,
drawing after him a great number of those easy Captives, whom he quickly found
kind and coming, when allured by the specious Title of The Family of Love. And
this has been a very great help in the Propagation of Quakery, by making the
Woman first in the Transgression, who by her continual Solicitation and
Importunity (as Delilab did Samson) wins the good man to betray himself into
the hands of these uncircumcised Philistines.

CHAP. X. The Advantage of Familism above other Sects and Heresies.
IT will now be questioned since Quakerism is so monstrous and sottish a
Persuasion, as tends to the overthrow of all true Religion, by rasing the very
Foundations of it, by denying the Person of Jesus Christ as God and Man now
living in Heaven, and taking away the future Subsistence and Immortality of
Human Souls; yet nevertheless it should take so much with the ordinary sort of
People, and gain ground upon so many of them.

In answer to this, I may suggest, that those who are caught and drawn into
this abominable Heresy of Quakerism, are but the Refuse of the World, Persons
of the meanest Quality and lowest Parts and Education; and for such as these to
be enticed by Quakers is no strange thing, they being indifferent to any
Religion, and that they observe any at all, is more out of Custom and Fashion,
than Choice and Understanding. Or I may say, that it is to be feared, it is a
just Judgment of God for their former unfaithfulness not only to the Light of
their own Consciences but of the holy Word of God, that since 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10,
11.
they would not receive the love of the Truth, that they might be saved, God
should send them strong Delusion, that they should believe a lie. And although
this may give some Account of the diffusion and growth of Quakery, yet I shall
mention some particular Advantages it has over other Sects and Heresies; and
the First is this,

1. In that it pretends to a high degree of Holiness above all other, and to be
raised above the rest of the world lying in sin. That all the Earth is in
Bondage and Slavery, overspred with Lusts and Sins; and therefore are in a dark
and blind Condition, not knowing how or by what means they shall escape out of
that lamentable and confused state they are in: But the Quaker, he is mounted
up so high, that it is broad day with him, when yet it is perfect night with all
men beside; he is in the Light, and this Light leads and guides him into all
Truth, so that henceforth he sins no more, but is pure and clean in his own
eyes. Christ is within him, and he has atteined to a Perfection and Freedom
from Sin, and whoever comes not to this state, is not of God. These are fine
things and high Conceits, and the giddy Multitude that always affect Novelties,
are very much pleased with so much holiness as is pretended, and it works
mightily upon their Fancies, that if they be once Quakers, they shall be
without sin, and by the cunning management of this pretense of Holiness, the
People are quickly caught in their nets.

2. Quakery cracks and boasts much of immediate Inspirations, which every one
in their measure are capable of. And this is a strong and potent temptation to
inveigle the multitude withal, to tell them, that when they are once Quakers,
they shall be immediately acted and moved by the Spirit of God, as the Prophets
and Apostles of old were, and that what they now speak and write is as good
Canonical Scripture as the Bible; that they need no external teaching, being
all taught by the inspiration of God, which is so pleasing and easy a
Doctrine, that it is very strange if the vulgar (who would fain go to Heaven by
the easiest and least troublesome way) should not be seduced by it.

3. The luscious and sweet bewitching Language which they use, as if
Sugar-Plumbs lay under their Tongues, when a deadly poison lodges in their
Hearts: which being nothing but a canting in Scripture Phrase and expression,
and fitted to feminine fancies, yet has a very great influence upon the people,
especially when their minds are prepared and prejudicated with an opinion of
their being inspired. In these respects now it appears that Quakery has a very
great advantage above all other Heresies, and has strong and powerful
temptations to allure unstable and wavering minds from the knowledge of the
truth. But their Impostures and Cheats being so plainly detected and discovered
in this foregoing Treatise, if any man, knowing and warned of them, yet
wilfully and presumptuously shall fall into them, his destruction is of
himself, and his ruin inexcusable; he has now no cloak for his sin.

The Conclusion.
I have now run through the chiefest of the Quakers Opinions, and plainly and
evidently proved them in every thing to be exactly Familistical: I shall now
for a Conclusion of this Treatise, only add this serious Admonition to those
who approve of, and are hankering after Quakery: And to this end I would have
them consider, that the Quakers do deny the Books of the Old and New Testament
to be the Word of God, and say that they are no Rule of our Faith and Manners,
which must needs be of the most dangerous consequence to the souls of men: for
men being reasonable Creatures, and in that Princely Prerogative Superior to
the Beasts of the Field, must of necessity guide and determine their Actions by
some Rule and Measure; and if neither Reason nor Scripture be that Rule, they
are liable to be imposed upon by every Cheat, and led into any error whatever,
and so at last eternally destroyed: for by this means having cast away Reason
and Scripture from having any thing to do with their Actions, good and evil,
Truth and Falsehood will be all alike, and there will be no difference between
Virtue and Vice; and to kill a man's Neighbor, and seize upon his Estate, may
be no sin, if the voice of Reason and Scripture be not to judge of it. These
things will be of a very sad consequence to every one that expects and looks
for another life when this is ended.

But it may further be considered, that the rejecting of the Scriptures, and
denying them to be the Word of God, is likewise a piece of Familism, and was a
part of the Doctrine of Caspar Swenckfield a Silesian, and that upon this
ground (which the Quakers likewise urge) because Christ is called the Word. But
so are the Scriptures too called the Word of God, 1 These. 2. 13. For this cause
also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the Word of God
which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is
indeed) the Word of God. So Heb. 13. 7. Remember them which have the rule over
you, and have spoken to you the Word of God.

Moreover, they would do well to reflect and consider how they hope to be
saved: If they profess Quakery, it cannot be by the Death and Satisfaction of
Jesus Christ the Son of God, because the Quakers own no such Person living
without them, nor do they believe the History of his Death and Passion at
Jerusalem, in the letter of it: so that every man who turns to be a Quaker,
puts himself out of a capacity of being saved: for there being no Name by which
any man shall be saved but by the Name of JESUS, and he being denied by them as
a Person living in Heaven, they are by the Tenor of the Gospel excluded from
having any Salvation by him. By which it appears, that every man professing and
embracing Quakery, hazards and sets at stake the everlasting Happiness of his
Immortal Soul.

But it is no wonder they take so little notice of their Souls, when they
believe they have none; and he that follows their ways and opinions, must cast
away all care for another life, nor think of any thing but for the present: for
Heaven, Hell, and the Day of Judgment are (as they say) in this Life.

And though the Quaker will impudently deny all this, and boldly affirm that he
holds no such things, yet I have produced nothing as their Judgment but what I
find published by some of them in their printed Papers, or has been delivered
by them at their own Conventicles and Meetings, and therefore is sufficiently
known to be their own opinion. But it need not startle any man to hear a Quaker
outface his own Errors when challenged with them; for he that takes away all
distinction between good and evil, will not stick to lie when it is for his
advantage.

Wherefore these Heretics being so dangerous, and their Doctrine so
destructive of the Salvation of men's Souls, they ought carefully to be avoided,
and their society detested and abhorred: for he that associates himself with
them, cannot be free from Sin, but as he is guilty of Sin in the sight of God
by joining himself to them, so unless he speedily return and repent, he will
partake of their Punishments. For so said the Spirit of God, Numb. 16. 26. Come
out from the Congregation of these men, lest ye be consumed in their sins. And
the Apostle St. John, Epist. 2. ver. 10. 11. says, that If there come any to
you, and bring not the Doctrine of Jesus Christ (which is contained in the Books
of the New Testament) he is not to be received into your house, nor to be bid,
God speed; for he that bids him, God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

Lastly, if any man would keep himself from being drawn into their Errors, he
must be sure to observe the written Word of God as the Rule of his Belief and
Actions, nor must he forsake the Dictates and Notices of right Reason: For by
these two things he may judge of any Doctrine propounded to him, and whatever
any man tells him, if it be contrary to Scripture and Reason, he may be certain
that it is false. As for instance, the Quaker comes and pretends, that what he
delivers, it is divinely inspired to him by the Spirit, and that he has
immediate Revelations from God. In this Case now, I am to try what he brings by
the Word of God and right Reason. St. Paul says, Gal. 1. 8. 9. That if any man
or an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Doctrine than what they had
already preached, and the believers received he should be accursed. Now
therefore, if these Quaking Inspirations contein any other Doctrine than what is
delivered in the Bible, that Doctrine is false, and those that broached it are
accursed. And if the Revelation be of something which the Word of God meddles
not with, as concerning the going or not going to such a Place, the doing or
not doing of such an Action; Common Reason will help a man to judge very much
in it, and will afford so much light as to discover the Revelation to be
foolish and ridiculous, and nothing else but a Fancy arising from a deep
Melancholy, and mistaken for the Inspiration of the Spirit of God. And by these
two helps, supposing a man to be faithful to God and his own soul, he may
easily discover and avoid such pernicious Errors. For it is the cunning of
these wicked People to deny the Scriptures and the use of Reason, because they
know they are so diametrically opposite to their Doctrins and Opinions.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THe Cognation and Agreement between the Quakers and other Ancient and
Modern Heretics. CHAP. II. Of the Authors of Familism, and the Quakers
Agreement with them in their Doctrine. CHAP. III. Of the Holiness of Times,
Things and Persons under the Gospel. CHAP. IV. That Quakery, though it pretend
high, is mere Sadducism at the Bottom. CHAP. V. That the Quakers are dangerous
Enemies of the Civil Magistrate. CHAP. VI. Of the Light within. CHAP. VII. The
Quakers Pretense of Immediate Revelations. CHAP. VIII. Of the Quakers
Perfection. CHAP. IX. The Ways and Arts the Quakers use in gaining Proselytes.
CHAP. X. The Advantage of Familism above other Sects and Heresies.
FINIS.

