Imprimatur,

Geo. Royse, R. R. in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Johanni Archiep. Cantuar.
a Sacris Domest.

April 23d, 1692.
THE EXCELLENCY OF Moral Virtue, FROM THE Serious Exhortation of St. Paul to
the Practice of it.

In several Discourses upon Phil. 4.8.

To which is added, A Discourse of Sincerity, FROM JOHN i. 47.

By HENRY HALLYWELL, Vicar of Cowfold, in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

To the most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, by the Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England and Metropolitan, and one of
their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace
TO accept of the following Discourses as a Testimony of my Humble Thankfulness
for your Grace's Favors toward me. The Substance of them was lately delivered
to a small Country Auditory, into whose Minds I endeavored to instill a
Generous Sense of Virtue, being Convinced not only of the Great Usefulness of
such Monitory Exhortations in a Degenerate Age, but fully persuaded, that if
Men Neglect the Sincere Practice of Virtue, the Renovation of their Minds into
the faultless Image of Jesus will never effectually be carried on. I most
Humbly Beg your Grace's Pardon for their Imperfections, hoping your Grace will
not be offended at the Meanness of an Offering which proceeds only from a
Desire of doing Good. And to Assure your Grace of the Vprightness of my
Intentions herein, I have added as an Appendix I judged not unsuitable to the
foregoing Discourses, one likewise of Sincerity, in which your Grace will see
the high Esteem and Value I have of that Lovely Qualification.

Now that God would preserve your Grace in Health and Prosperity for the Good
and Benefit of this Church and Nation, and after you have finished your Course,
that your Grace may receive a never fading Crown of Glory when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, is the hearty Prayer of

My Lord, Your Grace's most Humble, and most Affectionate, Servant, Henry
Hallywell.

Phil. 4.8. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things.


THE true life and spirit of Religion consists not in dry and barren
Speculation, but in Practice: And that we may the better know what is the
matter of our Practice, the Apostle here instances in diverse Moral Duties which
frequently occur in the life of Man; and indeed seems to resolve all Religion
into the serious and hearty Regulation of the Life and Actions according to the
Rules and Measures of Virtue.

And because Morality by some has been too much slighted and undervalued, and
a Moral Man looked upon but as a more refined Reprobate or Castaway, I shall
endeavor to make good this in the first place,

That the sincere Practice of Moral Virtue is the Ground work and Foundation of
that Life by which we must be saved: or, That the main and substantial part of
Religion consists in the Practice of Moral Virtue.

For to be a Christian is to be all this that the Apostle mentions; to be true
in our Words and Promises, to be honest in walking answerably to the Dignity of
our Natures, to be just in our dealings one with another, to be pure in our
Bodies and Souls, and to practice such things as are lovely and of good report
amongst the best and wisest Men.

And if there were any Pagans that ever attained to this high and excellent
pitch, they must be reckoned amongst those that were (...) fitly disposed for
the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. Acts 13.48.
and (...), ranked and set in order for Eternal Life. And whoever thinks
himself to be a Christian without the due observance of these and such like
Duties which flow from true and right Reason, he has the name indeed, but wants
the thing it self, and does but cheat and deceive himself, and will hereafter
feel the ill effects of his delusion when he comes into the other World.

By Morality then I understand all these Virtues the Apostle mentions, and
whatever else is consonant to true and right Reason, and tends to the improving
and bettering the Life of Man.

I do not say that the Practice of these Virtues alone will save a Man, because
the Gospel is set at something a higher Pitch, and requires such a Nature as
cannot be attained barely by these: But this I say, that all these Virtues are
the foundation of our Salvation, and without the sincere Practice of these we
shall never be saved. They are as necessary to Salvation, as the casting of
Corn into the Ground is to the future Harvest. And he that is not right in the
practice of these, let him otherwise never so much applaud himself, is so far
from being a true Christian, that he is but a dissembling Hypocrite both in the
sight of God and Man.

Now that the main of Christian Religion consists in the Practice of
Moral-Virtue will appear;

1. In that God in the Scriptures seems to set this as the ultimate end and
perfection of Religion.

Micah 6.8. What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? that is, God requires nothing more or
greater in comparison of these: for otherwise there were other things which God
required as immediate parts of his Worship, and a Prevarication in which had
doubtless been a very great sin; but he required the Practice of these Virtues
chiefly, and in respect of themselves, and declares, that the doing these
things is more grateful to him than a Thousand Sacrifices. And Christ himself
approved of what the Scribe said, Mark 12.33. That to love the Lord with all
our heart, with all our understanding, and with all our Soul, and with all our
strength, and to love our Neighbor as our selves, is more than all
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices. For though God had commanded the Daily
Sacrifice to be offered, yet the practice of Moral Virtue was more pleasing to
him, this having an inward Goodness and Loveliness in it, which the other had
not. Nay, God disdains and reproaches even the Acts of his own Worship, when
they are performed by Men of unholy Lives and Conversations, as we read Isa.
1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the
Lord? I am full of the Burnt-Offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed Beasts, and
I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He-goats. Here is a
manifest slighting even of those very Acts of Worship which he himself had
injoined; and what should be the reason that the Lord should abhor his own
Offering, and not be pleased with what he himself had commanded? We find it
expressed, Verse 15. Your hands are full of Blood. They were guilty of open
Violations and Transgressions of the Eternal Laws of Nature. Therefore it
follows, Verse 16. Wash ye, make ye clean; put away the evil of your doings
from before my eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, relieve the Oppressed,
judge the Fatherless, and plead for the Widow.

From hence you see that it is clear as the Sun, that God puts a higher
estimate and value upon the faithful discharge of these Moral Duties of
Religion, than he does upon the immediate Acts of his own Worship. And that
whatsoever Service is performed to him, it is no further acceptable than as it
stands in Conjunction with Acts of Kindness, Beneficence, Justice, and Equity,
toward our Fellow Creatures. Nay our Savior himself and his Apostles, when
they would give us a brief Summary or Compendium of Religion, they always make
the practice of Moral-Virtue to be the main part and foundation of it. For thus
our blessed Lord himself says, that to love God and our Neighbor, are the
substance of the Law and the Prophets. And St. James tells us, Chap. 1.27. that
true Religion before God and the Father is this, To visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World.

Moreover, the value that God puts upon Moral-Virtue, is so great, that when
the Scripture gives a Character of any person that is dear and acceptable to
God, the description is for the most part drawn from instances of Morality. In
the 31st Chapter of Job, we find that Holy Man making a profession of his
Innocence and Integrity, and all the instances he gives of it, are but so many
Acts of Moral-Virtue; yet has he this Commendation given him, That he was a
perfect and upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed Evil, Job 1.1. And
that which indeared Cornelius to God, and made him be thought worthy of the
Visit of an Angel first, and then of an Apostle, was, (as we read, Acts 10.2.)
That he was a just and devout Man, one that feared God with all his House, and
gave much Alms to the people; and prayed to God always. Insomuch that St. Peter
makes this general Deduction and Conclusion from it, Verse 34, 35. Of a truth,
I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that
fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. As if the Apostle
had said, In all times and ages whoever he be, and in whatsoever part of the
World, that acknowledges the being of a God, and sincerely honors him, and
lives up as near as he can to the Prescriptions of right Reason, that Almighty
Being looks down with a favorable Eye upon him.

Certain it is, that Christianity it self whose ultimate end is the Salvation
and Blessedness of Mankind has therefore appeared, (says St. Paul, Tit.
2.12.) teaching us, That denying all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World. Which is nothing
but the perfection of Morality. And that we may conclude this Argument, when
the Apostle would give us the Character of a complete and full grown Christian,
he says, Heb. 5.14. that he is such a one who by reason of use has his Senses
exercised to discern both good and evil. So that the Perfection of all Religion
is made to consist in having a vital relish and discrimination of good and
evil.

2. By these Moral Actions we partake of the Nature of God. The Apostle in 2
Pet. 1.4. makes the ultimate End and grand Design of Christian Religion, to be
our partaking of a Divine Nature. Now the Nature of God, as it is communicated
to us, does not consist in Wisdom or Power, but in Goodness and Truth, in
Holiness, Justice and Equity, in Love, Commiseration and Pity. All which are
Moral Excellencies and Perfections, and as we partake more or less of them, so
do we more or less resemble and draw down God into our Souls. The Eternity,
Omniscience and Omnipotency of God, are no where set as our Copies to follow;
for these are Incommunicable Properties of his Nature; but in all his
Moral-Perfections, we are to imitate and become like unto him. It is by his
Holiness and Purity, by his Love and Goodness, that God falls down into our
Souls, and impregnates them with his Sacred Life, and forms there his own Image
and Likeness. And we cannot doubt but that which so nearly resembles God, and
is nothing but his own Life and Nature copyed out and implanted in his
Creatures, must needs be most of all valued and respected by him; and we are in
his Favor as we increase in Holiness and Purity, in Truth, Goodness and
Righteousness.

Now that God accounts these Things most dear to him, is evident from that
Example he proposes to us for our Imitation, that is, The Example of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, who was God dwelling in our Nature, and in whom that
Divine Life, which is the highest Perfection of Men and Angels, was most
clearly and conspicuously discovered. And the great Things which have made the
Life of Christ Examplary, and set as a Godlike Pattern for us to follow, were

1. His Superlative Love and Charity; designing not so much his own Interest,
as the universal and common Good of all the World. His Kindness and Compassions
were not circumscribed to this or that particular sort of Men, but extended and
communicated to all that were capable of them. He made no distinction of Age or
Sex or Parties, but scattered his Bounty to all, and filled all Places and all
Persons with Joy and Gladness by his Presence. And whenever he made use of that
Almighty Power which resided in him, it was not to the Harm and Damage, but to
the Support and Relief of those he conversed withal.

2. Again, he made his Life an Examplary Pattern to us in his Humility, and the
Resignation of his Mind to the Divine Will and Pleasure. For we never find our
Savior ever arrogating any Praise or Glory to himself, but refers all the
Glory of his Actions to God. Insomuch as (though he knew himself to be Innocent
and without Sin, yet) he refuses to be called Good, saying, That none was good,
save one, that is, God. And whatever his Condition was, he never murmured or
repined at it, but entirely committed himself to the wise Providence and
Disposal of God. Nor did he ever desire the fulfilling his own Will and Desires
any further, than they might consist with the good Pleasure of his Heavenly
Father.

3. And then lastly, Our Lord has given us a clear Example of an unspotted
Purity both of Body and Soul. He conversed with a Wicked and Censorious World,
with Men that lay at the catch to ensnare him, and yet we do not read they
could ever fasten any Sin upon him. And as his Soul was ever kept undefiled and
unspotted from the World, so his Body was never polluted by any inordinate
Pleasure or Excess; but both Body and Soul remained always pure as the Temple
of the Living God. Here now is that Divine Nature that we are called to partake
of, and this is the perfect Image and Resemblance of the Divinity that we are
to be conformed to; and yet these are no other than Moral Virtues; and our
partaking of the Nature of God is the conformity of our Souls to these and such
like Rules of Eternal Reason.

3. The Practice of Moral Virtues is so absolutely necessary, that without it
we can never perform any Christian and Acceptable Service unto God. The Ten
Commandments must first be kept before we can arrive to that higher measure of
Perfection required of us under the Gospel; and we must first be good Men
before we can be good Christians; and none can be good, except he be true and
faithful, and just and honest. For what Sign can that Man give that he desires
to be like to God in Justice and Equity, who never omits any occasion of
injuring and defrauding his Neighbor? How can he be said to be a Follower of
Jesus, who went about doing good, that will neither afford Relief to the Bodies
or Souls of Men? God is Love, but when Men live in Envy and Hatred and Malice,
it were strange they should be like to God. Suppose any Person should say, That
he desires and hopes to inherit the pure State of Angels hereafter; can we
believe this, when we see him at the same time pursuing all beastly and sensual
Pleasures? The Practice of Moral Virtue is a thing that God has put into our
Power, and he requires that we should be faithful to it; because from hence
Springs that new Nature which is wrought in us by the overshadowing Power of
the Spirit of God. There is such a near connection between these Moral Virtues,
and that Divine Life which Jesus came to plant in our Souls, that one cannot be
without the other; nor can we perform any Service acceptable to God, while we
either neglect, or are false in the Practice of these.

These are the Arguments which may serve to enforce the serious Practice of
Virtue in general upon us, and to let us know that the esteem which God has of
us, is according to our Growth and Progress in it. All other Qualifications are
of little or no worth in Comparison of this. And if we are defective here,
though we are otherwise never so gloriously accomplished, it will do us no good.

We may now briefly consider the Encouragements the Apostle gives to the
faithful Discharge of these Virtues in general. They are these two, expressed,
v. 9.

1. That these things are not new nor strange; the Apostle desires nothing but
what they had learnt, and heard, and seen in him. If they feared the Truth of
what he said, they should look on him, and see if his Life and Actions were not
conformable to his Doctrine. Examples are very great Encouragements to a Holy
Life; and Christians ought not to walk every Man by himself, but imitate and
stir up and follow one another in the same Course of Holiness. That as they
offer up the same Common Petitions and Prayers for themselves and all Mankind,
so they should all strive together and encourage one another in the same way of
Virtue; that so at last they may all come to the glory and felicity of Jesus
who is gone before them.

2. He tells them the God of Peace should be with them in so doing. The highest
Motive and Incentive to the Practice of Holiness and Virtue that can be thought
of. Though all the World be in a Storm and Confusion about us, yet so long as
we are Holy and Good, that God who Creates an Everlasting Peace for Righteous
Men, shall be always with us. And where he is present there is an Eternal
Quietness and Calm: God will never forsake his own Life and Nature; and
Holiness being the very Nature of God, he cannot but love and regard it
wherever he finds it in any person. Though Earthly Parents may forget their
Children, yet God cannot be unmindful of those that are Good, Virtuous and
Holy. He can never withdraw himself from them, but will continually visit them
with his Powerful Love. He gives them that Peace of Conscience in this Life,
that the World cannot give, and brings them at last to that Land of Peace and
Blessedness where there is no Disturbance or Alteration.

(...). Whatsoever things are true.
The Gospel being given to amend the Manners, and reform the Lives of Mankind,
and to bring into use those Virtues which began to grow out of fashion through
the general Wickedness and Corruption of the World; the Apostle begins with
Truth; Whatsoever things are true.

Now Truth is to be considered,

1. As it refers purely to the Understanding.

2. As it relates to Practice.

First in Opinions, and in reference to our belief of any Doctrine that is
propounded to us; and thus it is opposed to Error or Falsehood and Heresy. So
that when the Apostle injoins us to follow those things that are true, he would
have us entertain no other Doctrins but such as are purely Christian.

Now although a good Christian that believes the Scriptures, and sincerely
endeavors to understand them aright, and to lead his Life according to them,
may be well assured, that God will keep him from all Errors that are
destructive of his Salvation; yet because Error is so various, and that there
be too many who act the Devil's part, and make it their business to delude
Harmless and Innocent Persons; it will not be amiss to lay down some few Rules,
whereby we may discern true Doctrins from false, and secure our selves in a
good measure from being imposed upon. For the Scripture being a Book that is
not all of the same Nature, nor written by one Man in the same Method and
Style, but is filled in some places with Advices and Counsels to that which is
best; sometimes with Precepts and Commands; and in other places with dark and
obscure Prophesies; and lastly, with the choicest Parts of true Reason and
Knowledge, though often delivered in somewhat a Mysterious way: These things
being considered, it is impossible that all Men should have the same Thoughts
and Apprehensions, and conceive of all places in the Scripture after the same
way and manner. Hence it comes to pass that some Men through weakness and
carelessness, and others out of design, broach many Errors and Falsehoods, and
spread them abroad in the World.

Therefore if there may be some plain Rules set down, which may serve as a Mark
to guide us in a doubtful and dangerous way, it cannot but be gratefully
received by every one that loves Ingenuity and Truth.

1. Therefore, whatever Doctrine is repugnant and inconsistent with the
Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God, it is to be rejected as an Error. For the
Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God are so manifest in all things, and in all
places, that as no Man can miss of the knowledge of the Being of his Creator, so
it cannot be a Truth that seeks to diminish and obscure those Essential
Attributes of the Deity which so evidently appear throughout all the Tracts of
Immense space.

Thus then, when we look into the Frame of the World, nay, but into the Fabric
of our own Nature, and see with what wonderful Art and Contrivance things are
made, and how each Part is subservient and conspires to one great End and
Purpose, that is, for the good of the whole; this very Consideration, That
things are made and framed for Ends and Designs, will lead us to the knowledge
of a Conscious and Intelligent Nature, which is no other than an infinitely
Good, and Wise, and Powerful God. Therefore if any one should go about to
persuade us, that either the Beautiful Frame of this visible World, or the
Admirable Structure of Humane Bodies in which is lodged so much Art and Skill,
had no other Original but blind Chance and Fortune, and arose from the
Fortuitous Coalitions of Atoms; we cannot but look upon it at first sight as an
Error and Delusion, because it derogates and takes away from that Infinite
Power and Wisdom, which we behold in the making even of the least thing in the
World.

Again, if any Person should tell us, that God made the greatest part of
Mankind on purpose to Damn them, without any Consideration of their Sin and
Provocations: It is impossible (keeping our selves to this Rule) that ever we
should believe such a Doctrine, because it is so contrary to his Goodness and
Love, which as it brought all things into Being for no other end, but that they
might be Happy, so it will never destroy or turn any thing out of that Happy
State, without it is own demerit and default.

To instance once more; If any Man shall Teach, That the Commands of God are
impossible to be performed, and that though he invite all Men, yet he denies
sufficient Grace to the greatest part of them, whereby they may be enabled to
Obey him, and be Extricated out of their Miserable Condition:

By this Rule we ought to look upon such a Doctrine as a downright Falsehood:
Because it is certain, that an Infinitely Wise and Good God cannot command and
injoin Impossibilities; nor exact and require Men's Obedience to his Laws,
without furnishing them with a sufficient Power whereby to do them. And to do
otherwise, would so little deserve the Name of Justice and Equity, that it
would be no better than Tyranny and unaccountable Self-will.

Hence now it follows, not only in these Instances, but in any other Doctrins
whatever; if they any way lessen the Goodness, Wisdom, or Power of God; if they
disparage all or any of these Attributes, such Doctrins can never be true. For
Truth is always the same and alike, and is ever found agreeable with the Nature
of God, who is the Fountain of all Truth.

2. If any thing be taught that is contrary to the undoubted Principles of
found Reason, or the clear Evidence of Sense, it is to be looked upon as False.

Because Reason is that Lamp or Candle of the Lord which he has lighted and set
up in the Soul of Man, whereby it is able to make a difference, and discern
between Truth and Falsehood. And our Senses are another infallible means of
Communicating the true Knowledge of things to us, when they are sound and not
vitiated, and their Objects duly and conveniently Circumstantiated. Now as our
Eyes and Ears were given us to discern Objects of Sight and Hearing; so are our
Reasons to discern those things that belong to Reason. And as no Man, (but such
a one as is Crazed in his Intellectuals,) will distrust his Eyes or Ears when
their Objects are duly placed; so neither will he distrust his Reason when it
Acts according to those common and self-evident Notions upon which all Reason
is founded. And that this may yet be more manifest, it is to be Considered,
that the Nature of Man is not indifferent to Truth or Falsehood; that is, no Man
can believe what he pleases whether right or wrong. It is not in the Power of
any to believe that to be True, which he knows to be False, because there is
such an ungratefulness and disagreeableness between Falsehood and the Rational
Nature of Man; and to believe a Falsehood, were to offer Violence to our
Rational Faculties.

Wherefore, because it is not in the Power of Man to believe or disbelieve at
his Pleasure, his Understanding being limited and bound up by those Eternal
Rules of Truth and Falsehood, it is clear, that Right Reason must be the measure
of Truth and Falsehood, and consequently that Doctrine must be False that is
contrary to Reason. To give some light to this in a particular Instance: Our
Adversaries of the Romish Church say, that Transubstantiation is True, that is,
that the Consecrated Wafer, and every Crum of it, is the whole and entire Body
of Christ that hung upon the Cross: But according to this Rule, it is utterly
False, because it is contrary to the Reason and Sense of Mankind. It is
contrary to Reason, because Christ's Natural Body cannot be in Heaven, and at
the same time, without any continuation of it self, be in a Thousand distant
Places upon Earth. And it is contrary to the Evidence of Sense, because Three
of our Senses, viz. our Tasting, Touching, and Seeing, inform us, that it is
still Bread. And if our Faculties may deceive us in their proper Objects, it is
impossible we should ever arrive to the certain knowledge of any Thing, but must
be Condemned to an Eternal Skepticism. But that our Senses are true Judges when
they are rightly Circumstantiated, appears from all the Miracles which our
Savior wrought, which are only so many Appeals to the Evidence of Sense.

3. Whatever Doctrine or Opinion there be in Religion that does not drive at
Holiness of Life, nor design the Perfection of Men's Souls, it is to be looked
upon all one as if it were False.

For all the Mysteries and Truths of the Christian Religion are such, as some
way or other serve to beget in us a true Fear and Reverence of God, and tend to
the making us better. Their Design is to communicate such a knowledge of God and
of his Works to us, as may affect our Hearts, and render us more God-like.
Holiness is the Intent and Purpose of the whole Gospel, and whatever does not
in some measure promote and advance a Pious and Religious Life, cannot be
believed to come from God.

Thus if a Man shall imagine that a bare Naked Faith, without an inward Change
and Renovation of the Mind is enough to save him; or if he shall frame to
himself any Opinion that gives any Liberty, Indulgence, or Allowance, to any
Sin: These and such like Fancies are utterly False and to be Abhorred, because
they destroy the great End of Religion, which is the inward Holiness, Purity
and Sanctity of the Mind and Spirit.

By these Rules we may Examine the Truth of all Doctrins propounded to us, in
order to God and to Religion. And this may serve as an Explication of Truth as
it relates to the Understanding.

2. Truth as it relates to Practice, is properly Veracity, and is opposed to
Lying and Deceit. To be plain and true hearted in our Words and Promises
according to the simplicity of the Gospel. So that when the Apostle bids us
mind such things as are true, it is all one with his Exhortation, Ephesians. 4.25.
Wherefore putting away Lying, speak every Man the Truth with his Neighbor. For
God being a God of Truth, and not capable of deceiving Men either in his Words
or Promises, he would have Men to be like unto him. And this Duty is necessary
upon these Two Accounts;

1. From the Conformity and Likeness it has to the Nature of God.

God is represented in the Old Testament by the Holy One of Israel that cannot
Lie; and in the New, the Apostle Argues from the Immutability of the Nature of
God, that it is impossible for him to Lie or to Deceive. For to Lie is a
Weakness, Sickness, and Imperfection of the Mind, which God cannot be subject
to. No Power or Force can constrain him to do otherwise than his Nature wills;
and his Counsels and Will being directed by an Infinite Goodness and Wisdom,
there cannot be in him any Variableness, Inconstancy, or shadow of turning. And
he is most like unto God who stands Confidently and Immutably to what is True
and Right. For Truth deriving from an Infinite and Almighty Being, is bold, and
takes place, when Deceit and Falsehood is put to its Shifts, and runs into
holes, hating the light. Therefore the wiser Heathens used to say, That to
speak the Truth, and to do Good, were things that made us most like to God. And
most certain it is, that the more a Man swerves and declines from Truth, the
further he is removed from a Participation of the Nature of God. Hence when the
Jews would not believe our Savior, who testified that Truth he had received of
God, he tells them, John 8.44. They were of their Father the Devil, who was a
Liar, and the Father of it. He was the first Inventer and the first Author of
Lies in the World: Therefore, (says Christ,) when he speaks a Lie, he
speaks of his own. It Is none of God's Creation, but an effect which he is the
sole Cause and Author and Original of. When that foul Spirit had once disjoined
and separated himself from God, then he began to Lie and to Deceive, and taught
Men to do so too; which showed the weakness of his Nature, when once it became
uncentred and unhinged from that Stable and Unchangeable Being who is Truth it
self.

2. Truth is the Bond and Foundation of all Civil Society. There is no Commerce
or Intercourse between Men in the World without this. And hence it is that a
Liar is banished and excluded from all sober Society; and the Reason is,
because he destroys that which God and Nature ordained should preserve and
maintain a Correspondence one with another. Therefore the very Formality, that
is, the Nature of a Lie includes in it a piece of Injustice, and is a real
Injury done to another. For Words and Expressions being only the significations
of our Minds one to another, every Man has a right of judging and understanding
by these what is signified to him. Now when a Man tells a Lie, he imposes upon
his Neighbor, and deprives him of his Right, by making him to believe quite
contrary to what the things are. Therefore our Blessed Savior tells us, That
for every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall be accountable, Mat.
12.36. which is not meant of every impertinent or useless, but every vain or
false Word, i. e. for every Lie. And there is a great deal of Reason for this,
because he that Lies to another, not only betrays the Effeminateness and
Weakness of his Nature, but is really injurious to his Neighbor, and destroys
and undermines that which is the common Cement and Bond by which Societies are
incorporated together.

Wherefore let it be every Man's Care to avoid all Fraud and Dissimulation in
his Words and Actions. For nothing is more unbecoming a Man, much more undecent
and odious is it in a Christian, who professes a Religion that owns the
greatest simplicity and openness, and freedom, and plain-heartedness in the
World. Our Blessed Savior though he many times prudently avoided Captious and
Ensharing Questions, yet when he was demanded an Account of that for which he
came into the World, i. e. whether he were the Christ, or the true Messiah, he
owns it, though he knew this very Truth would cost him his Life. When the Cause
of God and a good Conscience lies at stake, then Truth must in a particular
manner show it self: For to Dissemble and to be False to this, is to betray the
Religion that we profess. Therefore we find among the Catalogue of those that
are excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, are all such as love and make a Lie,
Revel. 22.15. not only such as make Deceits and Dissimulations to betray the
Truth, but such as love and delight in such Treacherous Actions. And in express
terms, God Almighty Threatens all Liars, Revel. 21.8. That they shall have
their Portion in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Because Falsehood
is not only contrary to the Nature of God, and sinks us into a Condition the
furthest removed from him, but destroys the Interest of Christianity, which
requires in all its Professors the greatest Truth and Faithfulness in all their
Words and Actions. Christ came to promote a Fair and Innocent Nature in the
World, which cannot consist with those Blemishes and Spots that attend Lying
and Deceit. Truth is plain and easy, but a Lie is crooked and perverse, and
made up of many windings and turnings. So that he that considers the Nature of
God who is absolute Truth, the Interest of Religion, and the Good of Mankind,
will not think such an Exhortation as this to be unseasonable, but will with
all diligence pursue and follow such things as are true.

(...). Whatsoever things are honest.
Besides what we have here discoursed of Virtue in general, we may further
Note, that these and such like are the Moral Furniture of our Souls; they are
the Transcripts and Derivations of the Nature of God, which however by a long
Degeneracy they seem to be worn out, and the Traces of them in many to be
scarce visible; yet there is such a Cognation and Congruity between them and
the Nature of our Souls, that they are ready to embrace whenever duly offered
to them.

After having advised to things true, the Apostle comes next to whatsoever
things are honest: which is not to be taken in a strict signification, as
Honesty is a part of Justice, (for that St. Paul mentions afterward,) but the
word [honest] here must be taken in a larger signification, for whatever is
becoming. So the Word in the Original imports, whatever is venerable, grave,
decent and becoming.

For doubtless there is such a thing as Natural Decency and Decorum, which may
be rated according to the different Circumstances and Qualifications of Men.
Thus some things may pass irreprehensible in a private Person, which are
unbecoming a Prince. And that which may be allowed in another would yet be
unfit for a Minister of the Gospel, who is to be (...) 1 Timothy 3.2. of good
behavior, which in Verse 8. is expressed by (...) Grave, i. e. Adorned with a
comely Gravity and Decency in his whole Conversation. So that whatever Degree
or Place a Man holds in the World, he ought to Act suitably and agreeably to
it. Thus Parents and Masters ought to set their Children and Servants an
Example of Gravity and Becomingness. Which though in many things it is to be
taken and measured from the Use and Custom of the Place and Nation wherein they
are, yet there are some General Rules of becomingness which Nature and Reason
will furnish us withal. For Grave, and Venerable, and Becoming, being Things of
a Moral Nature, it is certain, that there is some Rule and Measure, whereby
these things are to be known, as well as for any other Virtue. As,

1. This Gravity and Becomeingness which the Apostle advises us to follow,
requires that we Act in all things suitably to the Dignity of our Nature. We
are to Consider, that God has made us Rational Creatures, and endued us with a
Power of discerning between Moral Good and Evil. Now we having the Laws of Good
and Evil, of what is Base and Deformed, and what is Honest and Becoming
engraven upon our Souls, whenever we Transgress these Rules, we Act contrary to
the Excellency and Dignity of our Nature. Hence was that Precept of the
Philosophers, Reverere teipsum, Reverence thy self, i. e. Take Care that thou
Act not below the Dignity and Eminency of thy Nature. For Right Reason being
that Rule and Measure according to which all our Actions are to be formed and
squared, whenever we swerve and deviate from that Rule, we go below and debase
our Natures.

And this Superiority of Reason over all our Animal and Brutish Passions and
Inclinations is denoted in Genesis 1.28. where God bids Man have Dominion over the
Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that
moves upon the Earth. There are many Passions and Affections and Sensations
which arise from the Body, and as they are Innocent in themselves, so they are
Necessary to the Perfection of our Nature. Wherefore Man being made after the
Image of God, he has likewise an Empire and Rule and Dominion given him over
all his Bodily Affections and Inclinations to moderate and guide them in the
lesser World, as God does all the parts of the greater throughout the whole
Creation. Thus St. Jude, Verse 6, speaking of the Lapsed Angels, (...) which
kept not their first Estate, the Vulgar Latin has it, Principatum suum non
servaverunt; which is thus expressed by Simplicius after the Platonical manner,
In Epictet. p. 163.
and in terms very little different from the Apostle, (...), neglecting that
Archical Power wherein consisted their similitude with God, and giving
themselves up to the Conduct of their irrational Appetites. Now when the
Brutish Life leads us astray from the Government of Reason, and we cast away
that (...) that Principality and Archical Rule wherewith God has invested us
over all our Corporeal Passions and Affections, then the Order of the Creation
is inverted, and the Beast governs the Man; than which nothing can appear more
unbecoming and unhandsome to every one that has any spiritual sense and
discerning in him.

It was an Evil which Solomon says he saw under the Sun, Eccles. 10.7. Servants
upon Horses, and Princes walking as Servants upon the Earth. The Moral is true
in every Wicked Man, in whom Reason is dethroned, and the lowest of his
Appetites and Desires command and force him to obey them. For any Man therefore
by Intemperance, Debauchery, and a lawless pursuit after sensual Pleasures, to
abuse any Power of his Body, or Faculty of his Soul, he does that which is
Dishonest and Uncomely, in forcing Reason from its Seat, and setting up his
Brutish Lusts in its stead.

To be carried out in a fond doting upon the World, and an immoderate love of
Sensual Vanities, and to follow them with a mighty eagerness and desire, as if
they were the ultimate Happiness of Man, it is to debase and dishonor our
Souls. It is an abuse and a slur cast upon Humane Nature, because we make use
of it to those Purposes which God never intended it for. In like manner, to be
overcurious in making Provision for the Body, and to bestow too much time in
Decking and Adorning that to the Prejudice and Neglect of the Soul; it is what
is unbecoming and dishonorable to a Man; because it is a preferring our worser
part before our Souls, which are much the Nobler half of us.

Now as for that Decency which ought to be even in our Apparel, it is to be
measured by the Custom and Manners of the best and wisest Persons among whom we
live; whose Judgment in this Case ought by no means to be slighted or
undervalued: The State likewise and Condition of Persons is to be Considered;
They that are Gorgeously Apparalled, and live Delicately, (says Christ, Luke
7.25.) are in King's Courts. In which our Savior does not condemn the wearing
of Rich Apparel, either as a thing undecent or unlawful, but seems to intimate,
that the Quality and Condition of Persons is to be observed.

2. Gravity and Comeliness require, that in all our Actions we consider the end
of our Beings; and that we Act suitably and agreeably to that end. Every thing
is such as is the end to which it is determined; and as the end is more or less
Noble, so is the Excellency of a Creature proportionably more or less. Now the
highest and best end of Man as a Rational Creature must undoubtedly be the
Participation of the Nature of God; for there is nothing in the World more
Noble, nothing more Excellent than this. Wherefore all Comeliness and Decorum
consisting in an apt and due order and consent, it follows that we then Act the
most Becoming, when we Act the most Agreeably and Consonantly to the Great and
Universal End of our Beings. Therefore whatever it be that hinders our
Communication with God, and our partaking of his Nature, so far forth it is
Dishonest, Vile and Unsuitable to our Intellectual Creature.

It was good Advice of the Wise Ben Syrack, Ecclesiast. 7.36. Remember the end,
and thou shall never do amiss. For he that Acts agreeably and conformably to
the end of his Being, he Acts according to that Order which God has appointed,
and therefore cannot be guilty of any thing that is Base and Unworthy. Let them
seriously Consider this who can quietly and contentedly wallow and tumble in
Sensual Pleasures; who are never better pleased than when with the Serpent they
are Creeping upon the Ground, and Licking the Dust; how infinitely they deviate
and swerve from that great End of their Creation! Man was made to be united to
God, and to Converse with him, and therefore has such Faculties and Powers in
his Soul as are fitted to that Purpose. But when our Understandings and our
Wills, when our Love and our Desires are taken up with the search and
complacency they find in Worldly and Sensual Objects, these Faculties and
Passions of our Souls are misplaced, which breeds a Disorder and a Confusion;
and this is what in it self is dishonest and unbecoming.

Every Excess and Exorbitancy of our Passions is an Indecency, not only as it
sinks a Man below the Dignity of his Nature, by Exalting the Brutish Part in
him, but as it destroys and contradicts the Great End of his Being, that is,
his Participation of the Divine Nature, which is the most Calm, and Uniform,
and Sedate thing in the World.

3. Gravity and Becomingness command us to Treat Holy Things and Persons with
that Reverence that is due and proper to them.

Virtue is not a thing that is merely acquired, and transfused into us from
without, but rather an Exsuscitation and raising up of those Intellectual
Principles, Pro re nata, and according as the Circumstances of Humane Actions
invite, which were Essentially Engraven and Sealed upon the Soul at her first
Creation. And amongst the Rest, this is one of those Laws or Principles which
are Connate and Born with us, That we should Reverence our Superiors; and
according to the Degrees of their Superiority, so our Reverence and Esteem and
Honor are to be paid. Thus God is to be Honored with the highest Honor, to
be Loved with the greatest Love, and Served with the most Cheerful and Sincere
Obedience, because he is the most Excellent Being, the Fruitful Cause and
Original from whence all Things both in Heaven and Earth flow and derive
themselves.

And if it be Judged among all Nations a thing very unbecomeing to deride and
treat our Parents with Contempt and Scorn, much more is it when this Abuse is
offered to God himself, and passes upon Things or Persons that for his sake are
called Holy. It is one of the Great and Crying Sins of this Age, that Men are
grown of such a light and frothy Temper, as to think it the greatest part of
their Wit to Laugh at the Notion of a God, to Ridicule the Scriptures, and to
Expose to Scorn the Sacred Person of our Blessed Savior. And he that can do
this with the finest Fancy, and Cloth the Lewdness of his Mind in the Neatest
Dress, is Applauded by the rest of the Herd, and passes for a most Exquisite
Wit; though it be such a kind of Wit as the Devils themselves are either
Ashamed or Afraid to make use of, (for they tremble at the thoughts of God,)
but these Whifflers who have neither Learning nor good Manners, are neither
Afraid nor Ashamed by their Rude Drolling and Buffooning to Expose to Contempt
all that which the wisest and best Men in the World have always had the
greatest Veneration for. And how Unbecoming and Uncivil a Thing this is, the
Universal Sense of Mankind speaks aloud, and whoever has but a dram of true
Wisdom and Understanding left in him, must needs Abhor it, as contrary to that
Gravity which Nature her self instructs Men in.

4. To Expose any Man to Scorn and Contempt for any Imperfection of Body or
Mind, is inconsistent with the Rules of Gravity and Decorum. For as for the
Imbecillities and Imperfections of the Mind, since all Men's Souls were Cast in
the same Mould, and the distinction that is made, proceeding from a hidden and
reserved Providence altogether unknown to us, it were very Unbecoming to Expose
them to Scorn for that whose Reasons we are perfectly Ignorant of. A Fool is
rather the Object of our Pity and Commiseration, than of our Contempt and
Derision. And to Vilify and Upbraid another for any Defect or Deformity of
Body, it is to Upbraid him for that which was no more in his Power to help,
than it was in his Power not to be Born. Least of all does it become us to make
our selves Merry with other Men's Sins, but rather to Mourn and Weep that they
are so degenerate and fallen from the Excellency and Height of their Creation.
And as for their Follies, though they may seem to give an Occasion for
Derision, yet it is better to imitate the sad and sober Temper of the Holy
Jesus, of whom we Read that he sometimes Wept, but never that he Laughed.

5. Lastly, Christian Gravity will Teach us to avoid all Filthiness, and
Foolish Talking and Jesting, which this Apostle St. Paul tells us, Ephesians. 5.4.
Are not convenient, i. e. they are not agreeable to that Gravity and Modesty
that a Christian ought to Observe. Out of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth
speaks, and he that either uses or delights in Obscene and Filthy Discourse,
it is a certain sign that the Frame and Temper of his Soul is strangely sunk
and bemired in Flesh and Blood. And though (...), Vrbanity, which is here
rendered [Jesting,] be reckoned by Aristotle as a Virtue that helps to
Accomplish a Man, and those who neither willingly use, nor take any pleasure in
Jests, are by him termed (...) Rustical: Yet as the one will hardly Merit the
Name of Virtue, unless it be used with great Caution and Prudence, so the other
is so far from Rusticity, that it may rather seem the Exaltedness and
Heroicalness of the Mind, that Slights and Undervalues these little Flirts of
Wit as Mean and Trivial. In a Word, We that profess Christianity ought to
behave our selves with that Becomingness as that we may neither be Taxed with
Superciliousness, Pride, or Scorn, nor yet with a Vain, Light and Frothy Spirit.

(...). Whatsoever things are Just.
We have Discoursed of the Two First of these Virtues mentioned by St. Paul;
the next in order is to Consider of such things as are Just. And let no Man
look upon the Practice of these Virtues as Mean and Light, and a thing of no
Consequence; for whoever is defective in these can never truly pretend to
Christianity. For the true Christian Life is made up of such things as these
are; and he that is not true in his Words and Promises, that does not act
suitably and agreeably to that Nature God has implanted in him, and moreover
can allow himself knowingly to defraud his Neighbor, whatever plausible
Covering he may shelter himself under, yet he can never pass for a true
Christian in the sight of God or Man. We are too apt to believe that we shall
be saved, though we transgress these Rules of Virtue; and we may go on and
deceive our selves if we will, but when we come into the other World, we shall
find the great Enquiry there to be, whether we have Acted according to the
Prescriptions of Virtue or not. Hence it is that the Holy Apostle so fervently
Exhorts us to the Observance of all Virtue, and particularly of that which is
Just.

God has made Man a Reasonable Creature, and by this distinguished him from
Brutes. Now Right Reason is nothing but that Eternal Law which God has Engraven
upon every Man's Soul; and from this general Law of Reason are derived all
Particular Virtues; amongst which this of Justice, which always supposes some
Law, to which as to some standing Measure all its Acts must be Reduced and made
Conformable. For Just in a large sense is no more than Crongruous and
Agreeable: And there must be something which of necessity must be the Rule and
Measure of this Congruity and Agreeableness; which can be nothing else but that
Nature of Eternal Reason that God has formed in our Souls. Hence it follows,
that to do that which is Just, is to do that which is Agreeable to Eternal and
Immutable Reason.

But the Words of the Apostle here, seem a little more restrained and confined,
and when he says, Whatever things are Just, it is all one as whatsoever things
are Righteous. Now Righteousness that respects others, and then to be Just is
to give every Man his due. And that we may know these things the better, Christ
gives us an Excellent Rule (which is indeed the foundation of all Justice, and
for which the very Heathens Reverenced Christianity,) Mat. 7.12. Whatever you
would that Men should do to you, do ye so to them. Into this great Principle
all Natural Justice and Equity may be resolved. Which that we may not abuse by
a wrong understanding of our Savior's meaning, (as some are too apt to do,
thereby to palliate, excuse or shift off their Sin) there are Two things to be
considered;

1. That it was not Christ's Mind to Confound the different States and
Conditions of Men; as if by this Law Princes were bound to perform all those
Duties back again to their Subjects, that their Subjects do to them: Or that
Masters are bound to Obey their Servants, because they would have their
Servants Obey them: Or that Parents should Reverence their Children, because
their Children are obliged to Reverence and Honor them. For this would destroy
all the differences of things, and set Princes and People, Masters and
Servants, Parents and Children, upon equal terms; which it was never Christ's
intent to do. But only to consider how we would be dealt withal, if we were in
the place of those we deal with, and to Act accordingly.

2. Nor did our Savior intend that this Precept, [of doing as we would be done
by,] should be enlarged to things Unjust, and against the Common and Public
Good of Mankind. As for Example, Because Men that Violate the Sanctions of
Right and Just, and break those Laws that are made for the Common Profit of the
World, would willingly be freed from Punishment, that therefore we are bound by
this Precept of Christ to deal so with them. For this would be to encourage all
Wickedness and Impiety, and to open a Door to all the Villainies and Enormous
Actions the Vilest Wretches can think to commit. This were to give a liberty to
Wicked Men to Invade that which is another, and to Countenance Rapine and
Fraud by Christ's Law. Therefore it is certain, that our Savior who came to
discountenance all Vice, and to give Men Rules of Holy Living, and teach them
Justice and Equity, never intended his Words should be understood in this
Sense. But his Words are to be restrained to whatever is Lawful and Right; that
which is agreeable to the Nature of God, who is the highest and most Impartial
Justice; a Copy of which he has Transcribed and Written in every Man's Soul.

And so the Command signifies thus much, That we never do that to another,
which if we were in that other Man's place, we would clearly and truly suppose
to be Injustice, and against the Laws of Evident and Right Reason. To give a
plain instance of this Law; If a Man were brought into great Difficulties,
Straits and Distresses, he would willingly be relieved by those that are able
to help him; therefore now he must do the same to others, and be ready to
relieve them. If a Man would not be Defrauded or Oppressed by another, he is
bound by our Savior's Command to bear such an Honest and Just Temper of Mind,
as not to Defraud and Undermine, and Circumvent and Oppress any other.

You see now by this what the Apostle means by things that are Just, viz. That
it is to follow that Excellent Precept of our Savior, in which all the Parts
of Justice are in a few Words comprised, i. e. To do as we would be done by.

Now you will better understand, and peradventure remember this, if I show you
in a few particulars what every good Man desires, and would have done to him;
for then you will evidently discern, that what you desire to your selves, you
ought to do to others.

1. Every Good Man desires above all things his own Happiness both in this Life
and in the next. And since he is so willing to have this for himself, it is a
piece of Christian Justice and Charity, that he should stand so affected to all
others. He would not have any Man disturb the Ease and Comfort and Quiet of his
Life here; he desires not to be Pained or Grieved, or to have his Spirits
wasted and consumed with Cares and Miseries. Now if we would but be as Just to
others as we are to our selves, we should not only desire but endeavor to help
forward, (as far as we are able,) the Happiness of all Mankind. We should
Comfort those that are cast down, and pour in the Oil of Joy and Gladness into
the Bones that God has broken; we should never behold any Watery Eyes, but be
ready to dry them up; nor find any Aching Heads, but endeavor to Bind and Ease
them. We should never send away any without the real signs of our Charity and
Compassion. If there be any that desire our Counsel and Advice in weighty and
doubtful Affairs; any that are wavering and unsettled in Religion, that stand
in need of, and want some Faithful Guide to resolve and settle their
Fluctuating Minds: All these are Objects to which this great Law of Justice
obliges us to afford our best Skill and Assistance; because we would desire the
same at their Hands, if they were in our Circumstances, and we in theirs.

Let those then reflect seriously upon themselves, and behold how far they are
removed from this great Law of Justice and Charity, who take delight in the
Miseries of others; that are pleased in another Ruin and Affliction; that have
an inward Joy and Contentment, (as it were) when they have Defrauded and
Overreached another. And yet their own Hearts testify against them, that they
would not be served so themselves; they would not willingly receive such
Measure again. Is there not all the Reason in the World that Men should abstain
from doing that which they are not willing to receive?

2. Every Good Man would willingly enjoy so much of this Worlds Goods, as may
make his passage Comfortable while he is Traveling toward the next. And if
every Man wish such things to himself, in Justice he ought not to Envy them to
others; much less ought any to hinder or endeavor to frustrate the honest
Industry and Diligence of another to support himself in the World: And the
Reason is, because no Man would be Abused so himself. And if Men would always
in the performance of their Duty to others strive to square their Actions by
this Rule, the World could not be so overrun with Deceit and Treachery. If
every one when he is going to hinder the welfare of another, or Oppress and
Encroach upon his Neighbor, would but Ask himself the Question, Would I be
pleased to be so dealt with by another? Or, if I might have my own Choice,
would I not desire to be otherwise used by other Men? Why then should I mete
that Measure which I cannot endure to receive again? This would be the way to
free the World from that great Burden of Cruelty and Oppression that it groans
under. There would not be so many Complaints of Men's hard Usage of one another;
of their Unmercifulness, and those frequent Instances of Rapine and Extortion.
Moreover every Man does not only wish and desire his own Good, but this desire
is sincere, and accompanied with real Endeavors. What a Man does for himself,
he does it with a real intent to do himself good; and with the same Measure
ought all others to be Treated. Let Love be without Dissimulation, says St.
Paul, Romans 12.9. Every Man loves himself sincerely, and desires that all others
should do so too; which by way of Justice engages us all to unfeigned Kindness
without Hypocrisy. Those that the Apostle mentions in James 2.16. that would
give good Words to the Poor and Indigent, and bid them depart in Peace, and be
Warmed and Filled, but never gave them any thing whereby they should be so;
they would not have been served so themselves: They would have said, that Good
Words could not Fill a Hungry Belly, nor Cloth a Naked Back, nor Warm Chill and
Benumbed Limbs. Therefore he is Unjust that uses those very Courses he
Complains against.

3. Every Man desires that God would Pardon all the Offenses done against him;
and if so, then our Savior's Rule of Justice must take place in reference to
others. For if we desire that God would remit the Trespasses done against him,
it were Injustice in us to Treasure up the Wrongs of others against us in order
to a Retaliation and Revenge. Nay our Blessed Lord is so express in this Duty,
that he makes it a part of our Prayers to be forgiven no otherwise than we
forgive others. This would make the World better indeed, if all Men were
Convinced they ought to walk thus; and if upon this Conviction they would
sincerely endeavor to manage the Course of their Lives accordingly; there
would not be so much Hatred and Malice, and Revenge and Bitterness, in the
World as there is: But Men's rough and uneven Tempers would be changed and
wrought into Mildness and Kindness, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven them.

4. Every Good Man would have God supply all his Wants and Necessities, and
therefore in Justice we ought to do the same to others. We that must Ask even
our Daily Bread at the Bountiful Hands of God, must remember that there is a
piece of Justice due to others: Whether it be to supply the Bodily Wants and
Necessities of any one; or whether it be to Comfort a troubled Spirit, and
Cheer up a drooping Soul; or whether it be to defend the Cause of such as are
injuriously Wronged and Oppressed. All these are parts of Justice that we owe
to others, forasmuch as we would have them deal in that fair manner with us.
With what Measure ye mete, it shall be Measured to you, said our Savior, i. e.
you cannot but expect that God and Man should deal with you as you deal with
others.

You see now by these particular Instances, (which are all included in that
general Precept before mentioned of our Blessed Lord,) how Comprehensive this
Virtue of Justice is. And I have the rather made choice of them for their
plainness-sake, and the general Influence they have upon all the Actions of our
Lives, and also because Justice seems to bear a part, and to be interwoven into
the Frame and Nature of all other Virtues, and from the distinct Consideration
of other particular Virtues, the several Offices of Justice may be taken. For
as Justice respects God, it is Piety, as it relates to Men, it may be termed
Probity; and because Mercy, and Kindness, and Goodnature, are due to their
respective Objects, so far forth they are comprehended under Justice, and
involved in that Golden Rule given by Christ.

It remains now that we briefly prosecute such Inferences as may naturally flow
from the Apostles Exhortation to such things as are Just.

1. This Teaches us that Just and Right, are not Arbitrarious and Factitious
things, and Changeable by Will and Pleasure. They are not things that are
merely made so by Law, for then it would be in the Power of Men to turn the
greatest Villainies into the most Consummate Virtues, and Consecrate Wickedness
by the Sanction of a Law. Indeed Plato as he is Cited by that Excellently
Learned Person Dr. Cudworth, represents the Old Atheistick Hypothesis something
after this manner, Intellectual System, l. 1. c. 5. p. 892.
That every Man has an infinite Right to all things, and that whatever his
Sensual Appetite desires, (though it be the Murder of another Person,) he has a
Right to do it, yet because it is impossible that all Men should have Dominion,
and every Man having a Natural Right, or Jus ad omnia, it so came to pass, that
after Men had been a good while Cutting and Slashing, and Justling against one
another, (the State of Nature being a State of War against all,) they became at
length weary hereof, and therefore compounding the business amongst themselves,
they agreed together by Pacts and Covenants, neither to do nor suffer Injury,
but to submit to Rules of Equality, and make Laws by Compact, in order to their
Peaceable Cohabitation, they calling that which was required in those Laws by
the Name of Just. Here we have the Sum of the Atheistick Ethics, whose
Foundation is laid (as the forecited Author observes,) in the Villanizing of
Humane Nature, as that which has not the least Seeds of Equity and
Philanthropy, Charity or Benevolence, but what arises from mere Fear,
Imbecility and Indigency. No Care and Concern for Public and Common Good, but
tends directly to the destruction of all Society. For if there be nothing (...)
but only (...) Just, that is, If there be no such thing as Just and Right
Naturally and Antecedently to all Will and Power, but that it wholly arise and
flow from Positive Determination, then it will not be Unjust for any Man to
break and rescind those very Compacts and Agreements which he himself has
made, as often as he has Opportunity and Power so to do. Which must effectually
destroy all Society, and leave all Men in a State of War one with another, the
Greater and more Powerful, like Brutes, Eternally preying upon and devouring
the Weaker. But that there is such a thing as Just and Right by Nature, is
pertinently observed by that great Poilosopher Dr. More, in his useful Treatise
of Ethics, lib. 2. c. 6.
where upon Andronicus Rhodius his Definition of Equity, That it is that by
which the Defect and Error of the Law is supplied and corrected: He adds, If
there be nothing Just but by virtue of some Written Law, what need is there of
Emendation of the Law, since the Law it self, be it what it will, makes any
thing Just? But it is the Property of Equity to Correct the very Law, and to
appoint such things upon Emergent Circumstances, which (if he could have
foreseen them) the Legislator himself would have Constituted and Appointed;
which yet were very Ridiculous, if the Nature of Just and Unjust depend wholly
upon the Arbitrament and Pleasure of the Legislator, and not upon the Nature
and Circumstances of things themselves. Wherefore we are to conceive of Just
and Right as things Essentially inherent in God, who is that Eternal and Living
Law from whence all Justice and Equity flows. And he has Engraven these
Principles in Humane Souls; so that if there had never been any Positive Laws
made, yet there would have been such a Nature as Just and Right, which was so
Yesterday, to Day, and will be for Ever, Eternally Independent upon all Will
whatever.

2. We are informed that all Men in the World have a Right to Justice, and
though they be never so Wicked, they ought not to be Injured or Wronged. For
Just and Right being Eternal and Unchangeable things, that can never alter, or
be otherwise than they are; the outward Circumstances of Men ought to make no
alteration in them. Though a Man therefore be never so Wicked he must not be
Defrauded, or Injured, or Oppressed; because he has a Right by God's Order and
Decree to the things of this World, and consequently cannot without Injustice
be despoiled of his Propriety. Contrary to the Fancy of some, who think none
but Saints have any true Right to Earthly Possessions and Enjoyments; whereas
certainly their Claim is the least, their Holy Lord himself saying, That his
Kingdom was not of this World. Christ's Religion does not Justify an
Unrighteous Action, though done to a Wicked Man.

3. It Teaches us that there is no Sin so Black and Heinous as that of
Injustice. For as Justice in some sense comprehends all other Virtues under it;
so all Sins have some tincture of Injustice in them. For there is a Right that
is due to God, another to our Neighbor, and a Third to our selves; and to
violate and break any of these is a piece of Injustice. But besides this, the
Heinousness of Injustice appears in this, in that it is the most destructive of
Societies: It is that which is a manifest Nuisance against the well Being of the
World, and that which turns the Earth into a desolate Wilderness to be
Inhabited only by Wild Beasts. Therefore this Sin being so contrary to the
Nature of Man as he is a Sociable Creature, and so opposite to God's Providence
and Government of the World, hence it is that there is no Sin so severely taken
notice of as this of Injustice. For the Great Lord and Father of all having
Ranked all Beings that are capable of Moral Good and Evil, under their
distinctive Families, and formed them into several Societies and Corporations,
whatever in their respective Precincts deviates from the Rules of Just and
Right, must have a more severe Inquiry than any other Fault, forasmuch as it
more or less tends to the overthrow or subversion of Society.

4. It Teaches us in all our Actions to follow that which is Just. Which if
every Man would carefully endeavor to do, the World would soon be turned into
a perfect Heaven, and become once more the Habitation of Righteousness. And why
should not Men endeavor to bring on such a Spirit of Benignity and
Righteousness, which may put an end to all Rapine, Cruelty and Oppression? That
may take off their Minds from the World, which is commonly the Cause and Root
of Injustice? He that follows that which is Right and Just, will certainly find
the Advantage of it. He shall have Peace of Conscience here, and the great
Reward of Blessedness hereafter.

(...). Whatsoever things are pure.
The Apostle comes now to urge the following and practicing such things as are
pure: The Old Translation renders it Sancta, as supposing it to have been Read
(...), Whatsoever things are holy. Now the Universal Christian or Divine Life
being expressed frequently by this general Term of [Holiness,] of which Purity
is an Essential Branch, it may very well be supposed to be comprehended under
it: And we have no reason to depart from the common and more restrained
Expression, Whatsoever things are pure. Moreover Sanctum is no other than
Separatum, (as Grotius observes,) a thing that is separated and set apart from
common and impure Uses, and Consecrated to the Service of God. And thus
Sanctity is opposed in Scripture to Filthiness or Pollution. Hence it is that
the Righteousness of the Saints is compared to [ Fine Linen, Clean and White;
for the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints, Revel. 19.8.] in opposition
to the Impurities of Sin and Vice, which are denoted by [Filthy Garments,]
Zech. 3.4. where Joshua being Clothed with Filthy Garments, the Angel says,
Take away the Filthy Garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have
caused thine Iniquity to pass from thee, and I will Cloth thee with change of
Raiment.

The Purity then that St. Paul exhorts us here to, is no other than an
Essential Part and Branch of the Divine Life, whereby we have so perfect and
full a Command over all our Sensual Appetites, and all the Delights and
Allurements of Flesh and Blood, that they may not in the least hinder our Union
and Conjunction with God, nor by gross and material Steams and Suffusions
intercept our sight of that Eternal Pulchritude of the Divine Nature, to which
we ought always to have an Eye, and direct all our Actions.

Hence the Platonists speak so much of their (...) Purgative Virtues, whereby
they cleared the Mind from all those irregular Motions that were raised from
the Objects of Sense, or sprung from Corporeal Imagination. And indeed the
whole Scope and Design of their Philosophy was (...), a Meditation of Death, a
Dying to our Earthly Passions, Appetites and Desires, and a weaning the Soul
from an inordinate Love of the Flesh, and a through Purgation from all Carnal
and Sensual Lusts, that they might behold (...), with a pure Mind the unspotted
and incorrupted Deity.

But whatever they aimed at is more clearly and fully made known to us in the
Holy Scriptures, wherein we are commanded to Mortify our Members which are
upon the Earth, Coloss. 3.5. i. e. our Earthly Lusts and Affections, which
spring from too near a Communication and Adhesion to these our Terrestrial
Bodies, such as Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, Evil
Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry. And to encourage them to
this so indispensible a Duty, the Apostle uses these two Arguments; the first
is in Verse 6. For which things sake, the Wrath of God comes on the Children
of Disobedience, i. e. upon those who would not be persuaded nor wrought upon
by the Motives and Arguments of the Gospel to Change and Reform their Lives.
The other Argument is taken from the Profession they had engaged themselves in,
Verse 8. But now, you also put off all these, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy,
Filthy Communication out of your Mouth, q. d. You that now have given up your
Names to Christ, and make Profession of his Religion, cannot but know that
Christianity gives no Allowance to any of these Impurities and Pollutions, but
calls Men to an Imitation of God who is the highest Purity. Wherefore there is
an Indispensible Obligation lying upon all Christians to put off and lay aside
all such Corrupt Lusts and Affections. And again, Romans 13.12. The Night is far
spent, the Day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the Works of Darkness, and
let us put on the Armor of Light. Let us walk honestly as in the Day, not in
Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and
Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof. By the Day is meant the Time of the Gospel
or Christianity appearing to the World: And by the Night is understood that
State and Condition of Sin and Vice, wherein the World lay before the appearing
of this Great Light. Now as the Light is a pure and bright Substance, and the
Gospel which we profess, such wherein is no Darkness at all, so it behooves us
to Assimilate our selves to it in Works of Purity and Sanctity, and to have no
more to do with any of the Deeds of Sin and Vice, which befit only the Spirits
of Night and Darkness. And for our Encouragement herein, we ought,

1. To set before our Eyes that sublime Copy and Example of Purity and Holiness
which is set forth in the Life of our Blessed Savior: Who, though he were
subject to all the harmless Passions and Infirmities of Mortality, (being made
like unto his Brethren in all things, Sin only excepted,) yet kept both his
Body and Soul as a Pure Habitation of Righteousness and Temple Consecrated
wholly unto God; into which he never suffered any thing that was defiled and
polluted at any time to enter. Though he Conversed with all sorts of Persons,
and his Behavior was free and open, yet he tasted as little of Bodily Delights
and Pleasures as ever did any Man in the World. Yea even where they were
allowable, he carefully abstained from them, to teach us Self-denial and
Mortification, and to show us, that though we live in the Body, and have an
intimate Union with it, yet we may keep it under Subjection, and so regulate
all its Motions and Affections, that our whole Man may be a fit Receptacle and
Habitation for God to take up his Abode in. Therefore foreseeing the danger how
easily Men are betrayed by the secret Whispers and charming Insinuations of
these Earthly Bodies to which they are united, like a Faithful Friend he
Admonishes them, in Luke 21.34. To take heed (...) lest at any time their
hearts be overcharged, i. e. burdened and pressed down with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, and the Cares of this Life, which like a heavy weight under which
they are not able to stir, keep and detain them from lifting up their Souls to
God. For, the Souls of Men though they are confined to Bodies of Earth, and so
at the present Inhabitants of this Corruptible World, yet are made with such
Capacities as to live with God in Heaven: but by a too free indulging to their
Bodies and Corporeal Affections, they are fatally tied and chained down to the
Earth; and though they may now and then make some little Efforts and faint
Attempts to ascend to those higher Regions, yet it will be utterly impossible
till they are perfectly disentangled and disengaged from the pleasures and
delights of Sense. And lest this Faithful Admonition of our Lord and Savior
should not be sufficient to keep us at a distance from the ensnaring
Inescations of Flesh and Blood, he assures us, Matthew. 5.8. That it is only the
pure in Heart that shall see God. The Philosophers tell us, that all like is
known by its like, and if there were not something that were Congenerous and
Analogous to Light in the Eye, the whole World would be to us in a state of
Darkness: In like manner, unless the Soul be purified and cleansed from all
dark and bodily Affections, and become in some measure enlightened whereby it
may resemble God, it is impossible it should ever see him. Therefore our
Blessed Savior giving us so illustrious an Example of all Purity, Temperance
and Chastity, and so earnestly recommending the same to all his Followers, not
only shows us the Absolute Necessity of the Mortification of our Bodily Lusts
and Corruptions, but also the Possibility of attaining to such a state wherein
all the Motions of the Body may be brought into a due subordination to our more
Divine Powers.

2. We are to consider that this Purity is indispensibly necessary for the
attaining Divine Wisdom and Knowledge. There is nothing so much darkens our
Understandings, clouds our Judgments, and besots all the Rational Faculties of
our Souls, as the bathing and sinking our selves into Bodily Delights and
Pleasures. For as the Corrupt Life of the Body grows and increases, so
proportionably the Divine and Heavenly Life dies and is extinguished, and we
lose all sense, and relish, and taste of Heavenly things. And it is impossible
it should be otherwise, for (as John the Baptist said, John 3.31.) He that is
of the Earth, is Earthly, and speaks of the Earth. And while the Earthly
Principle is only alive in us, it will Act according to its Nature, and we are
ruled and guided by its Motions and Inspirations: And we know that this [(...)]
Natural Man, Receives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. There
is a Divine quickness and sagacity that springs up in a purified Soul, whereby
it readily apprehends, and has a Vital Sense of Heavenly and Divine Things,
which they that are sunk and lost in Bodily Lusts and Passions are perfect
strangers to. And not only Philosophy but Christianity tells us of Two distinct
Principles in Man, which St. Paul calls by the Name of the inner and outer Man:
And these Two have their different Motions, Tendencies and Designs. The outer
Man is the Inheritance we derive from Adam, which he elsewhere, Romans 6.6.
styles, [the old Man,] which is to be Crucified with Christ, That the Body of
Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin. Now this outer
Man, or old Adam, is only the Corrupt Life of the Body, which leads to all
manner of Impurity and Vice, and is to be Mortified and Destroyed. But the
inner Man is (...), (as Plotinus calls it,) the true Man, whose very Form and
Nature consists in pure and unspotted Righteousness and Holiness; it is the
Image of the Lord from Heaven; and as is the Heavenly Adam, such are they that
are Heavenly. Now each of these Two Principles of Life is very diligent and
industrious to Diffuse and Propogate it self; and therefore is never wanting to
offer all fit and insinuating Arguments to promote its own Interest.

Hence the Apostle St. James, Chap. 3.15. tells us of a Wisdom, that is,
Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish: Now this Wisdom is the Genuine Production, and
true Offspring of the Bodily Life: it is the Thoughts and Projects of the Old
Adam, and is said to be Earthly, because all its Designs and Purposes are laid
out and contrived merely for this Earth and World wherein we live. And it is
Sensual, because it studies only for the Gratification of Sense and the Animal
or Brutish Life: And Devilish, being such as only upholds the Devil's Kingdom,
and promotes his Reign and Empire throughout the World. But then he says, Verse
17. that there is (...) a Wisdom that descends from above, from the Father of
Lights; and as it derives from Heaven, so it is still endeavoring to attract
and lift up the Soul thitherward. This is that Wisdom which is communicated to
the Soul from the Spirit of Christ, and being it self so Pure and Holy, will
not dwell in a Body that is Polluted with all Carnal Excesses and Defilements.
And if we should look upon the Effects of Sensuality and Debauchery, as they
are Daily visible before our Eyes, we shall find that nothing does more Corrupt
and Spoil our Rational Powers. There are none that spend their whole Time in
Gratifying their Carnal Lusts, but their Understandings grow Dull and Heavy,
and lose their Briskness and Liveliness; their Memories are Treacherous and
Decayed; and their Fancies and Imaginations serve only as a Stage to Represent
and Act over again their past Filthiness and Pollutions.

3. Without this Purity of Flesh and Spirit, there is no Union of our Souls
with God. Union and Communion with God are the greatest Blessings the Soul of
Man can partake of: But none can think that God will dwell in a Charnel-house,
or take up his Habitation among Dead Bones. And those that are given up to
Bodily Pleasures, and drown themselves in Sensual Delights, in St. Paul's sense
are no better than Dead, even while they Live an Earthly Life, 1 Timothy 5.6. We
Read indeed of Spirits conversing among the Tombs, but God will have no Society
with the Dead: It is the Living alone that praise him, and declare his Truth.
There can be no Intercourse nor Communion between God and such a Man's Soul
that has no Life stirring in it, but what is the very Life and Nature of the
Spirits of Darkness, who are the most of all alienated and estranged from him.
He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.17.
that is, there is such an entire Consent and Agreement between such an One and
God, that he wills nothing and desires nothing but what God wills and desires.
But there is is no Harmony, Consent, or Concord, between God and that Person
that is joined and tied to his Bodily Lusts and Corrupt Affections. The pure
Virgin-Chastity of the Soul is Violated and Defiled by Prostituting it to the
Foul Embraces of Corporeal Pleasures; so that it is a kind of Spiritual
Fornication or Adultery.

Now to the intent we may all endeavor to attain this Purity that God
requires, and which it is our Interest to pursue, let us

1. Abstract our Souls as much as we can from Sense and Sensible Delights and
Pleasures. Even a Heathen could say, Simpl. in Epictet, p. 257. and 78.
(...), that is, That there is nothing more Destructive and Pernicious to the
Soul, than to give it self up to Bodily Pleasures; because they do as it were
nail and bind it fast to the Earth, that it has no might nor strength to lift
up it self toward Heaven. Therefore our Blessed Savior requiring us to pluck
out the Right Eye, and cut off the Right Hand, would have us do Violence to the
Unruly Affections of the Body, and bring them low, and abate their Power by
such a due Moderation, that they may never betray us to Act against Reason and
Conscience. If we would endeavor to set a little loose from our Bodies, and
withdraw our Hearts from Sensual Pleasures, and deny the Cravings of our Carnal
Appetites, we should not only find a mighty Peace and Satisfaction within our
own Breasts, but be more fitted to Converse with the God of Purity.

2. Let us frequently represent to our selves that pure state of Angels in the
upper Regions; and that such a state cannot consist with Carnal Impurities.

Heaven is no Mahumetan Paradise, filled with Carnal and Sensual, but Divine
and Intellectual Joys and Pleasures. The time will quickly come when we shall
be stripped of these Earthly Bodies, which we now so fondly Dote upon, and Caress
and Pamper to the fulfilling all their Impure Lusts. And therefore it were our
Wisdom to separate and disjoin our Minds from their too near Intimacy and
Familiarity with them; and to dwell often and much in our Thoughts upon that
Future State in which all these Corporeal Pleasures will be at an end. Then we
should not be so unwilling and uneasy to leave our Bodies, but should put them
off with a full Assurance, that we should not be left Naked, but Clothed upon
with our House from Heaven.

3. Consider how infinitely Bodily Lusts and Affections debase our Souls, and
render them Brutish. Every Christians Body is or ought to be God's Temple,
wherein he dwells and makes his Residence; and it is a great Abuse and
Profanation of this his Temple to make it a place for nothing but Carnal
Debaucheries and Pollutions, and in our Savior's Language, Turning it into a
Den of Thieves, and which is all one, a Receptacle for those Unclean Spirits
which solicit Men to all Impurities. Therefore let every Man reflect with
himself, that he has a Soul that was made in the Image of God, and that Christ
came into the World to renew in it his Holy and Pure Image; and therefore that
he ought not to turn himself into a Beast by Drunkenness, Debauchery, and
Lasciviousness. For how unreasonable a thing is it, that any Man should thus
fall from the Excellency of his Nature, which is fitted to Converse with God,
by Associating himself only with his Brutish part! that he should so far
derogate from his Native Glory, that whereas he was first made in Honor, he
should be only now fit to be compared with the Beasts that perish!

4. Lastly, Consider that this is the Field of Virtue, and herein lies true
Fortitude and Courage in overcoming all the Deceitful Allurements and
Inescations of Flesh and Blood. This is the Province which God has given every
Man to undertake, and wherein he who is the first and the last, (if we be not
Faithless and Hypocritical,) will undoubtedly give us a complete Victory and
Conquest. Here lies the Gallantry of a Noble Mind, which scorns to be enfeebled
with Flesh and Blood, but soars aloft, and is impatient till it attain its
Crown of Glory. For certainly it is the inordinacy of our Corporeal Affections
that Effeminates our Spirits, and makes them so nice and tender as not to
endure or undergo any thing for the sake of God and Virtue.

(...). Whatsoever things are lovely.
After the Apostle's Exhortation to things pure, he proceeds to things that are
lovely. For unless our Minds are first purified from all Earthly and Sensual
Drugs, we are in no fit disposition to discern Intellectual Loveliness and
Beauty.

Whatsoever things are lovely, that is, Attractive and Desirable; such as carry
an inward Beauty in them, and are suited and accommodated to win Favor and
Friendship, and by their obliging Sweetness bind as it were the Minds of others
to us. For, as there is an Inward and Natural Deformity in all Vicious Actions,
so there is a Natural Pulchritude in those that are Virtuous: Which Beauty and
Loveliness wherever it may be scattered, and in whatever subject it may reside,
is only a Ray or Emanation from God who is the Original Fountain of all
Pulchritude and Beauty. Now the Great Difficulty here will be in discerning
what things are Lovely and Desirable, and what are not: For though there be
never so many Amiable and Desirable Objects in the World, yet unless we have
some Criterium, something into which they may be resolved, and which is able to
distinguish them from others, and to discern True from False and Adulterate
Beauties, it will signify little to us.

To this Purpose therefore we ought to know, that there is an Intellectual
Beauty and Loveliness, as well as that which is External and Corporeal. Hence
Plato that Contemplative and Thinking Philosopher, speaks of a twofold Venus,
the one is (...), a Celestial Venus, which is nothing but the fair Pulchritude
of the Divine Nature it self, which though it dwell in those upper Regions, yet
has made very visible Impressions of it self upon the whole Creation; and has
contracted and closely sealed that Beauty which lies dispersed and diffused in
all Parts of the Universe, upon all the Orders of Intellectual Beings. The
other is (...), a kind of Common and Harlotry Venus, which deriving only from
the Body, and a branch of the Animal Life, draws down the Soul to what is
merely Corporeal, and mingling with it, defiles and pollutes it.

Now when St. Paul Exhorts here to things that are lovely, he does not mean
what is Grateful and Acceptable to this Earthly Love, but that which is
agreeable and symmetral, (as I may so speak,) with Divine and Heavenly Love. So
that things are to be accounted so far Lovely, as they more or less partake of
and resemble that Uncreated and Eternal Pulchritude above. And whatever things
may exalt the Soul to a Participation of this Primitive and Original Beauty,
the practice of them is called by St. Peter, 1 Epist. 3.4. The Adorning of the
hidden Man of the Heart, whose incorruptible Glory and Excellency is seen and
discovered in a meek and calm Spirit. And surely nothing in the World can be
more Beautiful and Lovely than that which has the most exact Symmetry and
Conformity with that Archetypal Copy of Divine Loveliness and Beauty. Which was
never made so visible to Mortal Eyes, as it was in our Blessed Lord and
Savior, who being the express Image and Character of his Fathers Person, came
on purpose to restore in Men that Beautiful resemblance of the Great Author of
their Being, which their Tumultuous and Disorderly Affections had Obliterated
and Defaced.

It is said of Christ and his Apostles, that they increased in favor with God
and Men: Of our Savior we have it in Luke 2.52. that he increased in favor
with God and Man. And of his Apostles it is written, Acts 2.47. Praising God,
and having favor with all the People. Now surely the great things that
purchased them this favor, was in general, the doing and practicing all such
things as were Lovely in the Eyes of all Virtuous Men. For what else could make
our Savior and his Apostles appear such excellent Persons in the World, but
only the doing of all grateful and obliging things? They left great Obligations
upon all Men.

There are Two things considerable in the Person of our Savior which will
excellently well instruct us in what things are lovely. For he is certainly the
best Pattern we can imitate; and by beholding the fair Character and
irreprehensible Example of his Holy Life, we may learn in all general respects
how to lead our own.

1. The Obligingness of his Carriage and Deportment.

2. The Innocence of his Life and Actions. As for the first of these; Our Holy
Lord was of the sweetest Nature and Temper that ever was in the World. We
usually account it matter of Praise to a Person, that he is of a Fair and
Obliging Temper: Behold then a Description of the best Nature that ever was
Clothed in Flesh and Blood. Our blessed Master, (whose steps all Men are bound
to follow,) was no Proud or Morose Person, Slighting, Undervaluing and
Contemning others; but so Humble and Meek, that he disdained not the Company of
the meanest and lowest upon Earth to do them Good. Insomuch as this free and
excellent Temper of his drew upon him the Envy and Hatred of the Supercilious
and Censorious Pharisees, Luke 15.2. they upbraid him, That he received Sinners
and Eat with them; and he defends himself, That he came to call Sinners to
Repentance. He did not think it below him to do good to the worst of Men. For
he knew himself sent, and his Compassions extended to the Salvation of the
Souls of the Meanest as well as the Greatest Persons: Being very sensible that
God his Father, looked not upon Men as they were high or low in the World, but
designed equally the Salvation of them all. We read in Matthew. 8.2. that there
came a Leper to Christ: If he had come to the Pharisees, they would have bidden
him stand off, because he was Unclean; though they never considered the
Uncleanness of their own Hearts, which made them appear as Deformed and
Polluted in God's Eyes, as possibly the Leper could be in theirs: But Jesus put
forth his Hand and touched him. He was as willing to Heal him, as the poor
Leper was to be Cleansed.

Search but into the Gospel, and you shall see such Rays and Beams of
Loveliness flow from our Savior as cannot but possess your Souls with
something of that Mild and Amiable Glory. He was Courteous and Affable to all,
and easy to be entreated to any Good Office that lay in his way. In Matthew.
15.32. it is said, That when the Multitude had been long with him, and had
nothing to Eat, Jesus had Compassion on them. They were in a Wilderness, a
place very unfit to procure Food; and they had a great way to go, and without
some Relief might have fainted by the way. It is true, it was Christ's chief
Business to distribute the Bread of Life to their Languishing Souls; but he
considered likewise the Infirmities of Humane Nature, and was willing to
sustain their Bodies likewise: From whence we see, that our Savior had rather
work a Miracle, than not be helpful to the Infirmities of Mankind. Nay where
there was no absolute Necessity, but only a matter of Courtesy and Good
Nature, yet our Lord was willing to show it; As when he turned Water into Wine
at the Marriage in Canaa of Galilee. All these Actions made his Soul appear
with as clear and serene Loveliness, as his outward Visage when his Face was
Glorious as the Sun in the Day of his Transfiguration.

But the greatest Sign of a good and excellent Nature was, his readiness to
pass by Affronts and Disgraces without the least show of Anger or Impatiency.
In John 11.8. we read, that though the People a little before were ready to
stone him, yet he goes again to teach and instruct them; as if he had clean
forgotten the Wrong they intended against him. Yea, when that Execrable Traitor
came by a Treacherous Kiss to betray him into the Hands of his implacable
Enemies; though he had in the most shameful manner Violated all the Ties of
Friendship, (being one of them that familiarly Eat of his Bread,) yet he gives
him no harsher Language than that of Friend. And when he was Mocked and set at
Naught by Herod's Men of War, he never uttered an Impatient Word, nor was ever
heard to Revile those that Reviled him. Nor was he ever moved with Anger
against any, unless it were for their obstinate Unbelief. How Amiable and
Lovely was the Person of our Lord and Savior! How Divine and Godlike was his
Carriage! The Foundation of all true Friendship lies in Virtue, and here we may
see Virtue in her most Exalted Luster; all those winning Graces which may
Conciliate Friendship, Benevolence and Kindness. There was nothing that can
possibly render any Man Grateful and Acceptable to others, but it was found in
him.

He always went about doing Good, and like the Sun shedding a Salutary
Influence even upon the Unthankful and Evil. If he met with any that were
troubled with Bodily Pains, and desirous of his Help, he gave them Ease; if in
Doubts and Perplexities, he Resolved them; showing to the World that he came to
bring Health and Happiness both to Soul and Body. As for those black and
ill-favored Passions of Malice and Revenge, they never had any place in his
Heart, which was constantly inflamed with Love, whereby he forgot and forgave
the Injuries he received. When the Samaritans rejected him, and would give him
no Entertainment, his Apostles in their thoughts had already devoted them to
Destruction, and want only their Master's Permission to call for Fire from
Heaven to Consume them, Luke 9.54. But Jesus was of a better and milder Temper,
and tells them, That his Business was not to destroy Life, but to save it.

Think with your selves now; Was there ever a more Courteous and Obliging
Nature in the World than that of Christ Jesus? Was the Divinity it self with
all its inconceivable Beauty and Glory ever more Conspicuously manifested to
Flesh and Blood, than in the Person of our Blessed Lord? These things were
Lovely in him, and the Practice of them made him win the Respect and Favor of
all Virtuous Persons wherever he came. And doubtless, the Apostle when he bids
us mind things that are Lovely, means all these Acts of Love and Benevolence
and Philanthropy which we have seen in Christ Jesus.

2. The Innocence of our Savior's Life and Actions. As his Converse was
Obliging, and his Deportment exceeding Courteous, so his Life was Innocent, and
never Blemished with any Sin. All his Actions were squared by the most exact
Rules and Measures of Virtue. For his most implacable Enemies could never Tax
him with any Spot in his Life, or with any Unrighteous Deed during his whole
Abode upon Earth. He was indeed the most useful Person that ever Lived in the
World. For though a Man have never so excellent a Spirit, yet if this be wholly
shut up within himself, it falls short of our Savior's Pattern. And if
Self-interest and Self-design be the Motive of Acting, whatever proceeds
thence, loses all its Beauty and Loveliness. But the Purity of our Savior's
Soul, and the Exaltedness of that Divine Life that was in him, made him
Sagacious, and of a quick Perception between things that were really Lovely,
and such as were Ugly and Deformed. And these Two things rendered our Blessed
Lord the most Exact and Complete Pattern of a Lovely and Excellent Nature that
ever appeared upon the Stage of the Earth. Now though we have given a General
Delineation of what is Lovely, from the Life of our Blessed Savior, yet
perhaps it may be more easily apprehended if we reduce these General
Observations into some more Particular and Distinct Heads. He therefore that
would do things that are really Lovely, and come up as near to the Similitude
of the Life of our Holy Lord and Master as he can, must Breath nothing but Love
and Good Will to the World: And

1. He must be of easy Access, and ready without any Contempt or Disdain of
any Man's Person to afford his Assistance as far as he is able, to the Meanest
both in Word and Deed, according as he shall find their Necessities require:
Cheerfully affording Counsel to the Afflicted, and binding up the
Brokenhearted, and without any Bitterness or Reproach, or Base and Shameful
Flattery, making his Converse with others Sweet and Delightful.

2. He that would do things Lovely, must take care even in the Reprehensions
and Rebukes of others for what is Amiss, that it be done with so much Candor,
and Passionate Sweetness, that those whose Sins are Reproved, may clearly see,
it is their Good, and Benefit, and Advantage, that is only aimed at. For
otherwise Men's Minds may rather be Exasperated than Healed, when Truth it self
in such a Case is delivered with too great a Sharpness and Harshness. Men do
not usually care to hear of their Faults; but when they shall be laid open and
discovered with Bitterness, Contempt and Scorn, it is so far from casting an
healing Influence upon their Souls, that it provokes and inflames their Minds.

3. He that would exactly follow that which is Lovely, must provide that in
doing Kindnesses, he do not Upbraid and Shame them upon whom he intends to
confer them. There are many Persons of that tender and modest Disposition, who
blush and are ashamed either to ask or to receive those Kindnesses which really
they want. And then, the doing things Lovely obliges a Man so to assist them in
whatever it be, as may least of all make them Ashamed.

Now by what has been said from General Observations drawn from the Life of our
Savior, and by these few Particulars, we may competently enough understand
what the Apostle means by Exhorting us to the Practice of Whatsoever things are
Lovely.

(...). Whatsoever things are of good Report.
The last instance of Virtue the Apostle makes use of, is to persuade us to the
practice of such things as are of good Report: By which we are taught to think
of and do all such things as may purchase us a Good Name, and Esteem, and
Reputation, among such as are Virtuous, and understand the differences of
things. Now from hence we are informed,

1. That all things are not indifferent and alike. There is a Natural Bravery,
Excellency and Becomingness, in some Actions, and there is a Baseness and
Filthiness in others, whether we will or not. For the Difference and
Distinction of things does not depend upon our Wills; nor can we change their
Natures as we please. Indeed to the Atheist and to such as do not believe the
Existence of any Spiritual Being, but resolve all things into Dead and
Senseless Matter, there is no Distinction or Difference of things, but only
what Men are pleased to make; and then as often as Wicked Men get into Power,
they may make things Vicious in themselves to be called by the Name of Virtues.
But since there is a God, (and none but Fools can think otherwise,) we are
assured that all Virtue derives from him, and is a participation of his Image
and Nature, and Consequently that there is an Essential Difference in the
Nature of things. And God has Copied out and Engraven this his Image upon the
Souls of Men, whereby all Men that have a due use of their Faculties, have
likewise the differences of Good and Evil deeply Sealed upon their Minds, and
they cannot change them at their Pleasure.

Hence it comes to pass that such Actions as are Conformable and Agreeable to
those Intellectual Laws and Principles which God has fixed in our Minds, they
are Virtuous and Praiseworthy; and such as are otherwise, they are Detestable
and Vile, and have an inward Turpitude sticking fast to them. And since all Men
have the Laws of Virtue written on their Hearts, and are sensible that they
ought to walk according to these, there will Naturally arise an Esteem for
those Persons who walk the nearest according to these Rules. And this which we
call Esteem or Fame, and a Good Name or Report, is indeed a part of the Reward
of Virtue; when Men are Applauded and Praised, when they fulfill the end of
their Creation, and Act like Rational Creatures according to those Laws and
Prescriptions the Eternal Mind has interwoven in the Essential Frame and
Contexture of their Souls.

True it is, Fame and Reputation is a thing that is mightily sought after, even
by those that are no great Admirers of the strictness of Virtue; and there is
in all Men a secret Desire and Tendency toward the Embalming and Consecrating
their Names to after Ages. Of which no other Reason can be given, but that
there are some secret Convictions and Natural Presages of a State of
Immortality after this Life, in all Men's Minds. There is something that
whispers to them, and mixes it self with all their Thoughts and Actions, that
they have something in them that shall survive their Ashes, and Live and Act
when their Bodies are Dead and Rotten in the Grave. And from hence they
Naturally Affect and Desire a Continuation of themselves, and a kind of
Immortality in this Life. And this sets them upon those various Ways and
Methods of the Purchase and Acquisition of it; some by Valor and Heroic
Actions, others by Honor, and some by the increase of their Posterity: Which
evidently shows the Desires and Inclinations of all Men to continue and live
for ever upon Earth, at least in their Fame, and Names, and Memory, although
they are withdrawn from it as to their Personal Beings. Thus we Read, Psalm.
49.11. of some whose inward thought was, That their Houses should continue for
ever, and they call their Lands after their own Names, i. e. Many Men seeing
that themselves are Mortal, and quickly Die, yet desire to perpetuate their
Names, and that their Memory should Live after them: Whereas this only shows,
that there is implanted in Men Naturally a Sense, that there are things of good
Report, which will procure Fame, and Esteem, and a Good Name, while they Live
here, and continue it when they are gone from hence: But they mistook in the
Ways and Means of Attaining it.

But now true Religion assures us, that it is only the sincere Practice of
Virtue that will advance a Good Name, and purchase Esteem here, and continue it
after Death; according to that of the Scripture, The Righteous shall be had in
Everlasting Remembrance. It is true, many a Wicked Man's Name is Remembered, but
then it is to his Infamy and Disgrace. Therefore it is said, Prove. 10.7. The
Name of the Wicked shall Rot, i. e. it shall be as Offensive and Unpleasant as
a Dead and Rotten Carcass. We Read of a Covetous and Treacherous Judas who sold
his Master, but we Detest and Abhor his Memory: And of a Cruel and Bloody
Herod, but with almost as keen a Passion as those sorrowful Mothers felt at the
Death of their little Infants. Thus every Wicked Man, if he be at all
Remembered, it is with some Infamous Character and Note of Disgrace; as that he
was a Profane, and Debauched, or a Lascivious, Covetous, or Unjust Person; and
it were better that our Names Perish for Ever, and we descend into a Common and
Ignoble Grave, than to be thus Remembered.

2. We are informed, that the proper Judges of things of good Report, are
Virtuous and Wise Persons. Among all those things that are Valuable with Men,
there is none, (or at least ought not to be any,) of so high an Esteem as true
Virtue; which being the Image of God Communicated unto Man, it follows, that
things are only so far of good Report as they are Virtuous. And hence it is,
that the true Judge of what is Virtuous, and what is not, must be the Wise and
Virtuous Man himself. For he being plentifully endued with, and perfectly
awakened into this high and exalted Principle of Life, he presently feels and
knows, and has a quick taste and relish of what is agreeable to that Divine
Life which his Soul is so thoroughly possessed of: And being perfectly Dead to
all Sensual Affections which may Cloud or Distruct his Judgment, he instantly
discerns the least Blemishes and Corruptions of Life, and so becomes perfectly
enabled to determine what is Laudable and Praise worthy, and of good Report:
This Internal Sense of his being as fitly qualified to discern its proper
Objects, as the clear Eye is to discern Light and Colors. But as for Men of
Depraved Souls, and Wicked Lives, they are no more able to determine and define
things of good Report, than Swines are to Judge of the Symmetry of a Beautiful
Picture.

So that when we speak of things of good Report, we must take our Measures from
what the best and wisest Persons in all Times and Ages have accounted so. And
for a Man to undervalue the Judgment of such who have jointly and unanimously
concluded from that inward Sense they have of Virtue, that such and such
Actions are Laudable, and of good Report, and the contrary Dishonest and Base,
is no better than a great piece of Pride and Arrogance.

3. He that purchases a good Name by Virtue, he purchases the greatest Treasure
that is to be had in this World. Therefore Solomon says, Prove. 22.1. That a
good Name is rather to be chosen than great Riches. Because Riches are
something without us, and do not at all contribute to the Perfection of the
Soul; but things of good Report being nothing but the effects of Virtue, and of
that Life which is the true Being of the Soul, they are inseparable from it.
Moreover the Virtuous Man cannot fail by such Actions of making many Friends,
which are, (as Boethius speaks,) Pretiosissimum divitiarum genus, The most
precious kind of Riches. And further, our good or ill Fame is not peremptorily
confined to this World, but passes before us into the next: And every Man by
his good or bad Behavior brings a good or ill Report of himself in the Regions
of Spirits, before he comes to dwell and converse with them. If we be Wicked,
we are as much scorned there, and our Names as Hateful, as the Names of Judas
or Herod. The Angels and separate Spirits quickly know what we are, (for those
discerning Spirits are not easily deceived,) and the Fame of our Doings arrives
to them before we leave the World. Those Blessed Spirits are said to Rejoice at
the Conversion of a Sinner, Luke 15.10. which is an evident Testimony that our
good or evil Behavior readily comes to their Notice and Cognizance. And surely
it is no small damage to have an ill Report among those who should Assist us
and Minister to us in our Wants and Necessities.

4. By doing things of good Report, we consult not only our own Esteem, but the
Credit of that Holy Religion we profess. It is said, 1 Samuel 2.17. that the Sin
of Elie's Sons made Men abhor the Offering of the Lord. Their Sinful and
Vicious manner of Living brought an ill Report upon themselves, and it
redounded likewise to God's Dishonor, and caused Men to Slight and Despise and
Undervalue his Worship and Service. So it is with us, when we deservedly by
some Evil Action bring an ill Report upon our selves; the Dishonor lights not
only upon us, that reflects on God, and that Holy Religion that we profess.
Thus it is said likewise of David, 2 Samuel 12.14. That by his Sin he had given
cause to the Enemies of the Lord to Blaspheme. When they saw so Holy a Man as
David fall so foully into Sin, they would be apt to despise Religion it self,
and cry out, Is this the fruit of Religion? And when those that are Christians
shall commit Dishonest and Abominable Actions; when they shall allow themselves
in the Practice of Open and Scandalous Sins, Wicked and Profane Persons are
apt to traduce and speak Evil of Religion it self. Thus our Holy Lord and his
Religion which he Sealed with his own Blood is Despised and Contemned through
the Bad Lives of those that Profess it. It should therefore be our Care to
consult the Credit of Religion, and to make it appear Lovely, (as it is) in all
Men's Eyes, by our practicing all such things as are favored and well esteemed
by all the Lovers of Virtue. When we go to the House of God, and tread his
Sacred Courts, we should use no light and trifling Behavior, but compose both
our Souls and Bodies with that Awful Reverence as becomes the Presence of God
and his Holy Angels. Our Devotion should be grave, serious and fervent, without
any Affectedness, or vain desire of Ostentation. And we should make it appear
that our Hearts are inwardly touched and inflamed with that unimitable Love of
Christ in Dying for the World, by our frequent Communicating of his Blessed
Body and Blood. For these things, as they are matters of good Report, and will
certainly procure favor and esteem, so they show that Religion has something
that is really valuable in it, and that Christianity is the choicest Wisdom
that ever was communicated to Mankind.

If we would therefore do things that are of good Report, we ought

1. To put in Practice all these forementioned Virtues, and whatever else is
Laudable and Praiseworthy. The Honor and Credit of Religion is never better
secured, than by a due Regard to its Sacred Laws and Institutions. Though we
profess to own Truth, yet if we are always wavering and unsettled, and tossed
about with every wind of Doctrine; if we are not true to our Words and Promises,
but Falsify and Dissemble and Lie one to another, we seem not to be
overjealous of her Honor. Nor can we be said to consult the Credit of our Holy
Profession, while by the Lightness, Vanity, and Unbecomingness of our Actions,
we express no Veneration for it. Who can believe that we are in Earnest when we
talk of Justice, and yet do not endeavor to frame our Conversations by that
excellent Rule of doing as we would be done by? A Discourse of the Sanctity and
Purity of Angels will little affect others, while we our selves wallow in the
Mire and Sink of all Carnal Lusts and Pollutions. Should we tell Men of an
Internal Beauty and Loveliness in things, yet it would be but Words spent to no
purpose, unless we demonstrate our knowledge of it by doing lovely and obliging
Actions. It is the faithful discharge of our Duty that conciliates Reverence
and Esteem to Religion, and promotes a fair Reputation to our selves, when Men
shall see that we are in Earnest by our unblamable Conversations. Which is
according to that sound Admonition of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your
Conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as
evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, Glorify God
in the day of Visitation. Notwithstanding all the Malicious Cavils, and
Atheistical Objections made against Religion, yet a true Christian that walks
answerably to his Profession, must gain at the last a Repute and Esteem from
all that are Lovers of God and Virtue.

2. If we would do things of good Report, and which may purchase us a good Name
amongst Men, we must carefully avoid, not only the open practice of Vice, but
whatever may have any suspicion in the Minds of Men of Vice. And this is called
by the Apostle, An abstaining from all appearance of Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
Whether that signify from every sort or kind of Evil, or from every thing that
bears the likeness, appearance, or show of a Sin. For he that will venture as
near to the Confines and Borders of Sin as he can, seems to declare a Tacit
Liking and Approbation of it, and consequently exposes himself to the hazard of
being Betrayed and Surprised, and so of losing his Credit and Reputation.
Therefore a Wary and Cautious Christian, (and such it behooves every Man to be,)
will studiously avoid every thing that may cause the least Jealousy in the
Hearts of others of his Sincerity.

There are many things which are not directly Sinful, yet to another who has
not that Maturity and Ripeness of Understanding, may prove an occasion of
Stumbling and Falling, and therefore are not to be done by him who would
acquire a good Esteem and Reputation. It is true, if a thing that is in it self
indifferent be, upon weighty Reasons and Grounds commanded by Law; and another
through Weakness is scandalized at the use of it, it is a thing which a good
Christian cannot help; and there is an Offense taken, but not given: Though it
were to be wished that there were as few of these Stumbling Blocks laid before
Weaker Persons, as may fairly consist with the Honor and Interest of Religion
it self.

3. He that would acquire a Good Name and Reputation, must take care that in
all his Actings with others he be sincere; i. e. upon all Emergences, he must
practice Virtue for Virtues sake, because it is in it self the best and most
desirable thing in the World. For if in our Conversation we proceed upon
Sinister Ends, and that Self-advantage and Interest be the Measure of our
Actions, besides that it redounds to the discredit of Religion, it casts a
Disgrace upon us, and we so far deviate from the Principles of true Virtue, as
Selfishness is concerned in our Actions. And the Reason is, because he that
makes a fair show of some Virtuous Actions, merely to compass Self-Advantage,
does hereby manifestly declare, that if it were not for this Private and Self
Love, he would not do them; which the generality of Mankind must needs look
upon as a gross piece of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; than which nothing can
be a greater Enemy to our true Credit and Reputation.

Thus you have an Account of the several Virtues, to the practice of which the
Apostle so seriously Exhorts us. And he that has any Care for the Peace of his
Conscience in this Life, and his Eternal Happiness hereafter, will carefully
think on these things. Which that we may all do, He who is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith grant to us; to whom be all Honor and Glory both now and
for evermore. Amen.

A DISCOURSE OF Sincerity.
John 1.47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.


THESE Words our Savior spoke of Nathanael, who is reckoned one of the Twelve
Apostles, though called by another Name; for we find him expressly mentioned
with them, John 21.2. This Person being brought by Philip to Jesus, when he was
come within distance or hearing, Christ says, Behold an Israelite indeed, in
whom is no guile. As if our Lord had said, See here a Man of that Integrity,
Simplicity, and Sincerity, which is highly valued and prized in God's sight.
And though this were spoken particularly of that Apostle, yet it instructs us
in this Great and Weighty Truth, That Sincerity is the great Accomplishment and
Perfection of a Christian in God's sight. For it is no new thing for true
Christians to be called in Scripture by the Name of Israelites: For St. Paul
expresses it so in more than one place in plain terms, Romans 9.6. They are not
all Israel which are of Israel, i. e. though they may Lineally descend from
Israel, yet it is only those that are Sincere that are the proper Israelites,
or true Christians. So again, Romans 2.28. Now to be without Guile here, is to be
Sincere and without Hypocrisy; whereby it appears, that a Man is Valued and
Esteemed in the Eyes of God according to his Sincerity.

And this sometimes is represented by the Name of Truth: I have no greater Joy,
(says St. John, Ep. 3.4.) then to hear that my Children walk in Truth; that is,
that they are Sincere Christians. I am sure it was St. Paul's great Comfort
when he supposed himself near his Death, 2 Cor. 1.12. That in Sincerity and
Godly Simplicity, he had his Conversation in the World. He neither flattered
himself, nor those that heard him, but told them the plain Truth, showing them
both by what he himself, and they, must hope to go to Heaven: And this was the
downright Sincerity of his Heart, when he had no doublings, windings, or
turnings with God, but endeavored as far as ever he could to please him, and
do his Will. This alone has the Promise of Heaven, and upon this the Blessed
Land of Righteousness, the Pleasant Mansions of Immortality are Entailed. This
is the Complement and Perfection of Holiness, without which all our Religion is
but a mere Shadow and Pageantry. For then only is the Soul of Man said to be
Sincere, when it is fully and wholly carried out after that which is simply and
absolutely the best.

And all Men that have any sense of Religion, must own, that God and the
Participation of his Nature, is absolutely and above all Comparison the best
thing in the World: And to attain to a Union with God cannot be denied to be
the greatest Happiness the Mind of Man is capable of. And since this is not
only simply the best, but the utmost and complete Felicity of our Nature, it
follows that Sincerity is then most perfect, when our Wills with all their
Affections and Desires are fully and wholly carried out after it. Fully and
wholly (I say) that is, without any By-ends, or Self-designs, or Sinister
Respects of particular Fame, or Gain, or any such thing, but merely upon a
clear Knowledge that it is the best thing in the whole Creation. For he whose
Intention is not directed aright, can hardly attain that excellent
Qualification our Savior so much commended in his Apostle.

Now to the end we may judge of our own Sincerity, we may resolve our selves by
these Two plain Notes or Characters.

1. If our Religion be as well in Private as in Public.

For he that confines his Religion only to the Church, or to a Festival-Day, is
like those Heathens that Chained up their gods, for fear they should run away,
and they should never find them again. But when we are hearty in Religion, and
it be deeply sealed and impressed upon our Souls, it will exert and show it
self, as well when none but God is present, as if Ten Thousand Eyes of Men were
upon it. For since we believe that God is Omnipresent, and that the bright Eyes
of Eternity are ever broad awake, and looking upon us, it argues little Fear
and Veneration of that Holy Being, if we can dare commit a Sin in his presence,
though no other Being in the World were privy to it. Therefore when all
Circumstances are fair and inviting, and concur to the Acting a pleasant or
profitable Vice with the greatest Secrecy and Impunity; then to Abstain and
Hate the Sin out of a Religious Fear of offending God, and debasing our own
Souls, it is a good Argument that the Purposes of our Hearts are Right and
Sincere.

2. If we adhere to God, and keep firm in the ways of Virtue, as well in
Adversity as Prosperity.

It is easy to be Religious when God incircles us with his Blessings, and
Rains down Pearls as it were into our Mouths; but when he hides his Face, and
writes bitter things against us, and a Storm of Miseries and Afflictions from
without blows hard upon us, then to be Virtuous is truly Honorable and
Praiseworthy. And as it si no great Credit to practice a Virtue that is in
Fashion, or to Adorn our selves with a Modish Piety: But to follow Virtue
through rough and uneven Paths, and to be Religious when Holiness is contemned
and disgraced; that shows a steady Resolution, and that a Man Loves God because
he is the most Excellent Being.

These Notes and Characters of Sincerity are few and plain, and by them we may
examine our own Hearts, and discern whether there be any Hypocrisy in them or
not: And by these we may discover the state of our Souls, without perplexing
our selves with a Multitude of Evidences and Signs of our Salvation, which it
may be upon an exact search may prove either Impertinent or Unreasonable. Nay
certainly he that is thoroughly possessed with a Vigorous Sense of God and
Virtue, and makes it his whole business incessantly to breath after, though
with the loss and hazard of all these Worldly Enjoyments, yea even of Life it
self, shall find a more lasting Comfort, and a stronger Security for Heaven
flowing from his own Soul, than if an Angel should tell him he was Ordained to
a Celestial Happiness.

And we have the more reason to endeavor after this Integrity and Uprightness
of Heart, from its great Necessity and apparent Usefulness. There are Two main
Seasons or Times of Trial of a Christian, wherein a Sincere and Candid Breast
will be his greatest Strength and Support. And these are,

1. The Days of Affliction and Calamity. Prosperity is a very false Glass, and
most commonly represents us to our selves in other Colors and Features than
really we are. But Adversity and Affliction wipes off all this Painted Gloss
and Varnish, and shows us the true Face of things. And in this Case, a Formal
and Hypocritical Dress will do us no good. While we can draw Waters at our own
Cisterns, we speak well of God, and make a cheerful Profession of Religion: But
when a severe Providence dries up the Well-springs of our Comforts, and leads
us through a Scorching Wilderness, wherein we Combat with fierce and
fiery-flying Serpents, then is the time of Trial. And indeed the True and
Native Glory of Virtue, is never made so Visible and Conspicuous, as when it is
surrounded and begirt with the greatest Dangers.

Adversity is a proper mean to discover, whether our Love to God and Virtue be
Sincere and Unfeigned, or whether it be Counterfeit and Adulterate. Which our
Savior intimated in a Parable in the Gospel, where the Scorching Beams of the
Sun, [ i. e. the Times of Misery and Tribulation,] quickly showed the
difference of the Soil wherein that Divine Seed was cast.

2. The Hour of Death is another of those Times which will discover our
Sincerity. Men have not the same Apprehensions of Sin in their Health and
Strength, as when they are drawing near their End, and entering upon the borders
of another World. For as the Body in Sickness Loathes even those things that
were most grateful and pleasant in its Health: So is it with the Mind or
Spirit: When it foresees that it is hastening to another and stranger World, it
distasts and hates the thoughts of those Sins it so freely Acted and Indulged
it self in before. For then the Body, which is the Root and Occasion of Sin,
being broken and out of order, the Soul may more freely and clearly behold the
difference between Good and Evil, and accordingly is more sensibly affected
with it. And the clearer sight we have of Sin and Wickedness, the greater is
that Horror and Fear the Conscience inflicts upon us, when we are sensible of
our own Guilt. Now since the Hour of Death and Dissolution of our Earthly
Tabernacles makes so perfect a Representation of Things to us, stripped of all
their outward Appearances, and divested of that Paint and Flourish we put upon
them; it must needs be a mighty support and comfort to find the Face of our
Souls Calm and Smooth, and our selves not burdened with the Heaviness and
Weight of Guilt.

But when the Sins of our past Days come into our Remembrance, and we consider
how False we have been to God and our own Souls; when it may be we have
betrayed our Faith and Religion to support a frail and tottering Interest in
this World; there will then be little else but a dismal Scene of Horror
presented to our Eyes. The nearness of our Approach to that State wherein we
must dwell for ever, strikes a Chilness and Coldness to our very Hearts. And
all because we have lost that Hope and Confidence which flows from Sincerity,
when we have done our best to serve God.

And if now I should endeavor to bring into view this Frame and Temper of
Spirit which we call Sincerity, Clothed with all its Native Richness and Glory,
I should sooner want Words to express it, than be able fully to represent the
Excellency of it. Its Beauty is so faultless and irreprehensible, and the
sweetness of its Nature so great, that there is nothing on Earth so Lovely and
so Desirable. It Is such a State of Soul, which he that is possessed of, would
not lose; and he that has it not, (if he knew but the worth of it,) would give
all the World, (if he had it in his power,) to purchase it. For certainly, if
ever Virtue could be made Visible to Mortal Eyes, it must be by this Excellent
Frame and Temper of Mind which we term Sincerity. It has all that Excellency
and Worth that Solomon speaks of Wisdom, which indeed is nothing but the
Perfection of Sincerity. It is better than Rubies, and all the things that are
to be desired, are not to be compared to it. The Fruit of it is better than
Gold, and the Revenue than choice Silver. Whosoever finds Sincerity, finds Life,
and shall obtain favor of the Lord. Which is enough one would think to render
so Charming a Qualification highly valuable in our Eyes; since there is nothing
that is Noble and Good, but is some way or other contained in it.

But if this be too general a Representation of the Worth of it; take it more
particularly.

1. Sincerity alleviates all Crosses and Afflictions. Troubles, Vexations,
Miseries, and Disappointments make up a very great part of Humane Life. The Son
of God himself was not exempted from Humane Miseries, but made his way unto
Glory through Death and the Grave. And it is our Lot and Portion to arrive at
our Blessedness through many Tribulations; neither must we forget that the
Passage to the Celestial Paradise lies through a Valley of Tears. Therefore
since we cannot hope to be perfectly freed from Calamities and Vexatious
Circumstances in this Life, our next enquiry must be how to alleviate and make
them tolerable. And the most certain way for this, is to be Sincere, i. e. to
have our Minds fully and wholly carried out after God and Virtue.

When a Man falls into Calamity through his own Folly, or that a Great and
Heinous Sin has been the immediate Cause of his Affliction, he loses his Peace
and Quiet, because his Conscience tells him that those things might have been
avoided. But when Tribulations arise from the Decree of Heaven, and that a
Man's Troubles are the effects of Divine Goodness, and sent as fit
Opportunities to make Trial of his Patience, Resignation and Humility; then the
Mind is quiet, submissive and composed, because when it looks back, it has no
ugly and staring Sins to affright it. From whence it evidently follows, that if
we are immutably fixed and grounded in the Sincere Love of God and Goodness, we
cannot be hurt by any Affliction. Nay, the greatest Misery and Calamity will be
eased, and the smart of it taken off, because, while we are Sincere, our Hearts
assure us of better Usage, and a more Comfortable State in another World. So
that, let it be loss of Friends, loss of Liberty and Estate, or whatever else
is accounted a Happiness in this Life, yet a Sincere Person knows that he is
befriended by the Holy and Kind Beings of the invisible World; that a tender
Providence shrouds him under its Wings, and will hereafter recompense this
short and light Affliction with a Great and Eternal Weight of Glory.

2. Sincerity contains whatever is truly desirable by the heart of Man. Are we
pleased and delighted with a Beautiful Object? Can there be any thing more
Beautiful and Lovely, than a Calm and Serene Soul, whose Glory and Luster is
not so concealed and obscured within, but it diffuses and communicates such
Rays and Beams of Mild and Unfeigned Simplicity, even in the Eyes and outward
Visage, as must needs affect every Rational Being with Admiration and Love? Do
Riches appear Splendid and Glorious? What Riches can be comparable to this
inestimable Treasure of Simplicity and Sincerity? And when the Mind is Adorned
and Clothed with this, it is much more Bright and Dazeling than Solomon's
Glorious Apparel and Robes of Royalty. Besides, Riches are fugitive and
uncertain, whereas Sincerity is such a Treasure as can neither be taken from
us, nor ever exhausted or drawn dry. Do the Pleasures of this World affect our
Hearts? We are to consider then, that in the Judgment of all Wise Men, the
Pleasures of the Mind are much more Noble than those of the Body: And Sincerity
in this exceeds all Earthly and Corporeal Pleasures, in that it never burdens
us with Satiety, nor torments us with the Fear of its Decay. Could we be
delighted with Honor? Then know that the highest Honor in the World is to be
like to God, who is the Greatest Unity and Simplicity. Sincerity is a Uniform
thing, always steady, and one and the same for ever; but Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation is Changeable and Various, and goes always under a disguise. In a
Word, search all that any way appears grateful and desirable by the Heart of
Man, and this Excellent Qualification of Sincerity will be found to be much
more Eligible. This Unites our Minds with God, and fits us to Converse with
Angelical Spirits, whose Natures are so much the more Excellent and Exalted, as
they partake more of Uniformity and Simplicity.

3. The very Perfection of Holiness consists in Sincerity. For certainly the
most perfect State of Angels in the Regions of Glory consists in this, that
they love and serve God truly according to the utmost of their Powers. And this
is what every Man may and ought to do. It is true, in this Life our Affections
cannot be so vigorous and enlarged, nor our Desires so comprehensive as those
of an Angel; but they may be as Sincere and without Dissimulation. There is a
great abatement and allowance to be made to the Variety of Humane Imbecility
and Imperfection. All Men are not born Philosophers, and the very Notion of a
Spiritual Being makes not the same lively and Impression upon all, but he that
retains such a Sense of it as keeps him steady and firm in the Practice of
Virtue, shall never be forgotten by Divine Goodness. Though all our Services
are mean and poor, yet they may be hearty and unmixt; and we may express a
Cordial Sense of our Love to God, though that Holy Fire do not flame and
sparkle with the Brightness of a Seraphim. Virtue and Goodness is not always to
be measured by the highest Degrees, but by the Truth, Plainness and Simplicity
of it.

4. Sincerity brings the truest Pleasure in the World. For as all Corporeal
Pleasure consists in the exercise of the Senses, and is more or less according
as it affects them: So when the Soul is Sincere, there arises in it a true
sense and taste of Righteousness, which brings an ineffable Pleasure along with
it. It must be granted indeed, that this lively and pleasant sense of Virtue,
and that Gratefulness that springs from it, is a thing that is not to be made
known by Words, but is only perceived by the inward sense of the Soul it self.
And hence a Carnal and Animal Man may enjoy himself in Sensual Delights, while
in the mean time he is a mere stranger to that Noble Pleasure that results from
Virtue; because that Principle which should taste the relish and sweetness of
it, is yet asleep in him. Moreover all Earthly Pleasures are muddy and defiled,
and have a taste of the Cask, that is, the Body wherein they Lodge: But the
Pleasures of Virtue are Refined, and run pure and clear for ever. Because the
Spring whence Virtuous Pleasure derives, is Sincerity, which is a State and
Condition pure and unmixed, without any Art or Adulterated Compositions.

5. Sincerity begets a generous Boldness and Magnanimity. No Man can be more
confident of the well-being of his Soul than the Sincere Person; and this
Confidence makes him look Afflictions and Dangers undauntedly in the Face. The
Sincere Person whose Conscience can Testify to him that he has fathfully
endeavored to Serve and Obey God, is fully assured, (however it may fare with
him here, yet) it shall go well with him in the other World. He knows that God
will never be unkind to an Innocent or Penitent Person; and is assured that he
can never forsake what is his own Life and Nature, which surely an
Unself-Interesssed and Universaliz'd Love is.

Wherefore such a One, though it were in the Agonies of Death it self, can
cheerfully commit himself into the Gracious Hands of God, and with an Humble
Confidence trust himself with the invisible Guards of those higher and better
Regions. For what shall separate us from the Love of God, says St. Paul?
Nothing surely, if our own Hearts do not Condemn us of Hypocrisy; for then we
may rest secure of God's Love, who always Loves for the same Reason: And his
Love is Immutable and never changes, till we change by Inadvertencey and Folly.

6. Lastly, Sincerity fills the Soul with an Eternal Peace, and secures it from
all Intestine Broils, Distractions and Tumults. It is this lower and troubled
Air that is subject to Thunder and Storms, while those upper Regions above the
Clouds enjoy a perpetual Sunshine and Calm. And it is Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation, and a Guiltiness and Consciousness that we have been False to
God and Virtue, that raises Storms and Troubles within our own Breasts. But
Sincerity sets us above all these, and we Breath in a Freer and Purer Air, and
our Souls are Calm and Composed, Fair and Lovely, as the Clear Face of Heaven.
In this Soil grows the Tree of Life, and here are those Rivers of Living
Waters, which overflow and enrich the Paradise of God.

In a Word, this State of Sincerity is a more valuable Treasure than all the
World. It Is every thing that a Man can desire, because it makes him beloved of
God who is an Infinite Fullness of all Happiness and Perfection. After this
State we ought earnestly to contend, and never leave off our pursuit till we
have attained to it. This delights the Heart of God and Man, and is so
enravishing a Temper, that our Savior could not but commend it in his Holy
Apostle. Now that we may all press forward to this Mark, God of his Infinite
Mercy grant, through Jesus Christ, to whom with the Holy Spirit be all Honor
and Glory now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

