A Modest Offer of some Meet Considerations, tendered to the ENGLISH about Their
Coin and Trade, and particularly to East India.
THE Ordinary Means of Increasing our Wealth being Foreign Trade, Managed so
that the Balance be for Us, not against Us; And the Seat of our now War being
distant from us, (which is our Happiness) where we must pay our Armies and
Fleet, we ought to provide that Foreigners (be they Friends or Foes) do not
get our Trade nor our Wealth from us.

It does behove us therefore to secure our Foreign Trade in the first place, by
safe guarding and wisely Conducting our Merchants Ships at Sea: Which may be
done if our Naval Affairs and Strength (our chief and commanding Point) be put
into the Hands of Men of Integrity, Skill and Courage, of Sobriety and
Diligence, and of desire to shorten the War. Such Men as these we may hope will
effect the like Qualities in them they do Command; and then from the Nature of
the Thing, and by Divine Ordination too, we may expect all good Success. Our
Armies and Fleet may then be paid abroad, because the Goods we Import being
Exported again will create Bills for us, (which are not now to be had) and make
the Exchange in our favor. The Kings Customs and our Wealth will increase, and
the French being without Trade and Captures at Sea, will the sooner be reduced
to Extremity.

The next Thing is our Money: Not to alter its Fineness, Weight, nor
Denomination, but to permit none that is (lip'd or False to pass in Payment,
and the Good at no higher Value than formerly. Our Milled Money, as now it is,
is not only the Common and True Measure of our Lands, and of all our Means in
the Kingdom, but also of our Foreign Commerce with Strangers; therefore to
alter it would bring us into Confusion and Loss too: For Gold and Silver being
their Product, not Ours, when we add to its Value, They have the Advance of us.
This increases the Balance against us, and we must pay it in Gold or Silver,
not at our Valuation, but as the Exchange will allow; which whilst we pay our
Armies and Fleet abroad, will not exceed Five Shillings our Milled Crown, and
Twenty Shillings the Guinea. And if, as some propose, we advance the one to
Thirty Shillings, and the other to Six Shillings Three Pence, in Payment, we
thereby Add to Spain, etc. 50 per Cent. in their Gold, and 25 per Cent. in
their Silver, and Substract as much from our selves in all our Rents, in all
our Now made Contracts, and Loans, in all the Customs and Charges that
Foreigners pay for Goods they Import here, and in all we buy here and send
abroad to Foreign Markets, (in case that Strangers do buy the like with us) and
in all that we do remit to discharge the Balance upon us.

When Gold or Silver from Abroad comes to pay their Debt to us, it is Good; but
when to increase our Debt to them, it is an Evil to us: For it must go from us
at less Value than it came to us We should therefore hasten to Extinguish this
Balance, or lessen it all we can, by safe guarding at Sea our Ships in Trade,
and by sending our own Product and Manufacture to Markets abroad upon equal
Terms with Foreigners who buy them of us; which cannot be done if we add to the
Value of our Money: What we add they have our Manufacture, etc. cheaper than
our Merchants, and then we lose our Trade too. The Course of all Exchanges in
Time of Peace, or when we are free and safe in Foreign Trade, does show that
generally our Mint at Twenty Shillings a Guinea, and at Five Shillings the
Mil'd Crown, is the best Market in Europe for Gold and Silver, it will then
come to us, and what we now part with for Payment of our Armies and Fleet
abroad (which by the way will be done with one Third less if we do not advance
our Money than if we do) will Return to us in Time of Peace, and I hope it is
not far off, if it be, I am sure, when it comes it will be the better and more
lasting with us for this War Upon the whole, to advance our Crown to Six
Shillings Three Pence can serve no Purpose of ours, is needless, and
pernicious, therefore not to be done.

But if we do not reduce Guineas to 21 s. 6 d, or 22 s. and make our Money good
to 5 s. the Milled Crown, and no more, (as formerly it did pass in Payment,)
and stop the Currancy of Clipped and False Money, and if we do not make Foreign
Trade free, and safe to all the Subjects of England, and put it so that they
may set forth in it upon equal Terms with Foreigners; I say if this be not
done, there can be no Paying our Armies and Fleet abroad; consequently, no Army
or Fleet of ours there: Then the French will soon subdue our Allies, and next
us, then Slavery and Popery will be the Lot of our Inheritance for ever, and we
with our Allies thus ruined, shall soon end this War,

Object. But is not our Coin rather to be Ordered hereafter than now, and by
Degrees (the Guineas at least) than all at once.

Answ. If we will go on with the War, it must be done presently. Last Years
Delay giving them opportunity for it, some (I wish them branded) to distress
our King by making the Payment of his Army in Flanders, if not impossible yet
very difficult and costly, set upon the Project of raising Guineas, others for
their particular Gain did the like, and these together advancing Guineas to 30
s. it left neither Silver nor Bills for Payment of the Army in Flanders, and by
that Means made it next to a Miracle that our King did subsist there the last
Campaigne.

Every Moment we delay, our Clippers and false Coiners are at work, and which
is worse, Guineas at 30 s. and Clipped and false Money from abroad is poured in
upon us, and so we increase our Balance and Loss by th^se degrees, and this
Delay. Now is a fit Time to do it, when some, confident that our 5 s. would be
made 6 s. 3 d. have laid up in Silver Bullion about 200000 l. value, that must
be brought to our Mint, or applied (which is as well) to pay our Armies abroad.
The Bulk of the Guineas are now with (or of Right belong unto) Bankers,
Goldsmiths, the India and Africa Companies, Jews, Stock-jobbers, and the
Victualers, Agents, or Under-payers of the Navy or Armies, Persons well
provided by the Gains they have had, and who do now oppose the Fall of Guineas
only because they shall lose by it. And the doing it by degrees cannot help us,
nor will it ease us in the least.

The next Thing is the East India Trade: Which, though the most mischievous of
any to us, yet since we must have it, and it is become in Value near one half
of the Foreign Trade of the Kingdom, it ought to be made National, and secured
that it be not lost to the Dutch (who by the continuance of our Now Company are
much increased in that Trade,) nor gotten from us by the Scotch Company, who
Invested as it is in Act of Parliament, and having Jews, Hamburghers,
Hollanders, English, and some of other Nations, Subscribers into it, will soon
(if not timely prevented) get that Trade, and more Beneficial Trades from us, I
mean those to Guinea and West India, and perhaps all Trade: For the Grants in
that Act set together, make that Company as it were Universal Monarch of Trade.

Now for Prevention against the One and the Other, I do humbly offer against
Establishing by Act of Parliament the East India Trade in a Company with a
Joint Stock Exclusive of others the Subjects of England. For such
Establishments of Trade in England are Malum in se, Monopolies at Common Law,
for that they Give and Appropriate that to Some only which is the Common Right
of All: And in the Instance now before us, do make but One Buyer for what is
Exported, and but One Seller for what is Imported, to the Value of near One
Half of the Foreign Trade of this Kingdom.

It is true, New Invention and Discovery has always been encouraged and
rewarded with Exclusive Grants; for that in those Cases no other have any Right
Antecedent to the thing Granted. Yet even in these Cases, it has been usual
with Parliaments to allow no more than Fourteen Years, Exclusive to others the
Subjects of England, because they should not be long excluded in any Case. And
for time out of mind, the Wisdom of our Nation in Parliament has condemned
Exclusive Grants of Trade, as appears in Magna Charta, and in many other
Statures Unrepealed.

It may, and most likely will, endanger the Peace and Being of the English
Monarchy.

It is a most pernicious Contraction of Trade, for that it cannot be extended
to Persons so as to make it National. If the whole Trade of the Nation were
Contracted as this to East India is, it would soon Nationally perish; for that
the whole then in proportion, would scarce enrich One Hundred and Sixty
Persons, and maintain very few Adventurers or Traders.

If the Trade be thus settled for Twenty One Years, it will for many of those
Years Exclude from Trade the greater number of Merchants, and many others, as
Minors; Those who are not now in Cash, and those who have their Trades
swallowed up by this.

Future Admission into this Trade will be precarious, very costly, and may be
lost.

It will cause the Dutch and Scotch to surmount us in this Trade. Where our
Trade is without a Company we outdo the Dutch; and where we have a Company and
they none, they outdo us. Therefore,

The Dutch above all things desire the Continuance of the Now Company in
England. They by their Agents here in 1656, importuned O.C. to establish the
Now Joynt-Stock.

It will unavoidably give being and support unto Stock-Jobbing. The loss of
Estates by Cheats this way, and by the Monopolists double Tax upon us of One
Buyer and One Seller, in so great a Trade as this is, will in less than Twenty
Years exceed Two Millions.

The Proposal in ease of our Lands to raise Money by such Grants, if accepted,
will lessen the Value of our Lands, and soon rid us of them.

The Benefits to our Nation are many, if the Trade to India be Free, or in a
Regulated Company, without a Joynt-Stock.

Ingenuity will be encouraged. New Places of Trade will be applied to, others
Discovered. More of the Sons of our Gentry may be sent Factors. It will
increase the Exportation of our Manufacture and Product. It will enable us to
furnish Europe with all the Commodities of those Countries, much Cheaper than
the Dutch. It will add to our Navigation, and Augment the Kings Custom,
Stock-Jobbing will cease. And it will prevent taking up Money at Interest upon
a Common Seal, which as done by our Now Company, is a thing very unequal and
hazardous to the Subject; and make it impossible to do the Evil Deeds our Now
Company has done (and if continued may do) here and in India, fully proved
upon them before the Commons in Parliament.

The India Trade has been carried on better for the Nation without a Company
in a Joynt-Stock than with one, and may be so again.

Forts and Castles in India, if we have them, cannot defend us in case the
Dutch, or French, or Indians, be our Enemies; but may tempt us (as it did the
Now Company) to offend them, or create a Jealousy in the India Princes of us,
and by that means tempt them to offend us.

And however Joynt-Stocks in Trade may have been used here in the Infancy of
Foreign Trade, and granted by Kings to a number of Subjects named, (the
intention whereof was not particular but to them in Trust for the general good,
and in prospect of a future opening it unto National Benefit) yet now when we
of this Kingdom are arrived at the utmost degree of Experience in Commerce with
all Countries, I cannot see any Reason why the Subjects should lose their
Right, or should be clogged by Joynt-Stocks to the great Damage of the Nation,
as I have before made evident.

What I have here said with respect to the India Trade, is applicable to the
Guinea Trade also.

I am Troubled for the late Loss of Six Ships coming from the East Indies,
whereof Two were Interlopers; the whole, I compute, did cost them in India
Three Hundred Thousand Pounds, not more. But I cannot infer thence any Reason
for an Exclusive Grant of that Trade: For if so, then the Interlopers who lost
One Third, must have One Third of that Trade, Exclusive of the Now Company. And
by a Parity of Reason, the Now Jamaica, Barbados, and West India Merchants,
who during this War have sustained greater Loss, must have Grants of those
Trades, Exclusive of all others; which if done, would make it cruel pity, and
most unjust. As it had been if when London in 1666 was burnt, we to Rebuild it,
in compassion to them, had Taxed the Nation to the value of all our Lands.

To prevent Scotland being the Chief Seat of all Trade, or as it were the
Universal Monarch in it; I think we ought to make that design (if we can)
Abortive: And I think it will be so in case our Parliament shall please.

(1.) To Declare that the East India Trade is and shall be Free to all the
Subjects of England. And that it shall be Managed in a Regulated Company (as
the Turkey, or as near it as may be) without a Joynt-Stock, except a small One
to defray the Common and Necessary Charges of Ambassadors, etc. And, (2.) That
from and after the end of the Session of Parliament, which shall be in the Year
1697, in case it shall appear that the East India Company in Scotland have made
any progress in Trade, that then all Goods Imported from East India, in English
Ships and by English Men, shall be Custom free.
To induce the former I have said enough before; and to enforce the latter I
say, That the doing it will not lessen Our Kings Revenue (comparatively) One
Penny: For if it be not done, and the Scots do proceed in that Trade, etc. as it
is Enacted or Granted to them, we shall not Import any thing from India, etc.
because they will have gotten all that Trade from us.

A Court of Merchants might be of use to us at this Time.

LONDON, Anno 1695.


