A Private LETTER of Satisfaction to a FRIEND Concerning 1. The Sleep of the
Soul. 2. The State of the Soul after death, till the Resurrection. 3. The
reason of the seldom appearing of Separate Spirits. 4. Prayer for departed
Souls whether lawful or no


(...).

Origin. Printed in the Year 1667.

SIR,
I Received yours --. In which upon the sudden death and abruption of your dear
Lady, having wasted her silent hours in pensive sighs, and moistened her funeral
Cypress with a shower of tears; you have now converted the Griefs into
Patience and a noble Charity, and made your sorrows the Scene of Divine
Speculations, concerning the memory of your dead Saint: And, admitting her into
your retired thoughts such as she desired to be, that is, amiable and pleasant,
Not to discompose the quiet serenity of your mind by any afflictive
circumstance, but to administer a lenitive to your sadness, and elevate and
advance your joys;

To this end, you have propounded these following Questions: To which out of a
due sense of gratitude and of that service and obedience I owe you, I shall not
detract to give you the best Solution I can.

1. Whether the Soul, when separated from this terrestrial body, sleeps till
the general Resurrection. 2. Whether, upon the quitting this body, she be
immediately carried either to Heaven or Hell? 3. Why Separate Souls do seldom
appear? 4. Whether it be not lawful to pray for our reparted Relatives? or,
whether the duties and obligations of friendship are extinct by their death?
That there is in us a Principle of life and motion wholly independent upon
matter, and which by an intrinsic virtue actuates this stupid and heavy body
we carry about us; I think, there are few so gross and sensual as to deny: At
least, if there be any such, I shall not now concern my self with them, but
take into consideration that odd Hypothesis which some have fallen upon, who
fancy the soul (though distinct from the body) to fall into such a profound
sleep, as never to be awakened but by that shril-sounding Trump which shall
echo through the arched roof of Heaven, and rouz the dead from the silence of
their dormitories, to appear before the just tribunal of the Son of God. Which
if examined to the bottom will prove little less than a piece of Epicurism and
a branch of new -- modeled Atheism, to exclude and banish all hopes of a
future reward in those immortal regions of love and joy out of the minds and
spirits of men. It will be necessary as well for the promoting of righteousness
and holiness, as the discouraging vice and impiety, to show the lubricous and
brittle foundation upon which this doctrine is built.

In order to which, Argum. 1.
we may consider the Soul of man as a spiritual Essence capable of acting and
subsisting (if God so please) after she is disengaged from this weight of dull
mortality, to which by a vital harmony and essential congruity she became at
first united. Which happy Crasis being worn out by the length of time, or
discomposed through the violence of a disease, or some other disordered motions
in the body, that sweet Tie is presently dissolved and broken, and the Soul,
freed from her terrestrial prison, becomes a denizon of another world. For,
what cords or springs can retard a spirit? Or what walls can detain and
imprison so subtle and penetrative a Being as the Soul of man? For, that the
Soul at any time separates from the body, is not from her own actual will, but
from the vitiated temperament of the body she is united with, which by harsh
and uneven motions becomes very unpleasant and disharmonious to her inward
sense or plastic life, so that, being once loosened from the body she regains
a vital energie or power far more vigorous than before, and attains to a
clearer perception of things than when cloystred within these walls of flesh.
No law of Fate or Immutability, can stop her flight from the insensate Corpse
which is no longer in a capacity of entertaining it is departing Guest. So then,
this sleep of the soul must be resolved into the cessation of her operations
upon her disunion with the body: For, Death, say they, quite obliterates and
wipes off all those various phantasms with which the mind was stored here
below: which being excited and stirred up in her by the presence of their
several objects, now that she is dispread and fallen back, as it were, into
that universal Life, can never re-enter her knowledge, nor can she be conscious
of ought, but must lie thus senseless for ever, unless that benign Spirit
which first brought her into Being, awaken her from this mortal Sleep.

But he that shall consider those several powers and faculties the great
Creator of the World who made all things well, bestowed upon the Soul of man;
and how orderly in their due time and place they awaken into act, will be
forced to confess, that Infinite Wisdom has so happily contrived it, that she
shall never want proportionate instruments of action, whatsoever state the
various revolutions of an unerring Providence shall place her in. Those clear
eyes of Heaven and divine Omniscience foreseeing all the possible fates of men,
beheld them not only as being inhabitants of this terrestrial World, but as
those that were not far removed from the confines of eternity, and capable of
dwelling in that Kingdom of light and glory which no mortal eye can behold and
live, and to this end, endued them with such powers as should make them happy
both in the enjoyment of themselves and God, in that condition of Being wherein
they are. While we are here in this Region of mutability, we are in a state of
banishment from our native home, and the life of the body grown so powerful and
vigorous that the gentle touches and soft vibrations of our more divine part
are scarce perceptible within us: Those fatal Inclinations which at first pent
up our spirits which lay wide as the World, embracing the Creation in an
extensive love, and sunk them down to a boundless indulgence and regard of
sense and corporal pleasures, are now most lively and active, and the more near
approaches we make to this muddy life, the more gross and feculent are the
apprehensions and Idea's of our minds. The scorching flames of Envy and
degenerate Malice dry up the gentle dews of heaven that enlarge and widen the
soul with a divine fertility; the vile and impure motions of Lust bemire the
internal beauty of this Daughter of heaven; and every caitive affection
captivates her to a new invented pleasure, and a further deflection from her
Original and Primitive good. This is the lowest degree of life that is seated
in the Soul of man, this is that pleasing Magic which bewitches and enchants
the Mind with these poor and contemptible Goods: Thus Adam lost his Paradise by
listening to the charming voice of his new espoused Bride; and thus we fell with
him, and became mancipated and enslaved to the body; and that eternal Fire
which was first kindled from heaven, sensibly decayed and vanished, and
darkness took away the light of the day and hid the beams of truth and
righteousness from our eyes, leaving us wandering in a night of error, without
any guide, save that now and then a ray of glory pierced through those clammy
mists, and left an impression upon us sufficient to let us know that it sprang
from an heavenly source and fountain. But when the edge of this luxuriant
principle shall be taken off, and men dye to their grosser bodies, another and
far more ample degree of life shall awake in the Soul. For, there being in the
spirit of man such a gradual subordination of faculties and all so closely
connected to their indiscerpible head and center, it is very natural to
conceive, that, upon the extinction or cessation of a lower power, a more
extended and enlarged Capacity should arise and spring up in its room. Thus,
Death being nothing but a Consopition of some inferior faculties, will be so
far from drawing over the whole man this benumming drousiness, that it will
bring into play those hidden powers, which like some keys in music lay dead
and silent, till struck by the careful hand of Nature to keep up that Universal
Harmony which the Eternal Mind wrought in the essential contexture of the
Creation. All the powers of the Soul do not operate at once with an equal
degree of intenseness and vigor, but, as the dull and heavy life of sense and
corporeity is emacerated by repeated acts of mortification, and made sequacious
and obedient to the dictates of the intellectual man, so the mind and divine
life becomes more subtle and abstracted from matter, assimilating its self to
that Holy One whose perfection it is, to be wholly spiritual and immaterial.
And we our selves plainly perceive, that when the mind is bent and fully
carried out upon the contemplation of an object, the external Sense is very
much debilitated and abated, so that the Vibrations of corporeal motion upon
the Organs both of sight and hearing are for a time suspended and unconcerned,
which plainly inferrs that the Soul cannot attend to two distinct powers at the
same time in their highest actings and capacities, but that, as the operations
of the one are brought low and decrease, so the other are invigorated and
augmented. And who can rationally averr that the actings of the soul shall
cease when divested of these garments of mortality, since that there is a
gradual declension and derivation of all her powers from the perceptive part or
first and primary substance of such an essentially-incorporate Spirit as the
soul of man? For, the higher life contains and includes the lower, and still as
we ascend upward life is more large and complete till we arive at the highest
of all: which whoever has thoroughly awakened, is installed in the greatest
Happiness, humane nature is capable of; flying beyond the regions of death and
dissolution, and seated above the reach of envy and malice, in the great
diffusions and communications of heavens glory and beatitude. All life is not
destroyed at once, nor can the power of death and the grave exceed the
dissolution of the Souls vital congruity of actuating a terrestrial body:
whatever looks beyond this remains safe and secure as the laws of heaven; so
that we need not fear, an eternal oblivion should creep upon us, or that we
should slide out of being when we cease to converse with men, and have our
Ashes crowded into their narrow urns. To carry on this Argument a little
further, and to pleasure and gratify our fancies: we may conceive the Soul of
man to be a Circle whose Center is that noble and divine part full of essential
Intellect and perception; the Area, those exterior branches or essential
emanations from the first central power and activity, which descend (...) by
abatement from the Primary substance, the will and Reason being the nearest the
source of life and vigor, the Imagination a degree lower, from whence we go
down to the Senses which take cognizance of external objects and make a true
and faithful representation of them in the seat of perception: and still the
further they are removed from their origin and Spring, the more straightened and
confined they grow till they arrive to the Periphery wihch is the Plastic and
deepest or lowest power, and the most narrow and contracted of all: Thus we see
how all the powers of the soul lie in a natural graduality and subordination to
the eye and Center of this little World, which like the Sun, the bright Eye and
Center of the world, fills the whole Air with rays of light, to its utmost
confines and circumference. Having thus illustrated the Nature and Powers of
the Soul, it is easy to imagine (she not being an independent, homogeneal Mass
like a lump of matter, but one part the gradual result and efflux of the other)
that some vital congruity may be laid asleep, and Death may cause a cessation
of the actings of some faculties, without the total consopition of the Soul.

The Moral state and condition of the soul after death is such, Argum. 2.
as to every considerative and ingenuous Spirit will give sufficient security
against those irrational fears of her Sleep and senselesness when she has left
the body.

Though men here strayed from God the fountain of their bliss and happiness,
and defaced the beautiful Image of their Creator by a vigorous prosecution of
the exorbitant motions and pleasures of sense, yet he regards and cares for
them, remembers that his own good hands first gave them being, and pities the
unhappy miscarriage of so noble a part of his Creation. And therefore, as a
tender Mother shoves off her pretty infant from her that it may return again
with fresh and more ardent embraces; so God the benign Father of Spirits is
pleased for a while to banish his own dear Offspring into this region of
mortality, that he may more endear them to himself, and enhance the price of
heavenly joy, by begetting in them an impatient desire and breathing after it.
And to this end that All-comprehensive Wisdom which made all things well, and
fitted the capacities of his Creatures to those several states they were to
run through, has clothed the souls of men with coats of skins, and made them
inhabitants of the Earth; not that they should make the Paternal bounty and
indulgence of God an occasion of a riotous licentiousness, and take heart from
his kindness to be the more vicious, but to curb their lawless wills, and
restrain their irregular appetites, refine and purify their minds and Spirits
to a high degree of Generosity, Sobriety and Goodness: For, in this life it is
that men lay the Trains and Seeds of their future happiness or misery, and that
just Nemesis, which passes through the universe, and interestes it self
peculiarly in the affairs of rational Agents, will inevitably seize on the Soul
when departed from her decayed tenement, and convey her to that place and
society which the rectitude or obliquity of her moral Nature has fitted her
for. There are two opposite Principles or contrary Natures in the World,
between which there is an eternal and irreconcilable Feud, viz. Sin and
Righteousness; to one of which every man ioyns himself, and becomes a member of
a society or body Politic; and carries on (...) an immortal war, Sin is
nothing but a deflection from the divine Nature, a transposition or undue
connection and dis-harmonious union of some principles in the Creation, which
raises a perturbation and disorder in the Soul of man, and, when confirmed by
repeated acts, becomes a habit, and incrassates and obnubilates the mind,
crowding it into narrowness and servility: But righteousness is a concord or
agreement and suitableness with those living laws impressed upon every moral
agent, when the Soul acts adequately and conformably to those innate notions of
truth and holiness, and this enlarges and sets free the Spirit of man from
Tyranny and slavery. And hence it comes to pass that the actions of men are not
as the transient effects of necessary causes, as a stone to fall downwards;
but, being the results of spontaneous principles have a moral influence of good
or evil upon their future states and conditions: For, men arrive not to the
utmost degrees and completion of goodness or iniquity in a moment; but, as in
Naturals, so likewise Morals there is a latitude required; and things ascend
gradually to their perfections: and consequently the wicked or righteous Nature
respectively dispreads it self and incorporates and conjoyns the Soul either
with Hell or Heaven in this life. For Hell in a moral sense is nothing but an
Orb of sin and unrighteousness, a state of penury and anxiety, and sucks in
and draws, as it were with hidden cords and strings, every thing that is like
to it self; so that every wicked man truly carries the beginnings of Hell and
mi^ery within his breast; and to this purpose is that of Porphyry, (...). The
Spirit is said to be in Hades because it partakes of the dark nature and void
of light. But Heaven is the region of serenity and quiet, a state of
righteou^ness, peace and joy, and takes hold of every thing congenerous to its
own Nature, elevating and winding the spirits of men off from their commerce
with vice, and the alluring objects of sense, and transforming them into it is
own beauteous Image and pulchritude; and the further they recede from the
Cuspis of the love of wickedness and the unrighteous Nature, the more liberty
they find; and when once they are so far risen that the utmost projections of
this dark shadow cannot touch them, then are they arrived to an eternal and
boundless freedom.

Every man therefore so fatally adjoining himself either to Heaven or Hell in
this life, it will inevitably fall to his share to be happy or miserable when
departed out of it; which cannot be, except the Memory and Sense of his past
actions return, upon his separation from the body: And that it does so, is not
only a probable but necessary consequence from the Nature of the Soul: For,
Memory being a radicated faculty of the Soul, and having no greater dependence
upon the body than all other exertions and operations of the mind whatsoever,
it will remain safe and entire, notwithstanding the various turnings and
transmutations of corporeal principles: Indeed, were Memory, and those other
Faculties, which not without great reason we attribute to a knowing and
intelligent Principle, the sole effects of the re-action or tremulous motions
of certain pieces of matter striking upon each other; it were a necessary
deduction from thence, that Death should spoil their sport and quite deface and
obliterate whatever their nimble friskings and uncertain agitations might
represent unto us: but this is already sufficiently demonstrated to our hands,
to be both frivolous and precarious by an excellent Person, who has divested
Matter of all cogitative powers and properties. And if we well weigh the state
of the Soul after death, it will appear that Memory will then be more vivid and
lively; and Conscience, which is nothing but a reflexe act of Memory, more
sensible and awakened: For the great cause of all our weak and imperfect
actions in this life, is the stubbornness and inobsequiousness of matter to the
powers of the Soul, whereby they become dull, languishing, and inactive; but
when death shall give us entrance into another World, and the Soul united to a
more ductil and pliable vehicle, her operations will become more sprightly, and
the Memory bring into view many and diverse things which, before it was not
able to command; and the Conscience afflict or cheer according to her
deportment in the former life. Neither is this any more than what we find
already in the natures and causes of things: For, if Memory being lost by the
violence of a disease or some other extraordinary indisposition of the body;
yet returns and is regained upon the cessation and amotion of the distemper,
and reduction of the spirits to their pristine temperament: I see no reason,
why it should thus totally be despoiled by Death, there being oft-times a
greater change and perturbation in some malignant diseases, than we see happen
to sound and healthy persons, whom the casualties of War or other sudden Fate
has brought to an untimely end. This only difference is assigned (which yet
when severely examined carries no great moment with it) that when Nature or Art
has expelled the morbifick matter, and restored the body to a healthful
vigor, and the spirits depurated and rectified from their vitiosity, become
accommodate instruments for the operations of the Soul, her vital union with
matter continues, which in Death (say they) is totally lost and dissolved; and
how the Soul unbared from all commerce with matter can be capable of acting,
seems utterly unintelligible: Whether therefore the Soul does, or does not act
without the help of matter, when her garments of mortality are laid aside, is
not my present purpose to discuss: Only I shall cast in this by the way, that
no man can be demonstratively certain that the Soul cannot act without the
assistance of matter, but if he remind himself of that intimate dependence the
Soul has upon matter in this life even in her sublimest exercises, (for I omit
here the power of moving the body, which is likewise performed by the motion of
matter directed according to the will and pleasure of the Soul) as also her
sympathy with the mutations and alterations of the Air, whereby the mind
becomes more elevate and serene, or cloudy and dull, and those infinite
varieties likewise which a man may observe in his own temper and constitution,
not to instance in any other but those of an extraordinary joy and cheerfulness
of spirit at sometimes, and at others as great a pensiveness and melancholy, of
which a man can give no account or reason from any external cause, but only
from the purified and more subtle, or fulsome and gross steams ascending into
the brain; and withal consider that the great Crown of our Faith and Patience,
the happiness and reward of glorified Spirits, to purchase which for mankind
the ever blessed Son of God left the sacred mansions of Heaven, the bosom of
blessedness, and veiled his glory under the clouds of flesh and blood, shall be
an ethereall and heavenly body, which Plato calls (...) a resplendent vehicle,
and St. Paul (...) a spiritual body: he, I say that attentively perpends this,
that the instruments of the Souls operations both in this life and the next are
corporeal, will likewise think it probable, that she is not wholly denudated of
Matter in the intermediate space between death and the resurrection, at what
time she shall be possessed of her long expected joy, and her vile body shall
be transformed into the similitude of the glorious body of the Son of God.
Supposing then the Soul vitally united with matter after death, she will both
act, and also be capable of pleasure or pain, which are the unavoidable
concomitants of her transactions in this life: For, can we imagine that God
will put a stop to the course of Nature, and alter that order and constitution
of things which bears upon it the signature and Image of his eternal Wisdom?
Surely, it cannot be that he should frustrate the hopes and expectations of
men, when all things so favorably conspire to give them an energetical and
vital reception into the other World. And if God do not drench the Souls of men
in this lake of oblivion and soporiferousness (which we have all the reason in
the world to believe, and ought to be confident that he will not) they will
infallibly be instated, upon their dereliction of their earthly bodies, into a
condition of happiness or misery, which will altogether take away that fanciful
dream of their sleep till the great day of judgment. For, although here the
voice of Conscience may be drowned by the clamours of Sense, and those many
Diversions arising from the present state of affairs in this life; yet, when
death shall draw aside the curtain of mortality; and those various objects,
which so often presented themselves to our view, pass away like a shadow,
leaving nothing to the Soul but the vast prospect of an eternal Tragedy; the
conscience will then awake, and pierce her with an extraordinary resentment and
vexation: For, besides that the Soul shall see all her wicked attempts and
designs blasted upon Earth, the memory of her name cursed and detested, and
become thoroughly apprehensive of the miscarriage and iniquity of her past life,
and have a full and clear sight of all her impious actions, stripped of their
painted gloss and varnish, and in their proper colors and genuine
circumstances; besides this, I say, the Fame of her unrighteous demeanor will
go before her into the other World, and quickly be dispread over the secret
regions and receptacles of Spirits, by those vigilant spectators, who take
cognizance and give intelligence of humane affairs: which cannot but afflict
her even unto death, to see her self abandoned both of good Angels, and the
spirits of just and holy men, and confined to the society of degenerate Fiends
and Demons reserved to the judg^ment of the great Day. And these fiery stings
and gripeings of conscience shall rage perpetually, and, if we can imagine any
intermission, it will be but like the sleeps of the wind in a storm, or the
broken sighs of a tempest, to recover its exhausted spirits, and return with a
greater impetuousness and fury. But to take a view of those good and holy
persons whom the Father of spirits has called out of this present life, who yet
are in as small a probability of being overtaken by this long night as the
other, there wants not sufficient employment to keep them vigilant and active:
For, whether it be that they delight in converse and society, they will find
those immense tracts of space, not empty deserts and wildernesses, but
replenished with diverse sorts of Beings, some equal to, others more noble than
themselves, who all studiously endeavor to promote and carry on that great and
general design of the diffusion of the Life and Nature of God over the whole
Creation; they may there likewise meet with many of their departed Friends and
Relatives, with whom they may again renew their ancient leagues of friendship,
and entertain an amicable correspondence and familiarity: or, whether they be
contemplative, and affect a solitary retiredness and recess from the rest of
the World, they may there call to mind their almost obliterate Speculations,
and please themselves in the exertions of the innate Idea's and notions of
their minds, and raise within them a high sense of joy and delectation in
finding out many choice Theorems of Nature and Providence; besides many other
advantages which are not allowed or permitted to this state: So that, there is
no fear the Soul should sleep or cease from acting, when loosened from this
earthly body.

The resurrection of the Son of God from the dead is so palpable a pledge of
the Soul's living and acting after death, Argum. 3.
that he must commit a rape upon his faculties, and do violence to all his
intellectual powers who will not be convinced by it. For, that he should by
wicked hands be bereaved of his innocent life, and so thoroughly slain that his
malicious enemies the Jews never question his death, and, which further
confirms the truth of it, lie three days buried in the grave, and afterward
rise again and exercise the proper functions of a living man, and that not for
some small and inconsiderable time, but conversing forty days with his
Disciples upon Earth to take away all cause and suspicion of delusion, and then
ascend in the sight and presence of his Disciples and Friends to the
comprehensions of that Glory which not long before his death he prayed to his
Father to glorify him withal; this, I say, is a full and convictive
Demonstration even to outward sense that that dull and lethargick stupour shall
never take away sense and action from our Souls when they depart from their
living graves and monuments of flesh and blood. And as it was with him, so
shall it be with us, in our order, measure, and proportion; Christ our head
lives, and is seated at the right hand of God in the highest glory and
felicity, (for he there makes intercession for his Church;) and because he
lives, we his members shall live also. He is a living Vine, and all the members
of his mystical body are living branches not only in a moral but natural and
physical sense: For, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: (...),
for all live unto him. Now if the Souls of men fall into so permanent a sleep,
they are dead, or rather annihilated, (for, not to be, and not to be conscious
of ones Being, are much one) and their recuperation to life is to them as it
were a new Creation; neither know they why they are rewarded or punished,
because Death and that Narcotick state which immediately follows it (according
to this extravagant Dream) washes away the memory of all past actions
whatsoever. To this we may add the Apparition of Moses, and Elias, in their
Celestial robes to our blessed Savior at his Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor,
when his Face shone like the Sun, and his raiment became pure and white as the
light; and those two divine Personages foretold the good events of his Death,
and spoke words of comfort to him under the consideration of his inglorious and
humble Passion; which is an evident proof that the Souls of Moses and Elias did
not sleep when they left their Bodies, but that they now live and act in the
felicities of Jesus, to whom in the days of his flesh they brought relief and
solace. And if it were otherwise, 11. Cor. v.
I do not see how the Apostles affections could be carried out in so vehement
and longing a desire to be freed from this Earthly body (for so (...) i. e.
Tabernacle, signifies, and is used Wisd. 9.15. and by Pythagoras in Hermippus)
and to be possessed of that Building of God, which he calls likewise (...), a
house which is from heaven, that is, a heavenly body, (for (...) is the same
with (...), and both answer to the Hebrew (...); and so St. Chrysostom
understands it, where, to the Apostle's (...) he thus speaks, (...). that is,
what house? tell me: An incorruptible Body: To this sense Gorgias Leontinus in
Stobaeus uses the word (...), when he calls our earthly body (...), a putrid
and decaying Tenement:) for if he enjoyed nothing of this great Reward till the
Resurrection, but upon his dissolution from the body were deprived of all Sense
of his Being, it would be far more desirable for him, and all other
Christians to continue still in this World, then to groan to be delivered from
the burden and encumbrances of the flesh, only to fall into a state of
inactivity and silence, being neither conscious of themselves nor of any thing
in the external Creation. What Christ once said to his Disciples, may very
accommodately be applied to this present Case, In my Fathers house are many
mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you. And surely if the Souls of
men after death fall into such a dead and heartless condition, as not to know
they are in Being, the infinite goodness and veracity of almighty God so
wonderfully displayed to the World in the Son of his love, would never have
deceived the hopes and expectations of the wisest and best Persons even to this
present age, but timely have corrected and prevented so Universal an error,
especially in so weighty a Concernment as this, wherein the manner of their
reception into the other World differs so widely from the Schemes and
representations they drew of it in this. Nay, if it be an error, the Veracity
of God is deeply engaged to discover it; because the greatest Prop which
upholds and maintains its credit amongst men is founded upon the most holy
revelations of his will.

Before I descend to the second Demand, give me leave to insert these two
Paragraphs.

1. That Sensuality is the great Patroness of this heartless and dull fancy,
of the Soul's Sleep after death.

2. That when the Intellectual man is refined by purity and holiness, it will
lift up the Soul far above these panick fears.

It was the love of Sense and corporeal pleasures, that first sunk us from our
happiness, and drew the Sable Mantle of death over the comely pourtrayture of
Gods Image in our Souls; and it is this which still degrades us, and makes us
unlike our Maker: This outward World is that (...) the Great Magician or
Enchanter (as the Platonic Philosopher calls it) which with its Siren Music
bewitches and allures the Mind from the still and quiet contemplation of the
beauties and pulchritude of the moral and intellectual World; for all those
charming complacencies and exterior phantasms with which the Soul is so
ravished and captivated, are nothing but so many emissions and radiations of
the external World, variously striking upon and moving the Senses or bodily
life; so that the declining Soul according to the diversity of its degeneracy
becomes more or less dispread and incorporated with the outward World: (...),
(as Porphyry speaks) Where the motions of Sense are predominant, there is a
recession from Intellect. There is in every man an Animal and an Intellectual
Nature, the one respects (...) sensible objects, the other (...) intellectual
and things abstracted from Sense: Now the more we check and control the
Luxuriancy of the Animal or bodily life, the more refined and vegete are those
higher powers of the Soul, in the exercise of which consists her true life.
For, what more besotts the perceptive faculties of a man, than those grosser
pleasures of the Sensitive life? And who Philosophize more grossly concerning
the future state of the Soul, than those who make it the greatest part of their
happiness to enjoy to the full whatsoever pleasure their degenerate wills and
lusts shall suggest unto them? But he that by a wise and timely management of
those powers the provident care and goodness of God has vouchsafed to him,
has so gallantly maintained the Nobility and heavenly Nature of his Soul, that
he soars above terrene vanities, disdaining to mingle with the unsatisfactory
pleasures of the corporeal World, and by a due and severe castigation has
brought low that exorbitant principle by which he is connected to this Earthly
body; he has subtiliz'd his mind and is united to that Omnipresent and
alcomprehensive Intellect, and foresees his reception into the other life, and
presages that happy and blessed state he shall then enter upon, when the links
and cords of mortality shall be broken or worn asunder: Such a one, I say, is
confident that it shall go well with him, when he has finished the last Act of
life upon Earth, and that if there be any Beng more excellent than Matter, any
Providence ruling and presiding over the affairs of the world; he shall not
then slide out of Being nor cease to Act, when he goes hence and is no more
seen. These Speculations therefore require a due preparation of mind. And every
man cannot be convinced by them; because few are in a fit capacity and
disposition for the entertainment of them. (...), Like is known by its like:
and it the inward sense and touch of men's spirits be adapted only to the relish
and gust of the Bodily Life, the suggestions of the Intellectual Nature will be
like the sudden immission of light upon sore eyes, burdensome and offensive;
and the man is no more capable of the force and power of such argumentations,
than a Swine of Morality, or the savage Tigers of Ingenuity and Goodness.

I come now to your second Question, which is, Whether upon the quitting this
Body, the Soul be immediately carried, either to Heaven or Hell? The Holy
Scriptures, which give us all imaginable certainty of a blessed reward of our
Faith and Patience, at the Great Day of Recompenses, when God shall have put
all his enemies under his feet; are very silent in delineating and depainting
out to us, the state and condition of the Soul between Death and the
Resurrection. Yet this we are assured of in general, That the Souls of Good and
Holy Men, are always under the careful eye of Heaven, and live in joy and
felicity, far above the troubles and discontents that attend this obscure and
evanid life they lead on Earth: and on the contrary, That shame and misery
await the refractory and irreclaimable spirits of Impious persons, upon their
separation from their terrestrial bodies. But, whether the one be in Heaven,
properly so called, and partake of those great diffusions of Glory, which shall
be conferred on the children of the Resurrection; and the other in Hell, that
is, in that place of torment prepared for the Devil and his Angels, or into
which Death and the Grave shall be cast, when time shall be no more,
immediately upon their disunion from their Bodies; the Sacred Writ has
nowhere determined. He therefore, who will seek further, may indeed light upon
some probable Conjectures, which may bear the visage and phisnomy of truth, but
can never positively assert them as convictive and indubitable. The only remain
in Speculations of this Nature, is, To decide them by free and unprejudiced
Reason and Philosophy: and if by that light and conduct, the mind of man fall
upon any conclusion consentient with the Attributes of God, or those eternal
and immutable laws, implanted and wrought in the essential frame of the
Creation; though I do not say, it is impossible for him then to err, yet his
miscarriage will be exceeding pardonable, pleasant, and ingenuous. I confess,
the world has been long contented to live in an easy and affected ignorance;
and men, either out of a deplorable proclivity to vice and impiety, or from a
stupid and blockish zeal to Religion, willingly profess, that all things are
uncertain, and sit down in this, that we can know nothing; as if the wise and
benign Author of our Beings had made the very essential principles of our
Natures, fallacious; and that we should then be most of all deceived, when we
think we have the clearest apprehensions, and most distinct Idea's of the
things we converse about. Reason is the Image of God in the Soul of Man, and,
when assisted by the Divine Wisdom, is the only (...) to discriminate between
truth and falsehood: And though it be true, that an honest and sincere heart be
dear and precious in the eyes of God, and sufficient to instate a man in that
happiness which attends the faithful adherents of the Kingdom of Light; yet he
that employes his faculties in searching out such considerable truths in Nature
and Providence, as may benefit the world, and do good to the generations of
men, ennobles his Soul, and widens it for the reception of some greater good
and influence, from that inexhaustible Fountain which gave life and being to
the whole frame of Nature. But I fear my Pen has been too luxuriant in pleading
for the free use of Natural Reason, and I have need of your pardon, and shall
make amends, by falling immediately upon the Question in hand. I say therefore,
So far as the Light of Nature is able to judge, the Soul does not immediately go
to Heaven or Hell in their strict significations, upon it is separation from the
body; but that there is some middle State of Being between Death and the
Resurrection. And that you may not think I take in the ashes of the Church of
Rome, and seek to revive and blow up that ridiculous Doctrine of Purgatory; I
shall crave leave to tell you, that by this middle State I mean no such
condition of Being, as that wherein a man from his impious transactions in this
life, shall undergo very sharp and acute torments, the protraction or
abbreviation of which yet, depend upon the will and pleasure of his Holiness
and mercenary Priests; and after such a time of penance and purgation, be
delivered, and translated into Heaven: but, such a state, wherein, by a due
purification of their minds, and subjugation of those stubborn lusts and
desires which exalt themselves against the life of God, and which were not
thoroughly tamed in this life, the Soul of man becomes wholly dead to every
inordinate affection, and daily kindles that fire of Divine Love, till at last
it arise to a perfect flame, and triumphantly carry up the duly prepared soul,
like Elijah in his fiery chariot, to the beatifical vision and enjoyment of God.

Argum. 1.
And this is no more than what Reason it self assures us of; For, he that shall
consider, that the operations of the Spirit of God upon men's hearts, and their
progress in Holiness and Virtue, are wrought successively by parts, and distant
proportions; and that a man is not a Saint in an instant, or by the Piety and
Religion of a day; but attains and reaches to that glorious Crown by patient
continuance in well doing, and that by sharp and unwearied conflicts with Lust
and Sin, by habitual and persevering acts of Virtue, and an undaunted
Resolution, he must demonstrate himself a true and faithful disciple and
soldier of the Son of God: must necessarily conclude, either that the
infinitely far greater part of men are damned, yea, those who have had very
small, and few opportunities of doing good to themselves or others in this
life; or else that there is a time and place of bettering themselves, and where
that benign Spirit, who expressed his dear compassion in hovering over the new
born world, will be as ready to help forward the tender inchoations of the life
of God, and perpetually raise and lift up those fettered souls into the true
liberty of the sons of Heaven and Immortality. As the efformations of the
spirit of Nature out of fitly-prepared Matter, are not instantaneous, but
gradually arrive to their perfection and maturity; So are the operations of
that Universal Spirit of Love and Goodness upon the hearts of men, wherever
he meets with fit and kindly dispositions and capacities. And surely no man
can, without blasphemy, think that God ever was, or will, at any time or place,
be wanting to the faithful endeavors and attempts of sincere persons, after
the participation of his own Image, and the renovation of their minds and
spirits into that divine frame and temper, which is dearer to God than any
thing in the world. Nay, he can never do it; for it is as possible for the Sun
to withhold his beams from shining upon the earth, and leave the disconsolate
world to an eternal night of sorrow and darkness, as for God, the Sun of
Heaven, to be divided from that which is his own life, and suspend his kindly
influence from the tender productions of his Nature. I can sooner believe, that
darkness should desert it is black and pitchy caverns, and sport with light and
the day; or that the Elements should change their natures, and the Frame and
beauteous order of things be tumbled into an eternal confusion; as once to
entertain a thought that God should be unkind, and severe to the pious
breathings of an innocent and harmless Soul. There being therefore in the world
so many truly Religious persons, who affectionately pant and aspire after a
greater communication of the life of God, and yet are denied those
opportunities of perfecting their minds, which others enjoy, by reason of that
place and station assigned them, by the wise, and unerring Providence of God,
in this transitory life; there being likewise so great a part of the world
lying yet under a squallid barbarity, wholly oppressed and laden with the
ruins of their broken Natures, whom yet the Son of God thought not unworthy
his care and love: surely it would be a great eyesore and blemish in Heavens
righteous Economy and dispensation in the World, if there were really no time
or means allowed for the recovery of these lapsed Souls: whose condition,
though it be very sad and calamitous, yet it is not desperate, nor are they
sunk below the compassions of their Maker, but still lie under a benign aspect:
and though the Sun of Righteousness seem to set in a cloud, and leave their
Hemisphere to a night of darkness; yet there is hopes that there will come a
time (if it be not already) wherein he will rise again with healing in his
wings, and visit the desolate and dejected regions of the world, with his
chearing heat and vigor, and their entangled pinions be again set loose, and
their plumes freely dispread in the open and boundless tracts of Immortality
and Joy. It is not the will and pleasure of God that any innocent person should
perish; and therefore we may conclude, that there is some time and place, where
the young and tender efformations of God's holy life, in the more harmless
Pagans, and such who lived in the dark and ignorant age of the world, shall be
brought to their due measure of maturity and perfection: For, to think they are
damned, is not suitable to that everlasting Goodness which is the source and
root of the Divine Perfections; And that they are not immediately translated
into Heaven, properly so called, will appear from the Economy of Providence in
the world, and the Nature of the thing it self.

Arg. 2.
As an Appendix to this, we may add, That Heaven is rather a State than a Place,
and consists in the frame and temperament of a man's mind and spirit; and if we
could imagine a degenerate and sinful person taken up into Heaven, unless God
did likewise miraculously change and alter the present temper and disposition
of his mind, it would be a pain and affliction to him, and he would be no more
capable of dwelling in that glorious brightness, than Owls and Night-birds to
face the Sun, and steadily behold that amazing luster. When the benign Creator
of all things produced the glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth, and
replenished all the empty regions of the World, and the vast capacities of
immense Space, with diverse sorts and degrees of Beings; he so wisely ordered
and disposed every thing, that nothing should act beyond it is sphere, but
proportionately to those powers and faculties it became invested with; for so
the order and frame of the world required. Thus, the beasts of the field cannot
live perpetually in the water, nor fish in the air, because the vital
congruities of the one are adapted to the gross and more compacted body of the
Earth, the other to the fluid and yielding Element of the Water. The Angels,
which are an Order of Spirits above the rank of Humane Souls, cannot actuate
and inform a terrestrial body; nor can man, in his earthly state, become an
inhabitant of the thinner tracts and regions of purest Ether. When therefore
in the beginning God created Mankind, foreseeing that they would not always
continue in the immortal mansions of Paradise, but eat and dye, and instruct
themselves, by unhappy experiments, in the frail and imperfect fate of this
lower World; he fitted them with such vital powers and congruities, as might
capacitate them for action, that so the revolutions of the wheel of Providence
(though wide, and seemingly intricate and perplexed) may at last appear equal
and unerring. There being then a peculiar Crasis or congruity required to
inform that heavenly Body, which shall be the reward of departed Saints at the
Day of God, (and that not to be awakened but by a long and regular depuration
of the Mind, and perfect submission and resignation to the will of God;) we
cannot rationally imagine, that any one should pass immediately from the Body,
to those regions of Light and Glory, before this Divine Principle be
sufficiently invigorated, and the others perfectly laid asleep. And to think
that God will immediately call forth into act this Ethereal congruity of life
in the soul of every pious Man, departed this life, is to set the miraculous
power of God at a very cheap and easy rate. Besides that, it despoils the
Nature of the Creature, and renders useless and ineffectual such Faculties as,
without this supernatural check and control, would, in their due time, awake,
for the orderly accomplishment of that, to whose production we entitle the
immediate operation of the Divinity. Nor does it less entrench upon the Wisdom
of God, by drawing such a Scheme of things, wherein God must continually unbare
his arm, and upon every occasion exert his eternal power for the effecting of
that, which would certainly arise in it is order and proportion, by the attempts
and operations of rational agents, accompanied with the concurrence and
assistance of divine grace and benediction. For so we see that God works in men
now; and we may as well think that God should take every man immediately into
heaven upon his first embracing the Gospel, and by his infinite power make him
a perfect Saint, as that he should do the same for them upon their deathbeds,
or upon their disunion from their bodies. Far be it from us to entitle such
precarious, and unaccountable actions to the Deity; but rather believe, that
the constancy and immutability of his Nature is such, that he always works
orderly, and according to those Laws and Rules he has placed in the World,
unless a visible and certain good of a part, or the whole Creation intervene,
and cannot so advantageously be effected by the ordinary course of Natural
Agents. And now let us consider how very few there are that have arrived to
such eminent degrees and measures of virtue, as to be capable of this exalted
state of mind; and what multitudes of sincere and hearty lovers of truth and
righteousness are snatched away by the rude arms of death, before the luxuriant
branches of the Animal or Brutish life are taken wholly away; and Reason will
extort this confession from us, that there must be a time of purgation in some
state on this side Heaven, wherein the infant productions of the Divine Nature
may arise to their full maturity and perfection. For, it cannot consist with
that eternal Goodness which is the rule and measure of all the actions of the
Deity, to send the greatest part of Mankind into the World, there to lead a
frail and miserable, and, at best, but a short life, subject to infinite
casualties and imperfections, and (which yet blemishes Heaven's righteous
Economy) having but very few, and those weak means and ineffectual helps, as
to the recovering the broken and decayed Image of God in their Souls, for the
want of which notwithstanding they shall be thrown into everlasting misery: I
say, it cannot consist with the Benignity and Goodness of God, to deal thus
with his Creatures: Wherefore, if we will not admit of this, we must seek out
some other Hypothesis, to salve up those flaws and defects which otherwise will
appear in the beauteous Order and ministration of Providence.

Not to omit any thing which might give light to the present Question, I shall
consider the use of those terms and expressions in Holy Scripture, which by
many are extended and drawn to the contrary Sense; and methinks from thence
some few glimmerings ray forth, on purpose, as it were, to allure the lovers of
knowledge to a diligent search and inquisition after it. In my Fathers house
(says the Son of God) are many mansions: but I go to prepare a place for you.
The whole world is the house of the great King, and in it are many Outer-Courts
and different Places, both higher and lower Rooms, fitted for the several
capacities and states of all his Servants; and yet, there was a place whither
all holy Souls shall arrive, and which was not then ready. From whence it is
plain, that the Souls of the Patriarchs, and holy men, which lived before the
Coming of the Messiah, were not entered into the Coelum Beatorum, that is, into
Heaven, properly so called; but were in a state of joy and happiness, (which
the Greek Fathers call (...); and (...), as Luke 16, and the Latin, Refrigerium
and Somnum pacis) where they conversed with God, as the Prophets did in their
Dreams, in which they received great degrees of favor and revelation, and were
refreshed with the frequent visits and society of Angels, till they arose to
their ethereal State. And this is the Receptacle of all good men, in whom the
fire of Divine Love is not so enflamed and kindled, as to melt their less pure
bodies into a Celestial splendour. And to this accords that speech of Christ to
the penitent thief; This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, that is, in the
joys and felicities of pious Souls; for (...) is by the Greeks, and Philo,
called the Garden where Adam was placed: And hence, when the felicities of a
future life began to be discovered more clearly, the state of holy Souls
expecting the resurrection of the dead, was called by the Jews (...). The
reason of which was, (as Grotius in Luke 23. conjectures) because of the
analogy between them; that, as the Garden of Paradise, in which Adam was in his
state of innocence, abounded with pleasures and delights; so does this
receptacle of pious and devout souls after death. And hence it was that St.
Paul in 2 Cor. 12.2.4. was first shown the joys of the children of the
Resurrection; and, least his resolute and active Soul should be troubled with
the long expectation of such ineffable felicity, the comforts and refreshments
of Paradise, and antepasts of Heaven, were likewise discovered to him. Which
were denoted to the sons of sense under the notion and figure of a Garden,
because they could not conceive (...) nisi sub figura (...), intellectual
things, but under a sensible Scheme. And to this are opposed (...), and (...),
which signify the state and condition of such irreclamable spirits as are sunk
below all the principles of Righteousness and justice, and make it their whole
design to obliterate those Idea's out of their minds. Now, as Paradise and Hell
signify the distinct condition of good and bad Spirits, so ((...)) Hades
denotes the common receptacle of them all, and is opposed both to this Life,
and the Resurrection; and answers to the Hebrew (...), as Genesis 37.35. (...);
for I will go down into the grave unto my son, mourning; which could not be
meant of the Grave, as if his son had been buried, (for he supposed him to be
torn in pieces by wild beasts) but of the region or state of Invisibility; for
so Hades properly signifies: Thus Heraclitus, (...). speaking of the Helmet of
Hades which makes men invisible, he says, It is (...), the end, or death of
every man; (...), to which he that comes, becomes invisible. It is more than
probable therefore, that Paradise signifies no other, but, according to the
Jewish notion, a place of delight and pleasure, appropriated to the Spirits of
just men; such as the Poets understood by their Elizian field, which Pindar,
Olymp. Od. 2, as he is cited by Eugubinus, in his book de perenni Philosophia,
excellently well describes; (...)
(...),
(...),
(...). These verses not extant in our vulgar books.

(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).


For, that our Savior by Paradise did not understand those ethereal Regions
of bliss and joy, which are the portion and inheritance of defecate and sublime
Spirits, will be evident; in that he himself was not there, but, in the
intermediate space between his Death and Resurrection, preached, (...), to the
spirits in prison, that is, to those who in the days of Noah were drowned in
that general Deluge, and now were released, and set at liberty by the approach
of the Son of God; such as the Prophet Zach. 9.11, 12. calls Prisoners of hope,
lying in the lake where there is no water; that is, where there was no constant
stream of joy to refresh their present condition, but yet they were supported
with certain showers and gracious visitations from God, and illuminations of
their hope. That of St. Paul, Phil. 1.23. makes little to their purpose, who
think the Soul goes presently to Heaven, upon the dissolution of the body; for,
To be with Christ, signifies no more, than that our Souls are received by
Christ, into merciful, joyful, and safe custody, as dear pledges Act ^.59 and 2 Timothy 1.12.
committed to his trust and care, till Hades shall deliver up it is dead; and
then we, who before were (...), invisible, shall come forth, and be presented
to the view of the World, and receive that great (...), and Crown of
Righteousness, which Christ has laid up for St. Paul, and you, and me, and all
that long for his appearance. The sum of all is this, that it cannot be made
good, either from Scripture or Reason, that the Souls of men departed this
life, go immediately upon their separation, to Heaven or Hell, in a
Scholastical sense: For this we have the suffrage of Justin Martyr, who
disputing with Trypho the Jew, taxes those as erroneous, who say, (...).

Your third Demand carries with it more d^fficulty; and while I discourse of
it, I am wholly in the dark, and can only give you a Conjectural Essay: which,
if it may be subservient to my purpose, that is, please, and gratify your
fancy, and, like the little dots or characters in Brachygraphy, bring to your
mind a more copious illustration of the present Theme, I shall obtain my desire.

I consider therefore, the whole World, under God the great Monarch of the
Creation, (so many, I mean, as participate of Reason and Intellect) to fall
under a Political Government; and it seems altogether necessary, that among the
aereal Inhabitants it should be so; for they being a mixed, and heterogeneous
number, of good and bad, if there were not a due execution of those Eternal and
Sacred Laws enacted by the Counsel of Heaven, for the promoting and
establishing Piety and Virtue, and the everting and eradicating Vice and
Impiety, the condition of all good and holy men would be unspeakably grievous
and miserable; there being so many degenerate Spirits, who are only awake to
the life of the Body, and being wholly dead to all sense of Pity and
Compassion, please themselves in wreaking the rage of their furious and
exorbitant Lusts upon the Innocent and Virtuous: whose calamity must needs be
Eternal, should not that just Nemesis, which pervades the essential contextures
and inmost capacities of the whole Creation, erect a Polity and Kingdom of
Light, to preside over, and curb the lawless actions of the dark Associates.
And as the Condition and state of separate Souls is in a manner quite different
from ours, so their Laws and Mulcts are diverse, and are best known to those
that live under them: But whatever they are, it is most certain, their Penalties
are severely executed upon offenders. And, for the due effecting of this, and
conserving the peace and quiet of this great Empire of Intellectual Agents,
there are Ethereal Princes set over the several Kingdoms of the World; and,
in subordination to them, are, the Governors, or tutelary Angels of Provinces,
and little Exarchats; and last of all, every man's particular Genius, or
guardian Angel: so that this Government reaches even from Heaven to Earth, and
none can, through subtilty or power, free themselves from it. Considering
therefore, The blew Arch, or Concave of Heaven, is so full of eyes, and careful
Inspectors of the several actions and demeanours of separate Spirits, and their
punishments so sharp and heavy, it is not to be thought that they will easily be
induced to violate any of their Laws, (of which, perchance this may be one, of
concealing their state from us Mortals) unless some one beg a Patent or
dispensation, to satisfy the importunity of a relict Friend, or discharge the
obligation of an Oath. And this may be one reason why we hear so little news
from the aereal Regions.

Another great Cause of their so seldom appearing to us, may be the d^fficulty
and uneasiness of incrassating their Vehicles; Thus have I seen, of twenty
boys, bathing and washing in the streams, scarce one delight in diving to the
bottom; and if perchance he do, his stay is so small and inconsiderable, that,
had he been sent on Embassy to the Fishes, the time would scarce permit him to
have Audience, before he were constrained to disappear. And I am the more
confirmed in this persuasion, from those assiduous Apparitions of Spirits among
the Laplanders, whose Air being gross and clammy, it is no hard matter for a
Demon to condensate it to visibility; and from hence it was, that those people
used to interr their deceased Friends under their hearths, that so the warmth
and heat of the fire, accelerating the putrefaction of their bodies, and
rarefying the Crasie consistency of the Air, might prohibit their otherwise
more frequent Visits. And he that shall recollect some, of those many stories
of Phantasms, and the Apparitions of Spirits, which every age supplies us with;
and take notice of those artifices and ways, which, in all probability, they
make use of, when they intend to show themselves to the frail eyes of men: he
cannot but conclude it to be a pain and affliction, to constipate and hold
together the gross particles, and glutinous suffusions of their Vehicles, for
any considerable time. Hence it is, that those Spectra which infest the Earth,
are generally maleficent Demons, whose spirital part, grown fat and dull,
through a perpetual indulgence to their lower Faculties, like Swine, they take
a great complacency in dabling and soaking their vehicles in the miry, and
caliginous tracts of the Air; and often become visible, by fermenting and
agitating the stagnant blood of their despicable bodies they left behind them,
and which the charity of men laid to rest in the Earth. And, by the way, this
is the reason why sometimes the Spectra have never been seen or heard of, after
the burning and consuming of their bodies, which furnished them with effectual
instruments and provision for their gamesome or wicked attempts. But if this be
not ready at hand, they descend into the nasty Caverns of the Earth, and
attract to them the thickest fumes and exhalations; or else suck in the impure
and fulsome steams arising from the blood of slain beasts, like the Zabii,
licking the blood of the Egyptian Sacrifices, which is, nor only a kind of
Nutriment to their vehicles, but the most likely means to transform themselves
into whatsoever visible shape they please. To this purpose is that of
Porphyrie, Lib. 2. (...). Sect. 42.
(...) (scil. (...)) (...). And this, no doubt, is the reason why the
Familiars, and Imps of Witches, make themselves a kind of Teat in some part or
other of the bodies of their accursed Consorts, whereby they exhaust their
blood and spirits, and render their visages for the most part horrid and
ghastly, like themselves, when they appear to them. From the consideration of
these evil Genii, we may proportionably guess at the state of those better
Souls, who have nothing more to do upon the Earth, when they are once departed
from it; or, if they appear again, it is upon a great necessity, and for a
weighty occasion; and then they scorn and abhor those ignoble ways of making
themselves objects of our Senses; and having effected their design, they are no
more heard of, but rest in peace and quietness; chiefly aiming at the loosening
and freeing themselves from their commerce with the impurer parts of matter.
For, as the other do delight in incrassating, so these are continually intent
upon attenuating their Vehicles, and awakening to life their ethereal
congruity; which having attained, they become invisible to the Aereal
Inhabitants. And, as when we traverse the hills, and suck in the purer gusts of
air, we are more vivid and cheerful, and it is an affliction to stay in a
thicker and unwholesome Region; so these purer Spirits, having free access to
the tops of mountains, and more serene Quarters of heaven, find themselves
sensibly pained, when they descend into these lower tracts, and coagulate their
looser bodies into a visible consistency.

To give some further light to the Physical consideration of this Argument, in
reference to the Apparitions both of Good and Bad Spirits; it may be, it will
require almost as deep a degree of Fancy, to constipate their aerie Bodies to
visibility, as it does to attain to that (...), or separation and disjunction
of the Soul from this terrestrial Body without Death, and then it is no wonder
if so few appear to us: For, though the matter of their Vehicles may be very
pliable, and easily formed into any shape, yet the efformation of it into this,
or the other particular (...), depends not so much upon the will, or
arbitrarious power, as upon a very strong imagination, impressed upon, and
reaching the plastic Faculty; and it seems to be no more in their power to
condense their Bodies into visibility, than it is in ours, to rarifie our Blood
into Steam and vapor. Their bodies therefore, naturally falling into humane
shape, and retaining the characteristical personality they bare in this world,
if at any time they constrain them to represent another effigies, or contract
and constipate the laxe and diffuse particles of their vehicles, so as to
become sensible to us, it cannot be counted a spontaneous action, that is
effected by an arbitrary power, but depends upon the strength of Imagination
which, although it act more quick and perceptibly upon their tenuious bodies,
yet all effects are not equally produced by the same degree of Fancy or
Imagination: Thus the signature, or impression of a Cherry upon the Foetus in
the womb, is more easily produced, than the transformation of all it is members,
into those of a Cat or Dog. And, as it is storied of Cardan, that by use and
custom he had so altered his body, that he could, when he pleased, fall into a
perfect (...); so I deny not but some separate spirits, may, by practice, and
the aid of the Spirit of Nature, which may not improbably be thought assistant
at such Feats as these, without any great pain or trouble become visible.

Having given you this brief account of the Question, I shall digress a little
(if I may call it so) to another Speculation, not unlike the former, and that
is, Why Good Angels, and pure and defecate Souls, whose exalted State makes
them no less lovers of Men, than when their radiant Goodness was clothed with
Humanity, and dwelt among them; should nevertheless hide it, by their short,
and seldom Converse with the World? The great Cause of it therefore seems to
lie in the general wickedness and impurity of men's lives, insomuch that
wickedness has deluged the World; and Impiety and Vice, like a mighty torrent,
swept away the ruinous and broken remains of Virtue, and defaced the air and
features of the Divine Image, so that Holiness looks like a strange and unknown
thing, as if it were as much forsaken of God as despised of men. For surely,
did a real Spirit of truth and righteousness prevail in the hearts of mankind,
and were they inoffensive and harmless, as the Sons of God and virtue, laying
aside all Envy, Pride, and Self-interest, and expelling the principles of the
impious Nature, and becoming in all things conformable to the mind and temper
of the Holy Jesus; there would be no such strangeness between Heaven and Earth,
but the communications of the Divine and Terrestrial Nature would be more
frequent; and the Holy Angels, and the departed Souls of Just Men, would
descend upon Earth, and visit the World, and Men would be made one Polity with
them; and to Dye would be no more than to walk out of a close Prison, into the
free and unbounded Air. For, what else can there be that should impede, or put
a stop to such happy entertainments, since their pretensions and designs on
both parts are the same, that is, the carrying on the Divine Life in triumph,
to its utmost completion and perfection, and the utter eversion of the Kingdom
of Sin and Darkness? The Angels, though much more noble than we, yet are no
narrow, and self-contracted Beings, sporting themselves in the circles of their
own glory, in an utter oblivion, or abhorrence of the poor and calamitous
condition of the Inhabitants of the Earth, but full of love and benignity,
remembering them as those who were once invested with the same happiness
themselves now enjoy; and therefore are careful Observators of them, and
Promoters of their felicity; Nor can we imagine, that Death can alienate the
affections of pious and holy men departed this life, from their fellow mortals,
or make them less compassionate and studious of their good and welfare, but
rather increase, and fann their Love into Flames and gentle Ardors, and having
more knowledge, and a greater resentment of their wants and necessities, become
not uninteressed Spectators, but earnest Abettors of their innocent and
faithful attempts, in recovering their ancient glory. It Is to be hoped
therefore, that the time will come, before the periods of this World are run
out and unravelled, that the Divine Life shall have a general conquest over the
hearts and minds of men, and a Spirit of Love and Righteousness overspread the
face of the Earth; and men shall be fully assured and convinced even to outward
sense of the immortality of their Souls, and the joys of a future life, by the
frequent intercourse and converse of holy and benign Spirits with them in these
regions of the Earth.

To resume and conclude my former argument: That the apparitions of separate
Souls are rare and infrequent, proceeds from the causes above recited; but,
that there have been some in all ages, serves to carry on that great design of
Providence, in assuring men of the future subsistence of their Souls, and
confronting that dull and sottish spirit of Atheism, which is gone abroad into
the world; That there is something in us that looks beyond the periods of this
fleeting life, and survives our ashes, and is capable of acting freely and
nobly, when these carneous fabrics shall fall asunder, and be crammed into
their narrow Urns. The Soul of man, while it is held captive in the shackles and
fetters of flesh and blood, is but in a Sleep, or a longer Dream; and the
expiration of this terrestrial period, which we call Death, is the
expergefaction, or awakening those nobler Faculties, to a sense of Divinity,
and unmasking the intricate, and perplexed apprehensions of the mind, from
error and falsehood. And hence it was, that the Indian Brachmans Eorum
sententiam sic exprimit nobis Strabo, lib. 15. (...). Vid. and insignem de hac
eorum sententia locum, apud Porphyr. lib. 4. (...). Sect. ^8.
affirmed, The life of man in this World, to be like the state of the Foetus in
the Womb; and Death, to be the Birth to Life, truly so called; to a Life of
Happiness in the Blessed Reg^ons above, in the quiet Plains of Heaven, the Seat
of the Immortal (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Genii: where the winds never ruffle up a cloud to intercept the light of the
Sun's brighter face, nor Snow or Showers ever pass through; but an undisturbed
calm and serenity of an Eternal Day overspreads the utmost limits of these
Blissful Mansions.

Your last Question propounded, is, concerning the lawfulness of Praying for
the Dead, and, Whether the mutual obligations of friendship cease, when they
are removed from the ruinous fabrics of their Earthly Bodies? And truly,
methinks, it is a Problem worthy your eximious and generous mind, which is not
contented only to make use of all the instances and opportunities of doing good
to mankind in this life, but your pious charity would likewise follow them into
the next; and, if it might be, make them as happy as God at first created them.
For (as I have often heard you discourse) it is a pain and affliction, great as
the tearing and rending our bodily life, to a noble and free spirit, to
persuade himself, that, when our Piety has committed our dead Friend's body to
the Earth, its common Parent, and besprinkled his Hearse with a Funeral tear,
and, it may be, for some small time after, breathed out a fresh gale of Sighs
upon the sight of a Picture, or any thing, which, with his last words, and
dying groans, he recommended to us as his Memorial; that then he should be
banished out of our minds, and no more regarded, than if he had never lived in
the world, or were now quite extinct, and put out of Being. I cannot therefore
attribute this unconcernedness for the state and condition of departed Souls,
to any thing else, but to that poverty and narrowness of spirit, which makes
men look upon themselves as private, and particular Beings, sent into the world
to promote and advance their self designs and little interests, in
contradistinction to all the rest of mankind, forgetting that they are a part
of Gods Creation, and members of that great Body Politic which reaches from
Heaven to Earth, and is extended every way through the vast comprehensions of
immense Space; and therefore, that all the Creatures ought to have a share in
their love; and that the more perfect their Natures are, the more they ought to
be widened and enlarged in Charity, and an universal Benignity toward all,
especially toward mankind, in promoting, to their utmost power, the completion
of their happiness. For, although men, when they go away hence, become
invisible to us, and we are in part at loss, in reference to their affairs and
concerns; yet nevertheless we are assured they are in Being, and members of
that great Society, of which we our selves make a part; and therefore are not
to be accounted such strangers to our thoughts and devotions: and if their
Prayers can at all prevail, and be effectual in our behalf, I do not see why
the Prayers and Oraisons of a Good and Holy Person upon Earth, may not enter
the ears of Heaven, and derive a blessing upon them, supposing them to stand
in need of those things he desires in their behalf. That separate Souls are not
unmindful of us when they have left the prisons of Flesh and Blood, and inherit
a new and stranger freedom, cannot easily be denied; unless we will say, that
the more perfect they grow, the less charity and love they retain toward those
who want those degrees of felicity they have arrived unto. It Is true, those
holy Spirits which depart hence, are seated far above the reach of Envy or
Passion; and the dead Wife is not troubled at the songs sung at the next Bridal
Feast, nor grieved to see another inherit the Joys of her Husbands-bed; but
yet they are not removed so far, as to beget in them an utter oblivion of
those they have left behind: nor does the augmentation of their Happiness,
diminish their love toward us Mortals, who begin our lives with weeping, as a
sure presage of our future calamities; and the first tribute we pay to the
light of the Sun, is to present him with a tear, and watery eyes. There is then
without doubt a Relation continued still, which, not only the laws of their
Friendship, but their own native goodness, which dispreads it self every way,
when freed from the contagion of Earthly Concretions, will never suffer them to
rescind: To this purpose, Josephus brings in Abraham thus bespeaking his son
Isaac, before that fatal stroke designed to let out that pure Soul into the
Skies; (...). And St. Ambrose gave some things in charge to his dying brother
Satyrus, that he should do for him in the other world. And as they present
themselves before the Throne of Majesty in humble Petitions for us, so
certainly something belongs to us to do for them; and we must, by all those
ways we can, preserve, and continue the memory of our dead Friends, and of all
good men: which can no ways be better done, than by desiring God, with hearty
and constant Prayer, to call home his banished to him; that those (...), those
little particles, and shreds of Divinity, (as Epictetus calls the Souls of men)
may be gathered up, and reunited to the first, and al comprehensive Good; and
when the periods of this world shall be expired, they may have a joyful
Resurrection, and a perfect consummation of their Bliss, in the Immortal
Regions of Glory and Felicity. Thus St. Paul prayed for Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy
1.18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day;
who, it is probable, was at that time dead, because the Apostle salutes the
house of Onesiphorus, and not Onesiphorus himself; who, doubtless, had he been
alive, and part of his family, would have been named particularly in the first
place, and not afterward, distinct from his House. But I do not lay so much
stress upon this: If therefore the dead are in a state and capacity of being
bettered, (as I think I have sufficiently proved they are, by what I have said
in answer to your second Question) they may likewise receive good and advantage
by our Prayers. For, to think that the Soul of man is immediately snatched up
into the highest bliss and happiness in Heaven, or depressed into the torments
of Hell, is not only contrary to Reason, but repugnant to the sense of
Antiquity, which unanimously determines a time, (...), of Purgation, before she
can be admitted into the society of the Spirits (...), of just men made
perfect; and if our Prayers can be in any measure beneficial to men in this
life, they may have the same effects and purposes upon them in the other. For,
let any man that thinks otherwise consider, what he means by Heaven, and if he
have any congruous, and rational apprehension and Idea of it, he must
necessarily conclude it to be a state of the highest purity and holiness, and
the farthest removed from the infectious pollution of Mortality, and dreggs of
the Terrestrial Life, and then let him reflect upon the moral Natures and
Dispositions of the greatest part of Mankind, when they leave this world, and
see how many vicious habits and inclinations toward the complacencies and
inordinate pleasures of sense remain unmortified, how stubborn and inflexible
their wills are yet to sincere Goodness and Righteousness, and how vigorous the
Animal and bodily Life is, notwithstanding the continual contradictions and
oppositions of Reason, and higher principles; and how very few of those which
are sincerely good and righteous, to their utmost powers, have brought
themselves under the Divine Life, so as to awaken in them that high and
comprehensive principle of Life and Immortality: let him, I say, consider these
things, and then tell me, whether he can rationally averr, That the Souls of
men, immediately upon their solution from their bodies, are carried into those
degrees of happiness which are competible only to Heroically good and Virtuous
Spirits. Nor can this enervate the force of this Argumentation, to say, That
all the sins which a good man is guilty of in this life, proceed from his union
and conjunction with this terrestrial Body, which continually administers fuel
to the flames of inordinate Passions and irregular Desires and Actions; and
consequently, when he is freed from the strait and narrow Laws of Mortality, he
will become necessarily Good; and it will be as impertinent to pray for his
emendation, and perfection in Holiness, as when we see the Sun leaving our
Hemisphere, to pray that he may rise, and enlighten the world again to morrow.
For, besides the ridiculousness of supposing the Soul of man, immediately upon
it is relinquishing the Body, to arise to such prodigious degrees of Sanctity,
and Wisdom, and Goodness, that she becomes an Angel, or Demigod, or, I know not
what transcendent Being, and so perfectly cleared, and purified from all spots
and defilements contracted in this life; as that glorious Eye of Heaven, the
Sun, cannot epsy a blemish in her; besides this, I say, one may well question,
Whether the Soul of man will be so Necessarily, and Fatally Good, in the other
state, as the Objection seems to infer; since that she is never out of the
reach of danger, till she has attained her heavenly Body, which Christ, the
righteous Judge, shall bestow upon her at the general Resurrection; but is
always encompassed about with the same invisible enemies, which attended her
in this life; (there being a mixture, and complexion of good and bad Spirits,
as of Mankind upon Earth): nor can she be totally freed from the extravagant
impulses, and motions of her body, though it be far more passive, and yielding
to those gentle impresses and strokes she lays upon it, to countermand it is
luxuriant solicitations to Impurity and Vice: And, though we should grant her
to be Heroically good, (which is all that can be desired) yet her own Will, the
principle of her first Rebellion and Apostasy, still remains, and she can have
no greater security of her non-retrogradation, and falling back again, then the
Angels, or she her self enjoyed, before her unhappy lapse: so that even here,
there is required a timely care and vigilance; and, if the most virtuous Person
upon Earth, may stand in need of Good Men's Prayers, to be excited to this
careful industry and inspection over his ways, then may they likewise in the
other world. The Similitude therefore is ill applied, from the necessary, and
inevitable laws of Matter and corporeal Motion, to the emergent and spontaneous
effects of free Agents; for, unless we will make those bright Suns of
Immortality, the Souls of men, to be purely Mechanical Contrivances, and
despoil them of all liberty and innate principles, whereby to guide, and
determine their actions; we cannot imagine, that their Apogee's and Perigee's,
the excess and diminution of their rays, and beams of Righteousness, should be
so fatal and determinate, as the Rising and Setting of the material Sun, which
illuminates the World. But, lastly, If we are to pray for nothing, which we are
certain will come to pass whether we pray or no; I do not see how any man can
say those Petitions, in that most excellent Prayer our Blessed Lord himself
has taught us, wherein we desire, God's Name to be hallowed, his Kingdom to
come, and his Will to be done; for all these things will certainly be effected
and accomplished, although we never pray that they should: Or, what need we
pray, as our Church enjoins us, in her complete, and exact Service and Office
of Burial, that God would shortly accomplish the number of his Elect, and
hasten his Kingdom? Will not such Prayers as these, according to this Rule, be
wholly useless and insignificant? Did not Christ pray for his Apostles, in the
days of his Flesh, whom yet he knew certainly to persevere, and continue
faithful unto Death? But I need not multiply Instances in this case. He that
will follow therefore the duct of Reason, which alone ought to be Judge in this
case, where the Scriptures are silent, must necessarily subscribe to this, That
those who go out of this Body with love and affection to Sin and Vice, must
receive a punishment proportionable to the inequality and obliquity of their
spirits; and be fatally carried to such places of the Universe, as are suitable
to the coursness of their tempers; and, so on the contrary, That Virtuous minds
shall be rewarded with such degrees of Felicity, and take up their station in
rhose Habitations which are most congruous and agreeable to their Natures and
Genius^s; and, consequently, that those, who have not conquered their Lusts,
nor subdued their rebellious Habits, but are taken away in the contest between
the law of Sin, and the law of the Mind, that is, when the man is neither
wholly alive to God nor Sin, but in the intermediate state, carrying a war
within him, and acting perpetually with a reluctance, and adhering sometimes to
the one, and then to the other Principle, according as the strength of Natural
corruption, or the auxiliaries of Reason prevail upon him; he must conclude, I
say, that such Persons as these, dying, cannot be immediately rewarded with the
Bliss and Glories of Heaven, because they have not as yet performed the
condition upon which that Felicity is entailed; which is, to be changed and
renewed in the spirit of their minds, to be purified throughout, and become
holy as God is Holy, partaking of his Nature, and becoming in all things
conformable to the Holy Jesus, as to a perfect and complete Copy of all Virtue
and Righteousness; Nor will the Goodness of Almighty God, whose Spirit is
always taking hold of every heart, that retains any capacities and
dispositions for the reception of it is own Nature, frustrate such auspicious
beginnings, but rather cherish and fold them, like a tender mother, in it is
loving arms, till it bring them to that due perfection, which alone can render
them the proper subjects of Immortality and Life. It will follow then, that
such as these (and such are the greatest part of mankind) are fit and adequate
objects of our Prayers; Nor can the small, and only conjectural knowledge which
we have of the state of separate Souls, make us ever a whit the more remiss in
performing these exercises (which are the only ones we can show) of love and
charity to our departed friends, if we remind our selves of what I before
hinted, and shall now further prosecute; viz. That the unfallen Angels, and the
Spirits of good and holy men, departed this life, and all just persons upon
Earth, who are daily breathing after, and aspiring to the highest pitch of a
Christian life, are one Polity, Society, or Corporation, which reaches from
that Blessed and Glorious Seat of Majesty, which we more eminently call Heaven,
to this Globe of earth, whereon we live; so that, all those intermundane Spaces
are replenished with several ranks and orders of invisible Agents, who are, as
the benign-eyes of God, beholding the administration of the affairs of the
Earth, and protecting the sincere lovers of truth from the tyranny and invasion
of the Airy Principality; and there is no need we should fancy them beyond the
Stars, when they have quitted their bodies; where all that they can do (if
happily they can attain so much), is, to be compassionate Spectators of our
Calamities, being unable to afford the least relief or succor, but look upon
them as not far distant from us, where they may not only behold the several
transactions of men, but really assist and abette their innocent and pious
attempts after the divine life and Nature. And the more good and purified they
are from the contagion of mortal concretions, the more compassionate and benign
Inspectors will they be of humane affairs and more concerned in their behalf
for their advantage and welfare.

Having thus far discoursed from the reason of the thing it self I may cast in
the suffrage of the ancient Fathers of the Church, to let you see the Sense of
Antiquity, that prayers for the dead were in use even in the early dawning as
it were of Christianity: Tertullian de Corona Militis, has these Words,
Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis, annua die facimus. And, in his Book
de Monogamia; Pro anima ejus (nempe mariti) oret, and refrigerium interim
adpostulet ei, and in prima Resurrectione consortium; and offerat annuis diebus
dormitionis ejus. Damascen. Orat. defunctis. (...).

See likewise Dionys. Areopag. de Ecclesiast. Hierarch. (mihi) page 147, 148.

Saint Austin likewise, in the ninth Book of his Confessions, chap. 12. and 13.
sets down at large the prayers he made for his mother Monica, and her husband
Patricius.

And if any yet desire further Testimony let them consult the ancient Liturgies
of the Church, where are set down particular Forms of Prayer for the dead; for
such I mean who deceased in the Communion of the Church: Nec ullus invenitur
(says the learned Grotius) alicujus authoritatis Scriptor, qui ei mori
contradixerit. St. Chrysostom likewise in Homil. ad Pop. Antiochen. ad Hom. 3.
in Epist. ad Philipp. as he is cited by Cassander in his Consultat. p. 239.
affirms that this Form qua Ecclesia omnibus suis membris in Christo
quiescentibus locum refrigerii, and quietis, and pacis postulat, was of
Apostolical institution. And although, says he p. 240 it were not agreed upon
by all, In what state the Soul was after her departure from the body; Omnes
tamen hoc officium, ut testimonium charitatis erga defunctum, and ut
professionem fidei de immortalitate Animarum and futura Resurrectione, Deo
gratum and Ecclesiae utile esse judicarunt. Add to this (which, in such a case
as this may have it is weight) that our blessed Savior coming into the World to
amend and correct the manners of mankind, and to introduce a Religion which
should be Universal over the whole world, did, as it were on purpose to
gratify both Jews and Heathens, as well retain whatever was good and laudable
in either of their Religions, as expunge whatever was useless or of a bad
consequence; and yet we never find either in the History of the Gospels, or in
any credible Author, that ever he reprehended that custom of praying for the
Dead, which was in use even at his coming into the world; as the ancient
Talmudick Form, composed as it is thought by the Jews in their Babylonian
captivity, and that Apochryphal Writer of the second Book of Macchab. chap, 12.
sufficiently testify. And Calvin himself Instit. 3. c. 5. confesses that
Prayer for the dead was in use above a Thousand three Hundred years ago.

Those two places, Ecclesiast. chap. 11. v. 3, and Apocalypse. chap. 14.13. some
make use of to prove that Men immediately upon the dissolution of their Souls
from their bodies go immediately either to Heaven or Hell, and therefore our
prayers are impertinent because their state whatever it be, is fixed and
irreversible; belong little to that purpose. As for the first, the words of
which are these, If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the
earth; and if the Tree fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place
where the Tree falls, there it shall be; it has no relation to this purpose,
but properly belongs to the case of Charity, as Castellio has noted: Dum
abundas largire. Mortuus largiri non poteris, ut lapsa arbor jam nequit in quam
velit partem ferri.

The other likewise as little promotes their Design, if we look well into the
words, which are these, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them: which verse must have a connection with the
precedent, (...) Here is the patience of the Saints, namely, in holding
constantly the profession of the faith in the midst of those Persecutions which
should shortly come upon them; upon which occasion the Spirit of God accounts
them happy who die (...), quickly, for they hear no more the voice of the
oppressor, but are taken away from the evil to come, and rest from their
labors, that is, are freed from troubles and persecutions; for so (...)
signifies. A like speech, is that Eccles. 4. upon mention of the oppressors,
and the no comforter, it follows v. 2. Wherefore I praised the dead that are
already dead. Thus Sir I have at last finished that Task you imposed upon me,
in the performance of which I shall esteem my self infinitely gratified, if by
it you will please to account me,

Sir, Yours etc.
June, 25. 1665.
FINIS.

