Christ's Ascension INTO HEAVEN ASSERTED, AND Practically Improved, IN Several
SERMONS.

By the Reverend Mr. Joseph Hallet, late Minister of the Gospel in Exon.

Whereunto is added by way of Preface some Account of the Pious AUTHOR.

I ascend to my Father, and to your Father, and to my God, and your God.

John 20.17. London: Printed for John Salusbury, and Robert Osborne Bookseller
near the Bear in Exon. 1693.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To that Congregation of Christian People in Exon, that were usually my
Father's Auditors, during the public Exercise of his Ministry in this City;
and to all his Friends and Acquaintance.
DEAR SIRS,
IT is Customary with some Persons, to front the Reasons of the Publication of
their Treatises with this: viz. That they were induced thereto, by the pressing
Importunity of their Friends. I verily believe I may have as good a Foundation
for the employing of this Argument, to excuse my exposing some of my Father's
Sermons to public View, as most of those that have at any time addressed their
Readers with this Plea: With what Vrgency many of you have been prompting me to
this Undertaking, I leave you to your selves to be informed. To gratify your
desires, and in Compliance with your earnest Solicitations, I here at length
present you with a few Sermons of his, that were some Years since Preached
amongst you, upon the Subject of our Lord's Ascension into Heaven. I confess, I
was a long while very backward to the Publication of my Father's Discourses,
because I saw the World was already cramb'd with so many Treatises on all kind
of Subjects, that I almost doubted, whether amongst so great a Crowd, there
would be any room admitted them for Entertainment. However, I have resolved to
send these into the World, but what acceptance they may meet withal I cannot
presage; only thus much I dare adventure to presume upon, that they will meet
with a Cordial welcome from you. But let me leave this Caution with the Reader,
that he expect not to meet in these Discourses with a Gaiety of Expression, or
a pompous Rhetoric; for the Author never affected a finery of Language in his
Pulpit-Discourses, but always studied plainess, that he might affect and
Profit, not Amuse his Auditors. I have often heard him speak with somewhat of
concern against those Pulpit-Declaimers, whose Language discovered their Design
rather to be Ostentation, then Edification. I question not but he was as able
to Trim and Adorn a Discourse, as most of those that would fain have the World
applaud them as mighty Orators. But he was satisfied, however, that might make
the People admire, it was not the way to make them wiser or better. Well, a
plain Discourse it is that you are here presented with; but yet as it is not
gaudy, so neither does it appear in so sordid a Dress as to attract Contempt:
Had my Dear Father had the Publication of it himself before his Decease, you
may be confident it would have had something more of exactness, then now can be
supposed to attend it. For its highly improbable, that posthumous and popular
Discourses (especially if their Authors never designed them for the Press)
should be chargeable with no Defects; when as some of the least Composures of
this kind have their Flaws. If you meet with any thing in the following Sermons
liable to Objection, remember these Discourses could not possibly have the
Author's Review to render them more Correct before their Publication. And then
they struggle under the Disadvantage of having been Copied from a few blotted
Notes that were scarcely Legible: yet thus much I dare aver, that although the
Scribe may have been guilty of some few mistakes, yet not of very great ones.

But as to the Author of these ensuing Sermons, My endeared Father, it may
perhaps, be expected by some, that I should give a Character of him suitable to
his Worth, and tell the World what were those commendable Qualities in him,
that recommended him so much to the esteem of many that knew him: I could, I
confess, say many things of him, as a good Christian, a Scholar, a Pastor, and
a Parent, which would discover him to have been a Person above the common Rate;
but I should incur the censure of many, should I attempt any thing of that
nature. Therefore all I shall do as to that matter, shall only be to remember
you of some things concerning him, which fell within the knowledge of most of
you. He was, although a Person of a crasie Body, yet a very painful and diligent
Student, that carefully employed his time to the best advantage; insomuch, that
he was not but with great difficulty, at any time drawn to recreative
Diversions. Though it may be, his enfeebled Body, and his shattered Spirits
called for their frequent Repetition. He was a very faithful and affectionate
Pastor, that readily condescended to the meanest, and would Conscientiously
discharge the Duties of his Function, notwithstanding the Frowns of the
greatest: He was as forward to reprove the Lives of those of a higher Station,
as the Follies of those that moved in a lower Sphere: His Prayers were always
fervent and pithy; his Preaching very clear but warm, and he delivered his
matter with such a winning Pathos, that he even commended the Attention of his
Auditory; he filled not his Discourses with bitter Invectives against the
Persons of those that differed from him in some Controverted Points, but many
times spoke honorably of them. His design was not to raise men's Passions, but
to allay them when exorbitant; not to Exulcerate men's Minds, but to calm and
sweeten them. He Preached to instruct the Ignorant, to reclaim the Sinful, to
comfort the contrite Soul; but not to fill men's Hearts with Rage, or their
Mouths with Clamor. He was a Person irrecoverably averse to any thing of
flattery, or a daubing Language; who always made his Tongue the Interpreter of
his Heart. There are a sort of men in the World, with whom there are, as the
Poet speaks, (...). Moschus.

Charming Tongues, but Hearts full of rancour and bitterness, whose Words do
not keep Peace with their secret Intentions. And I am sure the Author had
sufficient reason to be exemped from that number; he was a fond lover of
Integrity, and was obstinately set against all Temptations to any thing of
Injustice; insomuch, that he has sometimes drawn upon himself the displeasure
of his Friends, by his stiff adhesion to Truth and Equity. It was always his
temper to value Truth and Honesty before the Applauses of Men, or the profuse
Commendations of mistaken Friends. Amicus Plato, Amicus Aristoteles, sed magis
Amica veritas; He might have justly challenged for his Motto: He was a very
Conscientious and Laborious Minister, so well pleased with the Work his Master
had called him to do; that his many Bodily Infirmities that very much
indisposed him toward the last of his Time, could not detain him from engaging
in it. How often has it been fitter for him to have been in his Bed then in his
Pulpit? His Weaknesses were so very great, although his bodily Disorders were
sometimes violent; yet then was he extremely willing to spend the little
remains of his Strength to instruct and profit you. He often adventured into
the Pulpit, when his Distempers had exceedingly enfeebled him; so that
sometimes he has been seized by a fit of the Hipochondriack Passion in the
midst of his Work, to the sudden surprise of the Congregation, (for that was
the Disease that attended him by frequent returns, from the Confinement in the
South gate-Prison in your City, to the utmost Period of his Days). The last
time that ever he was in the Pulpit, he labored under a great deal of
Weakness, and a visible disorder of Body; insomuch, that his Legs trembled
under him, which I observing a little before he entered the Church, entreated
him to forbear Preaching for that Season, and to permit me for once to supply
his room; or that he would allow me to apply my self to the Reverend Mr.
Collings for his Assistance, who had often made a very friendly Offer of it, in
case my Father's great weaknesses should at any time disable him for his
ministerial Work. But he put me off with this Reply, that he was loath to omit
that Season; because he was afraid he should never have on opertunity of
Preaching more; which was a sad Presage of what soon befell him: yet he could
not be dissuaded from doing his Master's Business, although he labored under
such great bodily Infirmities, but he ascended the Pulpit, and entertained the
Auditory with an excellent Discourse from the Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.1. which
Song begins thus; Give ear, oh ye heavens, and I will speak, and hear oh earth,
the words of my mouth. He designed several Discourses upon these Words, but his
Death prevented him. From the consideration that Moses delivered that divine
Song just as he was about to take his final Farewell of this World; he thence
observed this precious Truth.

Doctrine 1. That gracious Souls, the nearer Heaven they are, the more Heavenly
will they be.

On this Truth he had Preached several Sermons; but then farther remarking that
this sweet Song delivered by Moses just before his departure, had a manifest
regard to the welfare of the Church of Israel, he thence observed this other
precious Truth.

Doct. 2. That good Men die with the Interest of God, and Souls much upon their
Hearts. In his last Sermon he mostly insisted upon this Doctrine, and concluded
it with this Passage: Oecolampadius when he fell sick at Basil, sent not for
the Physician, but the Pastors of the Churches, and notwithstanding his Pain
and Weakness, with much Life and Vigor, besought them to continue constant and
firm in the purity of that Doctrine they had professed and Preached; and for
other things he willed them to be less careful, assuring them, that the
alsufficient God would provide for them, and not be wanting, When thus he had
ended his Discourse, he concluded all with these sad Words (which he spoke
feelingly, tho with a sweet Voice) I believe this is the last Sermon that ever
I shall preach to you, or that ever you will hear from me; Or Words to that
purpose which proved a truth, tho a doleful one: For no sooner had he left the
Congregation, but he instantly repaired to his House, betook himself to his
Bed, and from thence in a few days was carried to his Grave: A vast Multitude
of People attended his Funeral; after his Interment the Reverend Mr. George
Tross, his worthy Successor preached his Funeral Sermon to a very numerous
Assembly, from those Words, Zech. 1.5. Your Fathers where are they? and the
Prophets do they live for ever? From which Text the Auditory were entertained
with many suitable and profitable Truths, which I wish may have a lasting
Impression upon all that heard them. My Endeared Father, preached his last
Sermon, March 6. 1688. and exchanged this life for a better, March 14 of the
same Year: Yhus, he delivered, as it were his own Funeral Discourse, then went
to his home, and dyed: Thus suddenly was he removed not without your sorrowful
Resentment of so great a Loss; may those excellent Truths that he taught you,
still have a room in your memories, and a happy Influence upon your Practices,
and that will be the best way to secure his Name from Oblivion, and to evidence
your own Names to be written in the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 21.27. But before
I can dismiss this Account of my Father, I look upon my self obliged to reply
to an invidious Objection, that formerly many have made a Noise with to lessen
his Esteem, and procure his Discredit. Viz.

Obj. Mr. Hallet said they, was a man of very mean Abilities, that had little
of a Scholar in him, for he had never the Benefit of an Academical Tuition, he
was never graduated in any University, never had a regular, methodical
Education, and therefore wondered People were so fond of one of so little
Learning.

To which I answer, 1. I heartily rejoice that I could never hear any thing
objected against his Piety. 2. I do most sincerely wish that the Persons that
made a clamor with this Cavil were Possessours of a great deal more Learning
than my Father was ever Master of. 3. I may further add, that I have known very
many Persons that have had an Education in our Academies, that have no great
reason to boast of their acquired Abilities, or to value themselves upon the
account of their Clerkship: Degrees and College commons, I am convinced do not
inspire Men with Knowledge and Learning; and I have reason to believe that Men
may be wise and knowing, although they were never nursed up in those Seminaries,
for I have been acquainted with some that have been well skilled in Arts and
Sciences, in the learned Tongues and Languages, and yet had never the Advantage
of an Accademial Instruction: Such have profited more by their Diligence, and
their own private reading, than many others by their College Lectures, and
their little Debates in the Schools: I say this, not that I would be thought
to give a disparaging Character of an Academial Tuition, but only to prove that
Learning and skill in Sciences are not always confined to Persons thus
educated; and I am sure my Father was a plain instance of it. But 4. I shall
offer a farther Reply to this Objection in the Words of the learned and pious
Mr. Baxter, which you may find in the Preface to his Teacher of Households;
Speaking there of the learning that is to be met with in the Universities; he
thus expresses himself, If any say there is no great or solid Learning to be
got elsewhere, let them think where great Augustine, and most of the great
Lights of the Church for Four hundred Years attained their Knowledge; and
whether the Scaligers, Salmasius, Grotius, Seldom, and such others got not more
by secret laborious Reading, than by Academical Tutors and Disputes; and
whether such famous Men as John Reinolds, Blondel, etc. even in the
Universities, got not their great Learning by searching the same Books which
may be read in another place. This I suppose to be abundantly sufficient to
blunt the Edge of that Cavil, and to vindicate my Father's Esteem from that
Objection.

But now to return to the following Discourses, I have already told you that
their Subject Matter is our Lord's Ascension into Heaven; a Subject very proper
to be discoursed upon to a Christian Auditory, or to be propounded to the
perusal of Christian Readers; seeing we find it an Article inserted in that
ancient and common Creed, which usually, (but yet how truly I cannot say)
passes for an Apostolical Composure: This Article of our Lord's Ascension, is a
Truth upon which a Christian's Hopes are much bottomed, and Promises a Treasury
of Comfort to all the faithful followers of Jesus; for that our Redeemer has
escaped the confines of the Grave, that he has gloriously triumphed over Death
and Hell by his Resurrection and Exaltation, and that he is now in Heaven at
the right Hand of his Father, interceding for his faithful People, who are got
in this Vale of Mortality, is matter of transporting Joy to all that are
sanctified. This assures them that the great Work of Redemption is completed,
that God is reconciled, and that they themselves shall at last be advanced to
Heaven, where their glorified Head now resides, managing their Cause for them,
as their most prevalent Advocate; but I shall not undertake to discourse on
these Matters in this Preface; because this will be but to detain you from
reading the same things better said in the Treatise it self, only let me
observe that the Author in these Discourses most convincingly proves that the
Humane Nature of Christ ascended above all aspectable Heavens, or that Christ
as entire Man, as to Soul and Body, was translated into the blessed Regions
obove. And its strange, that any that pretend to credit the inspired Writings
should call this into question. I nothing doubt, but that very Body of Christ
that was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, was the very same Body that
was laid in the Sepulcher; and am fully satisfied that this same Body was
raised out of the Grave, and ascended into Heaven, and is now there at the
Right Hand of God: I doubt not but the Body of Christ is now glorious, and is
beautified with more excellent Qualities than it was vested with, whilst he was
here in his state of Humiliation; but yet this hinders not, but that this Body
is still the very same that bled, and expired upon the Cursed Tree, neither do
the Sacred Scriptures tell us any thing of another Body that Christ has now in
Heaven quite distinct from that which was crucified and laid in the Grave But
all this while I do but detain you from reading more weighty and instructive
matter.

Therefore to conclude, Sirs, Remember it was the Importunity of many of you
that drew these following Sermons into public View; let me therefore entreat
you to give them a careful and diligent perusal, and do not throw them by into
a corner a moulding (as too many deal by their Books) as if they were some of
the useless Lumber of your Houses. But read them seriously, and meditate upon
the Truths contained in them, with some Solemnity of Thought, and then you will
fully answer the Design of the Publisher; Who is,

SIRS, Your real Friend and Servant in the LORD. JOSEPH HALLET. F.
Ex musaeo, Nov. 26. 92.
OF CHRIST's Ascension.
Luke XXIV. 51. And it came to pass while he blessed them, he was parted from
them and carried up into Heaven.


IT was in Paul's Judgment no less a Mystery of Godliness: That Christ risen
from the Dead was received up into Glory, then that being come off his Glory he
was manifested in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. Without Controversy great is the
Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the Flesh, received up into Glory;

We have formerly seen what of the Mystery of Godliness, and Comfort for the
Godly has appeared in the former Christ's Humiliation by his Incarnation. We
now come indeed by the Revolution of time to see what of both may be found in
his Exaltation by his Ascension, and indeed his Ascension is the second degree
or remove of his Exaltation, which is all Mystery.

For so it pleased the Father, that his steps to his Crown should be
answerable, but opposite to those descents which carried him to his Cross.

I. He rose from the Dead, that is opposed to his laying down of his Life: That
is his Resurrection is opposed to his Death. II. He ascended into Heaven, that
is opposed to his descent into the Grave. III. He sits at the Right hand of God
in opposition to his abode while in the State of Death. Signified by that
Expression he descended into Hell. IV. He shall come to judge the World. In
opposition to that wretched state, in which as he stood, he was judged by the
World.
It Is the second step or degree of his Exaltation or Advancement, which we are
come from the Words read to treat of at this time. And it came to pass, etc.

You may learn Luke's Project in his Gospel, from Luke's Pen in the Acts, for
they both own him to be their Penman. Where in the 1st. Chap. v. 1. He tells
you that what he had done was to let you know,

1. What Christ did. 2. What he suffered. 3. What he said. 4. How he departed.

His departure from his Disciples to his Father, which he had often before
inculcated to them, and prepared them for, you have described in this Text.
Wherein you may take notice.

1. Of the Place where he ascended on Mount Olivet, nigh Bethany. 2. The
Persons who were called forth as Eyewitnesses of his Ascension. His Disciples.
3. The Manner of taking his Farewell. He lift up his Hands and blessed them. 4.
You have the Action of his Ascent described.
1. By his separation from his Apostles he was parted from them.

2. By his advance on high. He was carried up into Heaven. He led them out as
far as to Bethany: Beza thinks that by Bethany, was meant the whole Tract of
Olivet; but others with stronger probability conceive it to be a certain
Village near Jerusalem upon Olivet, where the poorer sort had their dwellings,
the Out-skirts of the Suburbs: And the name of the place seems to give some
countenance to the Conjecture; It being that which signifies in the Hebrew
Language, the House of Affliction, or the House of the Poor: Beth Inanjah: That
is the House of the Poor. Our Savior seemed much delighted in this place, and
most conversant amongst such Company. Thy King comes lowly, humble it is Inani
poor, afflicted: Poor, says the Prophet Zachariah 9.9. He came of poor
Parents, to a poor People, in poor Habit, with poor Attendants. No such hurt
then in a low and mean Condition in the World. If Enjoyments are but small,
Temptations are the fewer. Satan has not such advantage to play his
Temptations in a low, as in a high and raised Estate in the World. And
certainly that is the best Condition in which Sin can take the least advantage,
and by which we are disposed to do God the greater Service. But it is observable
that Christ makes choice of that place for his ascension, which was the place
of his Agony. Thus does Christ take the House of Affliction in his way to
Heaven; And thus God in his Providence does often bring his Joseph's from the
Prison to the Crown, carries them through Bethany to Bethel. Through the House
of the Poor to the House of God. Thus must the Captain of our Salvation be
perfect through sufferings, says the Author to the Hebrews. Heb. 2, 10. He
that descended is the same that ascended, says Paul. Heb. 4.10. (...): -- As
an ancient: He descends as a Man but he ascends as God.

As Pride goes before a Fall, so often comes Advancement behind it. And so
says the wise Man: Before Honor is Humility, Prove. 15.33. Self-abasings are
ever antecedent to God's advancings. As God does employ his Wisdom to make his
Children high, so it shall be in such a way as withal may make his own-Name
great. And therefore does then most frequently appear to help, when his People
to sight are almost past hope. He suffers the ungodly to build high, and even
to touch the Heavens with their Heads. In Obad. 4. To set their Nests among the
Stars, that when they come tottering down, all the World may say: The Lord was
above them; and for his own People he suffers them often to be reduced to Job's
sad Condition, to sit Mourning on a Dunghill, that when they are advanced and
set in high places, all may see, and sing, and say the Finger of the Lord was
there:

We must not then think it strange, nor that God wrongs us, if he bring us
first to Bethany, and then to Glory: From the Dunghill to the Throne; for all
the World is but a great Dunghill. Great Enjoyments will do us less hurt, and
sad Providence when they come, will less afflict, if with Children we begin
our Lesson at the Cross: Think of a Combat before a Crown, that we run our
course, and so get the Prize by knowing this is not the Place of payment: We
are in a World that was never intended to be our Heaven, and happy for us if we
go not about to make it so. That we do not, as a Learned Man says, Pro summo
bono bonorum infirma amplecti: That we choose not the lowest Goods for the
highest Good. Grasp at a Cloud instead of a Goddess, and make Vanity an Idol.
He that considers how sad it were to have our Heaven here, will rejoice that he
shall not have his Crown till he shall get above. Thus much for the place where
he ascended, at Bethany on Mount Olivet.

2. For the Persons that brought him going, called to this glorious Sight. They
were his Apostles. As you have also proved to your hand, in 1 Acts.

Which by the way, though People must not deifie Instruments, and make of
Instruments efficient Causes, yet People may by this be taught to give them
more Honor and Respect than the World will now allow them.

It was necessary that all the Disciples, all that then professed the Gospel
should be ascertained of Christ's Ascension, and of the Manner of it too. And
Christ might have done it, by giving notice of the time, that all might have
been Eyewitnesses of his Glory for the Confirmation of their Faith: But it
must be all hushed, and those to whom the Dispensation of the Gospel was
committed, must only be called forth to see, and so to deliver and attest it to
the World; which was indeed a deep Contrivance: Our Wisdom would have thought
it might have been more, for the Advantage of the Gospel, that all the living
might have had a sight of his triumphant Departure: That the Glory which he
appeared in at his departure might be as a Seal and Confirmation of those
Gospel-Mysteries which he had Preached; and that the Adversary might have seen
it and been confounded. But it pleased God rather, that hereby the Ministry
should be established for the Revelation of the Mysteries of the Gospel to his
People; and so upon sight of his Ascension they went forth and preached, Mark
16.19. And in many of Christ's more notable Actions, you may still find one of
Christ's Eyes looking forth to the Establishing of Ministerial-Instruments, for
the dispensing of his Gospel-Blessings.

When he fed his People in the Wilderness, he might with a far less Miracle
have given every one his Portion with his own Hands. But his Apostles must
receive from him, and the People from the Apostles, so Ananias must be sent to
heal and restore St. Paul when Christ could have easily done it himself; and
Philip must be sent to teach the Eunuch: God will have Instruments employed in
his Work till we come where he shall be all in all: And Christ waved the way
that must have convinced all Beholders of him, purposely to establish a
Ministry. And so we come to the manner of taking his Farewell. He lift up his
Hands and blessed them.

1. Where we may observe by the way; that Christ was then nearest his highest
Glory, when his Mouth was fullest of Blessings. Whilst he blessed them he was
parted from them. A good thing to depart out of the World with a Blessing in
our Mouths: That is to go as Christ went. Mouths accustomed to cursed Language,
will but ill dispose a Man to Divine Enjoyments. Hellish Language makes but bad
Preparation for Heaven's Glory. And as Apostles should not only enjoy it, being
only then present, so it will not be left to Christ only to do it. Surely when
Saints are near the State and Place where all their Works shall be blessing and
praise, they will, before they go, enter on their work: God's People are always
desirous to do good, but at their departure, when they are going to the City of
the living God, then are they more abundant in gracious Desires; And as they
are breathing out their Souls they breath out Blessings. Thus did Moses Mouth
run over with Blessings just before his Death. Deuteronomy. 33.1. Let Reuben live and
not die. Hear Lord the Voice of Judah. For Levi let thy Thumim and thy Vrim be
with thy Holy one. Bless his substance and accept the work of his hands, etc.
He shut up his Life with the sweet Effusion of many Benedictions upon the
People of God.

The same was Isaac's Care and Practice when he found his Age had brought him
near Death, and when Death would receive him was uncertain, he bethinks himself
of his last work, to bless his Children before he died, and so ordered Esau to
provide for his Blessing before his decease, Genesis 27. and afterward blessed
both his Sons. The very last words that you hear from Jacob, but the ordering
of his Funeral were. The Almighty shall bless thee with Blessings of Heaven
above, with Blessings of the Deep that lies under! Blessings of the Breasts
and the Womb, Genesis 49. He breathed out his Life with Blessings in his Mouth;
frequently do the Sunbeams shine with the greatest clearness and strength just
when the Sun is about to set, and so does Grace when the Person is a dying. Do
but read the 2 Pet. 1. Observe how Heaven sits on Peter's Lips, that every word
breaths Immortality and Glory, in the Counsel he gives after (and ver. 14.) he
had considered that shortly he must put off the Tabernacle of his Flesh.
Certainly Friends, when Death is nearest, than are all Graces most pregnant.
Then will gracious Souls take their fill of Faith, and Repentance, and Hopes,
and Prayers, and Blessings, and Counsels, and Reproofs; Death breaks the Box of
Ointment, and then is the House filled with the Smell: When St. Paul was to
leave the Ephesians, and as he told them, they should see his face no more, he
Preached till Midnight, Acts 20.7. and after that again he talked with them a
long while, verse. 11. and then he kneeled down and prayed with them all, verse.
36. It was his last, his parting, his farewell Sermon: He was to be gone from
them for ever, and so could not tell how to make an end, but his Soul was
resolved all into Blessings and Prayers, and Counsels for their good when he
should be gone: This was a Heavenly parting, and such are the Partings of God's
People; Full of Blessings, full of Prayers, full of Encouragements, full of
Counsel to those they are to leave behind. Thus as Christ all his time taught
you to live, by his departure teaches you to die. And it is a brave thing to
find any of our Friends to depart as Christ departed with much of Heaven
within, insomuch that the disorders of Distempers, cannot hinder gracious Words:

2. It is worth our Observation too, that Christ when he left his People left
his Blessing with them. He blessed them, and then was parted from them; like a
good Parent finding the time of his departure near, calls his Friends together,
prays with them, prays for them and so dies, and leaves them. It Is a comfort to
a Child to receive his Father's Blessing, when God is ready to receive his
Father's Soul. And it cannot but be an infinite Encouragement to the Faithful
however times prove, to know that Christ left his Blessing to his People, when
he was going to his Father: his corporal Presence gone, was no less, when his
Blessing filled the room. And thus had he set his last Seal to the truth of his
last Sermon. John 13.1. Having loved his own, he loved them to the end; he
blessed them as he left them. Let Men curse them what matters that; Christ when
he went to Heaven blessed them. The Apostles only hear it; but the Apostles
should not only enjoy it: For says Christ, Neither pray I for these alone, but
for them also which believe on me through their word, John 17.20. So that
Christ's Blessing is a common Stock to all the Church. And so we come to the
last thing; The Actio ascensus: The Action of Christ's Ascension, and that is
described.

1. Disjunctione ab Apostolis; In separation from the Apostles.

2. Sursum sublatione; By his being carried aloft into Heaven. Now how this was
done you shall find the same Evangelist more fully to express. 1 Acts 9. While
they beheld, he was taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight.

What might be said of this Cloud might prove a Region too sublime for many of
your understandings: It Is the Spiritual Profit and Advantage I aim at, and not
Philosophical Speculations which ordinarily makes Men's Minds like Jude's filthy
Dreamers; to become Clouds without Water carried about of Winds, Jude 12. And
therefore of this Cloud I shall only say this at present: That it is probable,
that by this Cloud was meant the appearance of Angels; at least with it a great
Company of these Ministers of God: So that when it is said the Clouds received
him, it is meant the Angels received him.

For it is ordinary in Scripture to describe the appearance of Angels by a
Cloud, as signifying a great Company, a Cloud of Witnesses, and hence you find,
25 Exodus 22. God speaks of the covering of the Ark, says, There will I meet
thee, and commune with thee from betwixt the two Cherubims. In the 16 Levit. 2.
it is rendered, I will appear in the Cloud upon the Mercy-seat. Sometimes a Cloud
is in Scripture taken for God's more glorious Exhibition of his Majesty, and of
his special Protection; as that Pillar of Cloud that went before them by day;
so that in this place without any hurt done to the Analogy of Faith, we may
understand it of both. That Angels appeared, and that the Majesty and Glory of
the Lord did in some notable way discover it self carrying up our Savior as it
were in a Triumphal Chariot to Heaven.

You see how fruitful this Text is of Observations: I shall only from a
Declaration of Christ's Ascension tie my self to this one to be handled from
the Words.

Doct. That Christ after his Passion and Resurrection ascended up into Heaven.

A Proposition that has in it as great a Mystery, and as great a Mercy as any
delivered in Scripture; that therefore it may be so to us. I shall in the
handling of it,

1. Explain the Terms. 2. Prove it. 3. Give the Grounds and Reasons of it.

They are only two Terms which call for Explication, Ascending and Heaven.

The first Christ's Ascension will be best explained by resolving these
Questions.

Quest. 1. What is meant by Ascension.

Sol. His Ascension is that whereby Christ by the Power of his Divinity was
advanced above all Aspectable Heavens, and as complete Conqueror over Death and
Hell: Is Triumphantly sat down as a public Person on his Throne next the
Father, in order to the glorifying of himself and his People. I shall not now
take this Description abroad into its parts, because the most contained in it
will fall in to our best advantage in the Application.

Only this: Take notice of what I say, nor do I say it only, but the Scripture
with me: That he ascended not as a private but a public Person. He ascended
not barely as the Son of God, but as a public Person he ascended as the
Representative of all the Elect, he ascended as a Head. And therefore you shall
find that after Paul had excellently discoursed of the Power of God, manifested
in the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead and Ascension into Heaven, 1 Ephesians.
he does. 22. ver. look upon Christ thus risen and advanced on high, as the Head
of his Church and they his Body. And afterward, Chap. 2. looking upon Christ as
a public Person, representing his People in his Death, Resurrection and
Ascension: Speaks of them thus interested in him, as those who already sit in
Heavenly places, ver. 6. They do not sit personally, but in their
Representative, as the People of England sit in Parliament by their
representative. And as the People yet unborn may be said to sin in Adam,
because he was a Person that stood up in the stead of all. So with as much
proprie^y of Speech may the People of God now on the Earth be said to sit in
Heavenly places, in that Christ who stands up for them, and in their names is
there ascended and sat down.

Quest. 2. Can Christ be said to ascend in both Natures or no? did he ascend as
God, if so his Motion overthrows his Omnipresence. Now for answer hereto, you
must know that Ascension is taken two ways: 1. Figuratively in regard of State
and Condition; and so we say a Man gets up or comes down, as his Estate and
Honors grow or decline though he moves not in place. 2. It is taken properly
for Local motion, a Motion from a lower to a higher place.


Now both these may be admitted to their place in Christ's Ascension, though
not both to both Natures.

For we must know, that Christ is a compound Person, a Person consisting of two
Natures, the Divine and Humane.

Now then the Divine Nature can be only said to ascend in regard of Condition
and State. When that which lay obscured and veiled in Dust and Flesh, came to
have its Glory and Perfections to be manifested, and to shine forth more
clearly; then is he said to ascend in his Divine Nature. So far forth as
Ascension presupposes a Change, it may by no means be predicated of the Divine
Nature. But there may be an Ascension in respect of manifestation, which does
not imply a change, but a more full appearance. As a bright Candle in a
Lanthorn, is the same whether the Lanthorn be covered or clean wiped. And yet
the Light is not alike, discovered in the one as in the other, so that the
change is not at all in the Candle but in the Lanthorn.

2. The Divine Nature may be said to ascend causally in as much as he caused
the Local ascent of the Humane Nature. But now Christ man ascended both in
regard of State and Place too.

1. In regard of State; in that he received that Glory and these Perfections,
which before he had not: For till he was ascended his Manhead was not glorified.

2. In regard of Place. In that he left those lower Seats of the Earth, and by
the Power of his Divine Nature was carried up to those Mansions which are above
the Heavens.

We may learn what his Ascension was by his descension: His descension was not,
say the Schools, proper but metaphorical, in respect of his Divine Nature: Non
mutatione loci vel motu aliquo locali. It was not the change of Place or Local
motion, as if he were come off that glorious and holy place, that he might come
down upon the Earth: Sed tantum naturam humanam in terra non autem in caelo
assumendo: But only by assuming Humane Nature on the Earth which he had not
assumed in Heaven. And so I may by parity of Reason say, that his Ascension was
humanam naturam in terra assumptam intra coelum recipiendo or transferendo. A
receiving or translating his Humane Nature assumed into Heaven to be glorified.

And so I come to the second Term, the Place to which he was advanced; to which
he ascended; and that was to Heaven.

Now Scripture and Philosophy agree in the Number of Heavens; and from both we
have warrant for three.

1. The Region of the Air.

2. The Starry Firmament or Spears, where the Planets run their course.

3. The highest Heavens where are the Seats of the Blessed: The Caelum
Empyreum: That resplendent and glorious place, where are the blessed Spirits made
perfect. The City of the living God, the new Jerusalem: Now when we say Christ
ascended into Heaven we mean, into this Heaven of Heavens above all those
visible Heavens, and those heavenly Mansions where God does more fully show and
manifest his glorious Presence and Perfection, and where his Angels and blessed
Spirits have their abode. And hence it is, that Christ is said to be ascended
afar above all Heavens, Epes. 4.10. To that Holy place which does as far out-go
all the other Heavens for loftiness of Situation, for stability of Duration,
for dignity of Substance, for largeness of Capacity: Does as far, I say out-go
all other Heavens for these, as also for Glory and Blessedness; as it does
out-go all the Abilities of a Humane Understanding to comprehend them.
Sometimes called the Heaven of Heavens, 1 Kings 8.27. by way of Eminency.
Sometimes the House of God the Father, John 14.2. Sometimes the 3d. Heaven. So
far Faith as it is compared with the Air and Firmament, stretched out and
adorned with so many glorious Stars and Planets, 2 Cor. 12.2. and verse. 4. It
is called Paradise, whereof that ancient Paradise planted in Eden was a Type.
Sometimes it is called Abraham's Bosom. Sometimes the new Heaven. Sometimes the
high and holy place shadowed out and often described by Mount Sion. Therefore
called the Holy Mount of the Lord. Sometimes it is called a City which has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11.10. Sometimes the Heavenly
place. Now to this high and to this heavenly place above all Heavens visible,
to those immortal and unseen Ones above, was our Savior at his Ascension
carried by the infinite Virtue and Power of the Divine Nature, to sit with the
Father triumphant in highest Glory and Majesty; And that he was so, we are now
to prove.

Now this I shall make good.

1. By Types. 2. By Prophesies. 3. By Promises. 4. By Witnesses.

1. By Types: And hence was it as I conceive, and all the Learned I have met
with: That Enoch before the Law was translated, and in the Body advanced from a
mortal to immortal Condition, to that place where the blessed Spirits remain:
Till their Bodies raised by the Power of Christ's Voice, shall be prepared for
such a perfect Translation. Genesis 5.24. And Enoch walked with God, it is said,
and he was not, for God took him. And that this was only an Ascension without
any acquaintance, with the Grace or Corruption, the Apostle tells us, Heb.
11.5. By Faith Enoch was translated that he should not see Death.

Another Type you have under the Law of Eliah specified, 2 Kings 2.11. who set
on fire with Zeal, for God; was suitable to his Work and Spirit carried up to
God in a fiery Chariot. There appeared a Chariot of Fire, and Horses of Fire,
and parted Eliah and Elisha asunder, so that Eliah went up by a Whirlewind into
Heaven.

The Chariot parted Eliah and his Friend Elisha, but not his Soul and his Body;
his Soul was translated to Heaven without any smell of Death upon his upper
Garment, his Body. Thus have you only heard of one before the Law; and one
under the Law by an ascension translated to Heaven: The third (whereof both the
other were Types) was Christ under the Gospel.

2. I prove it by Prophesies also: In order whereto if you please to turn to
the 68 Psalm 18. you shall find David so confident of Christ's Ascension, that
his Faith looks upon it as a thing already performed. Thou have ascended on
high: The Fashion of that Language to express the absolute certainty of things
to come by a Tense that denotes the performance already past. Whence that
Expression, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, though it be not accomplished to this
day; and least any should mistake the Act, he takes off all misunderstanding by
the Effect: Thou have led Captivity captive. Thou have received Gifts for Men.

And that this Prophecy had an eye to Christ's Ascension; that Christ's
ascension was the completing of it. We are told by Paul in two places, Ephesians.
4.8. Where you have an account of what Christ did after his Ascension, in
Expressions proportionable to the Prophecy of what he should do. When he
ascended up on high he led Captivity captive. The other Text is, Heb. 4.14. The
Psalmist had said before: Thou have ascended on high. The Apostle in this place
says: We have a great High Priest that is past into the Heavens, Jesus the Son
of God. Nor can I think or find less understood by that Expression of the
Psalmists, Psalm 110.7. He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore he
shall lift up his head. That it is spoken of Christ all grant, and that he
should be advnaced at God's Right Hand, the Sense of the whole Psalm carries
it. But first he must drink of the Brook by the way, of that Cup which God had
put into his hands, for the taking off of his Peoples Sins and attoning the
Justice of God, and then should he lift up his head: That is, rise from the
Dead, and ascend into Heaven.

But if this shall be thought too obscure, take a further view in the Prophecy
of Daniel, 7 Chapter 13, 14. I saw in the Night Visions, and behold one like the
Son of Man came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and
they brought him before him, and there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a
Kingdom that all People, Nations and Languages should serve him: His Dominion
is everlasting, and his Kingdom that which shall not destroyed.

This Kingdom and Dominion must be understood of Christ's Ascension, and not of
his coming to Judgment, because at his coming to Judgment all things are to be
delivered up into the hands of the Father, 1 Cor. 15. And that it is to be
understood of Christ's Ascension we may sometimes gather from the Manner of his
coming to Heaven; Which faith the Prophet was in the Clouds; and in the 1st.
Acts, you there find he was carried up to Heaven in the Clouds.

3. I prove it also from Promises; many whereof you have from Christ's own
Mouth. Nor can I conceive less signified in that Speech of Christ's, 6 John 62:
What, and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before. And in
that 16 John 5.7. But now I go the way to him that sent me. What dress soever
the Words seem to appear in we know they were given as a Cordial and Support to
the Disciples Spirits at Christ's departure; the Comfort and Direction of the
Spirit being that which should follow upon, and so was a Promise.

4. I prove it by Witnesses too. You have it reported from the Mouths of those
that saw it; an Eyewitness is a good Evidence: He gathered the Eleven
together, and while they beheld, it is said, he was taken up, Acts 1.9, 10. Nor
Nor did they only see it jointly but witness it severally, so says Peter, 1
Pet. 3.22. He is gone into Heaven.

And after him comes Paul with a late, but as sure a testimony, Ephesians. 4.10. He
that descended is the same also that ascended. But if Men should mistake,
Angels may he heard. They also are recorded as Eyewitnesses of his glorious
Triumph, Acts 1.10. As he went up to two Men stood by them in white apparel;
which also said this same Jesus which is taken from them into Heaven, etc. And
indeed scarce shall you find any one Point in all the Scripture proved more
punctually: And no wonder. I know no Point that has a Womb greater with
Mercies. There cannot fall out a Cross, but a dull Eye may here see an
excellent Comfort. Nor any Condition so mean and low, which this new State of
Christ's will not sweeten, and in time change. As by God's assistance we shall
show hereafter. Be instructed how to carry your selves when the time of your
Dissolution draws on.

Nay, take all in a word, Descendit secundum naturam assumentem quae se in
carne manifestavit: Ascendit vero secundum naturam assumptam in qua se
manifestavit. He descended according to that Nature which did assume, which
manifested it self in the Flesh, but ascended according to that Nature which
was assumed, in which he manifested himself.

HAving thus opened and confirmed the Proposition by Scripture: We shall now go
on as far as Scripture will warant, to give some Reasons. Why it was that
Christ did ascend into Heaven: Some Reasons respect Christ, and some his People.

Reas. 1. Because he had finished that Work which he was sent to do; he was
sent forth from the Father to bring about that great design of Heaven, Glory to
God, by good will to Man: His Work done, that is God's ends accomplished, he
had no more to do, but to go whence he came, and to manifest that his Work was
done, by taking his place again on the Throne.

When Ambassadors have delivered their Master's pleasure according to their
Commission, they return again to their Masters Courts. And hence it is that our
Savior ready to depart, tells his Apostles: That he came from the Father into
the World, and having done his business, was to leave the World and go to the
Father again, John 16.28. and 17 John 4.5. He looks upon finishing his Work as
so great a reason of his ascension to Heaven, that he makes that the only
Argument to move the Father, to glorify him with that Glory which he had once
enjoyed with himself. I have glorified thee on Earth; I have finished the Work
which thou gave me to do. And now, O Father glorify thou me with thine own
self, with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was. He had
finished his Father's Work on Earth; It was now but reason that he should go to
Heaven. It Is observable that Christ could not recover his former Glory again,
till he had done the Sinner's work; that is, he could not have the Glory again
till he had opened a way for more Souls to be glorified too. Oh Grace
inexpressible! No entering for Christ into Glory, till he had done that Work
that would bring poor Souls to Glory; And can any after this doubt of God's
Love!

2. He must ascend; that he might manifest to all the World that he was God as
well as Man; his Divinity must have lain under a Cloud and Suspicion had he not
been thus in a Cloud taken up into Heaven. Christ had told his Hearers of many
things which were too sublime and high for their understandings (that were got
but little above the pitch of Nature) to assent to. And therefore, that by the
Dignity of his Person, he might win a full assent of Faith to his Words, he
makes it manifest that he came down from the Father, and how. Why by this in
that he was to ascend to the Father again, as you may see, John 3.12, 13. How
shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? No Man has ascended up into
Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in
Heaven: As if he had said ye cannot believe his Words till his Godhead is
proved by his Ascension. And you find Paul to make use of his Ascension as an
Argument to prove his Godhead by, 4 Ephesians. 9, 10. Now that he ascended, what is
it but that he descended first into the lower parts of the Earth, He that
descended is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens that he might
fill all things. His going up to Heaven is there made by Paul an Argument that
he came down from Heaven. That is that he was God.

3. He must to Heaven again, that there might be a full Requital and Recompense
made him for all those Sufferings, and Sorrows, and Dishonours which he met
with in the Body. It may astonish Nature to consider what he suffered, and from
whom. Now what kept him up in his Sufferings, but the assurance he had of his
Reward? How did he bear what he did on Earth, but by considering what he should
be in Heaven. This is the Argument that Paul makes use of to prove his Glory
by, 2 Phil. 8.9. Being found in fashion as a Man he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto Death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore says he, God also
has highly exalted him, etc. Quia Christus propter nos in nostra carne ultro
sese humiliavit: Deus ea proptus nos, in carne nostra etiam in sammam exhilit
sublimitatem. Because Christ of himself for us humbled himself in our Flesh:
Therefore did God for us advance him to the greatest Glory in the Flesh. The
Top and Perfection of Glory must be the reward of his Submission, to carry on
God's Purposes, 110 Psalm 7. He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore
shall he lift up the head. He should drink of that Cup which God should put
into his Hands embittered with the Wrath of God and Rage of Men. And then
should he lift up his Head; yea, and there he should lift up his Head; he
should be advanced above the Grave by his Resurrection, above the World by his
Ascension, and above all aspectable Heavens, by sitting down at the Right Hand
of God. When Christ had been at Bethany, the House of the Poor, then should he
come to Bethel, the House of God. His Cross must be his way to his Crown, he
must wear the Crown of Thorns before he could put on the Crown of Glory. We see
Jesus, says the Apostle, For the Sufferings of Death crowned with Glory, Heb.
2.9.

4. That he might make it appear that his Kingdom was not of this World: His
Disciples no sooner saw him delivered from the Bonds of Death, but their
thoughts were presently on a fifth Monarchy; a Temporal Kingdom; They began to
grow Millenaries; dream of a Personal Reign, which Christ himself should
exercise over Israel, and deliver them from the Bondage of the Roman Yoke,
under which they then groaned; as appears from 1 Acts 6. When they therefore
were come together; that is, his Disciples, They asked of him, saying, Lord,
will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel: And this was the
Epidemical disease of the Jews at that time they were so sensible of their
temporal Bondage, and it made them so impatient, that they thought it must be
the Work of him that was the true Messiah by making himself King to set them at
liberty, and this and little else made them look after a Messiah; and this fond
Conceit (because they understood not wherein Christ's Kingdom did consist) made
Christ a Stumbling Block and Rock of Offense unto them, that they could not
believe in him: Now Christ's Disciples living amongst them, began to be tainted
with the same Opinion; That Christ by a personal Exercise of Sovereignty came
to restore the temporal Power and Kingdom to the Jews. Now that they might not
be so taken with Christ's bodily Presence as to forget his Spiritual Rule and
Scepter. He withdraws that from them by his Ascension, and promises a more
effusion of his Spirit upon them, whereby their carnal Blindness might be taken
off, and they guided in the way of all Truth. And thus much Paul's Words
import, 2 Cor. 5.16. Though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more. As if he had said, All carnal Knowledge of
Christ in respect of personal appearance must now be laid aside he is ascended
on high. We must now labor to know him in a Spiritual way, so to know him as
to believe in him, to submit to him: To look for Grace by him and Heaven with
him.

These Reasons I shall only give, as respecting Christ himself; There may be
others drawn from that Eye which Christ had to the Advancement and Comfort of
his People. But I shall wave them here and propose them in another place; as
the blessed Consequences and Effects of his the glorious Ascension of Christ.

And now shall according to promise proceed unto Application; and thereby
improve it three ways, to Information, to Comfort, to Counsel.

1. Is it so that Christ is locally ascended into the highest Heavens; first
Use for Information, and that in sundry Particulars.

Use 1. Then may we here see the Vanity of that Popish Transubstantiation. That
real, or rather Corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which they with
so much fury maintain: A carnal and corporal Presence: For we deny not a real
Presence in a Spiritual sense: For Christ is really present in the Sacrament,
though not corporally; and it were no way improper to call it a senseless
Opinion, since they must deny the Office of all the Senses that all Men have in
the World to maintain it: And though the Senses at the time of Administration
are all at a loss in respect of finding any thing which may be a Confirmation
to their Opinion, yet will they not endure a Spiritual Understanding of it:
They place it under a miraculous Power, and yet no change found by any Sense;
whereas Christ never did Miracle, but convinced the Senses when he turned Water
into Wine: They tasted Wine: So the five Loaves, etc. It must not be thought a
Perception above Sense, though themselves cannot but deny it to be such a
Perception as the Senses are not at that time capable of. But had we no other
Arguments to show the Absurdity of this Opinion than what we were helped to in
the Doctrine of Christ's Ascension it were enough. And therefore as the Angel
argued from Christ's Resurrection, that he was not in the Grave, Mat. 28.6. He
is not here for he is risen; so may we argue from Christ's Ascension that he is
not in the Sacrament in that manner as the Papists dream. He is not there, that
is, not corporally, for he is ascended: And to this very end does Christ speak
of his Ascension, 6 John 61, 62, 63. That he might there convince the Disciples
of their Mistake; when they thought that Christ was carnally or corporally to
be eaten.

In the 55, 57 Verses, Christ had told his Disciples, that his Flesh was meat
and his blood was drink; and says Christ, he that eats me shall live.
Hereupon the Disciples like the Papists, began to think of a Corporal eating of
Christ's Flesh, and were offended at it: Now Christ to satisfy them, tells
them, that his meaning was spiritual, that they should feed on him spiritually,
and not carnally, for to eat him corporally at the Sacrament that could not be,
says Christ: And how did he prove that it could not be? Why, Because he was to
ascend to the Father: His ascension to Heaven would take off his corporal
Presence at the Sacrament. What, says Christ, if ye shall see the Son of Man
ascend up where he was before: It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh
profits nothing, the Words that I speak to you are Spirit; by which Christ
clearly shows, that it is a Spiritual eating of him in the Sacrament that he
requires, and not a carnal; and that it can be understood of no other but a
spiritual; because he is ascended where he was before. Can Christ be corporally
present at the same time in Heaven and on Earth too? he cannot be fed on here,
for he is not here, but ascended.

2. By this Doctrine of Christ's Ascension may we be assured too, that we are
gainers and not losers by the want of Christ's bodily Presence: We are all like
Christ's Disciples, they were loath to part from him after they had enjoyed
him: And we are ready to think they only were happy, who when he was in the
World did enjoy him: And oh how happy had we been had we lived at that time! My
Brethren, We should be less happy, if we had Christ now upon Earth! then we can
be now he is for us in Heaven: It Is our gain that we do not now corporally
enjoy him.

The Sun could not be placed so much for our comfort any where upon Earth, as
it is now it is set in the Firmament; and it is our greatest advantage that our
Sun of Righteousness is placed on the Throne above all Heavens to appear before
the Lord for the good of his People. Therefore when Christ perceived his
Disciples sad at the news of his departure, John 14.28. If ye loved me, says
Christ, you would rejoice because I said I go to the Father.

It Is a Crown of Joy set on our Heads, that Christ, who is the King, our
Righteousness, is sat down with that Crown on his Head, which instates him in
such a Dominion and Riches as shall make for the Comfort and Advancement of his
People: As we shall see more particularly anon.

3. Be we assured of this too; that though he be gone above us, he is not gone
from us; his ascension to his Father has not taken off his relation to his
People. Though he has changed his place, he has not lost his affection: He is
a Brother still: When Christ was upon Earth, go tell my brethren, says he, I
am to ascend, and after he was ascended, he calls them Brethren still, Heb.
2.11. Friends, are you now ashamed of Christ? Christ is not ashamed of you, now
he is gone to Heaven. Some Men, when they are preferred and got into great
places, will disown their poor Relations before great Personages: But Christ is
not of this Temper, he is still the same to thee in Heaven, that he was on
Earth; thy God still, thy Christ still, thy Friend still. I ascend to my Father
and your Father, to my God and your God, John 20.17. A Consideration that has
Sugar enough in it, to sweeten the bitterest Portion that can be put into thine
hand.

Christ stands in the same Relation to thee that ever he did, and the same
Affection; he has not lost his Bowels by going to Heaven. Oh, it was a Cordial
that made Job's bitter Cup a most sweet and pleasant Draught. I know that my
Redeemer lives Goali; I know that my Kinsman lives so the Hebrew will bear,
Ruth 4.10. Have thou no Friends here, remember thou have a Kinsman in Heaven,
that will own thee when all the World will leave thee; nay when thou must leave
the World: Thou were a poor despicable forlorn Creature; yea, but now thou art
allied to the Crown. Thou art kin to the Heir apparent of Heaven; one that will
never deny his Relation; one who, though he be gone out of thy sight, yet thou
art not out of his Mind; his Heart is still with thee a peculiar People: (...),
a People of Purchase: A Man will not lose a Jewel that has cost him dear.

4. By this Doctrine of Christ's Ascension we come to be assured too; that
Christ has finished that Work which he came to do for his People. That the
Purchase is made. Heaven purchased for us, our Souls for him. He our
Inheritance, we his: The Work of Redemption ended, and all fully accepted; for
Christ's Ascension does fully prove that all is satisfied: And so much I
understand by that Phrase of Christ's, John 16.10. He shall convince the World
of Righteousness, because I go to the Father. The Spirit of God should convince
his People, that all satisfaction was made by Christ in that he was gone to the
Father. But you have a most excellent and full place to this purpose, 9 Heb.
13. By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal Redemption for us. In that he entered into Heaven, into that holy place,
it was clear that the Work of Redemption was finished. When he had by himself
purged our sins he sat down on the Right hand of the Majesty on high, says
Paul, Heb. 1.3. Had he not fulfilled the Law, struck out the score, which lay
in God's Debt-book charged on our Account: Had he not in all things satisfied
his Father's pleasure, he had never got into that holy place: But he cries
(...): It is finished and the Father, Heb. 1.13. xxx. says to him, (...) sit
down, as an acknowledgment he had done his Work; a very Scheme and Draught of
Heaven, as it were in a few words: Christ is ascended, the great Work of
Redemption finished. Not a Sin left now for a Believer to answer for, but can
you believe. A Pardon purchased, Heaven obtained and not a penny to be paid. The
Debt paid, the Book crossed. Christ has done all and that he has, we know that
he is ascended: His very ascension shows that you have now nothing to do, but
believe, sins be many, sins be great; But can you believe? Christ has made the
purchase, taken possession. Thou have nothing to do but to walk to thine
Inheritance, all thy care is but that thou do not lose thy way. Christ prepares
all against thy coming.

5. Something for thy Instruction thou have too, in these Circumstances that
attended this glorious Ascension which are very remarkable, which were pointed
to in opening this Proposition.

1. From the place whence Christ did ascend; from Bethany on Mount Olivet, 24
Luke 50, 51. It was that place where Christ was taken, when Judas did betray
him. The place of his Sufferings should be as it were the first step to his
Glory; He must ascend from Bethany, the place where his Peace is disturbed, his
Glory begun, Bethany, I then told you, was a Compound in the Hebrew Language,
made of Beth and Inaniah; and signified the House of Affliction, or the House
of the Poor; very observable. The House of Affliction was the place of his
Exaltation: He must go to Heaven out of the House of the Poor: And truly, My
Brethren, Bethany is ordinarily the way to Bethel; The House of the Poor; the
way to the House of God: And thus does God often make his Peoples sufferings
In-lets to Glory: Comforts are never so well relished, as when they come up in
the rear of Crosses. It Is twice a happiness when a Man comes to be happy after
he has been miserable:

2. Whilst he blessed them, he was parted from them: He sang his sweetest Tunes
when he was nearest his end. Whilst he was blessing his Disciples, and was
speaking to them, things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, he was taken away,
Acts 1.9. A worthy Presedent and Pattern, for all that are drawing nigh their
end to dress by. The Kingdom of God was in his Mouth before he had it in
possession Heaven was in him, before he was in Heaven; He was talking of God
before he went to God: Thus must all that hope to live with him, speak much of
him: You must all die, Brethren, learn here what to do when you come to die,
make your dying times, times of living Counsels. Dying words often make a
notable Impression on living Spirits: And therefore when God seems to call for
any of you, begin at least to speak Heaven's Language before you go: And that
you may learn Heaven's Language before you come to die: That Is the Reason Men
are so speechless in respect of heavenly Discourse on their Sickbeds and Death
beds, because they use their Tongues so little to Matters of Heaven, in time of
their Health: David had mostly God on his Tongue, and Heaven in his Heart when
he was in Health, and hence it is that you hear of nothing else in his Mouth
when he came to die; as you may see when he was about to take his farewell, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

3. When Christ was to depart he calls his Friends, his Family about him; All
the Eleven were with him, Acts 1. A good Example to all Men, to call their
Friends together, to give them living Counsel, when they are dying Men: It is a
comfort to a Man to die amongst his Friends; and if his advice be good, it may
be their Happiness, that he died amongst them. Christ when he departed the
World would have his Friends about him: And what to do, but to leave them a
Copy what to do when he should be gone.

And so I come to a second way of improving this Proposition, and that is by
way of Consolation, and truly in this one Doctrine there is so much lodged,
that all Believers may look on this Truth, and without any censure of folly
sing a Requiem to their Souls. Soul now take thy rest, thou have much laid up
in store for many years: Now, my Brethren, this is the Top-stone of all our
Happiness, which being laid all, the People of God may cry, Grace, Grace unto
it: Never could Comforts have been solid and permanent had not Christ ascended;
for by this ascension you heard before we enjoy a Christ when we do not see
him, and he owns us though we do not see him: And hereby all his other Labors,
and Travels, and Sufferings are made our perfect Mercy. This finished all, and
this got all; his death could not have given but an imperfect sound, had he
died and stopped there, he had done you no good, his Resurrection had been but
half Comfort. Our Pardons had been but little worth if he had not by this act
of his Ascension made Proclamation of them: Nor would our Enemies have abated
much of their boldness and triumph had not this triumph of Christ thrown them
on their backs. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died, yea, rather
that is risen again, who is ever at the Right Hand of God, Romans 8.34. That we
may have these cordial Pearls prepared in the Gospel to lie by us against our
times of faintings (which hasten on apace) let us consider how many of them may
be found: In those ends which Christ did propound to himself in his Ascension
for his Peoples advantage.

1. Then this was the Mark in Christ's Eye when he did ascend; he went up to
Heaven that he might open and consecrate a way for us to the Throne of Grace,
Christ went up to Heaven that our Prayers might come thither, a Mercy above any
sum we can make. Brethren, Sin had thrust us out of God's Presence, and shut
the doors after us: Christ now is ascended to open Heavens door again for us,
and bid us welcome into God's Presence Chamber; what an unutterable Privilege
is it to have a clear Passage to Heaven in our Duties, that poor contemptible
Creatures that are afraid to speak to Men may yet boldly and freely converse
with God. Now that way might be made to go to God for us, that the Sluices may
be broken up for God's Mercy to come down upon us, was one of Christ's ends why
he did ascend, Heb. 10.20, 21. Having boldness to enter into the holiest by the
Blood of Jesus: By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us, let
us draw near with a true heart, etc. Our hope to be heard in Heaven is Christ's
being in Heaven for us: What a taste of Heaven may we find in this Point before
we get thither. That we may now with boldness come since Christ is gone before.
Oh, that Christ has left us such an Encouragement to wait on God in all our
necessities, as is to be found in his Ascension! We may now pray and not fear,
our Mediator is gone before, our Advocate is with the Father.

Be now wholly confident that thou shall be heard in that thou fear, weak
Duties cannot hinder acceptance, when Christ is above to further it: When thou
do pray thou go to a God that has thine Advocate at his Right Hand. He
that is of God's Counsel is thy Counsel: This the Apostle thinks is enough to
give a Man a bold and confident face in that holy Presence, 4 Heb. 14, 16.
Seeing then that we have an High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus
the Son of God: Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace. Never
fear, Christ is above: Who would not come boldly into the Court, when he knows
he has such a Person to present his Petition. The eldest Son to the King is of
thy side, what need thou fear; some would take off Prayer from being now a
Duty because we live in the days of the Gospel. Days say they of a high
Dispensation, it is ill being too high for Duty. No, my Brethren, pray now if
ever, for now thine Advocate is in Heaven, and therefore thou should now be
always sending up Petitions thither.

2. Christ ascended to Heaven, that he might make a full Conquest over all his
Peoples Enemies: And this we are told by the Author to the Hebrews, Chapter 10.12,
13. This man sat down at the right hand of God expecting till his enemies be
made his footstool; That is, till they are fully conquered; and in the 4 Ephesians.
8. When he ascended up on high he led Captivity captive; That is, he led those
captive which had before kept his People in captivity; as we may see to be the
meaning of the Phrase in the 5 Judges 12. An allusion to the Custom of the
Romans, who after their Victory led their Captives in triumph. So Christ's
ascending up to Heaven, it was his getting into his Triumphal Chariot, leading
his own and his Peoples Enemies captived at his Chariot-wheels as it were; and
so says Paul, 2 Colos. 15. Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them, (...): -- That is, he did in height
of confidence make them a public Example of fcorn and shame. It Is true, Christ
struck the last stroke, and won the day on his Cross. Then the Devil and Sin,
and Death received their mortal wound. But at the Resurrection he seized the
Prey, laid hold on those he had subdued; and by his Ascension dragged them as
it were at his Chariot-wheels to be trampled upon by all those that are Members
of his Body; which makes the Victory of God's poor People certain. Oh what a
comfort is this, my Brethren, that Christ by going up to Heaven does manifest
to all the World that all their Enemies lie bleeding at his Feet. That he has
overcome the Grave, Death, the Devil and Sin: They may bark, they can bite no
more, the Serpent may put out his Sting but cannot hurt. They now lie all as
Captives chained in the Stocks till the King's Pleasure: How are we hereby
armed against the fear of Satan: I confess these spiritual Powers are great in
their own nature: But they are not now what they were. They are disarmed
Devils, they are Devils, but they are naked Devils, Devils they are, but
wounded Devils, conquered Devils; Devils led captives; Devils in Chain; no fear
of a chained Enemy if you come not within his reach.

2. Again, what Encouragement have we here to hold out in all our Encounters
against these Enemies: They may foam but they cannot fight; they are Prisoners,
Captives chained up from doing hurt: Christ our Lord does hold them pinioned
that they cannot stir, they think they may do what they please; but no more
then a Goal-bird in Irons, they are held with Irons of Guilt, and in Chains of
Providence; we would all say that that Man has a base low Spirit, who when he
was well appointed, and well-guarded should rear a naked Enemy.

We have our Weapons with us, our Captain with us, our Enemies naked and bound:
Let us be strong then in the might of him that strengthens us, to look upon
Satan now as loose, is to deny Christ's Ascension. He is a Devil still, but a
chained Devil.

3. Here Is an Encouragement for our Faith too; keep that eye clear, that thou
may see thy Victory, and thou art safe; there is no more required then that
thou see thy Captain triumphing. Give Glory unto Christ, that he has done this
for thee, and he will apply it to thee.

Does the Devil hold hard: Fear not, one look of Christ's, will make his
Weapons fall out of his hands: Is Sin strong? Yea, but the Sting is gone:
Christ has the Victory; look to thy Savior, let but thy Faith mount into his
Triumphal Chariot, and thine Enemies are all under thy feet also. You know it is
a mighty Encouragement to a Soldier to fight, when he sees his Commander go on
beating down his Enemies before him. We should fear our Enemies less, and
prevail more, if we would eye Christ's Conquest more frequently; having such a
Friend in Heaven we need not fear any on Earth, nor Friend in Hell.

3. He ascended on high for the pouring forth of the Graces of his Spirit, that
his People might also be prepared for that holy place; not only that they be
secured here, but crowned above, whence says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.8. When he
ascended on high he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto men. It is an
allusion to the Roman Custom, that when the Conqueror rode in Triumph toward
the Capitol or Palace, he did not only draw the Prisoners at his
Chariot-wheels, but also scattered Money to the Spectators that saw him ride
along in Triumph. Why so? Christ having by his Ascension spoiled Death and the
Devil, cast his Gifts unto Men, dispenses his Graces in a greater measure into
the Hearts of his People: He has conquered his Enemies; and now gives about
his Favors to those that are his, so that strength of Grace is the Fruit of
Christ's Ascension; and Acts 2.33. Being by the Right hand of God exalted; he
has shed forth the Holy Ghost. And therefore to comfort his Disciples at his
departure; shows them, what they should get by the loss of his corporal
Presence, John 16.7. It is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not
away the Comforter will not come to you: But if I depart I will send him to
you: And 7 John 39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Christ was
not yet glorified; Not that this Text, or that other, gives any countenance to
that Socinian dotage; That before Christ's Ascension there were no saving Gifts
of the Spirit, for that will suppose, that before Christ was there none went to
Heaven, or that Holiness was not necessary to the seeing of God: But the Graces
of God's Spirit were not given down in that full and abundant measure till
after Christ's Ascension: The Apostles had after Christ's Ascension, as in the
2 Acts, a greater measure of the Holy Ghost poured down into them, they had
been given to the People of old. The Disciples living in the Enjoyment of
Christ's corporal Presence, were so hung upon that, that they were less capable
of his spiritual Presence; and therefore Christ must be gone that way might be
made for this Spiritual appearance; an infinite comfort in this Age of great
work and difficulties, that God's People may now go with boldness to beg
greater measures of Grace, yea and expect them too, for this was the end of
Christ's Ascension; That if Troubles grow and Work increase, a Soul may now
expect higher and more enlarged Graces. Christ did ascend not only to give you
Gifts to bring you to Heaven, but to give you Ministers enriched with eminent
Abilities to fit you for Heaven, Ephesians. 4.10. which by the way may show Men how
ill they requite the LORD when they band themselves against him. Your Graces
and your Ministers were alike the Fruit of CHRIST's Ascension, that oppose them
is to resist the GRACE of GOD.

4. Christ ascended on high to make Intercession for his People. My Brethren,
Christ got into Heaven not only to open a way for his People to pray, but that
he might himself pray for his People, Heb. 9.24. He is entered into Heaven it
self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. It was requisite that Christ
should ascend into Heaven; that as he executed the Office of a Priest, by
offering himself upon the Cross for us, he might also do it by appearing before
God in Heaven to make Intercession for us. There is he now holding up his
Blood, his Wounds to the Father, that poor Worms may be pardoned, poor Souls
saved, poor Bodies raised, and then both glorified.

'Twas such a Priest we wanted, says Paul, Heb. 7.26. Such an High Priest
became us who is holy made higher then the Heaven, which by the way does show
us the advantage which God's People have by Christ's absence more then they
should by his Presence, Christ could never have fulfilled the Office of his
Priesthood by making Intercession for his People if he had not gone bodily into
Heaven; and therefore it is said, If he were on Earth he should not be a Priest.
Look on this now as an unspeakable comfort, that our Savior is now in Heaven
bodily appearing before God, making Suit and Intercession for his People, that
their Sins may be pardoned, that their Prayers may be heard, that their Souls
may be saved, that their Enemies may be disappointed, this was typified under
the Law, in the 28 Exodus 9, 10, 11, 12, 29. Aaron the Jewish High Priest was to
bear the Names of the Children of Israel in the Breast Plate of Judgment upon
his Heart, when he went into the holy Place for a Memorial before the Lord
continually; and this Type was fulfilled in the Ascension of Christ; as in Heb.
9.24. Christ is entered into Heaven, to appear in the presence of God for us.
Thither he is gone with the Names of all his People, not on his Breast, but in
his Heart, to make Intercession for them to his Father.

The Comforts whereof may be gathered from the two principal Parts thereof.

1. The Presentation and Tender of his own Blood to his Father, which he shed
for our Sins; a Blood of so much worth and value; as God himself cannot ask
more, for it is the Blood of him that is his fellow, that is as much as to say
the value of it is infinite, not infinite only by way of price but efficacy: A
Blood that dies white, that make Sins of a Crimson and a Scarlet-dye, like Snow
and Wool.

2. A making request for us: Thus did the High Priest, who was a Type of Christ
enter into the holy of holiest, which was a Figure of Heaven; not only with
Blood but with Incense, which did signify his Prayers to his People; that by
both he might perform the Office of an Intercessor, Levit. 16.12. What the High
Priest did typically within the Vail, Christ does now really within Heaven: And
therefore he is said to enter in by his blood into the holy place, Heb. 9.12.
and not only so but with his incense too, Revel. 8.2, 3. whereof it is said,
that much was given him, that he should offer it with the Prayer of the Saints:
Now indeed his very Blood has an interceding Voice, and therefore it is
called, the Blood that speaks, Heb. 12.24. My Brethren, all that is in Christ
has a Voice to beg his Peoples Pardon: A happy People to have such an
Advocate; his Person prays, his Office prays, his Humiliation, his Exaltation,
all have a Voice to beg mercy for a poor Sinner; like Paul for Onesimus: a
Mediator for him, and a Sponsor for him, Philem. 9.10. A Mediator I beseech
thee for Onesimus, says he, and a Sponsor; if he has wronged thee, or owes
thee any thing put it on mine account, I will repay it. Thus is Christ both a
Mediator and Surety: Hence he is called a Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb.
8.6. And a surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7.22. So that he does not only
pray for us but promise for us, he does not only beg for us but engage for us.
His Person, that cries for Mercy: The Nature that has sinned suffered: His
Merits that cries for mercy: The Debt which was due is satisfied: His Will that
cries for mercy: Father I will that they also whom thou have given me; be with
me where I am, John 17.24. Thus is Christ a complete Intercessor: All in him
intercedes, and he intercedes for all in us: For Sin to be pardoned, for Sin to
be purged; for the Soul to be saved; for the Person to be glorified; hence come
all our Mercies, privileges all our Hopes for.

1. Hereby we come to be brought into a more familiar acquaintance with, and
enjoyment of God himself, I pray for these, says Christ: That as thou father
art in me and I in thee, they also may be one in us, John 17.21. That God and
his People are as one, was the Purchase of his Blood, but that they are
fastened in the most uniting Bond of Love and Affection is the Fruit of
Christ's Prayer.

2. Hereby we come too, to be furnished with all spiritual Graces; for our
spiritual Employments. I will pray the father, says Christ, and he shall give
you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever even the Spirit of
truth, John 14.16, 17. Every glance of God on thy Heart, every motion of his
Spirit in thy Soul; every impression of Grace on thy Spirit, is the Fruit of
the Intercession of Christ.

3. Hereby come all our Services to be sanctified. The High Priest was to bear
the Iniquity of the holy things of the Children of Israel, Exodus 38.28. So does
Christ: He is that Angel who has a golden Censer to offer up the Prayers of
the Saints, Revel. 8.3. And therefore God's People through Christ are said to
be made Priests to offer up their Sacrifice with acceptance upon his Altar, 1
Pet. 2.5. An unspeakable Encouragement to poor timorous Souls: Who, be their
Prayers as as weak, as imperfect, nay as sinful as they may be, they have an
Advocate with the Father; And art thou ashamed of thy Prayers, art thou afraid
of thy Prayers? Thou have one that will new draw thy Petitions, who will not
present thy Prayers as come from thee, but as perfected and sanctified by
himself.

4. Lastly, Hereby we come to be assured of God's Favor to continue with us;
that our Infirmities or Miscarriages, shall not be available to take off God's
care of us, or care to us, whatever we have done, our Mediator is still in
presence, to keep off Judgment from us, Romans 8.34. This is the Apostles
Argument: Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died, yea rather that is
risen again; Who is even at the Right hand of God; who also makes intercession
for us; who shall separate us from the Love of God? As if he had said, In that
Christ is ascended on high, he is become an Intercession; and in that he is an
Intercessor. We can never be separated from God's Affection.

The Stability of our Condition is the Fruit of Christ's Intercession and his
Intercession the Fruit of his Ascension.

He is ascended, therefore he intercedes; he intercedes. Therefore who shall
separate us from the Love of God.

THat was the Fourth, Christ ascended to make Intercession.

5. Christ must ascend to Heaven to prepare a place for his People. That was
one end and a great one too of Christ's ascending up to Heaven: And this is the
Cordial he gives his Disciples, now ready to sink at the sad News of his
departure, John 14.1, 2. Let not your hearts be troubled, I go to prepare a
place for you: I go not from you to leave you but to provide for you: And
therefore the Author to the Hebrews calls him our forerunner, Heb. 6.20. (...)
our Quartermaster, if we may speak it with reverence: One gone before in his
Triumphal Chariot to take up Quarters for his People in Heaven: Now we must
know, that Christ may be said in Heaven to prepare a Place for his People three
Ways.

1. By way of Representation; as seating himself in God's Presence in the
stead, and as the Representative of his People; for as I told you in the
description Christ is not gone to Heaven as a private and single Person, but as
a public and common Person. The great Representative of God's Elect:

Adam represented all Men in Eden, and so by his Sin all sinned, they sinned in
their Representative in their common root; and so Wrath came upon all: Why, so
Christ in what he did in the business of Salvation, he did as representing all
the Elect. When he died they died, when he arose they arose; when he ascended
they did ascend; he did all in their stead, as their Representative and Root,
all imputed to them which he did or suffered, all made theirs which he
purchased. Thus when Aaron was to go into the holiest of Holies, the Type of
that holy place where Christ now sits at the Right hand of the Majesty on high.
He is said to bear the Names of the Children of Israel in the Breast Plate of
Judgment upon his Heart for a Memorial before the Lord; that is for a
Remembrance that they be helped, and blessed, and saved, Exodus 28.29. The People
must not go in, none but Aaron must come in and represent them to the Lord: So
Christ is ascended to that holy place, and there he has carried the Names of
the People on his Breast as it were, stands presenting them unto God in that
holy place as a People to be especially regarded; and therefore he is said,
Heb. 9.24. To be entered into Heaven, and to appear in the Presence of God for
us; there he stands in our steads to transact our business, to get the Sentence
of the Law reversed, and the Blessing of the Covenant to descend; And hence is
that passage of the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.6. And has raised us up together, and
made us sit together in heavenly Places in Jesus Christ: We are not in heavenly
Places, we are in earthly places: Yea, but we now sit in Heaven in our
representative. Our Burgess is as it were there a common and a public Person,
there sits in our steads; He sits there to bring us thither; and Heb. 6.20.
Thither the forerunner is for us entered: He went not thither himself, but to
take possession in our stead! As a Traveller that is sent out by his Fellows,
as a Harbinger to take up Lodging in an Inn for them: Enters the Rooms not so
much for himself as for his Company; and so in a Sense, when he is entered they
are entered: Christ is gone the Harbinger of his Elect in their stead and behalf
to Heaven; he is entered the Throne for them, and his entrance is their
assurance to be there.

2. He prepares a place for his People in Heaven by Intercession too; and
therefore is said, 9 Heb. 24. Christ is not entered into the Holy place made
with hands, but into Heaven: To appear in the presence of God for us
continually, praying to the Father that we be preserved here and be brought
safe thither. Interceeding that he would so uphold them by his Power, that they
may not fall and be lost; and so guide them by his Spirit, that they may be
brought to that place where he is: And that his Disciples might see that these
things would be his work in Heaven in the behalf of his People; He in their
Sight and Audience with much Reverence and Affection, puts it on practice a
little before his departure, as John 17. He lift up his eyes unto Heaven (it is
said) and said Father keep through thine name these whom thou have given me
that they may be one as we are one, Verse. 11. and 24. Father I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am that they may behold my
Glory. So then this is the Work of Christ's Intercession; To beg God's
Protection on his People on Earth and Glory with him in Heaven, that no created
Power impede their Comfort, nor any Sin their Salvation.

3. Christ prepares his People for Heaven by way of Operation; he makes a
Heaven within his People before they shall get to Heaven; he shall never enter
Heaven that brings not something of Heaven with him; he fetches up their
Hearts, their Affections to Heaven, before he sends for their Persons thither.
My Brethren, Never shall a Soul get to Heaven, that is not in Heaven before he
goes out of the World: In Heaven by holy Meditations, by holy Actions, by good
Thoughts, by a good Life. Christ never brings any Soul thither till he has
first prepared him here; Earth must be put off before Glory can be put on; and
therefore in that 17 John 19. Christ says* I sanctify my self, that they also
may be sanctified through the Truth: And then he cries, Let them be glorified
as I am glorified.

GOD must take up the room in the Heart before the Heart shall find a room in
Heaven; and there Paul, 1 Col. 12, 13, 14. Gives God thanks that he did not
only provide Heaven for his People, but made them meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; that is, prepared them for Heaven as well
as prepared Heaven for them. So then when Christ prepared a place for his
People in Heaven, he makes them meet for the place, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. No
getting into Heaven in our old Rags. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us again
unto a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus from the Dead. To an
Inheritance incorruptible reserved in the Heavens: Who are kept by the Power of
God through Faith unto Salvation: So then if you be kept for Heaven. Then you
shall be made meet for Heaven; he must first put on the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness that will put on the Robe of his Glory. Keep them from the Evil
of the World, says Christ; And what then? Why then Father, says he, I will
that they also whom thou have given me be with me, John 17.15, 24. And thus
have you had another end of Christ's getting to Heaven, in order to the Comfort
of his People; he went thither that he might prepare a place for his People,
and prepare them for the place. Matter of most excellent comfort to all that
have any Interest in him. It Is like that River in the Garden of Eden, which was
parted into four Streams, Genesis 2.10. which are as so many Channels full of
Comfort for fainting Hearts.

1. The first Stream is this: Is Christ gone up into Heaven, why then thou
may be sure, be thine Enemies what they will, and who they will in this
World, thou art safe. Thy Savior is above them, and what need thou fear:
This Jethro intimates as the Reason of the Destruction of those that were proud
Enemies against God's People, Exodus 18.11. In the thing wherein they dealt
proudly, God was above them: That God's People were now delivered, and his
Enemies under foot, was because God was above them. And the Psalmist makes
God's People's Deliverance as an Inference from the High place of God's
Habitation. Psalm. 97.9, 10. Thou Lord, says he, art high above all the earth,
thou art exalted far above all Gods. God dwells above, as if he should say:
Well; What then? He preserves the souls of his saints, he delivers them out
of the hands of the wicked. This is God's People's Confectio Alchermis: A most
excellent Cordial in their Fainting Fits. Have they potent and mighty Enemies,
Men in High places? Yea: But remember thy God, thy Savior, is above them; he
is in a higher place; he that died for thee, and was laid in the Grave for
thee, is got out of his dark Pit again, and is risen above all Principalities
and Powers: He that is for thee, is above thee; and what needst thou fear?

2. Here comes another Stream of Comfort too: Is Christ risen, is he got on
high, and that on this Errand, to prepare a place for his People in Heaven?
Here then is a warm Cloth for a cold Condition; for your Poor Ones that are in
Christ. You that have scarce Houses or Home in this World; that can say with
Christ, as he did when he was in the World: I have not where to put mine head:
no settled Habitation. Why, be patient a while, all Christ's Members will be
bravely lodged e're long. He that purchased an Inheritance for the Saints in
Light, is gone to take up Lodgings for thee. In an inheritance incorruptible,
that fades not away, says Peter. Mansions made without hands, says Christ.
Then thou shall have a House that is of too firm a Workmanship for a Humane
Hand, and that is incorruptible. It was curiously made, and shall be curiously
kept, It fades not away, 1 Peter 1.4. Some of you have poor smoaky Houses,
scarce a Roof to creep in under, and in a little time none may: why for all
this, if they are of Christ's Body, their Head will bring them into a brave
House shortly; he is gone their Harbinger into Heaven, and will get them good
Lodgings.

I have read that Valens the Arrian Emperor, did threaten St. Basil, one of the
Greek Fathers, That he should be safe neither by Sea nor by Land, from his
Power. Why, said he, for all the Emperor's Rage, I shall be in Heaven, or under
Heaven. Why, so, though thou be driven to and fro, and have no abiding place of
safety to put thy Head in; yet maugre the Malice of Men and Devils, thou shall
be in Heaven, or under Heaven.

After Luther had withdrawn himself from the Whoredoms of Babylon, I have read,
that one of the Cardinal's, in a great Huff, told him, That he should not have
a place in all the Empire to keep him. And what said Luther? why he smiled, and
said, If Earth cannot keep me, Heaven shall. Why so, thou poor Soul, it may be,
thou starved, thou persecuted One, bear up, Man, have thou no abiding place on
Earth, yet thou have one provided for thee in Heaven: He that has the keeping
of that glorious House, is gone to look out a Room for you.

3. Is Christ gone to Heaven? why then here comes a third Stream out of this
Eden. And that is, thou have a Remedy against Death, it claps Sugar into thy
Mouth against that bitter Cup, and makes the pale Enemy to smile upon thee. If
thou can lay but a well grounded Claim to an Interest in Christ, thou have no
reason to fear to die. No rather, thou have reason to long for that hour, above
all the Pleasures of the Earth: For what is Death then? It Is but a going to our
Inheritance, To take actual possession of our new purchased Lands, a going to
the Lodgings Christ has took up: Thy Christ is in Heaven, though he has not
taken away Death, he has taken away the Sting of Death, and altered the Errand
and Message of Death. Death now shall but carry thee, and not strike thee: It Is
but a Trap-door to let thee into that stately Palace where thy Savior is: No
looking upon Death now as a grim Herald, but a welcome Messenger; a Messenger
sent of God, to guide thee, and bring thee safe into thy Father's House; since
Christ our elder Brother is in Heaven, it is a great shame now, if every good
Man does not look upon Death, as old Jacob did upon his Son Joseph's Wagons,
come from Egypt, to carry him away: Why the Spirit of the Old Man revived, as
it is said, when he saw them, Genesis 45.27. Did Jacob rejoice to see a Wagon, or
a Chariot that would carry him into Egypt, to see his Son Joseph? And wilt not
thou rejoice to think, that Death is a Chariot to carry thee to JESUS CHRIST,
to carry thee not to Egypt, but to Heaven? Not to thy Son, but to thy GOD?
Death is but a Chariot to carry into Heaven, to bring us to that Eternal Goshen
of Light, where GOD's Presence shall both make and keep us blessed for ever.
And thus have you been offered a taste of Three of those Sweet Streams, which
came forth of that River which runs in the Eden of God.

4. The Fourth and Last is this: Is Christ gone to Heaven. Thou shall assuredly
go after him: It Is somewhat a sad thing, when Death comes and says, You must go
with me, the Body to the Grave, the Soul to God that gave it; I say, then
Nature makes a sour Face, upon such a sad Message: What my Body, that has cost
me so much! I used so tenderly! that lived so delicately! Now to say to
corruption, thou art my father; and to the worm, thou art my mother and my
sister! What this Face of mine be clothed with Clods of Dust! as Job says.
These Arms these Hands, these Feet of mine, that were my Pride, the Worms Meat!
They shall feed sweetly upon them, Job. 24. This is a hard saying to Nature,
and the harder to be born, when the Care has been all employed about the Body,
and the Soul forgotten; it will be dreadful indeed, to leave the Body in the
Hands of Death, when the Soul has been in the Power of Sin. But have thou the
least Hold-fast on Christ, a Faith but like a smoking Flax, thou have then a
Cordial to give the Spirit, when thy Body is falling into the Pit. No mattter,
let it fall, it shall up again, Christ is risen, and he is gone to Heaven; and
he is gone to receive thee thither, that thou may be even where he is. So he
tells you, Joh. 14.19. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more: but
you see me; because I live, you shall live also. The Branches live in the Root,
and if the Root lives, they will live. As if he said: Well, my Friends, I must
leave you a while; I must go to Heaven before you: but know this, I go to
Heaven for you; and be cause I live there bodily, assure your selves, you shall
live there bodily too. What says a Father to this? Well, says he, Christ is
our Flesh and our Bone; he is gone with our Flesh into Heaven, our Flesh has
taken possession already of our Inheritance. And this is a good assurance and
pledge to us, that our Flesh, these Bodies of ours, shall be in Heaven, where
Christ is: Christ is gone bodily into Heaven, and because he lives there, you
shall live there also; Because I live, ye shall live also, says Christ. And as
much you have in the 14 Joh. 3. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am, ye may be also. Christ
is gone for the present, but when all is prepared above, he will come again,
and fetch his People Home to his House, and to their Inheritance. Oh what an
unspeakable Comfort is this to a dying Soul! I am now ready to lie down in the
Dust, says a Soul; And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in
my flesh shall I see God, as Job said, 19 Job 26. Christ is entered into Heaven
in our Name, in our Flesh, has taken possession for us of the purchased
Inheritance, and therefore he will bring us thither in his appointed time.
Christ has gotten in his Head, his Body, his Church shall come after: CHRIST
will not sit in Heaven a HEAD without MEMBERS. It Is a Scripture more worth than
both the Indies, for a dying time.

6. The End of Christ's Ascension was, that he being full of Grace and Glory,
might be able to refresh and fill the Souls of all his People: My Brethren, as
I told you before, Christ did not lose his Bowels, his Pity, by going to
Heaven. We have not an High Priest, says the Apostle, which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities: let us therefore come boldly to obtain
mercy, Heb. 4.15, 16. No, my Brethren, our High Priest has not lost his
Feeling, by going into Heaven; he is not like a Man, that his Advancement
should make him forget his Friend's Good: That he might hear them, that he
might help them, that he might fill them; that he might save them, so says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up, far
above all heavens, that he might fill all things. He ascended with filling
purposes, as the Sun ascends with enlightening strength. And therefore at his
departure, what says he, John 17.19. For their sakes, says he, sanctify I my
self, that they may be sanctified. And Ver. 22. The glory that thou give me,
I have given them. Our Glory, our Fullness, our Holiness, was one of Christ's
Ends why he was glorified, and filled himself: Of his fullness we all receive
grace for grace, John 1.16. A notable Comfort to poor needy Souls.

Do thou see thy emptiness? yea, but look on Christ's fullness; he emptied
himself for us: Why so he filled himself for us. Do thou feel great want of
Knowledge? thou art a poor ignorant Creature; that as Paul said, thou do know
nothing as thou should: Thou do want Wisdom and Strength, and Grace, to
make thee solid and able in thy Christian Business. Thou can not walk as
prudently as thou should, in the place God has set thee. Thou can not
carry thy self as beseemingly, and as humbly as thou should, when God's Hand
is upon thee, thou have not that fear of God as thou should, nor that love
of God that his Mercies call for. Yet in the midst of all, here is thy stay and
support: Thou know where to carry thy empty Vessels to be filled. Thou can
now go to thy Savior, and say, Lord, thou art now in Heaven, filled with
unmeasurable Glory. Thou art a God full of Grace and Glory: Thou art full, that
thy People may be full: Oh of thy Fullness let us receive Grace for Grace.

Such Thoughts, such Meditations as these, will in time work us out of all our
Wants. Where I am, there also shall my servant be, says he, John 12.26. When I
shall be in Heaven, never a Servant of mine but shall be in Heaven too; the
Servant shall be with the Master: and you know in that forecited place, Ephesians.
2.6. The Apostle speaks of our Ascension, as a thing already effected and
wrought by Christ's Ascension: God has made us sit together, says he, in
heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. Oh my dear Brethren, here is a Comfort for
every Cross: Come what can come, Life or Death, Fears, Hopes, Trouble, or
Peace, this will give us Confidence in all our Fears and Calamities, in all our
Storms. We shall one Day be where our Savior is. What a calming Support will
it be, when a Soul shall say, It will be better when we shall be with Christ.
The Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.6, 7. Therefore we are always confident, says he,
knowing that while we are present in the Body, we are absent from the Lord: We
are confident, I say, willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord.

And thus have you heard the Four pleasant Streams of Eden come swimming to
you, from that great River of Christ's End in going to Heaven, To prepare a
place for his People. And thus have I finished the Improvement of the Point, by
way of Comfort; I now come to the last, and that is Counsel.

Is Christ gone to Heaven, and is he gone for us into Heaven. Oh then let us
carry our selves sutably to this Mercy, and to our Hopes by it, and that in
these particulars.

1. Is Christ gone to do our Work in Heaven? Oh, then let us do Christ's Work
here on Earth. It Is but Reason and common Equity, my Brethren, that since
Christ is gone upon our Business, that we have an eye unto his Business in the
World. Endeavor to carry on Christ's Interest, his Kingdom in your Hearts, in
your Families, in the Places where you live: Let all know you are the Servants
of Christ, and labor all you can, to make others Servants to him; do what you
can by your Prayers, by your Counsels, by your Lives, by your Examples, by your
Encouragements, to propagate and enlarge the Bounds of Christ's Kingdom.

It Is the Nature of Grace to be diffusive of her own Excellencies. Grace has a
wondrous greedy eye, it would fetch in all to Christ: And therefore you shall
find, that immediately before his Ascension, he showed his Disciples, that they
should mind his Business, when he was gone upon theirs, Acts 1.8. Ye shall be
witnesses to me, both in Jerusalem, and in the uttermost parts of the earth.
And then how after his Ascension, his Disciples, Men and Women, and all went on
in Christ's Business, you may see in the after Verses of that Chapter. Is the
Master of the House gone, and gone for the Servants Good? Oh let them not then
neglect their Master's Business: How would it wound thy Heart, and appale thee,
if Christ when he meet thee, should say, I have all this while on your Errand,
been employed to make you happy; and you have done nothing for me the while:
whilst I have been providing for your Glory, you have been dishonouring me.

Is Christ gone to Heaven to prepare a place for thee? Then do thou prepare a
Heart for him. It is but a grateful Recompense to give up thy Heart to him, who
is gone to get Heaven for thee.

What will thou give him for all the Prayers and Cost he has been at to make
thee happy? Why thou have nothing to give but thy Heart, and he calls for
nothing else: My son, says he, give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. Prepare a Heart
for Christ, who has prepared a Heaven for thee. Shall Christ go to Heaven, to
prepare a place for thee, and thou not suffer him to have a corner in thy
Heart: Christ is gone to prepare a Throne for thee, and thou let Lust to sit
upon the Throne within thee. There is a sweet Exhortation, 19 Revel. 7. Let us
be glad and rejoice, and give Honor to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his wife has made her self ready. Be thou as the Bride, ready
against the Wedding Day. When Christ went to Heaven, then it was the betrothing
Day: But thy Marriage Day is thy Dying Day. Make thy self ready against that
Day, and prepare a Heart for him, who prepares a Heaven for thee.

3. Labor to look upon him ascending with an Eye of Faith, then is some
spiritual Gift likely to drop down to us, when we see our Master ascended. It
is said of Elijah, 2 Kings 2.10. That if he should see his Master ascending,
then he should have his spirit doubled. Certainly it is no less true in this
matter, if we can but by Faith see Christ ascended into Glory, his Spirit shall
in some measure come upon us.

4. Thou must lean and rest thy self upon Christ for all, see him ascended on
high for thee, and so do all in his Strength and Power: However thine Hand
shakes in thy Duties, know thou have one above that will hold thy Hand: Set
about nothing but with Paul's Confidence, I can do all things in Christ that
strengthens me. This Use Christ directs his Disciples to make of his Ascension,
John 14.3, 4, 6. I go to prepare a place for you, says Christ. Whither I go,
you know, and the way you know. We know not the Way, says Thomas. No, why, I
am the way says he. No man comes unto the Father but by me; I ascend up to
the Father for you, and you must ascend up to the Father by me; all your
Doings, all your Fightings, your Works, your Wrestlings, are all to be
undertaken in the Strength of Christ. Thanks be to God, says, Paul, who has
given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor 15.57.

5. It Is our Duty that now we serve him more affectionately, and accurately,
and faithfully than ever. He has led Captivity captive by his ascending on
high. The World, Sin, Death, the Devil, now lie bleeding at Christ's Feet, yea,
and through Christ that strengthens us, at our Feet, so says the Apostle, He
will tread down Satan under our feet, Romans 16.20. What have we then to do but
to serve the Lord.

Deliverance does always infer Service and Obedience, being delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, let us serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our lives, Luke 1.74. Christ has
purchased our Obedience by Deliverance: Thus, 2 Samuel 7.1. when David had Peace
from his Enemies, he made this Use of it to raise up a House for the Service of
God; when the Lord had given him rest round about from all his Enemies. Behold,
says he, I dwell in an house, but the Ark of God dwells in courtains. When God
had given him Rest, it was not to enjoy quietly what he had, but to serve God
with what he did enjoy: He had no sooner Rest, but he thought of God's Service;
so these in the 9. Acts. They had Rest, as it is said, and walked in the fear
of God. Are you freed from Enemies, you are the more free to serve God; obey
more freely, since you may live more freely. This was that, when Christ was to
ascend, which he gives in charge to his Apostles to teach his People. He was
now ready to ascend, well, what was it now fit that the People should know? Why
that they must observe, whatsoever Christ had commanded them, 28 Matthew. 20.
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. Is the
Master of the Family gone his Journey, why now then, let the Servants every one
set to their Business, to their Service; now let it be known they are not
Eye-servants, but do what they do in Love.

6. There is another special Duty that from Christ's Ascension lies upon you,
that is, Spiritual Joy and Rejoicing: My Brethren, Christ's Ascension was his
Triumph, and if a People be loyal, when their King triumphs they will rejoice.
Oh let our joyful Spirits give Echo as it were to Christ's Trumpets, that
while they sound a Victory and Peace on Earth, we may cry glory to the Highest.
Christ himself made this an Evidence of his Peoples Love, 14 John, If ye loved
me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father. Had thou a poor
Kinsman advanced to some high Place in the Commonwealth, thou were but a poor
Friend, if thou would not rejoice: So it is our eldest Brother, yea, our Head
is gone into Heaven, and there in our Nature, sits next in Authority under
God the Father, who has put all things under him; and shall not we send one
Gratulation after him? See the Disciples Carriage when they had seen Christ
ascended; a Man would have thought, that they which had so sweet Converse with
Christ, should have been found in a sad and mourning Posture upon his
Departure. He gone whose Life was their Light, his Words a sweet Mixture of
wise Counsels, solid Comfort, precious Promises, and he departed from us: Who
but would have thought he should have found his Disciples wringing their Hands
and pricked at their very Hearts, since they had lost the Personal Presence of
him, who was their Counsel and Support, their very Hope and Life. No such
matter, they rejoiced, that he was gone, as you may see, 24 Luke 52, 53. He was
parted from them, and they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great
joy, and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. See my
Brethren, it was the very Joy of their Hearts, that Christ was gone to Heaven,
they rejoiced at it, and they continued rejoicing just like good Subjects when
their King rides in Triumph, they cry after him, GOD save the KING, GOD save
the KING, some such Triumphant Song should we send after our Triumphing
Captain. None should express more Joy in Words, in Works, in Carriage, in
Conversation, in Face, in Faith, than God's People. It Is an undecent and
unbeseeming thing, that a triumphing King should have a sad and a sullen
People. None should be so heartily merry as Christians; I do not mean toyish,
and idle, and apish in their Carriage, and their Words, which to see in People
of Age, may be the Wonder of Fools, and Laughter of Children; But in a
comfortable Frame of Spirit arising from the Mercies they have, and the Hope
they have founded on the Love of God manifested in Promises, that is Madness and
not Mirth, which makes Fools and Children laugh, but wise Men mourn. Their
Leader is in his Chariot on his Throne, their Enemies at his Wheels, at their
Feet, Thanks be to God that has given us the Victory, through Jesus Christ.

7. Lastly, Is Christ gone to Heaven? why then make up after him as fast as
thou can; ascend thither Spiritually, whether Christ is ascended Corporally.
Is Christ in Heaven? why then let thine Heart be in Heaven; let thine Heart be
where thy Head is: let thy Desires, Thoughts, Meditations, be like the Angels
on Jacob's Ladder, going up, coming down, hold constant Correspondence with thy
Prince. Remember, Christ thy Head is in Heaven, What have thou to do to build
Tabernacles here upon Earth? thou art Traveling to thy Country, to thy
Husband. Along in the way thou art going for Jewels, do not think of taking up
thy rest in thy way. Do thou believe Christ is ascended? What do thou
scraping then in the Earth, and rooting thy self in the Mud, or tumbling with
Swine in dirty Puddles of Filthy Pleasures? Observe what Paul says, 3 Coloss.
1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek these things which are above where Christ
sits on the right hand of God. What said the Angels to those that came to
seek Christ in his Sepulcher? Luke 24. Why, say they, Do ye seek the living
among the dead? he is not here he is risen. So, why seek you Christ amongst the
things of the Earth? he is not here, he is ascended. Christ is in Heaven, Why
then Let our conversation be in Heaven, says the Apostle, Phil. 3.20. Where
the Carcass is, thither will the Eagles be gathered, says Christ, Matthew.
24.28. The Glory of the Gospel shall with such Effect and Power be maintained
in the World, that it shall make Men as eager to come after Christ into Heaven,
as the Eagle is after the Prey. See then how you can find the Power of Christ's
Ascension growing upon your Hearts? Whether it draws thee up to Christ, makes
thee most Earthly and more Heavenly? Whether it makes thee more Passionately
eager, and more Importunately earnest after Christ in his Ordinances, in his
Presence, in his Grace, in his Members? This is thy Duty, and this, if it be
thy Work, will be thy Happiness. What, all for Earth, and Christ in Heaven? Let
thy Thoughts then be more working to Christ, thy Words more Talking of Christ,
thy Life more guided by Christ, thy Affection more with the People of Christ.
Thy Head is in Heaven, Let thy Heart be in Heaven and then doubt not but thy
Body will come after.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Salusbury in Cornhill.
THE Certainty of The Worlds of Spirits, fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Operations, Voices, etc. Proving the
Immortality of Souls, the Malice and Miseries of the Devils and the damned, and
the Blessedness of the Justified.

The End of Doctrinal Controversies which have lately troubled the Churches, by
reconciling Explication without much Disputing. Both by Mr. Richard Baxter.

The Protestant Religion truly stated and justified, by the late Reverend
Divine Mr. Richard Baxter: Whereunto is added by way of an Epistle, some
Account of the Learned Author, never before Published. By Mr. Matthew. Silvester
and Mr. Daniel Williams.

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Countrivance and Accomplishment
of Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. By William Bates D. D.

The Changeableness of this World, with respect to Nations, Families, and
particular Persons; with a Practical Application thereof to the various
Conditions of this Mortal Life. By Timothy Rogers M. A.

The Christian Laver, or a Discourse opening the Nature of Participation with,
and Demonstrating the Necessity of Purification by Christ. By T. Cruso.

Earthquakes Explained and practically Improved: Occasioned by the late
Earthquake September. 8. 1692. In London, and many other Parts of England, and
beyond Sea: With a particular Account of the Earthquake in Jamaica. By Tho.
Doolittle M. A.

The Pastor's Care and Dignity, and the Peoples Duty. By G. Tross.


