OF THE REASONABLENESS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

By H. H. D. D.

(...).

1 Pet. 3. 15. The third Edition.



LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1650.

OF THE REASONABLENESS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
The Introduction.
Reasonable to doubt of Principles first, and then to throw off the Deductions
that naturally arise from them, then to contest the Conclusions, when the
Principles or Premises are granted. This occasioned that saying of Picus
Mirandula, That the Speculative Atheist was the greatest prodigy, but one, and
that was the Practical Atheist. To acknowledge Christian Religion to be true,
and consequently that without sincere obedience to all Christ's Precepts, not
only the infinite rewards of the Gospel are forfeited, but the infinite
torments become our portion; and yet to live lives of profaneness, and luxury,
and indulgence to every liberty, that suites with our humors, without fear, or
discomfeiture of mind, is a shortness of discourse, that no man that has
consideration enough to examine, or judgment to compare, can choose but
discern and condemn in himself. As therefore the -- nam si nullum sinem esse
putarent Aerumnarum homines, nulla ratione valerent, Religionibus atque minis
obsistere vatum. Lucret. l. 1.
Epicurean that was resolved not to be represt, or live in the awe of Religion,
and Priests, counted it but necessary to disbelieve the perpetuity of torments
beyond this life, so has it been Satan's method (and the advantage which he
has taken of these times, from the commonness of casting down mounds and
hedges, of disputing, and questioning the most established Truths) to offer it
to the Reason and Judgment of his Clients, Whether it be not more easy and
hopeful to break up the foundation it self, then, while that remains in its
firmness, to demolish that which is erected upon it, and by entangling men in
those practices, which render them incapable of receiving benefit by
Christianity, to oblige them to endeavor to cast off the doctrines, and to rid
themselves from the ill consequences of it. Thus have some men taught
themselves the skill, and dexterity of unravelling principles, and by giving
themselves liberty to disobey Christ in some pleasant, or gainful particulars,
have at last in their own defense (that they may salve their phenomenon, and
appear congruou to themselves) arrived calmly to the scorners chair, the
casting off Christianity it self.

growing evil, and reduce the whole matter of debate to these two heads.

Grounds of Christianity in the gross, or bulk, all of it together, and in some
measure, justify the reasonableness of them; and then secondly, I shall
descend in the retail, to the survey and vindication of those particular
branches of Christianity, which appear to men at this time to be least
supported with Reason.

CHAP. I.
The Grounds of Christianity, or the Reasons upon which men embrace Christian
Religion in the gross, all of it together.

many grounds (or several branches, and improvements of the same one
complicated ground) which H. Grotius, and Phil. Morney du Pleisse, etc.
other men have very rationally enlarged on, This present discourse (which
desires not to expatiate, nor to suppose the Reader to have renounced his
Christianity wholly) shall confine it self to these two heads: First, the
Testimony on which Christianity is built: Secondly, The advantages that those,
which embrace it, shall reap by it. The first will render the belief rational,
and conclude it impious to doubt of it. The second will render the belief
gainful, and conclude it most uncharitable to our selves, yea, and unsafe, and
treacherous not to adhere to it. The first will pronounce it, with the Apostle,
a faithful saying; the second, worthy of all acceptance. The first will
reconcile it to our brains, the second to our hearts: The first will give it
possession of our understandings; the second will ravish our wills with the
beauty and luster of it.

Testimony on which we believe Christianity, i. e. on which we believe that
Christ was sent from God, to reveal his Fathers will unto us, and to be
believed in all that he delivered to the World, (which, when it is believed, it
necessarily follows, that all and every part of Christian Religion is
infallibly true, and capable of no farther doubting) is the most important, and
convincing of belief, or faith, which can be imagined.

Apostle had not said it, it is yet in it self most evident to common sense,
That Faith comes by hearing, i. e. that I cannot believe any thing to be true
on any better, nay on any other ground, but only that I hear it thus affirmed:
And as the affirmation is, such is the belief: If the affirmation be from a
fallible person, from a mere man, the belief must be a fallible belief, but if
the person affirming be infallible, then is the belief infallible also.

infallible affirmer is but one, viz. God, of whose nature it is, to be
veracious, to be able to do any thing, but to lie, which was also affirmed by
Christ out of the Principles of common nature. Let God be true, and every man a
lier, i. e. though no infallibility of testimony can be attributed to any mere
man, yet whatsoever is testified by God, does certainly deserve to be fully
credited.

God shall testify the truth of any thing, there can be no farther scruple or
possibility of doubting, or suspecting the truth of what is so testified, then
there is actual doubt, whether the God of Heaven be God, or whether the God of
truth, be the father of lies: which as it is a degree above the denying of
Christ, and above the infidelity either of the Jew, or Mahemetane, or even of
Heathenism it self, in that notion, wherein it signifies the (...).
acknowledgment of more gods then one, (for all that have adoted any deity,
have acknowledged that God, or gods to (...).
speak nothing but truth) so is the pretending to it peculiar to very few since
the beginning of the World. There being not many that appear in story to have
affirmed that there is no God at all, and those not able to persuade others,
that they did believe themselves when they so affirmed.

affirmation or testisication of God, that Christ was sent from him, to declare
his will to us, etc. (upon which being once supposed, the truth of all
Christian Religion truly so called, is immediately and infallibly founded) has
more then one way been authentically interposed. Such are the many repeated
testimonies of the Prophets in the Old Testament (which finding a perfect
completion in Christ, and none but Christ, do amount to a divine testimony.)
Such was the coming of the Angel to Mary the Mother of Christ, and to Elizabeth
the Mother of John Baptist, in the New Testament; as also the Star which
lighted the wise men of the East unto him. (and of which the Est quoque alia
vencrabilior and sanctior historia, que perhibet ortu stellae cujusdam
insolitae non morbos moresque prae untiatos, sed desiensum Dei venerabilis ad
humanae servationis (without question (...) in the Greek, though that be not
extant) rerumque morialium gratiam, quam a Chaldais observatam suisse
testantur, qui Deum super natum mor eribus venerati sunt. Calcidius in Plat.
Timaeum, p. 219.
Heathens themselves have affirmed, not only that it was an especial Star,
that never before appeared in the Heaven, but also that it had a portentous
significancy, pointing at the descent of a venerable God, for the salvation of
men, and the good of Mortals) So again that of the Miracles wrought by Christ
and his Apostles, which are another kind of Gods speaking to us in men, and
upon Earth (particularly that of raising the dead) and are by the Apostles
styled, what in reason they are, demonstrations, Acts 2. 22. and testifications
of God himself, Heb. 2. 4. But above all his own Resurrection out of the
Grave, after he had been Crucified by them. God by thus raising him is said
(most truly according to the dictates of reason) to have (...), Acts 17. 31.
given to all men Faith, i. e. an argument of full conviction, that he was what
he pretended to be, and so to (...). 1 Pet. 1. 21.
set him out as the person to be believed on, (...), Romans 1. 4.
being powerfully and determinately pointed out, by that great act, to be the
Son of God. But because all of these would much lengthen this discourse above
the designed proportion, and because each of them are largely insisted on by
others, and because no testimony is ordinarily deemed more Authentic, then
that of audible voice, I shall therefore choose principally to insist on that
one ordinary way of Gods testifying to men, known to the Jews by the title of
(...), the daughter of voice, or of thunder, i. e. a revelation from Heaven,
delivered in (or coming out of the midst of) thunder, which, say the Jews, was
the special way of Gods revealing himself under the second Temple.

three times gave testimony to Christ. First, immediately after his Baptism,
Behold, the Heavens were opened to him, i. e. visibly and miraculously parted
asunder, and he, i. e. John that baptized him, saw the Spirit of God descending
like a Dove, and coming upon him, i. e. descending, as a Dove descends upon any
thing, visibly hovering, and lightning on them, And behold, a voice out of the
Heavens saying, i. e. as the Heavens parted asunder, a clap of thunder came
out, and with it a voice delivering these words, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased, i. e. this is my Son, whom I have sent, his coming to
the world, and his undertaking is perfectly agreeable to, and has its original
wholly from my will: From which testimony of Gods, it is consequent, That
whatsoever he teaches, comes from God, and is to be embraced, as that which is
perfectly his Will, and Law. And it is observable that in one of the old
prophecies of the Messiah, where it is foretold, that Gods Spirit should
descend upon him, it is affirmed almost in the very words, which were here said
to come out of the thunder, that this was Gods beloved, in whom his soul (i. e.
he) was well pleased.

second time, in the presence of three sober men (which was the number, by
which the weightiest matters were authentically testified) Peter, and James,
and John, being all with him in a mountain, Behold, a lightsom cloud
overshadowed them, and a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased: Hear him. Giving an unquestioned authority to all,
that should ever come from him after.

Father, to glorify his Name, A voice came from Heaven, saying, I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again. And of them that stood by, some said
that it thundered, others, that it was an Angel that spoke to him: From both
which, it is easily concluded, That God, whether by, or without the Ministry
of an Angel, was heard to speak to him out of the Thunder.

personally to Christ, was with some small variation promised, (and so by John
Baptist first foretold) that it should be performed (after his departure) to
his Apostles, or Disciples, who were to preach his Doctrine, and what they knew
of him, after his going out of this world; and accordingly, in the very manner
which was foretold, it came to pass, as all other things foretold by him, did
punctually follow. For as they were all together; there was suddenly a noise
from Heaven, as of a violent wind, and filled the whole house where they sat.
And so this (styled the Acts 1. 5.
Baptizing them with the Holy Ghost, i. e. Receiving them with a far higher
Ceremony then that of Baptism, viz. with a shining glorious descent of the
Spirit of God upon them) did at once give them their Commission from Heaven,
and was a testimony of God himself, That what they should teach from Christ,
was the very doctrine, which God required to be embraced by the World.

eminent passage. A known and eminent Jew, one Saul, who by his Sect (a
Pharisee) and by his extraordinary warmth, and zeal to the Jewish Law, in
opposition to Christianity, had interessed himself profestly in the persecuting
of it, had a principal hand in the putting St. Stephen to death (as appears by
the witnesses, laying their garments at his feet, Acts 7. 58.) and was engaged
in a most vehement, bloody design against the Christians in Damascus, and
having gotten Letters of Commission from the High Priest to that purpose, Acts
9. 1. was now very rageful upon his way thither; This man thus breathing out
threatenings, and slaughters against the Church, and as he was close to
Damascus, his journeys end, on a sudden a light from Heaven shone about him,
like lightning flashing about his ears; and falling to the ground, by that
means he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? In
words so convincingly delivered, that he knew assuredly, that it was God, that
by an Angel thus appeared, and spoke to him; and thereupon he gave answer
immediately, Who art thou Lord? The voice replied, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest, with the addition of other words, which struck him into such a
horror, that immediately trembling, and in agony of Passion, He said, Lord what
will thou have me to do? And was again answered, what he should do, Go unto the
City, and there he should receive particular Directions. Which accordingly
happened, and this person became immediately a prime Apostle, or Preacher of
Christianity. This thing was not done privately, but every circumstance of the
story was publicly known at that time; his Letters from the High Priest were
known to the Sanhedrin; and before he came to Damascus, the news of them was
come thither, so far, that Ananias a Christian there, that in a vision from God
was bid to go to him in such a house, made this objection against obeying the
command, That this was the man, that had done so much mischief, and was now
come with such a Commission to apprehend all that professed the worship of Christ
in that place. And besides, there was company with him on the way, when the
prodigy befell him, and all they heard the voice, and saw no body, Verse. 7. It Is
true indeed, that in one relation of that passage, Acts 22. 9. it is said, That
they heard not the voice. But that (as all other seeming contradictions of the
Scripture) is easily salved by observing, that the word (...) in Hebrew, which
signifies a voice, signifies thunder also, as Hebr. 12. 26. Whose voice, i. e.
Thunder shakes the earth, and so very often. And so where it is said, That
they heard the voice, the sense is, That they heard the thunder, which was
joined with the lightning that flasht about him; and when it is said, They
heard not the voice, it is expressed in the place, what is meant by it, They
heard not the voice of him that spoke to him, i. e. The voice of Christ
immediately appearing from Heaven, and calling unto him, Saul, Saul, etc. but
only saw the lightning, and heard the thunder: but what was said to him, he
only heard that was concerned in it, but by the effects, his answers, and
consequent change, they easily discerned that also, though they heard it not.
This story did this man always avow as a notorious Truth, whenever he was
called in question by Jews or Romans, for Preaching Christ; and there was never
any question made of the truth of it: And this went for his Commission to be an
Apostle of Christ; and he never sought for any other: And after doing more
service in the Church, then all the rest of Christ's own (regularly chosen, and
designed) Apostles, he at last laid down his life for the testimony of that
Truth, which before this he had so sharply persecuted.

Gospel to the Gentile World, and for the declaring of Gods Will in that
particular, there was not only a vision to Cornelius, and an ecstasy, and an
audible voice from Heaven to Saint Peter, in these words, Arise Peter, kill and
eat, (the obscurity of which words, and of the representation, to which they
belonged, was presently interpreted by the effect.) But beyond both these, it
follows, That at the Preaching of Peter to Cornelius, and the rest of his
company of Gentile believers, the Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the Word,
i. e. probably came down upon them in some way of visible appearance, (the like
Acts 10. 44. See Acts 15. 8. and 11. 15. and. 17.
as before had befaln the Apostles,) or if not so, yet in such manner, as
evidenced it self by giving them power of speaking strange languages, and other
gifts, and graces, sitting them for several conditions in the Church: And this
was seen by the Jews, that were very far from being inclinable to believe such
a thing of Gentiles, and being convinced by the evidence, Verse. 45.
were astonished at it, rapt with admiration at the strangeness, but no way
doubting the truth of it: And it so fell out, that Peter afterward being
called in question by other Jews, for what he had then done in Preaching to
Gentiles, (which they thought utterly unlawful) by this relation of the descent
of the Holy Ghost upon those Gentiles, Acts 11. 15. and 18 Acts 19. 6.
he satisfied them; which sure he could not have done, if there had remained
any doubt of the truth of it. And the same fell out again to the Ephesian
Disciples, and the truth that it did so, was evidenced, by their speaking all
strange languages (which they had never learned) and prophesying. Two gifts,
which were so constant consequents of that coming of the Holy Ghost on any,
that they testified it convincingly to those, that had no evidence of the fact.

descent to this turn, and to that other grand one of giving Commissions (and
authorizing, and so testifying the truth of all that should be taught by them,
on whom the Spirit thus descended) may perhaps be better understood, by
remembering the customs appointed by God among the Jews. Those that were, among
them, called to be Prophets out of their Schools, were assumed, and consecrated
to it by anointing, (a ceremony of advancing to some eminent office; and
therefore the Chaldee Paraphrase for unction, reads ordinarily (...)
advancement.) Now for many years, before this coming of Christ, Prophecy had
failed among the Jews: Under the second Temple, say they, there was no Oil, nor
any Gradus Revelationis Divinae quatuor, Nesuah prophetia per visionem, and
spectra. Ruach Hacadosh, afflatus Spiritus Sancti, qui erat sinc istis, ut in
David, etc. Urim and Tummim in pectorali judicii (sple^descentia pectoralis,
seu Hoschen praenuntians Judaeis victoriam, quod cessavit splendescere. An.
200. antequam ego scriberem, inquit Josephus, cum Deus irasceretur ob
transgressiones Legum, vid. Suid. in voce Ephod) and Bath Col. i. e. vox
coelitus audita, and haec ultima erat sub templo secundo, etc. vid. P. Fagium
in Targum Pentat. Exodus
way of Revelation, save only that of the voice from Heaven. Now therefore when
God was thus pleased to send His Son, to reveal his complete Will unto the
World, and from him to continue the same, by his Apostles, and others after
him; in stead of that solemn Ceremony of Unction, is this visible descent of
the Holy Ghost on him, and on them, in a shining fiery cloud, and with it these
words of consecration to Christ, This is my Beloved Son, etc. and in lieu of
that voice, the gift of Tongues, to the Apostles, and others. This was foretold
by one of the Jewish Prophets long before, That the Lord should anoint him to
Preach, and that the Spirit of the Lord should be upon him, i. e. that he
should be anointed, i. e. ordained to this office of Preaching Gods Will, not
by material oil, but spiritual unction, by the real descent of the Spirit of
God upon him. And accordingly one of his Disciples, Saint John, being to
confute a sort of Antichristian Heretics of his time, which denied Christ to
be come really in the flesh, uses no other Argument (to fortify them, to whom
he writes) but only the mention of this Testimony from Heaven, this descent on
Christ and the Apostles, and others, who had instructed them in Christianity;
which he vails under the title of the Unction, viz. that unction vulgarly known
among them by that name; the unction from the holy One, as he calls it, i. e.
from God in Heaven, 1 John 2.
by which (as by their Teachers it had been communicated to them) they knew all
things (i. e. were sure that the Doctrine they had been taught, was true) and
needed not to be taught by any, i. e. wanted no more Arguments to confirm this
truth unto them: That unction, as he farther adds, teaching them of all, i. e.
giving them sufficient instructions in that matter, and in all other such
fundamental truths of the Christian Doctrine, testified to them by those who
had been thus anointed immediately from Heaven, authorized to teach them Truth:
This same again, as far as concerned Christ, is by another Acts 10. 38.
Evangelical writer joined with his working of Miracles, and called Gods
anointing him with the Holy Ghost, and with power, (as in Acts 4. 27.
another place Gods anointing him, alone) which is directly the same with that
other phrase used by Saint Paul, the Cor. 2. 4.
demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, the descent of the Spirit, and
working of Miracles: The two things, which he urged to the Jews or Heathens,
wheresoever he preached, (as things, which he was sure, they could no more
contradict, then demonstrations themselves, there being so many then alive,
that could witness the truth of them.) In which respect, he after tells them,
of Gods having confirmed them into Christ, and anointed and sealed them, all in
the same sense, to signify Gods having afforded them these convincing
testimonies of the truth of Christianity, preached to them by those, on whom
the Holy Ghost had descended and who wrought Miracles among them.

competent confirmation of the Doctrine of Christ, may yet farther appear by
considering, first the persons to whom this was to be done, the then Church of
God, the people of the Jews, which were acquainted with his voices, and his
Prophets, and his Oeconomies formerly among them: Secondly, the matter that was
thus to be confirmed, no greater change, then to which this way of attestation
may in reason be deemed abundantly proportionable. For the things to be
believed, only the real completion of some things, which had been before
foretold, and the revealing some truths, which had been more obscurely
represented in the Old Testament; and then those, how high and mysterious
soever, yet being clearly revealed by Christ, and the Apostles in the New, and
the explicit belief of them, no further required of any, then in proportion to
the degree of the revelation of them, the revealing of them must be looked on,
as the satisfying of an appetite, a desire of more knowledge (which is naturally
in all men, and is sharpened by the having received some imperfect rays of it)
and consequently should not in reason be expected to be attested with such a
pomp of signs, and prodigies, as impositions of tasks, and exactings of
obediences are wont to be. Then for the things to be done in Christianity, the
duties and observances; It is again considerable, that the change in that
respect was not such, as would denominate it a new Religion, but only the
reforming and perfecting that which was before received among the Jews, and the
making it more tolerable and easy to be received by other parts of the
(Gentile) World. The worship of the one true God, Creator of Heaven and Earth,
(contrary to the false worships of the many gods, and idols of the Heathens,
and to all the unnatural lusts attending them) had been sufficiently testified
to the Nation of the Jews, by many voices from Heaven, and undeniable
attestations of God himself (and indeed to other Nations by the fearful,
miraculous judgments, shown in Egypt, and on the Canaanites, under the conduct
of Moses, and Joshuah, etc.) and by Gods continual residing among that people,
and his attesting that by the Vrim and Thummim. by the several Prophets sent by
him, and the other ways of revelations. And to those that granted all this, it
was foretold (so often that no Jew doubted of it) that there should come days
of Reformation, that there should come a Messiah. This was long ago promised
through all passages of their story; to Adam under the title of the Seed of the
woman; to Sem, that God should dwell or pitch his tabernacle in the Tents of
Sem, take flesh upon him in his family; to Abraham, to Judah, to David, and all
along through the writings of their Prophets: Concerning this Messiah, their
carnal hearts had pre-conceived some mistakes, as that he should be a glorious
King here, and make them again, (after their being subdued by the Romans) a
most victorious, glorious people on Earth, and this, howsoever they demeaned
themselves, only by the privilege of having Abraham (to whom great promises
were made) to their father. At last this Messiah (otherwise described by their
Prophets, as one that should come in a mean and lowly manner, no way desirable
to the eye of the world, Isa. 53.) comes just as he had been foretold, a
forerunner being sent before him, on purpose to prepare his way, to dispossess
them of their fond persuasions of their absolute election (by having Abraham to
their father) and pointing him out particularly as the Son of God, the Messiah
that was now to be received (as he had been so greedily, and so long expected)
by them. This forerunner, that thus foretold, and after pointed him out, was
(as they, that crucified Christ, confess) by all the Matthew. 21. 26.
Jews taken for a Prophet. And moreover to this testimony of this acknowledged
Prophet, comes in the addition of the miraculous descent of the holy Spirit,
and the voice from Heaven, and all that has been mentioned consequent to that.
And to those, among whom this had always been acknowledged an authentic way of
attesting Gods will, nothing could be more required but this; Christ then (or
God himself in humane nature, assumed of a virgin, and born after a
supernatural manner) when he came to thirty years old (the age of a Doctor
among that people) sets to this business, which it was foretold he should
perform, tells them how the former law was to be reformed, (and especially
their former lives, from external observances to internal purities) and how to
be filled up, and perfected in some particulars; and then lightly changes some
ceremonies customary among them, and accommodates them to present use, removes
the wall of division, which had been between them, and all the rest of the
world, shows them, that that was meant only to keep them from imitating the
Heathens sins, and now that there was more need that Heathens, and they should
love one another, and join to reform both their lives, and practice Christian
virtues, then keep that supercilious distance from one another; and in a word,
he brings the whole matter to such a model, as all other men, but the Jews,
like extremely better, then that which was before among them, and consequently,
come in, in sholes, at the preaching of it: And the Jews, that do not so,
acknowledge the only reason why they do not, to be their zeal to their law of
outward performances, and the persuasion of their absolute election, that is,
in effect, that they had no other quarrel to him, but only that he did not
teach the doctrines that they liked, and were before imbued with, which if he
had, he had by that very means done contrary to the prophecies by them allowed
of, which foretold he should work a reformation. Upon these unreasonable terms,
they crucify him: And by their doing so, more wonderful attestations yet are
given to all this. In his very death the Sun is miraculously eclipsed* at a
time of the Moon, when by nature it was absolutely impossible, and so far
against all rules of Astronomy, that learned men in other places took notice of
it to be a violence done to nature, which must signify some great matter. Then
a prodigy befalls the Temple, and that a very significant one. Then the bodies
of many dead men arise and go to Jerusalem, and are seen by many. But above
all, he himself rises from the dead, and Angels again are sent to give notice
of it: And those that at his death had feared themselves deluded (as adversity
is a great temptation, and by Christ himself, foretold to be so) are every one
of them confirmed by seeing, touching, talking with him: And what is seen, and
testified by them, was seen also by five hundred persons at once, which lived
many years to attest the truth to all that doubted it; And at length (which was
the must immediate testification of the truth of all the former) he is bodily
and visibly taken up into Heaven, before their eyes.

promised, while he was upon Earth, he should, being himself departed, send the
Paraclet, which by descending visibly upon the Apostles, and by enduing them
with the gift of doing Miracles, and of speaking of all Languages, which they
were known never to have learnt, should enable them to convince the World, by
the testimony of Christ's Resurrection, and Ascension, and destroying of Satan
by his death (the most improbable means of working victories) that he was the
Messiah foretold, that Seed of the Woman, that should break the Serpents head.
On strength of this, they which so lately doubted, now cheerfully lay down
their lives, in testifying of all these truths: And those Jews that did not yet
believe on him, were according to his distinct predictions, many times
repeated, (they, their Temple, in which they trusted, their City, their whole
Nation, and infinite multitudes of them, wheresoever they were found) most
stupendiously destroyed by the Roman Eagles or Legions. All this (thus hastily
put together, so as necessarily to omit many weighty circumstances under every
head) is sure prodigy enough to attest, and authorize no greater a change, then
the clearer Revelation of some obscurer truths, the confutation of some false
Doctrines, and the Reformation of some ceremonies, and the perfecting and
heightning of some Laws less perfect before, and the instituting of a few
useful ceremonies in stead of many burdensome ones, can be thought to amount
to.

first gound of beleiving Christianity being thus mentioned, is not capable of
any dispute from any reasonable man, unless from him which shall question,
whether this be not fabulous in the relation, i. e. whether first there were
ever indeed heard such voices, or secondly, whether they were not delusions of
the hearers, or at least the voice of some other, and not of God. And to him
that shall make the former scruple, I shall be able to give as satisfactory an
answer, as is possible to be given, of a matter of this nature, of any the
lightest or weightiest consequence: To a matter of this nature, I say, i. e. of
a matter of fact, (for such it must needs be, that such a voice was heard from
Heaven) and that fact past so many hundred years ago: For first, that fact was
of necessity to be confined to some determinate time and place, to be done
somewhere, and why not in Judaea, where it is said to be done? to be seen by
some particular men, and by them of necessity (if it were to be known) to be
attested to others; nay, if it had been done so as to be heard, and seen by the
whole World then living, (though that this should point out that one person
Jesus, would not be well reconcilable with that, because his body could not be
in every place) yet could not the next Age come to know this, but must be
forced to make use of the attestation of men of that Age to reveal it to them,
and so proceed by the very way that now is allowed us, that of faith or
beleiving. For secondlly, should there at this hour come the like voice from
Heaven, in the hearing of any the most creditable honest men of this Age, what
way would be expected to convince the Ages to come (who should not be present
to hear it) of the truth of this, but by the constant affirmation of those, who
are now ear-witnesses of it, and by their committing all this to writing now,
so that all that should now live, and suspect, or believe it a forgery, might
be able to examine and discover the truth of it; especially, if to that they
should join the doing of the greatest Miracles, which coming only from God,
cannot be conceived to be by him allowed to assist the bringing a lie into the
World.

testimony of eye, or ear-witnesses thus publicly and authoritatively
protested, and conveyed to posterity, there is no rational evidence
imaginable, for those that lived not in that age; nor do men at any time exact
or require any more authentic proof of matters of fact, or ground of
believing any thing. For as to the voice of God again from Heaven, (which alone
can pretend to be above this) this is not at all commodious to this turn; for
this were for God to multiply prodigies, improperly and unseasonably, it is sure
unnecessarily, and to all that were not present, this would be again as
questionable as the former.

personally to interpose his own power, and authority, and to speak from
Heaven, yea, and to repeat that again and again, that there may no matter of
doubt remain concerning it: But when that has been thus done by God
sufficiently, then are there sufficient humane means to convey the truth or
history of this fact to other men, viz. the testimony of those, that saw or
heard it. And as it were ridiculous to suppose, or expect from God, that he
should testify from Heaven, that such men did hear that former voice from
Heaven, so the same Law of God, and Nature, which forbids lying, as sinful,
forbids also incredulity, as irrational, when a thing is by unsuspected
witnesses, upon certain knowledge, with so many improvements and advantages,
thus sufficiently testified: And if God upon man's several incredulities, should
be still obliged to give witness to his truths by his own voice, then should he
cut off that rule for belief, which in all other things (agreeably to the
dictates of reasonable nature) he has made standing among men. And in this
case to require any higher testimony, were the same inconvenient absurdity, as
not to believe any thing upon any other ground, then that of sight (which is
indeed to mistake knowledge for belief, or evidence for adherence, and must
necessarily leave nothing of virtue rewardable in that Faith, which is so
violently and unavoidably produced) or to expect a voice from Heaven to give me
daily assurance of all the passages, or relations of history, and not to
believe that there was such a man as Alexander, or Caesar, or William the
Conqueror, or Elizabeth the late (but before our birth) Queen of this Kingdom,
unless some voice of God from Heaven attest it to me.

believe at any cheaper rate, then of a new minuitly prodigy from Heaven, for
every act of beleiving a prodigy from Heaven, or (more plainly) they that will
not believe any thing, but what they know, must be fed also as well as taught
by miracle, or else must be obliged to abstinence (greater then any man
inflicts upon himself) by continuing constant to that principle. For no man
has demonstration, or infallibility, or evidence, for his safety in any bit of
meat, that he eats, or the firmness of any floor he stands on; it being always
possible, that what does most nourish, and sustain, might by some poisonous
mixture, smite and destroy; that the roof that covers, and protects, might
minuitly overwhelm and bury us; yet are we not such Hypochondriacks in these
matters of daily use, (and in them that are* it is interpreted an eminent
defect, or decay of reason, and not an higher pitch of it) as to deprive our
selves of the benefit of food and raymen, upon consideration of these remote
possible dangers, nor to fear all things but what we know infallibly.

eating is necessary for the preservation of life, and that that consideration
makes it reasonable to trust on those grounds, because by distrusting, we
should subject our selves to a certainly of that, whereof the other is at most
but an hazard; I answer, First, that this instance was produced only to show,
that we think it reasonable, without fear, or doubt, to rely on some things,
for which we have no demonstration, or knowledge of the impossibility of the
contrary, and that is still proved by this instance, though it be granted, that
eating is necessary; because if the necessity of eating were the cause that
made men venture that hazard, they should never venture it, till they were
necessarily to starve without it; and when they did so, they should do it with
continual doubt, and fear of the possible danger; neither of which are thought
rational, nor practiced by considering men. And secondly, the interpretation of
[being fed] in the instance, was [the whole course of men in feeding] which is
not the proportioning of food to the necessities of life, or the Lessian or
Cornarian diet, but the free manner of feeding among men, such as wa paralleled
to the standing on a floor, that might possibly fall, that is, being in an
upper room; which being not at all necessary to life, and withal possible in
nature that it shall minuitly be our death, is yet made use of among all Wise
men, with as much confidence, and fearlesness, as it is expected of us, that we
should believe the Gospel.

businesses of the World, wherein all men act most confidently; to that of
Trafficking, and Trading, and all kinds of Merchandising, which are really
mixed with not improbable hazards; the whole life of the husbandman, is a
continual example of those, that think fit to adhere, and believe, and act
accordingly, without having received any demonstration. And none of all these
are ever counted irrational, even by those who have fixed no thoughts beyond
this life, and the thriving, and prospering in it, and who consequently are to
lose their chief, and only good, if it should miscarry, and who in all things
of that nature are generally as rational, and wary, and hard to believe without
securities, as the wisest men in the World.

beleiving of the Apostles relations concerning those Testimonies given Christ
from Heaven, wherein we have infinitely stronger grounds, to build our Faith
on, securities, and convictions incomparably more pregnant and vehement) allow
it reasonable for us to do that once, which in all other things we do
confidently every minuit of our lives, viz. believe, what we have all reason to
believe, without exacting of evidence or demonstration, there will be no more
required of us in this matter.

testifying of the Gospel has all imaginable advantages, will appear by a bare
application of the particulars.

voices from Heaven concerning Christ, are testified by the joynt-concurrence
of all that were present at them, no one finding any cause of scruple, or
interposing any doubt concerning them. Those very persons with the addition of
many more, are allowed the favor of seeing him after his Resurrection, of using
all the most infallible means of securing themselves and others of the reality
of this. Being thus assured, they make it the business of their whole lives
after to communicate it to others, some in writings, all in preaching through
all parts of the World, (whither they traveled on purpose to propagate this
truth) agreeing in the whole matter of story, and in every circumstance of it.
The truth of what they say, they again back with Miracles on one side, with
completion of predictions, both of the Prophets of old concerning Christ, and
of Christ, concerning them, and the succeeding Ages, (especially that
concerning his speedy coming in vengeance against his crucifiers) on the other
side: Both, Testimonies of God, to authorize their testimonies. In propagating
this doctrine, as they use not strength, or force, which has been the engine
by which all other Religions have received their growth, so they never endeavor
to disturb States or Governments, for (or by) the planting this Doctrine, but
always Preach subjection to the powers, which are any where established, and
without all resistance, Profess (and by their actions demonstrate) themselves
obliged to suffer, whatsoever their lawful Magistrates inflict on them, and
contend only with their prayers to God, that they may live quietly and
peaceably under them, having still their cross in their hands, and many times
on their shoulders, to follow Christ. And if this were not sufficient to
prevent, or to satisfy the jealousies of Heathen Princes, yet, upon that very
account, it is the greater testimony of the truth of their Doctrine, when they
that propagate it, are so far from designing any temporal advantages to
themselves, which might bribe them to the deposing an untruth, that they
actually part with their very lives; and consequently with all capacity of
those possible advantages, and acquire nothing but reproaches, and torments and
death it self; and all this without any other imaginable reward, or payment, in
commutation, or reparation for all this, save only the future expectation of
that, for which they yet had no farther assurance, then the truth of that,
which they thus confessed; nay yet farther, when they have given this costly
testimony to this truth, God again bears testimony to them, and by Miracles
wrought at their Monuments, being dead, they yet speak.

true, is again it self testified, not only by records still extant under
their hands, who wrote the Gospels, and the Acts, and by footsteps and
remainders of all others preaching, wheresoever they taught, but also by the
like consent of the whole Church, i. e. whole multitudes of that age, wherein
this is pretended to be written and taught, who being convinced with the truth
of what we now enquire after, readily gave up their names to the belief of it,
and to the consequent confession of Christ, though the doing it, did in like
manner cost them very dear, the parting with their espoused customs of livings,
whether among the Jewish, or Gentile world, their pleasures, their worldly
wealth, and oft-times their lives also.

strangeness in it (viz. that from such mean and simple beginnings and
instruments, without any kind of power, or earthly authority to back it,
without one sword ever drawn in defense of it, Christianity should soon obtain
such a victory over the heart of men, in so great a part of the world) that
nothing but truth, which has that overruling force in it, can be deemed to
have been its Champion.

writings, those the tradition of those eyewitnesses, whose they pretend to
be, and that they were by such sholes, such multitudes of men of all Nations
believed then, and that belief signed by the blood of many, by the hazards and
adventures of most, by the professed non-resistance of all, this is as fully
testified to us, as any matter of fact can be supposed to be, by the concurrent
testimonies of all of that age, which say any thing of it, and by a general
successive attestation of all intervening ages, since that time, (the authority
of Among the (...) the confessed writings of Scriptures, attested by all, and not
(...) contradicted by any, (...). Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. (...). The four
Gospels are first to be placed, and then the story of the Acts of the Apostles.
those writings being never contested by any) i. e. by the same means of
probation, upon which we believe those things, which we least doubt of, and
against which men cannot feign any sound, or show of proof, save only that
testimonies are not demonstrations; which exception will in like manner be in a
like or far greater force against all other things, which we believe most
confidently.

scruple unsatisfied in this matter, and therefore I shall proceed to that
other bolder objection still behind, That that which is pretended to be the
voice of God, may not have been such, but some delusion of the hearers, or at
least the voice of some other, and not of God, as the devil in the oracle
delivered himself by voice; and therefore though it be confessed, that if this
voice were Gods, it is infallibly creditable, yet there will need some certain
way of discrimination, to assure it was his. To this I answer, That the person
whose objection this may be supposed to be, is either a bare Theist, that
acknowledges a God, but not the God of Israel; or else he that acknowledges
what the Jew did, the truth of the Old Testament: I shall reply somewhat to
each of these.

former, That if this way of objecting would be of force, there could be no way
for God to reveal himself to man, Veracity would be an empty attribute of God,
of no signification to us; For it is not imaginable that there should any
greater assurance of Gods speaking to men, then by the Heavens opening, and
from thence the Spirit of God descending visibly, and lighting on one, and out
of the clouds a voice delivered; whatsoever else can be imagined or named will
not be above this. And if all the ways that God can use, be not able to give
assurance, that it is God that speaks, what are we the near for knowing that
God cannot lie, as long as there is supposed for us no way to know, what at any
time he says? nay, to what use (as to this particular) is his omnipotence, if
he cannot reveal himself to us in such a way, that may be reasonable for us to
believe to be his, and not some deceivers voice? Nay, in this, God shall not be
able to do so much, as any ordinary man; for he can so reveal himself, or
speak, as no man that is present, and does not stop his ears, shall be able to
doubt of his speaking.

second sort of objecters, I answer, That the objection will lose all its
seeming force, if it be remembered; that although now among us, voices from
Heaven, are not heard, and (therefore we are not at this distance so competent
judges of the clearness or certainty, that such, when they were, were not
delusions, and accordingly the assent required of us of this age, is but
proportionable to the grounds of belief, which we enjoy) yet among that people
of the Jews, this was very ordinary. Gods Law was given to Moses in that
manner, and God lead that people by a pillar of cloud, and fire, which was
answerable to this: And in after times under the second Temple, they confess
this the only way of Gods revealing himself to them. And therefore in this
very matter it was allowed, and pleaded by some prime men of that people, that
if the Spirit, or an Angel had spoken to Paul, the resisting him would be a
fighting against God: And thereupon, Acts 23. 9. they confessed, that they
found no harm in him; that God had thus spoken to him, those men then thought
probable, but did not avow the knowing it certainly, having no present evidence
of the fact, save only the affirmation of Paul himself at that time. But had
they had evidence of the fact, by being present at it, (as they that testify
the voice to Christ, were eye and ear-witnesses of it) they would not then have
thought reasonable to make any farther question, whether that, which they call
the voice of the Spirit, or an Angel, were such or no, and being such, whether
the resisting what was spoken by it, were the fighting against God. For the
testifying therefore of the truth of such pretended facts; and indeed to leave
no place for rational doubt in this matter, there is yet a farther answer, That
the power of miracles, and the gifts of tongues that attended these voices, and
descents of the Holy Ghost from Heaven, were irrefragable testimonies, and
evidences of the reality of them, and could not be the immediate effects of
delusions, being such as could not be wrought by the power of the devil, nor
ever were pretended the effects of his oracular responses.

discrimination there are, by which the voices of the devil, or delusions
magical might be distinguished from Divine, as that of concordance with
predictions, acknowledged to have come from God; and such was the voice that
was delivered at the descent of the Spirit upon Christ, the same that was
foretold by the Prophet, and by him joined with the mention of the descent of
Gods Spirit upon him. And to the same belongs also the completion of the so
many other things in him, which had certainly been foretold of the Messiah,
which Concordance with Divine truth, is most diametrically contrary to
delusion. And besides, of the miracles which he did, most were to dispossess,
and cast out devils, (to restore health, as they brought diseases) who
consequently look on him as (and proclaim him) their enemy; and although this
may be thought to be done by them for some greater advantage (as the Devil may
suffer one charm to counter-work another,) yet could they not here be thought
to have used those endeavors to raise Christ into that power of destroying
them, or to assist their utmost, to give him an authority in the world. Indeed
the whole doctrine of Christ was so directly contrary to that, which had been
maintained by the Oracles, that it cannot be imagined to proceed from that
principle, to which they pretend. And the story is approved by Plutarch (and
the effect has made it not improbable, that there was some truth in it) that
about Christ's time, a voice was heard on the Sea, that the great God Pan was
dead, and an huge bellowing, and roaring, as of infernal mourners, following
it; and that this was probably the cause, acknowledgedly the forerunner of the
Devils silence, and never speaking in the Oracles any more.

manner of the Devils giving his Responses in the Oracle, it is confessed by all,
that then lived, and knew them, that they were delivered constantly by a man,
who was seen, when he did it, and was called the (...), one that spoke under
the Oracle, out of the caverns of the Earth, (by the vapor of which Plutarch
conceived him inspired, and so turned Enthusiast) which is a far different
thing from a voice (no man being seen) which came in a clap of thunder, with a
bright shining cloud from Heaven. This may reasonably satisfy the importunity
of that objection also.

ground of our Faith in gross, the testimony on which it is built, which being
an infallible word, derived and conveyed to us by the most creditable means,
and which we have no temptation from Reason to doubt of, may sure be concluded
a rational ground of belief.

CHAP. II.
A Digression concerning the use of Reason in deciding Controversies in
Religion.

convincing of the gainsayer; it may not be amiss to consider the beleiver
awhile, and give him the bounds or limits, within which Reason is obliged to
contain it self, in matters of Faith, and this even by the verdict of Reason it
self. And I shall do it by a brief stating of this Question.

Whether Right Reason be appointed the Judge of Controversies? Whether all
doubts of all sorts be to be determined by the dictates of Nature, in the Hears
of every Man which has the use of Reason?

To this I shall ground my answer in these two Rules, or Postulations. 1. That

natural power of knowing or judging of things, is his participating of those
things (in some degree) with God, in whom they are as in the Fountain. So that
the man may find, and behold them in himself as truly, though not as
eminently, or in the same degree, as they are in God.

For certainly, if a man denudate of all experimental, acquired, revealed
knowledge, of all forain helps, left only to himself as a man endued with
Reason, should be questioned in any thing, and supposed able to express his
conceptions, he would be fain to fetch out every word that he said, from within
him, say only what his own heart could discern within himself, otherwise he
should be supposed to answer more, then he had means to come to the knowledge
of; The work done would be above the proportion of the means to it; the
conclusion would have more in it then the premises.

From hence follows this second Rule, That

naturally able to judge only of those things, which by some sure connection
depend on those attributes of God, which are communicated to (and particularly
by) men, and are the like (as far as the adumbration or transcript, is to the
exemplar or pattern) for kind, though not degree, in man as in God.

Controversies, (i. e. all things subject to judgment) are reducible to two
heads, Goodness or Truth; so that the Question now is, Whether Right Reason can
infallibly judge, what is good, or bad, true or false?

And then to this I answer, First, Concerning the first Head.

good morally (for Metaphysical goodness is all one with truth) depends, by
sure connection, from that eternal justice which is primarily in God, That being
the rule, as it is the Fountain, of all moral goodness in men, or things: Every
thing being good, more or less, as it more or less partakes of that justice,
which is in God.

attributes of God, which are called Communicable, it is truly affirmed, That
that justice, which is in God, is the very same in substance, communicated to
men, though in a lower degree. And therefore it follows by the second rule,
that man by the light of nature, and general impressions, i. e. by a power of
seeing, whatsoever is within his sphere, is enabled by God to judge what is
just, what not, what morally good, what bad. And no man judges amiss in these
things, but he that has his judgment corrupted by some prepossession, or
habitual vice, or present prevailing temptation; and therefore of moral
Controversies, i. e. whether a thing naturally, or in it self, be good or bad,
just, or not, Right Reason is a Judge.

Caution, or limitation, that it be not extended to those things, wherein the
Law of Nature has been elevated higher by any positive Law of Christ. For as
Right Reason: cannot judge what is lawful in any particular Kingdom, because
what Nature has made lawful, the Municipal Laws of that place may have
forbidden, and made unlawful, (and that Right Reason cannot take notice of,
unless it be told so) so in Christ's Kingdom, the Church, when he has forbidden
what Nature had left free and unforbidden, Reason (untaught by Christ) cannot
say, that that is unlawful, yet generally will be found to bear that Testimony
to Christ, that what Christ has super-added to the Law of Nature Right Reason
will of its own accord commend, as best, or most laudable, and excellent in
them that do it, though not knowing any precept for it, it will not affirm that
it is necessary, so as it cannot be omitted without sin.

Then concerning the second Head, I answer,

true, i. e. to have a Being either potential or actual, depends partly on Gods
Power, partly on his Will. In respect of its potential Being, it depends on his
Power, in respect of its Actual, on his Will.

Gods Power, though it may in some sense be said communicable to the Creature,
because all ability in the Creature is a gleam of infinite ability in God, yet
is not this so communicated, as his Justice or Goodness was said to be. For
Goodness in the creature is a kind of image truly resembling the goodness in
God, and that a kind of natural image, as is the face in the Glass, not a
voluntary one, which has its Being from the variable Will of the Artificer.
But power, or ability in the Creature, is not thus a natural image of Gods
power, but as a reflection of a thing, which voluntarily, and variously casts
its beams. Voluntarily, I say, because the dispensing of his Power, either in
manner, or measure, is a free act of his Will; and variously, because he does
it, first, unequally; and secondly, not so to any, but that he can (and
sometimes does) withdraw or suspend it, when it is bestowed; so that I cannot
say, that as that which is just in God to be done, is just to be done by the
Creature, so what is possible to be done by God, is possible to be done by the
Creature.

not communicating of Gods Power to the Creature, as well as his Justice, may
be this, because it conduced not to the end of the Creatures Creation, as the
other did: For though God intended to make a Creature truly good, and just, yet
he did not truly powerful. Power indeed being in it self not a virtue, as
justice is, nor in it self morally good, or evil, and therefore not so
agreeable to the condition of a Creature, but rather indeed peculiar to the
Majesty of a Creator.

said second rule, that man is not able to fathom Potentiall truths, because
Power is not the same in substance in God, and in the Creature, and therefore
by what is in the Creature, he is no way enabled to conceive what is in God,
and so consequently to define of any Potentiall truth, because though it may
not be wrought by any thing that is in the Creature, or within his sphere of
knowledge, yet it may be by God.

natural impression, or light, that in this behalf a rational Creature has, is
that two contradictories cannot be true at once, and therefore I think, all
Principles that are not thought fit to be proved in any natural science, (if
they be truly so) may easily be resolved into this one, A thing cannot at once
be, and not be. And this natural impression rises not from any observation of
the power communicated to the creature, (for then still it would hold, that
though man cannot do contradictories at once, yet God may) but from a sight,
that this would be an effect of extreme impotency, more then is conceiveable in
any Creature, and therefore cannot be imputed to God, who is conceived
Omnipotent, nor consequently to man, unless God should take away all degrees
of power quite from him, and then he should be annihilated.

actual truths already in Being, which are works either mediately, or
immediately of Gods Will, our Reason is no farther judge of them, then as Gods
Will is communicated to us by some Images, or Pictures of it, either
substantial and real, as when a thing done, is presented to the faculty, to
which it is objicible, there a real image of Gods Will is impressed in me, (and by
that I may judge distinctly) or when it is revealed to me either from God, or
from any other witness, of which in this matter I am convinced, that he
partakes of Gods veracity, i. e. would not lie to me, and this may be called an
intentionall Image of Gods Will impressed in me.

Right Reason judge of things in Being, either because it is so really
represented to the senses, and that is evidence; or because is either revealed,
or else attested by God, which Reason knows can neither err, nor deceive, and
this is adherence; or because such a concurrence of testimonies agrees to tell
me so, as I have no Motive or Reason to disbeleive, and this is humane Faith,
(which may reasonably take place, until I either see somewhat, or receive
somewhat by an higher testimony revealed to the contrary) which also is weaker,
or stronger, according to the importance of the matter, authority of the
testifiers, my particular danger, if I be deceived in it, etc.

Hence the Conclusion is, That

Right Reason is able to judge of all merely Moral objects, whether any thing
be good or bad morally; of Natural objects in matter of fact, whether such a
thing be done or no, by the help of the means specified, and by discourse, and
analogy from things that we see are done, to judge that such another thing is
possible: But of supernatural truths, such things as it never discerned in
Nature, either in the kind, or the like, it cannot judge any farther then thus.
Either first, that though we cannot do it, yet for ought we know it is
possible, (nay it has a Being) with God; or secondly, that God has affirmed
it so, therefore I am sure it is; or thirdly, that comes to me from authority,
that I have no reason to suspect, but on the contrary concurrence of all
Reasons to be persuaded by it; nay, there are some inward Characters in the
thing it self, that makes me cast off all jealousy or doubt of such
affirmations, and therefore I believe it is so. But generally, and in thesi, it
is no way Judge of these last kind of Controversies.

God, in moral actions, even in himself, submits and appeals to man's reason,
Isa. 5. 3. Ezekiel. 18. 25. yet in these latter he derides all those, that go
about to judge of them by reason, 1 Cor. 1. 20. And agreeably Saint Paul in his
Preaching the Gospel, for the proving the truth of Christianity, was fain,
says (...) Cont. Cells. p. 4.
Origin, to use a peculiar way of demonstration. First, by comparing of
Prophecies in the Old Testament, concerning Christ: Secondly, by Miracles; but
in practical matters he appeals to that which was written in every ones heart,
Romans 2. 15.

Eulogius an Oration against those, who think to be able to comprehend the true
Theology of Christians (i. e. Christians discourses concerning the Persons of
the Deity) (...), p. 862.
by the Wit, or Reason of Man; and Photius has approved of that discourse of
his, that he does (...).
talk of God Piously, and devoutly, and set Christian divinity a pitch beyond
humane wisdom, (...).
superior to all other Vid. Just. Mart. p. 5. and 6. A and 8. C. 9. A. So Just.
Mart. p. 375. A. and for the (...), p. 379, So for the (...) of the union of
Christ's natures, 382. B. (...), 386. B. 387. D. 388. A.
artificial method, or rules of Art.

Scripture, that generally in defining these last sorts of Truths, Gods
authority is set down, as the only proof of what is said, without using any
other way of arguing, or secular demonstration: All that is indulged to men's
Reason, being only this; First, to consider, whether it be not very equal, and
reasonable to believe God, without any other motive, or topic of proof, even
in those things, which are above, or beside Right Reason, nay, against the
proposals of corrupt; and secondly, to search (by what helps soever a
reasonable man's prudence and diligence can suggest, or furnish him with) which
is that Word of God, which contains these revelations, which Reason tells them,
they must believe without farther reasoning.

believe any thing (though revealed by the Scriptures) but what Reason
otherwise would lead me to, is the same that Celsus persuaded the Heathens (of
his side) to, against Christ, to (...). Orig. cont. Cells. p. 8.
follow Reason, and the rational guide in all the doctrines, we receive, all
error and deceit being, says he, brought into the world by Faith; and that
they that believed any thing without Reason for it, are like them that delight
in Juglers, etc. and therefore he laughs at all those who requiring not Reason
for what they believe, use this phrase, (...).
Do not examine but believe, thy Faith shall save thee, as men that are
displeased with wisdom, and in love with folly. To all which Origin, as acute a
Reasoner as any, opposes nothing, but the Evidence of Prophecies, and the Word
of God for this rule of Faith. Which if it be not simply believed without any
Philosophical rational enquiry, concerning the things affirmed in it, many will
of necessity still wallow in infidelity after all that God has done for the
rescuing them out of it, and only a few find that by rational search, which
before they believed by simple Faith.

CHAP. III.
Of the power of the affections and interests in matter of Faith.

Christianity being in the first Chapter supposed to be thus sufficiently
recommended to the understanding, which is a wel-natured faculty, and very
ready to hear Reason, when it is offered to it: There is but one obstruction
possible, and that is from men's affections, or interests, and that by two ways
of proceeding: First mediately; secondly, immediately.

mediately by the will, and have sometimes that unhappy institence upon that,
as by their importunity to persuade it to interpose, before the full
representment or proposal of the object, and so to hinder the free access of
the Argument to the understanding.

prejudicate and passionate men, who are impatient of hearing or considering
any thing that may dispossess them. And thus we see it sometimes in those of a
better temper, who yet being unwilling to lose any advantages, which they can
make use of to maintain their present persuasions, are so intent upon their own
part of the dispute, that they do not receive the opposite Arguments, with that
equal Justice of improving them to the height, with which they are offered, or
to which if it had happened, that they had undertaken the maintenance of the
other part, they could have heightened them. This latter, being not an effect of
so great a distemper, is not so discernible (to our selves especially) as the
other, but yet is a fault, and that of ill consequence, and a deviation from
the rules of distributive Justice, which would allow as much of our attention,
or diligence to the improving of the Arguments of the one part, as of the
other, and express as impartial a kindness to the Neighbor as to my self. And
in all this the Will is culpable for being thus (more or less) isntrumental
to the affections. And so it is Negatively also, whenever we do not use that
industry of search as our condition permits, and the importance of the matter
requires of us,

affections and interests do themselves immediately, sometimes, perform their
own business, they cloud and darken the understanding, and make it less capable
and receptive of such representations as are made to it.

Aristotle to affirm, That Pleasures are in some men (...).
corruptive of principles, i. e. that those common dictates of nature, etc.
which are by all unbyassed men naturally consented to as true, and
unquestioned, do yet to voluptuous men (and the same holds in matter of fear,
and interest, and the other passions, and ill habits also) become matter of
dispute, whether they be true or not; not because in Reason any thing can there
be offered sit to infuse scruples into a rational man, or to combat with the
far greater potency of Reason on the other side, which denominated them
principles, but because these rational dictates having somewhat in them which
is contrary to, and unreconcileable with passions, and sensitive pleasures,
those consequently that have indulged to them, and espoused them, as the most
desirable things, do, for the enjoying of them, undervalue, and despise the
rational Arguments, which would cost them so dear (even the parting with their
lusts) if they continued in that reputation, which is due to them.

Heathen Philosophers have proposed it as the best preparative, to the studying
and search of truth, to have men's affections and appetites well regulated first
(though not by reading, or studying the Books, and Science of Morals or
Ethics, yet) by (...). Simplic. in Catheg. Arist.
assuetude, and virtuous custom, by inartificial precepts, and sober
education, etc. moderating and tempering their passions, and bringing them
(...), Anonym. Schol. in Categ.
to live Orthodoxly, (...). Id.
lest having their Reason disturbed by passions, they be not able to pass an
exact judgment of things; And without this, say they, it is as impossible for a
man to behold and judge aright of truths (such truths as have any thing any way
contrary to passions) (...). Hierocl. in Praef. ad (...).
as for a man with sore eyes to behold illustrious splendid objects, without
being anointed or cured of their distemper.

Accordingly it has been observed in the first Ages of the Church, that
luxurious and intemperate men were of all others most hardly brought to believe
the Christian Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body, and Immortality of the
Soul, because their carnal joys being so material and gross, and contrary to
what Christ has taught of an Eternal life, and of Spiritual bodies, and
bliss, their being so deeply engaged, and immerst in the former, fortified them
pertinaciously against all impression from the latter, and enabled them to hold
out finally against the belief of those Christian Truths, which others of more
ruly tempers, upon equal Reasons, and the same representation, did most readily
embrace and assent to.

doubts of the truth of Christianity, are either more sharp discerners of
truth, then all others, that are not (or then themselves, before they) arrived
to this pitch of Stanchness, and Skepticism; or again whether they have
seriously spent any considerable time in reviewing their Principles, and, doing
so, have sprang any special new Arguments, which they had not considered
before, and those of such weight with them, that they will contentedly expose
themselves to all the torments of Hell (the sure reward of an Atheistical
Antichristian life) upon the bare probability of those their Arguments, (which
cannot be rationally done by them, unless their pretensions against Christian
Religion exceed ours for it, in strength of credibility, as far as an eternal
Hell exceeds those short sufferings of this life, to which Christianity
betrays us, or as an eternal state of spiritual bliss in Heaven, does surpass
the transitory, unsatisfactory short pleasures of sin in this life) or whether
it be not really their freer indulgence to some liberties, which Christianity
admits not of, (and that more against light, and against the importunity of
Gods judgments, then before) or perhaps some change of affairs abroad, which
has made the practice of Christianity a more inconvenient, costly thing, then
it was wont to be; most men being willing to have the advantages of Religion,
as long as there be but few, and supportable encumbrances, that attend it; and
after changing their opinion of it, when they have run any hazards by it.

new, or strange, that it was a part of the Character, that our Christ set upon
himself, and his Doctrine, both in that parable of the Seed, that fell upon
stony ground, which is supposed to be scorched at the rising of the Sun upon
it, and by that cloze of his answer to John's Disciples, Blessed is he that is
not scandalized at me, foretelling them that the most eminent and considerable
danger to Christian Religion, is, That they which in prosperous times are
forward professors of it, will, when their Religion begins to offer them smart,
fairly forsake, and fall off from it.

Head of Arguments, on purpose to show the influence, that matter of advantage
may have on belief, and that on either side, not only where men's interests do
chance to thwart their persuasions, but also, and as discernibly, when they
appear on their sides, to assist and confirm them.

sweetness, and wel-tastedness of the Manna work as effectually on the Faith
of some Jews, make them as willing to adhere to God, and Moses, in opposition
to returning to Egypt, as the new miraculous manner of the coming of that down
upon them; and the Milk and Honey of Canaan, were very good motives, and
alectives, and engagements to the faith, and obedience of others: And so in
like manner the carnality of the paradise, that Mahomet promised to his
disciples, has much advanced the credit, and facilitated the belief, and
disguised the grossness and absurdities of the Alcaron.

advantages are not to be disliked, because they are such, but because they
pretend, and are mistaken to be such, when they are not, and by so doing, do
rob us of those that are truly so, or that are infinitely weightier, and more
considerable; and because that which is really the most advantageous, is always
most rational, most prudent for man to choose and pursue, and aspire to:
Therefore it is, that to the former Argument of the reasonableness of the
ground, or testimony on which we believe Christian Religion to be true, I now
proceed to the advantages, that those that embrace shall reap by it, both
because most men's Objections against Christianity, are founded in an opinion,
that it is not an advantageous profession, and would have no other quarrel to
it, if they were satisfied that it were, and also because though
advantageousness no way contributes to the making, or proving a thing to be
true or false, yet it does to the making it more or less worth beleiving, or
embracing, (for every slight truth is not such) and so more or less fit to be
set up in our hearts, as our Religion.

Religion every man entertains hopes of acquiring somewhat of benefit to
himself, and would not choose to enter into those bands, if he did not promise
himself some advantage by it, is a maxim, which I shall not think fit to
prove, or confirm in this place.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the advantages of Christian Religion in the gross.

testifying of the Truth, so proper for this present disquisition, as the
consideration of the advantages of Christian Religion, and those advanced above
all other imaginable advantages of any other Religion, as much as the
credibility of Christian Religion is above the credibility of any other that
pretends against it.

gross. And that will be done by this one consideration, which has been
enlarged on Second Sermon on Mat. ^^ 30.
in other Papers: That the Precepts of Christ, especially his supperadditions
to the former Laws of Moses, and of Nature, are, beyond all the contrary vices,
or the lower degrees of the same virtues, perfectly agreeable to Humane reason,
cultivated, and improved, and heightened by Philosophy; so that that shall
confess those things to be still most commendable, and most excellent, which
Christ has thought fit to command his followers. This might be demonstrated
through all particulars; but I shall more strictly restrain my self to the
advantages of a Christian life, by considering it first in order to outward,
and secondly, to inward advantages.

outward advantages, are again more public, or more private: Or the public
there is none sure more valuable, and more fundamental to all other, then that
of Peace, and that is so immediately and inseparably annexed to the Christian
Doctrine, that would men think fit to be guided by that rule, were but Christ's
precepts constantly practiced, there would be no occasion of destemper, or
disturbance, through the world, either between Christian Potentates among
themselves, or betwixt any Christian Prince, and the Subjects of his own
Kingdom.

In What state or condition soever a man is placed in any Nation be he King or
Subject, this commands him most strictly therein to abide with God; every man
to content himself with his present portion, whether it be of Soveraigntie, or
of inferior estate under subjection: Then secondly, wheresoever the Supremacy
of power is placed by the Laws of any Kingdom, there Christ requires
subjection, and non-resistance in all subjects; and both by himself, and in the
writings of his Disciples Matthew. 22. 21 Acts 23. 5. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 18.
repeateth and impresseth that far more earnestly on the subject, then he does
the duty of protection on the Supreme; and where they Ephesians. 5. 22, 25. and 6.
1, 4, 5, 9. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 7.
conjoyn them both, there they begin constantly with that of subjection in the
inferior, as being of more universal concernment to the peace and preservation
of the whole, and as that which earns the superiors performing of his duty, as
a due reward to their obedience. Thirdly, Christ prohibits self-love, thinking
highly of ones self, all covetousness, ambition, animosites, revenge, doing, or
returning of injuries, whisperings, backbitings, distrusts and jealousies, all
scrupulous preventions of remote possible dangers; and fourthly, he commands
doing as we Would be done to, blessing of enemies, contempt of the world, not
valuing any thing which is most tempting in it, and, above all things, pursuing
of peace, with all men, (in the greatest extent imaginable) as much as in them
lies, and wherever it is possible, even over the whole world. And fifthly, the
Precepts delivered by Christ, (plain and intelligible to all) as they are a
standard, by which every man is to measure his own actions, so are they also to
examine others, and consequently they will fortify against seducers, and sly
disturbers of a peoples peace, if, according to Christ's direction, we try them
by their fruits, and reject and stop our ears against all those, whose
doctrines bring not exact concordance to Christian practice along with them.
And where these precepts are put in practice, what possible inlet is there
left, for disturbance or sedition to enter?

Peace, Plenty is the most desirable public good, and that is hardly
separable from the former; but, beside the contributions, which all the
fomenters of peace have made toward plenty also, Christian Religion has
peculiar ways of ascertaining any people of that, if its Laws be embraced and
practiced: For, first, Christ commands labor, and industry, and diligence,
banishes the idle, as a (...). 2 These. 3. 6.
disorderly walker, disbands him as soon as he appears to be such. Secondly, he
makes the rich man his Almoner, or Steward to distribute to every man's wants,
as he is able; and as he blesses his liberality; and renders it the most
probable course to make him rich, so he convinces him, that gathering, and
hoarding up wealth is the meanest, and withal the most disadvantageous folly,
and that the only real commodity, in riches, is the joy, and happiness of
relieving others, and the enhansing of their future reward by so doing.
Thirdly, he forbids rapines, defraudings, gaining to our selves by any other
man's losses: And fourthly, by putting the wealth of the world in a channel, to
descend from superiors to inferiors, from him that has to him that has not,
from the part that is filled, to that other that is emptied, he makes a certain
provision for every part of the body. And beyond all this, fifthly, he has
taught men, that all the good of plenty is to be enjoyed in a competence, or a
sufficience, (and that there is only more trouble, and more charge, and more
fears, and more temptations annexed to any greater abundance;) And sixthly, he
has given all his faithful servants assurance, that he that has the disposing
of all, and knows what they have need of, will never so destitute them, that
they shall want these necessary things. And when plenty is thus interpreted,
and these provisions made for it, there will be little possibility, that any
people that live according to these rules, shall fail of that certain benefit
of them.

private outward advantages to every Christian liver, they will be as
discernible also. And these are of two sorts, First, those that have an
universal influence on the comfortableness, and cheerfulness of the Whole
life, without which neither health, nor Wealth, nor any particular advantage,
will have any taste or relish in them. Secondly, Those particulars of health,
etc. Of the first sort, I shall be confident to prefer the observance of one
Christian Precept, Attending to a man's particular calling, which, as it is the
strict duty of every Christian, of what rank, or quality soever, so is it
that, which sweetens the whole life to him, that lives orderly according to
that rule. It is certain that assuetude, and custom has a moral efficacy in
it, to make every thing pleasant, that is accustomed, (were it not upon that
score, it is not imaginable, that some sins to some men, which have natural
aversions to them, should ever be taught to go down so smoothly.) By this
means, business and bodily labor it self, which at the distance seems most
uneasy, to those that have been brought up in it, proves most pleasant and
delightful. To such an one idleness, and Want of employment is realy the most
uneasy affliction of his life.

experience, and are able to give the reason of it, from the active temper both
of the body, and mind of man, that there is no such constant torment, as the
not knowing what to do with his time, the having his hours lie upon his hands;
for the removing of which, most of the vain, or sinful mixtures of our lives
are sought out, as cures, or divertisements, and having no real pleasantness in
them, do yet imitate some, by ridding us of the contrary uneasiness, the
burden of that idle time, which is made more supportable by such varieties.
Thus has that uncharitable, and very mean quality of censuring, and
bakbiting, and deriding of others, become so frequent, and fashionable in the
world, (so inseparable from all our conversations, the only modern good
company, as it is called) only because many persons have no other employment
for their time, but that of talking, and of that sort this is the most obvious
to those, who have neither zeal enough to their own good, nor so much of
friendship to those with whom they converse, as to make the faults of one
another (in order to the reforming or fortifying one another) the subject of
their discourse. To this and all other sins and vanities of this nature, this
duty of attending the calling, is a certain Antidote or Cure: The advantages
of which cannot be more eminently exexemplified, then among those men, who by
mistake are conceived to have no Obligation of Calling upon them, I mean those,
of the Nobility and Gentry in a Kingdom. I shall enlarge on this instance a
little.

Calling of those that are not born to Estates, of Possessions, is generally
acknowledged to be somewhat of labor, or industry for the acquiring of Wealth,
and to them may reasonably be confined that part of Adams curse (which is yet
sweetened to Christians by Christ) that in the sweat of their brows they shall
eat their bread. But then, those that have ample possessions left them,
sufficient for themselves and family, (and much more) and besides, a
perpetuity of that to their families for ever, are certainly under no such
obligation to labor, to increase so fair an heap, or to spend that precious
time and sweat, and industry on the bringing more water into the Ocean, or
indeed more Weight unto that burden of wealth, which lies already an
encumbrance (more commonly then a real advantage) on their shoulders. Their
calling therefore, without question, consists in the scattering, not
increasing, in the discreet, charitable distribution of that yearly revenue,
which is committed to their stewarding, i. e. in the using that wealth (to the
richest advantages they are able) to the service of God. Such is the spending
their time, as Citizens not of one City, but of the World, enquiring what is
the duty of mankind, and how they may serve God cheerfully in those Precepts
of Christ, which are of the greatest perfection, observing the wonderful things
of Gods Law, and the harmony which those notes of discord make, which to the
unskilful or untuneable ear are so harsh. This and much more in reference to
God, and then in order to men, the well ordering of that part of the
Commonwealth, wherein they are employed, the releiving of those that want, the
attracting inferiors, by Exhortation, Admonition, Correption, (but especially
by exemplarie acts of all piety) to the practice of Christianity, and, as
much as in them lies, bringing virtue into countenance, and reputation, into
fashion, and credit in the world.

Wealth, and eminency of place are very proper instruments toward this end,
will not be needful to be demonstrated here, all that is seasonable will be,
to consider what a Treasure of Joy and Sweetness would come in to every such
person in a Kingdom, by a constant cheerful attendance on the severals of this
calling, every one of them infinitely more proportionable to the appetites of a
generous, ingenuous mind then any thing else, which his ambition could suggest
to him: Nothing vulgar or mean in it, and (beside all the particular delights
in every act of each) the great transcendent comfort of having satisfied
Conscience, the not having lived an unprofitable burden of the Earth, the
having, in some measure, performed the task, for which he came into the world,
would be to him that comes to reap them, unspeakable ravishments, though, at
the distance, perhaps the sensual designer discerns not such excellencies in
them.

several particular external advantages, as they are the desired portion of
every individual man, (which beyond all other prudential methods imaginable)
Obedience to Christ's Precepts provides for us. Of this sort, First, the health
of the body (the foundation of all other outward comforts) cannot better be
preserved from diseases, then by strict rules of constant temperance, and
sobriety, and of fasting, and abstinence sometimes, of continence, or conjugal
chastity, of active and industrious pursuit of the business of the calling;
nor can it better be secured from wounds and maims, and violent deaths, then by
mildness, and quietness, and sobriety, and bearing of injuries, all which are
the special charges of Christian Religion.

advantage to the health, and ease, and strength of the body, have in them a
far greater delight, and pleasure, and gratefulness to the senses, then any of
the unchristian contraries. No pleasure in eating and drinking, like that in
the temperate feeding on the plainest, wholesomest diet, and so in the rest.

Reputation, another special outward advantage, it is clear, that besides, that
Christian Religion teaches every man to think better of others then himself,
forbids judging, and reproaching, and backbiting, and so most certainly
preserves that Jewel entire to every man. The practice of Christian Virtues,
commands esteem and value even from those, which least exercise them
themselves. The proud man cannot choose but reverence the meek, the debaucht man
the temperate, the greatest self-seeker him that most divests himself of all
his self-interests. There are not three things in the World, which so certainly
bring a good reputation along with them, as Charity, and Humility, and
Constancy; and these three are the prime commands of Christian Religion.

outward, I proceed to the inward advantages, the advantages of the Soul, and
those either of this life at the present, or in order to another life.

Christian Precepts tend evidently to the bettering of the soul in this life:
First, by purging it: The Heathen Philosophers, Porphyrie, and diverse others,
especially the Pythagoreans, were much concerned in the pollutions of the soul,
which they discerned, and beyond all things in the World desired, and
endeavored the purging them out, sought to Magic and Sorcery to that end, but
terribly mistook in that way to it. Our Christ has done this by the Grace, and
Doctrine of Repentance, as far as is necessary for an inferior State. And so,
is foretold by the old Prophets under the style of [the desire of all Nations]
and [the exspectation of the Gentiles] as he that brought with him in his
precepts and in his graces, a full satisfaction to all the gaspings, and
thirsts, of the most rational, and earnest appetites about us.

cultivating it with all useful knowledge, and true wisdom. For such, by the
Oracles own confession, is Practical Knowledge, and of that kind all the
Philosophers that ever were, never ascended to so high pitches, as Christ's one
Sermon in the Mount has done.

satisfying it, allowing it here those enjoyments, which of all others a
rational soul is pleased with, 1. The pleasures of friendship, of profitable
conversation, admonishing, and instructing one another. 2. The pleasure and
special ravishment of relieving, and refreshing those that want, of making a
poor man happy. 3. The pleasure of contentment, and desiring nothing but what
we enjoy. 4. The pleasure of victories, in resisting, and overcoming
temptations of all sorts, but especially of overcoming evil with good; and,
whenever there is any unpleasant mixture, then 5. The pleasure of a difficult
obedience, thereby to approve our love and zeal to him, who has given himself
for us.

daily rewarding of it: 1. By the comforts, and joyous reflections of a good
conscience (as that is set off by the contrary Hell and torments of a bad.) 2.
By the several eases that the several Christian virtues give men here, the
ease of patience, contrary to the uneasiness of rage, the ease of contempt of
the world contrary to the perpetual drudgery, and toiles of the worldling, the
ease of the continent man, contrary to the flames, and d^squiets of the
libidinous. 3. By the present experience of Gods loving kindness here, in
answering of those Prayers which are useful for us; in denying those which
would be hurtful, in restraining us sometimes, in exciting us at other times,
in speaking peace to our souls, etc. 4. By conversing with God by meditation,
by thanksgiving, singing Hosannahs, and Hallelujahs to him, the most joyous
employment in the World. Nay, by a perpetual cheerfulness, rejoycings always,
which, as it would be another man's reward, so is it the duty of a Christian. 5.
By the exspectations of a reward in another life, which though future, is yet
by the benefit of two Christian virtues, faith and hope, forestalled, and
anticipated, and made present to us. And all these, if there were not
infinitely more, were sure advantages enough, to entertain a short life of
fifty or threescore years, and secure it from being wearisome to a Christian,
or from needing those sinful, shameful, unworthy divertisements, that all other
sorts of men, on purpose, that their time may not lie upon their hands, are
fain to seek out unto themselves.

advantages, which a Christian reaps by Christ, are in order to another life.
And those I shall best represent to you, by showing these two things. 1. The
Valuableness of the reward promised by Christ, and aspired to by Christians,
infinitely above all other rewards, that any other Religion pretends to bestow
upon men. 2. The Attainableness of that reward, and the blame that will light
on none but our selves, (so that we shall be bound to acknowledge our selves
most stupidly wretchless, and irrational) if we do not attain to it.

Valuableness of the Christians future reward, infinitely above the wages of
any other Religion, that will appear, 1. by the Immaterialitie, and 2. by the
Eternity of it: Both those it is defined to be by Christ, and by being so, is
concluded to be an eternal, infinitely blisful state; And that Christ said true
in that, need not again be proved, God Himself having been proved to bear him
witness, that all that he said is true. The Immateriality of this reward
demonstrates it agreeable, and proportioned to the nobler part of us, the upper
or rational soul, all other grosser pleasures, the Mahumetans enjoying of
Women, and the Jews long life in a Canaan, being gratifications to the viler
parts of us, our senses, or bodies, and to those too, in their vilest state, as
they are natural, not as they shall be spiritual (and equal to Angelical)
bodies.

shamefulness, and emptiness, and unsatisfactoriness of all bodily pleasures,
proceeding partly from the covetous ungrateful condition of that best-part of
us, as the heathens have styled the body, partly from the great meanness, and
poorness, and baseness of all bodily contents, (so unworthy to be the
ambitions* or any thing, but the servants, and attendants of the reasonable
soul) and the instant satieties, and irksomnesses, that they always are
attended with, such, as nothing could make any mere man place any considerable
value upon them, were not he either cheated into it at the distance, by the
false glosses that other men put on them, and by seeing, what hazards are
willingly run in pursuit of them; or were he not early engaged in an habitual
indulgence to them, which makes that difficult to part with, which he has
enjoyed so long, and consequently which imitates some pleasure, (and is
mistaken for it) by the contrary painfulness of giving it over.

immaterial, spiritual, more sublime satisfactions to the pure undefatigable
Spirit, the rational, immortal soul within us, as they cannot be liable to
those basenesses, and emptinesses, so neither are they in danger of those
satieties; and by satisfying, and blessing that part of us, which is infinitely
most excellent in our natures, must of themselves necessarily be concluded most
superlatively excellent, and deserve, as such, to be infinitely preferred, and
most valued by us.

immateriality of the Christians future reward, and agreeableness to that part
about us, which alone is worth providing for (the happinesses of the other
inferior parts being consequent to, and included in this, and a provision
withal being (by the wisdom of our God) made for them that they shall no
longer desire, or want those enjoyments, which is perfectly the same, if not,
with some advantage, better, then if they had them) it is not possible any
farther improvement, or accession should be made to this reward, but only by
the perpetuating of it.

Christ's promise, That the bliss, which he thus bestows, shall in respect of
its own plenitude never be exhausted or diminished, nor again, through the
Repentance of the doner, or the envy of any other, ever be withdrawn or forced
from us.

enhansement, and evidence of the rationalness of our Religion, how severe
soever Christ's commands, or how rigid his exactings are supposed to be, or what
sharpness soever we here are forced, or permitted to endure, in approving our
obedience to him. If there be any difficulty in the obedience, or
ungratefulness in the sufferings of a Christians life, yet the abundant
recompense of the present advantages, and, after those, of the soul-ravishing
unspeakable bliss (infinitely above the weight of the hardest; or roughest part
of Christ task of performances, and above the proportion of the sowrest
portion, that any pious man tastes in the afflictions of this life) were they
supposed to be of the same equal duration, would make our hopes, and patience,
and perseverance perfectly rational, according to the balances with which
indifferent men weigh, or Husbandmen labor, or Merchants traffic here on Earth.

pleasant, not painful obedience, to every mite of pressure (which God that
sends, gives strength also to bear cheerfully, makes matter not of patience,
but victory, and rejoicing to us) there is most immutably ascertained to us by
Christ an eternal (ETERNAL) weight of glory, how impossible is it, that those
few sour drops of so short transitory obedience, and patience, should not be
drowned, and lost in that vast Ocean, whereinto within a while they shall be
really, and at the instant, by Faith, and Hope, they are (in effect, and by
equivalence) poured out?

irrational, that God should so over-heap his measure, so over-proportion his
wages to us, reward that so gloriously, which, if there were never a Heaven
hereafter, were, at the present, reward sufficient to it self, and infinitely
preferrable before the condition of any other man's life. But the advantage of
that being on our side, we shall have little reason to dispute or complain of
it.

Christ's infictions are as immaterial, and as eternal, as his rewards, and the
reason not presently discernible, why our short, empty, nauseated pleasures,
the sins of a short life, and the joys of those sins, far shorter then the
shortest life, should be punished so sadly, and so eternally. This scruple of
the Atheist has been searched to the bottom, and answered Pract. Cat. last
Edition. page 303, 30.
in other Papers; and the brief of it is this, That the choice being referred
to us, to take of the two, which we best like, Eternal death set before us on
the one hand, to make eternal life the more infinitely reasonable for us to
choose, on the other hand, and the eternal Hell (whenever we fall into it)
being perfectly our own Act, neither forced on us by any absolute decree of
Gods, nor irresistible temptation of the Devil* nor our own flesh, but as truly
our wish and choice, and mad purchase, nay, much more truly, and properly, then
eternal Heaven is (when our obedience is first so wrought by Gods Grace, and
yet, after that so abundantly rewarded by the doner,) it is certain that if
there be any thing irrational, it is in us unkind, and perverse Creatures, (so
obstinate to choose what God so passionately warns us to take heed of, so wilful
to die, when God swears, he will not our death) and not in him, that has done
all, that is imaginable to be done to reasonable Creatures (here in their way,
or course) to the rescuing, and saving of us.

attainableness of that reward, and the no kind of fault of Gods (he has sent
his Prophets, his Son, his Spirit, his Ministers, his Mercies, his Judgments,
all sorts, and new methods of working deliverances: and salvations for us and
all slaughtered, and crucified, and grieved, and abused by us) but all merely
of our selves, if through our irrational prides, or sloths, we do not attain
to it. I shall not need therefore farther to enlarge on that, especially having
Pract. Cat. 1. Sect. l. 1. p. 6.
elsewhere abundantly demonstrated the truth of it.

CHAP. V.
The exceptions against some particulars in Christian Religion; and 1. Gods
dispositions of Providence.

gross to the retail, from the general to the particular view, and
consideration of those particular branches of Christian Religion, which seem to
men at this time to be least supported with Reason. And they will be of two
sorts, either concerning Gods Providence, or concerning Gods Commands now under
the Gospel. The first concerns his wisdom in dispensing the things of the World
among men, the second his choice of duties, wherein to exercise us.

Whether it can be deemed rational, that injustice should prosper, and patience
never be relieved or rewarded in this life, as it is every where taught to be
the Method of God, and is most eminently exemplied on Christ himself, in his
own person, in the Gospel.

question were, whether Injustice could be really favored by God, or by him so
approved, and encouraged, as to be thought worthy of any the least reward,
though but of a cup of cold water, by him, or (as consentaneous to that)
whether Injustice by going unpunished here, and by being triumphant in this
World, might be thence concluded to be an act either of sanctity or of
innocence, owned, and commended, and justified by God, by its thus prospering,
I should then, I confess, acknowledge this to be irrational, and not plead, or
undertake to be the advocate of that Religion, which should teach one such
Doctrine as this.

God (who by being such, is supposed to be of an immutable will, and justice) to
become inconstant and contradictory to himself, to forbid oppression, as
contrary to his will, and yet without making any change in the matter (without
withdrawing what he has given to one, and disposing it to another, as in the
case of the Egyptians Jewels, and the Canaanites land) to reward it, as
agreeable to his will, to pronounce that no covetous person, without repentance,
shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet to give the covetous, beside an
infallible title to the Kingdom of God, continued to him, as a special Saint
of his, the addition of all the blessings of this life. In a word, this were
the same irrational thing, as to affirm, that thief, which prospered in his
assault, and actually robbed the Traveller, and perhaps killed him too, to be
by that means turned honest man, and that nothing but miscarrying in his
attempt could denominate, or demonstrate him a thief; that no sin were any
longer a sin, if it were once acted, no oppression any longer oppression, if it
were permitted to come to its fullness; that every the foulest violence as soon
as it were come to the height, bearing down all the resistances of divine and
humane Laws, and force, did then presently cease to be violence, and by being
the lowest fiend in hell commence ipso fact the most rewardable Saint: And
therefore the only Religion, that has been known in the World to maintain and
countenance this, that of the Turk or Mohammedan, I profess to believe
absolutely irrational.

Christianity, that is so distinctly contrary to this, that the great
fundamental History, upon which all our Religion at once is built, is the most
lively example, and doctrine of the contrary. For when Christ himself was
delivered up into the power of wicked men, and by them arraigned, and reviled,
and crucified, not only the Disciples, which were his constant attendants, but
his Army of Miriads of Angels, that were always at his command, doing nothing
toward his release, when this consultation of the Sanhedrin became successful,
and obtained the desired event against him (the highest, and most prosperous
oppression of the greatest innocence and virtue) then though there were more
circumstances, which might affixe this on God his Father, and seem to draw him
into partaking in it, then we find recorded of any, or all other sinful
actions (as that Gods Hand and Counsel did foredetermine this to be done, that
God foretold it by all his Prophets, and from the certainty that they could not
lie, does, when it is done, conclude, that Christ ought thus to suffer, that
they that did it, even the chief Rulers of them, Acts 3. 17.
had the excuse of some ignorance, until Gods raising him from the dead
dispelled this mist from before their eyes, that what God had thus foretold,
and praedetermined, viz. that Christ should suffer, he had thus fulfilled, Acts
3. 18. that he that suffered, voluntarily laid down his life, and by a speedy
taking it up again, was freed from the saddest part of death, the remaining
under the power of it, nay was, in the issue, so far from being the worse for
suffering, that, beside the glorious advantages that came to his disciples and
children by it, he himself was in that humane nature of his highly rewarded,
and exalted for this his suffering; though, I say, all these circumstances
concurred to make the injury less, the crime more excusable, and altogether
more fit, and more honorable to be charged upon God, and so to turn it from
the crime of murder, to the virtue of obedience to Gods will, and charity, and
benefaction to mankind, (and even to him that suffered) set this one act of
the Jews, their doing, against the express command, and will of God, that
thing, which yet was by God (...).
determined to be done, their crucifying an innocent person, that desired
nothing, but their amendment, their committing that act, which by God was
forbidden, under the Commandment of murder, is thought fit by that God, whom
the Christians worship, to be punished most prod giously, and exemplarily, that
ever any sin of the deepest die, and the most mischievous effects, was ever
punished, even with the utter desolation of the whole Nation, and all the
prodigies that have been read of, the greatest pomp of aggravating
circumstances, the calling Heaven and Earth together, to make the execution of
these crucifiers the more solemn and remarkable; so far is Christianity from
owning any such irrational doctrine as this.

Doctrine, which is acknowledged to be Christian, being cleared to be only
this, that in Gods dispensations and providence, and governing of the World,
under the Gospel, it is not unusual for injustice to prosper, and patience, and
innocence never to be relieved, or rewarded in this life. This I shall now
assume on me to be clear to be perfectly reasonable; and it shall be by thus
taking it asunder.

wicked men should be permitted to be wicked, when all fair rationable means
have successlesly been used to bring them to repentance, to restrain them from
waxing worse and worse; that they that will not mend by all the probablest, and
most effectual means, should at last be left to themselves, and become
incorrigible; that God should not proceed from persuasion to violence, and
force them to be good (contrary to the nature of man in this his state of
proficiency, who was created with a will, or freedom of doing evil, if he
pleased, and contrary to the nature of free, and rewardable goodness, which, if
compelled, cease to be such) who will not be restrained from evil without
force: This will never be deemed rational in God, who has another Tribunal to
arraign* and punish those, who will not submit to Exhortation, and Discipline
here. But on the contrary it will very ill become the servant of God for his
own ease, and security, to wish the disturbance of that method of God with
mankind, to expect that man, which, when he was in innocence, was created with
a liberty to choose the evil, should now amidst the briers, and thorns, after
the provocations of a long vicious life, have such shackles laid on him, as
that he should not be able to break Gods Bands and Laws; and all this only
that the good man may be protected, who, if he be not, knows that it is far more
for his advantage, then if he were.

wicked, and have cast off all restraints of Divine and Humane Laws, which
break through all the ties, and securities, that promises and oaths can lay
upon them (the greatest protection for innocents, that any Religion, or Law,
has ever provided for them) should, by these advantages above other men, be
able to overreach, and defraud others; and by this means having acquired a
power of hurting, should, when they have it, make use of this power, to do what
is most agreeable to their lusts and interests to do, This again has nothing
in it strange, or irrational: It is far more strange, that it is not always
thus, that (wicked men, allowing themselves all the liberty, and being by their
very sins furnished with all armor, and instruments to work their will, and all
innocent men, that resolve to continue such, being by this means disarmed, and
naked before them) the wicked should not get the whole World into their
possessions.

wicked inclinations, would, in any humane likelihood, be encouraged to act to
the height of their power of hurting, were there not a peculiar hedge of
providence to defend the meek, without any of their own (considerable)
contributions toward it, to guard them wonderfully in the open field, without
any visible means of doing it: And if this shall otherwise happen at some one
time, perhaps but once in many Ages, and that for some very great end, in Gods
Wisdom more considerable to the Godlike Government of the whole World, then the
miraculous rescuing of a few meek innocents from a short oppression (in earthly
things, which are not worth their possessing) could be deemed to be; there is
sure no great wonder in this, nothing irrational in the sometimes permitting of
it.

inheritance in a quiet Kingdom, as long as any man enjoyed his own, as Majesty
were permitted on the throne, or Law, and Justice on the bench, would never
desire a fairer conveyance, or a longer lease of the most valued possessions of
this life; and this security remains to the meek man, though once in many Ages
it may have happened not to prove good unto him.

strange, or irrational on the part of the wicked oppressor that prospers, so
next on the part of the patient, or sufferer, that smarts under him, there will
appear to be as little.

Absolute innocence is a thing, which (save in the person of Christ) has never
been met with in Man or Woman on the Earth; and therefore he that is guilty of
no fault in one particular, may yet be culpable, and punishable in many others;
he that is legally possessed of an estate, and has done nothing to forefeit it
in Law, may yet have sinned against God, and so have punishments due to him
from that eternal Justice; which if they fall upon his body, or estate in this
World, there is nothing irrational in that, but especially if so light a
Discipline may pass for all the revenge, and (through the sufferings of
Christ, and interposition of mercy) avert all future punishment, and be
accepted in commutation for the torments of another Judicature, this sure is
all the charity and bounty in the World, that may be admired, but not
complained of as unreasonable.

other faults might justly be punished, should have this punishment inflicted
on them by those which themselves are wicked, and are actually such in thus
afflicting them, If this seem to have any thing unreasonable in it, it will
soon be answered by the necessity of the matter, which makes it impossible for
any but wicked men to be employed in it. The Israelites were once used to root
out the Nations, but that by an infallible Commission from God, the Supreme
Lawgiver (and whose will being once made known, overrules all former Laws)
and the universal owner and disposer of all the World, and the possessions
thereof: And by this Commission this became to them not only lawful, but
necessary, an act not only of justice, but of obedience; and so upon the like
Commission, the Levites killing their Brethren was an act of sanctity, a
consecrating themselves unto the Lord, those bloody Sacrifices were in a manner
the Ceremonies of their Consecration to their Priests Office. But then, first,
all this depended upon the infallible validity of their Commission, which had
it been falsely pretended by them, or had they not been ascertained that it came
from God, their actions had been as ungodly, and murtherous, as Abraham's
sacrificing his son must have been deemed, without the like Commission: And
secondly, this Commission was by no means to be enlarged to any other, but
those particular subjects, or matters, to which it was given. The Jews might
not at that time have destroyed or invaded any other Nation, upon the face of
the Earth, nor might the Levites at any other time have killed their Brethren,
on strength of that command, much less may any other People of any other
Nation, on strength of that example. And so now that such Commissioners are
out-dated, when all is left by God in the hands of standing Laws, in opposition
to new Revelations, and consequently when that which is most just for me to
suffer, or God to permit (or by prospering in him, to inflict on me) is most
injurious in him that does it, were it not perfect fury, much above the pitch
of irrational, to demand that Gods dearest Children should act as the vilest
men? To require such explicit contradictions, that none but godly men should
be permitted to oppress, to kill, to commit Sacrilege, to lay waste, and to
destroy, to break all those Commandments of God, which he that does, ipso
facto, cease be to godly? If there be any wickedness to be done in a City,
shall the righteous be the only men to do it? This were worth wondering at
indeed: But for the wicked, whose trade it is, whose joy of heart to be thus
forever occupied, he is in his element, he needs no call, or incitation to do
it. The turning him out of that office, and employing any body else, were the
greatest unkindness to him, as the casting the Devils out from tormenting the
man, was by them looked on as the destroying them before their time, whereas
the Angel of Light, would have looked upon it as a degree of Hell, had he been
sent in, on that errant to torment him.

reasonableness of having offenders punished temporally here, (which were
reasonable, if it were for ever in another World) there is a second, not only
Justice but Mercy in such sufferings, on whomsoever they fall. They are
Admonitions, and Doctrines, and Spiritual Medicines, Disciplines of the soul,
to awake us out of secure, and stop in wilful sinning, and are by God on
purpose made use of to that end, when prosperity has been long used, and
experimented to have no such auspicious influences in it, to be proper to feed,
and foment, very improper to starve, or subdue enormities. And if the Physician
administer a bitter Potion, if the Surgeon apply a Corrosive, or Caustic, when
Julips, or Balsoms are judged, and proved to be uneffectuall, sure it is not
the manner of men to count such methods irrational.

Hyperbole to affirm, that the addition of such documents as these, may
sometimes deserve to be preferred, and more pretiously valued, then all the
Doctrines in the Book of God it self without these, one such seasonable
Application, then all other Receipts in his dispensatorie. The Word of God
gives rules of living to all men, but those so general, and unapplied, that it
is ordinary for passionate men not to see themselves concerned in them. These
punishments and visitations will be able to bring home, and make us, while we
are under the Discipline, confess, that we are the very men to whom by peculiar
propriety they appertain.

third sublimer benefit, of such dispensations of God under the Gospel, which
will render them abundantly rational. And that is the exercise of many
Christian graces of the greatest price in the sight of God, and such as shall
be sure to be the most richly rewarded by him, which were it not for such
changes as these, would lie by us unprofitably, such are Patience, Meekness,
Humility, Contentedness with whatever lot, faithful dependence on God in all
outward things, thanksgiving for plenty, and for scarcity too, a submitting to
Gods Will in suffering, as well as doing it cheerfully, yea, and to his Wisdom
too, in resolving Gods choices for us to be absolutely fitter for our turns,
then any our own wishes; and lastly, that Wisdom, which Saint James speaks of,
the skill of Spiritual judging, James 1. 5.
which can really prefer this state of suffering for Christ, (an excellence
that Angels do not partake of) beyond any other state or condition of life.

variety, that all the burden of the day might not lie on those graces, which
are exercised in fair weather, but that those other, provided for the storm or
winter, might take their turns and give them some relaxation, this would be
very rational and useful for us, as Aristotle says, that the change of motions
from up hill to down hill, and so back again, does provide against lassitude,
more then the constancy of any one, be it in the easiest smoothest plain,
because that lays all the burden incessantly upon one pair of muscles,
without any relief or assistance from any other. But when withal, every
exerise of each of these graces has attending it an addition of more Gems in
our Crown, more degrees of Glory in another World, (that I may not add also of
present Joy, and Satisfaction, and Ravishment in the present exercises here)
then sure the superfluities, and pleasures of this life, the any thing that is
ever taken from us by the Harpies, and Vultures of this World, are richly sold,
and parted with by the Christian (which knows how much, or indeed how little
they are worth enjoying) if they may thus bring him in that rich freight of
never fading bliss in another World. And this will serve for justifying the
rationalness of Gods dealing with us now under the Gospel, in respect of his
Providence.

CHAP. VI.
The exceptions against Christ's Commands.

Christ's Commands under the Gospel, and show the rationalness of them.

Advantages, I shall now only descend to that one, against which our Modern
Exceptions are most frequently made, viz.

taking up the Cross to follow CHRIST; i. e. of approving my Obedience to
CHRIST in all and every particular, even when the extremest danger, the loss
of my Life is like to be the Price to be paid for it.

unreasonableness of this is argued and concluded from the contrariety of it
to that liberty of self-defence, and to that Law of self-preservation; which
nature is supposed to dictate to every man. And the showing the weakness of
this Objection, will be a full vindication of the rationalness of the Precept.

Self-preservation, and what by Nature, and what by Law. A man is made up of a
Body, and a Soul, a mortal and an immortal part, and those may be considered
either severally, or united: And consequently Self-preservation may be set to
signify any one, or more of these four things. Either, first, the preserving
that material mortal part of him from present hurt, or secondly, preserving the
immortal part of him in well, and happy being, or thirdly, preserving the
present union of one of these with the other, or fourthly, the providing for
the perpetual happy union of them eternally. The first is the preserving the
body, and with it the estate, and liberty, and reputation, etc. from present
loss or diminution. The second is preserving the Soul in innocence, or virtue.
The third is preserving of this life of ours, which we live in the natural
Body. And the fourth is providing for a joyful Resurrection, and an
everlasting Life attending it.

Nature, that may signify either blind unenlightned Nature, which sees no
more then the reflection upon it self, and the Book of the Creatures, and
Natural instincts represent to it; or else Nature, as it is enlightened by
Revelation, i. e. by Gods making known some things in his Word, which Nature
had never known, had they not been thus revealed: Such are the Doctrines of our
Faith, and particularly the eternal rewards, and punishments which are revealed
to us in the Scripture.

Laws, those may be either absolute, and peremptory, which yield not to any
superior Laws; or else conditional, and subordinate, when a superior Law does
not interpose to the contrary.

self-preservation be meant either the first, or the third notion of the self,
the preserving my body, or my life, then though it may truly be said that it is
a Law of Nature, that men may, and that (when no superior Law requires the
contrary) they ought, and are bound to preserve these imperfect mutilate
selves, these bodies; yet then as there is a higher notion of a man then as
that barely signifies his Body, his Soul being the far more excellent part of
him, and the eternal union of body and Soul together, being most eminently the
Notion, that he is concerned in, so there must be a superior Law of
self-preservation, then that which commands only the preserving the Body, and
though bare un-lightned Nature, that is able to look no farther then this life,
do not give any Law in this matter, yet Nature being supposed instructed in
the Christian Doctrine, that there is another life of Body, and Soul after
this, to last for ever, must needs be resolved to do it, it being impossible,
that reasonable Nature, when two things are represented so distant, as the life
of a few years here in the midst of such sad mixtures, and an everlasting life
hereafter in the fullness of all joys, should not enjoin the preserving of the
latter, even with the contempt of the former, when the care of the former may
bring any danger to the latter.

eternal life is in the hand of Christ to give to them, that continue obedient
and constant to him, and to none else, and when the fearing of them which can
hurt, and kill the body, the caring for, or preserving of this present life,
does at any time, or in any case, resist, or obstruct the performance of that
duty, which Christ then requires or expects from me; there Nature commands me
to despise the less, and preserve the greater; and if it be not absolutely
willing to Sacrifice the present to the eternal Life, and consequently to
prefer the obeying of Christ to the preserving of this fading short life, it
must acknowledge it self a blind Heathen Nature, (that knows nothing of an
eternal future life, and of him that can cast both Body and Soul into Hell) or
else an irrational wild Nature, that knows these distances of finite, and
infinite, and does not think them worth considering.

self-preservation to the Doctrine of taking up the Cross, and determine us
free from the Obligation of paying obedience to Christ, when it cannot be done
without endangering of Estate, or Life, that they speak out of their memory
only, what they have read in Books of that supreme Law of the preserving ones
self, but do not withal remember, that if that self signified only the Body,
it was the Philosophy of them, that knew nothing of the immortality of the
Soul, or the endlesness of an other Life, or if they were aware of the
Christian Doctrines of eternity, they never called the Body, that self, that
was to be so solicitously tended.

Church, that those Heretics that were enemies of the Cross of Christ, that
taught it to be (...). Eusebius. l. 4. Eccles. Hist. c. (...). Eusebius. l. 6. c.
(...). out of Origin on Psalm. 82.
indifferent and lawful in time of Persecution to forswear, and renounce
Christ, and offer Sacrifice to Idols, were a sort of men (the Gnostics) that
immerst themselves in all unnatural filthiness, and depended not at all on the
Promises of another Life, and having first taught, that Christ did not (...),
vid. Ignatii Ep. ad Smyrn. (...), vid. Cyril. Hier. Catech. (...). Non hic, nec
apud homines confessionem putant constitutam, sed in coelo. Tertul. cont.
Gnost. c. 10.
really suffer in the Flesh, but only in appearance, would not be persuaded
that either he had any Nec Deus humanum sanguinem sitit, nec Christus vicem
passionis, quasi ipse de ea salutem consecuturus, exposcit. Tertul. cont.
Gnost, cap. 15.
need of their lives, or indeed exspected it from them, Semel Christus pro
nobis obiit, semel occisus, ne occideremur, si vicem exspectat, number and ille
salutem de mea nece exspectat? Tert. cont. Gnost. c. 1.
being come, as they said, to save their lives, to die, that they might not be
killed. Where the mistake was clear and visible, that they thought they were
these transitory Lives, that Christ came to preserve, and not those other
lives, which were to be conveyed over to Eternity.

fate of those Gnostics at that time, was very remarkable, and that which will
render our irrational fondness of these bodily lives yet more irrational. Their
great care was to preserve their lives, and their prime dexterity, in order to
that, to comply constantly with the powerful persecutor; that was, especially,
with the Jews; (for though the Sword was in the Heathens hand, yet the great
malice against the Christians was in the Synagogue, from Synagogae Judaeorum
fontes persecutionum, Terti. b. c. 10.
thence sprang all the Persecutions.) To this end, those Gnostics took upon
them to be great zealots for the Mosaical Law of Circumcision, and generally
pieced with the Jews, and approved themselves to them. At last the Roman Army
comes against Jerusalem, takes Jews, and Gnostics together, and destroys them
all; and so Christ was as remarkably a true Prophet in that, as in any one
particular, That he that would save his life, should lose it, (that very
temporal life, that all his compliance with the Jews was designed to save) and
he that would lose, i. e. venture, and lay down his Life for Christ's sake,
should find it, i. e. have it more probably preserved, and continued to him
here, then they that were most solicitous for it, and, whether he lost or kept
it here, have it restored to him to continue eternally.

promise of the Gospel have truth in any sense of it; then is the command no
irrational command, of taking up the Cross to follow Christ, when he can, if it
be for thy turn, except of thy taking up the cross, without its bearing thee,
or, if he do not, can pay thee abundantly, for what thou losest, reward thee
with Eternity.

command of Christ, that could fall under our jealousy, and censure: I should
proceed to it, and be confident of approving it exactly rational. As it is, I
am at an end of my designed Method, and am glad it has been contrived into so
small a compass, being now at leisure to retire to my Meditations, which will,
I hope, be more calm, being thus disburthened, and make it my first Theme to
discourse with my* self, how extremely rational it is, that those very turns of
Providence, which have been our great temptation, and they say, made many
Atheists among us, should be reviewed again, and upon second demurer thoughts
engage, and instruct us all to become more Christian.

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things; Prudent, and he shall know
them? For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them,
but the transgressor shall fall therein, Hos. 14. 9.
FINIS.

