A CONTINUATION OF THE DEFENSE OF HVGO GROTIVS, IN AN ANSWER TO The Review of
his ANNOTATIONS.

Whereto is subjoyned a REPLY to some passages of the REVIEWER in his late Book
of Schism, concerning his charge of Corruptions in the Primitive Church, and
some other particulars.

By H. Hammond D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy. Lane, M.
DC. LVII.

To the STATIONER.
Mr Royston,
I Have been so often called on for the Reply to the Review of Grotius's
Annotations, that I am at length inclined to change my former purpose, and
permie those few sheets (prepared as soon as the Review came to my hands, but
then laid aside, on a persuasion that they might be safely spared) to follow
the former on that subject, rather then deny to any so easy a request. I am

Your Friend, H. H.
September. 4. 1656.
A CONTINVATION OF THE DEFENSE OF HVGO GROTIVS, In ANSWER to the REVIEW of his
Annotations.
1. IF he that has read the Review of the Annotations of Hugo Grotius, which
is offered as a Reply to the second Defense of that learned man; seem from
thence to have any new scruples infused into his mind, it will not cost him
many minutes to deposite them, by observing with me this method.

2. First, by adverting (on the first head that of the satisfaction of Christ)
not only what fair and large characters of his thoughts lie legible to all men
in his Book De satisfactione, written on purpose against Sosinus on this
subject, but also how those have been since backed with indubitable evidences
of a later and fresher date, taken from his own express words in his Discussio
(the last thing he wrote) and in a letter under his own hand (dated after the
time of his surmised change) written on purpose to forest all this surmise, and
to assure us of his constant adhering to that sense which he had delivered in
his Book De satisfactione. Which two as they are most irresrugable proofs of
the matter in hand, being testimonies of him that certainly best knew his own
thoughts, whether he were changed or no, so to neither of these is the least
word of Reply here offered by the Reviewer, and so stand in full force against
all that is here suggested.

3. Secondly, by remembering that from the Sea Ans. to Animad. verse: p. 132.
beginning of this debate, the posthumous Annotations on the Epistles were
expressly renounced and rejected by me, as departing manifestly from the
judgment of that learned man, formerly expressed in those writings which he had
completed and published in his life time, and consequently as unsufficient
arguments, or testimonies of his change, when produced against his own repeted
and express declarations to the contrary; And yet from these are the proofs now
principally brought in this Review, and by the contrariety betwixt these and
his Book De satisfact: his change concluded, with what appearance of reason the
Reader will soon discern, when he has considered the premises, and what shall
now occasionally be added thereto.

4. For this manner of dealing two things only are pleaded in the Review,
which here must be regarded, before I proceed: 1. That the Accuser having to
deal with that book of Annotations that goes under his name, If they are none
of his, it is neither on the one hand or other, of any concernment to him.]

5. To this I reply, first, that it is in the Reviewer a manifest diversion, a
course which is sure to render all debates infinitet In my answer to his
Preface of Animadversions on Iguntius's Epistles, etc. I inserted, ex
abundanti, one, and only one Digression, A Defense of the learned H. Grotius.
And streightwayes the whole stream of the Controversy is diverted into that
one narrow chanel, removed from the question of Episcopacy, to the inquiry into
Grotius's his opinions; and that is one compitent diversion. After this, when
both in that my Digression, and also in my second Defense, I had confined my
plea to Grotius himself, and those writings published by him in his life time,
and known to be written, and perfected by him, expressly rejecting this book of
posthumous Annotations on the Epistles, the Reviewer is now pleased principally
to insist, and found his charge against Grotius, on those his posthumous
Annotations; which is a perfect diversion again, instead of a reply, and to the
waving evidently, because changing of the whole question.

6. Secondly, as uneffectual at this plea it, it is yet much more unreasonable,
if circumstances be considered, being evidently prevented, and superseded by
that which has past in this debate. For if there were any truth in those words
of his Epistle to the Oxford Heads, [My Defensative as to my dealing with
Grotious 's Annotations is suited to what the Doctor pliads in his behalf] then
certainly he must be concerned in this, which yet he resolves to be none of his
concernments; For it is sure that my plea was framed in Defense of Grotius
himself, (not of those incomplete if not false images of him, those parts of
the Annotations, which I professed to reject, and not to plead for.)
Accordingly my words in the first proposal of this matter to debate, were
these, [This very pious, learned, and judicious man has of late among many
fallen under a very unhappy Fate, being most unjustly calumniated sometimes as
a Socinian, sometimes as a Papist -- ] And then how can this Defensative be,
according to his promise, conformed or suited to my plea, if it refer not to
the same subject, viz. to Grotius, or those Books of his, which are
acknowledged to be his completed, genuine writings? such alone being competent
testifications of his sense, and so measures to judge of his persuasions,
whether he were a Socinian or no.

7. A second part of his plea is by reflecting again on that evidence, which,
says he, he had formerly offered from the Printers Preface to the volume of
Annotations on the Epistles.] But here, in the very entrance, is a mistake,
which, for the clearing of my self, more then on apprehension of any advantage
the Reviewer can gain by it, I must first take notice of. The Evidence was by
him Epist. to the Oxford Heads.
cited from some words of the Preface to the last part of the Annotations,
beginning thus, Jam vero sciendum est -- To those words there found, I gave
answer in my second Defense, p. 7. and he now tells me that a slight in spection
will serve to manifest how ill it, i. e. my answer or the sense I gave of the
words produced) agrees with the intention and words of the Prefacer, who, says
he, tells us, that Grotius had himself published his Annotations on the Gospel
five years before, and so proceeds, reciting the words of the Prefacer for
eight lines together; and concluding, that if the Apologist read this Preface,
he ought to have desisted from the plea insisted on; If he did not, he thought
assuredly he had much reason to despise them with whom he had to do.]

Who would not think there were somewhat herein really mistaken by me, which
called for this so solemn rebuke? But the Reader is entreated to consult the
place, or if it be not worth his pains, he may believe me, who made the
inspection more then slightly, and can assure him, that there is no part of
what he thus now recites, to be met with in that Preface, whence he has
formerly drawn his testimony. I say in that Preface to the last part of the
Annotations under Gretius's name, from whence it was, that the words [Jam viro
sciendum -- ] were (truly) cited, and to which Words it was visible, that I
gave that answer, which he now pretends to refute from the intention and words
of the Prefacer.

9. The short is, There being two volumes of Annotations set out since
Grotius's death; the former on the Acts, and so on through the Epistles of
Saint Paul and Saint James, the later on the other six Catholic Epistles and
the Revelation, and before the former of these the Printers Epistle, inscribed,
Typographus Lectori, before the latter a Praemonitio ad Lectorem: From the
latter of these it is that the words formerly by him produced, Jam vero
scieudum -- and to which (consequently) I gave answer, were cited. And I that
obediently and diligently read over that to which I was directed, and there
finding the words which were cited, gave my answer to them, such as I thought
the words capable of, am now unexpectedly rebuked for not reading it, and more
then so for despising those with whom I had to do; when indeed what is now in
the Reply cited from it, is not to be found there, but in the Printers Epistle
to another volume. By what means he fell into this mistake, and was by that led
into this causeless severity, I leave him upon recollection to consider.

10. I need add no more for the vindicating my self in this matter, yet if I
shall now (having till now no occasion) attend to this other testimony, now
newly alleged by him out of that other Preface, it will soon appear that it
neither (as is pretended) disproves the answer, which I gave to the words
formerly cited from the premonition, nor refutes what I had first said
concerning the Posthumous Annotations, and then surely I shall not be much
concerned in it: Not the first; for my Answer being no more but this, that Opus
Integrum signified not that volume completed, and so made integrum entire by
Grotius 's own hand, but the whole volume or volumes which contained all his
(...) Adversaria on the New Testament.] This is no way refuted, but rather
confirmed by these other words of the Typographus Lectori, for there also Opus
integrum signifies the whole volume or volumes, as that is opposed to the Magna
pars voluminis in the line before, without any respect to its being completed
or made entire; Which alone having been denied by me, my answer is still
secured from any force of this Testimony.

11. Not the second; For if I shall now grant the Printer to have in that
Preface delivered the whole and naked truth, (which I had no obligation to be
confident of) and consequently that Grotius committed to a Friend those
Annotations, in order to Printing, yet this no way proves that they were
completed and perfected by him; There is a middle, truly supposable, betwixt
these two, viz. that they were by occcasion of the Authors unexpected
diversions, delivered to him imperfect. This Remainder of Annotations now by
the Reader expected to follow those on the Gospels, and on the Old Testament,
and the learned Compiler being now at some leisure to set about it, was
suddenly called back from Paris to Sweden, a long voyage, not certain whether
ever he should return again (as indeed he did not) or whether God would spare
him life and vacancy to perfect that work: Having therefore communicated his
notes to a learned man (one by the way, much more addicted to the doctrine of
Calvin then Socinus) going now thence, he left them in his hand, and committed
the publishing of them to his care, taking only with him those sheets which
were not legible, which he hastily transcribed in his journey, and, as the
Printer tells us, returned them from Hamburge, and these, as by his words
appears, belonging to the last volume, that on the Revelation, which therefore
had truly thus much of his last hand, as this hasty transcribing comes to; so
hasty that M. who was prepared to write them again for the press, did almost
despair of decyphering them. The rest, those on the Epistles remained in the
first rude draught, and are not pretended to have been (so much as hastily)
transcribed by him, and so never obtained that perfecter growth, that fullness
of limbs and lineaments, which I did and do suppose his (...), and greater
leisure would have afforded them. Which therefore cannot with any justice be
balanced against the contrary evidences and plain words either of his Discussio
(the last thing, as I said, written before his death) or of his later, dated
after his reading of Crellius's and the Socinians interpretations (to which his
supposed change is imputed) and avowing his continued adherence to his former
doctrine, much less of the several passages producible out of his undoubted
writings, maturely composed, and published by him, which positively and
professedly set down his sense, and cannot be prejudiced by such uncertain,
feeble suggestions as these, drawn from his supposed misunderstanding of some
few pages in the Epistles. And let this serve for a second stage in my proposed
method.

12. Thirdly, That adhering to my former method, and, upon the grounds
premised, abstracting from or setting aside (as it is visible I have done from
the first rise of this debate) these posthumous Annotations, upon account of
some heterodox mixtures in them discernible, especially in the matter of our
justification, and the satisfaction of Christ, and some other particulars,
elsewhere noted, and confining our discourse (more reasonably) to those
Annotations, which he perfected and published in his life time, i. e. to those
on the Gospels and on the Old Testament, taking in also all his other writings
whatsoever; There cannot be any ground of suspicion concerning his change, nor
want of instances (which the Reviewer now requires) to disprove his Universal
Negative, and to invalidate the charge brought against that learned man, of his
wresting to another sense every text of Scripture, wherein testimony is given
to that sacred truth, or at least concealing and obscuring the doctrine of
them.]

13. I shall therefore, being now admonished of Quintilians rule of aut
negandum aut defendendum, do my duty in observing it, and formally deny his
position, of every text, etc. and for contrary instances, begin with Matthew. 20.
28. where the son of man is said to give his life a (...), or ransom for many.
Here, says Grotius, Puto respici vaticinium, Isa. 53. 10. ubi dicitur, si
Christus vitam suam dedisset (...), quod hic recte (...) vertitur, fore, ut sui
cognitione multos justificaret, and postea, ipse peccata multorum tulit. Here
first, the parallel is set by Grotius betwixt the Evangelist and the Prophet
Isaiah, and to that 53 of that Prophecy is brought this sense, of Christ's
giving his life a ransom for many, i. e. of his satisfaction, and yet farther
explained by that other phrase of the Prophet there used, his bearing the sins
of many, and the like, Heb. 9. 28. his being offered to bear the sins of many.

14. Secondly, The (...) or ransom here is interpreted by the Hebrew (...) or
sacrifice for sin there, and after more fully, by sacrificium piaculare, (...),
an expiatorie, propitiatory sacrifice for sin, victima lustralis -- and the
giving his life a ransom, the offering it up such a sacrifice for many, and
this as the ground or condition of his justifying many by the knowledge of him,
which what is it but the founding of our justification in the propitiatory
sacrifice of Christ's death, i. e. in the satisfaction wrought by it for us?

15. So Mat. 26. 28. Where Christ's blood of the New Testament is said to be
shed for many for the remission of sins. Here, says he, Puto Danielis oraculum
respici, in quo de Messia dictum est, (...), cum praecessisset (...) ad
expianda peccata. Add quae Romans 5. 15. (it should be 10.) sic and in Barnabae
quae dicitur Epistola, (...) (...). Adding, Simul autem transit Christus a
comparatione foederum ad comparationem sacrificiorum piacularium, in quibus
anima pecudis offerebatur, velut succedanea anima hominis qui mortem meruisses,
unde victima far peccata dicebatur in lege. Hinc mo^i victima pro homine --
Here again, i. e. the words of Daniel of making reconciliation for iniquity,
and confirming the covenant with many, c. 9. 24. 27. are set as a Prophecy
parallel to this Evangelical truth of Christ's blood of the New Testament being
shed for the expiating of our sins. So likewise Romans 5. 10. of our being
reconciled to God, when we were enemies, by the death of his Son. And all these
three illustrated by the plain words of Barnabas's Epistle, that Christ offered
up himself the vessel of the Spirit, a sacrifice for our sins. 2. It is here
affirmed of his blood, that it was an expiatory sacrifice, such as wherein one
is offered up in stead of the other which had deserved death, and is
accordingly said to bear the sin of the other. And then what could be more
express to the doctrine of satisfaction, then these three places of Prophet,
Evangelist, and Apostle, thus interpreted, which being added to the former, and
now laid before the Reviewer (willing to have persuaded the Reader these were
none such, because I formerly thought it needless to produce them) will sure
now pass for (...), instances as competent as any Quintilian would exact, to
disprove the Universal proposition of the [not one text in the whole Scripture
-- which is not wrested to another sense, or at least the doctrine concealed
and obscured by these Annotations.]

16. But here on this ocasion the place in his Annotations on Isa. 53. is by
the Reviewer resumed, as hopeful to yield some color to infer his charge;
Where, says he, he gives such an exposition of the whole Chapter, as is
manifestly and universally inconsistent with any such design on the words, as
that which he intends to prove from them in his Book De satisfact and in
particular tells you in his Annotations on the place, as also on 1 Pet. 2. 24.
that (...) signifies auferre, which with all his strength he had there
contended against.

17. To this I answer, 1. (as to his exposition of the whole chapter) that I
have already told him, that Grotius endeavored to find a first sense of the
words of that Prophecy, so as to belong peculiarly to the Jews usage of the
Prophet Jeremy, and that I acknowledge not to be appliable always to their
usage of Christ. But beside this, says he, there is a more principal and
sublime sense, and that often the more literal of the two, wherein the whole
chapter belongs to Christ, but this sense being more vulgarly marked by others,
is only in general, once for all, pointed at by him, in those short
Annotations, being also more fully explicated elsewhere, in a set discourse on
that subject.

18. This answer being formerly given by me, the Reviewer is now pleased to
mistake, and to change it into a distinction betwixt the literal and mystical
sense of a place, and then to undertake that his perverting the first literal
sense of the chapter, or giving it a completion in any person but Christ, is no
less then blasphemy. But to this I reply, that my words are misreported by the
disputant, and agreeably my sense also. For I distinguished not betwixt the
literal and mystical sense of the place (or if I had, I must much have wronged
Grotius, who resolved the words to belong often more literally or (...) to
Christ, than to any other) but betwixt the first and literal interpretation,
which had its immediate completion among the Jews, near that time, wherein it
written, and the more remote, concerning Christ: that indeed mystical, because
veiled under the first, but literal also, because that to which the very words
belonged as properly, often more properly, than to the other; As when the (...)
or plain word without any figure belongs to Christ, and only the figurative
interpretation of it, the (...) to Jeremy. Of these two senses Grotius makes
frequent mention in his interpretations. See the note on Zach. 9. 9. Behold thy
King shall come, which, says he, primo and maxim obvio sensu, in the first
and most obvious sense belongs to Zorobabel, but sublimiore quodam sensu, in a
more sublime sense to the Messiah; And many the like.

19. If thus the Reviewer had understood my words (which I then thought plain
enough, till I saw them misapprehended) I am in charity to think he would not
have deemed it little less then blasphemy, thus to interpret words of some
other in a first, but that less principal sense, which belong to the Son of
God in the more principal and sublime sense, more remote in time of completion,
but not in respect of the propriety of the words.

20. This the instance did evince, which I gave from the words, [out of Egypt
have I called my Son] which evidently had a first sense in the Israelites, a
second, equally literal in Christ, and so it is applied in the New Testament;
and many more might be brought of affinity with it, if there were need of them.

21. It will be more to the purpose of vindicating Grotius's intention, and
clearing the whole matter, that I give the Reader one signal passage from him,
by which his sense must in all reason be judged, being by him premised before
his interpretation of the latter part of this Prophecy, from chap. 40. which he
generally interprets in a first sense, of matters that belonged to the Jews
from the time of their deportation, to the Maccabees, etc. but acknowledges to
contain also, and that more simply and more clearly the matters of Christ.

22. The words are in the prooeme to Isa. 40. Cum autem omnia Dei beneficia
umbram in se contintant little quae Christus prastitit, tum praecipue ista omnia
quae deincept ab Isaia praenuntiabantur, verbis saepissime a Deo sic directis,
ut simplicius limpidiusque in res Christi, quam in illas quas primo significare
Esaias voluit, convenirent. Whereas all Gods blessings have in them a shadow of
those things which Christ performed, this is especially applicable to all those
things which in the ensuing chapters (this of chap. 53. must needs be
comprehended in that style) are foretold by Isaiah; the words most often being
so directed by God, that they agree more simply and clearly to the matters of
Christ, than to those which Isaias would first signify by them.

23. Here is the ground of what I said of the first sense of these prophecies,
viz. that which Isaias first meant to signify by them, supposing that there
was somewhat else, belonging to Christ, which in a second sense or later
completion he signified also, and the words so directed by God the wise
disposer, that they most simply and clearly, i. e. without figures (which are
usual in prophecies) belonged to him. This being by him said once for all, of
all those prophecies that follow, does by perfect equivalence, (a collective
being as full and ^fficacious as a distributive) conclude of every particular,
and consequently of this fifty third before us (of which he again gives the
same account as has been said, particularly, when he comes unto it) and of
every verse in it, that it most clearly and literally belongs to Christ, though
in Jeremy he supposed it had another interpretation. And so this, I now hope,
will be deemed satisfactory, as to the general, to vindicate his exposition of
the whole chapter, and the having mentioned it may be in some degree necessary
to the preserving of them from misprisions who read not those notes entirely,
that they may comprehend the sense of the whole prophecies, (which is the
proper'st use of them) but cast their eyes upon some particular texts, to
satisfy their present wants, or curiosities.

24. But then secondly, for the particular verse 11. I answer, 1. that in the
Annotation on 1 Pet: 2. 24. I cannot be concerned, having often resolved that, as
the rest on the Epistles, to be unsufficient to give us his sense. As for that
on Isaiah, if it were true, that he had there interpreted (...) auferet, 1.
this could not have been justly charged upon him, as a Socinian interpretation,
Tertullian having given him authority for it, as he cites it, on Mat. 8. 17.
and indeed that Evangelist too having there applied that prophecy to (...), the
bearing their bodily diseases, which sure was so to be understood, as should
denote his curing, (i. e. his auferet, taking them away) and not his bearing
them in their stead, taking upon him all the diseases which he cured in any.
But then 2. it is clear, that he does not so interpret it [auferre to take away]
as to exclude, but expressly to include the far, or bearing also; Auferet,
says he, as applied to Jeremy, by a metonymie, but that founded in the other
of bearing, as the literal, quia qui sordes auferunt, solent ^as collo
supposito portare; so that the literal of bearing, or carrying our iniquities,
is (by the former observation) left to be completed in Christ, who did both
bear and take away the sins of the world, and nothing by Grotius is here
affirmed, or interpreted to the contrary of that. And so much for the other
part of the Objection, and so for the third part of my method.

25. Fourthly, when I had proposed to consideration two things for the
preventing all jealousy of any after change in Grotius, and the Reviewer had
taken notice of one of them, under the style of my first observation, and
offered some semblance of answer to it, page 6. before he comes to the second,
he cannot, as he says, but suppose, that he is already absolved from a
necessity of farther procedure -- ] by that means freeing himself from giving
any heed to that argument which I had laid greatest weight on, as that which of
all others was most considerable in this business, viz. Grotius's own words
(who certainly knew his own heart, better then any accuser, or diviner can be
supposed to do, and ought to be believed, rather then any contrary surmises
concerning him) expressly testifying his constancy in adhering still (now after
the time of his supposed change) to what he had delivered in his Book De
satisfactione. Herein I shall leave the Reader to pass the judgment, whence
that absolution was derived to the Reviewer, by which he could not but suppose
himself freed from any necessity of considering this evidence, when yet he was
at leisure (by way of commutation) to heap up contrary appearances from the
Annotations on the Epistles, which I professed not to allow to be his, and
therefore could not be concerned in the producing of them.

26. Here only I had expressed my opinion that the Notes on the Apocalypse, had
(as I still think I have been informed, and have already premised some proof of
it) received from his own pencil the very lineaments, and colors, wherein they
appear; And therefore when he pitches on one Annotation on that Book Rev. 1. 5.
Christ's washing us from our sins in his blood, where he thinks the
satisfaction of Christ concealed, and the Socinian interpretation taken up by
Grotius, contrary to his manner of explicating and applying it in his Book De
satisfactione; This will require to be a while considered by me.

27. The words of Grotius he has rightly set down, but I suppose not
sufficiently considered the latter part of them, which runs thus, Dicitur
Christus suo sanguine nos lavisse, quia and ipse omnia praestitit, quae ad id
requirebantur; Christ is said to have washed us with his blood, because he
performed all things which were required to it, i. e. to the washing of the
soul. Which words are certainly of competent largeness to contain (and so
exclude not) the doctrine of satisfaction, that being of the number of those
things, which in Gods counsel, were appointed, and so required to the washing
of our souls; This being considered, it will be no prejudice to that learned
man, that in the former words he took in Socinus's interpretation of [morte sua
certos nos reddidit veritatis eorum quae docuerat, quae talia sunt, ut nihil
sit aptius ad purgandos a vitiis animos -- ] For of that there is no question,
but that Christ by his death did give us assurance of the truth of his
doctrine, and that this assurance is very apt to purge us from our evil and
vicious courses. In respect of which purgation Saint Paul himself says, Tit.
2. 4. that Christ gave himself (that is surely even to dye) for us, that he
might redeem us from all in quity (the power as well as guilt of it) and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. And Gal. 1. 4.
he gave himself for our sins (and thereby, I suppose, made a satisfaction for
us) that he might deliver us from this present evil world, from the vices and
abominations thereof. And Ephesians. 5. 25. Christ gave himself for the Church, that
he might sanctify and cleanse it, that he might present it unto himself a
glorious Church; not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing. From whence I
conclude that the Socinians error consists not herein, that they affirm this,
but that they say this is all that Christ did by his death, and so exclude his
satisfaction; which can by no means be affirmed of Grotius, who, as he wrote a
Book in defense of it, so in this very place ascribes to Christ the performing
omnia all things, indefinitely, which were required to the washing of our
souls, from which number his expiatory sacrifice was never excluded by Grotius?

28. And then it may be fit to be remembered, that as the denying the
satisfaction of Christ is one great error justly charged on the Socinians, so
the confining the effects of the death of Christ, to that one head of
satisfaction, is an error also, very carefully to be averted by him, that
desires to reap benefit by Christ's death.

29. After his view of this place he is pleased (to prevent the Readers farther
trouble) to refer him to Grotius's Annotation on one place more of the
Revelation, chap. 13. 9. and I have observed his directions, and can assure
him, there is not there one word to this matter. Only that Arethas rightly
applies the phrase [from the foundation of the world] to the word [book] not to
the word [slain] evincing it from the parallel place, chap. 17. 8. where so it
is joined [Whose names are written in the book of life from the foundation of
the world] the book of life, in one place, and the book of life of the lamb
slain, or the slain lambs book of life, in the other, being perfectly
aequipollent.

30. The remainder of the Catalogue of Texts, that is added, is all again out
of the Epistles, and so has already more then once been accounted for, by
denying the Annotations on them to have been perfected by Grotius. And this is
all that need to be considered, in reference to the first branch of the
suggestion, that concerning the doctrine of the satisfaction of Christ.

31. On the second Socinian head of doctrine, that concerning the Deity of
Christ, whereon the Disputer had affirmed [that of all the texts of the Old and
New Testament, whereby the Deity of Christ is usually confirmed, -- Grotius
has not left any more then one, if one, speaking any thing clearly to this
purpose.] I thought I had given some matter of conviction, by referring to that
learned man's. Annotations on John 1. when both that one signal text is left by
him speaking clearly to this purpose, and many other places of Scripture are
mentioned, and interpreted, and applied to the same sense, as parallel, and
answerable to that. To this he replies, that this of John 1. was the one place
by him expressly excepted, and therefore this instance would not evade the
charge. And for the other places, Prove. 8, etc. he is pleased to suppose, that
on the view of my defense men must needs suppose that in the Annotations on the
places repeted; Grotius must give their sense, as bearing witness to the Deity
of Christ; Hereupon he will turn to the several places, and give the Reader an
account of them.]

32. But before he proceed to that, and to save the pains of many of them, it
may be soon considered, that what Grotius does in the Notes on John 1. is as
truly his act, as any thing that is done by him in any other place, much more
so, than what is published under his name, in the Annotations on the Epistles,
and consequently that as many places as he has there affirmed to be parallel
to John 1. 1. so many places he has left speaking clearly to this purpose.
Grotius had not at that time published any other Notes on any part of the Bible,
but those only on the Gospels. On the rest of the New Testament he never lived
to publish any, yet here on John 1. has affirmed the words of Saint Paul, Col.
1. 16. [all things were created by Christ -- ] to be agreeable to the words of
Saint John, that without him was nothing made that was made. Is it not now as
visible, that he has left that place of Col. 1. 16. speaking clearly to the
Deity and creative power of Christ, by which all things were at first made, as
if he had lived to set out Annotations purposely on that place, and had therein
so interpreted it? This certainly is so clear, that I cannot yet doubt (what
ever the Reviewers sarcasme would suggest) of being a successful advocate in
this matter.

33. The same is again as clear of 2 Pet. 3. 5. and of the two places brought
by him, in concent with it, from the Chaldee Paraphrast on Isai. 45. 12. and
48. 13. to testify that by this (...), i. e. by the word of the Lord, Christ,
the whole world was founded; which again (though he never should mention them
again in all his writings) are yet solemnly left by him, to testify clearly to
the Deity of Christ; And so more than that one of John 1.

34. But the place more largely recited by Grotius to this purpose, is that of
Prove. 8. from verse 23. A seculo habui principatum, I was set up from
everlasting, to verse 27. when he prepared the heavens I was there; And this
the Reviewer thinks fit to examine, by repairing to his Annotations on the Old
Testament, and there 1. he finds his first note on the Wisdom there spoken of
to be [Haec de ea sapientia quae in lege apparet exponunt Hebraei, and sane ei,
si non soli, at praecipue haec attributa conveniunt] and this he thinks a very
advantageous discovery, for if they agree solely or principally to the wisdom
that shines in the Law, how can they be the attributes of the person of the Son
of God?

35. But I answer, that note of his is on the first verse of that chapter, far
enough from verse 23. where the citation in his Note on John 1. begins. And why
might not many parts of the character of wisdom be by the Jews duly applied to
the Law (as will appear if you read the former part of the chapter for above
twenty verses together) and yet the latter and sublimer part of its character
be competible only to Christ, the eternal wisdom of the Father? And why
should not Grotius's [haec] on verse 1. rather belong to those former 20
verses, than to the 23 etc. which he there (as in the Notes on the Gospels)
expressly interprets so, as that verse 27. and 30. be all one with John 1. 1.
and so Prove. 9. 1. Wisdom built her an house, i. e. says he, corpus humanum,
a man's body, which is not applicable to any thing, but Christ in his
incarnation. And so I hope this artifice has stood the Reviewer in little
stead.

36. But then, says he, On verse 22. Grotius affirms of (...) that it is
rendered not amiss by the Chaldee (...) and by the Septuagint (...), though he
knew that sense was pleaded by the Arrians, and expleded by the ancient Doctors
of the Church.]

37. To this I answer, That Grotius's words, [sensu non malo si creare sumas
pro facere ut appareat] signify not, that that rendering is not amiss, for he
had formerly expressed his opinion of that, that Aquila and Symmachus and
Theodesian their rendering it by (...), was well agreeing or answerable to the
Hebrew (...) but that the other which was not the right rendering, might yet
bear a tolerable, or not ill sense, if it were interpreted to signify no more
than that which he there names, viz. [making to appear] a sense which the
Fathers never exploded, nor was fit to be pretended by the Arrians, or favored
by any in kindness to them.

38. This therefore was but a weak foundation of that confidence, with which
the Reviewer concludes, that of the Son of God, the essential wisdom of God,
subsisting with the Father, we have not one word] especially when he had
himself confessed that [on verse 27. he adds, aderam, i. e. (...) John 1. 1.]
for certainly if those words of wisdom, when he prepared the heavens I was
there, and the same again verse 30. (to which also he refers the Reader, though
the Reviewer pleased not to see it) When he appointed the foundations of the
earth, then was I by him] be all one with [the word was with God] John 1. 1.
there is then some word of the Son of God, the essential wisdom, in those
Notes, and perfectly as much as is proportionable to the manner of those very
short Annotations on the Old Testament.

39. To which may be added, that by interpreting the phrase [his ways.] verse
22. by operationes Dei, the operations of God, the sense of that verse (which
the Reviswer thinks perverted or obscured) must in his rendering run thus, In
the beginning of his operations God possessed this eternal wisdom, the Son of
God, which will be still to the same sense; And then the Note on chap. 9. 1.
sets down the incarnation of this eternal word, or wisdom; And what could have
been more punctual against the Socinian interest, than all this, being thus
briefly amassed together, if the Reviewer would have but the patience to
discern it?

40. What he adds by way of wonderment, that I should add the places of Isa.
45. 12. and 48. 13. to the number of texts interpreted by Grotius to this
matter of the Deity, is soon satisfied, by remembering (what was visible enough
before) that the Chaldee Paraphrast in those and many other places rendering the
word [God] by [God and his word] is fitly brought by Grotius, as a witness,
that the world was created by the word of God, as that is God, and that that is
the sense of those places. Which if it be, then are those texts of Scripture
left by Grotius, to testify to this truth of the Deity of the word of God, i.
e. of Christ.

41. Now for the principal place that of John 1. 1. the Reviewer has expressed
his dislikes also to that, and mentioned some grounds thereof, 1. that Grotius
is very careful of ascribing an (...)] But if by this phrase he would signify
him unwilling to ascribe an hypostasis to the word, this is misrepresented by
him; for it is evident, Grotius expresses no dislike to that style, all that he
says that way, is, vecem (...) -- non a primis Christianis usurpatam, cum
contra (...) dixerit Athanasius, Synodi Nicaena, Sardicensis, and Romanae
aliquot, that that word, and some others was not used by the first Christians,
that Athanasius, and the Nicene, Sardicene, and some Roman Councels affirmed,
that there was one hypostasis. And all these, I hope, are so contrary to the
Arrian, that if Grotius should choose to speak with them, he could with no
justice be accused of that heresy, or obscuring the Deity of Christ by so
speaking.

42. And yet it is farther clear, that from Origin and others after him, he
cites the distinction of hypostases, and what could he have done more to obtain
the Reviewers favor, then to cite it from them, that used, and not pretend it
from them, that used it not?

43. That he has interweaved many Platonic interpretations of (...) is also
in the second place suggested, and at once, that he has darkened the whole
counsel of God in that place.] But I hope there is no heresy in letting the
Christian Reader know, how much Platonists and hethen Philosophers have by
groping discoverd of divine truths, and to me it is not imaginable, that when
the Christian doctrine is once declared, such additions as these should by
being subjoyned ex abundanti, obscure what was once made clear, and so darken
the whole counsel of God.

44. Thirdly, It may not be amiss, says he, to observe, that not only the
Arians, but Photinus himself acknowledged that the world was made (...)] And to
this I answer, that what is wide of the mark, to which it is directed, no way
sufficient to infer the desired conclusion, is (in the managing of a
controversy) amiss to be observed; And such will this observation appear to
be; For the matter of the question being a charge against Grotius, of Socinian
doctrine, what can be concluded (to that) from the bare mention of the Arians,
and Photinus his acknowledgments, unless first it be proved, that Grotius was
an Arian, or Photinian, and secondly that all Arians and Photinians are
Socinians? Either of which, as they have not the least appearance of truth in
them, so are they not so much as attempted here to be proved by the author of
this observation. On the contrary, there are these five shrewd prejudices
against it. 1. That what the Arians say in this matter, Photinus does not say,
and so they were not fit to be put together. 2. That what the Arians say,
Grotius does not say. 3. That what the Photinians say, neither the Arians, nor
Grotius do say. 4: That the Socinians do in this differ much both from Arians
and Photinians; and yet 5. That Grotius differs as much (or more) from the
Socinians herein, as he does from either of the other two.

45. All this will appear by viewing severally the Arians, and Photinians, and
Socinians doctrine in this point, and the distance of Grotius's interpretation
from each of these. For the first, Arius did indeed acknowledge in his Epiph.
l. 2. Haer. 49.
Epistle, that God did by his only Son make (...), the worlds and the rest,
and in the words of the text, (...), that all things were made by him, and
without him was nothing made that was made. But sure this was no part of his
heresy, (if it were, the Scripture as well as Grotius, must be involved in it,
who affirmed it equally) but that he first affirmed Christ to be himself a
creature, (...), says he, he by whom God created the world was a perfect
creature of Gods, though created (...), before all ages; and again says
Epiphanius, (...), though they call him a creature, yet they confess him above
all his creatures. So again speaking of the Holy Ghost, they will have him to
be (...), the creature of a creature, where still that is Arius his heresy, in
this matter, that he made Christ a creature, and to that applied the
Septuagints rendering of the place Prove. 8. of (...), God created me, and
consequently would not allow him to be (...), of the same substance, or equal
with the Father. And when Grotius says any thing in favor of this doctrine,
of Christ's being a creature, or denies his equality with the Father, then he
must pass for an Arian; (Of which he has not yet had the luck to be accused,
that I know of;) But it is certain he has not done so, nay on the other side,
it is competently evident, if but by the notion which he applies to (...) in his
Annotations on Prove. 8. (to rescue that rendering from an evil sense) that he
utterly rejects that notion wherein the Arian took it, viz. for creating, and
so that he is herein profestly free from that heresy.

46. As for Photinus in the second place, it is certain his heresy, like that
of Paulus Samosatenus, consisted in denying that Christ had a being, or
subsistence from the beginning, or before the Holy Ghost's coming upon Mary, so
says b Epiphanius, (...) -- Now though this heretic was content to
acknowledge that the Father made the world (...), by the (...) which was in
him, yet that it was not Christ which he understood by that style, is most
clear, both by his denying Christ to have had then any subsistence, and 2. by
the similitude, by which he expressed himself, (...), as a man by (...) does what
he will (by (...) meaning a kind of Idea in the agents mind, by, or according
to which he does any thing) so by his own (...), or by the (...) which is in
him the Father has made all things; but especially by Epiphanius's way of
confuting him, (...) -- The (...) in man, whether the word of the mind within,
or the word spoken cannot be called man, but the (...) of man, whereas the
(...) in Saint John is said to be God. And so as Photinus saying [all things
were made by the (...), which was in God] said quite another thing from what
Arius had said (and therefore this Reviewers observation was in that respect
guilty of that fallacy, which Aristotle calls plurium interrogationum) so is it
most certain, that Grotius's interpretation of the Evangelist, it no way
consonant to Photinus (any more then to Arius) his notion. For when to those
words of the Evangelist [In the beginning was the word] his note is, Jam ium
erat, sic mos est Hebraeis aternitatem populariter describere] which defines
the eternity of his being, he brings for explication of that form of speech,
the words of Justine, (...), he was subsistent before the worlds. So again on
those words [the word was with God] he says this was in opposition to his
being seen in the world in his incarnation, vult enim dicere, ante eum fuisse
inconspicuum, he would express that before his incarnation, he was invisible;
adding for proof, Dicitur enim Deus (...), 1 Timothy 1. 17. for God is said to be
invisible, and to inhabit the light which none approaches; by all which it is
clear, that by [the word] he understands invisible God himself, being or
subsisting eternally with the Father, which is in every part contrary to
Photinus's doctrine, as has been showed.

47. Thirdly, for the Socinians their interpretation is known to differ toto
coelo in this particular both from Arius, and Photinus, being after this
manner, that c In the beginning of the spiritual Socin. in John 1.
world, or the Gospel, the word, that Son of God, which was born of Mary in
Augustus 's reign, so called in respect of his office, which was to make known
Gods word to men, was with God, i. e. before John 's preaching, was, as the
word, or in respect of this office, known to none but to God: That this word is
God, i. e. that Christ was so called (as Angels and Princes are) in respect of
the great benefits which we receive from him, and the dignity to which he is by
God advanced, (distinctly denying that he is the supreme God, the author of all
things, or creator of the world) that all things were created by him, i. e. all
the new spiritual and divine things, which are under the Gospel done in the
world, and so on in concerdance with this Foundation. From every part of which
Grotius's explications of that text are most remote, as has already appeared,
and have not the least infusion of this leven discernable in them, as will be
evident to any, who shall but cast an eye on his Notes on that place. Of the
Notes on the Epistles which came out since his death, this cannot be said, for
there many of these, or the like Socinian interpretations are crept in, some
words of the Epistles expounded in a sense expressly contrary to what he has
here incidentally said of the same words. This I have pointed at in one eminent
instance, the place to the Colossians, chap. 1. 16. of the worlds being made by
Christ, and thereon founded my resolution, that they were none of his, not
consequently did I ever permit my plea for him, to be extended to the
justifying of them. Thus much may suffice for the supernumerary observation,
which being sure, meant to insinuate somewhat, it now appears with what justice
it was produced by him. By the way I suppose my account also given, why the
interpretations of John 1. and Prove. 8. of the world being made by (...) the
word of God, were by me formerly produced, as irrefragable evidences, that this
learned man inclined not to the Socinians in this matter of the Deity of
Christ. The Reviewer may now judge what reason I had for it.

48. Lastly, there being a threefold (...), it is suggested that nothing but
(...) was by Grotius intended in those Annotations on John 1. 1. but withal
it is confessed, that much from some quotations there used may be said against
it.] And if there may, and if those quotations be so clear, as those out of
Justine Martyr, and Athenagoras, of Christ's presubsisting before the worlds,
of his being God before the worlds, that from the beginning God being an
eternal mind, (...), had the word in himself eternally, and if the negative
[nothing but (...)] be not reconcilable with any one mention of any thing
else, such as Christ's being God, and with God from all eternity; upon these
grounds, I say I shall confess it the prudentest course, which the Reviewer
here has taken, viz. to defer the undertaking of this task, and to add no
more, than the unproved suggestion, till space of greater leisure.

49. In reproching of me for a triumphant close, he is now pleased to give an
Essay of his own humility, in heaping these severals into one period, 1. That
he said not Grotius was a Socinian. 2. That in his Annotations on the six
verses in the Proverbs, two in Isaiah, one in Saint Peter, one in Saint Paul,
added to many in the beginning of Saint John, Grotius speaks not one word to
the purpose. 3. That he does not interpret Christ's eternal subsistence with
God, so as to a personal subsistence.

50. To these three I briefly answer. To the first, That the only thing that
in my first Digression (or second Defense of Grotius) I undertook in behalf of
that learned man, being the injustice of the charge, of his being sometimes a
Socinian, sometimes a Papist, sometimes both; This is by the Reviewer in his
Epistle to the Oxford Heads undertaken to be refuted, which can never be done,
unless he both say and prove, that Grotius was a Socinian. To the second, That,
as has now appeared, Grotius has spoken to the purpose of the Deity of
Christ, on the eighth of the Proverbs (as of his incarnation on the ninth) as
well as on John 1. And for the other places, as it is sufficient that he has
recited them to that purpose on John 1. so the account is clear why he is not
found to do it elsewhere. On Isaiah keeping himself to the literal Hebrew, he
had no occasion in those concise notes, to take notice of that, which only the
Chaldee there had said. The other two are in the Epistles, on which the
Annotations, which are published under his name, are by me deemed imperfect,
and not to carry his full sense with them. To the third as before, That he
cites out of Origin, and others after him, the use of the word hypostases, and
the distinction of them. Only he says the word was not used a primis
Christianis, by the first Christians, any more then (...) etc. And so it is
certain it was not.

51. In the next place, I am reproved that I neither make inquiry into his
Treatise, for the places in the Old Testament, wherein the Deity of Christ is
testified to, and are corrupted by that learned man, nor yet will look into
Grotius 's Annotations on those texts, which I remember at all times to be
pleaded to that purpose. To this I answer, 1. That I never undertook the
vindicaton of all Grotius's Annotations, nor ever said any thing, which should
engage me in such a long task as this. 2. The discouragements, which I
mentioned to have already received from making inquiry into this Reviewers
former Treatise, were taken from what had appeared from Grotius on John 1:
compared with, and found evidently to supersede this Authors suggestions of
[but one, if one place, in all the Bible, left by Grotius clearly testifying
this truth] For when, beside that of John 1. I found there so many more, put
together, particularly Prove. 8. verse 23. -- largely set down, and in the
Annotations on the Proverbs, found the same sense adhered to, and a reference
back again to John 1. where he had spoken so largely on this matter, what need
was there of farther inquiry for that, which had thus readily offered it self?

52. Now to my two suppletory considerations, he has his replies also; To the
first, by confessing, what I desire, that one express text of Scripture, is
sufficient for the confirmation of a divine truth] but then, denying that five
places have been by me produced out of the Annotations of Grotius for the
confirmation of the truth pleaded about.]

53. To this I answer, 1. that if any one be sufficient to confirm this divine
truth, then Grotius has been demonstrated sufficiently to have confirmed it,
who has evidently brought John 1. which is one such text. Secondly, that that
text, and Prove. 8. 23 -- he has certainly not depraved, nor kept back from
testifying to this truth; So likewise Col. 1. 18. and 2 Pet. 3. 5. if we may
judge by his own words on John 1. and not by the posthumous Annotations, which
I deem not competent measures to judge him by, and so there are four of the
five. Thirdly, he has there also applied to it the places of Isaiah, in the
Chaldee reading, and these superadded to the former, are very sufficient to
confirm a divine truth, and that is all I said in this matter. But then
Fourthly, as the conciseness of his Notes on the Old Testament, and his desire
to clear the first, and nearest sense of the Prophecies, such as pertain'd to
the then approaching affairs of the Jews, are a competent account of his not
enlarging to the more remote and ultimate completions in Jesus Christ. So his
general advertisements, more then once given (such as has been produced from
his Preface to Isa. 40. and to Isa 53.) are sufficient to testify his
acknowledgment of Christ's being predicted in those places of the Prophets,
where his Annotations on the several verses make no particular mention of him.
And so, when he gives a sense of Isa. 9. 6. which immediately belonged (in his
opinion) to Hezekiah, and according to that, interprets every part of that
verse, he yet thus prefaceth it, sic tamen ut multo excellentius haec ad
Messiam pertinere non Christiani tantum agnoscant, sed and Chaldaeus hoc loco]
thus giving only a lower notion of the words to Hezekiah, and reserving the
sublimer and more excellent to Christ. So again chap. 11. 1. Redit ad
Hezechiae. lauds, sub quibus sensu sublimiore latent lauds Messiae; and many
passages there are to the same purpose: As others also of referring to the
Annotations on the Gospels, wherein he has spoken so largely of this sublimer
completion of ohe Prophecies, that he would not repete them in the places of
the Prophets, to which they belonged.

54. In the next place he comes to the comparison betwixt Calvin's and
Grotius's dealing in this matter, and makes many offers of answer, to which I
am concerned to make particular replies.

55. First, he denies Mr Calvine equally chargeable, or in any degree of
proportion with Grotius. To which I answer, that whether he be, or be not truly
chargeable, in any degree, I am not concerned to examine, having not accused
him, but only made the parallel betwixt that learned man and Grotius, in this,
that each of them have by some been deemed chargeable. 2. The comparison which
I made, was not of the equality, or indeed of the degree of proportion, but
expressed with such caution, as sufficiently prevented that reply, my words being
these, that it will upon inquiry be found in some degree; if not equally
chargeable, on the learned and most valued of the Reformers, particularly on
Mr Calvin himself, etc. Here I said, in some degree, but proceeded not to
define the equality, or to consider what proportion that degree held with that
wherein Grotius was chargeable, not indeed believing that either Grotius or
Calvin had given any reasons for that charge, which I see lie heavy on both of
them.

56. 3. The comparison of equality, which I made between these two learned men,
referred only to the bitterness and injustice of the accusations and
contumelies that fell upon them, on that account, in these words, [Calvin
himself has been as bitterly and unjustly accused and reviled on this account,
as ever Erasmus was by Bellarmine or Beza, or is probably Grotius can b.] And
there will be no way to disprove my comparison in this, but by heaping far more
unjust reproaches on Grotius, then yet this Reviewer has done, which if others
are resolved to do, yet shall I not thereby be refutable, who, as justice and
charity obliged me, affirmed it only not probable that they would.

57. In the next place he requires me to prove of Mr Calvin that he has in all
his Commentaries on the Scripture, corrupted the sense of any text, giving
express testimonies to the Deity of Christ, and commonly pleaded to that end
and purpose, although he deny not but that he differs from the common judgment
of most in the interpretation of some few prophetical passages judged by them
to relate to Christ.]

58. To this I answer, 1. That the latter part of this (his not denying etc.)
is in effect the confessing all that I had said of Mr Calvin, which was but
this, that he was by some charged of disarming the Church of her defenses
against adversaries, by diverting those places of Scripture which had formerly
been used to assert the great mysteries, to other inferior ends; And then I
need undertake no farther tasks of supererogation, such as the proving Mr
Calvin to have corrupted the sense of any text etc. which he knows I never
affirmed of him. Yet remembering him that I am not now to speak my own sense,
but only to justify the truth of my report, that Mr Calvin and some of the
first Reformers have been severely accused and reviled on this account. I shall
now 2. (instead of Lutherani pene omnes Ariani smi eum accusant. Grot. Appendi.
de Antich, p. 85.
many) refer the Reader to Schlussetburgius a Lutheran superintendent, in his
Second Book De Calvinist. Theolog. and 6. Article; or to Fr. Fevardentius, a
Doctor of Paris, either in his Comment on Saint Paul to Philemon, or in his
Excerpta out of that Lutheran. Not: in Iren: Var: Fragm: p. 508, 509. In the
latter of these he will find a Catologue of twenty passages affixt to those
eminent first Reformers, especially to Mr Calvin, as 1. that the enmity betwixt
the Scrpent and the seed of the Woman, Genesis 3. is simply to be interpreted of
the hostility of Men and Serpents; that the prophecies of the Scepters not
departing from Judah till Shiloh comes, Genesis 49. expounded of Christ, gives the
Jews occasion to scoff; that the words of Balaam, Number. 24. A star shall rise
out of Jacob, must not properly be expounded of Christ; nor that of the Lord by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. I will raise them up a Prophet, which yet Saint Peter Acts
3. 22, and Saint Stephen Acts 7. 37: affirmed to belong to Christ; that Mich.
5. 2. Out of thee Bethleem shall he come forth to me that is to be a ruler in
Israel] must not be expounded precisely and properly of the divinity of Christ.
That Zach. 9. 9. Behold thy King comes lowly -- is by interpreters triflingly
and in a false manner expounded of his entrance into Jerusalem, which yet Saint
Matthew and Saint John have applied to it. These are a few essays whereby to
judge of many others. And the less Mr Calvin and the Reformers are guilty of
these, (as truly in many that I have had the convenience to examine, I cannot
but think him guiltless) the more evident is the parallel betwixt Grotius and
them in this matter.

59. Thirdly, he affirms that what the Papists raved against Mr Calvin, was
chiefly from some expressions in the Institutions about the Trinity, (wherein
he is acquitted by the most learned of themselves) and not from the expositions
of Scripture.] But 1. the truth of this will be judged by what was last said,
for all those twenty passages are fetched from the expositions of Calvin etc. on
those so many places of Scripture. And 2. it is certain I specified not the
Book, wherein he had written what was thus chargeable, and so had not been
reproveable, if they had been all out of the Institutions, those being as
acknowledgedly his, as the Commentaries, and both much more then the
Annotations on the Epistles are Grotius's; and 3. if he stand by learned men
acquitted of the charge, then as I said, that may make the parallel more exact
betwixt him and Grotius, though I undertake not that every learned man has
been thus just to acquit him.

60. But then fourthly, for Calvino-Turcismus by me mentioned in a parenthesis,
he tells me, I have forgotten the design of it, and that Calvin is no more
concerned in it than others of the first Reformers, nor is it from any doctrine
about the Deity of Christ in particular, but from the whole of the Reformed
Religion, with the Apostacies of some, that they compare it with Turcisme,
adding, that something indeed in a chapter or two they speak about the Trinity,
from some expressions of Luther, Melanchthon, Calvin, and others.

61. To all this I answer, 1. that it is visible I speak not of Mr Calvin alone,
but of the learned and most valued of the Reformers, and of Mr Calvin only,
as one of them. 2. That although the forgetting the design of Reynolds and
Giffords Book, would be far from a crime in me, had I been guilty of it, (the
subject matter of it is not so much worth remembering) much less any indication
that Grotius were insufficiontly vind cated; yet when the Reviewer confesses,
that in a chapter or two it speaks about the Trinity, from some expressions of
Luther, Melanchthon, and Calvin, and others: this clearly evidences, that these
Reformers were there thus accused in the matter of the Trinity, as now it seems
Grotius is; And 3. if Hunnius's Calvinus Judaizans, which is home to the
business, be answered by Pareus, and an account of the calumny given by him]
this still renders the parallel more complete. An account of the calumny and
the first author, and grounds of it against Grotius, being happily rendered by
himself also in the Discussio, p. 17.

62. The Reviewer concludes this matter with a signification of his constant
adhering to his proposition formerly asserted, with one limitation expressed
(of his own observation.) But I that first gave the occasion of the debate in
my Digression concerning Grotius, did never propose it with reference to that
limitation, not being able to foresee, how much this Reviewer had read, or
observed of Grotius's writings, nor can I yet pass judgment, whether what has
now been offered to him by another, will be yielded to come within the compass
of that limitation, or no. And so I must be content to leave it at this time.

63. On the second sort of suggestion, the Reviewer has chosen to be brief,
and has well prepared for it by expressing dislike and aversation to any such
undertaking, that seemed incumbent on him, viz. to prove that Grotius was a
Papist.] But to this I reply, as before, that this task is sure incumbent on
him, if, as he said, his defensative be suited to what I pleaded in his behalf.
For it is certain, that in the Digression, I had so proposed the debate, and
undertaken to vindicate him from this suggestion, viz. that he was a Papist.

64. That he closed with the Roman interest, he is now willing to infer, from
his observation on Rev. 12. 5. To that therefore I have turned, and there find
no other premises toward this conclusion than only these, 1. that Dispersi ex
Judaeis, instrumenta Ecclesiae Catholicae, multos de populo Romano Christo
genuere, that those that were dispersed from Judaea -- begat to Christ many of
the people of Rome, and that these are there called partus masculinus the
man-child or masculine birth, in respect of the great constancy which appeared
in the Church of Rome of those times; then 2. that the Church of Rome has this
above other Churches, that no Church subjected more people to the word of God,
so that her victories by the weapons of Christ, were not inferior to the
Martial successes of Old Rome: 3. that the regiment of other Churches after the
Apostles death belonged to that. Now this being clearly applied by him to the
infancy or first ages of the Church, that which is first said of the constancy,
is indeed much for the honor of the Primitive Roman Church, but no way for the
interest of the present, which having much departed from the Primitive, cannot
in any reason partake of those elogies, which he there bestows on that
masculine birth, at the first appearing of it in the world. So likewise 2. of
the ancient Roman Church it is, that he says, it converted so many to the
faith, which is a truth known, and acknowledged in History, but is not at this
day assumed (witness S. W.) to be the foundation on which their Supremacy is
built. 3. that after the Apostles death Rome being a chief Metropolis, and (as
the Imperial See) the most eminent of all others, had the dominion aliarum of
other (it is not omnium, of all) Churches, is not denied by any either ancient,
or modern, that I know of. All the suburbicarian Region, and the Churches in
that, were under the Primate of Rome, and that Primate was within a while looked
on, as the Patriarch of the West, and the First Patriarch. And the words of
Grotius are not, by any circumstance of the place, inclined to any other sense.
The aliae Ecclesiae, other Churches, being in no reason interpretable any
farther, than those, which Rome had converted to the faith, nor necessarily to
all them, but to the oppida minora and Provinciae, the lesser Cities and
Provinces, unto which (as he interprets) the woman is said to fly (and so
Christianity to be propagated) when Simon Magus by the favor of the Emperor
had opposed and much oppressed it at Rome, and drove the profession out of it,
by which means those aliae Ecclesiae were planted. And it may be worthy to be
observed, that when the text before him was general, for (...) all the nations,
he is not thereby moved to interpret it in that latitude of all simply, but (in
a more restrained sense, wherein all in Scripture-style often signifies but a
great many) only by the nulla plures, and aliarum, others and none more then
that.

65. Here before he concludes, he is pleased to look back on a passage which he
had used, [that if men be drunkards, proud, boasters, etc. hypocrites, haters
of good men, persecutors and revilers of them, yea, and if they be not
regenerate and born of God united to the head Christ Jesus, by the same spirit
that is in him, they shall never see God] for which, he now says, he fears not
what conclusion can regularly, in reference to any person living or dead, be
deduced.] To this I reply by acknowledging the certain truth of the general
Aphorism, and only remembering him, that the only question was, whether in a
particular discourse concerning Hugo Grotius, after the mention of his eternal
estate, and disclaiming all design of begetting in others any evil surmises of
it, or of judging him himself, 1. it were seasonably added, that he was fallen
to his own master, when falling in the style of that Scripture (visibly
referred to) signifies falling under condemnation, and 2. whether the applying
this general Aphorism to this matter, were not apt to beget in others those
evil surmises, which he was willing to disclaim: If in these he be not
concerned, neither am I, and therefore I shall not further importune him in
that matter.

66. To the fragments of Grotius's Epistles to Crellius, I had formerly spoken,
though they were not (possibly) formerly printed. But having no more in them
than was acknowledged, somewhat of civility to a civil adversary, commendation
of some things truly commendable (such sure is the care of good life)
acknowledgment of advantage received by his writings, readiness of performing
any office of kindness to him, and finally praying for him; All these are
certainly no more then due, as by Christ's precept to the injurious, so to a
learned man, from whom he differed in opinion, and may only serve to direct us
to the Christian manner of dealing with adversaries, that of never laboring
their ruin or hurt in any kind, but doing them all possible good. And if in
this matter the Reader will be moved with probable arguments; It is not well to
be imagined, in case Grotius had at this time been changed from the opinion
which he was of, at the writing of the Book De Satisfact: that having said what
these fragments signify him to have said, he would have concealed that, or
that any such passage, had it been in the letter, would have been left out of
the fragments, or being in the fragments, would have been suppressed by the
Reviewer.

67. What in the second Epistle is said of Crellius's notes on the Epistle to
the Galatians, that he had very happily found out the occasion, and purpose,
and whole contexture of the Epistle, no way concludes his embracing the
interpretation of each brief occasional passage in that Epistle, wherein the
Socinian controversies are concerned, or renouncing that, which he had given in
his Book De Satisfact: as his sense of those passages.

68. There is no more remaining now before me, which seems to exact farther
reply. Thus much I have once more added, lest the Reviewer may either think his
Animadversions despised, or conceive that they have succesfully performed what
they attempted; and moreover lest having once (though but (...)) undertaken the
Defense of this learned man. I should now by my silence seem to desert my plea,
and be deemed to have consented to, and in a manner confirmed those calumnies,
which on this score of his defection to heresit, I see from many pens daily
cast out upon him.

69. And this, as it is an act of mere justice, and charity to the dead, and no
less to those, who by their sin of uncharitable thoughts toward him, are
likely to deprive themselves of the benefit of his labors; so is it but a
proportionable return of debt and gratitude to the signal value and kindness,
which in his lifetime he constantly professed to pay to this Church and nation;
expressing his opinion, that of all Churches in the world, it was the most
careful observer, and transcriber of Primitive antiquity, and more then
intimating his desire to end his days in the bosom, and Communion of our
Mother. Of this I want not store of witnesses, which from time to time have
heard it from his own mouth, whilst he was Ambassador in France, and even in
his return to Sweden, immediately before his death; And for a real evidence of
this truth, it is no news to many, that at the taking his journey from Paris,
he appointed his Wife, whom he left behind, to resort to the English assembly,
at the Agents house, which accordingly she is known to have practiced. Which
therefore may serve for a competent addition to, and conclusion of the
evidences hitherto produced, (being in perfect accord and harmony with them)
that as far as the English establishment is removed from Socinian, and Popish,
so far this learned man stands vindicated from both these aspersions; which
makes me the less wonder, that some others, who have endeavored to maintain
their constancy of adherence, and submission to the Church of England, are in
like manner most injuriously aspersed by those who have departed from it; Lord
lay not this sin to their charge.

A POSTSCRIPT.
1. HAving lately a sight of a new piece published by the same Author, one of
the first things I happened to fall upon, appeared to be mine own concernment.
For having cited from some words of Hegesippus, that soon after the death of
the Apostles and their auditors, many false doctrines were preached and
divulged in the Church, he has these words.

2. I know who has endeavored to elude the sense of this complaint, as though
it concerned not any thing in the Church, but the despisers and persecuters of
it, the Gnostics. But yet I know also, that no man would so do, but such a one
as has a just confidence of his own ability, to make passable at least, any
thing that he shall venture to say or utter. For why should that be referred by
Hegesippus to the ages after the Apostles and their hearers were dead, with an
exception against its being so in their days; when if the person thus
expounding this testimony may be credited, the Gnostics were never more busy
nor prevalent than in that time which alone is excepted from the evil here
spoken of? Nor can I understand how the opposition and persecution of the
Church should be insinuated to be the deflouring and violating of its chastity,
which is commonly a great purifying of it: so that speaking of that breaching
and preaching of errors, which was not in the Apostles times, nor in the time
of their hiarers, the chiefest time of the rage and madness of the Gnostics;
such as spotted the pure and incorrupted virginity of the Church; which nothing
can attein unto, that is foreign unto it, and that which gave Original unto
Sedition in the Church: I am of the mind, and so I conceive was Eusebius that
recited those words, that the good man intended corruptions in the Church not
out of it, nor oppositions to it.

3. What just confidence any man can have of his own abilities to make any
thing passable that he shall venture to utter] unless it be found in a due care
never to adventure to utter any thing, which has not perfect truth in it, I
acknowledge my self unable to apprehend. But how unjustly I am here charged of
any kind of confidence of my own abilities, and how unsufficiently my answer in
defense of the ancient Church-writers is here invalidated, will, I hope, soon
appear, by a short view, 1. of my answer, 2. of the words of the testimony it
self, on which it was clearly grounded, 3. of that which is here objected
against the fitness of my answer.

4. For the first, It must be remembered (as the original of this debate) what
from this testimony of Hegesippus he had (a) formerly Pref. to his Book
Persever. p. 5.
concluded, viz. the corruption of the Church as to doctrine, immediately after
the Apostles fell asleep, whereof, says he, whosoever will impartially search
into the writings that of those days do remain, will perhaps find more cause
to complain, thou is commonly imagined.

5. To which my answer was, (b) that all that Hegesippus there says, is only
this, that the poison of the heretical or Apostatical, Answ. to Animadv. p. 13.
or Atheistical Gnostics, in express words, the (...), the sect of the
Gnostics falsely so called, and (...), the Atheistical seducers, did openly set
up against the truth of Christ, as soon as ever the Apostles were dead, which
being by Hegesippus terminated in the known despisers and persecutors of the
true Church, and Orthodox professors, the grievous Wolves that worried the
flock, and those constantly resisted and combated with, preached against and
written against by the Fathers and ancient writers, and never observed by any
man to have gained of them, or infused any the least degree of their poison
into them, or their writings that are come to us. It Is a sad condition, that
the just and unjust, the false teachers and Orthodox professors should fall
under the same envy, that the shepherds which often laid down their lives for
their sheep, should be defamed, aend again martyred by us their unkind
posterity, under pretense that they were in conspiracy with the wolves also,

6. In this answer it is not possible I should be subject to any mistake, if
this one matter of fact be true, that the Gnostics and Atheistical seducers
were the very persons, of whom alone Hegesippus spoke, (for that those were the
wolves, and that the Church-writers have constantly refuted and detested them,
and not sucked any of their poisonous doctrines from them, is so evident, that
this author has neither formerly nor now suggested the contrary.) And for this
in the next place, I appeal to the express words of Hegesippus, there at large
set down in Greek, but here only referred to, and more briefly touched on by
this author.

7. The words, as far as this matter is concerned in them, I shall recite; They
are these, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 111. (...). That there may be no place for
doubt in this matter, I shall now give the English Reader a full view of them,
thus. But when the sacred quire of the Apostles had severally ended their
lives, and the generation of those that had been thought worthy to hear with
their own cars the divine wisdom, was now past, then the rout or riotous
convention of the Godless seduction or seducers ((...) signifies a seditious
assembling, or military preparation of confederates or conspirators, and (...)
deceit or seduction, may be used for the men that deceive or seduce) received
its beginning, by the cunning or deceit of false teachers, who, now that none
of the Apostles were left, avowed and openly attempted to preach or promulgate
the science falsely so called, in opposition to the preaching of the truth.

8. What is here meant by the science falsely so called, no man can be ignorant,
that has compared that phrase used expressly by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 20. with
the writings of the Primitive Fathers, or but lightly considered the very
nature of plain words. The word (...) Gnostics, literally signifies knowing
men, so styled by themselves, but upon no grounds of truth, their doctrines
being indeed directly opposed to the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and so (...) knowledge or science falsely so called. This therefore must
be the meaning of the Apostles words, (...), the oppositions of the science
falsely so called, i. e. the doctrines of the sect of the Gnostics, in direct
opposition to the doctrine of the Apostles, and consequently the same must be
the importance of the like phrase in Hegesippus, in consent with the Apostles
dialect; what the Apostle calls science falsely so called, Hegesippus must be
believed to mean by the very same words, the science falsely so called, i. e.
the Gnostics; what the Apostle calls (...) oppositions or contradictings,
Hegesippus expresses by (...) opposite or contrary preaching, and these phrases
are both farther cleared by a passage in the ancient author (...): c. 6. which
tells us of (...), the contradictory discourses of the dotage or folly or
madness of Simon; by contradictory discourses certainly meaning the (...) and
(...), oppositions and antipreaching, and by the dotage or madness of Simon
Magus, the knowledge that he pretended to, and his followers, and which so puss
them up in a mad conceit of it, but was indeed nothing else but blasphemous
folly, far removed from all degree of true science.

9. From this short representation of this plain matter of fact, thus visible
before our eyes, I shall now suppose it clear, that it was not confidence of
my abilities, but a well grounded persuasion, that he that cited these words in
Greek, understood the plain meaning of them, upon which I built my hope, that
my answer to this passage of Hegesippus would approve it self to him. For if
the Gnostics and none else were the men spoken of by Hegesippus, then was
there no place for exception against my answer, and if Hegesippus express
words might be believed, thus it was. And thus stands this matter betwixt me
and my Reprover at this time; I have laid it before him, let himself now, if he
please, be party, witness, and judge; I cannot think it possible I should need
other.

10. But then in the third place, he has an objection against this sense,
which at least may have force against me; For, says he, if the person thus
expounding this testimony (i. e. I) may be credited, the Gnostics were never
more busy nor prevalent then in that time, which alone is excepted from the
evil here spoken of.

11. To this I answer, 1. that in case I had at several times spoken things
incoherent or contradictory, this would be no sufficient proof that what I now
recited from Hegesippus's plain words, was not contained in them. But then 2. I
have been far enough from having thus (any where) contradicted my self, or what
I affirm in this answer of mine, nor (if I may be allowed the confidence to
believe that I know and speak my own sense) did I ever let fall any thing
which will not be exactly reconciled with it. The short is this. The
Ringleaders of the Gnostics were verry busy in the Apostles times, but did at
first more clancularly operate, from whence in my opinion (of which here it
seems I must give an account) they are in the Apostle expressed by (...), the
mystery of iniquity, iniquity, but that somewhat disguised, till at last in the
season most for their turn, some of them put off their disguises; Simon Magus
in the Apostles times, and though he miscarried, yet many of his followers
afterward in a more avowed and professed hostility (the (...) in Hegesippus)
when they had the advantage of all those being dead who had received the truth
from Christ himself: This is the sum of what I have elsewhere frequently, and
more largely delivered, and this is exactly the sense of Hegesippus in that
place, as will yet more clearly appear by the addition of some other words, not
yet recited, and (I know not why) omitted by this author in his first producing
of them, when yet both the antecedents and consequents were set down by him.
They are these, (...). Till those times he there speaks of, those heretics,
though some there were, that endeavored to corrupt the wholesome rule of
saving doctrine, skulked in darkness undiscernable, but afterward (when the
senson better agreed with their design) they did it (...), with bare head, or
face, putting off disguise or care of secrecy, with this, indeed it would not
easily be reconcilable to say, that the Gnostics were never more busy nor
prevalent, then in the Apostles times; And this he is pleased to set down as my
saying; but has not intimated the place, where I said it (as easily he might
have done, and I suppose would not have neglected to do, if he had known
where.) For my part I remember not, neither believe any such words ever to have
past from me; If he shall produce any that have the least sound that way, I
shall not doubt to give him an account of them, such as shall sufficiently
supersede the conclusion, which now he is willing to draw from them.

12. Mean while I shall yet farther give thus much over measure of reply to his
objection, that in case Hegesippus had not expressly named the Gnostics, which
yet expressly he names, and therefore must mean them if he knew and considered
what he said, yet the (...) the Atheistical seduction or seducers, and the
(...) the riotous convention or confederation of these, must needs signify
some known sect of heretics in that age of the Church, be they Cerinthians,
Ebionites, Nicolaitanes, Menandrians, B^silidians, Saturnilians, or after them
Valentinians, Marcionites, or who ever else can be supposed; And then, as it is
certain, that all, or most of these, met and agreed in this common notion of
the Gnostics, so from the poison and taint of all and each of them, it is still
equally clear, that the Church of God, and the known Governors and shepherds
thereof, by Gods grace and blessing preserved themselves, and expressed their
constant opposition and dotestation of them, and marked them out to be avoided
of all Christians; and so cannot be imagined to have been corrupted by them
(but on the contrary whosoever was discerned to be so corrupted, was cast out
of the Church) and by their contrary doctrine, illustriously known in their
writings against these heresies, long after the Apostles times, (Irenaus
against the Valentinians etc. Tertullian etc. against the Gnostics) have
demonstrated themselves to have continued steadfast and immaculate, and not to
have been in the least corrupted: And then what can be farther removed from
truth, than this whole suggestion from Hegesippus, of the infection being
diffused in the Church?

But he further objects, That the opposing and persecuting of the Church, which
is a great purisying of it, cannot be insinuated to be the deflouring and
violating of its chastity: To this I answer, 1. that if there were the least
force in this objection, it would yet be unsufficient to disprove my answer; It
might possibly infer the impropriety of Hegesippus's expression, whereof I
undertook not to be the advocate, but cannot conclude him not to have meant
those to be the corrupters, whom he expressly names to be so. 2. That in respect
of those weak or deceiveable members of the Church, that received the heretical
poison, (and then fell off from it, or were by just censures cast out of it)
it is not improper to say, that the Church which once contained them, was
defloured and violated; though on the other side, in respect of the constant
fidelity of others, who were not moved by all their opposition, the Church was
still rather purified then defloured, as gold by trial in the fire comes out
more pure, whilst yet the dross is discovered by the same, means, and
declared to have no purity in it. The truth is, many visible and temporary
professors were infected and defiled by the Gnostick infusions, as in all times
of trial befalls those that forsake the Faith, rather than they will endure
persecution; And that is the plain meaning of Hegesippus's words, and has
nothing new or strange in it.

14. One thing by the way I shall farther observe, that in this citation he
has made some change in the words, from what before he had represented; to the
Apostles times, adding, the time of the Apostles hearers, and not only the
Apostles themselves, as if Hegesippus included that second generation in the
space of the virgin uncorrupted age, after whose decease (and not till then)
the corruptions by him spoken of came in: But that I suppose will be found to
be a mistake also.

15. In his former citing of the passage (in his Preface of Animadversions) he
understood Hegesippus of the corruption immediately after the Apostles fell
asleep. And indeed this is all that the words assure us [when the quire of the
Apostles, says he, were dead, and the age past of those that were deemed
worthy to hear with their own ears, (...) the divine wisdom, or the wisdom
that had divinity in it -- ] where that ages being past,] and the Apostles
being dead] sure signifies the same thing, and (...) the divine wisdome] very
fitly signifies Christ himself, the wisdom of the Father, and no way appears
to be extended to the Apostles also; and then they that were the hearers of
that Wisdom, will be the men of the Apostles age, specially the Apostles
themselves, and not the subsequent generation. And that indeed thus it was,
appears by the context in Hegesippus, which evidenceth him to speak of Trajanes
times, wherein Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem, one of the (...) and (...), seers
and hearers of the Lord, being falsely accused by heretics, ((...)) was put to
death. Now this we know, was but the conclusion of the Apostles age; (John, who
was one of them, living till that time) and not of the auditors of the
Apostles. But should it be granted according to his desire, that 'twas of the
latter age that Hegesippus spoke, it would, as has appeared, stand him in
little stead; and therefore I shall not spring new occasion of contention with
him on this matter; Had not the honor of the Universal Church of Christ
succeeding the Apostles (so nearly concerned in this his reinforced objection)
seemed to exact this just tribute from me, I had not here given him this
importunity.

16. Whereon seeing I am thus far entered, It will not be amiss to pay him at
once what he may expect of return to some other passages of this his last
piece, wherein he is pleased to reflect on me.

17. And 1. occurs toward the beginning of it, page 33. a discourse of (...)
etc. which he endeavors to apply to the prejudice of my evidences for the
Epistles of Clement, and of St Paul to the Corinthians, being written to all
the Churches of Achaia: In return to this I shall note but these four things of
very many that offer themselves.

18. First, that there is a double notion of (...) etc. one wherein it is
opposed to (...), (and is all one with (...) or (...), being strangers or
sojourners) in which notion D. verb. sig.
Pomponius takes it, when by it he expounds the Latin incola, as that is all
one with inquilinus a stranger in any place, qui aliqua, or rather, alia
regione ((...) says Theophilus) domicilium suum contulit. Of this notion of
the word I spoke nor, nor could be imagined to speak, nor (whatever he thinks)
is or can parochia or paraecia to be taken in this sense in any author. Another
notion there is of (...) for accola a neighbor, as in Thucyd. l. 4. (...), the
Spartanes, and the nearest of the neighboring cities, (some of those (...),
neighbors, it seems, nearer then others) and so Pomponius also, non tantum qui
in oppido moratur, sed qui alicujus oppidi finibus agrum habet, a borderer that
lives and holds lands within the bounds, i. e. in the territories of any city,
whether nearer or farther off, or whether that territory be wider or narrower;
wider as the territory of a Metropolis, narrower as of an ordinary city, or yet
lower, as of a town or village; And which of these it is in any author, is not
conclusible from the nature or use of the word, which equally belongs to all
these, but from the quality of the place, to which in any author it is applied;
If the discourse be of a Metropolis, then the territory, and so the (...) is
the whole Province or (...), as when Mark is said by Eusebius to have
constituted Churches in the plural at Alexandria, the chief Metropolis of
Egypt, these are by Eccl. hist. l. 11. (...).
him all contained under the phrase (...), as by Mark committed to Anianus, and
to the Churches that belong to the chief Metropolis of Crete, Gortyna, are by
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, called (...), the Church adjacent to i. e. the
Province of Gortyna; If speech be of an ordinary city, then the territory of
that, and so the (...) is that which we now call a Diocese (though (...)
anciently signified otherwise) Territorium est universitas agrorum intra fines
cujusque civitatis, says Ibid.
Pomponius, and is rendered by Theophilus (...), all the region which is under a
city; And so farther downward to towns and villages also, as they are called
(...), Paroecia, parishes, the whole territory or bordering neighborhood is
comprehended under it. And so in sum, Corinth, otherwise appearing to be the
Metropolis of all Aehaia (as Achaia was one of the Pausan: (...).
five (...) of Pelopounesus) and this both in the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Notitiae; in the Civil, as is evident by the Proconsuls keeping his residence
there, Acts 18. 12. 15. (Corinth being before this time Pausaen: (...). p. 44.
l. 19.
destroyed by Mummius, reedified by Julius Caesar, and now a Me. la l. 11. c. 3.
Roman Colony, and having a Pausan: (...): p. 44
Province belonging to it, called (...), the Corinthian region) and in the
Ecclesiastical, as appeared both by the general (...) or conformity between the
city and the Church, not only in after ages, but from the first, cited from a
most ancient learned Church-writer, Origin contr. Cells. l. 3. and more
particularly as to Corinth, by the express words of To: 3. p. 343.
Saint Chrysostom. All this, I say, otherwise largely appearing, and not
deduced from the bare style [(...)] this Church thus styled by Clemens, and
compared with Paul's first Epistle, which expressly comprehends the Saints of all
Achaia, and yet (as is granted on all sides) no greater an extent, then what
Clemens wrote to, is by me regularly affirmed to be that whole Province of
several Churches, (for which 'twas not yet that (...) grew to be the
Ecclesiastical word) and not that single Church of Corinth, but all under that
Metropolis.

19. 2. That it is most unreasonable to affirm that either 2 Cor. 9. 2. or any
where else, Achaia and Corinth are all one, for that is all one as to say
France and Paris, a region or nation, and a city in that region, are all one.
It Is true the Church, to which the Epistles of Paul were written, comprehends
under it all the Christians of Achaia, but then my pretensions must have place,
that those Epistles were written to all the Churches of Achaia, united in
Corinth, the Metropolis, not that Achaia, which had many cities in it was all
one with Corinth, that but one, though Metropolitical city.

20. 3. That of the Churches of Achaia, beside Corinth, that of Cenchrea is
expressly named, and though no other chances to be thus explicitly mentioned in
Scripture, which was not obliged to write the full Corography of the Apostles
plantations, yet this negative argument gives us no reason to doubt, but there
were more cities in Achaia then these two (all Geographers assure us of many)
and those in some proportion converted to the faith, and formed into Churches,
in Saint Paul's time, and before Clements writing to them. However that one of
Cenchrea concludes as much, as I want; Cenchrea being another city-Church,
different from Corinth, and (...) neighboring to it, part of its territory,
and under it as a daughter under a Metropolis.

21. 4. That Chrysostom, that speaks of Corinth as a Metropolitical Church,
speaks of it, not (as this Author pretends) only in the political, but
Ecclesiastical notion, and not only as in his own, but as it was in the
Apostles time: Else he could not say of S. Paul, as he does, (...) that he
wrote to a Metropolis; It Was certainly to the Church that Saint Paul wrote not
the city; and 2. to that Church, in Saint Paul's age. The testimony is as clear
as the Sun, that Tom. 3. p. 343.
Saint Chrysostom speaks of Corinth, Thessalonica, and the Ephesians, and
Galatians, to whom the Apostolical Epistles are directed, as so many
Metropolitical Churches, to each of which Saint Paul wrote, and thereby in
every of those Epistles wrote not (...), to one city only, (he adds, or to
two, or to three) but (...) to all every where in each of those regions,
relating to those Metropolitical Churches, to all the Churches of Galatia, of
Achaia, etc.

22. And so much for that affair, on which five leaves were providently laid
out at the beginning of his journey, to secure some principles which were after
to be improved by him, which yet he cannot but know are superseded by many
other evidences of Metropolitical Churches planted in the Apostles times, at
Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Thessalonica, Philippi, Alexandria, and Rome etc.
every of which requiring his answer, as much as (...).

23. P. 87. he minds me of his acknowledging the catholic church, both the
invisible body of Christ, his elect, etc, and the Universality of visible
professors, and consequently of the injury formerly done him, in comparing his
expression [that there was never any Church Officer instituted in those first
times relating to more Churches in his office, or to any other Church than a
single particular congregation] with the author of the Saints belief, which
instead of the Holy Catholic Church in the Apostles symbols substituted this
very hypothesis; as if I either really believed, or was willing to persuade
others, that he denied the Catholic Church.

24. To this I answer, 1. that I neither entered into his secrets, nor
endeavored to infuse any jealousies into others concerning his talent
undiscovered thoughts, but only considered those words then before me, not
being at that distance able to divine, how far he meant to acknowledge the
Catholic Church in a tract written two years after.

25. Secondly, That his acknowledging now two notions of the Catholic Church,
one of all the elect, the other of all that are called, does not so certainly
difference his doctrine from that of the author of the Saints belief; there
being no reason to doubt, but that he that compiled that, did at that time
acknowledge the Catholic Church in those two notions. The thing that he meant
to deny, and renounce, implicitly by leaving out the mention of the Catholic
Church, and explicitly by what he substituted in stead of it, was (I supposed)
the several degrees of associations, each known among men by the name of a
Church, 1. that of the whole Christian world, the Universal Church, either as
it by some pretended to be Monarchically, or by others Aristocratically
governed. 2. That of each National Church under the Primate thereof. 3. That of
each Provincial Church under the Metropolitan. 4. That of every Diocesan
Church under the Bishop; and lastly, of every Parochial Church under the Rector
thereof. And all these seem as avowedly to be denied by this author to have
been instituted in those (i. e. in Ignatius's) times, as by the compiler of the
Saints Belief they were; And some of these being, to my understanding, thus
anciently instituted, and express mention made in Ignatius, not only of the
(...) or multitude under a particular Bishop, which is one of these, but
farther of the Church of Syria, i. e. of that whole region, and the Church of
Syria which is at Antioch, all joined under Antioch, the Metropolitical Church,
and the Catholic Church, wider then either of these, and comprehensive of
both; this I deemed fit to be confronted to his hypothesis (and the parallel in
the Saints Belief) of the no other Church, than a single particular
congregation, which I supposed narrower than any one of these. And this is a
brief, and I hope, inoffensive, account of that particular.

26. Page 232. An exception is made to my instance in the Bishop of Oxon, and
that from a supposed exemtion of this author, at the time of his writing, from
the jurisdiction of that Bishop. But 1. I proceeded not to the naming or
specifying the author at all, when I spoke of the Bishop of Oxon, much less
considered the quality, which was peculiar to him, from other men, or the
exemtion consequent to that quality, which whatever it can be pretended, is but
temporary, and personal, and so not proper for any special consideration. 2. I
answer, The Bishop of Oxon has a Diocese, or else no man that lives in that,
could by any privilege of his place, be exemt from it. And then what I said of
the duty owing to that Bishop (somewhat more then styling him a reverend and
learned person, and being glad of his neighborhood and acquaintance, (...)
signifies more than that) regularly belongs to all such as are in his Diocese,
and are not exemt from his jurisdiction, and whatever he please to imagine, I
never meant to extend it to any other.

27. Page 122. I find a dislike of my way (he should not have said of
justifying our separation from Rome, but) of defending our Church from the
guilt of schism, charged on us by the Romanists. But this is no news to me; he
had once before signified thus much, and I was not then surprised with it, and
shall only assure him, that now I have seen his new way, I am no whit less
pleased with the old, than before I had the confidence to be.

28. The last that I took notice of to be my concernment was page 229. where
perhaps I may be the person, accused to have charged the doctrines (there
named, as a considerable portion of the doctrine of our Church) of everting
fundamentals. If it be so, I have then two things to say in this haste, and no
more, 1. that the doctrines, which I charge in the tract of Fundamentals, I
charge not of everting of Fundamentals, but (as may be seen in the title and
contents of the 12 chapter) of aptness to obstruct and hinder the
superstructing of good life upon Christian belief: Of which whether the
doctrines by me specified be guilty or no, I appeal to those indifferent
Readers that shall impartially view what is there said, and shall be content to
be concluded by that, though not by this Vmpirage.

29. 2. That no one of the doctrines thus accused by me are the doctrines of
the Church of England, as there (as far as I ever heard it doubted) is cleared
by me; whereas on the contrary some of them, that particularly of Christ's
redeeming none but the elect, are as expressly renounced by our Church, as any
branch of Atheism or Polytheisme is disclaimed by the Creed of the Apostles.

30. And now I may be permitted to take my leave of him at this time.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 11. r. and so. p. 5. l. 33. r. bad been long expected. p. 6. l. 20.
r. his letter. l. 27. r. few passages. p. 7. l. 18. r. so that 53. ibid. r. 10
this sense l. 35. r. (...) l. 36. r. (...) p. 8. l. 5. again, i. the. p. 9. l.
21. r. was written. p. 16. l. 7. r. (...) l. 16. r. (...) p. 25. l. 8 r. or as.
l. 34. r. Schlusselburgius p. 32. l. 13. r. sounded. l. ult. r. on them. p 36.
l. 4. r secrecy; with. p. 39. l. 8. dele to. l. 29. r. And so the p. 42. l.
16. r. symbol. l. 21. r. latent. p. 43. l. 1. r. as it is.


