A CORDIAL FOR THE CAVALIERS.
Worthy, and Deserving Gentlemen,
IN the Affairs and traverses of this life, it is a true Rule (and it is a
comfortable one) That He who discharges a good Conscience, has enough of his
Own wherewith to reward Himself, though he receive no compensation from any
where else: The World knows, and Envy it self does acknowledge, That in the
late Confusions, (which were of that length that might have shaken the firmest
Spirits in their Loyalty) you have discharged a Good Conscience three ways,
toward your Creator, toward your Country, and toward your King; your
Religion bound you to the One, Nature to the Other, and your Allegiance to to
the Third; And although Many of you have not yet received what you expected for
the two last, yet touching the first (whereunto the other also conduce) you are
sure to have such a Reward one day, that will not only be above all Merit, but
beyond all Imagination in the Kingdom of Eternity.

Add hereunto that I hold your Condition to be far from being desperate, but
that you may receive Rewards, at least some Consideration from the other Two,
viz from your King and Country; For the present Parliament, which represents
your whole Country, being composed of so many Wise, and well-weighed Gentlemen
(whereof diverse have been Co-sufferers with you) will, as it is well hoped, out
of a sense thereof, have such reflections upon your Sufferings and Services,
both Active and Passive, that they will enable his Majesty, whom the Law
styles, The Fountain of Honor and Bounty, and whereof indeed no other Power
should partake with Him, I say it may well be hoped, that this Parliament,
before their Recesse, will put his Majesty in a Capacity, and humbly Advise
Him, if not to Reward you, yet to Relieve your present wants in such a measure,
that the Steed may not starve while the grass grows.

You know well that the King has been among us but a little more then the
compass of one year, And his Grandfather Henry the Great of France, was above
seven years (which is an Age in our Law) before He could requite those who
stuck to Him not much above twenty months, in making Him Master of the
Flowerdeluces; You know the vast debts his Majesty has paid both by Sea and
Land, which yet were not his own, nor his Kingdoms, but of that accursed
usurping Commonwealth, which exhausted more of the Public Treasure, then all
the Kings of this Land, since gold and silver were first coind in it; You know
He is so shortened, that He has not yet provided bread for All of his own
House; He is in such a condition, that He cannot give his Royal Aunt that
treatment which might be expected; He has not wherewith to go his Progress:
Consider what vast Expenses his Fleets at Sea, his Lifeguard, with other
Garrisons do stand Him in; As also what debts He drew upon Himself so many
years beyond the Seas, for his necessary subsistence, etc.

Now, whereas some object he has rewarded Roundheads, Truly I believe if a
Catalogue were made of those upon whom he has conferred Honor or Office since
his Return, there will be found above twenty Cavaliers for one of any other
upon whom he has set any marks of Favor. It Is true, albeit he came not in by
the Presbyterian, yet he could not have come in without Him so peaceably,
Though some allege that what the Presbyterian did, was not as much out of a
Love to the King, as out of a Hatred he bore to the Independent, who may be
said to have used the Presbyterian as the Fox uses to deal with the Badger,
who having found out his Chamber in the Earth, he so berayeth it, that the
Badger comes thither no more, and so the Fox makes himself master of the hole.

Whereas some except against his Majesty's lenity, and Indulgence, let Them know
that Mercy is the inseparable Inmate of a magnanimous breast, and that the
noblest way of Revenge is to forget, and scorn injuries; I have read in Story,
that one thing which made Lewis the twelf of France most famous was a Speech
which dropped from Him, when being advised by some of his Counsel to punish such
and such as were professed Enemies unto Him while He was Duke of Orleans, He
answered, That the King of France does not use to revenge the injuries of the
Duke of Orleans; No more (with most humble submission be it spoken) does King
Charles resent much the wrongs that were done to Charles Stuart.

Therefore, Noble Cavaliers, possess your Souls with patience, We have a most
Gracious King who is in the Meridian of his years, and will live to revvard all
in time. In the confused medley of mundane affairs, the Proverb often is
verified, Some have the happ, but some stick still in the gapp, Some have the
fortune of preferment, some not, and 'twill be so to the worlds end. The Author
hereof though during the many years that he was in prison for his loyalty, had
3. sworn over his head in an Office of Credit that he should have had de jure,
yet it nothing discomposeth him, being more then in hope of a compensation some
other way.

And as we have a Gracious, so have we a Glorious King, the most Glorious
that ever wore these three Crowns, For all the eyes of Christendom are fixed
upon Him with a kind of astonishment and admiration* and not only of
Christendom, but of all the World besides, for it is written that the Great
Turk should say, If he were to change his Religion, he would fall to Worship
the God of King Charles of England, who has done such miracles for him, such
miracles that no story can parallel: And certainly, God Almighty must needs
love Him for whom he does miracles: which that his Divine Majesty may
continue to do, are the incessant Prayers of

20 Iulii 1661. I. H.

Sold by ^enry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, 1661.


