Hammond versus Heamans.

OR, An ANSWER To an audacious Pamphlet, published by an impudent and
ridiculous Fellow, named ROGER HEAMANS, Calling himself Commander of the Ship
Golden Lion, wherein he endeavors by lies and holy expressions, to color over
his murders and treacheries committed in the Province of Maryland, to the
utter ruin of that flourishing Plantation; Having for a great sum sold himself
to proceed in those cruelties; it being altogether answered out of the abstract
of credible Oaths taken here in England.

In which is published His Highnesses absolute (though neglected) Command to
Richard Bennet Esquire late Governor of Virginia, and all others, not to disturb
the Lord Baltamores Plantation in Maryland.

By John Hammond, a Sufferer in these Calamities.

1 Samuel 20. v. 23. As touching the thing which thou and I have spoken of,
behold, the Lord be between thee and me.

Job 22. v. 5. Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquities innumerable?

Job 12. 7. Ye speak wickedly for Gods defense, and talk deceitfully for his
cause.

Printed at London for the use of the Author, and are to be sold at the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill.

Hammond versus Heamans.
I Was very opposite to publish my self to the world a fool in print, resolving
rather to wait the determination of the Supreme Authority of England, by who^
(and not by railing invectives) we must be tried, than to have expressed so
much indifferency as to have carped unseasonably at the proceeding of these
inhuman, ungrateful, and blood-sucking Sectaries, which mention God in their
lips, but their hearts are far from him; but that I see daily a broaching of
lies, one confederating and in the neck of another, which begets belief amongst
many, and carries a vulgar applause along with their action, the only way these
people ever pitched on to effect their designs, and the rather are they
credited by our silence.

We desire to satisfy every man, and especially our worthy friends the noble
Virginians in England, (for in Virginia they are sufficiently informed) and
that by their unbyast discourses and relations they may undeceive such as the
hypocricies of these fellows has deluded.

This, and the inward vexation which perplexeth me to read what they write, to
hear what is reported, awakes me, as knowing more of their deceits and
proceedings than any man living. I have at this present written, lying by me an
Historical relation of the transactions of Virginia and Maryland, under the
Government and Tyranny of Richard Bennet and Colonel Claiborn, with many
remarkable passages of such State-policies as they and their creatures used;
but will for a while forbear to publish, as rather desiring this pen-jarring
may cease; but if any of this rout shall any more disturb the world (for us
they cannot do) with their seeming-sanctified lies, I will then not spare to
acquaint the world what they are, and how they live, and give each of their
Characters to open view, which now lies masked under the hood of holiness and
good disposition, in which I shall somewhat more largely answer Leonard Strongs
Babylons fall, the Book of Virginia and Maryland, and other objections and
allegations of theirs, being all full of impudence and ignorance.

But that Heamans should dare to write amazes me, knowing his imbecility, his
villainy, and therefore I shall in my answer to him, briefly and in his own tone
anatomize and lay him open to the world a fool, to the State a Knave, to God a
notorious offender, whose unfeigned repentance I cordially wish, and that his
future portion of Grace may overbalance his former talents of wit and
honesty, in the want of which the poor man has been too too unhappy. But to
the matter.

Roger Heamans gives a great account in his whole relation of his extraordinary
vigilance and diligence in mannaging of his charge, and the trust imposed on
him by his owners, but omits to insert what a disordered Ship and company he
had, how mutinous and quarrelsome they were amongst themselves, and how upon
every drunken bout they had, what Swords were drawn, what challenges made
between the Seamen and their great Commander, insomuch that the Inhabitants
observing their carraiges, with derision and detestation reported of the
fantasticknesse of Heamans and his rude ungoverned Ships Company.

The insolency of these were such toward the Inhabitants, (observing the
licentiousness of those parts) and taking occasion thereby, that they would
sell commodities to whom they list, and lighting on greater prices, would of
their own accords (after delivery made) repossesse themselves again, scoffing
at any pretense of Law or Justice, saying, (as it after proved too true) that
their Ship was of force enough to awe the whole Country, inflicting
punishments on the Planters, and robbing houses as they went, all which is
sufficiently proved by Depositions already taken.

He relates how civilly he entreated Captain Stone, formerly Governor Stone,
who refused the title of Governor from him, informing him that one Captain
Fuller was Governor of the Province, and intimates, that from that relation he
bends to Fuller, as Governor ever after. How disconsonant to reason this is,
let any judge that know reason, that know the passages, that know Captain
Stones temper.

At such time as Bennet and Claiborn came into Maryland, and had compacted to
take the Government out of the hands of Captain Stone, after he had notice of
the power they had gathered, he likewise empowered himself for defense, and was
in possibility to have cut Bennet and Claiborn and all off, but those few
Papists that were in Maryland (for indeed they are but few) importunatly
persuaded Governor Stone not to fight, left the cry against the Papists (if
any hurt were done) would be so great, that many mischiefs would ensue, wholly
referring themselves to the will of God, and the Lord Protectors determination;
and although the Protestant party with indignation to be so fooled, submitted
to what their Governor was persuaded to do, yet could not but complain in
that particular against the cowardice of the Papists.

After they had dispossessed Governor Stone of his Authority, and had by
promises to dis-bandon their party, persuaded him to do the like, they
presented him with a draught for resignation under his hand, which when he
refused, their whole party upon notice given, on a sudden returned, to the
astonishment of himself, and affrightment of his wife and children, and
required perenitorily to subscribe to what they had written, which he did,
saying, It matters not what it is, I will, being thus enforced, write what ye
will have me, it cannot be binding nor valid; Lo here the observance of Bennet
and Claiborns promises, and after this they would have empowered him as
Governor from them, which with scorn he refused; nor did Governor Stone ever
in his own esteem, nor in the eyes of those that had been faithful to his
Government, look on himself as less or otherwise than Governor, nor ever
received other title, how be it he ceased to act until he heard further from
England; yet in Heamans his hearing and aboard that Ship which he calls himself
Commander of, Governor Stone, and Secretary Hatton both, had some words with
Mr. Preston the new-made Commander, complaining of their injurious assuming of
the Government, and taking away of the Records, threatening, that unless they
would return them again, they would compel them away. How then did he dis-own
his Government? and for him to point to Fuller as Governor, had not only been
base, but ridiculous; for neither Fuller himself (until after their murtherous
assasinations) nor the Commission he had from Bennet and Claiborn, did own or
make him so; for after Governor Stone refused to derive or meddle with power
from Bennet and Claiborn, they erected no Governor at all, but gave Commission
to ten men, Fuller being first in that Commission, to be conservators of the
peace, until further order; then how is Heamans relation true?

He next after some frivolous relations prosecutes his feigned narration of
what his Governor Fuller (for until Heamans made him one he was never any)
had done in his absence, what Messages he had received from his Governor, how
obedient he was to the supreme command of Fuller, how careful to follow his
Merchants businesses, and yet how charitable and relenting to those
poor-distressed souls that begged his assistance. -- Hear this O ye Heavens!

At such time as Captain Samuel Tilman, (a man ever to be honored) arrived
into Maryland, he repaired to Governor Stone, acquainting him, that the Lord
Baltemore had not lost his Country as was bruted abroad, and brought him some
instructions and certainties of his Highnesses owning him the said Stone for
Governor, and when he was reproved by one Captain John Smith, then High
Sheriff, for giving Captain Stone the frequent appellation of Governor, he
replied, I must and shall own him and no other for Governor of these parts,
for seeing my Lord Protector so styles him, and by that title writes to him, I
neither can nor dare call him otherwise, and his example is my warrant.

Upon this the said Smith (as a man affrighted) hies him home, repaires to
Fuller and the rest, they treat with Heamans to assist their opposition,
compound with him for a great quantity of Tobacco, and so prepare to oppose all
power that should control theirs.

Governor Stone sent me, not knowing of the compact of Heamans and the rest,
to Patuxent to fetch the Records; I went unarmed amongst these Sons of Thunder,
only three or four to row me, and despite of all their braves of raising the
Country, calling in his Servants to apprehend me, threatened me with the
severity of their new-made Law; my self alone seized and carried away the
Records in defiance; at which time, what ever Heamans pretends of compacts with
Heathens and Papists to destroy them, Richard Preston their great but then
quaking-Commander, showed me a Letter from Heamans, wherein he promised the
Ship, Ammunition and Men, should be at their service if occasion were, and
encouraged them not to think of yielding to Governor Stone, nor any power from
the Lord Baltemore, and this was the first discovery that ever was made by
Governor Stone, and not a man in arms, nor intended to be at that time, and
yet before this, merely upon Captain Tilmans words, and their own jealousies,
had Heamans confederated with, and hired himself to them, and yet this fellow
must not only justify his Judas-like dealings, but as it were, challenge
applause and merit.

After this, my self again unarmed proclaimed a Proclamation amongst them, put
in a new Commander in the face of the whole County met, who as people
over-joyed to return to their former just Government, as in their voluntary and
humble Petitions, they presenting acknowledged the Lord Protector as Supreme
was prayed for, and Pardons were as freely consented to, as entreated for.

But those poor-oppressed souls of Severn, as Heamans styles them, being of
another temper and County, and more remote, having Heamans and his company
their assured Janiza^^^, rather choosing to lose their lives than their
Lordings; sent peremtory Messengers to the Governor, (not such as Heamans
relates and sets down,) which we all here know to be invented, and rather kept
and contrived to be published in England, than intended for their Governor,
who zealously affected peace, and twice before had suffered himself rather to
be fooled out of his Government, than to hazard the shedding of blood.

But how comes it that their little Agent Strong, nor the impudent Author of
Virginia and Maryland, in either of their whisking Treatises mention these so
specious propositions inserted in Heamans his works? Heamans you do it
scurvily, and we shall yet further discover you. The joining with Heathens, the
plundering of houses, the intent to fire your Ship, the hyring of Abraham Hely,
and the horrid treacheries you load us with, will more particularly be
questioned and answered in another place than here; we have your Book for
evidence of your charge, we only fear you will turn Jack Lilborn, and put us to
prove it to be yours, which if you do, we have other reckonings to put on your
score.

You can in nothing deal truly, the Letter you pretend you received, my self
writ, I procured another, now happily arrived, to transcribe it, which the
Governor signed, the contents whereof were, That he had been informed upon
sight of a Letter pretended to come from you, that you intended some
disturbance in the Province, and had promised Mr. Preston the assistance of
your Ship, Ammunition and Men, he rather conceived it was a forgery, and you
abused, than that any such things really were, and hoped you came for a
peaceable Trade, and to follow your imployers business, and not to meddle with
the differences of the Country, promising you all encouragement and justice
that could possibly be expected, and earnestly entreating, that if you had any
such resolution you would declare it, which had you done, and not treacherously
colored it over with promises to wait on the Governor, he had retired, no
blood had been spilt.

The Warrants you so crowd in your Book, in the name of the Lord Protector, you
imagine peradventure will bear you out, had you not been hired the juggling had
been handsome, but now it is foolish, nor can any Rebellion ever bear bulk,
unless it pass on in the name of Supreme Authority. For the Letter you
pretend you writ, you confess you did it by advice of your Severn imployers;
yet in that you affirm a monstrous untruth in saying the Government settled in
Captain Fuller was since established by the Lord Protector, you shall by and by
see how all such pretended powers are by His Highnesses absolute Commands null,
but never be able nor no stickler of you all to prove any confirmation, had you
had any such thing, although you talk much of it, you would have posted it and
published it to the World in Capital Letters.

You great Merchant Richard Owen, and his best penn'd-Letter, if it be his,
that ever came from him, was not a matter material for the Press, we knew him
a year or two since a Planter of little credit, and now a very sorry Merchant,
yet any stuff will serve such as ye are.

Concerning the firing of your Ship (I speak to the abused World, not to
Heamans) he knows already what I writ is true, that at trial of the Governor
and Council, one Captain Findall upon examination did acknowledge, that after
Heamans Treachery to shoot at them having discovered himself an enemy, he
undantedly told them that himself, could he have compassed it, would have fired
his Ship.

But how prettily do they forge? Fuller he says informed him that Captain
Stone intended to fire his Ship, and this dispute between the Hireling and the
Master must be taken as a truth, and come likewise to the Press, and yet
Heamans and they bargained before: Here, if it had been truth, you again show
your self a fool, to engage because Fuller affrighted you.

And why should Captain Stone think of firing your Ship, had you not been a
declared enemy? or if he had such an intent, why did he by Letter address
himself to you to stand Newter? before this address Fuller and ye fomented
these jealousies amongst the people, which by that after address, was clearly
manifest it was never intended, therefore being in its own reason only a
fiction, wherefore did you print it? The cause of your Seaman Helies running
away, I know not, but have been informed the Fellow was of an honest temper,
and that your fantastic domineerings was the cause he rather chose to lose his
Voyage, than longer to continue under you. In your whole relation of commands
and arguments between you and your imployers, you so impudently juggle, that
you raise both laughter and anger in me; I shall not swell this to descant on
each frivolous passage.

The delivery of your Benefactors of Ann Arundel Country, is indeed a
demy-miracle as you deliver it, but let a true information be received, it will
appear otherwise; first, to be treacherously dispersed and hurried a shore, as
our men were by Heamans firing at them.

Next, to be pursued by an other Vessel, commanding at a distance, and so
seizing on our Boats and Ammunition; what a great matter did ye? it is and has
been ordinary for a hundred men to surprise and take prisoners two hundred, but
ye had more, ours not so many as I mention, and the difference was, ours came
with a resolution rather to treat than fight, yours resolved to have the
Government or nothing, and therefore would not suffer any Declaration to be
published, but surprised the Messenger, and what was most monstrous, after
free quarter giver, to adjudge, condemn, and execute, as ye did, your self
Heamans sitting in consultation, and being of their Counsel of War, and most
active to have all executed, none reprieved, no not the Governor himself; It
was the first time that ever Heamans had power of condemnation, and therefore
thought to grow glorious by his unsampled severity. Take a little view of these
oaths, and then judge of this, and these fellows.

HEnry Coursey, Nicholas Guyther, and Richard Willan, of the Province of
Maryland in America, Gent. maked oath, That in or about the latter end of May,
in the year 1654. His Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, was by
Captain William Stone, the Lord Baltamores Governor of that Province, caused
to be proclaimed in the head of the people there, they being then summoned in by
Capt. Stone for that purpose; and the said Governor took order with Captain
Tilman, and Mr. Bosworth, two Co^manders of Ships, then trading in that
Province, to shoot off several pieces of Ordnance from their respective Ships,
in honor of that Solemnity. And they further depose, that in the Month of
July then next following, Mr. Richard Bennet (the then Governor of Virginia)
and Colonel William Claiborn, the then Secretary thereof, came from Virginia to
Patuxent River in the said Province of Maryland, and there entertained as
Soldiers the Inhabitants of the said River, with those of Ann Arundell,
otherwise by them called Providence, as also the Inhabitants of the Isle of
Kent within the said Province, and so forced the said Captain Stone to resign
his Government. And the said Deponent Henry Coursey further says, that the
said Bennet and Claiborn, afterward forced the said Governor to set his hand
to a Writing, the Contents whereof as this Deponent does remember was, That he
should not meddle with the resuming of the Government again in the Lord
Baltamores behalf. And all the said Deponents further say, that the said Bennet
and Claiborn then seized upon the records of the said Province, and put them
into the possession of one Captain William Fuller, Mr. Richard Preston, and
William Durand; and the Deponent Hen. Coursey says, That in March last, the
said Captain Stone sent up to the said Inhabitants of Ann Arundel, one Mr. Luke
Barber, and the said Deponent Henry Coursey, with a Proclamation to require the
Inhabitants there to yield obedience to the Lord Baltamores Officers, under His
Highness the Lord Protector; and that when the said Mr. Barber and this
Deponent Henry Coursey came thither they found the people there all in arms,
and the said Fuller would not suffer this Deponent to read the said
Proclamation, and so refusing to give any obedience thereunto, the said Mr.
Barber and this Deponent were dismissed, but suddenly after (before
conveniently they could get away) were taken prisoners by that party, whereby
the said Governor Captain Stone was prevented of any answer, whereupon he
proceeded to come up with what force he had into the River, called by some
Severn, where these people lived: And all these Deponents say, That when the
said Captain Stone came into the said River, there was one Captain Roger
Heamans, with a great Ship called the Golden Lion, whereof he was Commander,
who presently shot at Captain Stones Boats as they passed by him; And the said
Guyther and Willan do further depose, That the said Captain Stone (to avoid the
said shot) went into a Creek in the said River, where one Mr. Cuts with another
Ship (whereof he was Master, blocked up the mouth thereof and upon any
discovery forced there Ordnance at the said Captain Stone and his party, until
such time as the said Inhabitants of Ann Arundel had transported themselves
over the River, unto the said Captain Stone and his party; where after some
dispute, the Governor (finding himself over-powred) yielded upon quarter,
whereupon he and most of his party were transported over the River to a Fort at
Ann Arundel, where they were all kept prisoners, and about three days after,
the said Captain Fuller, William Burgees, Richard Evans, Leo: Strong, William
Durand, the said Roger Heamans, John Brown, John Cuts, Richard Smith, one
Thomas, and one Bestone, Samson Warren, Thomas Meares, and one Crouch, sat as
in a Council of War, and there condemned the said Governor Captain Stone,
Colonel John Price, Mr. Job Chandler, Mr. William Eltonhead, Mr. Robert Clerk,
the said Deponent Nicholas Guyther, Captain William Evans, Captain William
Lewis, Mr. John Legate, and John Pedro to dye, whereof they executed Mr. William
Eltonhead, Captain William Lewis, Mr. John Legate, and John Pedro, the rest
being preserved at the request of the Soldiers and Women belonging to the said
party at Ann Arundel; after which execution, the common Soldiers that did
belong to the said Captain Stone, were sent away to their several homes, but
the Officers and the said Messengers were detained longer, and at the
discharging of the said Deponents Henry Coursey and Nicholas Guyther, the
pretended Council of War imposed an Oath upon them, That they should not write
into England to give the Lord Baltamore any information of their proceedings;
and not long after they sequestered all the Estates of those of the Lord
Baltamores Council and Officers there; And the said Henry Coursey further
deposes, That he was present when Mr. William Eltonhead desired to be allowed
an appeal to His Highness the Lord Protector in England, but it was refused
him by the said pretended Council of War at Ann Arundel; And the said Deponents
Henry Coursey and Nicholas Guyther do further depose, That a little before the
sending of the Proclamation before mentioned, to the people at Ann Arundel,
they heard the said Captain Stone declare unto certain Messengers whom these
people had sent unto him, That if the said people, who he understood were in
arms, would repair unto their several homes, and submit themselves unto the
former established Government under the Lord Baltamore, which did acknowledge
His Highness the Lord Protector as Sovereign Lord, he would not offer any
violence to them, or do them any prejudice, either in their persons or estates,
or words to the very same effect; And the Deponent Richard Willan does also
further depose, That about the time when the said Luke Barber and Henry Coursey
went with the said Proclamation above mentioned, he heard the said Captain
Stone command that none of his party should rob or plunder any upon pain of
death.

Henry Coursey. Nicholas Guyther. Richard Willan.

Sworn all three the second day of July 1655. before me Na. Hobart, a Master of
the Chancery in Ordinary.

Now may the Reader thoroughly understand their Religion, their humanity, their
usage of His Highnesses name, and to what purpose, not to act further by it
than shall conduce to their own ends; they will, they say, be subordinate to no
power but to the Lord Protector, and yet deny appeals to His Highness,
rejecting His Highnesses Commands, breath out vants, that if His Highness will
not own their actings, they will not take notice of what comes from him. They
imprisoned, fined, and hardly forbore to have executed Doctor Luke Barber,
notwithstanding he brought in a Letter from His Highness, directed to Captain
William Stone, Governor for the Lord Baltamore of his Province of Maryland,
intimating thus, That the Bearer hereof Luke Gardner, having been one of his
Domestic Servants, was intended to remove himself and family into Maryland,
and therefore he entreated him to show him for his sake, what lawful favor
and assistance he could, signing it.

Oliver P. And under His Highnesses Signet.


This was pretended a forgery, and Mr. Barber put to prove it to be the Lord
Protectors, but he must prove it in that place, no appeal could lie good, and
the Gentleman as I have often heard him protest, was so overawed, that at last
he durst not affirmatively maintain it came from His Highness, but answered
doubtfully and distractedly. A strange impudence when a Mandate so sacred as
under His Highnesses Hand and Seal, must not only be disputed, but to require a
further evidence then himself, witnessing what shall issue out from himself,
this is the greatest spurning against, and overthrowing Authority, that ever
was heard of or suffered.

His Highness having notice of the proceedings of Bennet, Claiborn, and these
people, notwithstanding the sweet Letter (...) to Bennet, requiring him to
cherish peace in the Plantation, now further declares himself as follows.

SIR,
WHereas the difference betwixt the Lord Baltamore and the Inhabitants of
Virginia, concerning the bounds by them respectively claimed, are depending
before us and our Council, and yet undetermined, and that as we are credibly
informed, you have notwithstanding gone into his Plantation in Maryland, and
countenanced some people there, in opposing the Lord Baltamores Officers;
therefore for preventing of disturbances or tumults, we do will and require
you, and all others deriving Authority from you, to forbear disturbing the Lord
Baltamore or his Officers and people in Maryland, and to permit all things to
remain as they were there, before any disturbance or alteration made by you or
any other, upon pretense of authority from you, till the said difference
abovementioned be determined by where, and that we give you further order
therein: we rest,

To Richard Bennet Esquire Governor of Virginia, These. Your Loving Friend, Signed
Oliver P.
White Hall, Jan. ^2. 1654. Copia vera Examinatur per Will. Malin.


By this it appears how great care has been by His Highness used to prevent
bloodshed, yet nothing will prevail, and although by this in appears that
Bennets pretended power ceased, and any derived from him, yet will not Leo*
Strong, the Munkle-Agent of Providence (as he calls himself) cease to be an
Agent, but will justle this high command and revocation; he peradventure at
last will pretend his deafness, that he never heard it, but cannot allege
blindness, for he had and shall again see what it is.

Were not their actions very justifiable when they should keep men in prison
until they should submit to an Oath imposed on them, never to write for
England, or to the Lord Baltamore, what had been done? and suffer none to
depart for England but what got away by stealth? my self being proscribed by
Proclamation, and a great reward for him that should bring in my head, yet was
I never in arms, nor never was an Instigator against any of them in all these
hurliburlies. We have many authentic testimonies discovering all their actions
and proceedings, which are too voluminous to be inserted into an Answer to such
an Idiot as the Commander of the Golden Lion; we hereby endeavor to give you
only a hint that Heamans has abused the World with his Pamphlet, not a
syllable whereof is truth; how he has deluded his owners with pretense of his
care; how he has spurned at and belied the Supreme Authority; how he has
intruded himself without any lawful call, into the Seat of Justice, and there
acted the part of a bloody and aggravating Murderer, condemning Innocents and
trampling on the souls of them he has betrayed to death, for without his
combination nothing of this had happened, and our selves had without rigor,
without bloodshed, compelled Obedience to the Supreme Command of His Highness
under the Lord Baltamore, whom we with all solemnity proclaimed, and under whose
protection we rejoiced, as our Sovereign Lord; issuing out general Pardons in
commemoration of that great and happy Solemnity.

And therefore we do and shall justly charge this Heamans with all the blood
spilt in our Province, as the immediate Author, with all the ruins, the
banishments, the sequestrations of Estates, and the heartbreaking griefs he
has yielded our Wifes and Children, to whom if ever we return again, it is
through many dangers and hazzards.

For the cry of Hey for St. Mary's, hey for two Wives, if any rude Soldier in
those of any other terms were abusive, it must not color your matchination,
it proceeded by no order of the Governors, nor from the mouths of any of
quality, themselves were civil and atractive, nor was ever any party afoot
without some absurd expression, or disordered language; but these are weak
flourishes, and will only bear you out in weak esteems.

Your observation of Captain Stones dejection, and his renunciation of the Lord
Baltamore, the dead-heartedness of the Prisoners, being only affirmed by your
self, is of as little credit as any thing else you have related; nor are you
and your compacted theevish Ships company, to be evidences one for another, and
no better than Thieves and Murderers, to justify you you have none; the
religious rejoicing you mention, is no otherwise than such prayers and
rejoycings as Thieves and Gamsters at or after their enterprises use, and as
acceptable to God; but seeing Heamans was a Judge to condemn, and now is become
a Writer, I shall no longer dwell on Heamans papers, I shall conclude with that
fearful woe denounced by the Prophet Isaiah, against such as you are, Isa. ^0.
v. 1. Woe unto them that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things,

Verse 2. To keep back the poor from judgment, and to take away the judgment
of the poor of my people; that widows may be their prey, and that they may
spoil the fatherless.



FINIS.

