DREADFUL NEWS FROM LIMERICK, Being an Account of the Magazine of Powder Taking
Fire the 12th. of this Instant February, 1694. And the Destroying and Blowing
up of a great part of the City, Killing above One Hundred Persons, and Mortally
Wounding many more.
In a Letter from a Gentleman there, to his Brother, a Reverend Divine in
DUBLIN.
Dear Brother,
MY last to you was giving you an Account of the sad unfortunate Miscarriage of
poor Brother Paul, (lost at Sea:) This is to give you an Account of the most
Dismal and Tragical Mischance that ever befell a City in so short a time, by so
unhappy an Accident: The Long-Tower at the Key, where lay 250 Barrels of
Powder; the Foundation whereof being most washed away by the continual beating
of the Water; and being suspected for some time past to fall, Orders were given
by the Governor to Captain Wayt, who is Store-keeper, to remove the Magazine,
and prop the Tower, which sight occasioned a great Number of People to frequent
the Key that Morning, (which was yesterday between Eleven and Twelve a Clock)
to view it: But before ever they could get the Beams and other Materials ready,
the Tower gave way, and by the knocking of the Stones one against another, gave
fire to the whole Parcel of Powder, which blew the whole Tower amongst the
City, and killed above 100 and odd Persons; amongst which Abraham Bowman
Sheriff, Mr. Row Land-Waiter, Madam Butler, with several other Dwellers in the
Town; Counselor Lacy and Arthur Lillys lost each a Leg, and its believed will
not live: The Blast was so great, that there is not one House in the Town, but
received great Damage: The whole Key is blown to admiration; it has made as
great a havoc as the War. The thing was so excessive and so unexpected it is
impossible for me, or any else, to describe the distraction of the whole City,
no man well knowing what it was, but supposing it to be an Earthquake. For my
part, I have seen as terrible sights, as I thought could be seen, and have
escaped as many Dangers as any one, but never saw the like; nor never, the Lord
be praised, escaped narrower; I then being in Key-Lane, in an House that fell
by the prodigious weight of Stones that fell upon it: It blew Stones of 300
weight up to the Gallows, ( which is a Mile) and the Land against it is all as
if it were plowed; it killed several Persons at work in the Field, as Tom
Tingy, and several others thereabouts: The Key was not known this Twelve-months
to be so full as it was at that time, for the day being very fair, and every
one desirous to see the Tower fall, not suspecting the Powder would take fire,
flocked down, where many were as unfortunately lost. The Governor, the
Collector, and some others, were at Dick Sexton's House, but escaped with small
Wounds. Captain Wayt was under the Tower, and perceiving it to fall, made haste
from it, and Luckily fell, which fall saved his Life; but he is sadly Wounded.
It shook the Country for 12 miles round. Praised be God, all our Friends are
escaped; and this Deliverance ought never to be forgot, (nor by me never
shall.) I never yet heard of so unlucky a Mischance. I am sure you will hear of
it from other hands. But for fear you should suspect the losing any of your
Friends, I thought fit to give you this Account at large. There are as many
Wounded (and most of them mortally) as the Number killed, God make us all who
survive, thankful for the Deliverance; and always to acknowledge it as the
greatest of Blessings. I am

Your Loving Brother, J. H.

LONDON Printed, And Sold by R. Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1694.


