THe Admission of persons baptized in their infancy, without due Trial of their
Faith and growth in Christ, when grown in years, to a full participation of all
Church Priviledges and Ordinances, has caused great confusion in the
Administration of holy things. And therefore, I conceive, the Learned Author of
this Elaborate Exercitation has deserved well of the Churches, by clearing the
way of those Admissions from Scripture-grounds, and the concurrent Testimonies
of many, both Ancient and Modern writers: As also, by discovering and removing
those Popish additions and pollutions which by several steps and degrees have
crept into it. And if, what he has offered in this Essay come not up to the
Judgment and Practice of the best constituted Churches; yet this ingenuous and
pious overture holds out more then most Churches have hitherto attained, and
may provoke the zeal of many to hold out what they have attained, as more
commodious for, and perfective of the much desired and longed for restoration
of the Churches to their primitive purity both in separating the precious from
the vile, and in uniting the precious into a more beautiful and beneficial
Order among themselves. These considerations have confirmed me in giving not
only License to the publishing, but thanks to the Publisher of this discourse
of Confirmation.

The 24th, of the 6th. Month. 1657 Joseph Caryl.

TELEIOSIS:

OR, An EXERCITATION UPON CONFIRMATION; The Ancient way of Completeing
CHURCH MEMBERS. Wherein is indevoured its Recovery from the Corruptions of
Preceding Ages, under which it has lain so long Buried, and the Restitution of
it to its Primitive USE and END. To which are Annexed some Directions for the
putting of it into Practice: Together with Sundry Encouragements thereunto.
Published as an Help for the Reducing of our Churches into Gospel-Form and
Order, and as an Expedient to promote Peace and Unity among Brethren.

By Jonathan Hanmer, Minister of the Gospel

JER. 6.16. Ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein.

Tertul. advers. Praxeam. Id verum, quodcunque primum.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxey, for John Rothwell, at the Fountain in
Goldsmiths-Row, Cheap Side. 1657.

TO The Right Worshipful Sr JOHN CHICHESTER KNIGHT. The Worshipful JOHN FOWELL
ESQUIRE; And the rest of the Inhabitants of TAWTON-BISHOP in the County of
DEVON.
HAving been prevailed with to Publish this small Treatise, which was conceived
might prove of some Use to the Church of Christ: I have made choice to commend
it unto you, who, defire, may especially share in and enjoy the benefit of it.
Which, I have done, as a Testimony of that great Respect and Love which I owe
and bear unto: you: For though I be an unworthy Ambassador of Christ unto
others, yet doubtless I am chiefly so unto you, being that part of the Lords
Vmeyard wherein particularly he has set me to labor. And the searcher of of
hearts knows how much I long after your Spiritual Welsare; the prosperity of
whose Souls would exceedingly rejoice me.

When the Lord shall graciously vouch. safe opportunity of putting these things
in practice among you, I hope (and not without some ground) that you will be
found a ready and willing people to receive and submit unto them, so far as
they shall appear to be agreeable unto the mind of Christ, and to make for his
glory: And in so doing you will both Facilitate and further the Work, and
greatly encourage the Workman.

Now that the Father of Lights would fill you with the knowledge of his Will, in
all Wisdom and Spiritual Understanding, and enable you to walk worthy of the
Lord unto all wellpleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing
in the Knowledge of God. That the God of all Grace would stablish, strengthen
and settle you in his Truth and Ways in these-evil days, wherein so many
unsound and unstable souls turn aside from the truth, giving ear to deceivers
that with fair words and pretenses corrupt the minds of the simple, to the
dishonor of God, the grief of his Messengers, the offense of his People, and
the hurt and hazard of their own Souls.

Finally, That the very God of peace would sanctify you throughout, and
preserve your whole Spirit, Soul and Body blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is the hearty prayer of Your Servant for Jesus sake J.H.

Aug. 28.1657.

To the Christian READER.
THe Histories of all Ages do make it manifest, how prone the sinful hearts of
men are to deprave and corrupt the sincere Doctrines, and pure Institutions of
the Gospel. The Apostles (having received it from Christ, and being inspired
by his Spirit) delivered and left behind them unto the Churches, a perfect Rule
and Pattern for their Direction and Imitation; which they ought to have
followed and kept close unto: As in some sort, it seems they did for some short
space of time; as may be gathered from those words of Egesippus (an ancient
Historian, Vicinus Apostolorum temporum, Hieronym in Catalog. Bellar. de Scrip.
Eccles. an. 177 lib. 3. cap. 29
who lived near the Apostles times, and was contemporary with Justin Martyr,
and Athenagoras (mentioned by Eusebius: Ad ea usque tempora, virgo pura and
incorrupta mansit Ecclesia, etc. Unto those times ( viz. of the Apostles, and
that generation of men which by special favor had heard with their ears the
heavenly Wisdom of the Son of God) the Church remained a pure and uncorrupted
Virgin.

But corruptions grew on apace, SceMagd. Cent.
as the time of the revelation of Antichrist drew near, who by degrees so
deformed the beautiful face of Christianity through his alterations and
additions, that at length it looked almost quite like another thing, than it
was at the first: The mutations in the Church being not much unlike those in
the Jewish state, whereof Esaias thus complains: Isa 1.28
Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water.

In this deplorable condition did the first Reformers find the state thereof;
the weeds having so far over-topt the good grain, that it was a hard matter to
discern the one from the other, which yet, through Divine assistance, they did
in some measure, both showing and going before us in the way of Reformation.
And indeed much they did herein that have preceded us, for whom we have cause
to bless the Lord in this regard, having handed down Religion to us by much
more pure then they received it from those that went before them. But yet is
there much of this work remaining, the carrying on whereof unto further
perfection seems to be the proper task of this generation, which therefore
ought accordingly to be vigorously intended and attempted.

Now the best way to Reform, and bring things right, when through Tract of time
they have degenerated and grown crooked, is to have recourse to the first and
purest Ages, and to reduce them to the Primitive pattern and practice: Tertul
lib. de Praescript.
Omne genus, ad originem suam censeatur, necesse est. Doctrines therefore are
to be brought to, and tried by the Touchstone of the Word, (...). Exemplar 2 Timothy, 1.13.
Index sui and obliqui, the standard of Truth; that so what is found agreeable
thereunto, may be approved as sound, it being the pattern of sound words: And
what appears dissonant therefrom may be rejected as reprobate silver, and
counterfeit coin, Isa. 8.20 2 Cor. 4.4 1 Timothy 6.3, 4
forged by the Prince of darkness, improving that dismal darkness wherewith the
minds of men naturally are veiled and covered.

Discipline and Order ought to be scanned by those general rules in the Word
that refer to it, and by the example of the Apostles: the best Interpreters
whereof, are the general consent of the Churches of Christ, De Baptis. cont
Donat. l. 2. c. 7
(according to Augustines rule: Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec conciliis
institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum,
rectissime creditur) and the practice of those who next succeeded them: The
water being purer, the nearer it is to the Spring; and those who lived lest
remote from them, being presumed to be best acquainted with their manner of
proceeding, as having better opportunity then others to know their way in
matter of Fact: which is one of the principal uses to be made of the writings
of the ancients, and for which they justly deserve our due esteem and diligent
perusal.

As for the former of these; viz. Doctrines, those Worthies whom the Lord in
those latter days (wherein Antichrist was to be consumed by the spirit of his
mouth in the ministry of his servants) was pleased to raise up, and employ for
the rescue and release of captived Truth, and the refining of it from
Antichristian mixtures, by having recourse to the Word, and examining those
Doctrines that were commonly taught and received as the truths of God. By this
straight rule they through the assistance of the Spirit of truth, soon came to
see, and seeing to discover the obliquity of them, and by the blessing of the
Lord, made a happy progress to doctrinal reformation. The more to be admired,
and the goodness of the Lord therein magnified, if we consider what Anakims and
Goliahs they had to contend withal; in regard of the temporal power siding
with, and seconding them, the stream of the multitudes violently running with
them, (for all the world wondered after the Beast) and in regard of the deep
roo^ that those errors by reason of their long continuance, Rev. 13.3
had taken in the minds of men, custom with them having the force of a Law.

Yet so clearly did the Lord enable them to discern the truth from error, and
so wel-groundedly confident were they of the soundness of what they held, and
sandyness of what they oppugned, that they feared not to grapple with the
adversary notwithstanding all his advantages; putting to flight the armies of
the Aliens, each encounter proving a conquest; with their Rams-horns have they
batterd and made such breaches in the walls of Jericho, as shall never again be
repaired; yea to that height of skill and courage did they attain, that like
champions (having beaten him from the Scriptures) they durst challenge the
adversary at his own Weapon, and to assault him in that his supposed strong
hold of antiquity, which he had betaken himself unto for shelter: A challenge
not more boldly made (as far as to 600. years after Christ, the only time worth
the name of Antiquity) then wisely managed and stoutly maintained by that rare
Jewel of his time: Dr. Humphred in vita Iuelli.
so great is the truth, and will prevail.

As for the things that concern Discipline and Order, those choice Spirits
might happily the less heed them, as respecting only the beauty and wel-being of
the Church; having enough to do in dealing with those more weighty and
necessary things, whereupon the very being, at least the soundness of it as to
substantials did depend. Hence it came to pass that so much rubbish still
remained in our administrations after all the pains they had taken in purging;
so that though the languishing Church were well recovered in respect of the
danger her vitals were in, yet even to this day could she never attain unto her
native color and comeliness. A task which seems to belong unto us, and which
the Lord has reserved for this period of time, wherein the work of Reformation
is to be carried on to greater perfection. In order hereunto, and as making way
for it, we have seen the Divine providence bringing strange things to pass,
such as we yet scarce looked for, nor could conceive how they should be brought
about. What Mountains have been leveld and removed out of the way? what an heap
of humane inventions that had invaded the Worship and Ordinances of Christ, and
tyrannical usurpations in the Discipline of the Church, have been cast out and
abolished, though so riveted, and of such continuance, that, for their
pretended Right, they could plead Prescription and Possession time out of mind?
This was the Lords doing, and deservedly marvelous in our eyes. Moreover, what
a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication has the Lord poured out upon his people in
reference to this thing? How has he set it on upon their hearts as the proper
work of their day? What enquiring has there been after a right way? discussing
of what is dubious and uncertain, discoveries of what was dark and obscure; and
to what a height have the hopes and expectations of the Saints been raised of
the accomplishment of what has been foretold and promised concerning Sions
recovery of her Greatness and Glory, and her being made a praise in the earth?

All which call loudly upon us, each in our places, and according to what we
have received, to put to our helping hand and to afford our utmost assistance
for the promoting of this blessed work; and the rather, because they are so few
whose hearts have been made willing to set about and undertake it, and the
difficulties therein are so many and great; partly through the multiplicity of
corruptions that have been mingled with, and even incorporated into
Church-administrations, not easily to be severed from them; partly from the
violence of such as stand for, Consuetudo sine veritate, vetustas Erroris est.
Cyprian. Epist. ad Pompeium.. 12.
and strive to maintain them by arguments drawn from their pretended Antiquity
(though when they have done all, they are found to be no other then old
errors) and from the prudential necessity of them, in reference unto decency
and order. Whereunto may be added, the pertinacious humor of the generality
among us, crying up their great Diana, and eagerly opposing and frustrating
what they can, the endeavors of those that would remove them, and desire to
reduce things to the Primitive pattern: True Antiquity being through ignorance
decryed by the multitude under the name of Novelty; and what is but of
yesterday, and a later birth, fondly imagined to be, and doted on, as if ab
initio and of Apostolical institution.

Among other, the confusion in our Congregations as to the Members of them, all
heaped together without any distinction, is not the least remora and
obstrustion in the way of Reformation: which has created no small trouble, and
occasioned many hot contests among those, who have labored to regulate and
bring things into better order in this regard; the different apprehensions of
men in this particular, producing unseemly Animosityes, and sadning distances
between those, whose union would be exceeding amiable, and of considerable
advantage.

That a distinction of persons is necessary, is on all hands granted by the
friends of Reformation: But to find out what this ought to be, what are the
places or stations to be assigned to, and the privileges to be enjoyed by
them; how they are to be considered, and in what state to be accounted of,
according to their several capacities and qualifications, hic labor, hoc opus
est.

As an help hereunto was this Exercitation undertaken and intended: Wherein
from the best Antiquity it appears, that in the Primitive times there were in,
and belonging to the Church persons of several sorts and sizes, and accordingly
of several ranks and degrees; viz. Catechumens, incomplete, imperfect; also
adult, complete and perfect: recens nati and such as were in their minority;
also some grown up to maturity and of full age in an Ecclesiastical sense. And
that the ordinary way by which they passed from the one state into the other,
was the ancient rite of Imposition of hands or Confirmation; which through the
iniquity and corruption of the darker times, was so alterd (though not
altogether laid aside) that it was quite perverted from its first intendment,
the true use and end thereof being even lost and unknown, by reason whereof
great inconveniences and mischiefs have ensued and long prevailed, to the great
detriment of the Church; not in likelihood to be removed (as the fruitlesness
of endeavors hitherto have shown) but by the reduction of this laudable
practice into the Churches of Christ, the drift and scope of the following
discourse: which being but in part finished, Mr. John How
and communicated to a worthy and judicious * brother, had this approbation
returned in a few lines to the Author that partly procured its publication;
Sir, I have at length perused your papers, to my very great content and
satisfaction, and do hear return them with my hearty thanks for your happy
labor herein; and doubt not but the Church of God, when it comes to enjoy the
benefit of them (as I know it will be far from you to go about to defraud it of
what may prove so good an expedient, and I think the only one to extricate it
out of those many perplexing difficulties through which it is striving forwards
toward a Reformation) will find cause to thank you too, and to bless God for
you, who did in much mercy (as I trust) guide you to this undertaking, etc.

As it is here tendered to the perusal, and submitted unto the judgment of the
godly-wise: so is thy candid interpretation and friendly acceptances desired of
thee. If it be found to be a truth, the God of truth will make way for its
entertainment in the hearts of those that love the truth: If it may any whit
conduce to the settlement of the Churches peace, and the healing of the unhappy
breaches and differences among brethren, the Sons of Peace and Citizens of Sion
will gladly embrace it, and set upon the practice of it.

And that this may be the issue of this weak labor, thou art earnestly desired
by thy prayers to recommond it to the blessing of the Lord, by him who desires
to be found An unfeigned lover of Truth and Peace, I. H.

Christian READER.
HEaring of the following Treatise to be in the Press, and being desired to
give my thoughts thereof, I have adventured, according to the cognizance had of
it, to commend the main Contents, as useful to our present time. I had in my
hand some months past, a few sheets from the Author of the same Argument,
which now, I hear, is grown into a greater volume: The matter asserted therein,
was the due disposition, growth and preparation of the Baptized unto
Participation in the Lords Supper, collected from the Primitive doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, and testified by the concurrent votes of the Church in
some succeeding ages. In which, more than Dogmatical Faith, and Negative
holiness appeared to be requisite unto worthy Communicants in those times.

The proof of this, was the care taken of persons Baptized in their minority,
to nurture them up in the Faith, and orderly watching to the rule of Christ:
And after due experience, Confirmation of them, and admittance to Communion in
higher Mysteries.

This Confirmation or Approbation of the baptized being now adult, and making
confession of repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is by
some glorious lights in the Church understood in that phrase of Imposition of
Hands annexed to Baptisms, Hic unus locus abunde testaeur hujus Ceremoniae
Originem fluxisse ab Apostolis, etc. Hic locus ad Paedobaptismi approbationem
facit, etc. Calv. in Heb. 6.2.
Heb. 6.2. Whence it is said, That this One place does abundantly testify,
that the Original of this Ceremony flowed from the Apostles, though afterward
it was turned into Superstition, as other of the best Ordinances of God. And
again, That this place makes to the proof of Infani-Baptism.

What grounding Infant Baptism or Confirmation by Imposition of hands have in
this Scripture, I will not now dispute? but unless there were more express and
firm ground for both, we might be at a loss concerning these Ordinances. What
if it should be said, That Jewish Baptisms and Imposition of hands are meant
here by the Apostle writing to the Hebrews? and that these among them did teach
Repentance from dead works, and Faith in God, and the Resurrection of the dead,
and Eternal Judgment?

All this is truth: These were among the rest of the Jewish Rites, the very
Principles and Fundamental Elements which taught Christ, though most of them
were dull of hearing, and did not understand him by them.

But let this pass; As to the Initiation of Church-Infants, we have a sure word
of Covenant that cannot be broken. And that this must be done by Baptism, must
be granted, or else another way discovered. And as for the Confirmation of them
solemnly by prayer and acceptance to Communion, after their parental nurture in
the Elements of Religion, and experience of their profiting in faith and
godliness by Ecclesiastical institution; the Author in this Treatise, I hope,
will give sufficient proof.

The abuse of this by Popish Blasphemies, and Prelatical Corruptions cannot be
denied, so that it has been odious and ridiculous; but to restore it to
Primitive purity, in looking more exactly to the education of Infants in the
Church, and nurturing them according to their capacities, and at length
approving and establishing them in the truth of the Gospel, cannot but be
judged rational and Christian, if we take these Considerations.

1. That the Light of Nature guides, as to help children according to
capacity, to natural perfections, so to know above all the God of their
Natures: It is an opinion worse than Brutish not to season that tender age with
some things of God, as it can receive them. It is not taking Gods Name in vain,
reasonably to make him known to the weakest understanding that it may grow
therein.

2. That the Ordinance of God in the Old Church for the appearing of the Males
before him three times at least in the year, was to nurture them and bring them
to more acquaintance with God, and Confirm them in his Truth. And is there not
need to keep Analogy, with that for perfecting Souls toward God under the
Gospel?

3. That the many Exhortations in the Gospel for watching over the Flock, to
feed the lambs, to perfect, to stablish Souls in the truth, cannot but imply
the necessity and usefulness of such a practice in the Church for the nurturing
of tender ages, and at last Confirming them in Christ. To the edifying whereof,
I am confident the Author has his main scope, and I shall pray he may not miss
of his aim. The Lord own that which is his in the Work, and make it prosper. In
him I am,

Plymoth, Aug. 10. 1657. Thine to serve thee, G. HUGHES.

Christian READER.
IT is now many years since I wrote a passage in a book, called, The Sains
Rest, Part, 4: Chap. 4. Sect 3. which since I printed some misunderstood, as if
I affirmed the sufficiency of Baptism alone for qualifying persons to be
admitted by us to the Church Communion of the Adult: Whereas I there express
that [A Sober Profession of Repentance and Faith in Christ] if they be adult,
is necessary to qualify them first for that Baptism, and that they must after
[produce that Evidence, not blotted by Heresy or Scandalous sin,] In which I
plainly supposed that those that were Baptized in infancy, must also at age
produce the Evidence of an Infant Baptism, upon the Parents profession, with
their own actual profession when adult. But because I found some understood not
that which is written in few words, I have since diverse times explained it in
several Treatises, especially in one of Infant Baptism, and one lately of Right
to Sacraments. In the former, many years since I found it meet in dealing with
the Anabaptists, to plead for the restoring of Solemn, Public Confirmation of
all that have bin Baptized in Infancy, as their solemn entrance into the state
of Adult Members; and I presumed to make an humble motion to the Magistracy and
Ministry to take it into consideration, and (page 120, 121, 122.) gave in some
proofs of the necessity of a personal Covenanting of the Adult, besides the
Infant-Covenant by their parents.

What others thought of this Motion, I know not, but my Reverend Brethren of
this County, who after Associated for the better managing of their Ministerial
work, did so far approve the matter, that they readily concurred to make it one
Article of their agreement at our Association, in these words, [R. 7. We shall
distinguish between Infant-Members and Adult: and for the former we shall take
their Parents profession; and for the latter we shall expect their own. And
though it cannot be determined just to a day or year when any is past his
Infant Church Estate, yet none must be Enrolled and accounted among Adult and
Perfect Members, till they personally and publicly shall make their
Profession; whether it be only of their Faith and Obedience to Christ, that
they may be esteemed Adult Members of the Universal Church; or also their
consent to be Members of a particular Church.] We thought not meet to make
Imposition of hands then an Article of our Agreement, because its possible some
good men might differ in it. But the necessity of public personal profession
we agreed of. But still the most are too slack in the execution. Yesterday in
the conclusion of a Discourse of Conversion, I thought it my duty to motion
such a thing to my Auditory, as the public owning of Conversion, and lamenting
the sins of unregeneracy, and profession of Resolutions for a Holy life: And
presently the same day this Treatise came to be offered to my perusal, though
my judgment be not of that weight as to add much to the reputation of it, yet
the Treatise has that Evidence which I hope has added somewhat to my judgment.

The Reverend Author I am utterly unacquainted with: but in this Learned,
Judicious, Pious Exercitation, I see much more of him than the face. The
subject I take to be of very great usefulness; and the manner of handling it
needs not my commendations. I hope the Lord has in compassion to this
distempred Church, sent them this Reforming, Healing Truth, by the hand of this
our Reverend Brother. It is a point that should be entertained with universal
alacrity, upon several accounts.

1. Because it is so commonly received by Protestants; and therefore among us
the less liable to opposition; though unhapily the practice of too many has
overlooked it, yet by the easier, cheaper way of writing and speaking for it,
the most have given it a fair complemental entertainment.

2. Because it is so excellently suited to the joint promoteing of Holiness
and Unity, that it seems a salve just fitted to our sore; where one part runs
away from Purity, for fear of Divisions; and the other runs away from Unity,
for fear of Impurity.

3. And withal, our great sin against God and his Church, by so long and
common a neglect of this Duty, should awake tender consciences to penitency,
and the readier obedience for the time to come.

Though the Papists themselves do agree with us for Confirmation, yet their
Confirmation and ours is not indeed the same thing. The Council of Trent were
so much offended at the Protestants difference from them about Confirmation,
that they thundered against them diverse Anathema's [Si quis dixerit
Confirmationem Baptizatorum otiasam Ceremoniam esse, and non potius verum and
proprium sacramentum, aut olim nihil aliud fuisse quam Catechesin quandam qua
adolescentiae proximi fidei suae rationem coram Ecclesia exponebant, Anathema,
sit. 3. siquis dixerit sanctae Confirmationis ordinarium Ministrum non esse
solum Episcopum sed quemvis simplicem Sacerdotem, Anathema sit. -- But these
Fathers might have lest out the nihil aliud, when they read our Divines
maintaining the use of Exploration, Prayer, Approbation with Imposition of
hands also, in this duty. But I hope no Protestants now will disown or cast by
that sort of Confirmation, which the Papal Council cursed our Ancestors for
maintaining, I confess this duty was so timely corrupted, that has given the
Papists the greater pretense to Antiquity for their way! They did betimes make
such haste to it, as that they annexed it close to Baptism; and they quickly
introduced the Crossing and Chrism. But from the beginning it was not so.

If any call to us for Scripture proof of the duty of this Confirmation;

1. This Reverend Author has here given him some. 2. And some I have given in
the aforesaid Treatise of Infant Baptism, page 120 etc. But we must desire you
to distinguish between the Name and the Thing.
1. If your question be only of the Name.

1. We will not quarrel about a word, so you will but grant and practice the
duty. 2. And yet the name [ Confirmation] is so fit, and so ancient, and so
generally used, that we know no reason to lay it by at the groundless cavils of
every excepter.
2. If it be the Work it self that you question which part is it?

1. That Infant covenanting by Parents will serve only for an Infant
Church State and Privileges, is past all question. Otherwise an Atheist might
be saved, or at least have communion with the Church upon his Infant-title. But
its past doubt that an infant-title is upon the parents faith (for nothing is
required beforehand, but if he be the seed of a believer) and this cease when
he comes to age, if he add not the title of the adult, which is personal faith
(or profession, coram Ecclesia.) 2. And if the Adult must have a new title, the
Church must have notice of it, before she can admit them to the Communion of
the Adult: for we judge not of things that have no manifestation. 3. And the
solemn personal covenanting with God, (or owning the Baptismal Covenant) which
is this very title, I have in the place forecited proved from Scripture, and it
has been the constant practice of the Church. 4. And for the solemnization of
it by Imposition of hands, as you have here somewhat offered you for it from
Scripture, so the Church has constantly used it, which should not be a
contemptible consideration in our eyes: and if any scrupulous brother shall
yield to the Duty and refuse the Ceremony, we shall make it no matter for a
breach of Communion, but allow him his liberty, as he allows us ours. If any
say that this is commonly done already, in that our children come to Church,
and by degrees make a profession of personal faith, and also the very reception
of the Eucharist itself, is an actual profession.
I answer, 1. As to the latter, it is true: But it is a profession connexed
with such high privileges, that a precedent Profession is necessary to prove
men's title to them As to the former, If the profession he not solemn, serious,
understanding, explicit, it will be next to none, and unfit to attain its
ends. Some men in avoiding Forms, do destroy the Substance of duties, and make
them mere Transitory, Obscure, Insignificant acts. And by a disp^ting
perverseness they would reason us down to the very lowest degree, as the
profane would do about the substance of godliness: and because an implicit and
hardly-discernable Covenant or signification of consent, may prove the truth of
our Churches, therefore in days of Liberty we must go no higher; though
experience tells us, that many consent, not as not understanding the thing they
should have consented to! God in Nature has made the tongue to express the
mind, and yet some quarrel with us for calling them to this natural expression;
and if we ask them an account of their Faith and holiness, or whether they are
Christians or Church Members, we are supposed to do them wrong, because we take
it not for granted, or discern not their mind by their coming to Church, or
some more dumb and uncertain signs, even when we see the common ignorance,
ungodliness and looseness of the world, and multitudes maliciously opposing
holiness. Sure I am, that the adult in the Apostles days were called to
public profession of their Faith and Repentance, even at the time of their
baptizing, (if baptized at age): and I doubt not but that will prove the
continued necessity of such profession of the Adult, though they were baptized
in infancy upon another account. The benefits that this Ordinance of
Confirmation upon solemn personal profession is like to bring to the Church,
are very many and very great.

1. It is like to be a great means to destroy the groundless security and
false hopes of multitudes of the ungodly: Now they trust to this, that they are
Christians and regenerate, because they are baptized and come to Church, with
such like grounds; but then they would be brought to see that more is
necessary: when their personal conversion, faith, repentance, hope, love are
inquired after, and they understand that an account must be solemnly given of
them, or else they shall remain visibly in the rank of the impenitent and
unbelievers, or of mere seekers after a Christian faith, and when they see a
Visible difference made by a public Ordinance between Believing Penitent
persons and other men, this is like to do much to awaken them to look after a
true converted state that they may be Confirmed: And though some will but speak
to avoid the shame that follows their abode in an unconfirmed state, that so
they may be taken to be Christians, yet I should rejoice that Christianity may
have such an advantage, as may entice men generally to desire to seem converted
men; for while they are learning how to seem so, they may meet with that which
may teach them to be so; in the mean time discouragements are removed and
godliness it self by their profession honored.

2. It will do very much to satisfy the common scruples of Ministers and
Churches about the qualifications of Communicants, and end the differences
about it.

3. It may much tend to the agreement of the Presbyterians, Congregationals,
Erastians and others about the quality of Church Members, and general admission
to the Lords Supper.

4. If it calm not the Anabaptists, yet it will answer their greatest
objection; which is, That Adult Baptism lays a most solemn obligation on men,
and without it most are brought to delude themselves by a confidence in their
infant baptism: Whereas we shall show them that we take a mere Infant-title to
be insufficient for the Adult as well as they, and that it cease if personal
faith be not added: and that we are desirous as well as they that the fullest
engagements be laid on the adult; and that so great a work should be publicly
and solemnly done, that the obligation may be the greater, and the tarnsitus
into so desirable a condition, may by the solemnity be made the more observable
to all, especially to the careless that are apt without such solemn
discrimination to overlook it: And so Confirmation will attain those ends,
which they mistakingly think rebaptizing must obtain.

Object. But who be they that you would have Confirmed? the truly converted
only, or those that profess so much, or those that profess a common sort of
faith.

Answ. I have spoken to this in my Disputations about Right to Sacraments, at
large. The case is easy: Sincerity we know not certainly in others: Profession
with seeming seriousnes and understanding, is undoubtedly the sign by which we
must judge of it.

He that Professes true Faith, Repentance, Love and Resolution for a Holy
life, does profess Regeneration: and no lower profession must serve the turn.

Object. But this will bring up an affected formal show of Holiness, when men
are thus tempted to make a profession of it, before the experience of it on
their souls do constrain them.

Answ. 1. Some accidental evils will follow the noblest and most necessary
duty: but the good that follows will incomparably weigh down that evil.

2. And do you think that this formal show of Holiness is not a better
condition, at least, as to others, and the prosperity of the Gospel, then to
have men despisers and persecuters of Holiness? When Holiness is under a
general reputation and owned by all, O what an attractive it is to the minds of
the ignorant, and how fair are they for a true conversion! But when it is the
common scorn, what danger are they in by examples and discouragements?

The Church is at the best when there are most Hypocrites: for when there are
most Hypocrites, there are also most true Christians. Hypocrites may be
miserable themselves, but they may much help the Church when Heretics,
profane men, and persecuters much hinder it.

Object. But this Confirmation will grow in time but to a Ceremony: Careless
Ministers will Confirm any body, and huddle it up as the Bishops did with the
Boys, Confirming an hundred in half an hour whom they never spoke a word to,
nor saw before.

Answ. All Ordinances will be used as the persons be that use them. Bad men
will abuse them; godly serious Ministers will do otherwise. And if this should
move us to lay them quite by, it may move us also to do so by Sacraments and
other Ordinances, which the careless will use carelessely.

Two passages in this Book I suspect some will stumble at;

One is making the Catechumens to be a sort of Church Members. But this is
easily decided.

1. The Catechumeni strictly so called that are unbaptized: Are 1. Some of them
true believers, and these are therefore Members of the Church as invisible. 2.
Some of them do Profess true Faith and Repentance openly, though the Pastors
have yet delayed their Baptism: These are Members of the Visible Church, as a
King not yet Crowned, as a Soldier not yet Listed, though Verbally Contracted;
as married persons contracted but not solemnly married, have their relations:
They are incompletely Visible Members. 3. The same persons when Baptized are
Completely Visible Members. 4. But some of the Catechumeni are only yet
learning what Christianity is, and do not yet know it, or at least consent to
it, or discover this consent, though they are willing to be instructed; And
these are not Members of the Church, but in the way to it; being under that
first teaching that makes Disciples, and not under that second (to observe all
things commanded) proper to Disciples.


2. And as for the Catechumens, more largly so called, that is, such children
as were baptized, they are Infant-Church-Members (till they are Adult, and then
their Membership cease, if they add not the Profession of personal Faith.

The other passage is, That (page 60.) the Confirmed only are made the Object
of Excommunication. But undoubtedly the Reverend Author there means not those
only that are solemnly confirmed by Imposition of hands; but any that have
openly owned their Baptismal Covenant, and have been thereupon admitted into
the Communion of the Adult.

I conclude with this earnest request to all the godly Ministers of these
Nations, that they would take this matter into their serious consideration,
whether God do not offer you by the hand of this Reverend Brother the very Key
that must let us into Unity and Reformation? and whether ^t be not for want of
the right Key, that we have stood wrangling and groping so long at the door.
Pass not this over with a bare reading, but Assemble together, and consult
whether this be the way of God or not: If you are unsatisfied, desire the
Author to confirm his Doctrine of Confirmation, and answer your Objections. If
you see it to be the way, in the Name of God let us be true to God, the Church,
the Truth and our selves, and presently all agree upon the practice. If we will
not, it will be said by this age and posterity, That it was the idleness, or
unfaithfulness, or contentiousnesse of Ministers, that undid England.

But if we will be unanimously up and doing, God will be with us, and we have
reason to expect most blessed effects; and I doubt not but England will find
cause in the fruits of our labors, to praise God for the endeavors of this
Reverend Author. These are the persuasions of Your unworthy fellow servants,
RICH. BAXTER.

Aug. 21.1657.

TO THE Berean READERS.
TRuth is so precious a thing, especially that which refers to our information,
for the better regulating of our affairs to the glory of God, that both it, and
the feet of them that bring it should be beautiful in our eyes, and welcome to
us. Many truths of this concernment, if not of their own nature, for that of
godliness, as appears by the many controversies about it, is without
controversy a great Mystery: Yet either by reason of our dim-sightedness,
being not able to see afar off, nor to penetrate into the depth and bottom of
them, or by reason of the abusive traditions, and corrupt glosses with which
for many ages they have been clouded and overcast, both which do exceedingly
hinder our understanding of them. I say upon these and such like accounts, many
truths seem not to be so clear, but that they still need a further clearing.

Among others, such as relate to Church Discipline and order, have for a long
time been under debate, and not without some considerable advantage, though I
humbly conceive we have not attained so far as to be already perfect.

It remains therefore that we would press forward, and not be so passionately
fond of our own prepossest conceptions, as not to have the patience to consider
what may be offered to us, especially, by such as are well-wishers to Sion, and
desirous to see the Gospel-Temple in its beauty.

If any persons are spirited to search after further Knowledge in these affairs,
to dig for it as for hid treasure, and when they have found a vein of golden
Ore, to refine and stamp it for us, we should be in readiness to receive the
truth in the Love of it, and to pay it the tribute and homage of obedience, for
the sake of the God of truth, whose image and superscription it bears.

What great and profitable pains my much honored Friend the Reverend Author of
the ensuing Exercitation, has taken in this one particular presented to
consideration, and with what Curiousness, without curiosity? with what (as the
Apostle) Craft, without fraud? with what Pomp, without pride? with what
Learning, without ostentation? with what Brevity, without obscurity? In a word,
with how sweet a Religious ingenuity, and to what noble ends, he has laid,
managed and finished this admirable plot, you will best perceive by the view and
perusal of it? and though my opinion be of very little signification yet I
cannot forbear to say, That as to the substance and main of the design, I judge
it to be of so considerable an importance, that I do not see how it can be
neglected without a very great prejudice to Church Communion; to say no more.
Happily some may be so nice as to be offended with the name, and dislike
Confirmation for fear of Bishoping, as if that old fashiond-garment had but a
piece of new-nam'd cloth put to it, and dressed up in another mode; if it were
so, can no good come out of Nazareth? Bonus odor veritatis ex re qualibet.

But if any are under such a fear, I think I may assure them that they are more
afraid than hurt, yea, afraid where no fear is, as they will quickly find, if
they but please to come and see.

As for you Noble Bereans, I shall detain you no longer, but to pray you that
according to your wonted gentleness and Ingenuity, you would consider of what
is said, and to search the Scriptures to see whether these things are so.

Now the God of truth give us a right understanding of all truth, that we may
Know and believe, love and live the truth as it is in and from Jesus, who is
the way, the truth, and the life. Vincat veritas, let truth go on conquering
and to conquer; which is the hearty prayer of the Authors much obliged, and
ambitious to be his and every man's humble Servant in the service of Christ
Jesus our Lord, who died for our Sins, and Rose again for our Justification.

RALPH VENNING.

The Contents to be Prefixed.
1. THe several acceptations of Imposition of hands p. 2 2 The condition of
Catechumens p. 8 3 The several steps whereby they proceeded unto full
Membership p. 11. ad 23 4 How Confirmation did perfect Chuch-membership p. 16 5
Infant Baptized completed by Confirmation p. 23 6 Confirmation proved 1 By
Scripture p. 27 2 By testimony of the Fathers p. 31 3 By Councils p. 35 4 By
the judgment and practice of the Waldenses p. 37 5 By the judgment of the
Reformed Divines p. 40
7 Romish corruptions in Confirmation enumerated and removed p. 43 8 Ten
inferences drawn from the premises p. 52 9 The manner how Confirmation is to be
used p. 62 10 The duties of ministers for the recovery of Confirmation p. 69.
where 1 The duty of Catechizing is handled, as to the matter and manner of its
performance p. 74 2 Directions are set down by way of quere for the practice of
Confirmation p. 93
11 The duty of people in order to the facilitating of this work p. 100, where
1 Some objections against this course are answered p. 103 2 The duties of
parents and masters of families are set down p. 117
12 Encouragements to this duty drawn 1 From the benefit that will hence ensue
1 To Ministers p. 129 2 To domestic governors p. 134 3 To the persons
confirmed p. 141 4 To the Church p. 148 5 To the ignorant and profane p. 156
2 From the glory that will hence redound to God p. 160

A.
Abraham's trained or Catechized ones 119 Advantages of superiors in families
117 Adult persons to be upon their own account 25 Adult must be active in
Ordinances 26 Adult baptized liable to personal service 55, 56 Aggravation of
sin 144 Altar Damascenum 105 Apostles Creed, why so called 78 Apostles creed
as now, when finished 80 Areopagitae encomium 33 Assemblies Catechism 82
Auditors who, and why so called 12 Augustines Rule 32 Authority to be in a
Catechist 90
B.
Badge of Christians 151 Basis of Christianity 77 Baptismatum dies 12 Baptism
alone gives not right to the Lords Supper 54 Baptizati, illuminati, initiati
iidem 13 Baptized, and not Excommunicated are not full Church Members 61 Beauty
of the Church, wherein 69
C.
(...) quid significat 118 Care of preserving the honor of Ordinances 155
Cassander 31 (...) 86 Cateche^ical heads 81 Catechists and Catechumenium 11
Catechists office of great use 74 Catechists called fathers 92 Catechizing
necessary 76 Catechizing necessary to Reformation 92 Catechizing an help to
hearing the Word 92 Catechumens of the Church 8 Catechumens instructed 11
Catechumens of 2 sorts 8 Catechumens, the second sort 23 Cavil of Anabaptists
removed 156 Ceremonies observed about Baptism 21 Charge of parents 139 Children
of believers, how in Covenant 52 Children and servants domestic catechumens
119 Christians incomplete 15 Chrysme an imitation of Jewish unction 15 Chrysm
has no ground in Scripture 16 Chrysme how it perfected baptism 16 Chrysostom's
judgment 133 Church Membership of a magnetical nature 147 Circumspection
necessary 115 Clinici, who they were 34 Commonness breeds contempt 154 Common
faith Tit. 1.4. 78 Competentes who, and why so called 12 Competentes gave up
their names 12 Communion between Christians 150 Concealed ignorance dangerous
110 Confession of Gods name gives him his praise 160 Confession of faith
necessary in 2 cases 160 Confirmation what 22 Confirmation grounded on Heb.
6.2. 27 Confirmation an appendix to baptism 27 Confirmation originally from the
Apostles 29 Confirmation transmitted persons to higher rank 30 Confirmation
still practiced in the Church 31 Confirmation proved by the Fathers 33
Confirmation proved by Councils 35 Confirmation commended 42 Confirmation
properly no Sacrament 44 Confirmation why called a Sacrament 44 Confirmation
purged and restored 51 Confirmation no novelty 71 Confirmation a weighty thing
73 Confirmation to be performed in the Church 97 Confirmation necessary in all,
how 107 Confirmation a mean to holiness 144 Confirmed only admitted to the
Eucharist 21 Confirmed have cause to praise the Lord 165 Consent in adult
requisite to full membership 57 Corruptions in Confirmation 43 Course best, to
bring things right 62 Cyrils Lectures 75 Cyrus his Exhortation 127
D.
Danger of admitting unworthy to the Lords Supper 101 Darkness occasioned the
Churches injury 71 Declaration of admission 99 Dedication of our selves to God
163 Deep Mysteries 83 D^erings judgment of Confirmation 30 Defects in
Confirmation to be supplied 67 Denial of privileges to non-confirmed no injury
61 Deuteronomy. 6.7. expounded 85 Difference between Cyprian and Stephen 6 Difference
to be put between persons 134 Discharge of parents 139 Discipline domestic
necessary 124 Disorders in discipline 105 Dissatisfaction breeds distance 151
Drawing how spoken of God 69 Duties of Parents and Masters 117
E
Education of children necessary 74 Eli's sin 123 Engaging of great force 145
Englands excellency 104 (...) 23 Equality in Fundamentals 77 Evil of opposing
reformation 106 Evil of admitting the ignorant 108 Evil of wilful ignorance 110
Eulogiae what 9 Eucharist why called the Communion 23 Examples of parents care
in instructing 120 Excellency of the Scriptures 113 Excommunication respects
the confirmed only 60 Exemplary conversation in Governors 116
F
Faith and love the sum of Christianity 116 Familiarity in Catechizing 86
Fidelis, who 23 Folly of ^iding ignorance 111 Force of examples good and bad
126 Free admittance to the confirmed 138 Frequency in catechizing 84 Fruit of
discipline 124 Fruit of good education 143 Fruits of love 148 Fundamental
truths to be taught 76 Fundamental truths few 79 Genesis 14.14. Expounded 119 Gods
goodness to England 103 Gods presence efficacious 153 Gods goings in souls,
matter of his praise 165 Gospel preached here from the beginning 103 in
Tiberius reign 104 Governors ought to further the fruit of ordinances 122
Governors, to watch over the conversations of their family 124 Gravity to be in
a catechist 90 Ground of profaneness among us 106 Ground of Christian love 151
H.
Harmony in the exercise of confirmation 93 Heb. 6.2. Expounded 27 Heb. 12.2.
Expounded 149 Hierom. Expounded 34 Hieroms condenscension 87 Hieroms counsel
118 Holiness of life requisite to confirmation 96.116 wherein it consists 96
Holiness press't upon the catechumens 116 Holiness fits Gods house 153 Honor
of the Church 154
I.
(...) Corripere. Erudire 91 Jehovah Shammah 152 (...) 23 Ignorant and
scandalous to be debard from communion 132 Ignorant aged to be dealt with as
children 107 Imposition of hands, the several kinds of it 2 Imposition of
hands, the way of reconciling penitents 6 Imposition of hands, the gesture of
prayer 2 Imposition of hands commendable 97 At first the only Rite in
confirmation 98 Imposition of hands in different 98 Infan^ confirmation a
popish error 46 Infant baptized and adult. 2. distinct classes 54 Instances of
debarring from communion 132 Instruction, the duty of domestic governors 118
Joy of faithful ministers 130 Junilius 89
K
Knowledge of fundamentals sufficient 94 Knowledge necessary to holiness 110
L
L^cedemonian law 125 Love the bond of christians 150
M
Matter of the catechism 76 Means ineffectual without a blessing 114 Method of
catechism 81 Mildness to be in a catechist 91 Milk for babes 77 Ministers to
know the state of the people 129 (...) 23 (...) 17 Mysteries of the sacraments
concealed from catechumens 13 why so 14
N
Names given in to be recorded 100 Near relation and affection between
church members 147 Noah's seven precepts 10 None to be exempted from profession
95
O
Obligation of the confirmed 144 Obstruction of the reformation, whence 102
Original sin 135 Oversight of the first reformers 105
P
(...) 91 Parents care for frequenting ordinances 121 Parisiensis complaint 47
Passover, chief among the Jews 25 Pastors care 76 Pastors office 129 Penitents
how reconciled 6 why by imposition of hands 60 Peoples preparedness, an help to
reformation 68 People to be convin^'t of their duty 69 1 Pet. 3.15. Expounded
162 Persons ought to offer themselves to confirmation 59 Popish chrysme in
confirmation 44 Popish form of confirmation 45 Popish administrator in
confirmation 45 Popish ceremonies in confirmation 49 Popish end of confirmation
48 Prayer obtains wisdom 114 Praise the way of glorifying God 164 Pride
restrained confirmation to bishops 46.51 Private instruction useful 76
Privilege of believers children 24 Privilege of the confirmed 93 Privilege of
christian parents 137 Privilege of christian children 142 (...) Profane are to
be kept or cast out 97 Profession of faith necessary 94 Profession of faith to
be public 95 Profession without practice vain 115 Prosely^^ portae among the
Jews 10 Purity the churches beauty 152
Q
Qualification for church members 48 Qualification of a catechist 74 Question
and answer catechetical form 88
R
Ready reception the peoples duty 72 Real conviction efficacious 158 Recovery
of confirmation our duty 71 Reformation received here soon 104 Refusal of
reformation no small sin 107 Refusers of instruction incapable of communion 102
Register useful 99 Religious children a joy to parents 135 Religious servants a
joy to their masters 136 Reproofs by catechists necessary 91
S
Sanctifying the sabbath charged on governors 121 Satisfaction to ministers by
confirmation 131 Satisfaction from persons requisite 152 Seal of the Lord 19
(...) who they were 11 Seeking after knowledge a great duty 112 Self-conceit
dangerous 157 Semblance of confirmation in the reformed churches 41 Shame a
mean to personal reformation 158 Solemn engagements 146 Steps to full
membership 5. 11 Study of the scriptures, the way to wisdom 113 Submission to
confirmation, peoples duty 100 Sum of fundamentals 79 Symbolum magnum 80 Sions
enlargement her childrens joy 148
T
(...) 23 Thankfulness to God due from the confirmed 141 2 These. 3.14.
Expounded 159
U
Unction in baptism 2. fold 7 Unction a Sacrament in a large sense 19 Unworthy
not to be admitted to the Lords supper 101 Unworthy to be excluded from
communion 154
W.
Waiting at wisdoms gate, the way to knowledge 112 Woldenses testimony for
confirmation 37 Word, a perfect rule 70
ERRATA.
In M. Hughes Epistle p. 1. l. 22. for watching r walking.

In M. Baxters Epistle p. 1. l. 4. for printed r. perceived. Page 13,
adumbrare, read adumbrate. p. 14. there r. these. p. 15. perfectus r. perfectes
p. 20. assecultus r. assecutus p. 21. nequa r neque p. 21. data r data est p.
22. referter r refertur p. 28 positions r expositions p. 30 Scrinian r Scrinia
p. 33. Ridus r Fidus p. 34. invise renter r inviserentur p. 24. to be lamented,
quodque r quoque, p. 37. opara r. opera; p. 39. reputatem r reputatum p. 44 to
testify r. do testify p. 48. multi r multo p. 48 quam r quum p. 58. by the
Lord, r for the Lord p. 77. p^^cht r pitched upon p. 81. fittest r fit Test p.
82 lost r was lost p. 89 instructed r entrusted p. 108 add, be p. 110 imports,
r in part p. 12^ libris r liberis p. 131 puor r pudor p. 132 vouchsafed r
vouched p. 144. how r how much.

Confirmatio Rediviva, OR, An EXERCITATION UPON CONFIRMATION.
SEeing that Confirmation (the subject of this following discourse) falls and is
comprehended under one acception of Imposition of hands; and in that sense, as
the words are Synonimous, so is the thing signified by both: the same being
called Confirmation, from the Effect and end, and Imposition of hands, from the
Rite and gesture therein used and observed; whence it comes to pass, that in
the writings of the Ancients, the same thing is expressed and often to be
understood by both these Terms. I think it requisite to premise a few things
briefly concerning the Nature and Use, or End of this Ceremony.

Imposition of hands, was Simplicissimus ritus, a most Simple rite made use of
under both the Old and New Testament, Altar. Damase.
being none other then gestus orant is vel been dicentis, Rivet. in Genesis
exercit. 48.. ul.
quo manu imposit a persona indicatur pro qua preces and benedictiones
funduntur, ut impetretur gratia. The gesture of him that prayed or blessed,
whereby, the hand being laid on, the person for whom prayers or blessings were
poured forth, was pointed out. De Baptis. cont. Donatist. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Nihil aliud est (inquit Augustine.) nisi-oratio super hominem. It is none other
(says Augustine) then prayer over a man. And it is divided by some into these
four species; Curatoriam, Consecratoriam, Confirmatoriam, and Reconsiliatoriam.

But the several kinds according to the various ends and uses of it, may be
collected, and will best appear from those places of Scripture, wherein we find
mention to be made of it. And upon enquiry we shall find that it was made use
of,

1. In the Old Testament, and that upon sundry occasions: 1. In Benediction, or
blessing of persons: So the Patriarch Jacob in blessing the sons of Joseph,
laid his hands upon their heads, as Genesis 48.14, Pelarg. in loc.
15 symbolum erat gratiae coelestis, quae ceu largissima manu a deo
conferebatur in pios. It was a sign of celestial grace, which, as it were with
a most bountiful hand was conferred upon the godly. 2. In Consecration and
Designation of persons called to holy Functions: So Number. 8.10. thou shall bring
the Levites before the Lord, and the children of Israel shall put their hands
upon the Levites: They were by this sign to put the charge and service of the
Church upon the Levites, Ainsworth in loc.
and to Consecrate them unto God in their name. So also was Joshua Ordained by
Moses to succeed him in his government, as Numb. 27.18. The Lord said unto
Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay
thine hand upon him; together wherewith, probable it is, that he received a
greater measure of the Spirit, fitting him for that high office whereunto he
was called; as those words do seem to imply, Deuteronomy. 34.9. Joshua the son of Nun
was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him.
Pelarg. in loc.
Majore auctus est Sapientae Spiritu, and plus quam antea animatus; ob
intervonientem manuum impositionem, quae non in ne fuit gratiae coelests (...)
He was enriched with a larger Spirit of wisdom, and more animated then before,
for, or by the intervention of Imposition of hands, which was no empty Symbol
of celestial Grace. 3. In Oblation, or offering up of their sacrifices: Levit.
8.14. He brought the bullock for the sin-offering, and Aaron and his sons laid
their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin-offering; the like is said
of the Levites, Number. 18.12. Professi eoritu, se peccatis renunciantes, Pelarg.
in loc.
deonerare illa in Christum, factum pro nobis peccatum. Professing by that
rite, that renouncing their sins, they did lay the burden of them upon Christ
that was made sin for us, according to that in Levit. 16.21. 4. In bearing
Witness: as Levit. 24.14. Bring forth him that has cursed without the camp,
and let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the
Congregation stone him, Willet. in loc.
to signify the truth of their testimony; using also a kind of Imprecation,
that his sin might light upon his head.


2. It was made use of also under the New Testament: and that, 1. In
Benediction, or blessing: as Mar. 10.16. He took the young children up in his
arms, put his hands upon them, Cartwright. Harmon.
and blessed them: Vt impositione manuum and precatione ad Deum pro illis, bona
reportarent -- Deum pro illis precando, gratiam and dona coelestia in illos
contulit. That by Imposition of hands, and prayer to God for them, they might
obtain good things; by praying to God for them, he conferred grace and heavenly
gifts upon them. 2. In curing diseases and healing the sick: Mar. 6.5 and he
could do no mighty work there, save that he laid his hands on a few sick folks
and healed them; which is one of the signs promised to follow those that should
believe in the name of Christ, Mark. 16.18. they shall lay their hands on the
si^k and they shall recover: And thus accordingly did Paul cure of his fever,
the father of Publius, Acts 28.8 3. In ordination or setting persons apart unto
Ecclesiastical offices. Thus was Timothy Ordained by laying on of the hands of
the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.
Pisrat. and Cornel. lapid in loc.
(...) i.e. Donum, facultatem, munus d^cendi verbum Dei. The gift, i.e. power,
the office of Preaching the word of God, which the Lord was graciously pleased
to call him unto, and furnish him for. Thus also the apostle giving him a
charge to be careful and circumspect whom he admitted to office, he so
expresses himself, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be
partaker of other men's sins. Impositio manuum Ordinationem significat, Calv. in
loc.
prohibet enim ne quem minus adhuc probatum nimia facilitate admittat.
Imposition of hands signifies Ordination; for he forbids him too easily to
admit any one that is not sufficiently proved. So Acts 13.3. and when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. Unless we
understand this place (seeing these were in office before) of their solemn
mission about that special work, which the Holy Ghost had designed them unto:
Nam solenne hoc and Ordinarium fuit Judaeis, Cav. in loc.
ut quoties aliquem Deo commendarent, manus impone^ent. For this was usual and
ordinary among the Jews, that as often as they would commend any one to God,
they would lay on hands. 4. In Confirmation, and prayer for the establishment
of such in the faith, as had made a public confession of the same, for the
satifaction of the Church; whereof mention is made, Heb. 6.1. which Scripture,
that in the judgment of Expositors it contains and intends this thing, we
shall come in due place to show. 5. To all which we may add one case more,
wherein after the Apostles times, this rite of Imposition of hands was
practiced in the Church, viz. In the reconciling of penitents, and receiving
such into the Church as had been baptized by heriticks. Gregor. Epist. lib. 9.
cap. 61.
Ab antiqua Patrum institutions didicimus, ut quilibet, qui apud heresim in
nomine Trinitatis Baptizantur, cum ad sanctam Ecclesiam redeunt, aut unctione
Chrysmatis, aut impositione manus, aut sola professione fidei, ad sinum matris
Ecclesiae revocentur. We have learned from an ancient Institution of the
Fathers, That any one, who in heresy is baptized in the name of the Trinity,
when he returns to the holy Church, is recalled into the bosom of the mother
the Church, either by the Unction of Chrysme, or by Imposition of hands, or by
the only profession of the Faith. The great contest and controversy
here-about, that fell out beteen the famous Cyprian Bishop of Carthage with the
African Bishops, and Stephen Bishop of Rome, and those that joined with him, is
notoriously known. The one, viz. Cyprian maintaining that such as were baptized
by Heretics upon their return to the Church, were to be received by
Rebaptization; but the other, only by Imposition of hands.


That which is the subject of this Exercitation, is Imposition of hands in
Confirmation: which from the matter, after some while, made use of therein, is
by ancients frequently, if not mostly, called by the name of Unction or Chrysme,
wherewith the confirmed were wont to be anointed. But here we are to take
notice, that the Unction which they speak of, was twofold, which are to be
distinguished for the better understanding of them. 1. And followed
Abrenunciation and Exorcism; Vbi Pontifex tradit hominem sacerdotibus, toto
corpore (tanquam athletam) inungendum. Arcopagit. de Eccles. hierarch. cap. 2..
7.
That which immediately preceded Baptism. 2. That which followed for the most
part immediately after Baptism. And was only the anointing of the forehead.
And of both these, mention is made by Justine Martyr; or whoever was the
Author of those questions propounded to the Orthodox: Quaest. 137.
Qui fit (inquit) ut primum ungamur ^leo, deinde peractis in lavacro mo imentis
illis, unguento postea consignemur? How is it, says he, that first we are
anointed with oil, then Baptism being performed. we are afterward signed with
oil? Somewhat this way seem to sound the words of Tertullian; Caro ab^uitur, ut
anima Emaculetur; Lib. de Resur. rect.
caro ungitur, ut anima consecretur; caro signatur, ut anima muniatur; caro
manus impositione adumbratur, us anima Spiritu illuminerur. The body or flesh
is washed, that the soul may be cleansed; the body is anointed, that the soul
may be consecrated; the body is signed, that the soul may be fenced; the body
is shadowed by the Imposition of the hand, that the soul by the Spirit may be
enlightened.

Of this Imposition of hands, Confirmation or Unction (for all three names are
given to the same thing) that I may speak the more clearly and distinctly, we
are to know, That in the Primitive times among those that were of and belonging
to the Church, were such as were called and commonly known by the name of
Catechumens, being the lowest rank or classis, and as it were the seed-plot and
nursery of the Church. And of these there were two sorts:

1. Such as being heathens and infidels by birth, yet by some means or other
began to relish and embrace the Christian Religion. And let it not seem
strange, that I insert these into the number of such as are within the Church,
seeing they are in some sort truly so, and were so accounted of; the Church
taking cognizance and care of them, yea and making some suitable provision for
them as such. Thus that inquisitive Antiquary Albaspinaeus: Observat. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
Inter caeteros ritus, quibus olim formabantur Catechumeni, minutis quibusdam
Sacramentis utebatur Ecclesia, non solum ut mysteriorum rudes eucharistiae
Paulatim assuescerent; sed etiam ut vitae Christianae semina, quae in ipsa
auditione animis combiberant, horum Sacramentorum usu foverent. Nam quamvis
corporis Christi perfecta illi and omnino formata membra non erant, ut cunque
tamen ei adhaerebant, Christianitatisque Spiritum quodammodo ducere
incipiebant. Among other ceremonies, by which of old the Catechumens were
formed, the Church did use certain minute Sacraments, not only by little and
little to accustom them to the Eucharist, who were ignorant of those
mysteries; but also, that the seeds of Christian life, which by hearing they
had drank into their hearts, might be cherished by the use of these Sacraments.
For although they were not perfect and altogether formed members of the body of
Christ, yet however they did adhere to it, and began after a sort to draw the
breath of Christianity. Among those minute Sacraments, I conceive, were their
(...), or hallowed bread, Frusta panis benedicti.
which was distributed to these as well as to such as were absent from the
assemblies: Thus that excellently learned Casaubon, Exercitat. 16. 33.
a man eminently skilful in Antiquity. Dabantur, inquit, eaedem eulogiae and
Catechumenis, qui jus sumendae eucharistiae non habebant. Itaque hoc erat illis
loco Sacramenti: atque adeo Sacramentum quoddam hoc illis er at: Ita diserte
appellat Augustinus, laxiore videlicet notione, quia precibus sanctificabatur.
Ac propterea panem illum vocarunt etiam (...), quoniam locum obtinebat (...).
i. e. Eucharistiae. So also our learned Dr. Field, Of the Church lib. 1. cap.
12.
These, says he, are in vistibulo pietatis, like children formed and fashioned
in the womb, though not yet brought forth: These are within, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 5.12. though not by that solemn outward and Sacramental
admission which they do desire, yet in desire purpose and preparation fitting
them unto it. In Tertul, de paenitent. In notis. in disput. Taborit. Homil. ad
Baptizandos, tom. 5
Rhenanus therefore calls them Tirones fidei Christianae: and says Lydius,
Erant quasi hospites and vicini fidelium. Chrysostom styles them brethren. O
quam dulcis, inquit, is it a fratrum caterva convenit? O quam Suavis
dilectissimorum caetus inspicitur fratres enim vos and ante dolores partus
nomina: and ante cognationis affectionem, vocabulo charitatis appello. Epist.
155 Loc. Theolog. tom. 3. de Ecclesia.
Augustine also writing to Martianus a Chatecumen, gives him the title of
fratrem in Christo dilectissimum, a most beloved brother in Christ. Gerard by
diverse arguments proves them to be believers, and therefore of the Church. Yea,
some of them laying down their lives for the faith of Christ, were enrolled and
counted in the number of Martyrs: Two such came out of the School of Origin*
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 3.
viz. Heraclides and R^ais a woman; in whom Baptismus sanguini^, served in the
stead, and supplied the want of Baptismus flumi^is. In a word, these seem to be
like one sort of Proselytes among the Jew, to wit, those who were known by the
name of Pro^el^ae poriae, the Proselyte or stranger of or within the gate.
Weems Synagog. l. 1. c^6.. 4
Strangers they were by birth and religion, but not affection. They were
suffered to live among the Jews, being therefore called incoloe or inquilini,
inhabitants; but neither were they circumcised nor conformed themselves to
Mosaical Rites and Ordinances, Goodwins Moses and Aaron, l. 1. c. 6.
only they were tied to the obedience of those commandments, which among the
Hebrew Doctors go under the name of Noah's seven Commandments; viz. 1. To
renounce Idols and all idolatrous worship. 2. To worship the true God, under
which is Contained the keeping of the Sabbath. 3. To commit no murder. 4. Not
to he^d filed with fornication or other unclean conjunction. 5. Not to commit
theft and robbery. 6. To administer justice, and punish malefactors. 7. Not to
eat the flesh with the blood, or a member taken from any beast alive.
These though they came not into the Temple, yet were they admitted to the
worship of God (entering only into the uttermost Court, Mead. Dlatrib. in Acts
17.4.
called Atrium gentium) and the hope of the life to come: Quicunque (says
Maimonides) haec septem praecept a exequenda susceperit, ecce is est ex Pijs
gentium mundi, habetque partem in saeculo futuro: Whoever would undertake to
observe these seven Praecepts, behold he is of the pious of the Gentiles of the
world, and has hope in the world to come. And these this Ingenious Author, Mr.
Mead conceives to be meant by the (...) Devout, or worshipping Gentiles, so
often mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 10.2 and 13.16.
who are there sometimes also styled (...), men fearing God.

Step. 1.
This first sort of Catechumens in order to their admission into the Church,
and enjoyment of full membership, proceeded by these Steps or degrees.

1. They submitted themselves unto teaching and instruction, being Catechized
(from whence they had the name of Catechumens) in the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ; a summary whereof is laid down by the Apostle, in Heb. 6.1.
Cyprian Epist. 24. Pamel. in Annotat. Rhenan in Tertul. de pudicit.
They had therefore a special Officer in the Church, chosen and appointed unto
this work, known by the name of Catechist: and such were those famous men,
Pantaenus, Clemens his Scholar, and Origin his; the Master and the Scholar thus
succeeding one another in the famous and flourishing School of Alexandria. They
had a place assigned for this work, Bin. council. tom. 6. council. Constant. 4.
which therefore was called by the name of Catechumenium. To these Catechists
they gave diligent ear, duly attending upon their Lectures, wherein they were
instructed both in faith and manners; Lydius in notis ut supra.
and from hence were they called Audientes, or Auditores by the Latins, as
Catechumens by the Greeks, for the same reason.

2. They desired Baptism, Step. 2.
having been sufficiently instructed in the Mysteries of the Faith; and from
that time they were entitled Competentes, because they did join together in
the request of Baptism: Being usually many of them, because only two solemn
days or times in the year, were appointed for the administration of this
Ordinance unto them, viz. Pasche or Easter, and Pentecost, called dies
Baptismatum. and the number of these Competentes, In Heb. 6.2. So also
Primasius dixit Baptismata efferri provarietat accipientium. Setm. 116. Rhenan.
in Terrul. de Coron. Milit. Ludius in notis ejusdem. C^ran. Epitom.
Bez^ makes to be the ground of the Apostles Plural expression, Baptismatum,
not Baptismi Doctrinae. Competentes (inquit Augustinus) xihil aliud intelligi
possunt nisi simul petentes: The name imports no other thing then such as ask
together. They also then gave in their names, and came under a strict, even a
sevenfold examination, least any root of bitterness should remain in them
undiscovered, that so holy things might not be given to dogs. It was therefore
decreed in the fourth Council of Carthage, cap. 85. Baptizandi nomen suum dent,
and diu sub abstinentia vini and carnium, ac manus Impositione, crebra
examinatione Baptismum percipiant. Let such as are to be baptized give up their
names and after long abstinence from Wine and Flesh, and imposition of hands,
and often examination, let them receive Baptism.

3. These thus prepared and qualified were admitted unto Baptism, Step. 3.
by the participation of which Ordinance, they made a further progress and
entrance into the Church; being now no longer in the Porch only, but got over
the threshold; not guests and neighbors only, as before, but Denizons, and
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; being owned for
such, and having their names enrolled among the Servants of Christ. Ephesians. 2.19.
They are now ascended unto that rank known by the name of the Baptizati,
Baptismus vocatur (...) Just. Mart. Videtur Originem ducere ab Heb. 6.4. (ubi
Syrus interpres vertit, Baptizari) quia in Baptismo Initiatus eruitur de
potestare tenebrarum Francis. Scorsi notae in Theophanis Homil. 21.. 8.
Exposit, in Johan tractat. 11. Ibid.
and Illuminati; being before styled Baptizandi, and Illuminandi. Now are they
Initiati, and enjoy greater privileges then before; this among the rest, that
the Mysteries of the Sacraments are more clearly revealed and communicated to
them; which were concealed from, or obscurely spoken of before the Catechumens;
so that they were ignorant of them. Interrogemus Catechumenum; manducas carnem
Filii hominis, and bibis sanguinem Filii hominis? (inquit Aug.) nescit quid
dicimus. Ask a Catechumen; Do thou eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the
Son of man? he knows not what we say. Again, Nesciunt Catechumeni, quid
accipiunt Christiani, the Catechumens know not what Christians do receive. I
could say (says Cyril of Alexandria) much more hereof ( viz. of the Sacrm. of
baptism) Nihil reverer ur non Initia^orum aures, Contra Julian lib. 7.
were it not that I fear the ears of the^ that are not Initiated. So also
Chrysostom: Cupio sune (inquit) clare proferre verba, In 1 Corinthians. 15.29.
Apud Priscos Judaeos triplex fuit ratio Divinas literas interpretandi. 1.
Dicitur (...),quod est, (...), auditio, cum Historicum sensum exponimus. 2.
Vocatur (...),sive extensio; cum Historicum sententiam mystica expositione,
dilatarans. 3. Est (...),parabolica Caninius in commentar.

sed propter non initiatos non audeo: nam hi difficiliorem nobis
Interpretationem reddunt; cogunt enim aut non clare dicere nos, aut mysteria
vulgar. Dicam tamen, sed quantum fieri potest adumbrare. Truly (says he) I
desire to speak plainly, but dare not because of the Non-Initi^ti. For these
render the Interpretation more difficult to us; for they constrain us either
not to speak clearly, or to divulge the mysteries: Casaub. exercit. 16.. 43.
( viz. of Baptism) yet will I speak, but as obscurely as I can. This they did
for these three reasons especially.

1. Because of the Sublimity of the things. 2. That there might be stirred up in
them the stronger desires after these things. 3. Fear, least the Divulgation of
them, should bring them into contempt.
But now, to the Baptized these things were freely and fully discoursed of and
laid open; as appears from such expressions as these often occurring in the
Ancients, speaking of these Mysteries; Norunt Mysteriorum periti, sciunt
Initiati, norunt fideles, Inltiari est per illuminationem Pachymer, paphus. in
Areopagit. De Hierarch. Eccles. initio.
etc. Full to this purpose is that passage of Dionysius Areopagita; Doctrina
(inquit) de Sacramentis e Scripturis deprompta, solis fidelibus and Initiatis
est communicanda. The Doctrine of the Sacraments drawn out of the Scripture, is
to be communicated only to the faithful and Baptized. But though they were
advanced thus far, and admitted into the Church, as having solemnly given up
their names to Christ, yet were they accounted but incomplete Christians, they
neither did nor might enjoy all the Privileges of Church Members, because
somewhat requisite hereunto was still wanting, viz. Confirmation; Step. 4.
which when they once came under, they by it ascended one degree higher, and
were ranked among those in the Church who were called by the name of (...)
perfecti.

There were such as by Imposition of hands (which was the first and at first,
Priscis temporibus Impositione manuum Baptismum Confirmari solebat. Walfrid
Strabode reb. Eccles. cap. 26.
the only Ceremony herein made use of) were admitted to the participation of
all the privileges of Church Members, and so became, and were declared to be
complete and perfect Christians. This Ceremony the Ancients speak of and
express (as has been said before) by the name of Unction or Chrysme, because
the use of anointing with oil or Chysme was crept into this rite, as well as
into Baptism, though as a corruption into them both, the Scripture not
affording the least warrant for it, though it be pretended: Nor is there
mention made of it by any approved Author before Tertullian. Altar Damase. ex
Beda.
The Authors of it had an eye, it seems, unto the custom and practice of the
Jews, among whom the priests were anointed; in a fond imitation whereof, this
anointing was introduced into the Christian Church, Lib. de Baptismo.
as appears from the words of Tertullian: Exinde, inquit egressc de lavaero
perungimur benedicta Unction de Pristina Disciplina, qua ungi oleo de cornu in
Sacerdoti^ solebant. Next (says he) coming forth out of the laver we are
anointed with blessed oil, from an ancient usage, wherein they were wont in the
priesthood to be anointed with oil out of a horn. So that usus illius a
consuetudine Israelis absque mandato in Ecclesiam introductus est: Muscul. lo.
com.
The use hereof from the custom of Israel was without a command brought into
the Church. And indeed, Bellarmines Arguments and Allegations for it from the
Scripture, (for fain he would that it should have some footing there) are both
impertinent and frivolous, as any one that will examine them may easily and
soon perceive, and has been made evident by the Nervous Amesius (materia haec,
inquit (viz. Vnctio) est adeo remota a Sacramentis novi Testamenti, In Bellar.
enervit. tom. 3. lib. 3 ^ap. 2.
ut in toto novo Testamento, nulla fiat ejus mentio. This matter ( viz.
Unction) is so remote from the Sacraments of the New Testament, that in the
whole New Testament there is no mention made of it). Panstrat. de Sacram. l. 4.
c. 10.
And more at large by the learned and laborious Chamier.

Now this Imposition of hands, or Unction, immediately (for the most part) or
within a short time following the baptism of the Adult; because by it they
became complete Church Members, entitled unto, and invested with an actual
right unto all the privileges of such; hence is it spoken of by the Ancients
as that which perfected baptism, because it perfected the Church state of such
as were baptized: De Sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 11.
in which sense the expression is not only tolerable, but also good and
warrantable, though as used and meant by Belarmine and his party (affirming,
eam multo majorem gratiam, quam Baptismum confer nec sine hoc ritu perfici
Baptismum: That it confers far greater grace then Baptism, neither can Baptism
be prefected without this rite. Also, Contar. de Sacrament. l. 2. c. 2.
Sacramentum hoc est Baptismate perfectius: veluti inchoatione rei, ipsius
perfectio. This Sacrament is more perfect then Baptism, as the perfection of a
thing then its inchoation) non tantum Scripturae hoc incognitum and contrarium
est, Hommius Disput. 46.. 5.
sed etiam blasphemum Idololatricum: this is not only unknown and contrary to
the Scripture, but also blasphemous and idolatrous.

Concerning this effect of Confirmation; viz. That it made the Baptized perfect
Christians or complete Church Members, is evident in the ancients: being for
this reason called (...), unguenti consummans Vnctio, Pachymer. paphras. in
Dionis. Areopagit. Observat. lib. 1 cap. 25.
the perfecting Unction; whereof thus speaks Albaspinaeus, acquainting us with
the judgment of antiquity in general; Nemo olim perfectus existimabatur
Christianus, qui dono Spiritus sancti, confirmatus and donatus non esset. No
man was of old accounted a perfect Christian, who had not been confirmed and
endued with the gift of the Holy Ghost. This expression of giving and receiving
the holy Ghost, was still continued and made use of, because the Apostles by
Imposition of hands did confer the holy Ghost; which, though none after their
time did, or could do, yet the confirmed were presumed to receive him, though
not in the extraordinary gists, yet in the confirming grace of it, being
earnestly prayed for by the Church. The same Author shows us also, that this
Unction was that especially for which they were accounted worthy of the name of
Christian. Hoc uno, Ibid.
inquit, Sacramento Christiani nomen vel praecipue meremur, quod oleo sancto
corpus, and Spiritu sancto anima nostra ungatur and perfundatur; ut hac duplici
Unction deliniti, uncti and Christi dici possimus. By this Sacrament alone do
we chiefly obtain the name of Christian, because our bodies are anointed with
holy oil, and our souls with the holy Ghost, that by this twofold anointing we
might be called Christians or anointed ones. To the same purpose speaks Cyrill
of Jerusalem: Cateches. Mys. tagog. 3.
Hujus Sancti Chrysmatis dono accepto, merito appellamini Christiani; antequam
enim haec gratia vohis donata esset, non eratis proprie digni eo nomine, sed
pergentes eo usque progressi estis, ut efficeremini Christiani. i. e. The gift
of this holy Chrysme being received, you are deservedly called Christians: --
For before this grace was vouchsafed you, you were not properly worthy of that
name, but going on, ye have proceeded so far as to be made Christians. So that
till this were done, something was thought wanting to the complement of a
Christian. Again, nunc apud nos, Epist. 73. l. 8.
inquit Cyprianus, qui in Ecclesia Baptizantur, praepositis Ecclesiae
offeruntur, ut per nostram orationem ac manus impositionem Spiritum sanctum
consequantur, and signaculo dominico consummentur. To this day with us, says
Cyprian, such as are baptized in the Church, are offered to the overseers of
the Church, that by our prayer and Imposition of hands they may receive the
holy Ghost, and be consummate by the Lords seal. Also the same Father in
another place to the same purpose; Epist. 72. Sec. 1.
Tum demum plene sanctificari and esse Filii Dei possunt, si Sacramento utroque
nascantur, then at length are persons fully sanctified, and may be the sons of
God, if they be born of both the sacraments; meaning Baptism and Unction, or
Imposition of hands; which latter he calls a Sacrament in a larger sense, being
taken pro ritu Sacro, for a Sacred rite: or because usually it was conjunct
with Baptism. And thus is the same Author to be understood, where he speaks of
the necessity of Confirmation: Rivet. controver. tom. 2. p. 56 Signa cum ad res
Divinas pertinent, Sacramenta appellantus. Aug.
Vngi quoque, inquit, necesse est eum, qui baptizatus sit, ut accepto
Chrysmate, esse Vnctus Dei (i. e. perfect Christianus) and habere in se
gratiam Christipossit. It is also necessary (says he) for him that is
baptized, to be anointed, that the Chrysme being received, Epist. 70. Sec. 3.
he may be the anointed of God, ( i. e. perfectly a Christian) and have in him
the grace of Christ. For so Petrus de Aliaco shows his meaning to be:
Altenstaig. in Vocabular.
Adulto est necessaria, sic quod non contemnat, alias non est plenus
Christianus. Its necessary for the adult, so far that he contemn it not,
otherwise he is not a full Christian. Which is also the sense of that canon of
the Council of Laodicea: Oportet Baptizatos post Baptismum percipere Chrysma
coelefte, and regni Christi fieri seu invenivi participes. The baptized ought
after Baptism to receive the heavenly Chrysme, and be made partakers of the
Kingdom of Christ. And of those words of Hierom, Christianum nomen, regni
quoque and principatus Dei honorem in perceptione matis sive per
SanctiChrysmatis Vnctionem (viz. In Thren. 2.
inchoative by the one, and perfective by the other quoad Ecclesiam) suscepimus
and habuimus: Aliter (inquit Clemens Romanus) perfectus Christianus esse
nequaquam poterit, In Constitut.
sedere inter perfectus. Otherwise a person cannot be a perfect Christian, nor
sit among those that are perfect. And being thus interpreted, that passage of
Albaspinaeus may be passable, wherein purgation of the soul from the filth of
sin (viz. Sacramentaliter) is ascribed to Baptism, and ornation or the
beautifying thereof with grace, unto confirmation: Quemadmodum (inquit)
Baptismi aquis traduces and originales noxe deterguntur; Observat. lib. 1. cap.
25.
ita pretioso Spiritus sancti oleo and unguento, animae, quae in Baptismo
emersit detersa and candida, coelestibus donis variisque beneficiis vestitur
and ornatur: In this construction, it will not be so injurious to baptism
(wherein Christ is put on in both respects, as Rom 6) as otherwise it would be;
if we understand the latter of the augmentation of grace, or confirmation
therein: and also of their being invested with all the privileges of
Church Members who are confirmed.

And that by Perfection is meant no other there, then their right to, and
enjoyment of those privileges, especially the Lords Supper, will appear from
the following passages (to which many more of the like nature, if need were,
might be added). The mystery of Chrysme, (says Dionysius Areopagita, De
Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 14.(...)
or the book bearing his name) est Eucharistiae co-ordinatum, and di^itur
(...), quod reipsa consecret and consummet. Ibidem cap. 2. Contemps. 3. Sect. 8.
Again, Post Vnctionem confirmationis, eum qui initiatus est (i. e. Baptizat
us) Pontifex ad Sanctissimam Eucharistiam vocat, and Mysteriorum perficiendi
vim habencium, communionem illi tradit. After the Unction of Confirmation, the
Bishop calls him that is baptized unto the holy Eucharist, and delivers to him
the communion of those mysteries that have the force of perfection. Hence
Corderius in his Annotations upon him, reckoning up the twelve Ceremonies
observed about Baptism, makes these the two last of them; viz. the anointing
with Chrysme, and (as the consequent thereof) that thereby the Bishop did
declare the person anointed or confirmed to be capable of the Eucharist; and
then were they held complete. Clear and full for this, are those words of
Albaspinaeus in his Notes upon the Canons of the Council of Eliberis. Can. 77.
Et tanquam fastigium imponere.
Consirmatio (inquit) extremam quasi manum perfectioni addere videbatur; qua
quis Christiani nominis and Eucharistiae sumptione dignus putaret ur. Qui
igitur non esset confirmatus, Eucharistia non donabatur; quam qui nondum esset
assecultus, nequa sanctus, neque justus, aut fidelis nominabatur; quod
Eucharistia extremus esset actus formaque Christiani heminis. Confirmation
(says he) seemed to give as it were the last stroke to perfection, and to lay
on the top-stone, by which a person was accounted worthy the name of Christian,
and the participation of the Eucharist. He therefore that was not Confirmed,
was not entitled or admitted to the Eucharist; which who so had not as yet
attained, was styled neither Holy, nor Just, or faithful; because the Eucharist
was the last or utmost act and form of a Christian man. So also did the
Waldenses account of it. Apolog. cap. de Baptismo.
Confirmatione protinus data plena authoritas and jus corpori Christi and
sanguini cum omnibus fidelibus Communicandi. By confirmation is forthwith given
full authority and right of communicating in the body and blood of Christ with
all the faithful. Well then might they be esteemed imperfect, that were not
invested with this privilege.

After this manner, such as had embraced the Gospel, and after profession of
their Faith had been baptized, were completed and perfected by Confirmation:
Wherein by prayer, with Imposition of hands (to which was added in process of
time, anointing with Oil or Chrysm) the Lord was earnestly called upon by the
Church for increase of grace, and their establishment in the faith which they
had professed; And they declared to be such as had a right unto and were
capable of the Lords Supper, the highest mystery of Christianity, to the
participation whereof, none were admitted, but only such as were judged meet
for it; Albasp. obser. li. ^. cap. 25.
viz. eos, qui multo antea morum and probitatis suae specimen exhibuissent,
quique se ita fidos probassent, ut tuto eis mysteria divulgari possent: Those,
who some good while before had given proof of their manners and godliness, and
who had approved themselves so faithful that the mysteries might safely be
divulged to them.

And now are they advanced to the highest Classis or rank within the Church,
Sep. 5.
being in the number of these who were called Fideles, or faithful; who were
such as had been admitted to, and actually partakers of the Lords Supper; for
so that diligent searcher into Antiquity, Albaspinaeus: Baptismus and
Confirmatio per Eucharistiam proficiunter. Non enim illa perfect tradita
censebantur, nisi accesserit Eucharistia, quasi caeterorum consummatio. Casaub.
exercitat. 16.. 30. Eucharistia per excellentiam dicitur communio, quia
huncmodum Christus instituit long efficacissimum, perficiendae unionis quam
arctissimae intersese and membra sua. Ibid. Item, Eucharistia est perfectio,
quia conjunction nostrae cum Christo veluti colophonem imponit. Ibid.. 48.
(...) sacrorum maximorum contemplatio.
Ii sclum (inquit) censebantur and appellabantur Fideles, non qui Baptizati aut
confirmati, sed qui duobus istis Sacramentis muniti, insuper Eucharistae Sacris
donarentur and participassent. Those only (says he) were accounted and called
faithful, not who were baptized or Confirmed only, but who being prepared by
these two Sacraments, over and above, were entitled unto, and had been
partakers of the holy Eucharist. Hence as baptism was termed (...), or
Initiation; and Confirmation (...), or perfection: So was the Eucharist, (...)
the most perfecting of all the holy mysteries, Heinsius in Annotat. in Clemen.
Alex. Exercitat. 16 Sect. 43.
and (...) that which perfected all the rest: Also (...), Sacrorum omnium plena
participatio, the plenary participation of all the sacred mysteries. For For to
be epopta, valet cognitione rerum Divinarum and Sacramentorum perceptione esse
per fectum: Nihil enim ulterius fuit. Imports thus much, to be perfect through
the knowledge of divine things, and the participation of the Sacram^nts. Thus
the excellently learned Casaubon.

The second sort of Catechumens (and they are the only sort to be found now
amongst us) were the children of believers. Duo erant Catechumenorum ordines,
In Heb. 6.2
(inquit Calvinus) viz. extranei and liberi fidelium; there were two sorts of
Catechumens (says Calvin) viz strangers, or such as were heathen by birth, and
the children of believers; and both these were under the charge of the
Catechists; Qui Christianae pietatis praecepta aut pueris aut adultis ethnic is
tradiderunt. Cent. Magd. 3 cap. 7. de Scholis.
Whose office it was to deliver the precepts of Christian piety, either to the
children ( viz. of believers) or adult Ethnicks: which children had in their
infancy been baptized, because born of parents within the visible Church, and
actually members of it; to whom belongs this great and gracious privilege, to
have their seed as well as themselves to be accounted within the covenant, holy
in opposition to common or unclean, 1 Cor. 7.14. Ezra 9.2 Mal. 3.15.
and such as God owns for his; for which cause they are styled a holy seed,
yea, a seed of God.

These being grown up to years of discretion, were also to come under the rite
of Confirmation, Gratia corporis Christi, illis solis danda est qui jam per
baptismum facti sunt filii Dei and per manus impositionem. Chrysostom aut
author imperfect operis, in Mat. homil. 17. Contr. tom. 2.
before they could be admitted unto the Lords Supper, or full membership, and
therefore (as the former) were Christians and Church Members in complete, not
enjoying other privileges. They were as the nursery of the Church, carefully
to be trained up in the knowledge of the principles of Religion, respecting
both faith and manners: and this not only by their parents, but afterward
together with the the other Catechumens, by the Catechists: Sedebant (inquit
Rivetus) inter Catechumenos: They sat (says Rivet) among the Catechumens: and
that so long, Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 19. Sec. 4.
donec rite fidei mysteriis instituti poterant fidei confessionem coram
Episcopo ac populo edere, till being well instructed in the mysteries of the
Faith, they were able to make confession thereof before the Bishop and the
people. So that they were at the time of their being Competentees in reference
to the Lords Supper (as the former sort of Catechumens in reference to Baptism)
to give the Church an account of their Faith and manner of life (which was
inquired into) to their satisfaction in both; and so, (and not else) were by
confirmation to be owned and received as full members of the Church, and to
enjoy all the privileges of such, particularly as the chief (as among the Jews
praecipuus honos Paschae habitus est, Sigon, de repub heb. l. 3. c. 9
the Passover was chiefly had in honor) admission unto the Lords Table. And
it is both requisite and rational that so it should be: For 1. Whereas, in their
infancy and minority they were considered in, and as parts of their parents,
and so by virtue of their parents membership enjoyed the Ordinance of Baptism,
and that regularly, according to the word. So being grown up to maturity and
ripeness of years, they are now to be looked upon, and considered in
themselves, and no longer as in their parents, in reference to the enjoyment of
any further Church-priviledge; and therefore as being in a capacity so to do,
they ought now to take hold of the Covenant for themselves, they are to render
a personal account of their Faith, and to give their consent to the terms of
the Covenant that so they may be admitted into the fellowship of the Church, as
persons distinct and upon their own account. 2. In their receiving the
Ordinance of Baptism; they were merely passive (nor is activity a necessary
qualification of the subject, requisite in all persons to be admitted
thereunto, but only in subjecto capaci) the membership of their parents, and
their bringing and offering them up unto the Lord, being sufficient to their
enjoyment of it. But now, as to their admission to the Lords Supper, and the
intituling of them to all other privileges of full members, necessary it is
that they be active, because to the right receiving and improvement of them,
personal Faith and other graces must be exercised. That therefore the Church
may be satisfied concerning their meetness for such a state, and particularly
for the Participation of the Lords Supper; needful it is that they come under
examination, and make some such declaration of the work of God upon them, as
may be a sufficient ground to the Church for their proceeding, in the admission
of them to the actual enjoyment of that and all other privileges, as full
members; which is the thing that is done in Confirmation.


And as this is a Laudable and necessary course to be taken for the right
admission of persons unto full membership; so does it appear to have been the
practice of the Church of Christ in all ages (though corruptions have invaded
this as well as other usages, yea so overgrown it, as to the true Primitive
Notion, Nature and End, or Use of it, it has lain hid, and been unknown for
many Centuries of years together) and to have some probable ground in the
Scripture, both which I shall endeavor in some measure to make good.

1. A probable ground hereof in the Scripture we have, in Heb. 6.2. of the
Doctrine of Baptisms, and laying on of hands: Where this is made one of the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; viz. The Doctrine of laying on of hands.
Where first, its place is to be observed; viz. next after Baptism; being as it
were an Appendix thereof, for the most part immediately following it in such
adult as were baptized, and the next privilege of the Church that such did
enjoy, as had been baptized in infancy.

2. I find it by the best Interpreters usually understood of one or more of
three particulars, that Imposition of hands had relation unto.

1. Of the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were conferred at first
upon many new converts, by the laying on of the hands of the Apostles: whereof
mention is made in the book of the Acts. Act. 8.17, etc.


2. Of the Officers of the Church, who were Ordained and set apart unto their
offices by prayer and Imposition of hands. Thus Paraeus, Initiatis erat
doctrina de donis Spiritualibus and Ministerio Ecclesiae. In Heb. 6.1
It was an Initial Doctrine concerning Spiritual gifts and the ministry of the
Church. In Bell. Enerv.
Per Impositionem manuum (inquit Amesius) ministerium totum intelligitur: By
Imposition of hands is meant the whole Ministry.

3. Of the Confirmation of such as had been baptized, who before the Church
made a profession of their Faith; the adult before Baptism, In loc
the infant baptized before Confirmation. So Piscator understands those words,
of the time when those other named Fundamentals were publicly professed; viz.
at baptism, by such as were baptized, being adult; and at their Confirmation,
by such as had been baptized in their infancy. Paraeus also mentions this, as
by some thought to be the meaning of this place. Beza conceives these words to
contain in them the heads of the Catechism which was wont to be delivered and
taught unto those that were to be Baptized or Confirmed. Impositio manuum
(inquit Rivetus) cujus mentio fit. In Cont. tom. 2
Heb. 6.2. Referenda est ad solennem Baptizatorum benedictionem, quae a
pastoribus solebat fieri, eos in Christianismi vocatione confirmantibus.
Imposition of hands, whereof mention is made, Heb. 6.2. is to be referred unto
the solemn benediction of the baptized, which was used to be performed by the
Pastors, confirming them in the calling of Christianity. So also the Doctors
of Leyden. In Synop. disp. 47.
Referter impositio manuum, Heb. 6.2. ad curam illam Ecclesiae priscae, qua
pueri eruditi in Doctrina Catechetica, priusquam admitterentur ad coenae
participationem, Ecelesiae sistebantur, de fide sua responsuri; and precibus
deo commendabantur, adjecto ritu manuum impositionis, qui gestus erat orantium
and benedicentium, Imposition of hands, spoken of, Heb. 6.2. is referred unto
that care of the ancient Church, whereby children that were instructed in the
Doctrine of Catechism, before they were admitted to the Participation of the
Lords Supper, were presented to the Church, to give an account of their Faith,
and were by Prayer commended unto God, to which was added the rite of
Imposition of hands, being the gesture of such as Pray and Bless. In loc.
Anselme thus expounds it: Impositionis manuum, nempe, Epilcoporum in
Confirmatione neophytorum. Of Imposition of hands; to wit, of the Bishops in
the Confirmation of young converts. Calvin also gives this only as the chief
thing intended by the Apostle in this place; from whence he draws this
remarkable inference, wherein he plainly declares his apprehensions concerning
the Original and Antiquity of this Practice in the Church of Christ. Hic unus
locus (inquit) abunde testatur, hujus ceremoniae Originem fluxisse ab
Apostolis; quae tamen postea in superstitionem versa fuit; ut mundus semper
fere ab optimis institutis ad corruptelas degenerat -- quam ob rem hodie
retinenda pura institutio est, Superstitio autem corrigenda. This one Place
(says he) does abundantly testify that the Original of this Ceremony did flow
from the Apostles, which yet afterward was turned into a Superstition: as the
world almost always does from the best Institutions degenerate into
corruptions -- Wherefore to this day the Pure Institution ought to be retained,
but the Superstition to be corrected. Here then we see, that in the Judgment
of this excellent and incomparable man, Imposition of hands for the
Confirmation of such as had been baptized, is of no less then Apostolical
Institution, and of no later date, which ought still to be practiced in the
Churches of Christ. To which add Hyperius, qui intelligit, Heb. 6.2. de
impositione manuum, quae fiebat and in Confirmatione eorum qui jam erant
Baptizati, and recte instituti, ut acciperent Spiritum sanctum, and de
Ordinatione. He understands Heb. 6.2. of Imposition of hands, which was made
use of, both in the Corfirmation of those that had been baptized and rightly
instructed, that they might receive the Holy Ghost. And of Ordination,
Illyricus also, in Heb. 6.2. Credo, inquit, etiam sic esse in Primitiva
Ecclesia, tyrones ex Catechumenis transfer inter maturiores auditores, ut jam
eis fas esset communicare tanquam dijadicatis and probatis. I believe, says
he, that so it was in the Primitive Church, to transfer young ones from the
Catechumens among the more mature Auditors; that now it might be lawful for
them to Communicate, as having been tried and approved. I shall close the
positions of this Text, with that of the learned and godly Mr. Deering, in his
Lectures upon part of this Epistle: which is full to our purpose. Imposition of
hands, says he, was a solemn Ceremony used with Prayer, in which it was
declared, that the parties were accepted of God into his Church, according to
the faith of Christ, which they then professed --. This which this day ought to
be practiced as a thing very profitable in the Church of God, is miserably
defaced by the Papists; for where it was in the Church of God an use, that
Christian children should be taught the Principles of Faith, which when they
had well learned then in the open Congregation, with prayer and laying on of
hands on their heads, they were declared to be received as partakers of the
graces and Sacraments of the Church, etc.

By these, and other Expositors that might be added, is this place of Scripture
understood in part at least of Imposition of hands in Confirmation; which
therefore, in their apprehensions is warranted by it, as a Doctrine fundamental
that ought to be known by all (unless it be understood of the time when the
Fundamentals there mentioned, were to be professed) and a thing practiced by,
and taking its rise from the very Apostles themselves.

2. It was accordingly received by the Church and continued in the following
ages, though by degrees it came to be corrupted, and much changed from its
Primitive use and end. Cassander a most learned man, In Praefar. ad apparat.
Lydius in not. in Disput. Tab. In Consultat.
(even to admiration, says our Montacute) so far skild and versed in the
Ancients, that he is blamed for having been two great an admirer of them, which
hindered his progress in the knowledge and defense of the truth: He speaking of
Confirmation, asserts it, Semper in Ecclesia religiosissime observatam fuisse:
To have been always most religiously observed in the Church. The Centurists
also show it to have been in use in all the succeding ages after the Apostles
times, and do still refer it unto, (as its proper place) and handle it in the
chapter of the rites of baptism, because it was usually joined with the
Administration of that Sacrament to the Adult. Peruse that head in the several
Centuries, being for the most part the sixth chapter. Probable it is, from
hence, if not more, that it was derived from the Apostles, and had them for the
Authors and Institutors of it, according to that rule of Augustine, which more
then once he makes use of against the Donatists. De Baptism. contra Donatist
lib. 2. c. 7. and l. 4. c. 24.
Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec concilius institutum, sed semper retentum
est, (he pleads in the behalf of Infant Baptism) non nisi authoritate
Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. That which the Universal Church holds,
neither was instituted by Councils, but was always retained; that is, most
rightly believed to have been delivered by no other, then Apostolical authocity.

3. The Fathers frequently make mention of it, as a thing commonly known and
practiced in the Churches of Christ; but in speaking hereof, they give it
mostly the name of Unction or Chrysme, which betimes (it seems) became, though
corruptly, an addition both to Baptism and Confirmation.

And here I might ascend almost as high as the Apostles times, if I judged the
writings that go under the name of Dyonisius Areopagita, Clemens Romanus,
Scultets in Mecul. River erit. sac. coci censur. patr.
and the pretended Justine Martyr in quaest, ad orthodoxo^ (of whom enough
before) to be genuine. But that they are but counterfeits as to the name they
bear, Perkins in prep^r^t, ad demonst. problem.
has been sussiciently evidenced by many learned men. Though yet that they are
ancient it cannot be denied; and for the first of them, he is dignified by Mr.
Mead, Diatrib. in Zac. 4.10.
with the Title of the Ancient and high foring (though counterfeit) Dionysius:
And styled by the learned Casaubon, Exercit. 16. 43.
Scriptor sane antiquissimus and eligantissimus: sed quem, illum esse de quo
habetur mentio in Actis, soli in hac luce literarum, imperiti, and cum graecae
linguae tum Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae penitus rudes, audent affirmare. I
shall not repeat the forementioned passages out of Tertullian and Cyprian
(whose worthy monuments may not unfitly be called, Sacra Ecclesiasticae
Antiquitatis scrinian) refer the Reader to the places where they have been
already produced. To which add, Ambrose, De Sacrament l. 3. c. 1.
who having before spoken of Baptism, proceeds to Confirmation: Thus; Accipis,
inquit, Mysterium, i. e. Vnguentum supra caput. Quare supra caput? Quia sensus
sapientis in capite ejus. Solomon ait, friget sapientia sine gratia. Sed ubi
gratia acceperat sapientiam, tunc opus ejus incipit esse perfectum. And not
much after: Sequitur spirituale signaculum (Cyprian calls it signaculum
dominicum, Cap. 2.
Epist. 73. as has been said) quia post fontem superest, ut perfectio fiat:
Quando ad invocationem Sacerdotis, Spiritus sanctus infunditur. The spiritual
Seal follows, because it remains after Baptism; when at the invocation of the
Priest, the Holy Spirit is infused. Hierom declares this to have been the
practice of the Church: Advers. Eucise, tom. 2.
Vt ad eos qui long in minoribus ur^ibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos
baptizati ^unt, Episcopus ad invocationem Spiritus san^ti manus impositurus
excurrat. That unto those who afar off in the lesser Cities were baptized by
the Presbyters and Deacons, the Bishops should go forth laying his hands upon
them at the invocation of the Holy Ghost. The reason of the Bishops going forth
might be this; Baptism being usually administered but twice a year; viz. at
Pasche and Pentecost, (understand it of the unbaptized catechumens; for I
suppose they delayed not the baptizing of the infants of believers, Epist. 59.
as may be gathered from Cyprians Epistle unto Ridus) and that in the more
eminent Cities and places, where the Bishop did reside; (where, and what time
they were, if adult, confirmed also) in some cases, as of dangerous sickness,
Cyprian Epist. 26..10.
etc. (which was the case of those called Clinici, Baron ad an. 258..22.
so named, because being apprehended to be nigh unto death, they were bapcized
in their beds) they might and did dispense both with the time and place for
their baptism; Lydius in notis in disput. Tab.
and the Bishop afterward go out and confirm them in the villages where they
lay, that they might not depart out of this life, Peers. de tradit. part. 3.
without the benefit of this Ceremony. And so much the following words of
Hierom seem to intimate. Loc. supra citat. Examen. council trident. and Altar
Damase.
Alioqui, etc. lugendi sunt, qui in viculis aut in castellis, aut in
remotioribus locis baptizati, ante dormierunt, quam ab Episcopo inviserenter.
Otherwise, they are lamented, who being baptized in villages, or in castles, or
in more remote places, dyed before they could be visited by the Bishop. And in
this interpretation of Hierom, I afterward found both Chemnitius and
Didoclavius to agree with me. I shall conclude the testimonies of the ancients
with that of Augustine (that I needlessely heap not up instances in this kind)
In hoc unguento (viz. that mentioned Ps. 133.2.) Sacramentum Chrysmatis vult
interpretari; Contra lit. Petilia. l. 2. c. 104.
quod quidem in genere visibilium signaculorum, sacro sanctum est, sicut ipse
Baptismus. By this ointment he would understand the Sacrament of Chrysme, which
indeed is holy in the rank of visible Seals, as baptism it self. Ita vocat
(inquit Rivetus) and sanctum dicit, Contro. tom. 2
ut baptismum, quia ipsi erat annexum, non quod existimaret Chrysma Baptismo
aequandum esse. He so calls it, and says, that its holy as Baptism, because
it was annexed to it, not that he thought that Chrysme was to be equaled with
Baptism.

4. The Decrees and Canons of diverse Councils, do also evidently declare,
Confirmation to have been an ancient and general practice in the Churches of
Christ. I shall content my self with the mention only of two, which both
preceded the first and most famous general Council of Nice. Bin. in notis in
Council. Laodic.
In the Council of Laodicea in Phrigia Pacatiana held under Sylvester the first
of that name, Bishop of Rome (antiqua nobilitate celeberrimum, and graecorum
atque latinorum, scriptis celebri memoriae commendatum, medio tempore inter Neo
caesariensem and Nicaenam universalem celebratum) in the 48. Baron. an. 319.
Caranz. Epir.
Canon it was thus decreed. Oportet Baptizatos post baptismum sacratissimum
Chrysma percipere, and caelestis regni participes fieri. The baptized ought
after baptism to receive the most sacred Chrysm, and be made partakers of the
heavenly kingdom. Or as another renders the Greek, thus, quod oporter eos qui
baptizantur, Bin. in Council.
post lavacrum chrysma Eccesiae accipere, and regni Christi participes
inveniri. Bin. in Council.
Also in the Council of Eliberis in Spain: held anno 305. in two several
Canons order is taken about Confirmation, as can. 38. thus: See here the
meaning of Hieroms Excarrat Episcopus: ur supra.
Peregre navigantes, aut si Ecclesia in proximo non fuerit, posse fidelem (qui
lavacrum suum integrum habet, nec sit bigamus) baptizare in necessitate
infirmitatis positum, catechumenum, ita ut, si supervixerit, ad Episcopum eum
perducat, ut per manus Impositionem perfici possit. Or, ut per manus
impositisnem perficere possit. Such as sail into strange countries; or, if a
Church be not near at hand, a believer (if he have his baptism entire, and have
not two wives) may baptize a Catechumen in case of necessity through sickness;
but so, that if he recover, he being him to the Bishop, that he may be
perfected by imposition of hands. Again: Can. 77.
Si quis diaeconus regens plebem, sine Presbytero vel Episcopo aliquos
baptizaverit, Episcopus eos per benedictionem (intelligitur benedictio de
sacramento confirmationis) perficere debebit. Bin. in notis.
Quod si autem de saeculo recesserit, sub fide qua quis crediderit, poterit
esse justus. If any Deacon, governing the people, shall without a Presbyter or
Bishop baptize any, the Bishop ought by blessing to perfect them (which
blessing is meant of the Sacrament of Confirmation.) Now if such a one shall
before, depart out of this world, under or by the faith wherewith he believed,
he may be just: the meaning of which latter clause (says Albaspinaeus) is
this: Observat. lib. 1. ^^p. 25.
Si quis evivis recesserit, nondum confirmatus, is tamem inter sanctos
recenseri potuisset. If any one departed out of this life before he was
Confirmed, yet might he be numbered among the Saints.

5. This Doctrine and the practice of it, was received by the Waldenses as an
Apostolical institution, who retained Confirmation for the substance of it, but
removed the superstitious adhering to it; as appears from their apologies and
several confessions of their faith, which through the clamours and importunate
accusations of their adversaries, Joachim. Camerar. in Narrac. hostor. c. 6.
they were even forced to publish for their own vindication. In their short
confession which they sent and exhibited unto Vladislaus King of Hungary, an.
1504. Ibid. Professed. sidei Waldens. cap. de informat.
They thus speak of Confirmation: Fide ex divinis scripturis sumpta profitemur,
temporibus Apostolorum istum observatum fuisse; quicunque in pubescentiae annis
promiss a donorum Spiritus sancti non acceperunt, hujusmodi per orationem
manusqne Impositionem in fidei confirmationem suscipiebant. Eadem quodque de
Infantibus sentimus; 'quicunque baptizatus ad veram accesserit fidem -- talis
ad Episcopum aut sacerdotem duci statuique debet; qui interrogatus de fidei
veritatibus, praeceptisque divinis simul que voluntate bona, intention
stabili, ac veritatis operibus, illa omniae sic se habere fatendo testabitur;
talis confirmaendus est, in spe veritatis consecutae: Denique orationibus
Ecclesiarum juvandus est, quatenus ei incrementum munerum Spiritus sancti ad
stabilitatem militiamque fidei accedat. Manus postremo impositione ad firmanda
promissa dei veritatisque habita, in virtute nominis. Patris and Verbi ejus,
Flatus quoque almi Ecclesiae societur. We do profess with a faith taken out of
the divine Scriptures, that this was observed in the times of the Apostles:
Whosoever being come to ripeness of years, received not the promise of the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, such they did receive for the confirmation of their
faith, by prayer and imposition of hands. We think the same also of infants,
whosoever being baptized shall come to true faith, such a one ought to be
brought and presented to the Bishop or Minister, who being questioned
concerning the truths of faith, and Divine precepts, as also of his good will,
stable intention, and works of truth, confessing, shall testify that all those
things are so; such a one is to be confirmed in the hope of the truth he has
attained: Moreover, he is to be helped by the prayers of the Churches, that he
may have increases of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, to the Establishment and
Warfare of the Faith.

Lastly, by Imposition of hands for the confirming of the promises of God and
the truth, in the power of the name of the father, and of his word, also of the
holy Spirit, let him be joined to the Church; viz. of the Adult, as a complete
member. After this manner among them, we see, that such as having been baptized
in their infancy, did afterward being grown up, believe, and make profession of
their faith, were by imposition of hands joined to the Church as complete
members. And with how much caution they did proceed in the admission of such as
offered themselves to full membership and communion; viz. after the
manifestation of their earnest desire thereof, the grounds of which desire were
carefully inquired into (as was the manner of the Jews in receiving a
Proselyte) also after very strict examination, and an account given, both of
their knowledge in the chief doctrines of Christianity, and of their
conversation and manner of life; and lastly, after a serious and solemn
protestation made of their purpose of perseverance in both, Apolog. Walde. part
3. page 177. etc.
is very notably and at large (too large here to transcribe) set down in their
Apology following the Profession of their Faith.

Yet once more they fully declare themselves concerning this thing: their words
are worthy the recital; which are these: Itaque (speaking of children that had
been baptized) cum ad annos discretionis pervenerint, Apolog. Waldens. part. 4.
and rationem fidei suae jam intellexerint, ac Christum jam serio adamare
caeperint: Ducimus ad eorum professionem quaecunque parentum sive compatrum
opara, aut Ecclesiae Ministerio adsecuti sunt; ut ea omnia ipsimet suapte and
liberrime coram tota Ecclesia ad suam ipsorum salutem, in celebratione ritus
impositionis manuum profiteantur. Quo facto, fit illorum confirmatio Atque ibi
protinus datur illis plena authoritas ac jus corpore Christi and sanguine cum
omnibus fidelibus communicandi, in memoriam ac emnium bonorum nobis in Christo
depositorum ac datorum participationem and fruitionem praesentissimam, ad quod
mox ab infantia vocati and oblati fuerant, and verbo Christi ac illis baptismo
isthaec jam sibi promissa habuerunt, i. e. Therefore, when they come to years
of discretion, and now understand the reason of their faith, and begin
seriously to love Christ; we bring them to the profession of those things,
whatsoever they have attained by the industry of their parents or Godfathers,
or by the Ministry of the Church, that they themselves may freely and of their
own accord profess all those things before the whole Church to their own
salvation, in the celebration of the rite of Imposition of hands; which being
done, they are Confirmed. And then there is straightway given unto them full
power and authority to communicate in the body and blood of Christ, with all
the faithful, in memorial, and present participation and enjoyment of all those
good things which are deposited and given to us in Christ, whereunto they had
been called and offered immediately from their infancy, and had these things
promised unto them by the word of Christ and baptism.

Lo here represented unto us a lively Scheme of Primitive Confirmation,
recovered from the dark and dust, by those first reformers! wherein it
evidently appears what thoughts they had of it, and how useful and necessary
they judged it to be, as the only way whereby such as were adult, ought to be
admitted to full-membership, and the actual enjoyment of all Church privileges.

6. A Semblance hereof has been found in the succeeding reformed Churches,
though much differing from the Primitive practice, and too too complying with,
and corformable (in some especially) to that of the Romish Synagogue.
Particularly, here in this Nation (so much the more to be wondered at,
considering they had so excellent a president in these Waldenses, from whence
to have taken a pattern) among whom it was so far regarded, that even in the
Liturgy care was taken, and an order prescribed for the performance of it.
Concerning it, we have this account given: In poli^ia Eccles. Anglic.
Confirmation ought to be observed; quia cum pueri ad maturiorem aetatem
pervenerint, and didicerint quae and quanta susceptores ipsorum nomine in
Baptismo promiserint; ipsi proprio ore, proprio consensu, public in conspectu
Ecclesiae, eadem agnoscant and confirment; profiteanturque, se divina gratia
adjuvante; conaturos ea omnia fideliter observare, quibus jam suis verbis, s^a
confessione assenserint. Because when children come to riper age, and shall
learn what, and how great things their undertakers did in their name promise in
Baptism, they themselves should acknowledge, and confirm the same with their own
mouth and consent, publicly in the face of the Church; and withal, profess,
that through the help of Divine Grace, they would endeavor faithfully to
observe all those things, to which now with their own words and confession,
they gave assent. Again: Nemo ad sacro sanctam communionem prius admittatur,
quam and Catechismum didicerit, and Confirmatus sit. Let none be admitted to
the holy Communion, before he has learned the Catechism, and been Confirmed.
Bona verba; here are good words; Surely they deemed it to be of some weight and
consequence: And yet, as used by them, 'twas little less then ridiculous, a
mere vain, and empty Ceremony; or, as the Saxon Churches truly term the Popish
Sacrament of Confirmation, Harmon. conf.
inanis umbra, an empty shadow: Disp. 46.. 4
and Hommius; inane hominum superstitiosorum commentum; a vain invention of
superstitious men. But the Primitive practice herein, utilis consuetudo and
laudatissima, and Ecclesiae aedificationi, Sect. 2.
(being indeed the only regular way of adding complete and polish't stones unto
this building) utilissima, quam in purum usum restitutam optamus: A useful and
most laudable custom, and most profitable for the edification of the Church,
which we wish were restored to its pure use. In this pious wish the reverend
Calvin joins with him: In Opuscul. de Eccles. Reform. rat.
Nos inquit, ejusmodi ritum ubique restitutum merito optaremus. We could
deservedly wish that such a rite were every where restored. And again; Talem
manuum Impositionem laudo, and restitutam hodie in purum usum velim. Such
Imposition of hands I commend, Instit. l. 4. c. 19. Sect. 4.
and would that at this day it were restored unto its pure use. In Heb. 6.2.
Bullinger also herein agrees with them: Vtinam haec, inquit, postliminio ad
nos redeat manuum Impositio, ritus sanctissimus, and utilissimus. Would to God
this Imposition of hands might return to us again: a most holy, and most
profitable rite. Which desires of these worthy men, do not, as I conceive,
imply a total want and absence of this custom in the reformed Churches, but
the imperfection of it, as to its due administration. For so the professors of
Theology at Leyden, In Synops. pur. Theolog. disp. 47. Sect. 13.
as the former uttered their wishes for its restitution, presently add; Cujus
substantia in Ecclesiis nostris Religiose servatur: The substance whereof is
Religiously preserved in our Churches. So also Dioclavius: In Ecclesiis
reformatis adrem ipsam propius accedunt -- and ubi quid desideratur, Altar.
Damasc.
restitui optamus. In the Reformed Churches they come nearer to this thing, and
where any thing is wanting, we wish it restored. The restoration of it
therefore to its right use, and Primitive purity being a thing so desirable,
plainly argues the need which the Church stands in of it, and the great beauty
and benefit that would redound unto it thereby.

For this end, the corruptions adhering to it, through the iniquity of
preceding ages, should be searched out and examined, that upon trial being
found to be such, they might be cast off and rejected. So would the thing it
self appear in its own native color and comeliness. Those of Popish
confirmation (which comprehend also the Prelatical) may be reduced to these
heads.

1. The Name: Being by those of Rome called and accounted a Sacrament; but
without any just ground at all: the definition of a Sacrament properly so
called, not belonging to, nor agreeing with it, as Amesius well shows. In
Bellar. Enervat. cited in Altar. Damasc.
Yea, spalatensis proves out of diverse good Authors: Ceremoniam confirmandi
veteri Ecclesia per plura saecula fuisse ceremonialem ritum Baptismi non
peculiare per se sacramentum. That the Ceremony of confirming in the ancient
Church, was for many ages, a ceremonial Rite of Baptifm, not a peculiar
Sacrament by it self: Some of the ancients do indeed give it the name of a
Sacrament, but then is the word to be understood in a larger sense: Pro sacro
ritu aut signo, for a sacred Rite or sign: Or else is it to be considered as an
Adjunct or Appendix to Baptism; being so far as it were a part of it, in the
Primitive times, that it was accounted one with it: Panstrat. de Sacrament. l.
4. c. 11. Sect. 3.
tam certum est, (inquit Chamier) unum idemque sacramentum fuisse reputatem, ut
effecta baptismi and Chrysmatis promiscue describuntur. So certain is it, that
they were reputed one and the same Sacrament, that the effects of Baptism and
Chrisme are promiscuously described. No marvel is it then, that they who judged
them to be the same thing, should afford them the same name.

2. The Nature of it: Comprehending, 1. The Matter: Which among the Papists is
anointing with Chrisme, a compound of Oil and Balsome, Bellar. tom. 2.
consecrated by the Bishop: whereof there is no mention at all in the
Scripture; in so much as some of their own, have been of opinion: River.
Contro. tom. 2.
Nec ab Apostolis, nec a Christo fuisse institutum. That it was instituted
neither by Christ, nor the Apostles; but that it had its original (as some say)
from Calixtus Bishop of Rome: Flores tempotum, cited in confess. Tabo. cap. 7.
anno 218. Qui instituit confirmationem fieri cum Chrysmate, quae prius fiebat
cum manuum impositione sine Chrysmate: Who ordained Confirmation to be
performerd with Chrysme, which before was done with Imposition of hands without
Chrysme. And the best proof that Bellarmine brings for it, Tom. 2.
is the authority and determination (being of no validity at all) of those two
novel councils, as he calls them; viz. of Florence, anno 1439. Gesner de consil.
and of Trent, 1546. 2. The Form: Which they make to lie in these words:
Consignote signo Crucis, Bellar. Ibid.
and confirmo te Chrysmate, salutis, in nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus
Sancti. I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and Confirm thee with the
Chrysme of salvation, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. A mere humane invention and device, that has not the least shadow
for it in the Scriputure, wherein, (...) quidem, concerning it is to be found:
no, nor yet in the more ancient writers, (as Bellarmine himself confesses) so
that 'twas altogether unknown to the Primitive times and all true Antiquity; he
is forced therefore to allege in the defense of it, those fond officialists,
Alcuinus and Amalarius, who cite for the proof hereof an old musty missall,
known by the name of Ordo Romanus. And for the express form of words, he can
carry it no higher then the forenamed Council of Florence. This therefore is
but a late figment of Superstitious men, and deserves with scorn to be
rejected. 3. The Administrator: Who must be a Bishop at least (for the credit
of their Sacrament) to whom alone it properly belongs to Confirm, Bellar. tom.
2.
and to none other. But how weak, yea, even blasphemous his Arguments are for
the proof hereof, is by Amesius made evidently to appear. Ambition indeed seems
to have been the ground of this restriction, as Hierom intimates, Advers. Lucif.
, where he tells us: In multis locis hoc factitatum fuisse ad honorem potius
Sacerdotii, quam ad legis necessitatem. That this was in many places, done
rather for the honor of the Priesthood, rather then for the necessity of any
Law requiring it. 4. The Subject, or person to be Confirmed: Which the
Romanists will have to be not only such as are adult, but also children in
their infancy, before they come to the use of reason, and years of discretion.
Plerique (says Didoclavius, Altar. Damases
speaking of those of that party) censent expedire magis infantiae tempore;
quia aetas infantilis non est capax fictionis, qua effectus sacramenti
impediatur, and huic sententiae favet antiquus usus Ecclesiae. Many think it to
be expedient rather in the time of infancy, because the infant-age is not
capable of fiction, whereby the effect of the Sacrament may be hindered; and the
ancient use of the Church favors this Opinion: Sum. part. 3. q. 72. art. 8.
Hoc Sacramentum (inquit Aquinas) debet omnibus exhiberi. This Sacrament ought
to be given to all. Lib. de Sacram.
Contarenus renders his reason for it. Thomas (inquit) putat hoc sacramentum
debere tribui etiam valde infantibus quia ampliorem gratiam consequuntur, and
ideo ampliorem gloriam si decesserint: quem morem etiam nos servavimus, tanti
viri authoritate nixi. Thomas (says he) thinks that this sacrament ought to be
given even to very young infants, because they obtain more grace, and therefore
more glory if they die; which custom we have kept, leaning upon the authority
of so great a man. And indeed their practice is known to be accordingly; viz.
to admit of all sorts and sizes, without consideration of their meetness,
either in respect of age, or qualification, in point of knowledge or
conversation; herein crossing both the practice of the Primitive Church, and
the chief thing that confirmation was intended for. Which gave just occasion to
Parisiensie to take up a complaint concerning this abuse: Nihil amplius
(inquit) honoris and reverentiae ei relictum videtur, De Sacram? Confirmar.
nisi hoc solum, quod non ab aliis, quam a summis Sacerdotibus, i. e. Episcopis
dari seu ministrari per mittitur: Ita ut fides and reverentia hujus Sacramenti
jam pro part apud Christianos periisse videtur, and propter hoc virtus and
efficacia ipsius. Quam imperiti, quam indevoti illud hodie suscipiant; quam
turbulenter, irreverenter ad illud hodie accedatur, ipsi oculi nostri nobis
faciunt fidem -- virtus and efficacia hujus Sacramenti pene annullata est inter
nos, pro co, quod debito honor and reverentia non tractatur: Et hoc Doctoribus
and praelatis maxim est de his docere populos and commonere. There seems to be
no more honor and reverence left unto it, but this only, that it is not
permitted to be given and administered by any other, save the chief Priests, i.
e. The Bishops: So that the credit and reverence of this Sacrament seems now in
part among Christians to have perished, and for this cause the virtue and
efficacy of it. What ignorant and undevout persons do at this day receive it?
how turbulently, irreverently they come unto it, our very eyes to testify to
us? -- the virtue and efficacy of this Sacrament is almost made Null among us,
because it is not handled with due honor and reverence; and its believed that
this is to be imputed chiefly to the Doctors and Prelates, whose office it is
chiefly, to teach and admonish the people of these things. 5. The Effects and
Ends of it: Which those of Rome make to be, Bellar. tom. 2.
Gratiam confer gratum facientem; ad roborandam animam adversus diaboli
impetus, and characterem imprimere, quo ascribimur in militiam Christi. To
confer grace, that makes acceptable; to strengthen the soul against the
assaults of the devil, and to imprint a Character, whereby we are inrol'd among
the soldiers of Christ. Herein offering no small wrong to Baptism, which they
spoil and deprive of its efficacy, that therewith they may deck and adorn an
invention of their own: yea, they ascribe more virtue to it, then unto baptism,
and so prefer it before it: Huic tribuunt efficaciam multi majorem Spiritualem
gratiam, Hem. Di'put. 16. 5.
quam quae per Baptismum obsignetur, conferendi -- adeo ut baptismus sine hoc
ritu perfici non possit. To this they attribute a power of conferring much
greater spiritual grace, then that which is sealed by Baptism, -- so that
Baptism (in point of grace) cannot be perfected without this rite. For which
cause it has this honor bestowed upon it, that whereas baptism may be
administered by ordinary Priests and Deacons, yea even women, (as they hold)
this is not to be meddled withal by any, nor managed, but by the holy hands of
the Bishop alone. Bellarm. tom. 2. Bellar. Enervat. de confirm. c. 4. Syntag.
par. 2. c. 58. 15.
Bellarmines reasons for it are both empty and impious, as Amesius has pithily
evidenced. The true ground of it, is rather given by Tilenus: Nempe, ut tanto
praestantius habeatur Antichristi excrementum, Christi Sacramento, quanto
Episcopus Sacerdote. That an excrement of Antichrist might be esteemed so much
more excellent then the Sacrament of Christ, by how much a Bishop excels a
Priest. 6. Lastly, Those fond and ridiculous Ceremonies (such they are all, the
second only excepted) which are added thereunto; whereof eight in number are
reckoned up by Bellarmine; the recital of them, Bellarm. ibid.
would be a sufficient refutation, as being no other then the idle fancy of
vain and superstitious men; the Scripture not making any mention of, nor
affording the least ground for them: Nor indeed is any Text of Scripture by
that Champion alleged for the warrant of them, but only one; viz. I John. 2.
27. which is by him most miserably wrested and abused, as will easily appear
upon examination. I shall conclude the mention of these corruptions, crept into
Confirmation, in the darker and more superstitious times (by means whereof, as
the abuse of it has been very great, so the true end and use of it has been
altogether lost and unknown) with the words of Calvine: Nos (inquit) qui
Ecclesiae restitutionem molimur ubique in hanc partem incumbere debemus, ut
saltem. In Praefat. ante Catechis. inter Opuscul.
Chatechismi usus, qui aliquot ante hac saeoulis sub Papatu abolitus fuit, nunc
quasi postliminio redeat. Nam neque satis pro sua utilitate commendari potest
Sanctum hoc institutum; nec Papistis satis exprobari, tam flagitiosa
coruptelae; quod illud in pueriles vertendo ineptias, non modo sustulerunt e
medie, sid eo quoque ad impurae and impiae superstitionis praetextum turpiter
sunt abusi: Adulterinam enimillam Confirmationem, quam in ejus locum
surrogarunt, instar meretricis magno Ceremoniarum splendore, multisque,
pomparum fucis sine modo ornant: quinetiam dum ornave volunt, execrandis
Blasphemiis adornant; dum Sacramentum esse jactant Baptismo dignius: vocantque
semi-Christianos, quicunque faetido suo oleo non fuerint infecti; interim vero
tota eorum actio nihilaliud quam histrionicas gesticulationes continet; vol
potius lascivos simiarum lusus, absque ulla aemulationis art. We, says he,
that attempt the restoration of the Church, every where ought to apply our
selves faithfully to this part of the work, that at least the use of
Catechizing, which for some ages heretofore has under the Papacy been
abolished, may now return again. For neither can this holy institution be
enough commended for its utility, nor the Papists be sufficiently upbraided
with their so Flagitious corruption of it; that by turning it into childish
fopperies, they have not only taken it away, but have also so far shamefully
abused it for a color of an impure and impious superstition. For they do
beyond measure deck that adulterous Confirmation (which they have substituted
in its room) like an Harlot with great splendour of Ceremonies, and many pompous
gauderies: moreover, while they will adorn it, they do it with execrable
blasphemies, boasting that it is a sacrament more worthy then Baptism, and
calling them half-Christians, who ever have not been besmeared with their
stinking oil. But in the mean time their whole action contains nothing else but
histrionical gestures, or rather wanton apish plays, without any art of
emulation.




If therefore Comfirmation shall be drained from these mixtures of humane
inventions, that have for a long time so defaced and deformed it; viz If it
shall be accounted a Ceremony, and not a Sacrament properly so called; if their
Popish matter both Remota and Proxima, of anointing with Consecrated Chrysme
the foreheads of the Confirmed in the form of a Cross, be removed, and prayer
with Imposition of hands received and retained in the stead thereof, if the
administration of it be not confined to the Bishop only, who out of pride did
appropriate it to himself (as says Beda, Altar. Damase
Propter arrogantiam non concessa est Sacerdotibus singulis, sicuti and multa
alia, out of arrogance it was not granted to every Minister, as also many other
things) but be committed to every Pastor, to whom of right it belongs. If not
infants, nor children not yet arrived to years of discretion be admitted, but
only such as are adult, who are able to, and accordingly do render a
satisfactory account of their faith and Converssation, or of the work of God
upon them, as the proper subject of it. Finally, if those fained effects above
named as the end and use of it, together with all those idle a dditions that
have betided it in the declining times of the Church, be rejected and cast off;
and the admission of persons as full member; to the enjoyment of all Church
privileges, shall be the thing intended in its administration; the practice
hereof, as most agreeable to that of the Apostolical and Primitive times, will,
I conceive, be found to be not only commendable, but also exceeding useful and
advantageous, as a thing requisite if not necessary to a right reformation
(wherein this happily may prove the thread, that may extricate and bring us out
of those labyrinths that we have been so long involved in) and the reducing of
the Churches of Christ to their native beauty, and Primitive-purest state and
constitution.

Now from all that has been said, I suppose, these ensuing Corollaries or
inferences may be fairly deduced.

1. That the children of believers, who have been baptized, do stand, while
they remain such incompleatly in Church state, not upon their own, but upon the
account of their parents. For they are coasidered as comprehended in them, or
parts of them, and for their parents sake were so far owned as to be admitted
unto Baptism; and this by virtue of the covenant, which is made to, and
comprehends the parents in the first place: And the children secondarily, as
descending from such parents; for thus it runs: Genesis 17.7.
I will establish my Covenant (says the Lord) between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generations, to be a God unto thee and to thy seed
after thee. Cobbet. vindic.
The Jews and Proselytes children are externally in Covenant in their parents
right; God accepting the actual owning of the Covenant by the parents in stead
of their children also. Ibidem.
The same Author opening the meaning of 1 Cor. 7.14. thus says, The Covenant,
and Church Estate of Covenant, and inchu ched parents, is firstly the parents
Friviledge, and so to be considered. From hence arises the Foederal or
Ecclesiastical holiness of such children, by virtue whereof they are entitled
to Baptism, and differenced from other children; who, if considered in
themselves, would be in the same condition with others; viz. Extranei and
unclean as well as they; it is the parents Churchstate from whence they have this
privilege, as appears from those passages of Paul, speaking to this purpose,
Romans 11.16. If the root be holy, so are the branches: And 1 Cor. 7.14. The
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wise, and the unbelieving
wise is sanctified by the believing husband, else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy: viz. Foederally or Ecclesiastically so. Thus are they
after baptism in Church State, but yet incompletely so, because not perfect
Christiani nec consummati quoad Ecclesiasticam perfectionem, as has been
before declared.

2. That Baptism only, does neither entitle a person unto, nor make him
Proximately capable of any further Church privilege: They were, in this regard
ranked among the Ca techumeni, who, we know, were not admmitted so much as to
be present at, nor to behold the administration of the Lords Supper; nor were
the mysteries of the Sacraments opened and made-known to them, as has been
shown before.

3. That the Ordinance of the Lords Supper ought not to be administered unto the
baptized in infancy, when they are grown up to years of discretion, merely upon
the account of their baptism; which as it gave them a being in the Church,
after a sort, and incomplete only; so do they by it acquire only a Fundamental
and Remote, but not a Formal and Proximate right unto all other ordinances. It Is
indeed causa sine qua non, but not solitaria per se sufficiens, for the
investing of them with all Church Priviledges: for, though not such, as such,
or because such only; yet none but such are to be admitted unto full communion;
there being two doors to be passed through before we can come ad adyta and
intima Ecclesiae penetralia; viz. Baptism and Confirmation: whereof the latter
properly and immediately gives admittance; but withal our arrival so far,
presupposes our entrance in by the former.

4. That a distinction is, and ought to be made between Ecclesiam infantum
Baptizatorum, in Heb. 6.2.
and adultorum Confirmatorum: thus Paraeus. Infantes Christianorum jure
promissionis Baptizabaxtur in infantia, pueritiam egressi impositione manuum in
Ecclesiam adultorum recipiebantur. The infants of Christians are by virtue of
the promise baptized in infancy, and, having past their childhood, are by
imposition of hands received into the Church of the adult. Not that these were
two distinct Churches, (for they did both concur according to their several
capacities to the making up of one) but rather two distinct forms or Classes of
persons, of and in one and the same Church: Which two sorts, as they enjoy
their standing upon different grounds, so are they by the Church dealt withal,
and entertained in a different manner: The one she suckles as in infancy, with
the milk of principles; but spreads a table for, and sets before fore the
other strong meat, and variety of dishes, as it were; as a wise mater-familias
suiting their food and fare unto the condition and quality of the persons in
her family, giving unto each their proper portion.

5. That the Baptized in infancy, when grown up to years of discretion, are to
stand upon there own bottom, and to be considered by the Church as in
themselves, and no longer in their parents, as formerly. For now the Church is
to take cognizance of such, as obliged to the performance of personal service
to the Lord (being capable of ability so to do) which, as their parents cannot
perform for them, so neither can they exempt them from it. They have been
accounted of, and continued in the family hitherto, because they were born of
such parents as belonged to, and were full members of the family. But now must
they make good their standing for themselves, if they will enjoy further
privileges.

6. That in those who have been baptized in infancy, and are now adult,
somewhat more is requisite in themselves, and to be by them declared and
manifested, before the Church can warrantably proceed to the admission of them
to full Membership, and the actual enjoyment of all Church Priviledges; because
they themselves being of ability, in point of age, and use of reason, to act as
Church Members, are obliged so to do: Nor will the state and action of their
parents stand them in any stead, nor suffice any longer in their behalf. The
consent of the parents was indeed at first sufficient for the intituling of
them both to the covenant, and also the initiatory Seal thereof, they not being
able to perform it themselves: But now being adult, and so consequently of
ability, their personal actual consent is requisite to their enjoyment of any
further benefit or blessing of the Covenant; for the Lord intrusts a person
with no talent, but he expects the improvement of it, that being his end in
bestowing it. And as in subjecto capaci personal faith in the heart, and
confession with the mouth is required unto justification and salvation; Romans
10.10.
so likewise is it here, in such a subject the actual owning of the terms of
the Covenant, and voluntary engaging withal; as also profession of the faith,
and visible holiness; viz. such as upon probable ground may rationally by the
rules of the Word be concluded from the conversation of the person, are
requisite for the warranting of the Church in her proceeding to the admission
of such a one as was ^aptized in infancy, to the actual enjoyment of the
privileges of full and complete members.

7. That the baptized in infancy, when grown up to years of discretion, if they
either offer not themselves willingly, or offering themselves, cannot give a
satisfactory account of their Faith and manner of life unto the Church for
their admission, are to continue and to be left in that condition, without
enjoying any further privilege. For their actual and full joining unto the
Church, must be an act of their own; to which, that it may be duly performed,
tisrequisite that they therein be free and voluntary, as also fitly qualified.
Without the latter, the Churches act in admitting of them would be
unwarrantable, they not proceeding herein according to the rule of the Word:
And without the former, the act of the persons so offering themselves would be
invalid and of no force, as to the thing intended; viz. Communion, and the
benefit accruing thereby, whereunto the consent of the persons is chiefly
requisite, which is not truly such, unless it be free, and neither feigned nor
forced. This is that wherein theunion of a particular Church, and the Communion
to be observed therein by the appointment of Jesus Christ, does consist; viz.
Owen of Schi^cap. 7. Sect. 20.
in the joint consent of all the members of it, in obedience to the command of
Christ, from a principle of love, to walk together in the universal celebration
of all the ordinances of the worship of God, and to perform all duties and
offices of love respectively to one another, as are by God required of them,
and doing so accordingly. The Learned Professor of St. In his refutat. of Mr.
Lockiers Sermon.
Andrews in Scotland, Mr. James Wood, declaring what kind of profession of
Faith, holiness, and subjection to Ordinances, is a sufficient qualification
in the Ecclesiastic Court, to constitute a person fit matter to be received as
a member of the visible Church, does thus Modificate it; viz. that it be a
Serious, Sober profession: which he also thus explains; By Serious, says he, I
mean, such a profession as has in it a moral sincerity at least, i.e. which is
not openly and discernably Simulate, Histrionick, Scenical and Hypocritical, in
that hypocrisy which is gross; but all circumstances being considered, by
which ingenuity is estimate amongst men, giving credit one unto another, there
appears no reason why a man may not, and ought not to be esteemed, as to the
matter, to think and purpose as he speaks. etc. Thus ought the consent given
to be without collusion; and so ought it also to be without constraint. Thus
Erasmus somewhat to this purpose: Si qui parvuli baptizati sunt, In Declarat.
ad censur. Theol. Parisiens.p. 20.
^bi adoleverint interrogati negent se rata habere, quae susceptores nomine
illorum polliciti sunt: Fortassis expediet illos non Cogi, sed suo relinqui
animo, donec resipiscant, nec ad aliam interim vocari paenam nisi ut ab
Eucharistia sumenaa reliquisque Sacramentis arceantur. If such children as have
been baptized, when they are grown up, do, being demanded, deny to ratify
those things which their Godfathers did promise in their name. Perhaps it will
be expedient that they be not constrained, but left to their own mind, till
they repent; and in the mean time, have no other punishment inflicted upon
them, but this only, that they be debarred from receiving the Eucharist, and
other Sacraments. Nor is this tendering of themselves unto Confirmation a matter
arbitrary, and left to the choice of grown persons baptized, whether they will
do it, yea, or no; but a duty incumbent upon them being called upon, and
exhorted thereunto; yea, necessarily to be performed by them in order to their
full membership. So Binnius, upon the 48. In Notis.
Canon of the Council of Laodicea: Exproecepto Christi, velsaliem Eccl^siae,
baptizatos sub peccato ad Sacramentum Confirmationis suscipienaune, dum commode
possunt, obligari, colligunt nonnulli ex hoc Canone, Some do from this Canon
gather, That by the precept of Christ, or at least of the Church, baptized
persons are bound under sin to receive, when conveniently they may, the
Sacrament of Confirmation. In Epist ad Jul. and Julian.
And the words of Clemens Romanus, being thus understood (what ever he meant
bythem) seem to have some truth in them: Quam quis, inquit, regeneratus fuerit
per aquam, and post modum confirmatus, quia aliter perfectus esse Christianus
nequaquam poterit, neo sedom habere inter perfectos, si non necessitate,
sedincuria aut voluntate remanserit, etc. When any one has been regenerate by
water, and afterward confirmed, because otherwise he could not be a perfect
Christian, nor have a place among the perfect, if he remain so, not of
necessity, but through carelesseness, and of his own will, etc. As also those
of Peresius: Quamvis continno transituris sufficiant, regenerationis beneficia
necessaria tamen sunt (grandaevis scil.) confirmationis auxilia. Although to
those that forthwith do die, the benefits of regeneration are sufficient, yet
are the helps of Confirmation necessary: How far it follows: Erit adultis,
quando dabitur recipiendi copia, necessarium. It will be necessary for the
adult, if an opportunity be afforded of receiving it.

8. That the Censure of Excommunication cannot regularly be made use of, nor
exercised toward such as having been Baptized, are adult, but not Confirmed.
For they never were full members, nor had actual or a Proximate right unto the
Lords Supper, or other the privileges of such as are complete Members: and
therefore neither are they the proper objects of Excommunication, nor can they
be deprived by it, or cut off from the enjoyment of that, which
Ecclesiastically they never had a right unto, nor were actually possessed of.
For which cause it might be, that the penitents in the Primitive times, who had
been under that censure, and by it cut off from their state of fellowship with
the Church, upon their return were received into the communion of the Church
again, not by iteration of Baptism, but by Imposition of hands only; intimating
hereby thus much to us, That by Excommunication they were deprived not of their
Baptism, but only of those privileges which by Imposition of hands in their
Confirmation they had been entitled and admitted to the enjoyment of, and
therefore upon their repentance were they by the same way restored unto them
again.

9. That the denial of any further Churchpriviledge unto such as were Baptized
in Infancy, and are adult, but not Confirmed, can be no injury unto them at
all; for injury in the denial of a thing to any person, presupposes his lawful
title and right thereunto; which not being the case of such adult as have
nothing to plead for their right unto such privileges, but their
Infant Baptism only; the denial of them gives them no just cause at all to
complain of any wrong herein done unto them.

10. That all persons baptized and not Excommunicated, are not, nor ought to be
accounted Chruch-Members, as to the actual enjoyment of further
Church Priviledges. For, as more then mere Baptism is requisite to the
intituling of persons unto such privileges; viz. Confirmation, that properly
admits them to full Communion, and gives them their Proximate right, as to the
actual enjoyment of them: So, mere Baptism makes not a person a meet object of
Excommunication, and such a one as may be regularly proceeded against by that
censure, as the contrary Tenet plainly supposes.

Which being the Condition of most persons amongst us at this day, I conceive,
that the leaving of them unto institution by Catechizing and the Ministry of
the Word, that so they may come to the knowledge of, and be acquainted, as they
ought, with the principal doctrines of the Gospel, and by this means (through
the blessing of the Lord) their gross ignorance may be removed, and also they
reclaimed from their loose and profane practices, and their lives reformed, to
the preparing of, and making them meet persons for full Communion, and the
enjoyment of the privileges of complete members: and in the interim, to admit
and join with such only in the administration of the Lords Supper, and other
Church-Ordinances, as shall upon due trial approve themselves to be such, as to
whom of right they do belong, and are fit to partake of, and enjoy them. This
course, I say, I do conceive would much facilitate the work of reformation
among us, that has stuck as it were so long in the birth, and been attended
with so many insuperable and perplexing difficulties, and prove one of the best
expedients and readiest ways to bring us nearer unto the Apostolical pattern,
and the practice of the Primitive and purest times, and so to the enjoyment of
more peace and unity amongst our selves, and to heal our sad divisions; which
has been so much desired. What that practice was then, (and therefore what it
ought to be now) I shall choose to set down in the words of the Reverend Calvin
and Chemnitius, with whom herein do agree many other eminent lights of the
Reformed Churches; viz. Peter Martyr, the Divines of Leyden, 'Paraeus, Rivet,
Peter du Moulin, Didoclavins, etc. The words of Calvin are these: Hic mos olim
fuit, Instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 4.
ut Christianorum liberi post quam adoleverant, coram Episcopo sisterentur; ut
officium illud implerent quod ab iis exigebatur, qui se ad Baptismum adulti
offerebant. Hi enim inter Catechumenos sedebant, donec rite fidei mysteriis
instituti, poteran: fidei confessionem coram Episcopo ac populo edere. Qui ergo
Baptismo initiati erunt infantes, quia fidei confessione apud Ecclesiam tunc
defuncti non erant, sub finem pueritiae, aut ineunte adolescentia,
representabantur iterum a parentibus, ab Episcopo examinabantur secundum
formulam Catechismi, quam tunc habebant certam ac communem. Quo autem haec
actio, quae alioqui gravis Sanct^que, merito esse debebat, plus reverentiae
haberet ac dignitatis, ceremonia quoque adhibebatur manuum Impositionis. Ita
puer ille fide sua approbata cum solenni benedictione dimittebatur. This was
the custom of old, that the children of Christians after they were grown up,
should be brought before the Bishop, that they might perform that duty, which
was exacted of those, that being adult, did offer themselves unto Baptism. For
these did sit among the Catechumens, until being duly instructed in the
mysteries of the Faith, they were able to make confession of the Faith before
the Bishop and the people. They therefore, who, while they were infants, were
Initiated by baptism, because then they made no confession of their Faith
before the Church, about the end of their childhood, or beginning of their
youth, they were again by their parents presented, and examined by the Bishop,
according to a form of Catechism, which then they had certain and common. And
to the end this action, which otherwise ought deservedly to be esteemed grave
and holy, might have the more reverence and respect, the Ceremony also of
Imposition of hands was added to it. So that youth, his faith being approved
of, was dismissed with solemn Benediction.

Chemnitius a little more largely acquaints us herewith in these words
following: Nostri saepe ostenderunt ritum Confirmationis remotis inutilibus,
superstitiosis, ac cum Scriptura pugnantibus traditionibus, pie and ad
Ecclesiae aedificationem juxta Scripturae consensum hoc modo posse usurpari; ut
scilicet, illi, qui in infantia baptizati sunt (talis enim nunc est Ecclesiae
status) cum ad annos discretionis pervenissent, diligenter in certa and
simplici Catechesi Doctrinae Ecclesiae instituerentur: Et cum initia
mediocriter percepisse viderentur, postea Episcopo and Ecclesiae offerentur;
atque ibi puer in infantia Baptizatus. 1o. Brevi and simplici commone factione
admoneretur de suo Baptismo; quo scilicet sit baptizatus, quomodo, quare, and
in quid sit Baptizatus, quid inillo Baptismo tota Trinitas ipsi contulerit and
obsignarit, foedus scilicet pacis, and pactum gratiae; quomodo ibi facta sit ab
renunciatio sathanae, professio fidei and promissio obedientiae. 2o. Puer ipse
coram Ecclesia ederet propriam and publicam professionem hujus doctrinae and
fidei. 3o. Interregaretur de praecipuis Christianae religionis capitibus, ad
singula responderet, aut, si quid minus intelligeret, rectius erudiretur. 4o.
Admoneretur and hac professione ostenderet, se dissentire ab omnibus, ethnicis,
haereticis, phaenaticis, and prophanis Opinionibus. 5o. Adderetur gravis and
seria exhortatio ex verbo Dei, ut in pacto Baptismi, and in illa doctrina and
fide perseveraret and proficiendo proinde confirmaretur. 6o. Fieret publica
precatio pro illis pueris, ut Deus Spiritu suo sancto illos in hac professione
gubernare, conservare and confirmare dignaretur. Ad quam precationem sine
superstitione ad biberi posset impositio manuum; nec inanis esset ea precatio,
nititur enim promissionibus de dono perseverantiae and gratia confirmationis
Talis ritus Confirmationis valde multum utilitatis ad aedificationem juventutis
and totius Ecclesiae conferret: esset enim consentaneus and Scripturae and
puriori antiquitati. Our men have often shown, that the rite of Confirmation,
if the unprofitable, superstitious traditions, and such as are repugnant to the
Scripture, were removed, may be used piously, and to the edification of the
Church, according to the consent of Scripture, after this manner; to wit, That
those who were baptized in infancy (for such is now the state of the Church)
when they had attained to years of discretion, should be diligently instructed
in a certain and simple Catechism of the Doctrine of the Church: And when they
should seem to have received the Principles in some good measure, they should
afterward be offered to the Bishop and the Church; and there the youth that had
been Baptized in infancy: 1. Should by a brief and plain admonition be put in
mind of his Baptism; to wit, By whom, how, wherefore, and into what he was
Baptized; What in that Baptism the whole Trinity did confer upon, and seal up
unto him; namely, the Covenant of Peace, and Promise of Grace: How there was
made a renouncing of Satan, a profession of Faith, and a promise of Obedience.
2. The youth himself should before the Church make a proper and public
Profession of the Doctrine and Faith. 3. He should be examined concerning the
chief heads of Christian Religion, should answer to every one, or if he did not
thoroughly understand any particular, he should be better instructed. 4. He
should be admonished, and by this profession show, that he did dissent from all
Ethnic, Heretical, Phanatical and Profane opinions. 5. There should out of the
Word of God be added a grave and serious exhortation, That he would Persevere
in the promise of Baptism, and that Doctrine and Faith, and by a continual
proficiency be Confirmed. 6. There should be public Prayer made for those
youths that God would vouchsafe by his holy Spirit, to guide, preserve and
confirm them in this profession: unto which Prayer might be added Imposition of
hands, without superstition. Neither would that Prayer be in vain, for
it-stayes upon the promises concerning the gift of perseverance, and grace of
Confirmation. Such a rite of Confirmation would be of very much advantage to
the edfication of youth and the whole Church. For it would be agreeable to the
Scripture and purest Antiquity.



Their deep silence of the special and proper end unto which all this should be
directed, is much to be admired and bewailed, as proceeding from the darkness
and iniquity of the foregoing ages. In which regard (to complete this excellent
and necessary practice of Confirmation) as the Superfluities of Popish and
Prelatical superstitions should be pared off; so also ought what is defective in
the Reformed Churches to be supplied; viz. as to the principal end for which it
was at first intended; The admission of such only, as upon due trial and
examination were judged meet, unto full Churchfellowship, and the enjoyment of
all the privileges of complete members. By this means might the Ordinances be
preserved in their Purity, and the Church restored to her Primitive and native
beauty, which would make her amiable in the eye of Christ her Lord and husband,
the Joy of all the Sons of Sion, and a Praise in the whole earth.

Now for the Advancement and Facilitating of so desirable a work, as the
restoring of this ancient and laudable Rite to its Primitive use; somewhat there
is that appertains to those in the Ministry to be done by them, to whom as
Guids and Stewards the management of the affairs of Gods house is by him
committed; who are therefore to see that order set up and observed therein,
which he has prescribed, and accordingly his Churches in the purest times,
have practiced: and somewhat also there is that respects the people in order
hereunto, whose readiness and concurrence herein is requisite and of great
advantage: as may be gathered from Hezekiahs rejoicing at this in particular,
as a notable furtherance to him in the work of reforming the worship of God. 2
Chr. 29.30
For soit is said, that Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had
prepared the people; for the thing was done suddenly: as contrary wise, the
unpreparedness and untowardness of their hearts, 2 Chr. 20.33
has proved not the least re mora of a thr^ugh reformation, as appears. Howbe
it the high places were not taken away, for as yet the people had not prepared
their hearts to the God of their fathers. Good Jehoshaphat would have gone
through with the work, but so was the heart of this froward people set upon the
unwarrantable way of worship, which they had been long accustomed unto, that
they would not yield nor give place to a reformation in this particular.
Pelican. in loc. supra cicat
So that the pious Prince was either even forced to indulge unto them, in part,
in this their superstition, (which, if so, was his fault) or else, if he threw
down the old altars, they erected new in their room; if he defaced, they again
repaired them, or at least, frequented the places still, where once they stood.

As touching those in the ministry therefore, that they may promote the
restitution of this useful Ceremony, their duty lies in the diligent and
careful performance of such things as these: 1. In acquainting and convincing
their people by the clearest arguments they can furnish themselves withal, of
the necessity of this practice to the right framing of their Churches, and the
bringing of things into due order, which have been so long perplexed and full
of confusion. We may not magisterially impose upon, and force them to the
practice of what we conceive to be their duty; nor should we expect or like of
their receiving our dictates with a blind obedience, neither examining, nor
being sufficiently informed of the truth of them: 2 Cor. 1.24
for what were this, but for us to usurp dominion over their Faith, who should
content our selves in being helpers of their joy? yea, what were it, but to put
them into such a way, as wherein they could neither satisfy themselves in what
they do, Romans 14.5, 14
as wanting faith and full persuasion to warrant them therein? nor please the
Lord and be acceptable to him, Romans 12.1
who calls for (...), reasonable service from his people? We should rather deal
with them, as God does, that he may win them; who draws them indeed, but then
it is with the cords of a man, Hos. 11.4
and ina way of persuasion, by the strength of Argument; the power whereof is
such, that it infallibly prevails, Psalm. 110.4 Cant. 1.3
but yet the effect is none other then the gaining of them to follow him, by a
sweet, yet sure and effectual inclination of their hearts and wills through the
intervention of an enlightened and convinced understanding. As the Lords people
are required to be ready to render a reason of the hope that is in them; 1 Pet.
3. 15
so also, should they no less, of the things practiced by them, the Word being
a complete and perfect Rule, as well for the agenda, as the credenda of a
Christian: in so much, as what action soever cannot be just fled hereby, is no
less then sin to the doer of it. Romans 14. 24
This then in the first place should be endeavored by those in the Ministry;
viz. That the people under their charge may be informed of, and fully satisfied
in the warrantableness of this practice; yea, how requisite and necessary to
the rectifying of what is amiss, and the right management of the affairs of
the Church, that so they may admit of, and give entertainment to it, in such a
manner as they ought, and a ground may be laid, whereupon they might cheerfully
and cordially conform thereunto. One thus gained and prevaild with to embrace
any truth, or submit to any duty, is to be preferred before many that seem so
to do, either for fear of displeasing, or to follow the stream; or out of the
favor they bear to, and high esteem they have of those that are seto ver them.
2. In exhorting the people to their duty, of submitting readily and willingly
unto this course for their admission unto full Church Membership. Though it may
seem a novelty, Impositio manuum ceremonia suit magno quondam in honor habits.
Hyper, opus.de Cateches.
as being a thing that has: been unknown to the later ages, as to its proper
use and end; yet has it the warrant of the best antiquity, and appears to have
been the practice of the purest times, which is the fairest example and fittest
pattern for our imitation. The business that lies before us, and we are
engaged in, to which both ministers and people ought to contribute the utmost
of their assistance, is the work of Reformation, the recovery of the Church
from that low and languishing condition, that prevailing Antichristianism had
cast her into, unto a sound constitution and her Primitive beauty: for the
accomplishment whereof, as what is noxious and detrimental, having been
introduced in the declining and darker times, is to be removed; so should that
be restored again, which in her first and most flourishing state she did enjoy,
but since by the negligence of some, and the iniquity of others, she has lost
and been deprived of. One particular whereof is Confirmation: Quod Impositio
manuum (inquit Hyperius) negligatur, Ibidem.]
arbitror, non vacare cos culpa, quibus incumbit res Ecclesiarum ordinare. That
Imposition of hands is neglected, I conceive is not altogether without their
fault, upon whom it lies to order the affairs of the Churches. The smoke
ascending out of the bottomless pit, had for some fore-pass'd ages, overclouded
and greatly eclipsed the glorious light of Gospeltruth, and dismal darkness had
covered and overspread the whole heaven almost of the Christian world. At what
time, its no marvel if the Church has been stripped and spoiled of much of her
costly and comely raiment and attire: it was in the night season that the Church
received so much wrong as she complains of. The watchmen (says she) that went
about the City found me, Cant. 5.7. Impreatores, pontifiecs, Epis. Brightman.
they smote me, they wounded me; the keepers of my wall took away my veil from
me. But, seeing that the Gospel (through the goodness of the Lord) has begun
to recover its light, and in so great a measure has broken forth in the
brightness and glory of it, so that now the clouds and darkness are dispel'd,
and vanish before this rising Sun; is it not meet for, yea, the duty of all the
sons of Sion, to endeayour by diligent search and inquiry, the regaining of
what has been lost, and the investing and decking of the Church again with her
former Jewels and Ornaments; whereof Confirmation rightly made use of, is not
the least, and which will add not a little to the Churches Splendour and beauty?
Ibidem
Merito, inquit, Hyperius, isthaec in omnibus Ecclesiis and fideliter
proponeretur and religiose usurparetur. Deservedly would this be both
faithfully set forth, and religiously made use of in all the Churches. Being
therefore recovered and recommended to future practice, what welcome
entertainment and willing submission should it find from all those that wish
well to Sion, and do heartily desire the prosperity thereof? Have we been the
Lords remembrancers, earnestly beseeching him to have mercy upon Sion, and to
make Jerusalem a praise in the earth? Have we had compassion on, and taken
pleasure in the stones, and favored even the dust thereof? And has the Lord
graciously inclined his ear, and had respect unto the prayer of the destitute,
and not despised their prayer? Is he arisen, and does he begin to appear in his
glory, for the raising of his Church out of her ruins? And has he caused it to
be proclaimed, that whoever is willing should go up and build the house of the
Lord; and given his people not only liberty, but encouragement so to do? And
shall we now be slack and withhold our hand and discourage the builders by our
backwardnefs and untowardness? Shall we choose rather to abide still in Babylon
with the Potters, then to be employed with our Ezra's in re-edifying the
Temple, and setting up of the worship of our God in its purity? Far be this
from any of us that profess his name. Rather, let us bless the Lord (as there
is cause) that we live to see this day, and that he honors us with such an
opportunity of furthering so blessed a work; and let it not be undervalued and
overslipt. Let us readily and rejoycingly put our shoulders to the work, and
make it a matter of great exultation, to see the Foundation of the Churches
Reformation laid, and so good a progress made in its long desired restoration.
3. In considering of, and resolving upon some meet way, for the preparing and
fitting of persons unto Confirmation. The thing is not trivial, but of very
great weight and concernment; as that whereby persons are admitted unto full
membership, and so consequently, that whereupon the right constitution of the
Churches of Christ does much depend, and therefore not to be made use of
slightly and as a mere formality, (as too too long it has been) but with due
deliberation, and all diligent circumspection. Such therefore as have been
baptized in infancy, ought in order hereunto, to be carefully educated in the
Nurture and admonition of the Lord; Ephesians. 6.4
i. e. In Doctrina Christiana and piis commonefactionibus ad officia pietatis:
Piscst.
In things necessary to be known and practiced by persons professing
Christianity. To which end the excellent and useful duty of Catechizing was
religiously observed in the Primitive times of the Church, wherein a peculiar
officer was appointed, a meet order prescribed, and a great assiduity
discovered for the through and right management of so weighty a husiness.


In great and numerous Congregations, the distinct office of a Catechist would
be of very singular advantage; some meet and well furnished person, being
chosen for this purpose, and designed unto this work, which he should wholly
and diligently atted. The Ancients looked upon it as a business of so great
concernment, that special heed was taken for the committing of it to such only
as were meetly qualified for it; viz. to grave and staid men, Hyper. in opus.
de Cateches.
eminent for their holiness, endued with the gift of teaching, patient,
prudent, able to suit them selves in what they delivered, to the capacity and
condition of those they had to deal withal. Its true, that sometimes this task
was undertaken by such as were but young; for it appears that Origin was but
eighteen years of age, when first he was called to, and took upon him this hard
Province in the famous School of Alexandria: But then we are to consider, that
he was by his godly and learned Father Leonides trained up from his very
childhood, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. c. 1.
not only in the knowledge of the Scriptures, but also in the Liberal Arts and
Sciences, in both which he profited exceedingly and above his years, to the
great joy and admiration of his pious Parent and instructor, insomuch as that
sometimes he would uncover the breast of this his son, while asleep, and
solemnly kiss it, blessing God and giving him hearty thanks that he had made
him the Father of so rare a son. Besides it seems a kind of necessity put him
upon it, Hierom in Catalog. Origin Eusebius. l. 6. c. 2.
the Church of Alexanaria through the heat of persecution being then so
dispersed, that others of riper years, so meet, were scarce to be had. Such
another was Cyrill of Jerusalem, whose Catechetical Lectures to the
Catechumens, composed by him in ad^lescentia, in his youth, In Catalog.
Hierom makes mention of; though whether they were so many as now are extant,
or delivered Extempore, by him, as Grodecius would have it, Biblioth Patr.
River. Crit. Sa.
or be so free from corruption as they should be, is very questionable: only
thus much they plainly speak out, That he was sooner then ordinary, mature, and
so might the better be entrusted with that serious employment. But ordinarily
it was not so the Church using much caution in the choice of that person, upon
whose shoulders they thought it safe to lay so great and weighty a burden.

As for ordinary Congregations, the care hereof will lie upon the particular
Pastors, who ought to improve all ways and means for the bringing of those
under their charge to the knowledge of the chiefly necessary truths of
Christianity: Whereof private, personal instruction is neither the least, nor
unlikeliest to do poor ignorant Souls good. But of this, both that it is a duty
incumbent upon Ministers, and how it may be performed for the best advantage, I
shall forbear to say any thing, In his Gilds; Salvianus.
seeing the reverend Mr. Baxter has spoken so excellently of it already, to
whom I shall refer the Reader.

The more public and common means, is that of Catechizing, which the Church in
the purest times has carefully observed for the preparing of adult Catechumens
to Baptism, and the infant Baptized for Confirmation. This calls for the pains
and prudence of the several Pastors in their particular charges, that the
darkness of ignorance may be dispelled by the beams of the knowledge of saving
truths, and those over whom they have the inspection, may become a people
prepared by the Lord. For which end, care ought to be had of these two things
especially, that the thing aimed at in this duty may be the better attained.

1. Of the Matter: That the things to be taught and learned by those that are
thus to be instructed, be such as they ought to be; Viz. 1. Fundamental and
necessary truths, which all of capacity are bound to be acquainted withal, and
without the competent knowledge whereof, the hazard of Eternal life is
manifestly incurred. Theolog. Bremens. in Act. Synod. Dodreei
Catechetica institutio est fundamentum aedificationis Ecclesiasticae, adeo ut
ea mediccriter formando populo Dei sufficere possit. Catechetical institution,
is the foundation of Ecclesiastical edification; so that in some measure it may
suffice for the forming of the people of God. These truths are the Basis and
groundwork as it were of Christianity, that bear up all the building, which
therefore must be laid in the first place, before superstructions be attempted,
as we would be accounted wise Master Builders, Non sunt contemnenda quaesi
parva, sine quibus magna constare non possunt. Hisrom. Epist. 7.
Workmen that need not to be ashamed; and not undergo the censure that they
deserve, who think to erect an edifice without a foundation. Such truths have
been always the subject matter of the Catechism, which concern the weakest and
lowest in the School of Christ, as well as the strongest and those in the
highest form; being the necessary and common food of all the children of the
Church, Uthers S^^^^l in Ephesians. 4. 13.
in respect of which radical truths, there is not an unity only, but such an
equality also brought in among all sorts of Christians, as was heretofore among
the congregation of the Israelites in the collection of their Mannah, where he
that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack.
These are the truths which the Apostle Paul calls (...), Heb. 5.12. and 6.1.
milk (for babes) and the first principles (or the elements) of the beginning
of the oracles of God. Also, the pattern of wholesome words: 2 Timothy 1.1^
Sic vocat prima rudimenta Christianismi, qnae nos Catechetica capita vocamus,
Parae. in Heb. 5.12.
unde puerorum institutio in Scholis and Ecclesia inchoari solet. So he calls
those first rud ments of Christianity, which we call Catechetical heads, whence
the institution of children in Schools and in the Church uses to take its
beginning. In loc.
There is this order (says Dickson) to be kept, in bringing men to knowledge;
the first principles and fundamental Doctrines must first be taught. These
being the sum of those truths in the Scripture, Calv. instit. l. 2. c. 16.. 18.
which are necessary to be believed; hence it is, that the Ancient Creed
wherein they are briefly comprehended was entitled the Apostles Creed; not
because it was compiled by them (which some have thought without warrantable
ground, In his Treat of the Authors and authority of the Creed, as also Mr.
Parker de Descens. Christi lib 4. In Praefat. Catecher, institute a Dieterico
as the Reverend and learned Mr. Down has clearly proved by diverse Arguments)
but because the matter therein contained is perfectly agreeable with the
Apostles writings, and was collected our of them. For the same reason did
Luther call his Catechism, Parva biblia, because its a brief sum of the
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and a compend of the Orthodox faith.
Catechtical instruction ought therefore to be confined to doctrines fundamental
and necessary, which all are bound to believe, Epistad Durae, de pace. Tit. 1.4.
whereunto the learned Davenant supposes that the Apostle had respect, when he
styled Titus his Son, (...), after the common faith. And in this regard the
great Athanasius both begins and ends his famous Creed with these words; This
is the Catholic Faith, which unless a man steadfastly believe, he cannot be
saved. 2. Few and not needlessly multiplied: for so they were from the
beginning, that they might be attainable by all: in one of the Apostles
ordinary Sermons, there was so much matter delivered, as was sufficient to
convert men to the Faith, Usher. Sermon. in Ephef. 4.13.
and to make them capable of baptism. The confession made by the Eunuch, upon
which by Philip he was forthwith baptized, is contained in a very few words:
viz. Acts 8.37 Loc.com. 47 31.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: Quae verba, inquit, Bucanus,
continent perspicuam confessionis formulam quae temporibus Apostolicis a
Baptizandis adultis exigebatur. Which words do comprehend a perspicuous form of
that confession, which in the times of the Apostles was required from adult
persons to be Baptized. The sum and substance of that Confession of faith which
was made at Baptism, is comprised in those short words of Christ, when he
commissioned the Apostles to go into all the world, and to gather his Church
from among all nations: teaching and baptizing them. In the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Mat. 28.18 De Trinir.l. 2
Sufficiebat credentibus (inquit Hilarious) Dei Sermo, qui in auribus n^stris
transfusus est: Cum dicit Dominus, Euntes, etc. That word of God is enough for
believers, which was sounded in our ears, when the Lord says, Go teach and
baptize. So that its likely that the confession of the Baptized, at first,
extended no further then to the Doctrine of the Trinity: Parker de
Deseens.l.4.. 10
Whence it is that none of the ancient Creeds proceeded beyond it. That which
bears the name of the Apostles (whereof, though they not the authors yet
evident it is that it was were framed not long after their time) initio in sola
fide Trinitatis substitit: At first it stayed in the Faith of the Trinity only:
De Ecclesia articulus, and qui exm sequuntur, tempore Tertulliani, ut videtur,
addi caeperunt. The Article concerning the Church, and those that follow it,
began to be added, as it seems, in the time of Tertullian: De Praescript.
sdvers. Heretic.
yet is the rule of faith, set down by him, bounded within the same limits;
viz. of the Doctrine of the Trinity. So also is the Nicean Creed, Socrat.l. 1.
c. 5.
and that of Athanasius; to which more might be added. Christ then himself gave
the first Rule of Faith, in the above recited words, Martin. Ibld.
which are as it were, Centrum Fide^, the Center of Faith; whose command and
direction to the Apostles, is the very Basis and Foundation of it. Whence it
is, that the Ancients, when they fetch the Christian Faith from its first
Original, Parker de Del.4.. 11
or make any sum of the confession of it, non ultra Trinitatem progrediuntur,
go not beyond the Trinity. Lex fidei nostrae in Trinitate consistit, Sermon. 131
says Augustine; the Law of our Faith consists in the Trinity. Byfield on
the Creed.
And probable it is, that the Creed called the Apostles, was not fully finished
in this form it now is, till about the fourth Age after Christ. The Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews makes the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but
a few; Epist. ante lib. de Christ. relig. Piscat. Paraeus in loc.
as appears Heb. 6.1, 2. Which the eminent Zanchy calls by the name of Symbol^m
Magnum, the Great Creed: where some reckon but four, accounting Baptism and
Imposition of hands to be none of the Principles, but mentioned, as being the
times when anaccount was rendered, and profession made of those other; viz. by
the adult baptized at their baptism, U^sin. Prolegoad Catechism.
and by the infant baptized at their Confirmation: which Principles are
therefore called the Doctrine of Baptism and Imposition of hands. Some reckon
six, as they lie fairly to view: Hyper. opusc. l. in loc.
and some seven (which is the most that they can amount unto) making Doctrine
to be a distinct principle from Baptism and Imposition of hands: in which
Scripture, says Hyperius, a most certain method of the Catechism is contained,
then which a more compendious cannot be devised; so that marvel it is, that any
in the Church should dare to depart from that form. But though they did, yet
were the heads of Catechetical Doctrine still but few in number. Augustine
referred them all to these seven; Hyper Ibid.
viz. Of the Trinity, the Benefits by Christ, the Resurrection, the last
Judgment, Eternal life, Charity and Holiness of life. In Cateches^inter
opuseul. Pfeil. in clave Theolog. Decade.
Calvin refers them to four; viz. Faith, the Law, Prayer, and the Sacramets;
With whom herein Brentius and Bullinger do agree. Mostly have Divines kept to
those five; viz. the Decalogue, the Creed, the Lords Prayer, Baptism, and the
Eucharist; to which some do add a sixth; viz. of the Doctrine of the Keys.

So that in the duty of Catechizing, heed ought to be taken hereof, and some
short form pitched whereof a rational account should be required from persons
to be Confirmed. Among the many now extant, that lately set forth by the
Reverend Assembly deserves to be preferred (with which a shorter may be joined,
as making way to it) having so large an approbation and Elogy, Baxter Confess.
of Faith, 3
from so worthy and judicious a Pen: the approbation is given in these words: I
do heartily approve of the shorter Catechism of the Assembly, and of all
therein contained, and I take it for the best Catechism that ever I yet saw,
and the answers continued for a most excellent Sum of the Christian Faith and
Doctrine, and a fittest to try the Orthodoxness even of teachers themselves:
After follows this larger Elogy, I would have those men, that have such a
swelled belief, to compare the Assemblies shorter Catechism, not only with the
Epistles which the Apostles wrote to particular Churches, but withal the
confessions of Faith for four hundred years after Christ, in the Church; and
see if any of them used a more extensive Form. Nay, all the Creeds and
confessions of the Church set together for many hundred years, (except the
Scriptures) were not comparable to this for fullness and exactness of order
and Expression. -- Nay, what talk I of Creeds and Confessions, when you may
read many and many Volumes of the Fathers, (which yet in several respects (for
their reverend Antiquity, their better opportunity to know the way of the
Apostles in matters of fact, etc.) I do prefer before any writings of these
times) that contain not so much of the body of Theology, as this Catechism,
which Simpliciter and for the innate worth of the writings themselves, I prefer
much before them.

Thus he. 3. Facil and easy in regard of the expressions made use of in the
delivery of them. Its true, that some of the Catechetical Doctrines are some of
the deepest of the deep things of God: The lowest principles of Christianity
(say the Reverend Ministers of London in their exhortation to Catechizing) are
the highest Mysteries: being purely matters of Faith, and such as transcend the
reach of reason and mere humane understanding; yet as to the (...) of them are
laid down expressly in the Scripture, which are therefore to be propounded unto
those that are to be taught, as near as may be in the Scripture terms: in
which regard I call them plain and easy, because for the Divine authority of
the Scriptures afferting them, they are to be received and believed as the
truths of God, and as things that are unquestionably so; though by reason of
the shallowness and weakness of our capacities, we cannot apprehend why, and
how they should be so. Besides, they ought so to be laid down, because they are
truths of common concernment, necessary to be known and believed by all; the
weak Christian, (...) Clem. Alex. Heb. 5.13, 14. (...)
as well as the strong; babes and unskilful, as well as those of perfect age,
and who have their senses exercised: They are milk for the one sort in their
Proposition (says Mr. By field) and strong meat for the other in their
Exposition. On the Creed.
Easy and obvious they should be in their Supersicies to every eye, though
there lie hid in the bo vels of them the most profound and knotty Controversies
of Theology.


Sermon. 115. in
Thus what Agustine said of the Creed in the beginning of his Sermon, de
traditione Symboli, should be verified of the matter of the Catechism. Symbolum
inquit, quod vobis tradituri sumus, comprehenfio est fidei nostrae and
perfectio: Simplex, breve, plenum; ut simplicitas consulat Audientium
rusticitati, brevit as memoriae, plenitudo Doctrinae. The Creed that we are
about to deliver unto you, is the comprehension and perfection of our faith:
It Is plain, brief, full; that in the simplicity thereof, regard might be had to
the rudenes of the hearers, (or Catechumens) in the brevity to memory, in the
fullness to doctrine; Agreeable whereunto is that passage of the reverend Usher:
Sermon. in Ephesians. 4.13
We may not think, says he, that heaven was made for deep Clerks only; and
therefore, beside that larger measure of knowledge, whereof all are not capable,
there must be a rule of Faith common to small and great, which as it must
consist of few propositions (for simple men cannot bear away many) so it is
also requisite, that those Articles should be of so much weight and moment,
that they may be sufficient to make a man wise unto Salvation.

2. Care ought also to be had of the manner of performing this duty, which
being duly observed, may much facilitate and promote the work. To which three
things are requisite and to be observed.

1. That it be done frequently, even as often as conveniently it may; that so
there may be opportunity of dealing with all that need instruction this way;
and that each person (from whom an account of the whole cannot be expected at
once) may come the oftener under hand, and so by degrees a progress be made,
till the thing intended be attained. So much is intimated in that precept to
the Jews, wherein they are enjoined this duty of Catechizing their children
(for usually is this place brought as an instance hereof in the Old Testament):
Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, Deuteronomy. 6.7
and talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: In which Text two
things are contained, that are expressly to this purpose.

1. The word rendered, To teach diligently, signifies properly to Whet, (...)
and set an Edge upon them, as we use to do upon a Knife or Tool; and because
this is done, Saepius ad cotem impellendo: Shindler. Penta-glot. Oleaster in
Deuteronomy. 6.7
hence by a Metaphor it signifies, ing eminare, iterare, whence comes the word
(...) proverbium: Locutio quae Saepius in ore omnium revolvitur: A saying which
is often revolved in the mouth of all men. So that the meaning of the word here
used, is this: q. d. Pagnin. interl. Varablus. LXX.
Thou shall be often repeating and speaking of them; repetes ea, nculces ea
Filiis tuis; that so they may sink ino them by degrees; (...) a word used ^y
Matthew, concerning Herodias instructing ^er daughter to ask of Herod the head
of John he Baptist, which it is like she did with much ear^estness: Mat. 14.8
Maldonar. in l.
Non admonitionem solam (inquit Malmatus) sed persuasionem, incitationem, vim
^super quandam significat. 2. The Occasions which they are to take for the
doing hereof; viz. at home, abroad, early and late; all opportunities to be
improved this way, none omitted or neglected. Now what is here thus given in
charge to parents, so far also concerns the Catechist, that he is to be
frequently exercised in this duty; which the word, expresling his work seems
to import; Illyric. in Clav.
viz. (...) q. d. Insonare aut circum sonare; quod talem institutionem necesse
est summa fide and assiduitate tradere. The heart of man, specially in respect
of spiritual things, being l ke unto a narrow-mouthed vessel, taking in and
receiving them, guttatim as it were: Need there is therefore for the Catechist
to be doing the oftener with them, that his pains may be to good purpose.
Precept must be upon precept, Isai. 28.10
as speaks the Prophet, Precept upon precept, Line upon line, here a little
and there a little. And this was the custom of the Christian Church of old,
frequenter repetere, and ab auditoribus exigere quae exposita fuerant; Hyper.
in Opus. cap. de Catechcs.
often to repeat, and to require of the Auditors (or Catechumens) an account of
the things that had been expounded or opened unto them: And that the rude and
unlearned might the more easily and sooner understand: Non gravabantur
Catechistae subinde eadem commutatis verbis repetere atque inculcare. The
Catechists thought it not too much, again and again, changing their words, to
repeat and inculcate the same things.
2. Familiarly, and with much condescension to the capacity of the meanest and
weakest; that so none may be discouraged, but rather allured and brought to a
love and liking of the work, and to submit unto it readily and cheerfully.
Austerity and a Supercilious deportment would ill become a Catechist: From
which, what can be expected, but the daunting of their spirits, and deterring
of persons from him, who should rather by all means endeavor to draw and
indear them to himself. Such a carriage would better become, and be far more
commendable in him, as was in the Apostle Paul toward the Thessalonians: who
was gentle among them, 1 These. 2.7 (...) Delecto placidus; virtus arrogantiae
repugnans leigh. 1 Cor. 9.22 Paraeus in loc.
even as a nurse among her children: and also toward others; for, says he, To
the weak 1 be. came as weak, that I might gain the weak; i. e. Demittendo se ad
eorum infirmitatem, seu ut cum infirmis agends, mansucte and absque rigore.
Condescending to their infirmity, or dealing with them as with weak ones,
gently and without rigor. They are babes that are committed to their care, who
accordingly should be tenderly dealt withal, and the most winning way made use
of, that they may take in, and give entertainment unto those truths, which they
are to be instructed in. Epist. 7.
Thus old Hierom, having given diverse precepts and directions unto the widow
Laeta, for the right institution of her daughter Paula, closes his Epistle to
her in these words: If, says he, you will send her unto me, and magistrum me
and nutritium spondeo: gestabo humeris, balbutientia senex verba formabo, etc.
I promise you, that I will be both a Master, and a Nursing father to her. I
will carry her in mine arms, and, though an old man, I will frame my words in a
stammering manner (or speak as she) which thing Augustine thus expresses, De
rud. Catechizand.
as that which the Catechist should be willing to do; viz. Decurtata and
mutilata murmurare. To use half words as it were, and broken expressions
speaking a dialect most suitable to those that they have to do withal, and in
the most familiar manner that they can.

And has not thorefore the Church pitched upon that course for Catechetical
instruction; viz. by way of Question and Answer, as the most familiar and best
suiting with the condition of those that are thus to be instructed? And in
proceeding further with them, then the bare receiving of the answers in the
Catechism, were not a familiar Interlocutory discourse, the fairest and
likeliest way, to draw out of them their apprehensions of things, that so it
may appear whether they do rightly understand, and be able to render a rational
account of what they have learned, not resting in the mere work of the memory
and tongue? And wherein they mis-apprehend or come short, to rectify and help
them by the plainest explication of what they fail in? It is true, that for the
most part in the primitive times, the Catechist proceeded by way of Lecture, or
Homily, in propounding the rudiments of Christianity; to which his Scholars
were to give diligent ear, whence they had the name of Audients. Catechumens,
or Hearers; Bibliot patrum tom. 2
as appears y the Catecheses of Cyril of F^^salem, which are no other then so
many Lectures upon several texts of Scripture. Yet had they a certain day
appointed before Pasche and Pentecost (which were the ordinary Baptismal times)
wherein for a proof of their proficiency, Hyper. Opuse. de Cateches.
they were examined by way of Question and Answer. And that this way of
teaching was very ancient in the Church, may be gathered (says Pelargus) from
the two Books of Junilius an African Bishop, who lived, In Epist. ante Junili
Bellar, Eccles.
ann. 545. which he styles, of the parts of the Divine Law, and Dedicated unto
Primasius Bishop of Vtica, Augustines Scholar, Junil. in Praef. ad Primasium.
having written them at his request; wherein he observes this Form of Question
and Answer. And since the reformation, this duty of Catechizing having been
received, (which had in the times of prevailing Antichristianism been so long
neglected: Bucer. de vera Ecclesireconcil.
Vt Catechismi ubique non usus moao, sed and nomen ^enitu ixterciderit. That
every where not the ^se of the Catechism only, but the very name ^hereof lost)
the practice of it has been geneally by way of Question and Answer; insomuch,
that usually this is taken in the description of it. ^atechesis (inquit
Vrsinus) Christianae Reli^ionis, In Prolegomen. ante Catechism
est brevis, perspicua, and ad captum ruliorum accommodata Doctrinae
Christianae e Scriptis Propheticis and Apostolicis collecta, and ^n certas
quaestiones and responsiones digesta expli^atio and recitatio: Catechizing or
such a teaching of Christian Religion, is a brief, and plain explication and
recital of the Doctrine of Chritianity, fitted to the capacity of the rude and
gnorant, gathered out of the Prophets and Apostles, and digested into certain
Questions and Answers.

3. In a fatherly manner, with authority mixed with love; and with such gravity
and seriousness, as may become and adorn both their place and employment; so
that slightness and negligence may be prevented in those that are to be
instructed, and due reverence and respect may be given by them to their
teachers; which is a thing of no small moment and advantage. The advice of Paul
therefore unto Titus, should be looked on, and taken home by Catechists, as
belonging to, and to be followed by them: Let no man, Tit. 2.15
says he, despise thee. To which end, they ought so to behave themselves, that
no just cause of contempt be given by them: Quod fit, Heming. in l.
dum omnia sobria gravitate and gravi sobrietate (sine quibus authoritatem
intercidere necesse est) quasi condiuntur. Which is done, when all their
actions are as it were, seasoned with a sober Gravity, and grave Sobriety,
without which it cannot be, but all their Authority should come to nothing, or
fall to the ground. They should teach then, as those that have authority, so
that those who are taught may be sensible and take notice of it, which would be
found not a little to further the work. Befides, there will be great need
hereof in another case also, viz. in reproving: which the slothful, nesse of
some, and the irregularities of others will oftentimes even necessitate them to
make use of. Twill be requisite that this go along with instruction, which else
will be of little avail with some dispositions, in whom the one must make way
for the other. And is not so much hinted to us in this, that in both the Sacred
Languages the same word should signify and be used for both these; viz.(...),
in the Hebrew: Shind. Pentagl
Corripere, Reprehendere: to Correct, Reprove; and erudire, instituere, and
also to Teach and Instruct. So likewise (...), in the Greek: Quia institutio
and informatio puerorum, Leigh Crit. Sacr
sine Disciplina and castigatione locum habere nequit. Because instruction and
the information of children, cannot take place without Discipline and
Chastisement? And does not authority in the teachers set an edge as it were,
both upon the one and the other, making them to pierce the deeper, and so
become more efficacious then otherwise they would be?

But the word farther carries Sweetness and Mildness in it also, as well as
authority, which should be so far discovered, as that it might be observed and
relished in all the carriage of the Catechist, and be concluded to be the root
and spring from whence both Precepts and Reproofs do proceed. In how sweet and
winning a way does David compellate and invite those whom he would instruct and
Catechize: Psalm. 34.11
Come ye children, says he, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. Illos alloquitur, Gloss Ord.
qui prima fidei rudimenta percipiunt. He speaks to those who receive the first
rudiments of the faith: Andrews Care.
and being about to comprize Religion into a short sum, he thus makes his
entrance; Come ye children. His son Solomon also, who had been his Scholar,
taking upon him the same work of Catechizing, speaks in the same insinuating
Dialect: whose usual manner it is to call those whom he would instruct, by the
loving compellation of children: Pro. 4.1 and often elsewhere
as, Hear ye children, says he, the instruction of a father; Both of them
hereby showing, what a father-like affection and sweet behavior there should
be in the Catechist, toward those that are to be instructed by him. Which, it
seems, was in both these respects to be found in the Catechists of old, who
commonly had by their Scholars the respectful title of Fathers given unto them;
for so much that eminent Catechist, Stromat. lib. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus, tells us: Patres eos dicimus, qui nos in Catechesi
instituerunt. We, says he, call those Fathers, who have instructed us in the
Catechism.

Such heed ought to be taken in this important duty of Carechizing, both as to
the matter or Doctrines to be taught, and also the manner of performing it; as
being of very great use and advantage to the well-being and beauty of the
Church; ( nam nullus cerie fructus ab auditoribus Catechesi non probe
instructis expectari potest in Ecclesi^acirc;. For certainly, no fruit can in
the Church be expected from those hearers who have not been well instructed in
the Catechism) and a necessary mean to the present work of Reformation, in the
judgment of Heroic Luther. Loeicom. class 4
St Ecclisia, inquit, debet unquam reflorescere, necesse est, ut a puerorum
institutione exordium fiat. If ever, says he, the Church do flourish again, of
necessity the work must take beginning from the institution of children: which
therefore should speedlly and carefully be set about.

4. The duty of Ministers lies in this; viz. In considering of, and laying
down some meet way for the right management of the work of Confirmation, and
the receiving of such thereunto, as are fitly qualified for it; that as all
things in the Church, so this among the rest may be done and performed decently
and in order. For this end, because its a work of common concernment, (being
the solemn admission of a person to full membership, and by which he ascends
from the lower rank or Classis of minors and Catechumens, unto the higher of
adult, and those of perfect age, who have right, and accordingly are to be
admitted to the actual enjoyment of all Ordinances and Privileges of such, and
that not in one particular only, but in all the Churches of Christ,) requisite
it is, that the course and way to be taken and made use of, should after due
advice be concluded upon, by as general a vote and consent as may be, of those
to whom the care hereof properly belongs and is committed; that so there may be
a sweet Harmony in their proceeding in the practice hereof, for the prevention
of all jealousies and exceptions, and the taking away all just occasion of
distance and dissatisfaction hereabout.

In order to the better accomplishment of this thing, I shall crave leave to
propose by way of Quaere (not to anticipate or prescribe to any, but merely,
with submission, to communicate my present thoughts) these few particulars
following, which happily may not be altogether unuseful, but somewhat conduce
hereunto.

1. Whether a competent knowledge of the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity,
ought not to be the standard and rule, for me trial of a persons fitness in
this regard, and to be accepted of, and acquiesced in as sufficient. Qui credit
omnia (inquit Davenantius) quae hoc brevi Symbolo (viz. In Epist. ad Duraeum.
de pace, etc.
Apostolorum) comprehensa habemus, vitamque Christi praeceptis conformem agere
conatur, ex albo Christianorum non est expungendus, neque a communione cum
aliis Christianae cujuscunque Ecclesiae membris abigendus. He that believes all
things which we have comprehended in the Short Creed ( viz. of the Apostles)
and endeavors to lead a life conformable to the precepts of Christ, is not to
be wiped out of the Catalogue of Christians, nor cast out of communion with
other Members of any Christian Church whatsoever. Not, but that such a person
may have attained to more, and ought to strive after greater degrees of
knowledge, which in the work of examination may be inquired after. Yet in case
this, and this only be found, ought we not to rest satisfied with it, as was
the manner of the Primitive Church to do? Nevertheless, pressing them not to
rest here, but, according to the Apostles Exhortation; to go on to Perfection.
Heb. 6.1.


2. Whether the profession of their knowledge and Faith in those Fundamentals,
ought not to be required of every one to be Confirmed without exception? as
being necessary to a further progress, and the ignorance thereof inconsistent
with the very being and truth of Christianity in the adult? And are we not
herein to deal impartially, not respecting the person of any, seeing Christ
does not; whose commands and ordinances are alike obligatory to all (none being
exempted) and are to be submitted unto by one as well as another? and in case
of defect herein, or refusal, are we not to forbear to proceed any further, and
plainly to show such persons their sin and danger, exhorting them withal to
future diligence and submission?

3. Whether this profession (at least in men) ought not to be public, before
the Church or Congregration? Seeing that persons thus admitted, ought to be
owned by all, and joined with in Communion as full Members, and respected
accordingly in the performance of all those duties that such Members do owe one
unto another. This clearly appears to have been the practice of the Primitive
Church, the adult Baptized making a public profession of their Faith at
Baptism, wherewith Confirmation usually was conjunct; and that the like was
required of the infant-baptized, at their confirmation when adult, is more then
probable, because then they were to be admitted to full membership upon their
own account, and not of their parents; and therefore to make a personal
profession of their faith, and owning of that Covenant whereinto they were
Baptized, and to it by Baptism engaged. The infants of Christians (says
Paraeus) who had been baptized in their infancy, coming to years of discretion,
In Heb. 6.2.
were by imposition of hands received into the Church of the Adult, having
first, coram Ecclesia, before the Church recited those heads of the Catechism
there mentioned. So also Piscator; Heb. 6.2.
the infant baptized, having after their Baptism been instructed, coram
Ecclesia (coram Episcopo ac populo, Insti^. lib. 4 cap 19.. 4.
before the Bishop and the people says Calvin) solebant per manuum
impositionem in fide Christiana confirmari. Were wont before the Church by
impositition of hands to be confirmed in the Christian Faith; Obser. 4. in loc.
which course, says he, ought still to be observed; and was accordingly by the
Waldenses, who brought their children, when grown up, Apolog. 4. port
Vt rationem fidei suae ipsimet liberrime, coramque tota Ecclesia in
celebrations ritus impositionis manuum profiteantur. That they themselves might
freely profess and render an account of their faith before the whole Church in
the celebration of the rite of imposition of hands.

4. Whether ought not an inquiry to be made into the life and conversation of
the person to be confirmed, and satisfaction in that regard as to sins of
Omission and Commission to be given so far, that it may appear to be
inoffensive and without scandal; nothing being found therein that is either
cross to, or inconsistent with the Faith, whereof he has made profession, and
the Covenant he has entered into? Seeing that the beauty of the Church
consists in the quality of the members thereof, who ought to be both ^ound in
the Faith, and unblamable in their lives: the want of either of these would
make them the blemishes and deformity of that body to which they do belong: And
therefore as a course is provided by the Lord Christ himself, for the cutting
off, and casting out of such, as by the negligence or inadvertency of those who
should have prevented it, being gotten into the Church, do discover themselves
at any time to be such; So will it from thence follow, that due care ought to
be had for the keep^ng out of these that appear to be such, before they be
admitted, that so the Church may be indeed (as it ought) a Society of visible
Saints, whom Jesus Christ the King of Saints may own, and delight to be in the
midst of.

5. Whether ought not Confirmation to be solemnly performed in the Church, with
Prayer and Imposition of hands? Seeing it was the practice of the Primitive
Church so to do; wherein, though Prayer were the main and principal thing, yet
was not Imposition of hands omitted, being a rite or gesture that had been much
used, and honored in the Church before the coming of Christ, as may be
gathered among others, from Mat. 19.13. where it is thus said: Then they
brought unto him little children, that he (i. e. Jesus) should lay his hands
upon them, and pray, or bless them: Paraeus in loci.
Erat enim manus impositio vetus and celebre in populo Dei benedicendi
Symbolum. For imposition of the hand was an ancient and famous Symbol or sign
of blessing among the people of God. It was therefore continued after the
coming of Christ, as upon other solemn occasions ( viz. the conferring of the
Holy Ghost in the extraordinary gifts of it, and Ordination unto office) in the
Church.) So also in the rite of Confirmation; Heming in Heb. 6.2
Episcopi and Presbyteri examinatis imponebant manus, addita fausta precatione
and benedictione. Bishops and Presbyters did lay their hands on those that were
examined, to which was added Prayer and Benediction. This at first was the only
rite in Confirmation, till Unction came in, which yet excluded it not, but
still was it acknowledged, and at least pretended to be made use of: for which
cause. Confirmation was expressed by it as well as Unction. And since the time
that that super-added Ceremony has been abolished by the Reformers, (and
justly so) the Primitive rite of Imposition of hands has been retained: At
least appreved of, and withed for. See p. 42 Heming. Ibid.
Examen vetus retinetur in emendatis Ecoles^is: Superstitiosa, Vnctio, and
tactus genae, ut vana and inepta ^mittu^tur. The ancient way of examination, is
retained in the Reformed Churches: Superstitious anointing, and the blow on the
check, are justly omitted as vain and foolish. Evident then it is, that this
rite has taken place in the Church, from the Apostles times down along to this
day; and therefore, though, having no precept, it may be looked on as not
necessary, but indifferent; yet having the example both of the Apostolical and
succeeding ages, it deserves respect, and to be accounted of, not as a merely
frivolous and empty, but a commendable and convenient rite, rather to be
observed and practiced, then laid aside altogether, and neglected as useless:
manuum impositionem (inquit Piscator) putamus liberae observationis esse,
Observ^t. 4. Heb. 6.2
ut cujus exemp^um quidem Apostolicum extet, non autem praeceptum Chisti. We
suppose that the observation of Imposition of hands is to be left free, as
whereof there is indeed extant Apostolical Example, but no precept or command
of Christ.

6. Whether ought not the person so Confirmed, to be by the Pastor openly
declared to be admitted unto full membership, and to the enjoyment of all
Ordinances and Privileges of such, that so the whole Congregation may take the
more notice of it, and be stirred up to the performance of all those duties
that they owe unto him? That this was the manner and practice of the Church of
old, is testified by Corderius, In Annotat. iin D. Areopagit.
who setting down the particulars of those things that were observed toward the
adult babptized (who were then usually confirmed) reckons this for one: Quod
Pontifex ipsum Eucharistiae capacem declarabat. That he was declared by the
Bishop to be capable of the Eucharist.

7. Whether would it not be of use to keep a public register, wherein the
names of all those who have been confirmed should be enrolled? Which course
has been taken and observed amongst us for such as have been baptized, who yet
not coming under the like cognizance of, nor standing in so full a relation to
the Church, as do the other; there seems to be more reason (though there be
reason enough for both) why the former rather then the latter should be
recorded. The Ancients judged this a circumstance worth the regarding: among
whom as it was required of the Competentes that they should give in their
names; so the custom was to register or record them. Merito imprimis vetus
servaretur institutum Ecclesiarum de inscribendis eorum nominibus qui
Baptizantur. Hyper Opuse. cap. de Catech. Do not these places sound somewhat
this way. Psa. 69.28 See Calvin. See Ainsworths Notes also. Isa. 4.3.
Pachymerus in Paraphrasi in Dionys. Areopagit. Speaking of recording the names
of those that were to be Baptized, In Sacris tabulis, ads, hunc autem existimo
esse librum viventium. De Eccles. Hierarch. l. 2. Epist. 155.
Deservedly should the old order and appointment of the Churches be kept,
concerning the writing down of the names of such as are Baptized, who then also
usually were confirmed. This is evident from the Epistle of Augustine, written
to Martianus a Catechumen, which he shuts up with these words. Tua mereri
Scripta desidero, and te nomen dedisse inter Competentes vel daturum esse,
jamjamque cognoscere. I do desire to obtain some lines from thee, and now to
know that thou have given in, or wilt give in thy name among the Competentes.
And let this suffice to be spoken concerning the duty of Ministers for the
reducing of Confirmation.

2. As for the people, their duty lies in such particulars as these.

1. To be willing that Ministers should take this course, and readily and
willingly to submit unto it without murmuring or opposition; for as it is
required of, and belongs unto the one to take heed unto, Acts 20.28
and govern the flock committed to their charge, Heb. 13.17.
and over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers: So are the other
enjoined cheerfully to yield obedience to them in the Lord, and to be guided by
them. Your frowardness and refusal, will both displease the Lord, and hinder
the Work; as also, discourage your Guids, and be prejudicial to your own Souls:
For if you shall cause those to grieve and groan under the burden, whom you
ought rather to cheer in their work by your ready subjection; certainly twill
be unprofitbble for you. They may not, they dare not admit you unto full
membership, without satisfaction given, and till upon trial you have approved
your selves to be competently at least qualified for it. Their fidelity to
Christ and his Church, who has instructed them as his Stewards with the
administration of his Ordinances, (which they ought to preserve pure, and not
to prostitute them to the unworthy that would pollute them) calls for, and
necessitates them to care in this particular: So that it would be no less then
sinful neglect of duty in them to administer, and dangerous presumption in you
to adventure upon the participation of such ordinances, without due trial made
of your fitness on their part, and just satisfaction therein given on your.
Nefas esse ducemus, Hyper. Opuse. cap. de Catech.
quenquam ad cenam accedere Dominicam, qui exigi and reperi a se elementa
Religionis agree feret. Quae, malum, dementia, velle sacrosanctis mysteriis
interesse, and, ut Christianum decer, uti; interea autem nec fidem Christianam
profiteri, neque de recio usu Sacramentorum recitare quicquam posse? We shall
account it an heinous thing for any one to come unto the Lords Supper, who will
not endure that the Principles of Religion be required of, and repeated by him.
What mischief? what madness is it, to desire to be present at those Sacred
Mysteries, and (as a Christian ought) to make use of them, and in the mean time
not to profess the Christian Faith, nor be able to recite any thing of the
right use of the Sacraments? And do not they deserve exclusion, yea, in a sort
exclude, and render themselves incapable of communion, that shall wilfully
refuse to submit unto instruction, and the orderly way of admission? Ibidem
Equidem (inquit Hyperius) non dubitarem uno verbo edicere, si quis cum
Doctrina Catechistica nihil put at sibi commune esse, hunc perinde facere, at
que si se non esse Christianum and cum Christianismo nihil habere velle negotii
testificaretur. Verily (says he) I should not doubt roundly to pronounce, That
if any one thinks he has nothing to do with the Doctrine of the Catechism, its
all one as if he should declare himself not to be a Christian and that he will
have nothing to do with Christianity. We should let the people know (says Mr.
Baxter) that we take their refusal of examination, Gild. Salvian (...) p. 215
for a refusal of Church Membership, and exclusion of themselves. Can the Work
of Reformation be carried on prosperously and as it ought? or the Ordinances
comfortably and with benefit be enjoyed unless this course be taken? Truly, I
suppose, that if it were duly looked into, this would be found to be the
principal thing, through the neglect whereof, the work has been hitherto
obstructed, so that the desires and endeavors of the Lords people have been
thus far in a great measure frustrate and fruitless. And will you, the people,
still continue to lay this rub in the way, or oppose such as shall labor to
remove it? Believe it, in so doing, as your loss would be great, in depriving
your selves of what otherwise you might enjoy; so your sin would not be small,
in setting your selves against that, which the Lord in his Word requires and
calls for; the Saints have now a long time earnestly desired and prayed for,
and more then ordinary providence have made way for, and given you an
opportunity to promote and further.

Object. But you will happily say, Were not things well enough before, when among
us no such course was taken, or so much as thought upon? and therefore what
need this alteration, and the introducing of a practice into the Church,
unknown (as to this use of it) to our predecessors?

Solut. 10. Surely we should be inexcuseably ungrateful and injurious unto the
Divine goodness, should we not with all thankfulness acknowledge the choice
and singular benefits and privilege; bestowed on, and enjoyed by the unworthy
people of this Island, above what has been vouchsafed to most, if not to any
other Nation. The Lord (for ever blessed be his Name, and magnified be the
exceeding riches of his Grace) has ever looked toward us with an eye of
special favor and respect: Insomuch, that in the very first publication of the
glad tidings of the Gospel, and as soon as ever it began to go out into all the
World, the gracious providence of God took order, that the sound of it should
reach unto, and be heard in this remote corner thereof: De Pinord. Eccles.
Brit^. 1.
a primo exortu Evangel^i, (inquit venerabilis Vsserius) suscepisse Britannos
Christi fidem Gildae verba satis indicant. The words of Gildas do sufficiently
declare, that from the very first rising of the Gospel, the Britains received
the Faith of Christ; by the Ministry either of some one of the Apostles, or
their Contemporaries: Yea, (as says Sr. Henry Spelman) certum est B^^^anniam a
primis ipsis seminatoribus recepisse fidem. Council. Britan.
It Is certain that Britain received the faith by the very first Sowers of it.
And how early this glorious Sun visited our coast, the same Author shows:
Evangelii lumen (inquit) radiavit in Britannia tempore novissimo Tibertii
Caesaris, Ibidem.
qui obiit anno quinto post Christiresurrectionem. The light of the Gospel
beamed forth in Britain, in the latter end of Tiberius Cosa, who dyed in the
fifth year after the Resurrection of Christ. To the same purpose speaks the
wel-deserving Cambaen: Brittannia.
Certum est, inquit, Britannos in ipsa Ecclesiae infantia Christianam
Religionem imbihisse. Certain it is, that in the very infancy of the Church,
the Britains received the Christian Religion. And for the work of Reformation,
so happily enterprized by Luther, as this Nation was not the last, sor either
was it the least, but most considerable party, among whom Religion was
recovered and refined from the deluge and dross of Art christian errors: Where
(through Free Grace) the Work did so prosper, and the Gospel make so admirable
a progress, that (without partiality, and to the praise of that glorious Grace
be it spoken) as no Church has excelled us for Soundness in the Faith, Clerus
Anglic. ^tupor Mundi
and Orthodoxness of Doctrine: so has none equaled us in regard of the
Ministry, for lively and prositable Preaching, and (which through Divine
concurrence, has been the blessed fruit of it) in regard of the people (even
many of them) for the power of godliness. But

2. Though for the Doctrines of the Gospel thus preached and professed among
us, it were in a good measure well with us; yet in other regards was it so far
from being well enough that it fared very ill with us; things being much out of
order and beside the Rule, in matter of Worship, Discipline, and Government, so
that the way and form that herein was pitched upon, and established by civil
Sanction among us, found always some, even of those who were truly pious and
conscientious, that did oppose and could not conform to it; by which means it
became a ball of continual strife and contention, and through the violence of
those in power, an instrument for the silencing and suppressing of many that
might have been of singular use and advantage to the Church, and an occasion of
unhappy separation. Surely, it is much to be wondered at and lamented that those
first reformers anong us, pious and learned, wellmeaning, and well-deserving
men, should so far neglect the pattern contained in the Word, and borrow and
fetch so much of their platform from those, from whom they had so justly and
commendably receded; which gave an adversary of the polity of the Church here,
too just cause to entitle his Book upon this subject Altar Damascenum. Among
other things wherein they imitated those of Rome, was their childish
Confirmation, performed only by the hands of the Bishop: The true use, and
right end of this ancient and laudable Rite being altogether neglected if not
also unknown.

Whence it came to pass, that the Congregations in this Nation, were
overgrown with ignorance and profaneness, consisting mostly of such as were
the blemish of Religion professed here, and a scandal and offense unto those
that feared the Lord. And was it then well enough with us while things were so?
Do not, and have not the Lords people seen, and been for many years convinced
of the necessity of a Reformation in this particular? And will you now say
(when an opportunity is afforded for the doing of it) that there is no need of
it; and oppose the Ministers of Christ, that desire and endeavor the redress
of what is amiss, by the restoration of this ancient, excellent, and useful
course and practice Surely, such a carriage would be both your sin and your
shame, an injury to the Church, and a grief to the Saints; which you ought
carefully to avoid, and labor rather to cheer their hearts, strengthen their
hands, and occasion them to rejoice in, and bless the Lord for your ready
submission unto those that have the rule over you, in this so great and
necessary a part of their work.

Object. 2. This is a course to be taken with children, and not with those who
are of riper years, and now grown aged.

Solut. You may perhaps think so, because Confirmation heretofore has been so
(but wrongly) made use of; children for the most part being the object of it.
But that this was a mere abuse of it, sufficiently appears by what has been
said already. The Primitive Church admitted none hereunto, (as they ought not)
but such as were of competent years, and come to understanding in the things of
God. the same (as we have shown) was the practice of the Waldenses, and is the
judgment of the reformed Churches. The truth is, children are not capable
hereof, nor qualified for it; but such only as are adult and come to some
maturity; and therefore whatever your years or age may be, you ought not to be
owned as full and complete members, till you come under confirmation; you may
not enjoy the one, if you will withdraw and exclude your selves from the other.
Such, as being old men in years, shall yet upon trial be found to be children
in understanding and Knowledge, ought to be dealt withal as children in this
regard; viz. to be instructed in the principles of Religion, and required to
give an account of the same; their age cannot exempt them from an indispensable
duty: neither ought they to think much of it, nor be unwilling in a plain and
familiar way to be taught those things, the ignorance whereof is in them
inexcusable and so great an evil, that if persisted in, and not prevented, may
not only endanger, but prove the utter ruin of their precious souls for ever.
Quam diu (inquit Hyperius) ex omni hominum genere (juvenum, virorum,
matronarum, senum) aliquos esse constat, qui capita Doctrina Religionis
tenentur ignoratione; tam diu erunt omnis generis homines in schola
Catechistica auditores ac discipuli. As long as there are any sort of men
(youths, men, matrons, old men) that are ignorant of the heads of the Doctrine
of Religion, so long persons of all sizes shall be auditors (or Catechumens)
and learners in the Catechetical School: viz. In order to their admission unto
confirmation, to which such knowledge is pre-requisite: So that ripeness of
years is so far from being a just plea for the exemption of any, that it is
necessarily required in persons to be Confirmed.

Object. 3. We have been heretofore owned for full members, and have enjoyed
the privilege of such; and why should we not be so owned still?

Solut. That you were so accounted of, and dealt with, proceeded from either
the ignorance or negligence of those that should have done otherwise, unless
upon due trial you have approved your selves meet. Had they eyed, as they
ought, and kept close to the rule that should have guided them herein, you
might happily have come to see your condition to be otherwise then you deemed it
to be, and have entertained other thoughts of your selves then you did, which
might have proved of no small advantage unto you. So that if things be duly
weighed and considered, you will say, That they did you an injury rather then a
courtesy in dealing with you as they did; and be so far from liking and
allowing of such a course, whereby you were occasioned to sooth your selves in
a state that was neither good nor safe, that you will see cause of blaming them
for their unfaithfulness in a matter of great concernment, and to bless God
for those that shall endeavor the rectifying of your mistakes, and to let you
know that the case is far otherwise with you then you imagined it to be.

And as for the privileges that you enjoyed, ( viz. the Ordinances belonging
unto complete members only) alas, what could more endanger your precious souls,
you being not rightly qualified for them? For instance: It Is true, that nothing
is more sweet and refreshing then the Lords Supper to a gracious soul, drawing
nigh to the Lord therein as he ought: for therein he feeds and feasts upon the
Lord Jesus, and all his fullness unto eternal life. But now, the unworthy
person presuming to approach unto, and partake of that Ordinance, in stead of
Bliss, 1 Cor. 11.29.
meets with his Bane, eating and drinking Judgment to himself and becoming
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And so (according to the Prophet
David's imprecation) the Table of the Lord proves a snare before him, Psalm. 69.23
and that which sbould have been for his Welfare, a trap and ruin to him: And
now tell me, Is this a privilege worth the pleading and contending for?

Object. 4. You conceive it will be a disparagement and disgrace unto you, to
submit unto such a course, whereby you should discover your ignorance in the
very principles of Religion, having lived so many years under the Gospel.

Solut. And will you to avoid this seeming inconvenience expose your selves to
inevitable perdition? You have hitherto been estranged from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in you; and can you be contented to live and die
so? and lose the fruition of the Lord for ever, rather then men should know
your condition to be such, as indeed it is? If the fear of a little supposed
disgrace from men, and those but a few that you live and converse withal, of
such force as to cause you (to your Eternal hazard) to neglect a necessary
duty. Should not a destre to avoid utter shame and confusion of face before all
men and angels, be much more prevalent with you to neglect no lo ger, but
speedily to set about it? Do but seriously weigh the words of the Apostle Paul,
and then say whether you can brook to continue in your gross ignorance and
blindness to avoid any thing that may possibly betide you here below? 2. These.
17, 8, 9
The Lord fesus (says he) shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: (the inseparable
concomitant of such ignorance) Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his power. See
here; ignorance of God is as dangerous and destructive, as disobedience to the
Gospel, which is the consequent of it, and goes accompanied with it: Prove. 1912
For, without knowledge the heart is not cannot be good; and if that be naught,
which is the spring and root of all your actions, surely your lives must needs
be so, whatever your fancies and pretenses may be to the contrary. You would
account it (and justly so) a great discovery of weakness and folly in any one,
that should choose to conceal a grief or disease in the body, though mortal
(least it should be commonly known) from the Surgeon or Physician, and
refuse to put himself into their hands for the cure of it, and to prevent the
mischief that else would certainly ensue upon it. And are not they much more
blameworthy, that shall do so by their spiritual maladies? which threaten the
life of their far more precious souls, the Eternal ruin whereof must needs
inevitably follow, unless some effectual course be taken for the healing of
them? You plainly see, and will readily confess the great folly of the one;
Oh! be not guilty of greater in the other! The longer you have continued in
such a condition under the Gospel, the more haste ought you to make in the use
of all good means to get out of it: And seeing the Lord has spared you all
this while, and winked, as it were at the time of your former ignorance; Let
the consideration of this his goodness and forbearance now at lenth lead you
to repentance: Account the long-suffering of the Lord Salvation; Rom: 2.5 2
Pet. 3.15 Piscator.
i.e. Ad salutem vobis conducere, to conduce to your Salvation; the gracious
end of God herein, (and the use that you ought to make of it) being this, that
men should not perish, 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Timothy 2.4
but be saved, by coming to repentance, and the knowledge of the truth.

2. Another duty incumbent upon the people, is this: Diligently to labor after
knowledge, in the principal doctrines of religion especially; for without your
own industry added there unto, the pains of the Ministry will but little profit
you. You have seen the absolute necessity of it, in order both to your own
eternal good, and also to the Churches satisfaction for your admission to full
membership. Wisdom in this regard, is the principal, Pro. 4.7. (...).
or first thing to be looked after: therefore get wisdom, and with all your
getting get understanding: and if accordingly you cry after knowledge, and lift
your voice for understanding; if you seek her as silver, and search for her as
for hid treasures, then shall you understand the fear of the Lord; Prove. 2.3,
4, 5 Prove. 3.^3
and find the knowledge of God: And happy is he that finds it.

Which that you may do, your duty is: 1. To attend and watch diligently at
Wisdoms gate, Prove. 8.34 Lavater in loc. Wilcoxe,
and daily ( i. e. often) to wait at the posts of her door: Posts sunt
Sapientiae doctores. These Posts are the teachers of Wisdom: As painful
Scholars watching the School doors, that they may be first in upon the opening
of them; that you may hear her voice by her Messengers speaking unto you; whose
instructions you ought readily to receive and carefully to lay up, making your
hearts the storehouses of the word of Christ, Col. 3.16.
which should dwell richly in you in all Wisdom, being able to make you wise
unto Salvation. Such are by Christ pronounced blessed, Luke 11.28
as hear the word of God and keep it. And therefore ought you to give the more
earnest h ed unto the things which you have heard, Heb. 2.1. (...)
least at any time you let them slip or run out of your minds and memories,
being as leaking vessels, knowing that what is so received, is received in vain
and lost: Jam. 1.25
For the forgetful Hearer, is a Selfe-deceiver. 2. To Study and search the
Scriptures frequently and seriously: Which are, as it were, the mine wherein
the precious treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge lies. You should be familiar with
them, making them the matter of your meditation day and night; Psalm. 1.2
taking all opportunities of being thus exercised. Herein is contained both
Milk for babes, the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, plainly and
expressly laid down to the capacity of the meanest; so that the lamb may wade
here these waters of life are so shallow: And also strong meat for those that
are of full age; deep and hidden mysteries, such as may exercise the
understanding of those that are most skilful in the word of Righteousness; so
that here the Elephant may swim, and after all searches and seize have a
plus ultra to strive and press after. This is that incorruptible seed whereof
we are born again: 1 Pet. 1.23
and this same word of Grace is that whereby we grow, Act. 10.32
and which is able to build us up, after we are new born, till we come to be
perfect men, 2 Timothy 3.17
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. This therefore you may not be
strangers to, now and then only, occasionally and cursorily looking into it,
but familiarly acquainted with, and studious of it; as you desire to attain
that knowledge I am pressing you unto, which here alone is to be found. 3. To
beg it of God earnestly and humbly, in a due sense of your want and need of it;
who is the father of lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift, Jam.
1.6, 17
and who gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not. This is that whereupon
the success of your labor in both the former particulars does depend: Hearing
and Studying of the Word, being the only means of his own appointment, wherein
he uses to communicate this Wisdom to those that wait upon him; and which then
only prove effectual, when he is pleased to accompany them with his blessing.
So that if you would speed, you must pray and hear, and pray and read, and
meditate; and know, that neither means nor pains will be of any avail, if the
Lord by his Spirit do not teach you, and open your eyes, ears and hearts, to
see, hear, and understand those deep things of God, which of our selves we are
not able to apprehend. 1 Cor. 2.11.14
If you should enquire and ask, Where is Wisdom to be found? Job 28.12
and Where is the place of understanding? Your teachers will answer and say,
It Is not in us to give it, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6
for we are but weak instruments, able to do nothing of our selves: The
Scriptures also will say, It Is not in us, we are not the fountain of that
living water, but Channels only and Conduit-pipes, through which it is
conveyed and derived unto you: But they will withal both tell you, that you
must look higher, and go to God for it, who alone makes use of instruments and
means, and by them bestows it upon them that seek unto him for it: for the
Lord gives Wisdom, and out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding.
Prove. 2.6
Therefore let not this duty be neglected, but he much with God in the
performance of it, as you would not have your labor to be in vain.


3. Your duty is to be Cautious and Circumspect in your carriage, and to look
carefully to your conversations, that they be (as they ought) blameless and
without offense. To profess with your tongues that you know God, and the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and make your boast hereof; if in works you deny him,
Romans 2.17.
and walk contrary unto them, it will be construed and justly accounted no other
then hypocritical ostentation, whence it may be concluded, that though you have
a form, yet you want and deny the power of Godliness, from whom the Lords
people are required to turn away. That Faith that is not accompanied with a
life answerable is indeed without life; a dead faith, 2 Timothy 3.9
by which the Soul cannot live, nor will it be accepted and approved either of
God or men: neither will such a Faith justify your persons, as is not it self
justified by your works. Remember, that not only an account is to be rendered of
your faith, but a Scrutiny also must pass upon your lives. Great was the care
of the Church in this regard in the Primitive and purest times, and it ought to
be no less now: they diligently instructed the Catechumens, not only in the
Doctrines of Faith, and things to be believed, but also of charity and things
to be practiced and which concerned their conversations, whereof love is the
Sum and compend; unto which two heads some refer all the particulars that were
wont to be taught and delivered unto them grounding upon that passage of the
Apostle Paul to Timothy: 2 Timothy 1.13 (...) Beza in loc.
Hold fast the form or pattern of sound words which thou have heard of me, in
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus: Vel de fide and charitate; ut
intelligas sanam illam doctrinam in duobus istis capitibus positam essse.
Intimating that the Sum of that Doctrine is comprehended under those two heads
of Faith and Love; these two being connexed, and by an individual bond joined
together. Piscat. in loc.
So that where charity is not, there neither has faith any place. There was
therefore required of the Catechumens in order to their Baptism (and
consequently to Confirmation) not only knowledge and profession of faith, but
also vitae morumque integritas, and puritas. Holiness and integrity of life
and manners. Lib, de paenitent. c. 7.
Hence Tertullian so speaks unto them: Quid te cognovisse interest, cum issdem
incubas, quibus retro ignarus? -- lavacrum illud obsignatio est fidei quae
fides a poenitentiae fide incipitu^ and commendatur? non ideo abluimur, ut
delinquere desinamus, sed quia desiimus, quoniam jam cord loti sumus. What
will thy knowledge avail thee, seeing thou give thy self unto the same courses
as heretofore when ignorant? -- That laver ( viz. Baptism) is the obsignation
or seal of Faith, which faith is begun and commended by the faith of
Repentance: We are not therefore washed, that we may cease from sin, but
because we have ceased, being already washed in heart. The Catechist did call
upon, and earnestly exhort them to Duty, as well as instruct them in Doctrine;
as appears in the Catechetical Lectures of Cyrill of Jerusalem, and also by
Augustines Sermon ad Competentes; wherein dehorting them from several vices, he
closes with these words: Sermon. 116.
Competentes nihil injustum, nihil inhonestum exerceant, ne forte male agendo
viscera materna concutiant, and ante legitimum partum velut aborsum eos matter
sancta proijciat: Sed magis omnes benigni sint, humiles, mansueti, sobrii, ut
ad salutaris Baptismi Sacramentum ordine ligitimo conveniant. The Competentes
should exercise or do nothing that is unjust or dishonest, least happily by
ill-doing or mis-behaving themselves, they trouble the bowels of their Mother,
and cause her before the time to cast them forth as abortive: They should
rather be kind, humble, meek, sober; that they may come in a due and orderly
manner unto the Sacrament of saving Baptism. You may see from hence how much it
stands you upon, to look carefully unto your lives, and to labor so to demean
your selves, that when you offer your selves unto Confirmation, there may be
nothing, found justly to be objected against you, that might exclude you from
admission to full membership, and the enjoyment of the singular privileges of
such; which (if there should) would be no small Detriment unto you.

4. There are other duties in order hereunto, that are peculiar unto some
persons; viz. such as have the care and charge of others committed unto them:
which is the case of Parents and Masters of families in respect of their
children and servants; who may very much, and therefore ought to facilitate and
further the work of fitting them for confirmation. There advantages are many,
through familiarity and continual converse with them, and the power and
authority which the Lord has given them over those that are under them, who
are enjoined to honor and yield obedience to them: these are therefore as
talents carefully to be improved, and this way especially, as being the chief
end for which they are bestowed. Their duty is therefore, Plurimum enim
intererit quibus artibus and quibus hos tu moribus instituas. Juvenal. Satyr.
14. Quo semel est imbuta recens, etc. Difficulter cradic atur, quod rudes anim^
perbiberunt. Hierony Epist. 7.
1. To instruct them diligently in the principles of Religion: They ought to be
Catech sts in their own families, to whom this work belongs, as well as to the
Pastor, being common to both in their several capacities, and indeed, the
fidelity of the one, may very much ease and lighten the burden of the other.
The Scriptures are frequent in pressing this duty upon them: These words says
Mises, which I Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7
command thee shall be in thine heart, and thou shall diligently teach them
unto, or whet them upon thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit
in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, when thou lest down, and whin
thou risest up. Children, says Ainsworth upon this Text, (...) Initiare.
Cartwright in loc
are to be Catechized. Solomon also; Train up a child, says he, in the way
wherein he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. Scopus
est, parents ad piam liberorum institutionem excitare. His scope is to stir up
parents to the pious institution of their children. The word (...), Leigh Crit.
Sdc. Hinc apud Doctores (...). est Catechesis, Carechismus. Pagnin. the saurus.
when it is spoken of men signifies to Catechize. i. e. Prima elementa (inquit
Lavaterus) Religionis tradere. To deliver to them the first rudiments of
Religion. Again, Ye fathers (says the Apostle Paul) bring up your children in
the nurture and adminition of the Lord. This, as is conceived, Ephesians. 6.4
is the thing commended in Abraham, Geu. 18, 19
and his practice herein recommended unto us. I know says the Lord, that
Abraham will command his children and his household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. Dicit Deus (inquit
Paraeus) non modo quid sit facturus Abraham, sed potius quid facere debeat. God
says here, not only what Abraham would, but rather what he should and ought to
do. Whence he observes, That parenrs were then (and ought in this regard to be
so now) the Pastors and teachers of their families, liberi and domestici
(ingnit) erant Catechumeni: The children and rest of the household were the
Catechumens, and the heads of the Catechism (comprehended in that expression,
the way of the Lord) were Fides and Obedientia, Faith and Obedience. And may
not Abraham's servants with whom he rescued his brother Lot, Genesis 14.14 Pagnin.
interlvers.
be for this cause termed (...) his trained servants: (so our translation
renders it) Initiatos suos, his instructed ones, i. e. Catechumenos suos, his
Catechumens, or Catechized ones; such as having been born in his house, Pagnin,
thesau. (...) 70 Instructos suos, Buxrorf.
he had religiously edncated: The word, says Ainsworth may be understood both
of civil affairs and Religion, Pelican. in l. I^^is Exposit. of the Mo^al Law.
Command. 5. exercit 5.
wherein he had trained them: Quos instituebat moribus and usu rerum
temporalium: peritos art bellandi, alioqui etiam Religioni consecratos. Thus
also Mr. Weemes expounds this place; his Catechized ones. It is also
observable, that God says not concerning Abraham, I know that he will teach,
but command them: Paraeus in loc
implying, that parents ought to perform this duty with authority; which thing
is intimated in the holy resolution of Joshua: As for me (says he) and my
house, we will serve the Lord. And that this has been the practice of Godly
parents is evident from the Scriptures: Thus did David carefully instruct his
son Solomon, as he acknowledges: I was, says he, Prove. 4.3, 4.
my fathers son, tender and dearly beloved, he taught me, etc. So did his
mother Bathsheba also, as appears, Prove. 31.1. The words of King Lemuel, (no
doubt, says Mr. Wilcox, but this was Solomon) the Prophecy that his mother
taught hlm: Cartwr. in loc.
Nempe a teneris annis, quod blanda Lemuelis appellatio (quales matribuserga
liberos adhuc tenellos usitatae sunt) ^stendit. From his tender years, which
the pretty alluring appellation of L^mu^l (such as are usual with mothers
toward their children, while tender and young) does show, Religious education is
the best character of paternal affection. Such also was the pious care of the
godly parents of ^^mothy, 2 Timothy 3.15 (...) ab ub^^^ u. pendens: a sucking
child. Leigh. Espencaeus in loc.
by whose means it came to pass, that from a child he had known the holy
Scriptures: Gremium maternum huic prima fuit Schola Sacrarum literarum; his
mothers lap was his first School: Nec magis inejus sinu, quam Sermon educatus;
he sucked in not only milk from her breasts, but also the principles of religion
from her mouth. And this is that, for which the children of the virtuous woman
are said to call her Blessed, viz. Prove. 31: 28 Cartwright.
Propter educationem, and virtutem and pietatem per educationem procuratam: For
their education, and virtue and piety procured by it. This duty then you see is
enjoined and belongs unto parents: Neither may they think to shift it off from
themselves, by saying, It Is the Ministers Office to do it; for it is theirs also
as well as his, nor will his doing his part, free them from the obligation that
lies upon them. 2. Their duty is to require, and see to it, that those under
their charge, do diligently frequent, and carefully attend upon the public
Ordinances of Catechizing, and the preaching of the Word, especially upon the
Lords day, the due sanctification whereof both by themselves and theirs, is
charged upon them: Exodus 10.10 Zanch. in 4 praecept.
Datur praeceptum hoc imprimis cuique patrifamilias; this precept is given in
the first place to every father of a family, as those that should require the
same to be observed by the whole family. Again: Vult Deus, ut patresfamilias
authors sint toti familiae and duces, ut veniant in caetum fidelium, etc. Ibid.
The Lord would have the Governors of families to be procurers and leaders to
the whole family, to come unto the assembly of the faithful, to sanctify the
Holy Day, etc. -- Every governor of a family (says he) may and ought to
compel them of his household to the outward worship of God. Officium est (inquit
Bullingerus) boni patris-familias curare ut tota familia Sabbathum sanctificet.
Decad. 2. Ser. 4.
It is the duty of a good Governor of a family to take care that the whole
family do sanctify the Sabbath. Such persons therefore may not think it
sufficient to sanctify the Lords day, and to attend upon the publ ck
Ordinances themselves; but they are to look well unto those under their charge
that the fame be done by them also, whose profanation and neglect of the duties
thereof, may be laid to the charge of those that might and should have
prevented it, but did not, being regardlesse of them. Nor should they content
themselves with this only, that those belonging to them do attend upon the
Ordinances; but they are also to labor, that they do it to good purpose, least
by the careless and customary performance of their duty, God be dishonored,
and their own souls injured and hazarded. no less then by the omission of it.
They ought therefore to call upon them for, and require from them an account of
the things that they have heard, and help them to the fuller understanding of
them; that so through the blessing of the Lord, they may attain the end of what
they do, and their labor may not be in vain. 3. Their duty is to watch and
have a vigilent eye over them in respect of their conversation, to prevent
miscarriages, and to quicken them to their duty. The care of governors in this
particular is of very great consequence, without which, things will certainly
go amiss and many disorders will follow in the family. What Solomon says of a
King, and other magistrates in the Commonwealth, may not unholy be applied to
our purpose, every father being in some sort a magistrate as it were in his own
family: A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil
with his eyes. i.e. Cura. inspectione, coercet malos. Lavater.
By their care and inspection they lay a restraint upon those that are evil; so
that they are not so bad as they would be, nor take that liberty to sin that
otherwise they would do. The neglect hereof seems to be a part of good Elies
fault and this in likelihood imports the cause why the sins of his sons were so
great; he kept not so strict a hand over them and their actions as he should
have done, but was too indulgent toward them: Those words of his in dealing
with, and reproving them, seem to imply so much; Why, 1 Samuel 2.23, 24.
faith he, do you such things, for I hear of your evil dealings by this people?
nay my sons, for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the Lords people to
transgress. So here, the good man knows little but by hearsay, and what the
common rumor and complaint of the people brings to his ears. Sic dicunt,
inquit, sic ad me perfetur, q. d. Si vera sirt quae audio, gravitur peccatis.
P. Martyr in l.
So they say, this is brought to me, if the things be true which I hear, ye sin
grievously. The contrary carriage is commended in Solomon's virtuous woman; Pro.
3.27 Carswright
she looks well to the ways of her household: Lustrat mores universae
familiae; diligens haec inspectio, non solu, nec praecipue opera domesticae
respicit, verum etiam quomodo se in cultu Divino gerunt, quales in pi^tate
progressus faciant, diligenter observat. This diligent inspection respects not
only, nor chiefly the houshold-imployments, but she also diligently observes,
how they behave themselves in the worship of God, and what progress they make
in piety: Lavater.
Considerat, quibus moribus singuli sint praediti, quid dicant, quid faciant,
ne turpe quid committant. She considers what the manners of each one are; what
they say, what they do, that no unseemly thing be committed by them. Thus,
though eye-service be not good, yet is there need, and accordingly ought there
to be a watchful eye over them, that children and servants be not evil. 4. This
Inspection ought to be accompanied with the discreet exercise of Discipline;
without which, what we see to be amiss, may be far enough from being amended.
Haec duo quasi elements sunt virtutis; Spes honoris, and metus poenae, quorum
illa incitstiores reddit ad pulcherrima studia; haec segniores ad vitia.
Plutarch de lib. educand.
Such as need reproof and correction must have it; and those that deserve
countenance and encouragement should not want it: the evil are to be timely
checked and curbed, and the good cherished and commended. And these two being
rightly managed, will, by the blessing of the Lord, be found to be notable
means to restrain vice and promote virtue. Fond affection may prompt parents to
withold, but true love will bid them to make use of the rod when there is
cause: for nothing more endangers the disobedient then indulgence. Hence the
Scriptures do so much urge the use of discipline; thus speaking, He that
spares the rod hates his son, Prove. 13.26.
but he that loves him chastneth him betimes: Because there is folly bound up
in his heart, Prove. 22.15.
which the rod of correction drives far from him. Again, Witk-hold not
correction from thy child, Pro. 23.13, 14.
for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die: Thou shall beat him
with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell, But if he sin, and thou
suffer his sin to be upon him for want of rebuke, thou hate him in thine
heart. Levis. 19.15.
Qui emendare potest and negligit, participem se facit; he that can reform
another, Gregor.
and neglects so to do, makes himself partaker of his sin. It was a law
amongst the Lacedaemonians; nempe, Cragius de repub. Laced. 1.2.
Quicunque senum delinquentem puerum videns non increpat, eadem poena cum
delinquente teneatur, spectat eo haec lex, inquit Cragius, ut tollat simul
seniorum indulgentiam, and juniorum impatientiam; quum scirent necessitate
quadam adigi ad increpandi officium. And the Lord himself gives them an
example herein, Heb^ 12, 6
as a father correcting every son whom he receives, which he does (as parents
should also) out of his love for their good, and to reclaim them from their
wantonness and wanderings: For, says he, by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, Isa. 27.9
and this is all the fruit, the taking away of his sin. Castigationes sunt
remedia quibus Deus morbis nostris medetur. Calvin in loc (...) Patris
convitium, suaveremedium: Epist. ex Stobaeo.
Chastisements are medicaments, by which God heals our maladies, They ought
therefore herein to imitate him; and out of that affection which they bear unto
their children, to make use both of reproof and correction for the amendment of
what is amiss both in children and servants, being appointed of God as a means
hereunto, which they may expect his blessingupon: Indeed, not to do so when
there is cause, (...) Liberis nearrideas, ut in posterum nefleas. Solon.
argues little love, what ever they may pretend, and as the neg^ect hereof, is
clearly their sin, so the issue will in all likelihood prove their shame and
sooner or later occasion them sorrow enough. 5. Their duty is to walk
exemplarily before them, and to be patterns of piety to them; giving them in
their conversations a Copy to write after. Examples have a strong influence,
Logum iter est per praecep^^; breve and effic^x per exempla, quia homines
amplius oculis quam auribus credunt. Sencca Epist. 6.
especially of superiors upon inferiors: Insomuch, that as the parents and
masters are, such for the most part are their children and servants; Si damnoss
senem juvat alea; ludit and haeres.
men being usually more led by example, -- Velocius and citius nos corrumpunt
vitiorum exempla domestica magnis cum subeant aniuns autoribus.
then precept. For which cause they ought to be very careful how they behave
themselves, -- Nihil dictu soedum os^que haec limina tangac, intra quae puer.
leaft going awry, those that are under their charge treading in their steps
(as they are apt to do, Maxima debetur pueris reverentia. Juvenal Satyr. 14. de
lib.educand.
presuming it is safe for them) should walk in such ways as will bring dishonor
to God, and destruction to their own souls: in which cafe, those whom they
follow, can neither wash their hands from the guilt of their sin, nor free
themselves from being authors of their ruin. And as the bad example of such is
atten; ded with much detriment: so may their good example produce as great
emolument; the one being no less an inducement to virtue, than the other is to
vice. Ante omnia (inquito Plutarchus) debent parents nihil peccando, omniaque
pro officii rationibus agendo, evidens se libris exemplum praebere, ut in
illorum ii vitam tanquam in speculum intuentes, a turpibus dictis factisque
avertantur. Above all things parents ought by forbearing sin, and doing all
things according to their duty, to show themselves an evident example to their
children, that they looking into their lives as into a glass, may avoid every
dishonest word and deed. Cyrus also, in the close of one of his orations to the
chief about him, presses them to this very duty, with this very argument.
Xenophon l. 7 de Inftit. Cyr^
(...)etc. For we our selves (says he) shall become better, if we exhibit our
selves the best examples to our children: and our children, though they would,
shall not easily become evil, when they shall neither hear nor see any thing
that is unseemly; but shall spend all their days in the study of virtue and
honesty. Such is the force of example in parents, according to that Proverb, as
is the mother, so is the daughter: Ezekiel. 16.44 In loc.
Non semper verum est, inquit Calvinus, sed (...): though not always, yet it
is for the most part so. As God therefore our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord
and Master, do often times propound themselves as patterns to their children and
servants; so ought we to ours. Thus Augustine exhorts: Sermon. ad Com, pecentes.
116
Nos, inquit, qui ante multa tempora in Christo renati sumus, istis, qui
baptizandi sunt, exemplum sanctoe conversationis in omnibus praebeamus, ut, si
nos imitari voluerint, non per latam and spaciosam viam trahantur ad mortem,
sed per arctam and angustam portam pervenire mereantur ad vitan Praecipue qui
filios aut filias excipere religioso amore desiderant. We that were long ago
born again in Christ, should render our selves in all things an example of an
holy conversation, to those that are to be Baptized (and to those also that are
to be Confirmed) that so, if they will imitate us, they may not by the broad
and wide way be drawn to death and destruction; but by the straight and narrow
way may come to life and salvation; especially those that desire religiously to
love either their sons or their daughters. Hierom also in his Epistle to the
widow Laeta, ^pist. 7
giving her directions for the pious education of her daughter Paula, thus
speaks to her: Sic erudienda est anima, quae futura est templum Dei; nibil
aliud discat audire, nihil loqui, nisi quod ad timorem Dei pertinet. So ought
the soul to be instructed, that is to be the temple of God: Let it learn to
hear and speak nothing, but what pertains unto the fear of God. Again: Ibidem
Nihil in te and in patre suo videat, quod, si fecerit, peccet: mementote vos
parents virginis, magis eam exemplis doceri posse quam voce. Let her see
nothing in thee or her father, in doing whereof she should sin: remember ye
parents of this virgin, that she may be taught rather by your example, then
your words. Of so much concernment is the example of superiors in families,
which therefore calls for their special care.


And thus having laid down the duty both of Ministers and people, for the
recovery of Confirmation: I shall add some Arguments to stir them both up to do
accordingly, drawn from the consideration of the great Utility that will hereof
ensue. And that

1. To Ministers themselves, to whom it will be of no small advantage. For by
this means, 1. They will come to be better acquainted with, and have more
through and particular knowledge both of their people and their condition; each
one coming under their Cognizance, and being personally dealt withal by them.
As a prudent and provident householder is diligent to know the state or faces of
his flocks, taking particular notice of them: Pro. 27.23 (...) Carrwright.
Quanto magis cavendum est iis, qui ovibus Christi, precioso ipsius sanguine
redemptis praeficiuntur. How much more ought their care to be, that are
entrusted with, and set over the sheep of Christ, which he has redeemed with
his precious blood. Being constituted by Christ to be the shepherds of his
people, they ought herein to imitate him the chief Shepherd of our Souls, who
knows his sheep, and calls them by name. Joh. 10.3, 14
Herein lies the Office of Pastors, so to have particular knowledge of those
committed to them, that they may approve themselves to God, Workmen that need
not be ashamed; 2 Timothy, 2.15
rightly dividing the Word of truth, giving to each his portion in due season:
Luke 12.42.
For some need instruction, others admonition; one correction, another
consolation; the weak must be strengthened, the sick and diseased healed, the
broken bound up, the lost sought, Ezer. 34.4
and those that were driven away must be brought back again: Every one should
be carefully looked after, and provided for, according to what his particular
condition does require, that so they may (as they ought) take heed to all the
flock over which the Holy Ghost has made them overseers, as those that must
give an account of them; and blessed is that servant and shepherd, whom his
Lord when he comes shall find so doing: 1 Pet. 5.4.
For, when the chief Shepherd shall appear, Mar. 25.21
they shall receive a crown of Glory that fades not away: and having been
faithful over a few things, shall be made rulers over many thing, and shall
enter into the joy of their Lord. 2. Great will be the comfort and
encouragement in their work that will follow hereupon: When they shall behold
and have experience of the proficiency of those who are committed to their
care, and so see the fruit of their labors, and that they have not run nor
spent their strength in vain; which to such as are faithful, who have minded
not their own, but the things of Jesus Christ; and sought not their own gain
and outward advantage, but the winning of souls to Christ, and fruit that might
redound to their account at the great day of Christ's appearing, is of all other
the most refreshing, and matter of great joy. 3 John 4 Affluentiam elecorum and
Silvancorum Muscul. in loc.
This is that which will much satisfy them, to see (as it is said of Christ,
Isa. 53.11.) the travel of their soul, the work of the Lord to prosper in their
hand, children whom they have begotten to God through the Gospel, and of whom
they have traveled in birth till Christ has been formed in them: They will
remember no more (or if they do, they will remember with gladness) the pain and
travel that they have been at, for joy that they have been instrumentl of their
new birth, and bringing them into the Kingdom of God. How frequent is the
Apostle Paul in manifesting the great comfort he took in those, who had been by
his ministry brought to the knowledge and obedience of Christ: My brethren,
says he, Phil. 4.1
dearly beloved and longed for, my joy, and crown. Again, What is our hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even Je? for ye are our glory and joy. Yet
again: I These. 3.9.
What thanks can we render unto God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we
joy for your sakes before our God? And of how great advantage will Confirmation
be to this joy of faithful instructers, wherein a Specimen is given, and
discovery made of the success of their labors? 3. They will be much quieted
and facilitated through the satisfaction hence accrewing concerning the persons
to be admitted, in the administration of the Lords Supper, the principal thing
about which there has been, and still is so great a noise among us: wherein we
have had experience of neither few nor small difficulties and differences among
those, who have desired and endeavored a right regulation of it. That it is
not Common for all comers to feed upon, and challenge a right unto, because in
a fort they profess Christianity, is the judgment after much search and inquiry
into the Scriptures, of most pious and conscientious Divines, both in this
Nation, and also in the Reformed Churches abroad; who are fully convinced from
the word, and thus far unanimously agree, That both the ignorant and scandalous
are unqualified for, and therefore ought to be debarred from the participation
of this Ordinance. And that this was also both the opinion and practice of the
Ancients, is very evident in their writings. Justine Martyr (who lived about
the year 150 after Christ) speaking of the manner how the duties of public
worship were performed by Christians in his time in their Assemblies, among
other things, acquaints us with the qualifications required in such as were
admitted unto the Lords Supper. Apolog. 2.
Hoc alimentum (inquit) apud nos vocatur Eucharistia, ad quod nemo admittitur,
nisi qui credit veram esse nostram Doctrinam, ablutus regenerationis lavacr^ in
remissionem peccatorum, and sic vivens ut Christus docuit. This food is with us
called the Eucharist, unto which no man is admitted, but only he that believes
our Doctrine to be true, being washed in the laver of regeneration for the
remission of sins, and living so as Christ has taught us. Cyprian also who
lived about 250 years after Christ) presses much to caution this way; and
being demanded concerning a Stage Player, whether he might communicate, he thus
answers, Epist^ad Euchratium. Number. 61.
Puto nec Majestati Divinae, nec Evangelicae disciplina congruere, ut puor and
honor Ecclesiae, tam turpi and infami contagione soedetur. I think, says he,
that it is agreeable neither with the Divine Majesty nor Evangelical Discipline,
that the holiness and honor of the Church should be defiled with so filthy
and infamous a contagion. Which place, says Goulart, In Notis.
meets with those who admit unto the holy Communion without distinction, such
as are impure and impious. Chrysostom (who lived ann. 400 after Christ) is
large upon this Theme; pressing it upon Ministers as their duty to look to it,
that no unworthy person be admitted to Communicate at the Lords table: Adeat
nullus crudelis, etc. Let no one come, In Mat. 26. Homil. 83
(says he) that is cruel, unmerciful, impure, by any means. I speak this to
you that Communicate, as well as to you that administer the Ordinance. No small
punishment hangs over your heads, if you permit any to partake of this Table,
whom you know to live in any sin or wickedness. Therefore if a Captain, if the
Consul himself, if he that wears the Diadem come unworthily, restrain and
hinder him: thou have greater power then he; -- what pardon can he obtain for
such a contempt, that shall suffer those that are polluted with sin, debauched
persons to come? The Lord would adorn you with so great honor, Jer. 15.12.
that you might most diligently discern these things. -- Therefore let us
plainly put back whomsoever we see to come unworthily: Let no one Communicate
unless he be of the number of the Disciples. -- Even this multitude is the
body of Christ; wherefore, thou, who do administer these mysteries, must take
heed that thou provoke not the Lord, in not purging this body, lest thou give a
sharp sword in stead of meat. But if any shall through ignorance come to the
Table, fear not to reject him: fear God, not man; -- but if thou dare not to
repel him, tell me; I will not permit these to be done. I will rather give my
life then the Lords body to any unworthily: I will rather suffer my own blood
to be spilt, then tender that most sacred blood to any but the worthy: Thus
that resolute and holy Bishop. And that those of the Reformed Religion abroad
are of the same mind, twere easy for the proof hereof to produce many
pregnant testimonies. A difference then is to be put between persons professing
themselves Christians in reference to this Ordinance, which ought not to be
administered promiscuously to all, but to such only as are qualified for it;
viz. having a competent knowledge in the principal and necessary Doctrins of
Christianity, and this accompanied with a conversation not contradictory and
inconsistent, but in some measure suitable thereunto. Of both which an account
is required, and solemn public profession made to satisfaction, by such as are
admitted unto Confirmation: So that by this means, the stewards entrusted with
the dispensation of these mysteries, may with freedom and comfort proceed in
their work, having sufficient warrant so to do, as seeing the persons upon due
trial approving themselves to be such, to whom according to the rule, they do
belong.


2. To parents and masters, that have the charge of others committed to them,
the comfort redounding from hence will be great; especially, 1. To see the
fruit and success of their care and industry for the Religious education of
those under their charge, through the blessing of the Lord, who has graciously
answered their prayrs and expectations in the main thing that they have desired
in their behalf. Their children had their being from them, but withal a sinful
being; Original guilt being derived and transmitted to them, and an universal
pravity and corruption of their whole nature, as an hereditary disease or
leprosy: Cen. 5.3.
For fathers (as Adam the father of us all) beget children in their own image,
and after their own likeness. And all may say, as does the Prophet David,
Psalm. 51.5
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Now for
parents to be instrumental for the Regeneration, and new birth of their
children, wherein being freed from their former misery, they are made new
creatures, and do bear the image of the heavenly and second Adam, as before
they did bear the image of the first and earthly. This must needs be matter of
very great joy to such as are gracious; of whom in this regard the words of
Solomon are verified: Pro. 23.24, 25
The father, says he, of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that
begets a wise child shall have joy of him. Thy father and thy mother shall
be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice; Not that they are born such by
nature, but made such by Grace: Cartw. in loc.
Vnde qui liberos it a erudierunt and a teneris instituerunt ut cooperatione
Spiritus Dei regeniti sint, non immerito etiam regeneratorum parents censeri
and appellari possint. Whence those that have so trained up, and instructed
their children from their tender age, that through the cooperation of the
Spirit of God, they be regenerate, may not undeservedly be accounted and called
the parents of the regenerate. And so likewise, the masters of such servants as
are Religious and fear the Lord, having been good proficients in the School of
their families, cannot but greatly rejoice hereat, and look on, and account
them as in the rank even of children: Pro. 17.2.
For a wise servant, says Solomon, shall have rule over a son that causes
shame, and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren. So dear will
godliness make even servants to be to their godly Masters, whose hearts they
do greatly cheer. Such a servant was Eleezer to Abraham; a servant born and
bred in his house, and one of his Catechumens, of whose godliness, as the
trust reposed in him by his Master, is an apparent argument, so is his carriage
a clear evidence and demonstration thereof, when he was sent and employed about
that weighty business of choosing a wife for his only son Isaac: Genesis 24.2
for in likelihood this servant, In Loc.
says Ainsworth, was his steward Eleezer: Haud dubie erat, inqui^ Paraus; Genesis
15.2, 3
without doubt it was the same. This servant was so dear to, Paraeus Mat. 8.5,
6 Luke 7.1. E^as. Paraphras.
and beloved and respected by Abraham, that he had thoughts (before he received
the promise of Isaac) of making him, (or at least his son) his heir. Of such
esteem was the Centurions servant unto him: Qui non aestimavit eum ex
condition, sed ex fide and sinceritate morum. He had respect unto his faith
and uprightness of life, not to his condition: and therefore he sends the
Elders of the Jews to Jesus, yea, after comes himself, earnestly beseeching him
to cure him, being sick. Thus godly parents and Masters cannot but have great
joy to see their children and servants, whom they have been careful to educate
and train up in the knowledge and fear of the Lord, to be such; and so, that
their labor has not been in vain: Whereof in Coufirmation they have a solemn
and ample testimony from the account which they give both of their faith, and
manner of life for the satisfaction of the Church. 2. To see those who are so
nearly related unto them, to be upon trial approved, owned, and admitted as
complete Members into the Church, to the enjoyment of all the privileges of
it, with themselves; an honorable condition and of greatest advantage, because
so in respect of things of greatest concernment; viz. Such as makes most for
the promoting of the spiritual and eternal welfare of their precious souls; in
the preparing and fitting of them for this excellent state, they having been
happy instruments through the blessing of the Lord upon their pious endeavors.
1 Cor. 12.2^.
And if (as says the Apostle) when one member is honored, all the members
rejoice with it: Surely their super-added relation to them, and instrumentality
in the honor, must needs not a little augment the joy. It is the choice
privilege of Christian parents, that not only themselves, but their children
also with them, are comprehended within Gods gracious Covenant, being owned of
him for his, and having a right unto the initiatory Seal; the consideration
whereof, administers greater matter of comfort unto them, then the intituling
of them to the fairest outward patrimony and inheritance. How much greater joy
then must it needs occasion in them, when they shall behold the Covenant so far
made good, their children now owning the Lord for their, and personally and
actually taking hold of his Covenant, giving up themselves unto him; and so
ratifying by their own act, what their parents had done in their behalf, at the
time when they dedicated them upto the Lord in their baptism. They were before
as children in their minority, though an holy seed, and heirs of the same
promise with their parents, yet little differing from the other sort of
Catechumens, (among whom they were ranked) being fed with the milk of the
principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and not admitted to the higher enjoyments
of those of perfect age. But now the door is open for them, and free entrance
is afforded them unto the participation of the daintiest provisions of Gods
house; They are now brought into the Wine-cellar, and Banqueting House, to sit
down at the Table, there to eat and drink abundantly of the wine upon the Lees,
well refined, and of the fat things full of Marrow; wherewith the feast, to
which, as guests they are invited, is plentifully furnished. In a word, the
Churches store is now unlocked unto them, whereof they may freely take their
fill, it belonging to them, as well as to the rest of her grown children: And
is not here matter of great joy to such as have so near relation unto them? 3.
To see themselves now discharged by the Church of that obligation which was
laid upon them at the time of their childrens baptism; when having given them
up unto the Lord, they received them again under a serious and solemn
engagement, to take care of them as his, to train them up in his knowledge and
fear, and so to return them unto the Church as persons fitted and prepared for
their masters service. What was the duty and work of the Susceptors or
undertakers of old in reference to such as being adult, desired Baptism, and to
give up their names to Christ; to whom they committed themselves as unto
parents and masters, to take the care of, and engage for them unto the Church:
the same was, and still is the duty incumbent upon Christian parents in
reference to their children that were baptized in their infancy: Qui brobe
intelligentes, Qui coelestium munerum Sacro fuerit desiderio captus, accedit ad
aliquem ex sidelium numero, precaturque tum ut se ad Pontificem adducat, tum ut
reliquae suscipiat curam; cuise tanquam parenti and magistro totos addicebant.
Hyper.ibid, ex Dionys. Areopsgit.
( inquit Hyperius; in Opusc. cap. de Cateches. Speaking of the Susceptors in
the behalf of adult ones) quantopere sint Deo and Ecclesiae, pro fide alterius
nomine data, obstricti, non abs re crebro instabunt, quo istud fiat; utpete qui
animadvertunt, non prius sponsione semel facta se posse liberari, quam hi quos
ex sacro font snsceperunt, pro se ipsi abrenunciare diabelo and pompis ejus,
fidem de Deo Patre, and filio Jesu Christo and Spiritu sancto confiteri;
denique obedientiam fidei coram Deo and Ecclesia universa promittere valiant.
Who well understanding, how much they stand bound to God and the Church for
their faith given in the name of another, will, not without cause, be often
instant, that that ( viz. for which they stand engaged) may be done; as
considering that they cannot be freed from their promise once made, till those
for whom they did undertake in Baptism, can themselves in their own behalf
renounce the devil and his pomps, confess their Faith in God the Father, Jesus
Christ the Son, and the Holy Spirit; finally, till they promise the obedience
of faith before God and the whole Church. A like course to this was taken by
the Jews (as Buxtorfe tells us) in the behalf of their circumcised children, In
Synag. cap. 3
whom they begin to teach some select places of Scripture, as soon as they are
able to speak; and so proceeding on by degrees: At thirteen years of age, he is
called (...): filius praecepti, the son of the precept: (and then was he to
receive the passover, as says Mr. Weemes) then also he ought to observe the
six hundred and thirteen precepts, Synag.l. 1. c. 5.. 5. Parag. 1.
which comprehend in them the sum of the Mosaical Law and Jewish Religion; and
then is he accounted guilty and liable to punishment, both divine and humane,
if he do transgress them; whereas before his faults were imputed to his father,
of whom the punishment was exacted. But being thirteen complete, the father
calls ten Jews to witness, saying, That his son is now of age, has been
instructed in the precepts, well learned their customs, and can recite readily
the benedictions and daily prayers, etc. Proinde se liberum perro and immunem
esse velle, filiique peccata a se excutere. Therefore that he is willing to be
henceforth free, and to shake of the sins off his son; after which done, he
concludes with prayer, wherein, Deo gratias agit singulares, quod filii sui
poena liberatus sit, and Deo supplex petit, ut filius suus in longos annos
bonaque opera adolescat. He renders special thanks to God, that he is freed
from his sons punishment; and humbly beseeches him that his son may grow up
into many years and good works. As therefore the burden being great was taken
on with holy fear, so (the work being accomplished) it will certainly be laid
down with joy, and many thanksgivings returned unto the Lord, that through his
graciousassistance has enabled them comfortably to undergo it, and in some
measure to discharge their duty herein; and withal has by his blesing made
their labors successful, whereof they have now an ample testimony in the
public and solemn profession of their faith made by their children before the
Church, to whom they stood engaged for them; and the satisfactory account given
of their conversations. And thus the comfort to godly parents from hence cannot
but be very great.


3. No less benefit will hence redound unto the persons themselves that are
confirmed. For, 1. It cannot but much affect their hearts with love, and
thankfulness unto the Lord, that so much care has been taken of them in their
minority, that he has been pleased to second with his blessing the pains of
those under whose charge they have been in their pious education, and now
vouchsafes to bestow upon them so great and such choice privileges. It is no
small mercy to be born within the bosom of the Church, and to descend from such
parents are as members of the same. The Question being propounded: Romans 3.1, 2
What advantage has the Jew? and what profit is there of Circumcision? It Is
answered, Phil. 3.5.
Much every way: to come of the stock of Israel, to be an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, (when it is not made the matter of our glorying, nor proves an
impediment, being refted in, to keep us from Christ) because to them pertains
the Adoption, Romans 9.4.
and the Glory, and the Covenant, and the Promises. Which are applicable to the
children of Christian parents under the Gospel; who are therefore to look upon
them as the Lords, and enjoined to take care of them accordingly. Now for
children, in that dangerous and unhappy age of their childhood and youth,
wherein they were apt through their head strong lusts so many ways to
miscarry; to be under such tutors and governors as had always a watchful eye
over them, ready to check their folly and wanton humors as soon as they began
to discover themselves, and to nip those shrewd weeds in the very bud; who were
also ever and anon instilling wholesome principles and holy precepts into them,
therewithal to season the vessel of their tender hearts; and were moreover
patterns and examples to them in their conversations of the things they taught
them, what abundant cause will they have, to bless the Lord for such parents,
and for making their endeavors for their spiritual good so successeful, as now
in an especial manner appears, when they come to reap such excellent and
blessed fruit of all. With how grateful acknowledgment does Solomon make
mention of the admirable industry of his religious parents in trayning him up
in the way wherein he should go, and pressing him with so much earnestness to
get Wisdom and Understanding, to know the God of his fathers, and to serve him
with a perfect heart, and willing mind; The sweet and happy effect whereof did
soon show itself in him, for having scarce attained to his ch^^^ng time, and
being put to his choice to ask of the Lord what he would, 1 Kin; 3.9
he prefers Wisdom before Riches and Honor, making that the sum of his
petition. The seemingly strange choice of Moses also, Heb. 11.26
as soon as come to years of discretion, speaks out no less the religious
culture of his preceding age; as does also the faith of Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5
Fides, quae ex avitae maternae que successionis institutione quasi haereditario
jure descendit. Espen^ caeus in loc.
which was derived to him as an inheritance, and as it were by way of
succession from his eminently gracious Ancestors: both proclaiming, that
descent from such Progenitors is no mean prerogative. How much, think we, were
the Catechized servants of Abraham affected with the mercy, when they saw
themselves included in the same Covenant, and partakers of the sacred Seal and
blessings of it, with their believing Master? How did they bless the Lord,
that ever they came under his Roof, and had so near relation unto such a one,
by whose means they came to be owned of the Lord, and to enjoy the singular
privileges of his people? And is not the case the same of those that come
under Confirmation, having been prepared for it by the diligence of those, to
whose care they have been committed? What cause have they to break forth into
the praises of God, being now so far admitted into his family, Pla. 65.4.
as that they may make the nearest approaches unto him, and be satisfied with
the fatness of his house, even of his holy Temple? Surely such have great
cause to love and bless the Lord. 2. The serious proceeding made use of in
Confirmation, their public personal in^^^ment then entered into, and the sole
(...) laid upon them before the Church, cannot ^^at quicken and stir them up to
utmost care and diligence, so to demean themselves, as that they may answer in
their conversations the state they are brought into, and the expectations of
God and his people; being a credit to the one, and a joy to the other. What a
notable bridle may this prove to curb unruly lusts? what a strong bar to fence
the soul against temptations? and what an effectual spur and incitement to
duty, yea, to every good work? when they shall consider (as they frequently and
upon all occasions should do, that they have openly and voluntarily professed
and vouchsafed themselves to be the Lords, owned his Covenant, and lifted up
their hands to heaven, promising fidelity and obedience to him, and have been
conjured by the Church to look unto it, that they carry themselves in all
things as becomes such to do, lest otherwise they should bring dishonor to
God, be a grief to his people and a blemish to religion. It would be a great
aggravation of their sin, if being under so sacred abond, they should not
withstanding it, recede from the faith which they have professed, or become
profane and scandalous in their lives, casting off the yoke of obedience to
Christ, which they have so solemnly promised. The force and efficacy of such a
course to keep persons (if any thing will do it) close to the Lord and their
duty, does plainly appear from hence, that it has been practiced and made use
of by godly (...) nours from time to time, as the liklyest (...) ^fect what
they have earnestly desired ^^^emselves and their people; viz. This way of
solemn engaging unto the Lord. This Moses brought the children of Israel to do,
to prevent their departing from the law of the Lord, which he had given them:
who freely make this profession, All the words, say they, Exodus 14.3.^
which the Lord has said, we will do; and be obedient. The like did his
successor Joshua a little before his death; who having exhorted the people to
their duty and provoked them thereunto by his holy resolution concerning
himself and his family, drew from them this treble resolution, We will, say
they, serve the Lord, for he is our God. Josh. 24.18.21.24.
Again, nay, but we will serve the Lord; yet once more, the Lord our God will
we serve, and his voice will we obey: Whereof he took themselves to witness;
who said unto him, We are witnesses; Lavat. in leal
Quia libero consilio hane Religionem delegerunt, perfidia ipsorum postea minus
potuisset excusari. Because they freely made choice of this Religion, their
profidiousness afte ward would be the less excusable. This same also was the
practice of their pious Kings in after ages: as in Asa his days, Chro.
15.13.14, 25.
the people with him entered into a Govenant to seek the Lord, which they
seconded and backed with an Oath, whereat they greatly rejoiced. After him
Josiah made a solemn Covenant with the Lord to walk after the Lord, 2 Chr.
34.31.32.
and he caused all the people that were present to stand to it; And as thus
before, so did they after the captivity of Babylon: In Nehemiahs time, Neh.
9.38.
they made a sure Covenant, and wrote it, and the Princes, Levites and Priests
sealed unto it. Wo'ph. in loc
Illis, hac obligatio frani vice erat, quo contineri in officis possent, etc.
This obligation was in stead of a bridle to them, to keep them close to their
duty. They herein made good that Prophecy of Jeremy: At that time, Jer. 50.45.
says he, they shall go weeping, and shall ask the way to Sion with their
faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our selves unto the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten. Omnil us in sidem presventibus
and unikentibus, quisi calcar adderetur adpie, just and Christian vivendum.
Hyper. Opuse.
Such engagements therefore are as strong cords that cannot easily be broken;
which, being reflected upon have a notable virtue in them to overawe the
spirit, and so to prevent extravagancies; the continual influence whereof being
duly improved, would so extend and diffuse it self through the whole Sphere of
their lives, that a watchful eye would be over all their actions, and care
taken that their conversations did correspond with their covenant, and were
such as might suit with their condition, in which regard the benefit will be
found to be exceeding great. 3. It must needs much indear the Lords people to
them, and interest them in their choicest affection, being now brought into the
nearest relation unto them. They had been as it were in the womb and bowels of
the Church before, as imperfect Embryo's, where they were fashioning from day
to day, and so respected and tendered as such, of whom there were ex ectations,
that they might in due time come to perfection; but now having received their
complete shape and form, and being born as it were and brought forth, they are
equally ranked among the rest of her children, and owned and embraced by them
as brethren, interested in all the rights and privileges of the family, to
whom they willingly give the right hand of fellowship, and admit them into the
most intimate familiarity and communion; there being nothing which they do not
freely impart unto them, and vouchsafe them the participation of. This arguing
great love and respect to them, cannot but beget in them an answerable love
toward those from whom they do receive it, which will exceedingly further them
in the cheerful discharge of their duty, and put them upon the ready
performance of all those offices of love which they owe them, upon all
occasions, whereby the reality and truth of it may be demonstrated. For this
they know the Scripture calls for, and requires at their hands; As they are to
love all men, but especially the brotherhood: 1 Pet. 2.17. (...) Ga. 6.10.
So they ought to do good unto all men, but especially to those that are of the
household of Faith: these are to have the chief place in their affection, and
accordingly to be preferred before others in the discovery of it. This
fraternity has, as it were, a magnetical virtue in it, whereby it draws and
closely knits the hearts of each to other; so that they are of one heart and of
one soul, Acts 4.32 1 Pet. 1.22
they love entirely and cordially: it is (...), unfeigned and servent love; and
where this is, Romans 13.10
no duty will be omitted, for it is the fulfilling of the Law: It will cause
them to endeavor, and to rejoice in the Good of their brethren, as much as in
their own; to distribute to their necessities, to bear with their infirmities,
to sympathize with them in their calamities, and to condescend unto the meanest
office, even the washing of their feet for their good; wherein they shall
imitate their Lord and Master, and show themselves to be his Disciples indeed.
4. The Church also, even all the particular Members thereof, will share in the
benefit, for great will be the joy which it will occasion unto them.


1. To see the children whom she has traveled with, to come to the birth, and
brought forth lively and perfect, having Christ formed in them: Another living
stone squared and polsted, added to the building, increasing not the bulk
only, but the beauty of it also. Will they not be ready at the sight hereof, to
break forth into acclamations, as it is prophesied the people of the Jews should
do at the building of the second Temple, when Zerubbabel after all opposition
should bring forth the Head or Top-Stone thereof, with shouting, crying, Grace,
grace unto it? Zach. 4.7. Lux^ 11 Lexie.
Phrasis usitatissima in familiar thus Judaeorum scriptis, quando summas alicui
gratias agere volunt. The prosperity of Sion in her enlargement, and the
multiplication of her children, is matter of great joy unto all those that love
her. Every child of the Church being in this regard an Isaac, causing laug ter
and rejoicing; of whom she may be apprehended to say as did Sarah, G^l. 426 In
loc.
(by whom was figured out Jerusalem which is above, who is the mother of us
all; i. e. Christiana Ecclesia, (inquit Paraeus) sic dicta ab origin, unde
est: The Christian Church, so called, because her original is from thence) God
has made, Genesis 21.6.
says she, to laugh, so that every one that bears, will laugh or rejoice
with me. And as it adds to the beauty of the Church, so also does it make much
for the honor of Christ the King of Sion, as being the manifestation of the
day of his power, wherein persons are made willing to submit to his Scepter, to
kiss the Son, Psalm. 110.3.
acknowledging him for their Lord, and cheerfully coming in, and joining with
the rest of his people to worship him in the beauty of Holiness; whose
exaltation is a chief ground of exultation unto all those who love his name,
and to whom his glory is dear: Psalm. 14 5.11, 12
Who delight to be speaking of the glory of his Kingdom, and to talk of his
power: to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious
majesty of his Kingdom. As the number of his subjects increases, so does his
glory spread; Prove. 14.28 Isa. 51.10, 11 Heb. 12.2
for in the multitude of people is the Kings honor. Yea, this he accounts a
satisfaction for all his sufferings, when he sees his seed and the travel of
his soul: Who for the joy that was set before him (viz that arising from the
consideration of our salvation, and that being lifted up he should draw all men
unto Joh. 12.32. Theodoret.
him: Gaudium vocat animarum salutem) endured the Cross, and despised the
shame. Now what is a joy to Christ, will surely be so to all that are his; to
behold any soul voluntarily giving and offering up himself unto him and his
service; hereby that prophecy being made good, One shall say, Psa. 44 ^
I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the
name of Israel: Whereof with David, they will triumphingly make mention
concerning Sion, Psa, 87.4, 5.
saying, this and that man was born in her.

2. To have their scruples removed concerning those that are to join with them
in communion, and the use of Ordinances, especially that of the Lords Supper:
Whereof they that partake together, do thereby profess the union and communion
which they have and hold, not only with Christ as their head, but also one with
another as members of the same body; as is evident from that of the Apostle
Paul, The cup of bl^ssing which we bless, 1 Cor 10.16.17.
is it not, says he, the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one
bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread: Which is
effected on their part by faith as to their union with Christ, by which they
eat his flesh and drink his blood, Joh. 6.56.
and so dwell in him and he in them. And by love as to the union they have one
with another, this being that sacred bond of perfection, that knits up the
members of the body together. This love is not that common love, Coloss. 3.14.
Vinculum perfectionis est, quis unit membra Ecclesiae inter se Davenant. Luke
10.36.
which they owe to all as men, in which regard every one is our neighbor)
flowing from the participation of the same reasonable nature, and being upon
that ground due: but more special to some particular persons, as Christians,
relating to the same mystical body, whereof Christ is the head, and the Lords
Supper the symbol of that their union; which therefore must have somewhat for
the foundation of it as such; viz. that appearing in them, and manifested by
them, from whence it may be rationally concluded, that they are members of that
body: Which in adult persons is none other, then a solemn and serious
profession of faith in, and obedience unto Christ, the only badge and character
whereby all that are his may be known. Where therefore this is wanting, or
(which is equivalent as to the case in hand; for de occultis non judicat
Ecclesia; the Church judges not of things secret and hidden) not discovered
and to be discerned; there cannot be such a closing in affection, as is
requisite to be found in those that partake together in that special Ordinance
of Communion: For there will be disaffection and distance between such as do
not convenire in al^quo tertio, visibly meet in the judgment of charity in
Christ their head: Whereof we have had frequent experience, persons not only
scrupling, but even forbearing to communicate, because of the admission and
presence of such, as have given no testimony (but rather the contrary) of their
qualification and meetnesse for that Ordinance in the forenamed particulars.
And indeed, satisfaction herein seems to be requisite, not only in reference to
the officers, but also to all the particular members of the Church, who are to
have fellowship with them as well as they, being equally concerned in the
Apostolical injunction of withdrawing from, and casting out from among them
(and consequently not admitting and jo^ning with) the unworthy and unmeet for
communion. And that this is sufficiently done at Confirmation, when persons, as
complete members are admitted to full communion, evidently appears from what
has been said before; which therefore cannot but occasion joy to the Church,
as conducing so much to the removal of those jealousies which would necessarily
arise in their hearts, and as certainly disquiet them, concerning the persons
which they are to join in communion withal.

3. To behold the comely order of Gods house, and due care taken to prevent the
polluting of it, and the defiling the holy things thereof, by the hands of
those that ought not to touch or meddle with them. Purity in the administration
of the Ordinances, is no small part of the Churches beauty, Psalm. 93.5. Psalm.
84. l, 2.^^.11.
which makes the Holy God delight to dwell there: For Holiness becom^th his
house for evermore. His gracious presence in it, Psalm. 46. and ^8 and 76.1, 2
Ezekiel. 48.35.
is the glory of it; and that which makes the assemblies of the Saints so
transcendently excellent and amiable above all other Societies whatsoever, is
this. That God is in an especial manner in the midst of them: and when they may
truly be called Jehovah Shammah. As the glory of the Lord filling the Temple
did add more worth and splendour thereunto, 1 Kin. 8.10, ^^
then all the costly and curious workmanship bestowed upon it by Solomon; so is
it here. Moreover, all the virtue and efficacy of the Ordinances depends
hereupon, which are weak and worthless things, if God be not enjoyed in the
use of them. If the Lord be gone, and have withdrawn his presence from it, alas!
1 Samuel 4
what can the Ark contribute to the safety of Israel? and what stead can it
stand them in? It Is a vain thing, and will be found of no advantage at all, to
cry, The Temple of the Lord, J. r. 7.4
and the Ordinances of God are with us, if we cannot say withal, The Lord of
the Temple, and the God of the Ordinances is with us also. To see therefore due
care taken that the house of the Holy God, may be indeed the beauty of
Holiness, nothing being suffered to enter thereinto, that might defile it, and
provoke him to withdraw his presence from it; but things so ordered that it may
be in some sort a meet habitation for the Lord. This must needs greatly rejoice
the hearts of his people, who desire nothing more, then to dwell in the house
of the Lord all the days of their life; Psalm. 27.4
so, as to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enjoy communion with him:
Whereof they have a gracious promise, if they shall diligently discharge their
duty herein; for so speaks the Apostle Paul: Ye are the Temple of the living
God, as God has said, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.
I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people: Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. Again
this would make much for the honor of the Churches, and the preservation of
the dignity of the Ordinances, which else are apt to be vilified, and come into
dis-esteem; Audiant illi, qui impudenter omnibus and temere copulantur,
despicabilia ea, quae sunt reverenda, facientes: Nam and mysteria ideo
clausisjanuis celebiamus, and cos qui nondum sunt initiati prohibemus adesse.
Chrys^st, in Mat. 7.6.
for nothing more exposes them to contempt, then their prostitution unto all
without distinction, and the making of them common, which God has sanctified:
which thing therefore the people of God have ever been very solicitous to
prevent; insomuch, as persons unworthy, and not qualified to partake of it,
were not admitted, no not so much as to be present at, nor to behold the Lords
Supper administered; Liturg. Jacobi in Biolioth patr.
but by the Deacon were dismissed after this manner: Nullus Catechumenorum,
nullus eorum, qui nobiscum orare non possunt, ingrediatur: Item, videte ne quis
Catechumenorum, Liturg. Marci. ibid.
etc. See that no Catechumen, nor any one that may not pray with us, do enter:
Omnes Catechumeni, for as discedite, omnes(...), Casaub. exercit. 16..43
possessi, omnes (...) non initiati. The like course was taken even by the very
heathens, in the celebration of their idolatrous worship: Virgil Aeneid.lib. 6.
-- Procul o procul este profani,
(Conclamat Vates) totoque absistite luco.
Yea, the very Doctrine of the Sacraments (not the thing signified, nor the
effects of them: Sed Symbola, and eorum tractatio, Profani. i. e. nondum sacris
initiati. Brisson. de formul, lib. 1. Martin. in procateches. In Praefat. in
Cateches. suas.
and^ mysticae singulorum causae) were concealed from them; Cum Catechesis
recitatur (inquit Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus) si Catechumenus ex te quaesierit,
quid dicebant Doctores; ne dicas extra: Mysteria enim tibi and spem futuri
seculi tradidimus. -- Jam ergo tu (fidelis) in finibus nostris constitutus,
cave, n^ quid effutias. Non quod digna non sint narratione, sed quod indignus
est ille audire, cui referres. So also among the Heathen: Brisson. de Formul.
lib 1
Non modo aditu sacrorum prohibebantur profani, verum etiam mysteria and arcana
iis aperire and enunciare nefas habebatur. This they did to maintain the honor
of those mysteries; Quoniam ea quae statim nobis obvia sunt, vilescere soleant:
Because men use to think meanly of those things that are obvious to every one.
Well then may this course rejoice the hearts of the Saints, seeing that by this
means men will be occasioned to entertain more awful thoughts of the Church and
Ordinances of Christ, then otherwise they would do. Haec fidei confessio,
Hyper. Opuse. cap. de Catech.
haec participatio mensae Domini, mirifice induceret omnium animos ad
considerandam Christianismi dignitatem and excellentiam, simulque incredibilem
amorem and venerationem eorum, quae in sacris nostris fiunt, excitaret. This
confession of Faith, this participation of the Table of the Lord, would
wonderfully induce the minds of all to consider the excellency and dignity of
Christianity, and stir up in them an incredible love and reverence of those
things which are practiced in our sacred duties.

Lastly, This would to the joy of Gods people much silence the adversaries,
taking off that occasion and advantage they have too long had by the neglect of
this duty, of cavilling at the Churches of Christ about the administration of
Baptism to Infants. I do verily believe (says the same author) that for the
neglect of the duty of Catechizing so many ages, Ibidem.
the Church, through the just judgment of God has hitherto been vexed and
afflicted with many evils; and not long since with the upstart Sect of the
Anabaptists, who inveigh against the Baptism of Infants, chiefly upon this
occasion, because they observe that such, when they were Baptized did by
themselves make no confession of their Faith: Moreover, when they are grown up,
no care is taken for the doing hereof. Quod si eo, quo diximus, modo,
adolescentes capita doctrinae Catecheticae perdiscerent, post vero fidei
confessio coram universa Ecclesia serio and graviter ab iis exigeretur,
haberemus procul dubio quo Anabaptistarum ora possent obturari. If in that
manner that we have said youths did learn the heads of Catechetical Doctrine,
and afterward a serious and sober confession of faith before the whole Church,
were required of them questionless we should have that wherewithal the mouths
of the Anabaptists might be stopped.

5. It may prove advantageous even to those that are ignorant and profane,
unqualified for, and incapable of Confirmation; and who have been altogether
regardlesse of their duty, blessing and contenting themselves in the condition
that they are in. By this course, 1. Such may be awakened from their security,
seriously to consider of their sad condition, when they shall see themselves
excluded from the society of the Lords people, and communion with them in the
choicest privileges of the Church. Every man, as he is apt (through inordinate
self-love) to conceive well, and cherish a good opinion of himself, so is he
greatly desirous that others should harbor the like thoughts and esteem of
him, espicially in the matter of Religion; which when they suppose they have it
much confirms them in the thoughts which they have of themselves, that they are
right. Then which, there is nothing that more exposes poor souls to extreme
hazard, the way by this means being barred up against that which might be made
use of for their recovery. Persons that think they have knowledge sufficient,
are hardly brought out of their ignorant condition; the sense of the want of
it, being a good step to the obtaining of Wisdom. So the Apostle James, If any
lack Wisdom, Jam. 1.6.
let him ask it of God. There are none but are destitute of it naturally, yet
few are petitioners for it, because but few are convinced and persuaded of
their need of it: Senecs.
Multi pervenissent ad Sapientiam, nisi se jam putassent pervenisse. The way to
become Wise, 1 Cor. 3.18
is to be fools in our own eyes. And the difficulty of reclaiming such as are
pre-possessed with thoughts of the goodness of their estate, Solomon fully
declares: See thou, says he, a man wise in his own conceit, Pro. 26.12
there is more hope of a fool then of him. Now one mean time to bring such
persons out of the Fools Paradise that they fancy themselves to be in, is to
behave our selves so toward them, and deal so with them, as that they may
sensibly perceive there is a wide difference between their own, and the
judgment of others concerning them; which may well (if any thing will do it)
make them begin to grow jealous of, and to question the truth of what their own
deceiving hearts have suggested unto them. Many there are who will little
regard, or be moved with the strongest and most demonstrative arguments,
whereby the unsoundness of their condition is plainly discovered, so long as
they may be owned and pass for others in the enjoyment of the same privileges
with the most pious and approved; which being denied to, and withheld from
them, they may in all probability, be the sooner brought to see and pass a
right censure upon themselves and their present estate, which is the next step
to Reformation: for Real convictions are of far greater efficacy then Verbal.
2. It may possibly make them ashamed of their barrenness under the Gospel,
when they shall behold others of less standing, and far short of them in
years, and, it may be, no less inferior to them (at least in their
apprehensions) for parts and natural indowments, to outstrip and go beyond them
in the knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel, and an answerable
conversation; whereof the Churches approbation is an evident demonstration. And
how this may prevail with, and provoke them to labor after knowledge (which
before perhaps they neglected and looked not after) and to leave off their
loose walking is easy to imagine. Calvin. Bez^ Piscator.
The Apostle Paul makes this one special end of Excommunication (for of that do
some understand the place) and why he would have the disobedient noted, and
their society shunned; 2 These. 3.14. (...) De excommunicationis not a ho^
accipio. Beza. Cornel. a Lap. (...). Pudefiat, Leigh. (...). Hesych. conversio.
Calvin in loc.
viz. that they might be ashamed, and so come to amendment: If any man, says
he, obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him: Vt scil. videns se ab omnibus vit^ri and negligi, in seipsum descendat,
and turpitudine sua conspecta, pudore victus resipiscat. That seeing himself to
be avoided and neglected of all, descending into himself and there having a
view of his deformity, being overcome with sh^me, he may repent. Optimum
hocremedium est, quism pudor incutitur peccatori, ut sibi disphcere incipiat.
This is the best remedy, to make the sinner ashamed. that he may begin to be
displeased with himself. Est enim pudor, sicuti tristatia, utilis ad p^ccati
odium praeparatio: quare hoc froeno coercendi sunt, quicunque lasciviunt: For
shame as well as sorrow, is a profitable preparation to the hatred of sin,
wherefore persons that are wanton, are with this bridle to be restrained.
Virtutis radil reflexi lauds, Bacon. Augment. scient.
As honor and approbation is a notable incitement to Virtue: so shame and
disallowance will surely no less lay a restraint upon vice, and put men upon
endeavors to remove that which brings disgrace up. on them; every man
naturally coveting credit and applause, and fearing and declining the contrary.
Est enim, est, inquam, Chrysostom. in Phil. 1.
and impudertibus vel modicus aliquis pudor. Pudorem enim Deus naturae nostrae
indidit: Nam quoniam ad componendum nos non satis valet timor; visum est ille
and alias quasdam instituere vias, ad hoc, ut non peccemus: Nempe ut homo leges
positas revereatur, gloriam amet, amicitias appetat. -- Nam saepenumero quae
Dei gratia facta non sunt, pudore facta sunt. For there is, there is, I say,
even in impudent ones, at least some small measure of shamefastness; for God
has put it into our nature: Because fear is not of force sufficient to compose
us; it seemed good to him to appoint certain other ways for this purpose, that
we might not sin; viz. to reverence established Laws, to love Glory, to desire
Friendship -- for often times, what is not done by the grace of God, is done
through shame.


6. Lastly, By this means God may have much glory. Especially these two ways,
1. From the Confirmed, by their personal and public confession of his Name and
Truth, and by their free and solemn dedication and giving up of themselves unto
him and his service: Which is the thing performed by them at their
Confirmation; at what time they own him for their God, and resign up themselves
to him to be his, make profession of his Truth, and promise obedience to his
Will. And that this is one special way whereby God has his glory from his
people is clear from the Scriptures: wherein to confess unto the Lord to
confess his Name, and to Celebrate his Praise, or give thanks unto him, are
equivalent expressions, and of the same signitication. For the word
(...)signifying properly to Confess, is in he LXX Translation renderd, Kircher.
C^^. cord. Psalm. 6.5 (...) Psalm. 106.1. (...)
sometime by (...), Laud^, to praise. Sometimes by (...), to Celebrate: And
mostly in our Translation, to give Thanks, or to praise. Thus often in the
Psalms, e. g. In the grave who shall give thee thanks? or confess to thee:
Cassiod. in lob.
and O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: Laudate Dominum; quia idipsum
est laudare Dominum, and ore illi honerem defer. Because it is the same thing
to Praise him, and to give him Honor with the mouth. And in the New Testamant,
the word (...), to Confess, is used in the same sense; as, I thank thee (faith
our Lord Christ) O father, Lord of heaven and earth; Mat. 11.25. (...) Piscat.
B za. Phil. 2.8. 9 10, 11.
i. e. Celebro te,, I Celebrate thy praise; gloriam tibi tribue, I give thee
Glory. And this we find to be one branch of the great glory that God has
conferred upon the Lord Jesus, who humbled himself, and became obedieat to the
death, cven the death of the Cross; therefore, says the Apostle Paul, God
exalted him, and gave him a Name above every name, that at the Name of Jesus
every knee should bow, etc. And that every tongue should confess, Cornel. a La^.
That Jesus Ckrist is the Lord; i. e. Quod proxime and maxim participet Dei
Patris gloriam, ut vere in eadem cum Deo Patre gloria esse dici possit. That he
does nearest, and more then any other, partake of the glory of God the Father,
so that he may truly be said to be in the same glory with God the Father. And
therefore are there such great and gracious promises made unto it, as that
whereby the Lord is in an especial manner glorified by his people. Luke 12.8
He (says Christ) that shall confess me before men, him shall the son of man
also confess before the Angels of God. Equivalent to that of God to Eli, 1 Samuel
2.30.
Them that honor me, I will honor. The like hereunto is that of Paul; Romans
10.9, 10.
If, says he, thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto Salvation. Hence the Apostle Peter exhorts unto it, as
a duty incumbent upon all Christians, being one principal way whereby they give
glory to God. Sanctify, says he, 1 Pet. 3.15. Deodat.
the Lord God in your hearts; i. e. Give glory to him truly and heartily. How?
be ready always to give an answer to every one that asks you a reason (or an
account) of the hope that is in you: (...)
i. e. Fidei in Deum and in Christum Jesum, Winckleman in loc.
quae fundamentum est sp^i de futura and coelesti haereditate: Of your Faith in
God, and Jesus Christ, which is the foundation of our hope of the future and
celestial inheritance. Paraeus in loc.
An answer, not to all curious questions that may be demanded, but such as do
appertain unto the fundamentals of Religion, which both the learned and the
unlearned ought to know. And this, not to every one that out of curiosity or a
captious humor to ensnare you, do demand it; but unto those who by their office
may require it, or out of a will and readiness to learn and be informed, do
desire it of you. So that that which the Apostle here intends, is this, That
Christians should he always ready to make confession of their faith, Calvin in
lec.
as often as there is occasion for it, that God may have his glory from them.
And there are two cases especially wherein this is necessary to be done by all
without exception. 1. In time of persecution, if by those in authority thority
they be called thereunto: In this case ought they to do it freely and boldly,
not fearing the faces of men, nor any thing that they can do unto them: Isa.
8.12, 13
but (as the Prophet Esau speaks, from whom the Apostle Peter borrowed that
passage) fear not their fear, nor be afraid; but sanctify the Lord of hosts,
and let him be your fear: remembering well those words of Christ; Whosoever
shall deny me before men, Mat. 10:33
him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven.

2. When the Church shall require it for their satisfaction, concerning their
knowledge in the mysteries of Christianity; and let not any say, They are
ashamed so to do, least Christ be ashamed of, and refuse to own them when he
shall come in his glory. They ought rather to account it an honor that an
opportunity is afforded unto them of glorifying God in so eminent a way; which
consideration should make all persons ready so to do willingly and cheerfully.

And as thus by the confession of their faith they glorified God, so do they
also no less by the dedication of themselves to him and his service, wherein
disclaiming all right in themselves, they freely profess that they are and
will be the Lords, offering up both soul and body to be an holy Temple and
habitation for him to dwell in, and to be wholly at his dispose, and employed
in his work, and doing his Will. According to those exhortations of the Apostle
Paul, I beseech you brethren, Romans 12.1 (...) to pre^nt by way of Dedication.
Leigh. Beza. 2. Cor. 6.19. 20
says he, by the mercies of God, that you ^ffer up, or present your bodies (i.
e. your whole man, by a Synechdoche) a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God. Again, You are not your own, but ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. And this he did
greatly commend in these Corinthians, as that whereby God had more glory, then
from their liberal alms and contributions: 2 Cor. 8.5.
And this you did, says he, not as we hoped, but first gave your selves to the
Lord, and unto us by the will of God. As David and other of the Lords people
did give glory to him, by the dedicate things; viz. the silver and gold, etc.
which they consecrated to the building and service of the Temple; which was to
honor the Lord with their substance: Prove. 3.9
So do persons much more honor the Lord by giving up themselves to him, having
no greater nor better gift to bestow, nor more especial acceptable sacrifice
that they can bring to God; which being Solemnly done at Confirmation, it is
that whereby God is especially glorified

2. From them and the rest of his people also, by the praises which this will
occasion them to render unto him; which is another special way, whereby the
Lord has his glory from them, as those words of God himself by the Prophet
David do fully declare: Stephanus in 1.
He, says he, that offreth me praise, he glorifieth me; Summo me honors
afficit, yields me the highest and most excellent honor. As for the
Confirmed themselves, well may the high praises of God be in their mouths,
being advanced to the enjoyment of the highest privileges that the Church can
confer upon them. If David saw cause why he should prefer the lowest room, even
a door-keepers place in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 84.10
before the most pleasant dwelling any other where: Well may these then, being
now admitted into the innermost rooms thereof, cry out, blessing the Lord for
so great a favor, and say in the words of the same Prophet, Psalm, 16.6
The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage.
It is a blessed condition in David's account, and therefore deserves the best of
their praises: For so he, Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, Psalm. 84.4
they will still be praising thee; having still cause so do. And again, Blessed
is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may
dwell in thy Courts: We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even
of thy holy Temple.


And for the rest of the Lords people, it cannot but much quicken them to this
duty, to give the Lord the glory that is due unto his name, and to bless him
greatly for his truth and faithfulness in building up and enlarging the
borders of his Sion; when they shall behold the goings of God in and toward
poor souls, his wonderful power and various wisdom showed and seen in bringing
them in and making them willing to submit unto the Scepter of Christ; hiding
the glorious mysteries of the Gospel from the wise and prudent, the rich and
honorable of the world, and revealing them to babes, obscure and simple ones,
making them wise unto salvation. Surely it must needs give them great cause of
saying as Christ did, We thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, who
have done this of thy good pleasure. And with the Apostle Paul, to break forth
into admiration, saying. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding
out! For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his Counceller?
Or who has given unto him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? For of
him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be glory for ever AMEN.

Gloria tota Deo nostri conaminis hujus, Paxque inter fratres firma, sequela
siet.

Quisquis haec legit, ubi pariter certus est, pergat mecum; ubi pariter
haesitat, quaerat mecum; ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me; ubi meum,
revocet me. August. de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 3.

FINIS.

