ESSAYS OF LOVE AND MARRIAGE: Being LETTERS written by two Gentlemen; One
dissuading from LOVE, the other an Answer thereunto. With some CHARACTERS and
other Passages of Wit.

-- Si quando gravabere curis,
Haec lege, pro moestae medicamine mentis habete.
London, Printed for H. Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

horse and griffin flanking Egerton coat of arms SIC DONEC

The Right Hon.ble Scroop Egerton Earl of Bridgwater V^scount Brackley Baron of
Elsmere 1703



THE Bookseller to the Reader.
It Is Expectation that makes the best welcome, and therefore I question not
what acceptance this Second Edition of the Essays of Love and Marriage may
find. I was very seasonably presented with a short Discourse, containing what
is remarkable in the late Piece called, Reflections on Marriage, before the
committing of this to the Press. Which being suitable as well in the Subject as
in its Bulk to the former Essays, I have linked them together. It matters not
whether I praise it with a commendatory Frontispiece. Good Wine wants no Bush.
But not being in this an indifferent Judge, I might not in my Attempt be much
regarded. Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces. However, I hope the same
Fate will not attend this as does the Subject now adays to remain uncourted,
but to find Acceptance with all, which will answer my Design to please you, and
profit my self.

Yours, Hen. Brom.

To his Honored Friend, being in Love.
I.
True Friend,
BUt that I know heresy is fashionable, and madness the time-Livery, thou
would force me to no little wonder, which way possible thou should stumble
into Love, be sick and sottish in Love, lost as well to reason as good company,
lock d up from all the world but thy own thoughts, and only conversant with thy
self; yet formerly pleasant and affable, desirous and desired of Society, and
one that I know has lived no Anchoret upon Earth, nor yet have had thine eyes
tied up to any one face, but have both viewed and discourst with variety of
Beauties; nay, I dare say, not guilty of the Ignorance of more: yet that after
so many Antidotes, thou should be so far fallen from thy primitive goodness,
as to lose thy self in dotage, and that dotage on one creature, and that
creature a woman, and call it Love too, really next to a miracle, is my only
Admiration. Prithee do not miscall thy disease, and be sick of lust, and
complain of Love: I can never believe that that noble Passion can be the ruin
of its subject; neither will I so much disparage it, as to make a woman its
object. If there be Love, it is to Heaven, Virtue, thy Country, Parents, Kindred,
Friends, or what is of worth: but to the Female Sex, and in thy sense where
Sensuality cannot but have an interest, though licensed by an Ordinance, it is
only Love scandal'd, it being (to the pity of the poor Passion I speak it) but
concupiscence handsomely burnisht, or a carnal appetite speciously entitled. And
therefore could I never win my judgment to affirm, that the most eager of
sinners were in love with sin, but only temptingly seduced to a vicious doting;
they did rather erroneously affect, than truly love. But let me enquire into
thy Passion: what, is it from the paint of Nature, those beautiful flowers of
red and white? Methinks thou should as well be enamored with thy Mistris'
Picture as her Body; for even that too is not excusable from Art, and may be
the worst drawn. Frank, he that marries for a face, marries for a year; it is
not a Summer since thy desires wrought as strongly upon Mistress M.R. as now on
this, and may be on as good a cause; yet how soon did a little disease wither
both her Beauty and thy Love? and I hope thou have not indented either with
Sickness or Time for this. Can thou be so prodigal of thy Affection as to
waste it on such incertainties? bind up thy self to love for an Age, when the
cause of that love may perish in a Month? But I tell thee, Frank, beauty is a
Chimera, and has no being in nature: Every man makes his own Mistress, and just
so much luster does he find in her, as first his fancy gives her. For I dare
challenge thee to show me but one Face in the whole world, that all opinions
will give in for beautiful; so that Lovers, as thou call'st them, are but in
the number of Pagans, they but worship that Idol which themselves have made.
May be thou will tell me of manners, carriage and virtue, I am very glad to
hear of it; but let not thy Passion hang in thy eyes when thou look on them;
for many of them, their Gestures are but School-postures, and seem rather like
a Motion than a Carriage. Consider that in the presence of their Servants they
are on the Stage, and it is rather Action than Behavior: it may be were thou a
peeper on them in their withdrawing rooms, thou would as much wish thine eyes
closed then, as now open. For their virtues, as I will not disallow the
judgment of that Reverend Doctor, That it is possible to find some virtue in
some women: so I cannot believe there is such a grand stock of it in any of
them, as to command any man out of his senses for the love of it; but I
suppose, as we more wonder to find a Diamond on the shore than on the rock: so
but a spark of virtue in a woman gets greater reverence than a bodied luster in
the nobler Sex; for it is our humor to admire the more where we expect the
less. The cause then of thy Love is either from Beauty or Virtue; if from
Beauty, how will thou love her when she is old? If from Virtue, why do thou
covet to lie with her? there needs not that low act of Generation to the high
Communion of Virtues; and I should scarce take thee for a Platonic Lover, to
warm a bed with her. But shall I tell thee the cause? don't be afraid of truth
then; thou first love her to satisfy thy Lust; and if thou after continue to
lie with her, it is either for want of a better, or 'cause thou can not be rid
of her. For I look on all the Perfections in females but as so many
Encouragements to desire; and that the best of women like the best of Sallads,
procure the strongest appetite; and in truth it is the woman is affected, not
this, the Sex being the substance, and the Mistress but the shadow; or that the
Rule of thy affection, and this the Instance. But then thou will be goring of
me with that common goad of objection, thy so much curiosity in choice, and
rather my Lady than Jone. Prithee tell me, be thy appetite never so good, does
thy meat relish the worse for being the cleanlier dressed? I never knew that good
cookery did turn the edge of a good stomach; and especially if thou limitest
thy fancy to one dish, thou had need to be both long in choosing and neat in
dressing, as well to avoid nauseating, as to continue provocation. Remember
that July holds not all the year, nor youth all thy life, there is a December
and Winter of age that attends on both; and that Passion that in its Spring
will take fire at any face, will in its Autumn be frost at all; a bed-ridden
palate is scarce sensible of sauce, much less meat; not the best of weapons, how
brisk and keen soever at the first, but after long using grows dull, and
requires a whetting: so that this studious culling of bed-fellows, argues but
the serious contemplations of mortality, and is no more than a wise provision
for futurity. Where, Frank, is your Love then? Call'st thou that Love that ebbs
and flows with the blood? that is the brat of a goatish humor, merely servient
to the body, and often dead before it? No, the Essence of that Passion is as
pure and lasting as the Soul it waits on; a sacred Vestal flame, perpetually
torrid and unextinguishable; it is thy under-girdle Love that is mortal, of
flames gross and transitory, which moving in a region lower than thy heart,
prove rather flashes than steady fires. I know thou art no stranger to
multitude of examples that have been hotter than Italians in the chase of their
games, and more frozen than Scythians after the taking it, that in the same
year have been ready to die of contraries, both Love and Hate; and with the
same eagerness studied both a Marriage and Divorce; that have not more longed
to obtein than having obtained, to desert their hopes, and their Loves perished
together, the fruition of one the expiration of the other. But may be thou will
add to thy other motive, that of Wealth, she is rich. Nay now I hear thee, and
do so far allow thee to court the Lady for her Fortune, as I would the
Chambermaid for her Mistress; but have a care of loving in earnest, or letting
in of Love farther than thy Tongue; a sigh or two in the presence if thou will,
but no ejaculations in private; remember a difference betwixt acting and
suffering a Passion; be nothing the sadder, though nothing the richer; like a
good Soldier rise not so repulst from one Leaguer, but to retein strength
enough presently for another, that in a while thy soul will become face-proof,
the later beauty the pellet of the former, till variety give the mastery to thy
judgment, and make thee a Catholic Servant, but no particular Lover. But thou will justify yet farther; thou have a fortune of thine own, and the
weightiness of that requires a partner in the managing it. I don't gainsay it;
nay I am so much of thy side, that I think a wife in no case more allowable,
than either for the getting or preservation of an Estate. As for thy
Love-marrying, I reckon it both the paradise and purgatory of fools. But yet
this, Frank, is only an Apology for a wife, not love, and think me no enemy to
marriage, but to the fondness of thy desire; I would have thee get a wife, but
not to lose thy self; to serve thy occasions, but to master thy passions; so to
love with reason, as not to woe without sense. Credit me, I do not at all think
it to savor of impossibility, seriously to court and marry too, and yet
unsing'd by any spark of Love, though I cannot but acknowledge the temptations
of the other Sex; for I reckon them amongst their Studies: yet that Reason, or
the Soul and Gallantry of Man should be basely prostituted to them, I should as
soon believe an Eagle to stoop at Flies, or Divinity at Toys. I conceive,
Frank, the necessity of thy marrying streightens not thy judgment to this one
Lady; I would have thee to look on her as not without companions, and then if
thou make an unlucky cast of it, thy fortune will have this comfort, thou art
no loser, though no winner. Prithee why should not a Woman be viewed with as
little ardour as an handsome Statue? or what is the influence of Flesh, as to
the eye, above that of Marble? If thou come into a spacious Gallery variously
behung, thou can walk it round, look on this Picture and like it, then turn
thy face and forget it in the beauty of another; there needing no more to the
aspect of a face than of imagery, but only the complacency of the Beholder, and
the commendation of the Author. Women are a kind of Traffic too: If thou
come to a shop, see a commodity and likest it, thou cheapen'st it; if thou
bargainest, thou take it; if not, to the next standing, the Market's full and
free. I tell thee it is an Injury no less to Nature than Reason, to impale all
perfection within the circuit of one creature. Now after all this, do I expect
thou should bid me turn the Tables and play my self the question, Was I never
in Love? Troth, Frank, I cannot excuse my self from the vanities of youth, may
be I have; but let me remember thee, I have had Rattles and Hobbi-horses too in
my days, but I have left them, and now look on them and thy thoughts with the
same disdain. That Mariner that has escaped a rock, may be a Pilot to the next
Passenger. It Is my faith now, that it is as possible to be sick of the Plague a
year, as of Love a day; and I doubt not, when time shall ripen both thy
judgment and age, but thou will then sit a most strict judge upon thy self, and
think no censure too severe to thy present follies, or charity too bountiful to
the true advice of

Thy true Friend, J.H.

II.
Prithee, dear Friend, do not burn Diana's Temple only to be talked of: Modern
wits (like spirits of the lower Region) once conjured up, must be set on work,
though of mischief. I must confess thou venturest hard on the paradoxology of
thy brain, that dare enter the Lists Athanasius-like, contra mundum;
disputing that with thy pen, which the world from Adam, and thy self by thy
practice provest undeniable. What is said in case of Religion, a little
Philosophy makes men Atheists, but enough confirms them in the truth, is true
of thee in point of love; of which and its objects thou art no more a competent
Judge, than a Red-coat is of a Moot-case. Did I not know that all wonder
proceeded of ignorance, and that people most admire what they least understand,
I should wonder at thy wonder, that a man of thy parts and complexion, and born
of a Mother, should call that stumbling, which is so graceful and natural a
motion; fall out with love and women, yet by thy own confession, understand
neither. Thou turn'st Andabate and fightest blindfold, not knowing against whom
or for what. I prithee, Friend, what Countrey-Girl has slighted thy Madrigals,
and disentertained thy affections, that thou quarrel'st and fall'st at defiance
with the whole Sex? He that said all Cretians were liers, was himself a
Cretian: and thou condemnest all Lovers as mad, yet art thy self a Lover, and
consequently mad, or else more mad that thou art not a Lover. I never yet knew
any despise Monarchy, but those that could not be Monarchs. Every man in this
is a Huntsman, who coming short of the Hare, cries, Hang her, it is dry meat.
Among the rest of thy wonders, thou may put this for one, that I who am
unconcerned, should at this distance take up the cudgels in defense of a
friend, whom thou have laughed into silence; but the Proverb excuses me, He whom
sorrow makes dumb, deserves double pity. For my part, I must confess I love to
sleep in a whole skin, and not to engage in another quarrel, unless he will
lend me his skull to bear the blows: but this being the common cause, it is pity
truth should be out-worded, and her innocence be suspected to want clearness,
merely for want of clearing There is no man more unfit for this work than I,
having been ever as atheistical in Love as thy self; and so far from being an
Opponent to thy Thesis, that I have ever been a noted Assertor of thy Doctrine,
till experience reformed my judgment, and makes me look on my former error with
regret and disdain. It Is so far from being a wonder to me, that one pleasant,
affable and sociable, one that has viewed variety of beauties, should fall in
love with one woman, that I wonder how it could be otherwise; none being fitter
for Love than one so qualified, nor can any find a best, that have not viewed
all. That Love per se is the ruin of its subject, I deny; yet I allow it may
be accidentally true, and be a passion not the less noble. And as I would not
have it only restrained to woman for its object: so I would not have them
totally excluded. And truly I am so far from believing that Sex not an object
of love, that I can hardly admit of any besides. That Love has several objects,
as Heaven, Virtue, and the rest which you reckon up, with many more, I deny
not. But all they, as oblique objects, are so far from being adequate, that
they draw Love in several denominations, as piety, duty, friendship, etc. And
but that seriousness would be thrown away on thee, and any thing here but
sophistry useless, I could tell thee from the learned, that Love is only an
expansion of the soul to its object; which is, whatever is attractive: and that
naturally man loves himself best and first, and all other things in
subordination to himself; and that whatever is most like man in nature and
habit, is the properest object of his Love. Then 'twill follow (whether you
will or no) that no object is so proper as woman. But thou wilt laugh at these
old-fashioned grounds, and account them like Harry's codpieces. To abstract
Love from sensuality in a natural sense, is both impossible and needless, it
deriving a greater influence from the sensitive soul, and being a Passion from
which Brutes are not exempt. Nay that very thing which you call sensuality, and
will allow it to derive its legitimation only from an Ordinance, may show an
antienter coat than Ordinances, it being the only way chalked out by nature for
propagation and preservation of every species. So that your Epithetes and
Synonyma's of concupiscence and carnal appetite, etc. I attribute to the
luxuriance of your fancy; and must tell you, we can easily give you and your
ways the like terms without the help of a Sylva. But your main hesitancy is,
What are your causes of Love? It Is not bare red and white, that are either
causes of, or colors for it, but the situation and contexture of both. I never
loved my Mistress face, because fair, but because I liked it, and thereby
thought it so, and I therefore thought it so, because hers: so that should time
or accident (from which no face has a Protection) alter the complexion in the
eye, I Would retein the same Idea still in mine. Next, for the Gentleman's change
(with which you upbraid him) much may be pleaded in excuse: for besides the
great delight in variety, I know no reason why, if a man find himself in an
error, he may not repent and take a new course. Nor may you call it
prodigality of affection; he that grounds his Love right is above
uncertainties, in regard the true cause of Love, which is sympathy, cannot
perish before its object. And because you say, Beauty is a Chymaera, and every
man a Pygmalion that carves to himself a Mistress; will you from thence infer,
that because all men do not think one face beautiful, no man should think any
so? And I appeal to the Synod of Divines, whether for a Lover to choose his own
Mistress, and love her, or court her be a piece of ignorance or paganism. Nor
can you deny that manners, carriage and virtue are incentives to Love; and that
these things are really visible in that Sex by any that look not through
spectacles of prejudice. But he that has an ill sight dislikes all objects.
Thou have an humor in thine eyes, whereby thou can not discern action from
behavior; I like it not the worse if acquired; no more than I do a good
Scholar that speaks Latin by the Grammar. That there are arcana imperii among
them, as well as us, is undeniable; for if all were as they appear, they would
be rather angels than women. It Is true much action and deceptio visus is in
both sexes in point of Courtship, whereby they reciprocally draw their
expectations to an height unobteinable, and succeeding enjoyments convince both
Sexes of a handsome (but commonly an equal) cheat. I shall not only allow of
that Doctors charity, that held, That it is possible some virtue may be found in
some women: but also shall experimentally add, That much virtue may be found in
many. It Is not for nothing that all virtues are declined by Grammarians with
haec, and fansied by Painters in female shadows. Virtues are like Diamonds rare
and small; nor should we esteem them were they to be bought by the pound. I
take virtue and beauty to be causes of affection; but I mean not by beauty the
mere superficies of a visage, but the symmetry of parts; and he that grounds
his affection rightly on that, finds a becoming beauty even in old Age. Virtue
also I conceive a cause of love, and love a motive of copulation. Nor is
generation for the communion of virtues, but propagation of issue; since it is
an undoubted law of nature, that all creatures desire and endeavor
perpetuation. You call lust the cause of love; it is true, if you take all
altitudes by your own Jacob's staff, it is so to you: so the Wolf conceives all
creatures to eat raw flesh, because he does. I cannot imagine such a Stocial
apathy in men, unless in Eutopia, but that we do and may make that which you
call lust a part of love. Nor is that Passion itself blameable, but
circumstances may make it so: for the Stoies themselves got children, and did
not deny the being of desires in men, but their domineering over Reason. Nor is
it the work of a wise man to be without passions, but above them. Consider man
as with a soul compounded of Will and Reason, the conquest of the will in this
life can be but by synecdoche; which being considered, it will follow, That men
abstracted from desires of this nature, are rather to be looked for, than
found. And for your erratical Love, that is so planetary and unfixed, it shows
its own weakness, but not your strength; though it be periparetical, it makes
not you a Philosopher; since Love, like Sunbeams, being diffused, are but
faint: but contracted to one object, are fervent and calefactory. Wives are not
Quelque chooses, in whom only variety breeds delight, but are solid food which
never nauseate sound stomachs. For a man to love Virtue abstracted from its
subject, is to fancy a Chymaera; but Virtue in a woman is an undoubted motive.
As to your similitude of Joan and my Lady; take the whole Proverb, put in (in
the dark) and you are answered. It Is not want of difference, but due
discerning; nor is she as good, but seems so. The Cuckoo once sang better than
the Nightingal; but remember who was Judge. Times swift motion and youths
transitoriness are common places in the beaten roads, where ever traveling wit
baits and refreshes himself in his pilgrimage. But yet desires being part of
the soul, and so immortal, do not decay in age, but only alter their motives
and object. Nor is the world barren of examples of aged men, eagerly desiring
and performing rites of conjuncture with women. As for those changeable and
quick silver minds which love and loath in a moment, it is their Vice, and may
give you this notion, That as their love can so soon and easily change into
disdain: so your present scorn may turn to a dotage on the like ground. And
though perhaps you have not yet been in love, it is commune malum (since you
will call it so) like the Smallpox, every one has been or must be troubled
with it; and bodies unacquainted with lesser discases, are irrecoverably
swallowed up of greater. Your wary advice to your friend, to love with
discretion, I allow and commend; and for my part were I to love again, would
not go a foot further than my counter-part should meet me; but where I found
real love, I would scorn to be out-vied, being of Alexander his resolution, No
creature should conquer me with love or hatred. It Is not good to play the
Butcher with that naked Sex that have no Arms but to embrace with, nor
Empiric-like, kill them by wholesale. I never yet met any of either Sex good at
the sport, but at last they met with a requital. It Is within the memory of man
since a pregnant Spark furnished with two of your Cardinal Virtues, wit and
disdain, flung his fireballs of contempt on the whole Sex, courted some into
dotage, and then jeered 'um; who at last fell foul on a Kitchin-wench, and
doted, who repaid him with the same devices; and which was worst, at last in
despite married him. Homicida is of both Genders, and belongs to both Sexes.
Your other points of marrying for wealth and yoke-fellowship, I shall agree to
with silence. But I would not make wealth my Mistris's Master, while woman
stands by like the Chambermaid with a broom to attend her. Let my Mistress be a
figure, and her portion the ciphers, which added to her, advance her much, but
of themselves signify nothing. Passionate Courtship should, but cannot be
avoided by all; every one is not Hercules: but dissimulation may and must be
shunned by all. There is no Soldier beleaguers a Garrison, but with hopes to come
off untouched: no Lover attempts a Mistress, but hopes for fruition without
bloodshed; yet the Soldier may receive a shot, and the Woer a repulse; and that
which he intends for a sin, often proves a punishment. He that lives a Catholic
Woer, may at last come to the Purgatory of a general contempt. But methinks,
Friend, you wheel about and approve that which at first you decried; there
might be some hopes of agreement and band shaking between us. Allow love and
marriage, and I will join with thee against dotage; and would have Love
sequestered from dotage, as much as thy mind from this obstinacy. But I see the
Devil has always a cloven foot; you would now allow of Marriage without Love,
and confound love and dotage as if the same. To wed without Love, is to be tied
by the loins like a Monkey to a bed-post, neither is it possible to court or
marry without love, as you write, for that want of love turns courtship to
flattery, and marriage to a bargain. That Women are Natures Errata, with
Aristotle I acknowledge; and that they study temptations, is undoubtedly true;
but yet that they do it not alone, your own example proves; who by this fancy
of Anti-womanism tempt the sex so much, that I could wish my self one to dote
on thee. Do not call the lawful and necessary intermixture of both Sexes to be
a base prostitution of the Reason, Soul and Gallantry of a Man; it is so false
and groundless, it deserves no answer but the lie. Let thy friend alone with
his choice, and if he think her so, she is peerless; only I admit your caution,
While he seeks to win her, let him not lose himself; nor shoot away all his
shot at one volley, but keep a reserve for a fresh encounter; it is but
discretion. And now to answer your similitudinary Question, Why a woman cannot
be viewed with as little ardour as a Statute? it is because a Statue is not a
Woman, nor directly like a Woman; if it could be, Pygmalion will tell you there
may be like affection, nor is the influence different as to the eye, but the
power that actuates it; if a man view a thousand Pictures, he generally likes
one best, and having perused all, returns to that; and though the Market be
free, and Wares various, a good Chapman sticks to what he best fancies, and
deals in it. Neither is all perfection thereby impaled in one Creature; but
there may be enough supposed in one, to content one. That your self has ever
loved, I question; but that you have fansied and mist, may be true; but you
cannot thereby go out a competent Tutor. Nor should I ever take that Mariner
for my Pilot, who has no other experience than splitting his own Ship: first
guide your own Vessel to the Port, before you take another to your management
and steerage. What it is to be sick of Love or the Plague, you know much alike,
and so shall be believed, having studied both but in shape; for my part, I have
known many sick of Love, and yet recovered; but the Plague I have no skill in.
My desire is, that you participate of your own counsel; suspend your severe
censure to your friend, and sit first a strict Judge on your self, till time
and experience ripen your judgment and change your mind. Which I hope I shall
not longer expect, than until you have seriously perused and weighed the
experimental directions and wholesome advice of,

Thine, and thy Friends Friend, A.B.

III.
IT is said concerning Diogenes, that he enjoined his friends, that should be
concerned about the manner of his interment, to bury him in a prone posture,
that when the world should be turned upside down, he might remain in a more
decent and the usual situation, with his face upwards. One would think that
this conversion is either now adays approaching, or has lately suffered it, if
we consider how much we are overgrown with a new Generation of men, (the Wits
of the Age) who by their gestures and humors not only design to oppose and
deride the primitive manners and well digested Principles of their Ancestors;
but have of late planted their squirting and airy Wits to bedash the sacred
state of Wedlock, that if possible they might unpeople the world, and usher in
its expiration with their own decease, as if conscious to themselves of the
vitiousness of those principles they have imbibed and the public miscarriages
they are guilty of, endeavor to obstruct a surviving posterity, that would
pity their ignorance and explode their examples.

It is now the Opinion of those who pretend to understand most, that the world
has been fooled in nothing more than in an idle and tame submitting to the
Fetters of Marriage; that some one unknown to them did most injuriously inslave
so many Generations with this dull institution, which did upon that account
lose the freedom and vigor of generous actions, and miscarried in those Essays
that would have shown a greater Bravery and Glory of mind, but when we shall
find that the world has not received greater Benefits by the Idolaters of
Liberty, than from the Votaries of Wedlock, we shall be able to return so
criminable a charge.

The highest wisdom took the prospect of all the species, and established what
was the benefit and good of all, and not what might please the humor of some,
who starting up in particular generations, and making a noise amongst those
whom they lived, could yet with no justice reproach the prudence that governed
their fathers; with which they are displeased through the capriciousness of
their own folly, and not the defect of precept, which like Beds and Couches are
not to be accused, because they are uneasy to the sick and distempered. This
institution like power ows its glory to the respect is paid it, whilst every
thing that is neglected, is by that scorn rendered cheap and contemptible: and
any disesteem Marriage lies under, is not from the inconveniences are found in
it, but only arises from the incivility of those times that forbear to respect
it. If persons would study to do it justice, we should find it again with the
same Votaries about it; and not like dethroned Monarchs without its state and
unattended. Marriage laid the foundation and first principle of civil society,
it was a yoke for which the neck of Innocence was not too soft and delicate,
and a condition governed by unerring virtue had yet need of these Allotments,
as to the advantages and improvements of society, and that which Marriage
appropriated was the first proclaming of Mine and Thine The earth was common,
and the enjoyments of it had an undistinguished right, whilst the concernments
of the bed were sacred and separate; in all things else, we can allow a sharer
but in the Interests of our Love. To oblige Mankind by an obligation sacred and
unaltered to the affairs and interests of one Love, was an act of that prudence
and wisdom against which none can dispute. We can with no equity raise a title
to more, since the Law of Nature proclames that loving of one should be for
enough, and that sex must have been left in a condition wholly base and
mercenary, to have took the pay of every Amor. There would have been set up a
Tyranny in Love, which must have been the most cruel and insupportable of
others, because exercised on the best interests of life. The force of conquest
had been a sufficient title to the objects we had coveted: But Marriage puts
the world into Discipline and a happy Government, enclosing the common
enjoyment that none might lay claim to the portion of another. Had beauty and
the possession of that Sex been left a prey to the Conqueror, and subject to be
born away by the most forcible Courtships: Mankind must have ever dwelt jealous
of each other, proclaming an enmity against all the world, and have judged
their power alone a sufficient defense; But by the force of Matrimonial Laws
and the Allotments made us from above, we live in quiet and security with each
other, who must else have stood perpetually on our guard, and secured what we
had loved from the wandering lusts of others. The world must have been
perpetually involved in quarrels, since Love is more restless and more
impatient than Ambition, and whilst a charming object had many claimers, she
must at last have yielded to the conqueror, and not have gratified the Passion
of the most deserving, but the most happy, being without the exercise of that
Empire which Halcyon laws had gave her, that must have been wholly lost amidst
the animosities of Rivals. But since Love is preserved in these bounds, its
excellencies and advantages remain to the world, its childish and troublesome
qualities are cut off by Laws, its made tame and gentle, which would else have
devoured the fairest concernments of the Universe, since the Love it cuts off
and regulates, it could not have born, and the Love it manages it cannot spare.

But why this condition is deemed so contemptible, and dreaded by the
Libertines of our times, is by reason of that severe censure they harbor of
it, to be as full of Plagues as Pandora's Box, no sooner shall we admit of it,
but presently find our selves to be fettered with cares and perplexities; and
therefore celebrate a single life for its freedom and repose. But let me ask
them, who found in a mortal state that tranquillity they have pretended to
admire; what condition of Life is there that is always serene, quiet and
undisturbed? and although cares may attend that estate more than other
conditions; yet those Advantages and Blessings, those sweet societies which
proceed from it, are able to sweeten its crosses, ease its burdens, and
retrieve whatever is deemed tedious. And although they can show us the life of
some rude and melancholy Philosopher, who in his retirements locked up from the
world, and Vatia-like lies buried in a dreaming Idleness, boasts of quiet and
repose. We can show them many examples of virtuous men, living not only
contentedly, but admired in the eyes of Matrimony, spreading their useful
qualities as well as issues, whilst the Stoic has permitted his virtue to droop
and wither in the shade of his own humor. An excellent person may do much for
the world with his own sufficiency, but he doubly obliges it, who in a Seminary
of Hero's is continually propitious to it, and by the force of embraces causes
lives to those Generations which stand next the worlds last calenture and
burning fit. Pompey did not only fight himself for the Liberty of Rome, till he
was its greatest and mightiest sacrifice, but left also those gallant sons who
bravely endeavored to revive it when faint and dying. We shine with a solitary
virtue without the irradiations of an Offspring, and beside it loses its
luster and strength, when it is obliged to wander in various enterteinments.
How had the world suffered, if a person who by many generous actions became the
darling of Mankind, neglecting to transinit a copy from so beloved and glorious
an Original, had set at once in his being and his race. In ancient wars infants
have been carried to encourage battles, thereby with their unactive blood
strangely animating the veins of others, and it has moreover been found to
work much upon the disposition of human nature, a kind of gallant affection for
the memory of some glorious person left to the guidance of a tender hand. Such
efforts served the race of the African and the Gothic Hero, procuring to the
world this belief and benefit together, that he which leaves his virtue an
orphan, may have erected for it the Hospitals of stately tombs and the
Panegyrics of history; but he that would have it lasting and useful, as well as
admired, must leave it to his Issue, where in the active torrent of generous
performances, it may accumulate the same glory and esteem it found in the days
of an ancestor. To be only admired is a barren advantage; to be useful and to
be beloved, is what the truly noble rather covet, which is found in the virtues
and good offices of our race. Neither shall we find any men of a more noble
gallantry as amongst those duo fulmina belli, I mean Pompey and Brutus, men not
only religiously prizing the married state, but such as were blessed with the
society of those women, that for the returns of love and kindness were famous
in every generation. We choose friendship as a field for virtue to reap
advantages in; and none but retired and treacherous natures will be without the
blessings of that. But without all question that friendship is the noblest
bound in the surest Ligaments that is commenced in Marriage, than any took up
on other scores. No nation could have flourished nor have been successful in
its affairs, if a wanton flame had consumed the manly temper and vigor of
youth, or if their Passions had not transported them to such violent actions,
yet the gentlest concernments of those flames, incensing the animosities and
jealousies of rivalship, the prodigality of amorous addresses, had dislodged
all Braveries of mind, and baffled all those advantages with which they should
have served their Generations. And therefore all wise and prudent Governments
knew they should have but little order and less of industry, where the affairs
of an idle passion possessed the hearts and heads of their Subjects. Marriage
gives the thoughts a home, and hereby betimes the inconstant and flitting
fancy is directed to an aim, and kept steadfast by a peculiar authority, that
would else be captivated by the wandering lusts of stews and concubines: And who
does not (that is bias'd by reason) take more pleasure in managing the
interests of a family, and a lasting name by an happy issue, than in cherishing
a short-lived inclination? The want of a just interest to manage has brought in
those Inconveniences that are found in the world; and that pleasantness and
gayness, which is childishly called, good humor, so much idolized in the single
life, what is it but a trifling and strange impertinence, a thing without all
conduct and prudence; and after the follies of youth are over, even
insupportable to those who have the most admired it. What Judgment can we pass
on this, any otherwise than that they lavishly spend the prudent stock of
nature, which becoming bankrupt by excessive practices, they are after forced
to yield to those humors, which speak the wants and poverties of nature, which
designed no man to that vanity, as to be taken up with the contemplation of his
own endowments, like the fantastic Youth, who made Love to, and died for it
himself. He that gathers the stock of his own endowments, into his own breast
and keeps them there like roses that grow in deserts, he dies uncommended and
unenjoy'd. Virtue is diffusive and loves occasions to exercise its vivacy and
vigor, what we carry about us sufficiently declares, that we were not designed
to be happy alone, whilst both the solace of the mind, and an endeared life
consist in an union with something different.

A Letter to a Friend, delivering an Opinion of the Scotch Rising.
SIR,
THat you may receive an Account of the Scotch business, and that there has
been such irresolute alteration about the Treaties lately, it is fit you know
this Northern storm, like a new disease has so far posed the Doctors of State,
that as yet they have not given it a name; though perchance they all firmly
believe it to be rebellion; and therefore, Sir, it is no wonder if these do
here as the learned in Physic, who when they know not certainly the grief^,
prescribe Medicines sometimes too strong, sometimes too weak. The truth is, we
here judge concerning the Scotch affairs much after the rate as Mortals do of
the Moon; the simple think it no bigger than a bushel, and some likewise think
it a vast world with strange things undiscovered in it; two ill ways of casting
it up; sure the first will make us too secure, the other too fearful. I confess
I know not how to write in the middle, and set it right; nor do I think you
know; since I should believe the question rather to be, A King or no King? then
A Bishop or no Bishop? In great mutinies and insurrections of this nature,
pretenses speciously conscionable were never wanting, and indeed they are
necessary; for rebellion is of itself so ugly, that did it not put on the visor
of Religion, it would affright rather than draw people unto it; and being
drawn, could not hold them without it. Imaginary cords that seem to fasten man
to heaven, have tied things here below faster than any other obligation. If it
be liberty of conscience they ask; it is a foolish request, seeing they have it
already, and must have in despite of power. For as Theodoret says to the Jews,
Nemo cogitur credere invitus. If they exercise that liberty, it is dangerous;
for not three men are of the same opinion in all; and then each family must
have a war within itself. Look upon the long preparations, and consider withal
that Prophesies are ceased, and therefore they could not foretell this Book
should be sent to them, and you will conclude they rather employed conscience,
than conscience them. Inquire after the leaders, and you will hardly find them
Apostles, or men of so high sanctity, that they should order Religion; Lesley
himself if his sore were searched, would certainly be found one, who because he
could not live well there, took up a trade of killing men abroad; and now is
returned to kill men at home. If you will have my opinion, I think their
quarrel to the King is the same they have to the Sun, that he does not warm
them so much, nor visit them so often as he does others. God and nature placed
'um in the shade, and they are angry with the King for it. To conclude, this is
the case; the great and wise Husbandman has placed these beasts in
out-fields, and they would needs break hedges to come into the Garden. This is
the belief of

Yours J.S.

CHARACTERS.
A Whore
IS one of Sampson's Foxes that carries fire in the tail, to destroy the
standing corn. She goes under the name of a decayed Gentlewoman; and indeed she
is gentle enough, a Half-Crown will make her come to hand. The Devil and she
are co partners in undoing, for one spoils the body, the other the soul.
Turn-up she affects above all roots in the Garden. She cares not for the
Bridewell, having lain often at the common Ward. Her walk is Covent Garden; and
her Exchange a Tavern. He that goes to salute her, is deceived, for she is very
coy of her lips, and therefore bulwarks them about with paint. Her breath
stinks worse than a Bear-garden; her furniture consists of a Plaisterbox, a
Periwig, and a Lookingglass; besides a Pimp, which she accounts one of her
necessary implements. She is a she- Bias, and can say, Omnia mea mecum porto.
She is a preservative against a hard frost; and a Regiment of them will beggar
Newcastle, for they carry fire about them. Her children, if any, are like
wind-falls, and found in the Kings highway. She is not ambitious, but delights
in fallings; yet by her falling her Stallions rise. She is a hackney Jade, and
lets every fool ride her; a Barbers chair, as soon as one is out, another is
in. She is a very Butcher, and sells her flesh by the stone; one may buy her
awhole at the price of damnation. She is like a Medlar, never ripe till rotten;
like Camomile, she thrives the better the more she is trod. About thirty she is
in her Zenith, and then from thence she declines; for the pox or rotten teeth,
etc. will write her stale or ugly, and trading will decay; and then her only
preferment is the degree of a Baud, where three Strong-water Bottles, an ounce
of Tobacco, and two Countrey-Wenches sets her up; and she drives a trade till
Shrove-Tuesday; and a Cart and a bunch of Turnips are the reward of her
labors; and the Bridewell the limbo of both body and bones.

A Patentee
WAs sometimes a Gentleman of Fortunes, but being cast overboard by his own
riot or folly, lays hold of the next thing he meets with. He is begot like a
Mule, between a Courtier and a Citizen, but turns Parricide to both. No air
nips him so much as a West-wind coming from the Parliament House, for that
brings him to the Falling Sickness; the Re-public and his Re-private never are
in conjunction; but like Castor and Pollux, when one sets the other rises. He
is an excellent Alchymist and can draw Gold out of Soap, Candles, Marrow bones,
and what-not? Nothing angers him so much as the sound of a Reformation; for
then he is projecting to procure a Patent to hang himself. Like a Louse, he
shrowds on the shoulders of Greatness; for that is his main protection. All
honest men shun his company, and he theirs; in which regard you may call him a
Separatist. His walk is Westminster hall, or the Court, with his hand-full of
Papers, because he would be taken for a man of note. The Monopolist and he like
Hippocrates twins, both live and die together. In his chamber his Glass and he
are in a deep consultation, how to set his face that it may go even with the
times; like a Watch, whereof his tongue is the Alarm. His pretenses are fair
for the benefit and ease of the Subject; To reform some grievance (meaning his
own poverty,) to increase Trade (meaning of Patentees,) and to prevent
disorders; to which he rather adds a sail than a ballast. He has little skill
in the Law, but only in the penal Statutes, and that in a defensive way to play
the knave in a circle, and yet keep out of their bounds to prevent hanging; and
less in the Gospel, unless to fish by Peter's example, for such fish as have
money in their mouths. His Religion is commonly but skindeep, it may appear in
his countenance, but it never comes near his heart; it is writ upon changeable
Taffata, for good and lawful considerations; his Religion and his Practice make
him like the new invented Pictures, one way an Angel, another way a Devil. All
his life is a continued Cataline's Conspiracy; he and the Commonwealth are
like two feet, if one rise, the other falls; if both chance to rise together,
it is but a leap, that the fall may be the greater. He feeds upon new Projects;
his drink is the tears of the poor Laborers; and commonly his Livery is the
ruin of some Corporation. His disease lies in his ears, for he is commonly
infected with a Pillory, which at last comes into his neck, and Tiburn ends
him; where his only glory is, that he died for the Commonwealths good.

A Politic
IS one that makes Heaven bow to Earth; he places his summum bonum in Earths
felicity, and depends on no other Providence but the reach of his own brain.
His Religion is but the visor of his policy; and whatever virtue he has, craft
is the keeper of it. His looks are candid, and hypocrisy is the only Saint he
adores. All his discourses are obscure and ambiguous; like the Devils in the
Delphic Oracle; you may understand the words, but not the meaning. He is like
an Aspen-Tree, every wind of greatness blows him and he bends. Is his Prince
valorous? he is daring; covetous? he is sparing; lascivious? he is wanton;
religious? he pretends much; his heart is a Theater, wherein all humors are
presented, and his face pantomimical. He is of that man's Religion, with whom he
talks; a Caesarean, a Pompeian, which soever prevails; he will cry, Up with them,
and Down with them all in a breath. Like a Waterman he looks one way and rows
another; or like a Lapwing, keeps most noise when she is farthest from her
nest; or a cunning Fencer, that seldom makes a blow without a falsify; fuller
of Questions than Answers, rather desiring to know another secrets, than
bewray his own. Pleasures he is not much delighted in, but only like the Dog at
Nilus, laps as he runs, for fear of the Crocodile. Every one that he deals
with, he supposes has the Master-reach in cunning; and therefore still
carries both eyes open. His sight is strong enough to apprehend dangers in
Embrio, and so quells them before shape or form make them terrible. If a
Contract blow favorably, he hoiseth sails, and with it steers his Voyage; if a
cross gale comes to his main underground Design, he thrusts out the Oars of
fair Pretenses through the Portholes of his conscience. He would be accounted
every man's friend, that he might know his secrets. All his actions are tipped
with fair Pretenses, yet are directed to himself, and therefore looks no
higher. Whatever his Theme be, his Application is his own ends: yet he is often
contented to do any cheap courtesies; and makes himself very joyful and happy
in an opportunity, so as he be sure to be no loser by it. His cap and knee, his
smiles and good words aee all at a minutes warning, to be dealt about on all
occasions. In a word, he is one that loves no man, but with a reservation, nor
will trust any; nor indeed any wise man him, farther than he sees him.

A Clubber
IS a Hogs-head set on two stumps fit for no use but to hold Liquor; the Tavern
only is his ubi and the proper place of his residence; any other where he is
like a Fish out of the water, who does nothing but gape. He thinks Nature gave
him a mouth, not to speak, but to drink off his Liquor, for that is the main
use he puts it to; he drinks not to live (as Nature commands) but lives to
drink. Of all the Miracles that ever Christ did, he thinks none so meritorious
for the salvation of his soul, as the turning water into Wine; and he in
imitation can work a miracle too; for he can turn a whole Shop of Wares into a
Pint-pot. His only enquiry is, where dwells the best Sack or Claret? You shall
find him and his Tribe about the declining part of the day, at rendezvous, like
a Constellation fixed in the lower Region of a known Tavern; where their noses
appear like Comets, and portend drought; there they are accommodated with a
private Room, a half-Pint, some clean Pipes, and a Jordan. Their first
Discourse is a general Vote about the goodness of the Wine; the next pair of
half-Pints Pints produces News; where each puffs over the inside of a Diurnal;
but for want of that, the main Scene is, who were drunk the night before, and
how they reeled home. They are internally Pharisees, and very exact in making
clean the inside of the Glass; their strictest Criticism is, Drink off your
Cup. At last, when it strikes twelve, they make a liquor'd Reckoning, drink
their Wives Health, in whose defense they are dutifully drunk, till they lose
their own; and then they stagger home to bed, and find it in small beer in the
morning.

A Politic Citizen
IS a lump of combustible ignorance, whom the least spark of news fires into a
blaze of unlikely conjectures; he measures all the designs of foreign News by
the line of Stow's Chronicle; which he never hears read, but out flies a piece
of nonsense, which he mis-calls State Policy, able to confound Machiavel. He
much haunts the Post House to note into what forms men concoct their Faces at
the reading of Letters; he frequents the Exchange in the post-meridian hours,
because then men empty themselves of intelligence; his only factorage is news,
viewing a Bill of Exchange, he swears it is a Libel. Tell him of a Curranto and
he is in heaven; he takes an Almanac of foul weather for one of Merlin's
Prophesies. Upon hearing of a Victory or loss of a Sconce, he is enraged, and
blames the State that he was not a General; he extols the Low-Countrey's
Government above any Monarchy, because the fat Citizens rule the roast; he holds
it impossible for the State ever to be ruined, because it swims in Butter. His
face is a piece of Stenography, where all Richelieu's designs are writ in
shorthand. He keeps a common place book of hard State-words, which though he
nor his English Dictionary understand, he after an Aldermans Plumb-broth Feast
spues out among the learned Fraternity; and is therefore slandered with the
name of a Politician, and he turns Heretic and believes it; for they had rather
ignorantly admire his speeches, than go to the price of understanding them. All
the passages he hears are Stratagems; if he hear but a Ballad, he sinells
Treason in it; he cannot endure Plays, because there are Plots in them, ask him
a question, you undermine him; answer him with silence, he takes you for a
State-Informer; he tells news by tale, not by weight. There is no way to strike
him dumb but drawing out your Table Book; every man is a fool that is not of
his opinion: but he takes him for an undoubted wise man that applauds his
conjectures; he seldom approves any thing that he understands, and yet he
approves most things; he meditates on an old Manuscript more than the
Pentateuch; he wonders why the Apocalypse is put in the end of the Bible, and
thinks it a disgrace; he takes Brightman for a better Interpreter than Daniel;
he cuts the Apocrypha out of his Bible, for fear of infection; yet cannot tell
why he hates it, but because it is Apocrypha; and thinks Solomon but a fool in
suffering his wisdom to be put there. Monarchy he cannot abide, but says it is
against Christian Liberty; but thinks Anarchy is as old as the Chaos. He takes
Malchus's Servant to be a Saint, because he had his ear cut; yet thinks him not
right of his opinion, because he had one left. He takes Peter for a Popish
Bishop, because he cut off that ear. Where 'ere the Scripture says strive, he
takes it for fighting; that makes him so in love with Civil War. Among his
Superiors he is dumb; to his inferiors deaf; the one he offends by silence, the
other by prating; to both he is ridiculous. In a word, he is the State
Incendiary, the Cities bane, and Kings evil.

A Schismatic
IS one of those rash Servants that will not let the Wheat and the Tares grow
together; but crops off his hair, or rather weeds it up, lest it should hinder
the growth of his ears, that when the harvest of tribulation comes, they may be
reaped by handfuls for good considerations. He thinks it impossible to be saved
if ones hair transcends his teeth in longitude. He is in the head an
Hermaphrodite, between a Friar and a Turc, the one shaves round the head, the
other the crown, he both; he hopes to be pulled up to Heaven by the ears like a
pitcher. He is a Papist turned the wrong side outward, and so strongly denies
their tenets, that he grants their maxims; his Religion and theirs run round in
a circle till they meet. He is fallen out with Learning so, that he thinks
ignorance his main saving grace; and would be content to speak no Language but
sanctified Bulls, but that the Pope uses them; he stands much for Christian
Liberty, yet will tie all men from the use of ceremonies; Free Will he cries
down in a Papist, yet mainteins that a Protestant may do what he please. All
his Discourse is the sand of zeal bound together without the lime of reason;
for he calls that human Traditions, and protests the Brethren do not use it.
You cannot vex him more than to tell him, his soul is Gods Image, for he hates
idolatry. To speak languages, he says, is to glory in the confusion of Babel;
and to talk sense is to advance carnal reason above the spirit. He wears his
soul, as a Gallant that has put on his Periwig the back part foremost; for
whereas his will should be judicious, his judgment is wilful. He flies human
learning as a Serpent; three words of Latin will give him nine stools. His
knowledge, how small soever, never sinks into his heart, but only swims in his
brain; standing bare at a Sermon makes his zeal catch cold, and that brings
snuffling in the nose. He is one of the Attorneys of Dovers Court; and can with
more patience talk five hours, than hear one. In company he is excellent
Physic; for he will either purge your gall with anger, or your spleen with
laughter. Against every new meeting, he takes in store of new arguments to
maintein some newfangled opinion; which when he vents, his proselytes are
ravished with admiration, and think him inspired with strange revelations, that
he can speak English and they not understand him. He will cross the Kings
Highway rather than view a Cross there. Aristotle was never so corrupted with
Dutch Comments, as the Scripture is with his; his brain is like the puddle at
Oxford, into which Aristotle's Well dischanels itself, and becomes stinking
water. When he takes a Bishop in his mouth, it is in that sense as a Wolf takes
a Lamb; not (...) but simpliciter. Tell him of a High Commission, and he holds
his ears, and says there is a mystery in that Posture. Set but his zeal on
fire, and it will flame, though it smother a Kingdom; the only way to confute
him is silence or laughter. He is all for Independent Church Government, yet
wishes all the Orthodox Clergy hanged. He holds a Stable as holy as a Church;
but holds a Chamber holier than both, if it be well furnished; that is, with a
Bed and a Sister; and then he cares not how long he stands. He that would draw
the character of his Religion, had need have a Map of all the Earth and of Hell
too, where his Principles are deeply rooted. He will not believe that Christ
ever descended into Hell, but intends to take a Journey thither himself to
dispute with the Devil. There let him go for me.

A Gallant
IS one that Nature made while the World was in a Chaos, and therefore detests
order ab origin. He dares use his tongue against Heaven; but scarce his hands
against a Butter-fly. Is he sober? his care is how to be drunk, is he drunk?
his next task is how to shift the reckoning. All his discourses are buttered
with Oaths, which he uses Euphoniae gratia. He has worn out all his friends,
but the Hangman; and all his Apparel, but his Sword; which he hacks sometimes
against a Mantle-post, and swears he has been in a desperate encounter; coming
from a Baudy-house, he swears he has been in hot service, though his courage be
soon taken down. Two French postures he has naturally, viz. to have his Flanks
and his hair fall off, which last defect he supplies with the mercenary
Auxiliaries, a Periwig. His face speaks him no true Subject, because of its
frequent risings; to which Rebels his nose is Standardbearer, and carries the
colors. His common Notion or Title Page is a Low Country Soldier; under which
visor he boasts of Victories and Adventures which he heard discoursed of at the
last Tavern. He sets his faith to sale, and cries, Who will give most? His
Loyalty lasts no longer than his Money. His Threats are like Thunderclaps, or
the motions of Mountains; and if a blow be brought forth it is like a mouse; in
the midst of his fury, if you care not for his menaces, nor fear his blows, he
will shake hands with you. 'Twere fearful if his valor were as great as his
wickedness, or if his power echoed his will. Though he be an Infidel himself,
he would have others believe his Oaths when he promises payment. You cannot do
him a greater discourtesie, than to make his Surgeon drunk, for then he
bewrays his secrets. He keeps good quarter with his Laundress, lest she should
discover the spots of his conversation. The first thing he does in the morning,
is to bid a Pox take those Fleas that bit him at night, which is sure to be
granted; and the last thing he does at night, is to curse the Genileman that
cudgel'd him that day. In the morning, imitating the Sun immediately after his
rise, he passes into an Alehouse; or if he can get one to spend for him, to a
Tavern; so passes from sign to sign, through a whole Zodiac in a day, till he
comes to Aquarius; and then goes by water to a Baudy-house, and comes out by
fire. He believes there is no Sign of Virgo left in the World. In the end you
shall find him kicked by his Companions for having no Money about him, which he
swears is in his other pockets, whenas he has but only one Suit, and that is
threadbare before the Tailor is paid. Thus when he has gone his round, and
been abused by his Companions for abusing them, he reels into the mouths of the
Watch, and from thence is rolled into the Counter; where to his credit, many
great Actions are imputed to him.

A Ballad-maker
IS a Volume of Rhyme composed by the hand of nonsense; or a musical Instrument,
not yet tuned. An Alehouse he accounts the only Helicon; and the Ale-drapers
Wife one of the nine Muses. His wit runs thick or clear, like the Ale-barrel.
He is a second Charon; for none are wafted over by the way of Tiburn, but he
receives money for their passage. He exceedingly longs for blazing Stars,
Earthquakes, Dearths, or strange accidents. The Brethren keep constant
correspondence with him, that he may compose their Libels into Meter; and being
whipped or Pillory'd for it, he rejoiceth, saying that he suffers for the truth.
His Companions call him Poet at every word, but it is in a jeer; and being
patient to bear all slanders, believes it and bears it. Call him Goose or
Woodcock, he is enraged; but yet had rather eat your words than you should. He
is sensible of no Argument but beating; and that alone drives him out of your
company. He is in pay by the Country Wenches, to write Love-Stories to
lamentable Tunes; which they sing to the Cows, and make them weep milky tears
to hear them. His common Vaticans where his Books are preserved, are the
windows and walls of an Alehouse in the Country. He like the Emblematists is
beholden to an Engraver; but only his Wood-carver has certain common Places; a
man and a woman serve like Panpharmacons, for all occasions. He is a dutiful
Son of the Church, and loves no innovations in Musics; but they go like Hopkins
and Wisdom, to the Tune of the same. He is in no better cue to write a
lamentable Story, than when he is Maudlin-drunk; his brain is the common-sewer
of Poetry; the streams which he sucks from Poets, he defiles with the muddy
stinking puddles of his Additions. There is many a man is made a Martyr by his
Elegies; wherein his Encomiastics persecute the very ashes, and hypocritically
tear the dead body of Hercules with a smiling countenance. In a word, he is the
Suburbs of a Poet; whose sepulcher is the Stocks, and his monument a Pillory.

The CHARACTER of a self-conceited Fellow.
HE is, I dare not say a Man, nor Boy; but in the Parenthesis of both; yet he
thinks only a beard is wanting to proclaim his manhood; because he has taken up
Women's Smocks, he writes sumpta virili toga, when indeed his wit is hardly out
of the clouts. He is an Ape, that imitates both, but wanting the wit of the
one, acts naturally the folly of the other. He thinks himself of deep judgment,
yet has nothing deep about him, but the pits of his nose; which makes him boast
of hills and dales in his own possession. He affects two contraries; for he
will be a laughing stock to good company, where his highest ambition is to be
told he talks like an Apothecary; or else is the Bell-weather of children,
fools, or Frenchmen; who have neither English enough to reprove his nonsense,
nor to approve his no-wit; but pass it over for jests by ignorant laughter. He
is an ignis fatuus to mis-lead fools by a shining nothing that is in him, or a
blazing Star placed in the lower Regions of a Tavern; and a Cup in his brain,
portends the birth of some prodigious conceit. To ingratiate himself into good
company, he keeps constantly in pay a Regiment of jests and hard words, to
salute their ears with a volley of nonsense; which if they be not graced with
laughter, he is nonsuited. But being dis-robed of this store, he whispers them
of a Wench; and rather than want employment, will turn Pimp. You cannot please
him unless you praise him; nor praise him, unless you flatter him. It is his
summum bonum to move laughter; and if his jests will not do it, his gesture
must; if neither, you may laugh at the Jestor. He most commonly procures
friendship with some wit, whom he enjoins to be the foreman in the peal of
laughter; who both to his face and behind his back, laughs at him. Much he
affects to speak some foreign Language, because in all his Discourse he would
overreach the capacity of an Englishman. He whispers How d' you, as if 'twere
Treason, in the ears of any new acquaintance, to make others think he is privy
to their secrets. He always detracts from other men's worth behind their backs,
as if he knew by instinct others dispraised him; and it goes hard if a man
wears any clothes, but he will pick a hole in his coat. He has not exchanged
two words with Nature in love (I had almost said since he was of understanding)
because she made him so low, that he cannot overlook other men's actions; but
to help this defect, he has gotten the faculty of taking the wall of his
betters; having nothing in himself worth his knowledge, he scorns noscere
seipsum. The thing is sometimes Poetical wherein he casts up his ignorance, to
make it seem of high account; he writes like the Egyptian darkness, wherein he
shows cunning; for when men laugh at his Verses, he may say, they laugh at they
know not what; and can boast of more than any Modern Poet, that he writes above
human apprehension. He carries such a deep conceit of his own conceits, that he
thinks no man worthy to understand them; nay he is such a niggard, that he
grudgeth himself the benefit. The Subject of his Fancy is himself; wherein he
truly shows himself poetical, if Fictions can do. He mislikes every man after
the first acquaintance; nay, grows weary of his native Country, and will
travel; and his actions and carriage therein, no tongue can express but his
own, for he may lie by Authority. Himself is gone beyond the limits of my
Paper, where my Pen nor can nor will follow him.

The Character of a City-Wit.
HE is a gaudy Vacuum, gilded over with a few hard words, which he imagins to
have a deep meaning, because his dull sense cannot dive into it; which with
much pains he has weeded from Authors, and placed in Garrison in a Common
place-book, that he may draw out a Regiment of Recruits when his wit is routed.
His Discourse is a Line of Sand, or a composition of so many foot and
half-words, which being put together, spell non sense. He admits not a word
into his Society, under the degree of a Tetrasyllable; and takes all Discourse
by measure, not weight. He were the only man to be Minshew's Son, and compose
another Dictionary of hard words, had he but wit enough to spell them, or
learning to tell their signification. Yet he thinks his nose a Jacob's Staff,
able to calculate the height of any man's fancy. By his tedious Discourses of
Heraldry, he would make you believe he were a Gentleman. And to gain Honor, he
dares be a Soldier; and has taken up Arms on his Signet, for defense of his
little finger; but intends only to fight by the Heralds Book, where his valor
will be seen by the miserable hanging, drawing, and quartering of his innocent
Coat. He had been preferred to a Trumpeters place, but that he could sound no
Alarm, but his own praise. Had he but Poetry, he would out-vaper Ben; but he 'l
not speak a Verse, lest they should be taken for children of his own begetting,
and known by their long legs. Besides his speeches are so masterless, they
think it against the Liberty of the Subject to be chained in a Verse. In his
Arguments his Solutions are more intricate than the Question; and that man
needs a deep reach that would define his definition. After many Pleonasms and
Circumlocutions, he is delivered at length of a non sequitur; yet makes no
Conclusion, for his Discourse is endless. You may be sick of a Consumption and
cured, before he has finished a Complement; and it is a wonder if the Palsy in
his tongue procure not the Frenzy in his head. Shows he prefers before
substance; and esteems an Alcoran in folio before a pocket- Bible. He uses
much to discommend himself; which we must interpret as a praise, the clean
contrary way; yet rather than lose a drop of his praise, he will lick it up
with his own tongue. The way to gain his favor, is neither to understand him,
nor be understood by him; he will then applaud the depth of your judgment; for
it is his property to think nothing deep, unless it be muddy. He accounts no
man rich in wit, that does not gingle with it in every fools company; he thinks
not that a man's Warehouse may be full, whose Shop is empty; and a Fountain of
Learning in that head, where there is no chanel in the tongue. He would fain be
a Philosopher, for he is very peripatetical; and because his wit is bald, he
periwigs it with stolen combings, which he calls his own, because he bought
them, and says he studied hard for them; but it was only to remember them; and
if by chance any word do put out his head in company, and is not conceived,
he will swear it is an admirable conceit. Because he is tall, he thinks his fancy
is predominant, and therefore is apt to insult over any short man, though he
has more understanding. He thinks every man barren of worth, that has not his
tongue tipped with self-praise; and those unacquainted with wit, that have not
their fancies writ in their faces, perspicuous to every Reader. He is mighty
glad if he be in company with a fool, and thinks him his foil, though indeed he
be his looking-glass. From the ruins of good Buildings he erects the Babels of
his own conceit, and enriches his brain, which indeed is no other but a
Confusion of Languages, where scarce one syllable understands another. In the
Church we must look for him in the highest Pew, but I am loath to stay his
coming out, lest he offend my stomach with some tedious Paraphrase upon the
Sermon; but there I leave him praying against a handsome Wife, lest he be made a
Cuckold; and against a witty Companion, lest he be made a Coxcomb.

J. B.

The Character of a Humourist.
HIs principal humor shall be my excuse, that is, inconstancy; it is hard to
draw his Picture, that will not settle his countenance; therefore expect it
rather in a Landscape than Statua. He is unsettled both in his actions and
opinions; which shows his fancy to predominate in him, rather than judgment;
yet can it not be denied, but that he is master of a sound judgment, but he
makes others, not himself the subject of it; being better able to inform
others, than reform his life; and more able to declame against others vices,
than reclame his own. His anger is more active than hot, rather scorching than
burning; soon kindled, and as soon quenched. And though that man must needs make
a strange combustion in the State of his soul, that upon the landing of every
Cock-boat sets the Beacons on fire; yet because his Reason stands Sentinel,
it is rather a disorder than a mutiny. Virtue he more gazeth after than follows;
or if he do follow, it is rather with his tongue than feet; choosing to talk
with her sooner than walk after her, and prefers a dram of Theorics before a
pound of Practics. At the Game of unlawful Pleasures he had rather be an Actor
than a Spectator; seldom forsaking them till teethlike he be forced to drop off
through too much satiety. Melancholy he will be in the midst of mirth;
certainly when he and his serious thoughts meet together (for they are
strangers) they are excellent company. Venus he esteems above all the seven
Planets; but had rather worship her in a Baudyhouse than in any of the twelve
Celestial Signs. In his Materials he is a Gentleman; but Fortune has cast him
in the City Mould. No doubt but age will reclame his unstaidness; it is no great
fault in a young Horse to use unreasonable mounting. To his friends he is
rather formal than real, apt to trust them with his person, not secrets. In a
falling out of two friends, he will rather side with one, than bring both
agreed; which is an Index of some indiscretion; thereby he being sure, of two
friends to make one his enemy. He is no stranger to Poetry, which is Music in
words, nor to Music, which is Poetry in sound; yet rather makes them his Sauce
than Meat. For Logic, which gives speech substance; or Rhetoric, which gives it
beauty; or Grammar, which gives a tongue to speech itself; he has only ta'n a
cursory view of the first of the three; but has ruminated on the two last. But
lest I make my Garment too big for the Body which I took measure of; and being
something in haste, I conclude with his own Proverb, By -- I cannot stay.

J.B.

The Character of a Fudler.
WE will only take a cursory view of him as he is in company, being not yet so
unhappy to know him farther; but we may ghess at the bulk of Hercules by his
foot. He is a confused lump molded when Nature did all things in the dark; a
Cub of the Chaos not lickt into form, rolled from Tavern to Tavern only to be
drunk and laughed at; where he grunts out words as ill-shap'd and gross as his
person; and if his speeches do chance to quarrel, you must take 'um as they
fall out. His body is built like Babel, but never with an intent to reach
Heaven; the Workmen were confounded, and put Mortar where Gold should be. His
ordinary Discourse is only scurrility and profaneness in a miscellany, boiled
together in huge quantities of Sack, which he carves to his friends as prime
Dainties. Rather than his Jests shall want fire, he will light them at Gods
Altar; and though a Conceit grow on the Banks of Hell, he will adventure to
fetch it; not caring to gain his conceit, though he lose his soul. In company
he monopolizeth all the Discourse to himself; not regarding if his tongue keep
on a gallop before, how far his understanding loiters behind. Sometimes his Wit
stumbles on a Jest, as he that shoots thick, sometimes may his; and then you
will do him a great discourtesie, if you do not laugh; but the main body of his
discourse is a Wild-goose chase after some printed Wit, which he cannot catch.
When he speaks, it is not the motion of his tongue, but the rattling of his
brains; and it is worth our wonder, that his belly should be so full, and head
so empty; but the fullness of the one is the emptiness of the other. His belly,
like the great Fish, eats up all the rest of his limbs, yet his wit is as fat
as that. He has spent much time in travel to learn to be an Ass, all that he
has seen is the Tun at Heidleburgh, which he studies to imitate; and all that
he has brought away, is the exact managing of his Fork at Table. He walks in
the streets like a Rundlet of Sack on two posts; and where'ere he goes, he
carries a fool with him. His study is old Jests and Tales; his recreation,
Drinking; and his main occupation is Wenching. But I fear I have been too long
in his company; by this time he is drunk, it is time to leave him lest he spue
in our faces.

A Solicitor
IS one of the blades of Corn that springs from the Ilian ruins, whose ears
grow up for the Harvest of a Pillory. His Profession is originally like a
Cuckoo, from the Nest of another Trade; where he has learned wrangling and
knavery enough in his own Causes to spoil another man's. With the sweetened
Ingredients of City-fraud he compounds himself (though simple enough) for any
villainy. He is truly said to follow a Cause; but a small Bribe will lame him
so, that he will never come near it. He is one of Sampson's Foxes, that fires
all about him; but that his fire is generally in his nose, as well as his tail.
His ambition is so low, not to have his Chamber in an Inns-of-Court, but in an
Alehouse of the City; a Tavern is his form, and licking of Pots his Law. Most
of his Actions are Assaults or Slanders; which are broacht where his Ale is, in
a Cellar; and after a long circumstance, center themselves where they begun;
where his foolish Client, being weary of his fruitless endless Suit, and
repenting the idle expense of his Money for an imaginary vacuum, called getting
the day; like the Chemist, that blows away his Silver and Lungs, for that Fools
(rather than Philosophers) Stone; does by his wholesome advice, when his Money is
spent, refer his Suit to Arbitrators and Vmpires; whose Verdict is after a long
debate, A Supper for themselves at the equal charge of both Parties; That both
must be sorry for what they have done (as they have good cause) and sit down by
their losses. He seldom gets any considerable preferment, but among Fish-wives
or Watermen, or in a Country Village, where all stand in awe of him, and
slander him with the Title of Master Lawyer. Ignorance and beggary makes him
resolute that he dares thrust his head into any employment. At last, having run
through the Zodiac of all Courts, if he escape the preferment of the Gallows, he
casts Anchor in a Gaol, or a Bridewel; and there we leave him.

FINIS.

