OF THE POWER OF THE KEYS: OR, OF BINDING and LOOSING.

1 COR. 11.31. (...). LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, 1651.

The Preface.
THat the prime Act of Power enstated by Christ on his Apostles, as for the
governing of the Church, (and exorcising or banishing all devils out of it) so
for the effectual performing that great act of Charity to men's souls, reducing
pertinacious sinners to repentance, should be so either wholly dilapidated, or
piteously deformed, as to continue in the Church only under one of these two
notions, either of an empty piece of formality, or of an engine of State, and
secular contrivance, (the true Christian use of shaming sinners into
reformation, being well-nigh vanished out of Christendom) might by an alien,
or an heathens, much more by the pondering Christian, be conceived very strange
and unreasonable, were it not a title clear, that we are fallen into those times
of which it was foretold by two Apostles, that in these last days, there
should come scoffers, walking after their own lusts: the Pride and contumacy
(which have almost become the Genius) of this profane polluted age, heightning
men to an Atheistical fearlesse scoffing and scorning of all that pretends to
work any cures, to lay any restraint on them, to rob them of any degree of that
licentiousness, which is become the very religion, and doctrine of some (under
the disguise of Christian Liberty) and (the Lord be merciful unto us) the
practice of most ranks of Christian Professors. This is the more sad and
wounding a consideration, because it was anciently resolved, that Christianity
wherever it entered in its purity, did plant all manner of exact and strict
conscientious walking, all humility, meeknes, purity, peaceablenesse, justice,
charity, sobriety, imaginable; that wickedness and dissolution of manners was to
be looked on as the only heresy, (and therefore Simon Magus, the Nicolaitans,
and Gnostics, with other their nearest followers, that led the Van of
heretics in Epiphanius, are notoriously known to have been persons of the most
vicious, debauched, libidinous lives) and good life revered as the only
orthodox professor* from whence (as nothing can be more consequent, so) I shall
design to infer no farther conclusion, then only this, that they which live
ill in the profession of a most holy faith, (or farther then so, embrace and
disseminate doctrines which tend to the dissolution of men's lives, making the
good spirit of God the author or cherisher of any of their unchristian
enterprises) but especially they that discharge and banish out of the Church
those means which might help to make the generality of Christians better, have
the spirit of Antichrist working in them, even when they think themselves most
zealously busied in the beating down his kingdom. What those means are which
might most effectually tend to the amending the lives of Christians, I shall
need no farther to interpose my judgment, then 1. by submitting it to Christ's,
who put the Keys into the Apostles hands, on purpose as a means to exemplify
the end of his coming, (...), Mat. 18.11. to save that which was lost, not to
usurp authority over the temporal power or sword, and like an apoplectick
palsie-^it (...), to invade, or smite, or dissolve the sinews of civil
government or peace, (it is a most sacred truth, that the spiritual hand has no
manner of jurisdiction, nor was ever believed to have for the first 1100 years,
over Princes in their temporals; and the composition of the Anglican Church
most perfectly, I had almost said, peculiarly acknowledges it) nor again to
give an office of splendour or grandeur to the Clergy, an authority valuable
only from the ability of hurting others, or magnifying our selves over them,
(which where it is pretended to, is indeed somewhat of the making of the
heathen (...) and (...), that lorded it over Gods heritage, served themselves,
either their purses, or their ambitions, or their passions out of the subjects
under them) but as Christ says, (...), to administer charitably to them in the
matters of the highest alloy, the divinest, valuablest charity of not suffering
sin upon the brother, Levit. 19. And 2. by minding my self and others, what the
Apostles say of this power, that it was given them (...), to build up the
Church of Christ by it in general, and in particular (...), to discipline them,
whom no fairer means would work on, and teach them not to blaspheme in words or
actions, to work them off from all lees of speculative, but especially of
practical Atheism. That these are the [not weak or carnal weapons of the
Churches warfare, but mighty to bring down every strong hold] i. e. the most
contumacious, stout, importunate sinner, that does but acknowledge the truth of
the Gospel, I shall anon have leisure to show you. In the mean, the only design
of this Praeloquium is, to awaken (if it be possible) the drousie world, and
quicken them so far from the mortified, putrified state of sin and stupidity,
as to be willing but to hearken to Christ himself when he comes but on a
message of mercy to them, to redeem them from iniquity, Tim. 2.14.
and purify to himself a possessed purchased people (or the people which he
had purchased for that one end, that they might be) zealous of good works. If
this general proposal, (so pertinaciously decried by our actions) might once be
thought worth the hearing, then sure Christ's peculiar way and method of working
this cure, would be thought of some use and advantage also; not looked on as a
mere engine, or artifice of ambitious men, as they cannot be blamed to conceive
it, who think it does any way entrench on those regalities which are placed by
God, I most willingly profess to believe, far above the reach of any humane
authority, solo Deo minores; or else suppose it a tyrannizing, or triumphing
over the most inferior offender, (he that can take any carnal or sensual
pleasure in the exercise of those Keys, in the using that sharp engine of
surgery, or ever draw it but in mere necessary charity, (to edification, and
not to destruction) is one of the (...) sons of blood, not fit to be admitted
on a common Jury, much less advanced to be a spiritual Judge) but as a most
sovereign medicinal Recipe, that which has the inscription of Christ on it;
not as of a Lord, but as a Jesus; not as a Lawgiver, but as a (...), a Savior
and a Physician of souls. And this peculiar way is the power of binding and
loosing, (the subject of this ensuing Discourse) which that it may be restored
to its full vigor in this Church again, and (where ever sobriety shall advise)
by addition of penitential Canons be reformed or regulated, and being put into
the primative Channel, may there be permi^ted to show forth it self in the
native purity and brightness, and so being ordered according to Gods
designation, obtain Gods blessing to make it effectual to its end, (the almost
only piece of reformation which this Church of England, as it has been long,
and as yet stands established by Law, may justly be thought to stand in need
of) shall be the prayer of him, who professes to love and admire the beauty of
this Fabric, even when it lies polluted in its blood, and to wish no greater
blessing to its dearest Friends, or, for whom he daily prays, most implacable
Enemies, then (that of old Ba^timaeus for himself, Lord that they may receive
their sight) that the scales may fall off from all our eyes, that we may see
and value what is so illustriously conspicuous, and ^stimable in it self, and
not so blear our sight with the observation of the miscarriages in this kind as
not to discern or value the designation; which, if the abuses, and excesses,
and mistakes (that have crept in in that matter) were timely discerned, and
removed, and that which is Christian and Apostolical revived, and restored in
prudence and sobriety, might yet again show the world the use of that Prelacy,
which is now so zealously contemned, and recover at once the Order and the
Estimation of it, set more Saints on their knees in petitions for reducing and
restoring, then ever employed their hands toward the suppressing of it. I shall
no longer need to detain the Reader in his entrance, having no use of any
popular topic to court, or get advantage on his affections, but desiring only
to treat with his reason (as that is elevated by Christ) his more noble
masculine faculty, and 1. From the institution of Christ, to show him the
benefit that will accrue to that better part of him, by continuing within
subjection to this government: and 2. By the peculiarity of the Fabric of this
excellent (yet established) Church of England, to challenge the most
sharp-sighted opposition to show where the due execution of this power
according to Law can provoke him to any thing, but charity and gratitude, both
to the Savior that designed, and to the Prelate that is his Angel in conveying
this seasonable mercy to him; and more generally, where, or in what point of
conjunction, or motion, it can any way enterfere, or disturb the civil
interest. Which it would be hard to affirm of any other national Church in
Europe, which has any power either of repressing heretics, or of reforming,
or but of shaming notorious offenders, left in it. The Lord grant us
unprejudicate honest hearts to judge uprightly of it, and every one of us, that
(...), precious ornament, 1 Pet. 3.4. (in stead of that (...), that bravery of
hell in Macarius, that the proud is so well pleased with) I mean that meekness
and quietness of spirit, to think some others may possibly discern betwixt
good and evil, as well as our selves; and when that prayer is once heard, I
shall then suppose that (...) that has given Themistocles the (...) or
pre-eminence over his fellows in the judgment of all posterity, (viz. that
every man named him next after himself) will certainly end the present
Church-controversie of these sad times. A moderate Episcopacy, with a standing
assistant Presbytery, and Vid. Con. of present use concern. change of
Church-gover page 16.
every of those assigned his full task and province of employment also) being
the only fourth, which as it will certainly satisfy the desires of those
whose pretensions are regular and moderate, (having by their study of learning
and Christianity attained to some measure of that grace which Aristonymus of
old recites among the benefits of Philosophy, (...)) craving nothing more, and
in many things less then the standing Laws of the Land allow them, so will it
appear to be that which all other parties can best tolerate, and which next
himself, both Presbyterian, and Independent, and Erastian will make no question
to choose and prefer before any of the other pretenders.

This, I conceive, is not by me magisterially dictated, but already
demonstrated a posteriori, by the experience which the few last months have
yielded us, since the pretensions of the Prelacy grew weaker, and of the other
three more flattering and hopeful one against the other. Where in every turn of
the trembling motion, that which has feared most to be supplanted by either of
the other pretenders, has been content to acknowledge, that their cost and
industry in the eradication of Prelacy, is not likely to be rewarded in this
life, but with sorer pressures, or more dangerous loosnesse, then that which
formerly they had mourned under. And for a demonstration a priori. I suppose it
sufficient, if it be but calmely considered, that the several excellencies of
the other three, by which they set themselves out amiable and desirable to
admirer^ or followers, (the Presbyterians sharpness and severity against all
ignorance and sin, the Independent zeal against mixed Congregations, and the
Erastians care that the civil power may not be entrencht on, and that they that
might receive benefit by the Word and Sacrament, should by no means be
interdicted the use of them) may all and each of them be found (at least, as in
mixture, refracted and) compounded in this fourth: Which to show particularly,
would require a length beyond the bounds of this Preface, and on that civility
to the Reader, it is now omitted, as also that I may not seem to have mistaken
the point of the present controversy; which certainly among the quickest
sharpest designers or managers of it, is not, what are the uses and
excellencies of this power, but what the properest seat, who the fittest to be
entrusted with it.

One thing yet more there is, which in this matter will deserve to be
considered, viz. the Conscience of Our Sovereigne, in order both to our common
duty to Him, and to an honorable and durable peace, toward which how near
soever we conceive our selves advanced by providence, we cannot reasonably
expect the sure blessing of God, to consummate and crown our hopes, if we do
not (...) in the Apostles phrase, i. e. use all the expedients, that any
ambitious man would employ to the attaining his worldly design, I mean, all
that prudence will suggest, and sober Christian conscience not reject, to the
making up a happy compliance with him; in a word, if we do not by all moderate
lawful means love and follow peace, and consider them who have the legal power
over us.

O that we would know, at least in this our day, the things belonging to our
peace, before that fatal voice go out, But now are they hid from your eyes. Of
the Power of the Keys: OR, Of Binding and Loosing.
FOr the clear stating of this point, there is but one Method seasonable,
(because but one asterisme that has any powerful influence upon it) the
conjunction of the several passages in the New Testament about the donation
and exercise of this power. For in matters of Christ's institution, which have
no foundation in the Law of Nature, it must needs be improper for reason to
interpose and assert, or define what that accounts most agreeable, (for that is
to subject to our tribunal, not the acts of his justice, which God has been
willing to yield us, Isa. 5.3. and Ezekiel. 18.25. and in them to appeal to our
own reason, but the acts of his wisdom, (for such are all his institutions)
which God will not allow us to judge, or dispute, Romans 9.20.) any farther then
by discourse to conclude from the context, and words of that institution, what
is most agreeable to the importance of those words, and by way of advice to
direct us to compare our conceits with the doctrines of those, who were
nearest to the times of that institution, and might probably know more of it
(and be more instrumental to us for the deciding any difficulty) then those
that being farther removed, look on at that greater distance. And therefore, as
in the business of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the surest course to
compose the controversies, and satisfy the scruples of men in that point, were
to reduce it to its principles, and to resolve by consent to assert no more in
that point (as matter of faith at least) then might be naturally and infallibly
concluded from the places of Scripture concerning the institution, use, and
nature of that Sacrament, or the ancient primitive understanding of those
places, and natural deductions from them (for the reducing of which operation
to practice, Pract. Cat. l. 6.
an attempt has been made in another place) so will it be the most probable
towardly course, I conceive, least subject to any dangerous mistake, to resolve
and observe in this business.

CAP. I.
Gospel concerning this institution (Matthew. 16.19. Matthew. 18.18. Joh. 20.23.)
are no two of them fully parallel to one another, or coincident; I mean, no
two of them narrations of the same one speech of Christ, but (as by the
occasion and circumstances of time and place it will appear) each delivered by
Christ at a several time; the first Matthew. 16.19. was (upon occasion of Peter's
confession) a promise of what should be conferred afterward upon him by way of
reward and encouragement [ I will (not yet de presenti, I do; but de futuro, I
will) give thee the Keys, etc. and then (...), whatsoever thou shall etc.] The
second Matthew. 18.18. was an exemplifying of that glorious truth ver. 11. that
Christ came (...), to save that that was lost: upon the heels of which bare
assertion, follows first a Parable, ver. 12.13.14. (a special piece of
Christ's Logic and Rhetoric to prove popularly, and so to persuade) and then
v. 15. the institution of a piece of discipline perpetually to continue in the
Church of his plantation, as most eminently isntrumental to that design, the
reducing obstinate sinners to repentance. The consideration of which one thing,
that these Keys, when Christ was gone, were to continue employed on that same
great work, or design, which brought Christ into the world, the saving of such
as were lost, will be able to set a competent value on this Institution, and
rescue it from the contempts and scorns, which the impious world is pleased to
make its portion; very agreeable to that greater stratagem of Satan, who by
complying with our wishes and our interests, easily prevails with vicious men,
to believe neither resurrection, nor judgment to come; and this, as it is
noted by the Fathers, the (...), the only beloved doctrine of the effeminate
and voluptuous. The third place Joh. 20.23. is apparently part of Christ's
speech to all his disciples (after his resurrection, and his having confirmed
them all but Thomas, in the truth of it, v. 20.) and was a kind of farewell to
his Church, and an actual inauguration, or consecration of them from disciples
into Apostles, as (...) disciples, v. 20. and (...) sent, v. 21. put together
do import, (and the (...) they that were with them, Luke 24.33. does not
contradict, for there is no mention of these words, of Binding and Loosing in
that Gospel, and if there were, it would not follow that the power of binding
was delivered to that mixed company, any more then the power from on high was
promised to them v. 49. which surely belonged only to the Apostles, as will
appear by the words immediately precedent, (...), being rightly interpreted,
[and be ye witnesses of these things] i. e. of his death and resurrection,
which we know was peculiarly the office of the Apostles;) which being a solemn
donation was set out by a special ceremony, viz. that of Christ's breathing
upon them, a significant one to express the (...), the eternal breath or
Spirit of God, which he would suddenly pour on them, and for it (...). Theoph.
in Joh. 20. The words [receive the holy Ghost*] signify, be you ready to
receive him.
prepares them by this (...), receive the holy Ghost (which were the words
annexed to that ceremony, the words of Consecration, the same that we now retain
in the Ordination of a Priest) whose sins you do remit, (or (...), if you do
remit any men's sins) they are remitted to them, and if you do retain any, they
are retained.

From all which Three places thus compared, the first general binding and
loosing is a solemn privilege or (...). Theoph. in Mat. 16. in the sense of
(...) Joh. 1.12. for priv^lege, or right, or power.
Prerogative of the Church of Christ, thrice insisted on by our Savior. 1. By
way of Prediction, that he would confer it, Matthew. 16. then secondly, by way
of a more particular description of the manner, and direction for the end and
use of it, Matthew. 18. And thirdly, by a preparatory ^ind of instating them in
this power, an initial investing them with this sacred ghostly authority, Joh.
20. (immediately before his final departure from the world) which seems to
have been (...). Theo. in Joh. 20. The perfect gift of the holy Ghost was
distributed to them in the Pentecost, a preparative only administered to them in
that breathing.
thoroughly perfected and completed, when after his ascension the holy Ghost
did visibly descend upon those to whom these words were by Christ then
delivered, [ Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.] This formal complete instating of
this power (of binding and loosing) upon them, and not only the giving of those
gifts of tongues, etc. being a main branch and effect of this descending, and
their receiving of the Holy Ghost, according to that of Isa. 32. if you compare
ver. 1. of the [ King and Princes ruling in judgment, prophetically intimating
Christ and his Apostles] with ver. 15. and 16. where the descent of the Spirit
is mentioned as a preparative to the exercise of that judicative power. And so
Ephesians. 4. He gave gifts unto men, v. 8. and gave some Apostles, etc. v. 11. And
this I conceive will direct us to the importance of those words, Luke 24.49. [
I send the promise of my Father upon you] so as they may be parallel with this
place, Joh. 20.23. receive the Holy Ghost. No doubt that promise of the Father
was the Holy Ghost, Joh. 15.26. and the [ I send upon you] (both as a verbum
^olenne, I send, i. e. I instate on you; and that in the present, I send, not
in the future, I will send) all one with the [(...), receive him] and so the
power from on high, in the end of the verse, clearly signifies that visible
mission of the Holy Ghost, which they were to expect, as the means of
completing this donation: and so it is clear by comparing it with Act. 1.4. and
8. where the same phrase are used. And therefore Joh. 20.21. immediately before
the [ Receive the Holy Ghost] he says, As my Father sent me, so send I you;
intimating that as at his mission to his office he was anointed with the Holy
Ghost, Act. 10.38. viz. upon his Baptism, Luke 3.23. (whereupon it is said,
that he by the Spirit cast out devils, Mat. 12.18. which is clearly symbolical,
and parallel to his loosing, or remission of sins) so the Apostles at their
mission, or entrance on their power, should be anointed also.

CAP. II.
HAving proceeded thus far by way of general precognition, intelligible, if it
be reduced to these few heads. 1. On whom this power was bestowed. 2. In what
it consists. 3. To what use it is designed, and to what sort of men it belongs
objective, or who are to be bound and loosed. 4. What is the real effect of
it, or what conjunction it has with binding and loosing in Heaven.

For the first, though to him that considers the place of Matthew. 18. alone by
it self (which is an obscure place) the matter be not so clear to whom this
power was given by Christ, and though thereupon some mistakes have arisen, and
occasion of conceiting this power of binding, etc. to be instated by Christ on
the whole aggregate of any particular Church, yet surely the matter will be
sufficiently clear, if (as it is most reasonable) we first allow that obscure
place leave to borrow light from the two other most evident ones (and not
obscure the more evident by that:) and secondly (after we have brought that
light to it) observe, what glimmerings of light we shall be able to discern (by
that help) even in that obscure place it self, which will (as the weak light
of the Moon, with that treasure of light, borrowed from the Sun, added to it)
become by this means exceeding lightsome. For although these three places are
not parallel one to the other, in respect of the times and occasions of
delivering them, and other circumstances, yet there is no doubt, but they
belong all to the same general matter, the power of binding, etc. And that
being (as it is apparent even by that of Matthew. 18.18.) instated not on the
whole world, or community of men, but determinated to some peculiar subject,
there is all reason to resolve that that subject, though diversely expressed, is
yet the same in all those places, unless some evidence of Scripture or
authentic testimony of ancient Church, or practice shall demonstrate the
contrary; which that it does not, will (as far as concerns the Scripture, which
deserves our first search) be thus cleared by considering the several places.

And first Matthew. 16.19. which was occasioned thus; Christ examining his
disciples what opinion they had of him, is answered by Simon, that he was the
Christ, the Messiah, the Son of the living God, verse. 16. upon which Christ
pronounces him a blessed person, as having received the supernatural gift of
faith from God himself, which no humane means could have helped him to, and
upon this, changes his name from Simon Bar-Jona (the only name he had, verse.
17.) to Cephas in Syriack, that is (...) in Greek, or as Homer and other good
Authors, and (which bears most affinity with the dialect of this book) the
Author of the second book of Mac. cap. 4.31. used it in the masculine (...),
signifying a rock or stone, to Intimate that he should be (as a foundation or
strong rocky stone in a building is a principal ingredient in the building,
and a means of the future stability of it, Matthew. 7.25. the storm and floods
and winds came upon it, and it fell not, because (...), it was founded on such
a firm rocky stone) a principal part, call it foundation, or rock, or pillar
of that Church of Christians, which partly by this confession of his, here
recorded to all posterity, and partly by his future teaching, he should be a
means to erect for Christ's service: and then being so glorious an Instument of
converting so many, Christ is pleased to give him the Keys of this Kingdom;
(...). Theophyl. in Mat. 16. authoritatively he gave him the keys, as his
Father had done the Revelation, (...), etc. as he goes on, a power of binding
and loosing, etc. so (...), the pardoning and punishing of sins, in a word,
is spiritual grace or power, or jurisdiction over these future Converts of his
(as generally in the Apostles times, and after, he that converted any Country
or chief City in his Apostleship, was settled as their Bishop or Governor in
spiritual matters, and so continued all his life, unless having settled them,
he thought good to commit that office, and power to some body else, that so he
might be the more free to go and preach and convert more) though not as yet,
because they were not by him as yet converted, yet by way of promise in diem to
be performed, when time should serve; I will give thee the keys, and
whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. the sum is, Peter was to be an Apostle, and
to do wonders in converting whole Nations to Christ, and among those whom he
thus converted, Christ promises that he should have a Jurisdiction, a power to
govern, and discipline, and censure, as there should be occasion in those
Churches.

This being thus promised to Peter, as a chief Apostle, and Confessor of
Christ's, not exclusive by way of exclusion, that none should have this power
but he, but honorifice by way of honor mentioned first to him by the
privilege of (...), of being (as I conceive he was) the first that was called,
but more peculiarly as a reward of his notable confession, v. 16. is by Christ
a little before his parting from the world, after his resurrection Joh. 20.23.
actually instated both on him, and (...), etc. Theoph. in Matt. 16. p. 94.
Though 'twere said only to Peter [I will give thee] yet 'twas given to all the
Apostles: when? when he said, If you remit any man's sins, Joh. 21.
the rest of the Apostles, who were to join in the same office with him of
begetting unto Christ, and educating those which were so begotten, of
converting and preserving, or governing, and in order to that end were to have
their several Provinces assigned them ((...), says Chrysostom. every of them his
distinct part) for Preaching first, as afterward for Jurisdiction, which I
shall adventure to affirm not improbable to be the meaning of (...), to go to
his own place Act. 1.25. applying it not to Judas, but to Matthias, or the
(...), him that should be chosen, and so again most probably of the (...), the
part, or lot, or portion of Ministry and Apostleship, in the beginning of the
verse, (the former of them belonging to the office of preaching peculiarly, the
latter to that of governing also) distributed to each, either by lot, or by
joint consent, and designement of that great (...), the College of the
Apostles; It being most proper and according to analogy, that the (...) those
which had labored and toiled in the word and doctrine, for the converting and
begetting men to Christ, should be also thought worthy of the (...), or (...),
the elder brothers privilege and prerogative, to be rulers or masters of the
family after the Fathers departure, and so be endued with a paternal power of
chastisements (i. e. discipline) and government for the keeping of them in some
compass, within the terms of a peaceable, holy, (...)* Chrysostom. in Joh. 20. As a
King that sends out rulers over Provinces, gives them power to cast in person,
and to let out; so sending the Apostles he endues them with this power.
truly-Christian Congregation; and therefore after the ((...) Joh. 20.21. I
send you) (the form of words that made them Apostles answerable to the (...)
nuntio's, messengers among the Jews, and not far unlike to the Proconsuls
sent out, though on a quite distant arrant of secular power, among the Romans)
immediately follows the (...), he breathed on them (proportionable to God's
course of making a living soul, Genesis 2. v. 2. by breathing on him the breath of
life) and said, Receive the Holy Ghost, If you remit any men's sins, they are
remitted; if you retain, they are retained; which words were apparently
delivered, (and in them this power) to as many as were breathed on, i. e. to as
many as were (...). Theophyl. To all the Apostles
sent by Christ, and indeed to no more, unless either first by way of
Communication from them to their successors, or secondly by special immediate
vocation from heaven, by the bath col, as the Hebrews phrase is, the daughter
of thunder, i. e. voice from heaven sent to consecrate them. Thus St Paul who
was none of the twelve, yet speaking of the power of excommunicating, says, it
was given to him (to him not as a successor of the Apostles, but to him as one
called immediately from heaven) by the Lord, or by Christ, 2 Cor. 13.10. In a
word, it was by Christ immediately then given to the Apostles all and each of
them, and to none else, till Matthias was received into the place of Judas, and
St Paul was afterward extraordinarily designed, and called unto the same
office, together with Barnabas, Act. 13.12. proportionably it may seem to what
befell the twelve Patriarchs, Ephraim and Manasses being taken in^, in Joseph's
stead that died, as these two in the place of James the brother of John, who
was cut off, before he came to do that work to which he was sent, the preaching
to all Nations.

subjects of this power, or objects of this donation, it is already more then
probable, that the third witness producible will agree with those two, or if
it seem otherwise, sure 'twill not be thought reasonable, that these two shall
be forced and violenced to consent to that, which is but an alien sense, by
some Interpreters imposed upon that third.

difficulty in it, Matt. 18.15. If thy brother shall offend against thee, it
seems the place belongs not (primarily, but only paritate rationis, by
analogy of reason) ^o all sins in the latitude, but peculiarly, to trespasses
or personal injuries done by one brother, one Christian to another; as besides
the express words v. 15. ( if thy brother trespass against thee) is more
clear by S. Peter's question to the same purpose, v. 21. ( How often shall my
brother trespass against me, and I forgive him?) Go and reprove him, (...) i.
e. either reprehend him for it, (as the word is used sometimes when it is joined
with (...), chasten or discipline, Heb. 12.5. Apoc. 3.19. or again, (...),
(...) Phavor. and (...), ib. and so Joh. 3.20. He that does evil comes not to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, (...) [discovered] in our
margent: and therefore 1 Cor. 14.24. when it is said of the unbeliever, that he
is convinced of all, etc. it is added, v. 25. Thus are the secrets of his heart
made manifest. so Ephesians. 5.13. All things that are reproved, or discovered, are
made manifest by the light; for whatsoever does make manifest, is light.
make him sensible of the wrong he has done thee, or as it may be rendered,
(...), and (...), and (...). Ph.
make him ashamed of his fact) betwixt thee and him alone, (i. e. do thy best
by private admonitions to bring him to a sense) If he hear thee (be thus
wrought on) thou have gained thy brother, gained him, first to thy self (gotten
a friend in stead of an enemy:) and secondly to Christ, gained a Convert, a
Proselyte to him, and this also a great acquisition to thee, to have had the
honor of doing that glorious thing, and of being capable of the reward of
them, that convert any to righteousness.

But if he hear thee not, if this first method of thy charity, and Take with
thee ((...) farther, or over and above) one, or two, that in the mouth of two
or three witnesses every word may be established, i. e. that the thing which
thou lai^st to his charge, be so confirmed; according to that, Joh. 8.17. The
testimony of two men is true, i. e. of sufficient authority in law (according
to an Hebraisme, whereby (...) true, among the Greek translators signifies
(...) fit to be credited) that so either by the testimony of these as
witnesses, he may no longer be able to deny the fact (as Heb. 6.16. an oath is
said to be (...)* for establishing, or confirmation, in that it is (...) an end
of affirming and denying. The thing so established ((...)) or (...)) by oath,
cannot be denied, or the parties denial will longer stand him in stead) or by
authority of these he may be induced (as the Judge is on the accused, Deuteronomy.
10.19. Heb. 10.28.) to give sentence on, to condemn himself; which if it may
be obtained, is the prime end of all these charitable artifices, to bring the
injurious to a sight and shame, the best preparatives to reformation; To which
purpose is that of Tertullian, Apol. c. 39. Disciplinam praeceptorum
inculcationibus densamus, We thicken the doctrine of precepts with ways of
inculcating, i. e. press them to reformation, whom our doctrine will not
prevail on; where he mentions these three degrees, exhortationes,
castigationes, censura; exhortations, and chastisements, and then censure.

obscure verse in St Paul, 2 Cor. 13.1. This third time I come unto you, in the
mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established, etc. It refers
clearly to this usage of the second admonition. St Paul had written before,
which was as it were the first single admonition, which v. 2. he calls ((...) I
told you formerly;) but that prevailing not, at his third coming (which it
seems was his second meddling with this matter, (...), I foretell you the second
time, ver. 2. he does that which is answerable to the taking with him (...),
one or two more, as appears by the addition of these very words which are in
Matthew. [in the mouth of two or three witnesses, etc.] which is, you see, the
style and character of the second admonition. This by the way.

But if he hear not them ((...), if he be still refractary, either through
non-conviction of the fact, or non-contrition for it) if this second admonition
be not in event (...), 2 Cor. 13.10 to edification, or instruction, if it work
not on him, then tell it to the Church, (I shall tell you what that is
presently) and if he hear not the Church (continue his refractarinesse still)
let him be unto thee as a heathen or a publican] which may possibly signify,
that in that case thou have liberty to implead him, as thou would do any
heathen, in any foreign heathen Court, for that injury, that trespass done to
thee, which was at the first mentioned. For certainly though it were unlawful
for a Christian, both here, and 1 Cor. 6.1. to implead a Christian for a
personal trespass before a heathen tribunal, yet to deal thus with a heathen
(or publican which was in account the same) was not either by Christ, or the
Apostle counted unlawful (but only the (...), i. e. Christian with Christian,
v. 6.) and consequently with a perverse refractary brother, whom you see Christ
gives leave to account and deal with, as with a heathen or publican, it would
not be unlawful also. But another interpretation I shall not doubt to propose
to you, that by heathen and publican may be meant a desperate deplored sinner,
such as the Rabbis call (...) i. e. (...) a sinner, as in the Gospel (...), a
deplored sinner; Thus in Musar, If he will not then, (i. e. when two or three
friends have been taken to be present at his admonition) be reconciled, go and
leave him to himself; for such an one is implacable, and is called (...), of
whom again it is there said, Si nec hoc modo quicquam profecerit, i. e.
adhibitis amicis, if this second admonition do no good, debet eum pudefacere
coram multis, he must be ashamed before many, (which may be the meaning of Dic
Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church, as will anon appear by 1 Timothy 5.10.) and this
interpretation of that phrase will seem most probable, if you mark 1. That
(...) and (...) publicans and sinners are frequently joined together in the
Gospel, as once Publicans and harlots, those (...) sinner-women. 2. That the
heathen are called (...) sinners, as when it is said that Christ was by the Jews
delivered into the hands of sinners, i. e. Romans heathen, and in St Paul [not
sinners of the Gentiles:] and then those words, [ Let him be to thee a heathen
and a publican] will sound no more, but [ give him over as a desperate deplored
sinner,] to whom those privileges of a Christian (viz. of not being impleaded
before an heathen tribunal) etc. do not belong, i. e. leave him to himself.
This sure is the simplest rendering of the place; and then he that is such, that
is capable of that denomination, is certainly fit, and ripe for the censures of
the Church, which follow in the next verse, and are appointed to go out against
this refractory incorrigible.

For so immediately it follows, Verily I say unto you: who are you? why 1. In
the plural number [(...).] Secondly* (...) to you disciples (for so in the
first verse (...) the disciples came to him with a question, and v. 3. he said,
Verily I say to you, i. e. to you disciples, and v. 12. (...), what do you
think? asking the disciples, or appealing to their own judgment, and so still
the same auditors continued, and his speech addressed to them, I say unto you
disciples) whatsoever you shall bind on earth, etc.

again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree upon earth, etc.] Many
false illations are by men of different persuasions made from these words,
which will all vanish, I conceive, and the truth be dis-involved, if the Reader
will not despise this one observation which I shall offer to him; and it is
this, that the method oft-times used in Scripture is, (when it has proposed
one or two severals to speak of) to resume the last first, and so orderly to go
back, till it come to the first, to which you may accommodate that expression,
and description of Gods method in other things. Many that are last, are first
(the last in proposing, first in handling or resuming,) and the first last.

If there be two things mentioned one after another, and any occasion to add
any thing on each of them, then I say the observation is, that the Scripture
sometimes uses to resume the second first, and the first after that. And so if
there be more then two. I said this was oft-times the manner and style of
Scripture, and to make good my observation, I am a little obliged to go out of
my way, and present you with some examples. Three visible ones I shall offer
you out of one book, the Epistle to the Hebrews. First, Chap. 5. where in the
four first verses there are three things propounded of an High Priest, 1. That
he offer for sin, and negotiate the cause of men with God. 2. That he be
compassionate toward sinners, and to that end he himself infirm, and offer for
himself as well as the people. 3. That he be called to this office by God
himself. To these three the Author speaks particularly (and applies them to
Christ) in the remainder of the Chapter, by way of (...), to the last, first,
v. 5, 6. So likewise Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest,
etc. To the second next, v. 7. and 8. who in the days of his flesh offered up
prayers, and supplications, prayers, and the ceremonies of petitioners (for so
(...). Phavor.
(...) properly signifies, olive branches, the emblem that petitioners used to
have in their hands) with strong crying and tears to him that was able to
deliver him out of death, (as when he commended his spirit into Gods hands, and
cried with a loud voice, Matthew. 27.50. Mark 15.37. Luke 23.46. at the
delivering these words) And (...).
was heard, for, or by his piety, through the great ardency of that his prayer
(expressed both by the loud voice in three Evangelists, and by the bodily
worship, bowing of his head, in the fourth, Joh. 19.30.) or as it may possibly
signify, He was delivered from his fear, i. e. from that which he feared and
prayed against. And though he were a Son, yet from the things he suffered, he
learnt obedience, (whether to God thus designing him to those sufferings, and
to that office of hearing prayers, or to men, by giving them audience in their
prayers, as (...) signifies, so to hear, as to answer a request.) And then the
Author returns to the first, last, v. 9. Being made perfect he became the
author of eternal salvation, etc.

Thus secondly, Heb. 9.1. the Author having named two things, the (...), the
ordinances of worship, and the (...), he dilates first of the latter of them,
v. 2, 3, 4, 5. For there was a tabernacle made, the first, etc. and after the
second veil, the tabernacle, etc. and over it the Cherubims of glory shadowing
the (...) the (not mercy-seat, but) So (...) from (...) (which signifies both
to propitiate and to cover) is here to be rendered covering, and though the
Greek be (...) from the former sense of the word, yet being to denote a part of
the Ark in this place, it must be taken in the other sense of the Hebrew, and
rendered, as if it had been (...), As it is Exodus 26.34. and 30.6. or as the
Hebrew (...) if it had been retained, would have imported.
covering of the arc, etc. all these belonging to the second particular, and
then afterward he comes back to the former, the ordinances of worship, v. 6.
Now ^hen these things were thus ordained, the Priest went always, etc.

So thirdly, Chap. 10.33. the Author having mentioned two acts of suffering in
them, the first personal in themselves, by reproaches, and afflictions, the
second by way of sympathy with their Apostle, (...), partakers with, or
relievers of others that were so tossed; in the next verse he resumes both
again, but first the latter, For ye had compassion of me in my bands, ver. 34.
and then secondly the former, took joyfully the spoiling of your goods.

This is farther evidenced by an example in this Gospel, Matthew. 5.6. Give not
that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine, lest they
tread them under their feet, and turning again, tear and rend thee. Where there
is no doubt, but the former of these latter speeches belongs to the latter of
the former, and the latter of the latter to the former of the former; per modum
regressus, by way of going backward thus, Lest the swine tread the pearls under
their feet, and Lest the dogs rend and tear thee. For it is not the manner of
swine to fall upon men, and tear them, but of dogs it is; and it is not the
manner of dogs to tread a thing under their feet, but of swine it is; So the 2
Cor. 2.15. St Paul having mentioned the (...) first, and then the (...), them
that are saved, and them that perish; he goes back, ver. 16. First to the
latter of them, to those a savor of death unto death, but to these a savor of
life unto life; So in the Epistle to Philemon v. 5. hearing of thy love, and
faith which thou have toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all the Saints; it is
apparent that the Lord Jesus is the object of the faith, and the [ all Saints]
the object of the love. So again Romans 14. having set down two heads of
discourse, that the strong should not set at naught the weak; nor secondly the
weak judge or condemn the strong, v. 3. he resumes the latter first, v. 4.
who art thou that judge? and then v, 10. returns to the former, and thou why
do thou set at naught thy brother? So Matthew. 23.25. Christ having mentioned
first the outside of the cup or platter, then the inside, v. 26. he returns
first to the cleansing of the inside, then the outside of it. So 1 Cor. 6.11.
after the general of washing, which contains the two subsequent, sanctifying
and justifying; the mention of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is first named,
must belong to the latter of the two, that of justification; and the Spirit of
our God to the former, that of sanctifying.

Other examples of this observation I shall leave the Reader Scripture more
ponderingly, and only proceed to help him to take notice of it in the point in
hand. Three cases, it is apparent, are here mentioned orderly by our Savior in
the matter of trespass, 1. Telling the trespasser of his fault between him and
thee alone. Secondly, taking one or two with thee, to do it more convincingly,
and with greater authority. Thirdly, telling the Church of it. Having said
somewhat to each of these, as he delivered them in the three first verses, 15,
16, 17. he resumes the matter again, and speaks first to the last of them, v.
18. telling them, what, after the not succeeding of the third admonition, the
Apostles and their successors are to do, when the cognizance of this injury
and contumacy comes before them (which, that in every case of trespass, it
always should, I conceive, does not hence appear to be necessary, save only in
case that the Magistrate or secular tribunal be heathen, because that
supposition may perhaps be the ground of the sit tibi Ethnicus, on which the
other is superstructed) viz. excommunicate such a refractary till reformation,
and then upon that, absolve him again, and [ verily I say unto you, whatsoever
you shall bind on earth, etc.] From this view it is not irrational to conclude,
that the (...) and the (...), the Church and the disciples (considered
prophetically under the notion of Apostles, i. e. Founders first, then
Governors of Churches) may in that place signify the same thing. So says St
Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 6. (...), Tell it to the Church, i. e. to the Presidents
and Rulers of it; and Theophyl. in Mat. 18. (...), etc. the Church for the
Rulers of the Church; To which purpose it is observable, what Kimchi a Jewish
learned Rabbi has affirmed, that the Governors, and Rulers are often meant by
the word (...), or Congregation; and so Philo, (...), the Congregation is the
Priests. Agreeable to which is the inscription of the ancient Apostolical
Epistle of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians, (...), The Church of God that
dwells at Rome, meaning, I conceive by the title [ the Church] himself (who
wrote the Epistle, and was chief there, or Bishop at that time) and the other
Clergy with him; For so the other part of the inscription [(...), to the Church
of God at Corinth] is after explained by him, in the words (...), to the
Bishops, and Deacons; but if this will not be acknowledged, then by (...) I
shall give you leave to understand any meeting or Congregation of pious men,
either a consessus Presbyterorum, a College of Presbyters, which were
ordinarily assistant to the Bishop in the ancient Church, or possibly the whole
or any part of the people convened, whose authority or consent may work
somewhat upon the offender, as St Paul conceives it were apt to do, when he
commands Timothy, (...), to rebuke the offenders before all men, i. e. in the
presence of the community of the people, 1 Timothy 5.20. and perhaps when he
speaks of the (...), 2 Cor. 2.6. the rebuke that was by or under the many,
though it be not certain whether that signify the chastisement, (as our
English reads) punishment and censure inflicted by the Presbytery, or (...)
under them, those assisting or joining in the censure, (...), acts of Canonical
severity, (which in case of sorrow and relenting of the offender upon rebuke,
or admonition before ejection out of the Church, were wont to be thought
sufficient without excommunication, and after excommunication, as in this place
to the Corinthians, if they were submitted to, were sufficient, though not
presently to restore him to the communion, yet to make him capable of being
prayed for by the Church, 1 John 5.16. and to be delivered from the stripes of
Satan, the diseases that the delivering to Satan in the Apostles times brought
upon them;) or whether, as the words may be rendered, it import the rebuke, or
reproof, viz. the third admonition, (or the second given by the Bishop, which
was equivalent to that) which was (...) under, or in the presence of many, viz.
of the people or Congregation. The former of these senses seems more agreeable
to the place to the Cor. the latter rather to belong to that in the 1 Timothy and
so that which even now in Musar was coram multis, before many, and in S. Paul
(if not (...) under many, yet) (...) in the presence of all men, Christ may
here express by (...) the Church. This interpretation being admitted, or not
rejected, it then follows commodiously, and reasonably in the text of the
Evangelist, that after the matter is brought to them (i. e. to those many) or
after this act of reproof, or rebuke before them, and upon continued
refractarinesse to these last admonitions, then the (...) (that sure is) the
Apostles or Governors of the Church, the Pastors, (which cannot be in any
reason excluded from under the former word (...) Church, whatsoever it
signifies) and those already promised this power, chap. 16. may, or shall bind,
or excommunicate them. And that is the sum of the 18. v. in reference to the
17. and then v. 19. Again I say unto you, (or as a very In Coll. Magd. Oxon.
ancient Manuscript, and some printed copies read it, (...), again verily I say
unto you, that second verily noting the speech to be of a new matter) that if
two of you shall agree upon the earth, or here below, (in reference to the
second thing mentioned, v. 16. take with you one or two) concerning any thing,
which they shall ask, it shall be done unto them of my Father, etc. For where
two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them,
which words are brought to give authority to the solemn admonitions of the
second order (addressed by the injured man, accompanied with one or two
assistants or witnesses to enforce them) by telling them, that as the consessus
trium virorum, the assize of three men among the Jews had some power; so shall
any two or three Christians be considerable in this matter, having the
privilege of Gods presence, as in their prayers thus united, so also in this
act of united admonition; for, first, God is to be thought to be in the midst
of them, (as that fourth person added to the three children in the furnace, and
the face of that fourth like the Son of God) to be present with them (as it is
1 Cor. 5.4.) in this his ordinance, in this piece of Discipline appointed by
him; whereupon the (...) the refractarinesse of the transgressor is become so
much the greater in this case; and besides, secondly, if upon admonition, they
shall be hearkened to, it will be in their power to pray for the penitent
trespasser, (as James 5.16.) and that prayer of theirs joined with the injured
person is likely to be more effectual then a single prayer, and so in both
these respects a greater weight is set on the (...) the taking of one, or two
with him. Thus having returned to the second of the three, in the second place,
and dispatched that, the method would direct to go on to the first again in the
third place; but in stead of that, St Peter it seems asks again about it, how
long a man is to forgive private injuries; and the answer in the following
words supplieth the place of having proceeded to that, and serves for the
conclusion of the whole matter.

The result then of this whole Chapter is this, that of the Gospel, concerning
the donation of the power of binding, and loosing, two of them at the first
sight most clearly convince, this power to be given to the Apostles, as
governors of the Church, (which will not be communicable to any, but either to
others that are (...) also, set apart to the office, immediately by Christ, or
to their successors, (...). Theoph. in Mat. 18.) and the third upon a thorough
consideration does the same also. For this we have the plain testimony of
Theophylact on that place Mat. 18. (...), etc. The power of binding and loosing
was given to all the Apostles; When? why, when he said, Whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted, etc. i. e. in this place of St John: and again, [(...)]
(...). [ and I will give] it signifies the future, i. e. the time after the
resurrection, which is that in S. John also; and again on Mat. 16. (...), where
the binding in S. Mat. and the remitting in S. John are put together, as
belonging to the same matter: and it is confirmed by no mean authority, that of
S. Paul himself, of himself, 2 Cor. 13.10. where speaking of these censures,
(noted there by (...) using excision, and (...), which is all one, and which,
it seems, he as an Apostle was to use among them, he, not the Congregation;
(...) I will not spare) he adds (...), according to the power that Christ
has given me, (which sure was not peculiar to him, but common to the rest of
the Apostles, which had it before him, and in a more ordinary way) and ver. 3.
he distinctly calls it, Christ speaking in him, a high expression, making every
such act of judicature in him, an act of Christ.

CAP. III.
Apostles successors in that power; and when the question is asked of that
power, I must be understood of the power of governing the Church peculiarly (of
which the power of the Keys was, and is a principal branch) for it must again
be remembered, that the Apostles are to be considered under a double notion: 1.
As Planters, then as Governors of the Church. The title of (...) in its
literal notation of Missus, sent, (Ambassador or Messenger) belongs
peculiarly to the former of these, and so though it have some extraordinary
privileges annexed to it, necessary to the work of planting, (as the gift of
tongues, the power of working miracles) which ennobles it beyond the order of
Governors in the Churches since their plantation, yet in the persons of the
Apostles, it was but a precedaneous power, preparatory to that other of ruling,
or governing, which no doubt is the reason that Chrysostom. calls Ignatius the
martyr, both (...) and (...), an Apostle and Bishop, and perhaps is the meaning
of that saying of an Anonymus writer, in Bibl. number. 254.
Photius, (...), That the Apostle Timothy was by St Paul ordained, and
enthronized, or seated Bishop of the Metropolis of the Ephesians, i. e. that he
that had helped to plant Churches, and so was an Apostle sent out to that
purpose, was at length ordained Bishop to govern that of Ephesus being planted.
Which distinction being premised', the question will now more easily be
satisfied, being proposed in these terms, [Who were the Apostles successors in
that power, which concerned the governing these Churches which they had
planted] And 1. I answer, that it being a matter of fact, or story, later then
that the Scripture can universally reach to it, cannot be fully satisfied, or
answered from thence, any further then the persons of Timothy or Titus, etc.
and the several Angels of the Churches in the Apocalypse (who are acknowledged
by all the Ancients to be single persons, that had power over all others in
those Churches,) but will in the full latitude through the universal Church in
those times, be made clear from the next evidences, that we have, viz. from the
consent of the Greek and Latin Fathers, who generally resolve, that Bishops
are those successors. This I shall not be so unreasonable as to attempt to
prove at large through the writings of those Fathers, but content my self with
one or two of the first of them.

Of this number I conceive the testimony of Clemens Romanus Epistle to the
Corinth. (which has been so often of late produced) might to any disinteressed
person be allowed to have some force in it; where speaking of the Apostles, he
says, p. 57.
that they foreseeing that there would be contention and emulation, (...) about
the name, or (as (...) may denote, (...)) dignity of Bishops or Episcopacy,
(...) (for I doubt not but that is the reading, and the sense there) they set
down a list, or continuation of successors, (as when Hesychius, (and out of him
Varinus) renders (...), perhaps it may be a false print, as there be many in
the edition of that book, for (...), but howsoever the Analogy from thence will
extend to this also, that as (...) signifies (...), so (...), will signify
(...), inheritance, or succession) that when any dyed such a certain person
should succeed him. To which affirmation of Clemens, when I have added (that
which all Ecclesiastical Stories have made familiar to us) that there were
preserved in several Churches such (...). Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. and
successiones Episcoporum quibus Apostolicam quae in unoquoque loco est,
Ecclesiam tradiderunt, Ib. lib. 4. cap. 63.
rols and catalogues of Bishops beginning from the Apostles in each See, I
shall conceive that that of Clemens was a pertinent testimony to this purpose;
especially when the voice of antiquity is so clear, that (...), Iren. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
Clemens himself was one of those Bishops (an Adjutor of the Apostles in their
life time, and after the departure of Linus, and Cletus, the only one that
retained the name of Bishop in Rome, all others being styled Presbyters only)
that Solus Clemens superstes, solus Episcopi nomen retinuit, tum quia inter
adjutores Apostolorum solus ipse restabat, ^um quia jam invaluerat distinctio
Episcopi, and Presbyteri, it a ut caeteris Ecclesiae Romanae Presbyteris qui
cum solo Clemente essent, nomen illud non fuerit tributum.
Vedelius at Geneva has at large acknowledged it, Exercit. in Ignat. Ignat.
Epist. ad Mar. Cassabol. c. 3.

Clemens (an assertor at once, and example of this truth) I must next appeal to
the Martyr Ignatius himself also Bishop of Antioch, that lived in the Apostles
age, and is by the enemies of Episcopacy discerned to be so full a treasure of
this truth (and of others in this kind) in so many notable passages, that there
has been no way (imaginable by those who resolve to have it otherwise) to
resist the plainness of his authorities; but first by Ignatius (...) ubique
inculcat Episcoporum supra Presbyteros gradum eminentem. Salmas. apar. ad l. de
prim. Pap. p. 55.
scoffs and defamations; Secondly, by Non esse Ignatium tam certo scio quam me
haec scribere. ib. p. 58. non esse Ignatium luce clarius est, etc. nemo mihi
unquam persuadebit, etc. p. 56.
confident rejecting of our whole volume of his Epistles, as spurious, and of a
latter birth; and thirdly, by some very slender shows of proof, that they are
so. One special of this sort (which I see lately made use of by Salmasius, and
for which it Haec argumenta praestantissimo Salmasio nuper probata gaudeo.
Blondel. Apol.
now appears he was beholding to a sight of Blundels book, not then printed) I
shall mention to remove prejudices, and it is this; that in the Epistle to the
Magnesians, he distinctly calls Episcopacy (...), which, says that learned
Grammarian, signifies it to be a new Order, and he attempts to prove it,
because (...), says he, cannot be referred to the age; and (...) signifies
(...), agreeable whereunto he interprets (...), 2 Timothy 2.22. to be novae, or
novarum rerum cupiditates, new desires, or of new things.

The dealing of this learned Grammarian in this business will Copies read not
(...), but (...) the youth of the Bishop (and no one of the Greek editions has
so much as mentioned any various lection in that place, till now the Florentine
or Laurentian copy has given us that variety.) Secondly, that the whole
context of the Epistle drives to this of (...), as even this Author confesses,
by saying, that he persuades them to receive their Bishop, and give him honor,
quamvis aetate juniori, though he were younger then they, and again that he
goes on to tell them, (...), that it becomes them not to be too familiar with
the age of their Bishop. But then besides this, thirdly, the vulgar, and even
Geneva edition reading (...), back it with citation of places of Scripture
pertinent only to that sense, as that Wisdom is not always with the hoary
hair, etc. Fourthly, that other reading is not avowed by, or cited from any
Greek manuscript, but only that in the Laurentiana Bibliotheca, and the old
Latin, made use of by the most Reverend Primate of Armach, which is directly
translated out of it, and so does not at all add to the authority. But then
fifthly, if that reading of (...) should be acknowledged, yet would it conclude
nothing against the Order of Bishops in those first times. For 1. what if it
were a new Order in Ignatius his time? that were pretty ancient, Ignatius
living with the Apostles; for that it was written by some body else above 200.
years after Christ, will want some other probation. Secondly, there is no
necessity that (...) must signify a new order, for although, as he says,
(...) does not signify age, nor (...) young, but may be interpreted (...) new,
etc. yet we are not bound to accept that interpretation of it, when the Context
of the Epistle belongs to another matter, and when another interpretation of
this phrase may be given, which (if that reading were acknowledged) will
reconcile all difficulties; For why may not (...) signify ordination? and
(...) that, that belongs to a (...), or a young man, and so it shall be the
Ordination of a young man, or a young man's being Bishop, which might have been
apt to provoke contempt in inferiors, if that good Martyr had not fortified
them against that temptation. And lastly for the interpretation of that place
of S. Paul to Timothy, it is so new, and so irrationally preferred before the
ordinary one, that one may justly conclude, 'twas prejudice, and willingness
to find an example for his novelty, that made him think of this; for why should
not the lusts (there appointed to be avoided) be youthful lusts, or such as
young men are subject to? why new lusts; or desires of new things? were not the
old ordinary lusts (so frequent among young men) fit enough to be avoided?
might any other be enjoyed, so they were not new? I am sorry I have insisted so
long on so weak an objection, and yet it is the best that that learned man (so
much looked on, and believed in this matter by those who desire change) has
produced, on which to build a^l his confidence, that those Epistles are not
Ignatius's: And it is a little strange that another learned man Grot. discuss.
(...) p. 400.
And. Rivet should speak of Episcopacy as of a novell order, and add [ sive
(...) ut loquitur Ignatius (...)] making Ignatius to say this, which if he
does, then is not only his Illustriss. Salmatius deceived, but also Episcopacy
must be acknowledged in Ignatius's time, in which if it were acknowledged to be
novel, it will still be ancient enough; and so it is indeed by that Author
confessed (perhaps by incogitancy) in the next page, when he acknowledges, that
the custom of Presbyters joining with the Bishop in imposition of hands on a
Presbyter (which sure is to suppose, not to deny the office of Bishops) ex
veteris aevi reliquiis mansit, and specifies what age he means, by [ juxta
illud Apostoli per impositionem manuum Presbyterii] wherein yet it had been
more ingenuous to have rendered (...) cum, and not have changed it into per,
quite contrary to the text; but this by the way. As for that other argument
added by Salmasius, that in that Epistle to the Magnesians there is mention of
the word (...) (as when he says that Christ was not, (...)) by which he
concludes that Epistle written after Valentinus, whose Idiom that was; if the
argumemt were concluding, (as Annot. p. 277.
Is. Vossius in his late Edition has sufficently proved it is not) it cannot
sure be in force against us, who find no such thing in our former Greek Copies;
or, if we did, could readily acknowledge any such passage to be supposititious,
and those few words taken into the text out of the margent, without casting
away the whole volume of Epistles in that fit of jealousy, or rage; if I could
discern in that writer any other show of argument against that general
opinion, which the Christian world has had of these Epistles, I should proceed
to the weighing of it. But now upon the Edition of Blondels book (out of which
Salmasius only brought us some gleanings) we find a great deal of pains taken
to cast off those Epistles; and it is very observable first, that he that has
taken in all the ancient Church-writers into his catalogue (even Hermas
himself, without any note or character of apocryphal set upon him) and out of
each of them labored (though very improsperously) to gather some honey to his
hive, some word or other, that might look like an accordance with that opinion
which he asserts out of St Hierome, and, it seems, had skill enough to make
even Tertullian, Irenaeus, and Cyprian, (and many others that have innumerable
manifest places against the (...) or equality of Bishops and Presbyters)
instrumental to his design, was not able to find one sentence in Ignatius,
which might be persuaded to be useful to him, and therefore has expressed that
severity on him, that he has not thought reasonable on any other, even those
which all antiquity has rejected; So partial and unequal is the mind of man,
when that (...) (that I say no worse) has the ruling of our counsels. The
exceptions which this learned man has made against Ignatius being the author
of those Epistles, are 1. Scriptionis genus affectatum, an affected kind of
writing, pompous Epithets (which says he, could not agree with an Apostle,
panting in the chains of Martyrs) such as (...), etc. (...), and among them
(...)] the very naming of which, I suppose, does show the frivolousnesse of the
charge, and weakness of the inference from it; for sure an Author may use
compounded words, (yea and words of his own making, as, I suppose, St Paul's
(...) is acknowledged to be, and yet many of these recited from those Epistles
are not) without the crime of affectation, as well as St Paul might his (...),
and the like: and though a holy Martyr in his chains may not be allowed the
vanity of affectation as that hunts for glory from men, yet sure he may be
allowed to have elevated affections, and by the command of them, to use
expressions which are not vulgar and ordinary. The second is his barbarous
words, (...), which indeed are Latin words made Greek, but so there are many
more in the New Testament, in stead of those four charged on Ignatius as
barbarismes, these fifteen which are ready at hand to me, (I will not take the
pains to seek for others) (...), and many as Latinizing (i. e. barbarous)
phrases, (...), and the like. And it is a little strange how this learned man
has minced this matter, confessing indeed that there is (...) in the Gospel
(naming only one of so great a number) and (...) in Hegesippus: and for the
excuse of that one word in Hegesippus, Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 27.
adding that he was at Rome from the year 150 to 170. whereas this liberty
might be allowed either Ignatius, or Hegesippus, without having been so long at
Rome, as well as the Writers of the New Testament, which have three times more
of such words then he cites out of both of them. The third is, several
passages, quae incommode dicta videri possunt, which may seem incommodiously
spoken, (and if it be but [ seem,] and that but [ may seem,] and at last but [
incommodiously spoken,] sure this charge will not wound deep) and comparationes
non exactae ad amussim, comparisons not drawn by the rule exactly, (and truly
the Martyr that was not to be permitted to have the vanity to affect, might as
well be thought not to have the leisure to take the line and the plummet, and
delineate every expression so exactly; But what are the miscarriages, and
defects in this kind? why, that he calls the Spirit (...) a cord, and Faith
(...) the Leader, whence, says he, in Ignatius's esteem, Fidei potior quam
Spiritus functio, Faith has a nobler office then the Spirit. But why may not I
more truly say, that the advantage in that comparison is given to the Spirit,
because that is said to draw, when Faith does lead only? It Is certainly clear
that his anger was very causlesse, who could quarrel at that doctrine, which
is in effect no more then this, That the Word of God apprehended by Faith does
lead us our way to heaven, and the Spirit of God is the cord to draw us
thither. 2. That he calls his bands (...), spiritual jewels, in which he
wishes he might rise, whereas, says Blondel, there is nothing properly
spiritual in the bands which wicked men put on the body of a martyr, and no
hope that he should rise in those bands. But sure his sufferings may be called
his bands, and those be matter of joy, and (...) to his Spirit, more then all
the Gemmes to the most vain glorious worldling, and this be very commodiously
expressed by those words, and then sure he might wish, (though not hope) (and
(...) is no more) to have this matter of joy continued to him, and so that he
might rise with them. 3. That he uses (...) and (...) so often; What a cruelty
upon a patient Martyr is this, not to give him leave to use such frequent
innocent words as these frequently, as well as St Paul is allowed the very
same, and (...) and (...), etc. these are certainly streined exceptions, the
learned man was at great leisure to quarrel, when this provocation was accepted.
4. That when Baptism is called (...) weapons, he calls Faith (...) as an
hlmet; love, (...) as a spear; patience, (...) as a complete armor. For Quid
enim Fides, etc. con^erunt jam per Baptismum armato? Si Christiani (...)
Patientia est, quid novi jam accedit ex Fide galealo?
what, says he, does faith and love, etc. confer to him that is already armed
by baptism? and if patience be the Christians complete armor, what new
advantage has he by having a helmet from faith? but why may not Baptism be
called weapons in the plural, and every of those graces professed and vowed in
baptism, have their several uses in the after life? and sure the armor of
baptism is not so perfectly of proof, but that there is need of the exercise
of every one of those Christian virtues to hold out against the impressions of
Satan, which are like to be so often repeated; and if faith do not defend the
head, and charity the heart, and patience and perseverance every part of the
body, i. e. every action of the future life, that subtle enemy may chance to
wound us mortally. As for the new advantage of faith to him that has the
complete armor of patience, the Author of that Epistle says no such thing,
but on the other side first requires the helmet of faith, and then the (...) of
patience, that sure is the arming of all parts, which were not before armed,
and that may go for an addition, as perseverance is to sanctity, and as our
Savior says of his believers, that he that endures to the end shall be
saved. 5. That it is not likely that presently after Ignatius coming into Asia,
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons should be ordained ejus rogatu, at his
entreaty, qui ad Antiochinos Asinorum gratulatorias Epistolas deferrent, who
should carry the gratulatory Epistles of the Asians to the Christians of
Antioch. I shall only say to this, 1. That they were ordained to some other end
beside this, yet might perform that task also, and that very solemnly. 2. That
a probable argument, or a conceived improbability against a narration of a
matter of fact (which relies not upon a confluence of all probabilities, but
only on the authority of the Relatour) is of all other the most unconvincing;
there was nothing ever done 1600 years ago, but a good fancy will observe
some improbability in it, and the matter of fact being still but one, when the
possibilities which never did come to pass, are infinite, some one of those
possibilities may perhaps become at a distance, to him that knows nothing of
the fact (but would persuade others that 'twas never done) tolerably probable
also. 3. That he bids follow the Bishop as Christ did his Father; and the
Presbytery, ut Apostolos, as the Apostles, and says that he that does any
thing clancularly without the Bishops knowledge, is to be thought (...) to
serve the Devil: whereupon, says he, An Episcopos ullos Prerbyterorum
comparatione Dominos, imo Deos a Christi martyr habitos credere par est? Is it
fit to believe that any Bishops in comparison to Presbyters should be counted
Lords, yea Gods by that Martyr of Christ? But sure this is to pervert and
torment the sense of that Martyr; For to bid follow Bishops as Christ did his
Father, is far enough from making Lords or Gods of them: nay if the comparison
were bound to hold that way, it were more proper to prove the (...), or
equality of Bishops and Presbyters, for sure Christ was equal with his Father:
and it is observable that in the place of Polycarp set down by this learned man,
p. 15. when obedience is required to Presbyters and Deacons as to God and
Christ, he finds no fault with it, though that be the very thing actually said
by Polycarp of Presbyters and Deacons, that here he unjustly first imposes on,
then accuses in Ignatius's words of Bishops, which yet are, only for the
manner of performing the obedience due to Bishops, as Christ obeyed his Father,
and cannot be extended to any equalizing the Bishop to God, or the least
appearance of doing so. 'Twere too long to go through, and render formal answers
to the rest of the heap of exceptions, which are every one single so slight,
and of no value (and consequently the total of them will not amount any
higher, it being not in the power of 1000 probables to become one
demonstration, or to be equipollent to one, much less of a few slight
improbables) that it is clear the number of the exceptions was the thing
depended on, and not the weight of them: Witness these four more, that shut up
the rear; 1. That he says that all pious men are changed (...) into a new
leaven, which he thinks inconvenient, when St Paul calls the Godly (...)
unleavened, whereas Christ being by Ignatius in the next words expressed to be
that (...) new leaven; there is then nothing fit to be quarreled in it, unless
to grow in grace, and the practice of all Christian duties (which is the
meaning of that expression) being an inconvenient advise. 2. That he bids fly
to the Apostles (...), as to the Presbytery of the Church, whereon having
resolved that by the Apostles he must mean the Apostles writings, (because in
the ninth of Trajan then past all the Apostles were dead) he concludes that the
Author of that saying makes no more of the Apostles writings, then of the
Congregations of men subject to error. Where in all sober reason and equality,
if the Apostles signify the Apostles writings, then the (...) need not
signify any other latter Presbytery, but those Apostles themselve, who when
they wrote those writings, were the Christian Sanhed^in, or Presbytery of the
Church, which was to decide all their controversies in Religion. 3. That
writing to Polycarp, tanquam ad plebe^um nescio quem, as unto an ordinary
person, he says, (...), observe your Bishop: as if forsooth the Epistle
written to Polycarp might not be written to the Church under him also, to whom
it is clear that plural precept [(...)] must belong, and not to any one man,
though he were never such a plebeian. 4. That he says he will flatter, nay, if
they will not, force the wild beasts to kill him, which says he is like the
desperabunda saeculi mancipia, the most desperate slaves among the heathen. As
if these fervent expressions of desire to suffer for Christ were thus to be
deformed, and charged against a pious man. After all this unprovoked severity,
one act of grace and mercy these Epistles are vouchsafed from this Author,
viz. that he contains himself from making use of one passage which
suppositionis earum argumentum videri possit, might seem an argument of the
supposititiousnesse of them; (and yet no greater an argument then that [ multa
quae incommode dicta vider possunt] made up a great number of arguments even
now) the passage is, that he disputed profestly against the (...) those that
affirmed Christ's, humanity to have been but an appearance, no reality; for
says he, whether you make Cass^an with Baronius, or Saturninus, Basilides, and
Valentinus the antesignanos Docetarum, the principal Authors of that heresy,
these being under Adrian and Antoninus Pius, will appear to be after Ignatius:
having gone thus far, he comes off again, with a Volens hoc argumento abstineo,
he willingly abstains from using this argument; because says he, Simon Magus
was before Ignatius, and he, says Irenaeus, taught this doctrine of Christ's
appearing only, not being a true man; and that Cassan, etc. were called the
chief of them, must signify, not that they were the first broachers, but in
their times the chief maintainers and abetters of that heresy. This mercy, I
confess, was but seasonable, and had much of Justice in it, and shows that
that Author was able to have answered his other arguments, if he had so
pleased, particularly that which is made use of so confidently both by him and
Salmasius of (...), the Valentian dialect, which is by Isaacus Vossius
satisfied with this very answer which here Blondel gives to the use of the word
(...), viz. that Valentinus was not the first that said (...) ortion, but that
it is agreed on by the Ancients, that he was not the founder of a new, but
reviver of an old opini^n (...), says Irenaeus, and other Fathers to the same
purpose as Isaacus Vossius has collected their affirmation sin his Annot. on
the place. Having gone thus far in rejecting these Epistles, he is at last at
leisure to remember and acknowledge, Plenom illis ipsis, quas confictas putamus
Epistolis, fidem habere Patres, that the Fathers (indefinitely, if not
universally, and it seems he had no one to produce to the contrary, if he had,
he would certainly have produced it, and with reason have depended on it more,
then all these other Topics) afforded a full plenary belief to these very
Epistles, which the two Champions of the age Salmasius and he think to be
supposititious, [putamus] is but a poor word, Salmasius could speak bigger on
weaker or fewer arguments, [ tam certo scio, quam me haec scribere.] To this
authority of the Fathers against his opinion, his answer is short, but has
much weight and asperity in it (which they that have as strong an appetite to
lay the Presbyterians flat, as the Presbyterians have expressed to destroy the
Bishops, they that have the same exceptions against all distinction, or
discrimination of Lay and Clergy, as Blondel and Salmasius have against the
impariety and inequality of Bishops and Presbyters, will, when they can hope to
be heard, be ready enough to make use of, and must not be denied to have urged
an argument ad homines unaswerable, whenever they shall please to make use of
it) and it is but this, Quid tum? What then? the authority of the Fathers in a
matter of fact (as that Ignatius wrote these Epistles) cast off without any
ceremony, or difficulty in two syllables. And the reason for so doing, which is
added will help the matter but little; Quam multa minime suspicaces ac
imparatos and fefellerunt semper, and quotidie fallunt? How many things have
always deceived, and daily do deceive men that are not suspicious, nor upon
their guard? And if all the Fathers of the Church, beginning from those that
were nearest Ignatius's time, must be involved in the number of these
incautious, cheatable men, I shall be afraid to mention the consequences, that
will too readily be deducible from hence. I shall only say; May not this
liberty, or license rather, be soon extended very inordinately to the invasion
of the sacred Canon of Scripture? Nay, when the same current, and consent of
Fathers, which delivers down all the books which make up our Canon of
Scripture, for Canonical, and Theopneust, shall be found at the same time to
deliver down, and make use of these Epistles of Ignatius, only with the
distinction of Apocryphal, (and mean by that, not supposititious books, or
books which are under suspicion that they are not their offspring, whom they
call Father, but only books of inferior authority, as Apocryphal is opposed
(...), to the books of divine Scripture, and legi Domini, to the Law or word of
God, and (...) to those that are put in the Canon, and in a word, (...), as you
may see in the end of Nicephorus's Chronography, and in others; inter scripta
novi Testamenti novi apocrypha, numbered among the apocryphal books, not of
Ignatius, but of the New Testament, and appointed to be read by pious men,
though not allowed that same authority and dignity, in which the books of
Sacred Scripture have been justly estated) when, I say, the same hands of the
ancient Church shall deliver both the Epistles of St Peter for Divine
Scripture, and these Epistles of Ignatius for the Epistles of Ignatius, though
not for Divine Scripture, who can say that Wall. Messalin.
Salmasius when he had thus confidently thrown off these Epistles from being
written by Ignatius, did not consequently, and agreeably to his (...) in
throwing off one of St Peter's Epistles also? And who can think it reasonable
that our wariness and censoriousnes shall enable us at 1500 years distance to
judge more truly of a matter of fact, (which none but they that are near, be
they never so wary, and suspicious, can discern any thing of) then they that
lived in those times which were nearest to the scene of action? Nay, how much
more rational is that of the same Salmasius? who in the controversy about the
parts of the Cross, i. e. when he conceived antiquity to be favorable to that
opinion which he defended, has made this argumentative against his
adversaries, An credibile est Gregorium qui vixit tanto tempore postquam crucis
supplicio nemo amplius afficebatur, certiorem esse testem de habitu crucis
totius, etc. quam eos authors qui scripsere cum adhuc passim in usu esset
communissimo nocentum crucifixio? Is it credible, that he that lived so long
after the use of that kind of death was left off, should be a surer witness of
any thing that belongs to it, then those Authors that wrote when it was in use?
De Cruce, p. 255. And again, if Blondel may say without proof, that the Fathers
were incautious in general, and thence conclude, that they were actually
deceived in this particular; Why may not I as reasonably affirm (having given
my reasons, when he has not) that Blondel is too censorious, and partial, and
willing to bring all to the cause he has espoused, and thence conclude
(knowing how contrary these Epistles are to his interests) that he has
actually expressed his passion, and injustice in this causlesse censure of these
Epistles? I have done with this learned man's observations in this matter, and
when I shall hear of any other argument which can seem of force against these
Epistles, I shall be glad to consider it, professing my self to conceive, that
as long as that one Author stands in the Church in his just value, the cause of
Prelacy and Hierarchy cannot want supports, every page almost of those Epistles
being sufficient (which the adversaries acknowledge in saying he does (...) in
season and out of season, at all turns assert Episcopacy) to interpret the
obscurer vestigia in the New Testament, and to assure us what was the practice
and doctrine of the Apostles and Primitive Churches in that point; and that is
the reason I have insisted so long on a thing which may seem so extrinsecall to
my first undertaking, and shall not think my self out of my way, if I be
content to return to this controversy again (as having such an immediate
influence on the cause in hand) whenever I shall be called to it; In the
mean, I shall content my self with this view of that matter; and for the
present, as I cannot but conceive it rashness to cast an Epistle of St Peter
upon a bare affirmation in a Parenthesis (quae sola plane genuina est) so will
it be in a lower degree, but in like manner, to deal with a most ancient
Apostolical-spirited volume, upon such unproved censures as these; and it is
observable, that the first writer that ever undertook to be thus severe against
that whole volume of Epistles, did with as much confidence, and as little
pretention to argument, cast off one of the books of Canonical Scripture. This
I thought not amiss here to insert, to vindicate the writings of that ancient
Martyr, though it may be taken for a parergon in this place.

Supposing then this writer to stand in the same repute in the Church of God,
in which he did, before he was observed to be unreconcileable with the designs
of the new Reformers, I shall proceed to make use of his testimony. He commands
obedience to be paid to Bishops (...), as to the Apostles; to the Presbyters as
to the Seventy, to the Deacons, as to the Deacons in the Acts. The passage is
known, and although in another place, he makes the Presbyters parallel to the
Apostles, and the Bishops to Christ, yet these places are easily reconciled, it
being clear, that that latter place considers the Apostles at the time, when
Christ was here on earth, at which time they were indeed but a second rank (and
in that respect it is that Origin says, Tr. in Mat. 24. Proprie Episcopus
Dominus Jesus est, Presbyteri Apostoli, Christ is properly the Bishop, and the
Apostles Presbyters) but the former place considering that after Christ's
departure, is that which more properly belongs to this matter; this power
(though promised before) being not yet instated on them, till after his
resurrection, immediately before his leaving of this world (or indeed till the
coming of the Holy Ghost) at which time they were left the Governors of the
Church, as Christ had been before, and the Bishops, their successors ever
since. To which purpose St Cyprian, Ep. 65. Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos and
Praepositos Dominus elegit, the Lord chose Apostles, i. e. Bishops and
Governors. So Judas's Apostolical function is called (...) Bishopric Act. 1.29
so Theodoret thinks Epaphroditus was Bishop of the Philipians, because he is
called (...) Apostle, and on 1 Timothy 3. says thus, (...), those that are now
called Bishops, they then called Apostles, so Titus, says he, and so Apollos,
and so (says Remig. on 1 Cor. 4.) Sosthenes also. Thus St Hilary frequently
calls St Paul Episcopum, Bishop. And Hilarious Sardus in Ephesians. Apostoli Episcopi
sunt, the Apostles are Bishops. So the Scriptor qu. in vet. and nov. Test. qu.
27. Nemo ignorant Episcopos Servatorem Eccles^is instituisse, ipse enim
priusquam in coelos ascenderet, imponens manum Apostolis, ordinavit eos
Episcopos. No man is ignorant that our Savior instituted Bishops over the
Churches. For he himself before he ascended to heaven, laying his hand on the
Apostles ordained them Bishops. So says Rabanus Maur. in 1 Timothy 4.14. of the
Apostles times, Episcopi provincias integras regebant, Apostolorum nomine nun
cupati. The Bishops were called Apostles. So does Blondel himself confess not
only out of Gildas, that St Matthew Episcopatum sortitus est, was Bishop, but
acknowledges it of St James the brother of the Lord, as the voice of all
antiquity, that he was Bishop of Jerusalem. Jacobum Hierosol. Ecclesiae
Episcopatum constanter asserunt veteres omnes. Apol. pro Sent. Hieron. p. 50.
And if it be said, that he meant by the word Episcopus Bishop, no more then a
Presbyter, one of many; I shall only then put him or the Reader in mind, what
the same Blondel in his censure of the Pontif. Epistles (when they say he was
not so severe against Bishops) has put together of St James. Hierosol.
Ecclesiam rexisse statuunt veteres, and a Christo Episcopale munus accepisse,
ait Hegesippus apud Hieron. in Cat. Epiphan. haer. 78. Hieron. in Gal. c. 1.
Greg. Turon. l. 1. c. 17. Nic. Methon. de pane consecr. a Christo and
Apostolis. Eus. l. f. 7. c. 19. Constit. l. 8. c. 35. Ab Apostolis, Constit. l.
7. c. 48. l. 8. c. ult. Clem. Alexand. apud The same author in his Chron. p.
43. affirms that he was by the Apostles ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, the
nineteenth year of Tiberius, i. e. the very next year in his account after the
death of Christ.
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1. Athanas. in Synop. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 2. Hieronymus de Script.
Eccl. Beda de 6. aetat. and Martyrl. ad Call. Maii. and Chron. Gr. anon.
Scriptor. (...), acknowledging all, that as Bishop he governed that Church, as
a single person, sa^e in the sea or throne; all the difference between the
Ancients being, whether by Christ or the Apostles, or both, or by St Peter
only, he was ordained Bishop.

Thus, says S. Hom. 86. in Joh.
Chrysostom. did Christ invest the Apostles with this (...), etc. as when a King
sends Governors over Provinces, he gives them power of imprisoning and
releasing, intimating the (...) or Rulers of the Church to be the men that are
here represented by the Apostles, and so in L. 3. (...)* speaking of the
weighty office of Bishops (to excuse himself who had fled from it) he
principally insists on the power which is entrusted to them, and in that
respect applies to them the style of the faithful and wise Servant, whom God
makes Ruler over his household. So Theophylact on Matthew. 18. (...), They that
after the manner of St Peter, are vouchsafed the honor of being Bishops, have
the power of binding and loosing. So again appears by the forecited Testimonies
of the (...) Presidents in St Chrysostom. and the (...) Praefects of the Church, in
Theophylact. And so in the name and sense of the Greek Church, Gabriel of
Philadelphia, (...) in his second difference betwixt the Greek and the Roman
Church* (...), The chief Priests, i. e. Bishops, are the successors of the
Apostles, and in plain words, (...), So that it is manifest, that the Apostles
were Bishops, and applies to them that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 45.16. of Gods
constituting them rulers over all the earth, and names the several Churches
wherein the several Apostles ordained Bishops, St John in Asia, St Andrew in
Achaia, St Thomas in India, etc.

Thus also among the Latins St Jerome who was not very Bishops, says expressly
that they were the Apostles successors, Episcopi omnes Apostolorum successores
sunt. Ep. 83. ad Evagrium. So St Ambrose, Claves illas regni coelorum in beato
Petro Apostolo cuncti suscepimus sacerdotes. All we, that are styled
Sacerdotes, in the blessed Apostle St Peter received the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven. And what Sacerdos signifies among the Writers of that time, and
particularly in St Ambrose, the observation of any diligent Reader will
instruct him; viz. that which the [ suscepimus] applied to St Ambrose's person,
will enforce, he being Bishop of Millain at that time, (and this is agreeable
even to the heathens acception of the phrase, who use Sacerdos and Pontifex
promiscuously; witness Servius in Aen. 3.) So de dignitate Sacerd. c. 2. he
shows out of Scripture, that the sheep are delivered Sacerdotibus, I shall
render it to Bishops, because it follows, and so must be subject to those
Rulers. So in St Chrysostom. in the forecited (...). l. 2. The word (...) (which
together with Pastor in Latin, is ordinarily the Bishops Title, in order to
the Shepherds office of ruling, and governing, as well as feeding the flock)
and (...), Sacerdos, are promiscuously taken, and the latter by the Interpreter
there rendered Episcopus, Bishop.

And to the same purpose most clearly St Cyprian, Ep. 12. Lapsi, those who
having fallen were under the censures of the Church, and how the Presbyters had
presumed to reconcile, or absolve them, he concludes that they did not (
Reservare Episcopo honorem Sacerdotii sui, and Cathedrae (reserve to the Bishop
the honor of his Priesthood, and chair, showing the indifferent use of those
words Episcopus and Sacerdos, at that time and that in opposition to
Presbytery, appropriating to the one the Power of the Keys, exclusively to the
other. This he had set down more plainly before Epist. 10. showing and
aggravating the greatness of the fault of those Presbyters that had taken upon
them to use the Keys* in that case, Praepositum sibi Episcopum non cogitantes,
not thinking that there was a Bishop set over them; quod nunquam omnino sub
antecessoribus factum est, resolving that it was a fact without any precedent
in the Church; and again, L. 1. Epist. 3. having proved the Episcopal power to
be immediately from God, he expresses it in these words, Sacerdotalis
authoritas and potestas divina dignatione firmatur, The Sacerdotall power is
settled by divine dignation, and adds the occasion of all Schisms in the
Church to be, quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, that the Bishop is not
obeyed: Nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex, vice
Christi cogitatur; and that it is not considered, that the one Priest, i. e.
Bishop, and Judge, is for the time in the Church in Christ's stead; which is yet
more clear by his making Sacerdotum Collegium, The College of Priests, all one
with Coepiscoporum consensus, The consent of Fellow-bishops, and presently
adding, that he that sets himself above this unus Sacerdos, one Priest, se non
Episcopi, sed Dei Judicem faceret, makes himself Judge not of the Bishop, but
of God. And therefore it is a strange proof of Blondels, that Episcopacy and
Presbytery is all one, from that speech of Pontius Diaconus concerning this
Cyprian, Apol. pro Sent. Hieron.
Quod ad officium Sacerdotii and Episcopatus gradum novellus electus est,
having before said, Presbyterium and Sacerdotium statim accepisse. Whereas the
equipollence of the word Sacerdos and Episcopus being observed, and the
difference of Presbyter from them, does clearly infer the contrary; and that is
apparent by the very place, Multa sunt quae jam Presbyter fecit; ad probationem
bonorum operum satis est, quod ad officium Sacerdotii and Episcopatus gradum
adhuc novellus electus est. He was it seems a Presbyter first, and did many
things in that state, and a proof that he did so, was his election to the
office of Sacerdos or Bishop, when he was a novice, then presently or soon
after his conversion, where the difference of his being a Presbyter and a
Bishop is most manifest. So when St in Psalm.
Hilarious Pictav. says, Aarone Sacerdotes significari non ambiguum, in Levi,
ministros ostendi; the same Blondel concludes, Sacerdotes sive praepositos, and
seniores to be all one, not knowing or observing again that that Sacerdos
signifies Bishop, who is there set parallel to Aaron, in lege primus Sacerdos,
the first Priest in the law.

Taurinum speaking of Palladius; A Triferio sacerdote fuerat mulctatus, he was
punished by Triferius, who, that he was a Bishop, (if it were doubted) would
appear by the acts of that Council, and particularly by his excommunicating
Exuperantius, a Presbyter, Can. 4. which sure none but a Summus Sacerdos, a
High Priest, or Bishop could do.

Bishops were the confessed successors of the Apostles in this Privilege or
Prerogative, that one Canon of the Apostles might satisfy it, (...), etc. Let
not the Presbyters, or Deacons do any thing without the consent of the Bishop,
for he has the people of the Lord entrusted to him, and shall one day be
required an account of their souls: which besides that it is evidenced to
belong to this power of the Keys, by the usefulness of that to the
discharging the trust about souls, appears further by the (...), the
prohibiting of Presbyters to do any thing without him.

Antiquity. Ignatius must begin the number in Epist. ad Trall. (...). It is
necessary that whatever ye do, ye do nothing without the Bishop. And if,
because it follows immediately, (...), obey the Presbyters, as the Apostles. it
be conceived, that that precept belongs to the people only, and not to the
Presbyters, it will then be easily replied, that to the whole matter the same
Ignatius in Epist. ad Magn. has given it in a latitude, which had prevented
this scruple (...). As the Lord Christ does nothing without the Father, so you
also without the Bishop; You, whether Presbyter, or Deacon, or Laick. Once more
in Epist. ad Smyrn. (...). Let no man without the Bishop do any of those things
which belong unto the Church. And the Council of Laodicea has (almost in
Ignatius's words) commanded the same. Can. 56. (...), The Presbyters must do
nothing without the consent of the Bishop; and many more acts and Canons might
be produced to the same purpose.

And if against all these, this exception be made, that by the Rules not only
the power of the Keys, but also all other power belonging to the Church is
appropriated to Bishops: to this the Answer (as it will be easy, so it) will
tend much to the clearing, and serve for the shutting up of this whole matter;
That indeed there is great truth in the objection, that all power in all
matters Ecclesiastical did primarily belong to the Bishop, and no others, even
Presbyters themselves; but as it was by the Bishop communicated to them, not
only by that first act of Ordination, in giving them the (...), or first power,
but also by a second act necessary to give them that other power to use or
exercise that power, when they have it.

This is the plain sense of the Canon of the Council of Arles, nec Presbyteris
civitatis sine Episcopi praecepto amplius aliquid imperare, vel sine
authoritate literarum ejus in unaquaque Parochia aliquid agere. The Presbyters
of any City must not command any thing without the precept of the Bishop, nor
do any thing in any Parish, without authority of the Bishops letters licensing
them to do it. Thus, I say, it is not only for the power of the Keys, but even
for the Sacraments. Ignatius's saying last produced in Epist. ad Smyrn is by
him thus in larged, (...). Let that Eucharist be reputed firm (or rightly
celebrated) which is done by the Bishop, or by him to whom he shall give leave;
and for Baptism, and that together, (...), It is not lawful without the
Bishop, i. e. without his leave, either to baptize, or administer the
Sacrament, (...), but when he shall think fit according to Gods pleasure,
(...), that all that you do, may be safe and firm. It seems the consent of the
Bishop was thought necessary to make it safe for any Presbyter to do any
Ecclesiastical act, or to give validity to it, when 'twas done by him. So
Tertull. de cor. mil. Non de aliorum quam de praesidentium manu Eucharistiam
sumimus, We receive the Eucharist from none but the Presidents or Governors.
They are all one with the (...) in Just. Mart. Apol. 2. to whom that whole
business is there remitted. So again Tertul. de bapt. Dandi baptismum jus
habet Summus Sacerdos qui est Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, non
tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae honorem, quo salvo salva pax
est. The Chief Priest who is the Bishop, has the power of giving baptism,
after him the Presbyters and Deacons, yet not without the authority of the
Bishop, for the honor of the Church, which as long as it is preserved, the
peace of the Church will be preserved also. So when the Scriptor. anon. quaest.
in V. and Nov. Test. which is thought to be Hilary, says, In Alexandria and
per totum Aegyptum, si desit Episcopus, consecrat Presbyter; that in Alexandria
and Egypt, if there be no Bishop, the Presbyter consecrates, it is clear by the
mention of that liberty in the Presbyter, as of a thing peculiar to Egypt, and
that too, only when there is no Bishop present, that regularly this power
belonged to none but the Bishops, and to those Presbyters to whom he gave it.
Where by the way will appear a great mistake of Blondel and (I suppose out of
him, as his many other Notes in his apparatus against Bishops) of Salmasius,
who in another place of Hilary in Ephesians. 4. cited by both of them, [ apud
Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit Episcopus, In Egypt the
Presbyters consigne, if the Bishop be not present] interpret consigning, either
to be Sive baptizatorum confirmatio, sive poenitentium benedictio, sive
ordinandorum consecratio. Blond. Apol. p. 57. and Salmas. in appar. ad l. de
Prim. Papae.
confirmation or blessing (I suppose absolving) of penitents, or ordination. It
being clear by the other place, just now cited, that consignatio signifies
there consecrating of the Sacrament, which is peculiarly called consecration,
that of giving orders being ordination, not as he calls it ordinandorum
consecratio (which what it would grammatically signify I know not, unless
some benediction of them that are after to be ordained) and it seems Sive de
Eucharistiae confectione, sive de Chrismatione, sive de ordinationibus sacris
interpretari placeat.
Blondel himself, p. 61. thinks it possible that consignatio may signify the
consecrating the Elements, and by what follows, I conceive him to use it in
that sense, saying, quod antiquis per solam Episcoporum absentiam licuit,
omnibus nunc absolute licet, that which anciently was made lawful to all (i. e.
to Presbyters) only by the Bishops absence, is now absolutely lawful to all:
Which I suppose he must mean of consecrating the Sacrament, and I am sure could
not reasonably believe of ordination. But this by the way, in passage, to
confirm that assertion of Ignatius sufficiently, that the Church was by the
Apostles put into the hands of Bishops, that ordinarily the consent of the
Bishop was required to enable a Presbyter for any Ecclesiastical act, the
plenitude of power being by Christ delivered down to the Apostles, and through
them to their successor-bishops, and by them dispenst out to others in that
measure, and those portions, which they should think fit.

And if it be demanded here, What it is which in our Church Presbyters in their
Ordination, as the full importance of the form then used [ Receive the Holy
Ghost:] I answer, not all that is at any time contained under that phrase, when
it is used in the consecration, but only the particulars which are after
mentioned; and so distinctly not the power of ordaining, which is not
mentioned, and which is a particular, that never was regular for any Presbyter
in the ancient Church to assume to himself, or to any number of that order
without a Bishop over them (and it would not be hard to give an account of all
that has been produced of late by Salmasius, or any other from the origines
Alexandrini, or any other record of antiquity to the contrary, but that it is
(...), and would be too large a (...) in this place:) and if the practice of
some few Protestant Churches in this last Century be opposed against it; then
1. I shall conceive those very unfit to be confronted against the Universal for
1500 years; and therefore secondly, I shall not doubt to affirm, that want is
not only a defect, but a corruption among them. Thirdly, it will be observable,
that even those that want it among them, have formerly thought fit to excuse it
by the case of necessity, and to acknowledge it their infelicity, but not their
fault, (their superiors in the State not permitting them to have Bishops to
ordain them;) and to give their judgments freely, that where Episcopacy is, it
is to be preserved; and where it is not, it is to be wished for; which is a
sufficient expression of their sense of it. And if the improsperousnesse of the
cause of late in this Kingdom has moved some of them to change their style, I
suppose there is no greater reason to depend on their judgments who are moved
or wrought on by such extrinsecal arguments, then on his, who lately made no
scruple to confess, in giving his opinion of H. Grotius, Ego non probo
prudentiam minus felicem. He liked not the choice of that side which was not
prosperous. And then fourthly, that this cannot be applicable by way of excuse
to those who desire to cast out Bishops where they are, on purpose that
Presbyters may usurp the power which belongs to them. Secondly, not al power of
binding and loosing, retaining or remitting, though those words are there added
( whose sins you do remit, etc.) but so much as the Bishops or Governors are
presumed to have thought fit to impart to them, and what that is, will appear
by other acts of our Church, especially by the Liturgy: as 1. The declaring of
absolution in the Church after the Confession of sins; 2. The absolving them by
way of prayer before the Sacrament (in case the Bishop be not present) and 3.
in Baptismal washing, and 4. upon special Confession on the sickbed; or any
time else which may by analogy or reduction come under these same heads, as in
the case of private conference, and confession at other times: In all these the
remitting of sins is allowed among us to a bare Presbyter, not only by way of
pronouncing, or declaring of absolution, but (as a ministerial act) actually
absolving him, (by Christ's authority committed to the Presbyters) from all his
sins.

absolving from the band of Excommunication, or proportionably to such power of
binding, any further (at most) then to confer the first power of it, which if
it be then given, does yet remain (as the other power of Preaching, and
administering the Sacraments) bound and restrained from being exercised, till
they be further loosed by the donation of a second power, as Luke 24.49. when
Christ sent them the Promise of his Father, which was at the time of his
breathing on them, Joh. 20.22. and gave them a (...), a grace, or first power
of it, he yet restrains the exercise of it, till the actual descent of the
Holy Ghost, (but tarry you in Jerusalem till you be endued with power from
above) and that is not done in this Church as it stands established by Law, (in
this particular of the Keys) till he become a (...), a ruling Elder, whether by
being made Bishop, or otherwise by having Jurisdiction vested on him: and thus
much will serve turn for the first enquiry, on whom the power of the Keys was
bestowed.

CAP. IV.
I Come now to the second general enquiry, in what this power That the power of
binding and loosing in these places of the Gospels, is (...), etc. Chrysostom. in
Jo. 20. (...). Theoph. in Joh. 20. (...) etc. Ib
(...), a spiritual gift, or grace, and belongs to the (...), in Theoph. in
Mat. 16. the pardoning or punishing of faults, the former to the Censures of
the Church, the Ecclesiastical punishments of Excommunication, and the later,
the power of loosing, to that of absolving from them.

This position I must vindicate from the contrary interpretations, or
objections which are thought to keep these Texts from concluding or
countenaning any such Censures. And of these, though they are not all to one
sense, yet one interpretation I have chosen rather to insist on, because it
has not yet been considered by others, and because it seems to pretend to more
ancient grounds, then the rest formerly have done, I mean that, which proceeds
by interpreting the Phrases out of the writings of the Talmudists, and from
them concludes (I shall power of binding and loosing is (...) facultas
decernendi, explicandi, interpretandi, declarandi de ligato and soluto, quod
plane millies in Talmudicis ex vetustissimae Ecclesiae illius usu denotat, quid
vetitum ex lege sacra, quid permissum (quemadmodum and Graecis Vide Eustath.
and Did. in illud Iliad (...). and Inscrip. Isid. apud Diodor. Sic. l. 1
scimus (...), quod ligare est, etiam interdicere sonare, and (...), quod est
solvere, etiam permittere, seu obligationem sive auferre, sive nondum inductam
monstrare, aut asserere) adeoque ad docendi, seu interpretandi, seu Theologiae
Praeceptivae munus solum ibi attinuit, etc. making it no more then the faculty
of explicating, or interpreting what is lawful, what not, etc. in a word, no
more then the power of deciding cases of conscience, seu sic de jure public
respondendi illudque dicendi, etc. The truth of which, I shall, with all due
respect, for a while take boldness to examine. First, by yielding, or for the
present not denying, that there was or might be an office or power among the
Jews entrusted to some select Elders of the people, of teaching and giving
public responses (by way of deciding cases of Conscience, though not by way
of Judicature) what was to be accounted lawful, what not, both by the Law of
God, and the Tradition of the Ancients; which yet being supposed and granted, I
must secondly interpose, that it is not thereby proved that this is called in
the Talmud, or by any of those writers, the power of binding and loosing, (or
that the power of binding and loosing, is by them so described) but (which is
quite another thing) (...) a power of teaching or instructing, etc. what is
lawful, what forbidden. Nor will it be a proof of any force to conclude (that
which we have no reason to believe without a proof, or some kind of affinity
in the phrases, viz.) that this power of binding is that power of teaching, and
no more, only because there was such a power of teaching among the Jews. For if
we will judge a pari, experience proves the contrary, in this Church of ours;
where though there be a power of binding, and a munus docendi, an office of
teaching, etc. yet no man is bound from thence to acknowledge these two to be
all one, but we have long believed them to be two faculties, or offices, the
one given the Apostles in the donation of the Keys, the other in the mission to
preach; (and though it were granted that we were mistaken in affirming them to
be two such distinct faculties, yet would not that hinder the truth of this
assertion, that in our books they are so distinguished, the question being now
of the fact, and not of the right, and it being clear that in our practice our
Preaching is one thing, and our Excommunicating is another) and secondly,
because it is clear, there were two distinct powers among the Jews, one of
declaring in foro, as well as the other extra forum, one judicial, as well as
the other doctrinal; and sure it would be but a poor supersedeas, or
prohibition to keep the Sanhedrin among them from judging and punishing any
offender brought before them, by telling them that there was among the Jews a
(...) a license or faculty of declaring what was lawful, without any power of
punishing; For they would be soon able to say, that 'twas by some other power
(and not by that of declaring) that they undertook thus to judge and punish:
and let me add that although the power among the Jews were acknowledged only to
be a civil power, yet might Christ in his Church set up an Ecclesiastical power
proportionable to that, and imitate that in the sacred, which they used only
in civil judicatures, as anon we shall have occasion to demonstrate. And
thirdly, the phrase of the Gospel, from whence we pretend, is not the facultas,
faculty, or power of binding, but the donation of Keys, and with that, Christ's
Promise, that whatsoever they shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven:
and therefore I conceive this will not be a convincing way of inferring this
conclusion.

We must therefore in the next place proceed to examine the power of binding
and loosing is no more then the power of declaring, etc. what is prohibited,
what is permitted, the office of the Casuist only. And these reasons I can
find to be but two.

1. That ligatum and solutum plane millies in Talmudicis ex vetustissimo 2.
That in some places of Greek Authors, (...) and (...), to bind and loose are
used also.

For the first of these, I shall first say, that if it were true, that
Talmudists were ex vetustissimo Ecclesiae illius usu, out of the most ancient
use of that Church the Law of Moses, and the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
being the Records of the most ancient Church, some footsteps of it might be
expected there; but I shall suppose there are no such to be found, not only
because I have there sought them in vain, but because I presume the Author
would have conceived any Testimony from thence to be more Authentic then the
Talmud, and so would certainly have produced them, if there had been any.
Secondly, for the Talmudists acception of the phrases; first I might say, that
we are no way obliged to interpret Greek words in the New Testament by the use
of the Talmudists, because though the traditions concerning Hebrew customs
mentioned in the Talmud may reasonably be thought antienter then Christ's time
(and so the Testimonies brought thence be worth the heeding for such, and fit
sometimes to be used for the explaining the like customs mentioned in the New
Testament) yet the book it self, and consequently the word in it (which only
we have now to consider) was written, and set out long after the New Testament,
the Misnaioth, or first (...), which contain the Text of the Talmud, being set
forth by the (...) Tannaim, or Doctores Mischinici, about the year 150 after
Christ, who as they profess to have had their beginning per continuam
successionem acceptionis legis oralis a Mose, says Buxtorf, by a continual
succession of tradition of the oral law from the times of Moses, so they
acknowledge to end in R. Jehudah hakkadosch, (styled Hannasi, the Chief or
Prince, and by way of eminence Rabbi, when he is cited in the Gemara) who lived
under Antoninus in the midst of the second Century. After these Tannaim, are
the (...) Amoriam whom Scaliger calls (...), the Authors of the Gemara, and of
that Gemara, i. e. those disputations, and decisions of those learned men at
Jerusalem together with the Mischna forementioned, does the Jerusalem-Talmud
consist, and was set forth Vid. Buxtorf. Lex. Rabb. p. 283.
an. 230. as the collection of the like disputations and decisions on the
Mischna, which were had in Academiis Pombedithana, Soriah, and Nahardeah, make
up the Talmud Babylonicum, which was completed an. 500. This will be
sufficient to show that the words of Christ, either as they were spoken by him,
or repeated by the Evangelists, ought not to be conceived to have imitated the
phrases of the Talmudists so long after them; and there will be as little
reason to believe (what is left the only possible) that the Writers of the
Talmuds have imitated the phrases in the Gospel, being themselves both Jews and
enemies to the Christian Religion; and besides, if the Idiom of the Talmudists
were of any weight in this matter, yet sure it is not sufficient to weigh down
the contrary Interpretation of the Christian Fathers, (who are to us in all
reason to be heeded, as the veryer Talmudists of the two, the Traditors and
deliverers of our Gospel, and Creed unto us) or the use of it among the Jews
that have written in Greek, particularly of the Author of Ecclesiasticus, who
is conceived to be the famous Ben-Sira, and with him (...), is punctually to
forgive sins, c. 28.2. however no way able to extend it self to that other
place in St John, where the phrase is varyed, and the [ power of remitting and
retaining of sins] is given to the Disciples, which will have no analogy with
that which is here pretended; for whatever should be granted of the words
ligatum and solutum, b^ing all one with prohibited, etc. the retaining or
remitting of sins, will be distant from it, for sure that will not be, to
declare one man's sins unlawful, another lawful, which it must do, if this
interpretation be applied to that place also.

This being premised as an Answer sufficient to take away ex abundanti
superadd, that I have used some care to examine those words, and to observe
their importance in those, and other Jewish writings: I shall give you an
account of it.

The Hebrew word for binding is (...), which I shall make no scruple to
acknowledge, does in the Talmud many times signify to forbid and prohibit; and
from thence (...) and (...) signifies a thing forbidden, prohibited, unlawful;
only by the way I shall crave leave to show you by what degrees it comes to
signify thus. The word in the Old Testament signifies to bind, (and sure that
is the best interpreter of Idioms in the New) and accordingly is rendered by
(...), etc. and is used commonly for binding with cords, and sometimes for that
band, or obligation, that proceeds from having made a vow as Numb. 30.4. and is
then rendered (...) definition or decree, because by that vow I bind, or define,
or determine my self to such a performance; Farther then this, it is true this
word is rendered by our Translators, Number. 11.28. to [forbid] Lord Moses forbid
them, where yet it is observable that the forbiding there, which Joshua desires,
is applied to the persons, and and not to the thing, and signifies a checking,
repressing, [ Lord Moses suffered them not, cohibeto eos] as when by chiding,
or disciplining, a superior restrains another; according to which use of the
word it is, that Philip de Aquin. makes it agree in sense with (...), and (...)
prohibuit and cohibuit, forbidding, and repressing: and thus it will be very
agreeable with our sense of binding, as that signifies Church-censure, (...),
disciplining, repressing offenders by that means. In the whole Scripture I
believe there will not one place be found where that word is rendered by the 72.
by any word signifying barely to prohibit, or the like, unless you will say it
does Dan. 6.7, 8, 9. where the word (...) is rendered (...), and (...), a
decree, and yet if you examine that place, and the nature of the decree, you
shall find, that it was not a bare prohibition, but a binding to punishment
upon nonperformance (for the decree was there, v. 7. that whosoever shall ask
any petition from either God or man, but of thee, O King, shall be cast into
the den of lions) and so the decree is that designation to the punishment of
casting into the den, which is there called (...) binding, as when the Jugde
decrees the Offender to be Excommunicated, that act of judicature is a decree,
yet nevertheless a binding, (this binding being a judicial act, and from
thence receiving its force of obligation) and e converso in that a binding, or
obligation to punishment; that it is such a decree, to wit, a decree sub poena,
that such a thing shall be done, so says Schindler, that the Chaldee (...) is
obligavit ad obedientiam, aut poenam, binding to obedience, or penalty, and
Elias Levita, that (...) etc. Every thing from which either sin or punishment
comes unto him that does it (...) is said to be bound, or is called Assure;
and therefore Munster giving an account of the use of the word in the
Commentaries of the Rabbis, says (...) or (...) signifies edictum aut
sententiam, qua quis tenetur, etc. by which any man is bound to punishment, if
he obey it not. In like manner as he that vows, binds, (and the word (...) Number.
30.4. etc. belongs peculiarly to that) because in vowing he does either by
words of execration explicitly, or else by intimation implicitly, call
punishment upon himself, if he perform not his vow, and so binds himself to
that punishment. And so still the word [ binding] by denoting a decree in this
kind, does not at all vary from our present sense of binding by way of
censure, which now we contend for, but rather confirm and concur with it; and
so I conceive (in those excerpta about excommunication, Exc. Gem. Sanhedr. p.
147.
which J. Coch has set down in Latin out of Maimonides) those words of
Maimonides do import, Quod totus Israel decrevit, non observat Princeps, etc.
What all Israel decreed, the Prince observes not: he speaks of inflicting
anathema's, and I shall grant that the word rendered decrevit, is in the
original (...) the word for binding (in reference to which it follows in the
next words, by him set down, remittitur a laeso, si ei satisfecerit, etc. The
injured person remits, if satisfaction be made him) and from thence shall
conclude, that even when it is to be rendered decrevit, it may yet note
punishment, particularly that of excommunication, or decree ad excommunicandum,
sentence to punishment being a kind of Legislation, and all binding to that,
an act of Command or power.

Having thus considered the verb (...) I shall as freely grant Rabbis or
Talmudists, signify very often a thing forbidden, prohibited, unlawful
(though in the Old Testament again the nouns there used (...), and (...)
signify not so, but are taken in a regular sense, and so rendered by the 72
(...) a band, and (...) an ordinance or decree, and (...) and (...), bound or
imprisoned, and the like, and not the thing unlawful or prohibited) which yet
being granted and added to what was before granted of the Talmudical use of the
Verb, comes not home to prove the objecters conclusion, which is this, that the
verb (...) signifies among the Talmudists, decernere, explicare, interpretari,
declarare, de ligato, vel quid ligatum sit, i. e. quid vetitum: to decern,
explicat, interpret, declare concerning a thing bound, or what is bound, i. e.
what is forbidden: for to prove this sense of the verb, that other supposed use
of the participle is not sufficient, any more then my confessing amatum to
signify a thing loved, will conclude me to affirm, that amo signifies to
declare a thing to be loved, which we know signifies formally to love, and
nothing else.

That the verb signifies to forbid, or decree, per modum legislationis ligatum
in the Talmud signifying nothing but illicitum) it is acknowledged, but that
will not serve the turn, thereby wholly to evacuate and nullify the power of
the Keys, which is pretended to belong to the Church from these texts; If the
Apostles had this power to forbid or decree, this were 1. more then to
interpret or declare a thing to be unlawful, the office of making laws is more
then that of the Casuist, or Counselor, or Preacher: and beside, secondly, it
would be but reason to suppose those decrees backed with some power of censures
against resisters, and so indeed the word imports, to decree sub poena under
penalty, and not simply to decree. But the thing for which this Talmudical
interpretation contends, and which we oppose, is that this power of binding is
only a power of declaring, and explaining a thing to be unlawful; and for this
from all that is pretended, or offered to our view, I have after all my search
no temptation to suspect, that even the Talmudists themselves do use the word.
The verb with them may signify [to prohibit] and the nouns, and participle, a
thing prohibited, or unlawful, and that is the utmost that Buxtorf could
observe of the words among the Talmudists, or that the author of the
interpretation offers any proof for [ ligatum and solutum, i. e. millies in
Talmudicis vetitum lege sa^ra aut permissum;] and if these notions will be
taken, then the meaning of [ whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound
in heaven] will be, that whatsoever they shall by decree prohibit on earth,
shall be prohibited, or unlawful in heaven; which were only to exchange the
power of Censures, for the power of giving Laws, which, as it is more then that
of the Casuist, so, I conceive, is never to be found any where without power of
punishing also.

Talmud were the umpire, or the use of words there the best Nomenclature for
the New Testament. But then over and above, we must again remember, that this
Talmudical observation will be but little conviction to us, who find that the
writers of the New Testament have no sympathy with the Talmud in this matter,
but use variety of other words to express [ commanding, or decreeing, or
forbidding;] such are (...), and the like, but never (...) or any of that
making; and in like manner have other phrases to express a thing unlawful, or
forbidden* (...), and the like, but never (...), or any thing like it: neither
is it, I conceive, pretended, that these words (...) and (...) have any such
sense in any other place of the New Testament; but only in these two, which
are (parallel one to another, and so) in effect but one, and that the matter of
the present controversy, and so a petitio principii, when it is made use of to
confute him that concludes the Censures from thence.

Add unto these yet farther, that even in the Talmud it self binding too, and
that not only in the obvious vulgar senses, but in that also which we here
contend for, of binding by censures, or binding over to punishment, (obstrinxit
ad poenam, as Schindler renders the Chaldee, and as Elias Levita the Rabbinical
word, be bound over to punishment) and so with great reason may be resolved
(even when it signifies to prohibit) to belong only to such penal
prohibitions, or at least, (belonging at first to such only) to have fallen
after in common use (which sure has been observed to bend words from their
primitive sense) to signify (...) all kind of decrees or prohibitions: which
surely will not exclude, but contain under it that which we now contend for.

I shall show the strength of this argument by a parallel, as I conceive,
exactly proportioned to it. (...) in Arabic signifies millies, very ordinarily
[to Vetare, prohibere, illici^um statuere.
forbid, or resolve any thing to be unlawful, from thence the noun (...) and
(...) is vetitum, any thing prohibited or forbidden, and (...) and (...)
prohibition; Suppose now in some discourses concerning the kinds or degrees of
excommunication among the Jews, or of the power of the Sanhedrin, or
indifferently in any Jewish writing, I should meet with the word (...) and
render it in Latin prohibuit, interdixit, and a friend ingenuously admonish me
that it ought to be rendered anathematizavit, devovit; would it be thought
reason or ingenuity in me to reply to my admonisher, No, but I have rendered it
aright, for in Arabic (...) signifies prohibuit, and therefore it is but an
ignorance in the Arabic dialect, to render the Hebrew anathematizavit, and but
a popular error (to be reformed from hence) in them, that conceive there was
any kind of excommunication among the Jews, meant by that word (...) whereas
it is clear, that word signifies only prohibition, and therefore belongs among
the Jews only ad Theologiae praeceptivae munus, or to the office of teaching
and interpreting, what is [ vetitum, vel interdictum lege sacra.] If, I say, I
should deal thus with any piece of plain Hebrew, my first question would be,
whether this account of my rendering that word would be accepted; and if not, my
second now is, whether the process of the present arguing has not done the
like, or somewhat more.

Solutum millies in Talmudicis licitum aut permissum; A thing loosed is taken a
thousand times in the Talmud for lawful or permitted) such are (...) and (...)
which I also acknowledge to be taken amongst the Talmudists for licitum and
permissum, lawful and unforbidden.

hiphil signifies solvere, to loose; (as indeed that which has no obligation
laid on it, which is loose from all band to obedience, or obligation to
punishment, is properly resolved to be lawful) but then this hinders not, but
that the verb in hiphil may still signify, (and indeed even among the Rabbis
ordinarily does) to loose, both properly and metaphorically; properly, as to
loose or unty those that are bound with cords, or such like bands, properly so
called, as Ps. 146.7. (...) solvite vinctos, loose those that are bound, and
Ps. 105.20. the king sent (...) and loosed them, where the Chaldee paraphrase
reads (...) and solvit eum, and the 72 (...), and Psalm. 146.7. Dominus (...)
qui solvit vinctos, loosing men out of prison: or metaphorically, and that in a
double sense, either as it is applied to doubts, or difficulties, and then it is
to dissolve them; or to persons, and then it is to let loose or unoblige, and in
this latter sense J. Coch cites it ex cap. 1. Nedarim, that on whom the
anathema or cherem is inflicted coram, or in his presence (...) it shall not be
remitted to him, but before his face also: where this word signifies clearly
remission or absolution, and that from a sentence of excommunication; so again
in that constitution of the law cited by Buxtorf, Ep. H^b. insti^. p. 57.
the word is twice used most clearly in our sense, He that continues in Niddui
30 days (...) and desires not to have it loosed, they separate him, or put him
under Niddui again, and if he continue so 30 days more, (...) and desires not
to have it loosed, (or as he renders it, relaxate) they excommunicate, or put
him under cherem; and therefore Schindler mentioning (...), and the Rabbis use
of it, renders it simply solutio, loosing; and there is a saying in (...) in
which it bears this sense. If any man swear in this form, [If this be true, let
me be excommunicate in this world, and in the other] and be perjured, he cannot
be absolved by any.

Another word synonymous to this, and ordinarily used by Talmudists is (...),
and that primarily signifying (as the other did) to loose or dissolve, as to
loose cords which tie, or Camels which are tied with them, is by the Talmudists
taken for Vid. Buxtorf. Rabb. (...).
absolving, remitting, forgiving, pardoning; so says Elias Levita in Thisby,
it is used by the Rabbis for pardoning and remitting, as, (...) The merciful
God pardon Hillel! and in the prayer that begins, (...) All shall be remitted,
or pardoned. So in a place cited by Coch out of Gem. Moed. Caton. c. 3. Quid
remedii? age cum ipso (...) ut remittat tibi, that he may loose you from the
excommunication: and again, adi principem, (...) that he may remit it to you.
So c. 1. Nedarim, Steti coram R. Huna, cum audiens quandam nomen Dei in vanum
proferre, eam excommunicaret, and statim ea praesente anathema relaxaret; there
the word (...) is used again, for loosing in our sense, relaxating of, or
freeing from a censure of excommunication, directly all one with (...)
remittatur ipsi, following in the same place, which even now we produced.

A third word there is ordinarily used to this purpose, of Vid. Buxtorf. Lex.
Rabb. p. 2465.
Moed Katon, Sapiens potest seipsum excommunicare, a wiseman may excommunicate
himself (...) and free or loose himself again: and so in that out of 1.
Nedarim, in J. Coch, excommunicationem posse e vestigio rescindi, there the
word is (...) in both, contrary to excommunication.

By the little that has been said, it may sufficiently appear, bind and to
loose may be found even among the Talmudists to signify somewhat beside
interpreting or declaring, quid vetitum, quid permissum sacra lege, what is
forbidden, what permitted by the law of God, as that referres simply ad solum
docendi, and interpretandi, vel Theologiae praeceptivae munus, only to the
office of teaching, and interpreting, and of preceptive Divinity, etc. and that
it is no way contrary to the style or idiom of those writers to affirm, that
binding and loosing belongs to Censures, (and not only to stating of Cases of
Conscience) even if the Talmud were our judge: for sure there is nothing more
ordinary in that, then to hear of loosing them who are excommunicate; which
must needs imply, that they which were so excommunicate, till they were loosed,
were supposed bound also.

H. Grotius having in his Notes on Matthew. 16.19. made this Talmudical
observation, that (...) to bind, and (...) or (...) to loose, are by the
Hebrews attributed to the interpreters of the law, (which seems something
agreeable to this observation) conceiving the Keys there spoken of, to be the
keys of knowledge, Luke 11.52. does yet on Matthew. 16.19. interpret (...) and
(...) binding and loosing there, by (...) and (...) retaining and remitting,
Joh. 20.23. and in his notes on that third place acknowledges, that thus the
Apostles did remit, either when by Baptism they received into the Church those
that professed the faith, or when after the testimony of serious repentance
they received into their communion those that had been lapst or fallen, and
applies to it that of the 2 Cor. 2.10. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive
also, (which belongs clearly to the excommunicate, incestuous person, in the
former Epistle, who was it seems by this Ecclesiastical course brought to a
capacity of remission, and absolution by that time, and now absolved by St.
P^ul) and for the conjunction of both these senses in the interpretation of
that place, he produces S. Cyprians authority, Ep. 73. To which I shall only
add, that in another part of his Notes upon the Gospels, Luke 6.22. this very
Judicious man (whose education might have given him as great prejudices against
the Prelacie, as any other) has given us a very excellent tract concerning
this subject of Excommunication, or Censures; And at last resolves out of St.
Cyprians Epistles, Totum ferme Christianae disciplinae vigorem in istis
judiciis constitisse, etc. that well nigh all the vigor of Christian discipline
consisted in those judgments of the Church. Quem morem qui ex Ecclesia sublatum
volunt, gravissimum infligunt vulnus disciplinae, quam corruptis adeo
Christianorum moribus ad veterem severitatem reduci maximum sit operae pretium,
p. 680.
tantum abest, ut ulla ejus pars reliqua laxari debeat, etc. Which custom they
which would remove out of the church, inflict a most grievous wound on
discipline, which (now in this notable corruption of the manners of Christians)
it were most excellently worth any man's pains to have reduced to its ancient
severity, so far is it from being fit, that any remaining member or part of it
should be loosed, or put out of joint; and in another place, Disciplinam morum
ego non refugio, ut modo pax coeat, nulla futura sit tam severa, cui non
libenter me meosque sim subjecturus. For the discipline in order to manners, I
would willingly subject my self, and all that belong to me, to the severest
that could be brought into the Church. But this by the way.

For the perfecting of this answer, and satisfying all the contrary Talmud are
utterly invalid and unconcluding, and that one thing not at all to be granted
by us, being indeed, as I conceive, very far from truth. It is this; that by
the particle (...) and (...) [ whatsoever ye shall bind, etc.] is noted the
thing, and not the person, for so that interpretation requires [ what thing
soever ye shall declare to be unlawful, etc.] whereas it is no new thing in all
languages and dialects to put the neuter for the masculine gender, things for
persons, and that in the New Testament, is not without example; as Joh. 17.7.
it is our Saviors dialect (and it is the very word (...), which we have now in
hand) (...)* etc. whatsoever, i. e. all those men, v. 6. and so 1 John 5.4.
(...) expounded by (...), etc. v. 18. every thing, i. e. every one, that is
born of God. Thus when S. John, Apoc. 21.27. speaks of man, and other the
like inhabitants of the new Jerusalem, he says, there shall not enter in there
any thing that defiles, or that works abomination, or a lie; (...) in the
neuter, which is, no doubt, no unclean abominable person, etc. So 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
the Apostle speaking of Antichrist, says, that he exalts himself above all
that is called God; where the [(...) all] in the neuter, sure signifies in the
masc^line, every person that partakes of that name, the King and Potentates of
the Earth; so Heb. 7.7. (...) in the neuter, for the lesser or inferior person,
v. 19. (...) for no man; and Chapter 12, 13. (...) for him that is lame: With which
Examples the phrase in this text bea^^s such proportion, that it cannot be
unjust to resolve, that it is at least possible, that the neuters here may in
sense be masculine also; which very possibility were enough to evacuate the
Talmudical observation, the accommodation of which to this place supposes the
neutral sense of the (...) and (...) to be certainly there meant, and is not
reconcilable with the Masculine. For to say [Whomsoever you shall declare to be
unlawful or prohibited, etc were not sense; whereas on the other side, the
granting the neutral sense, would not so necessarily destroy our pretensions,
this rendering of the words being proper enough, and home to our turn, [
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, i. e. whatever sins of any trespasser ye
shall conclude under the Censures] or again, whatsoever punishment you shall
bind on men's shoulders (the speech being still limited to this one sort of
punishments) it shall be bound or ratified in heaven: though the truth is, the
personal notion of the (...), being so agreeable to other phrases of the
Scripture, I have no temptation to doubt but that it is the importance of the
place [ whatsoever, i. e. whomsoever you shall bind on earth, by the power of
the Keys, shut out of this lower kingdom of heaven, conclude under the
Ecclesiastical bands, or censures, etc. shall be bound in heaven, etc.] i. e.
by God ratified there, (supposing that what they do, they do according to the
rule,) this is most commodious and agreeable to the mention of the Keys (to
which it is annexed, Matt. 16.) which certainly denote power of receiving, or
excluding not some thing, but some person, and to the trespassing brother
supposed to become refractary (to which it is annexed, Matthew. 18.) who is still a
person also; to which I will only add that in the beginning of that discourse,
Matthew. 18.11. there is another manifest example of a neuter word in a masculine
sense, The Son of man came to save, (...), that which was lost, i. e. those
little ones, v. 10. of whom God would not that one should perish, v. 14.

Talmudical use of the word, is not in the rendering this text of the New
Testament, necessary to be received) I shall yet farther add these two
observations more, 1. That the Talmudical sense cannot have place in the latter
part of Christ's speech [(...) shall be bound in heaven] and therefore will be
improbable in the former. For sure the binding in heaven] is somewhat more then
Gods interpretation or declaration of the lawfulness of any thing; and if the
Church should be thought unfit to have any kind of power, yet heaven is
acknowledged capable of it; besides, the form and composure of the words will
enforce, that if that pretended Talmudical sense were admitted in both places,
Gods declaring any thing to be lawful, or unlawful, must be consequent to the
Ministers declaration here, which will be very unreasonable; for though Gods
Censures may by virtue of his promise follow the Censures of the Church, yet
Gods Laws (for such are his declarations of what is law) sure cannot, or if
they do, this will be a great assurance that there is some power in the Church,
when it is so backed by God.

A second argument to this purpose may be taken from the Analogy of Scripture,
or comparing the two places in Matthew. of binding and loosing, with that third
in John of remitting and retaining; which I conceive is proved to belong to the
same matter, whatsoever that should prove to be, but then will not be so
capable of the Talmudical interpretation, for sure that will not be so clear
from those writers also, that (...) to retain, has that sense among the
Talmudists, which was imposed upon (...), to bind, which for the present I
shall take for granted, till some proof be offered to the contrary, and in that
found the power of the Church, (supposing it were not deducible from S.
Matthew) and then by analogy of those places in S. Matthew, with this in S.
John, apply it to those places also.

Now for the second proof which is offered by the same hand Greek authors where
the word (...) or binding is vouched to signify forbidding only, though I
might justly say, that forbidding is much more then declaring, or interpreting
a thing to be forbidden, that an act of power, and not only of doctrine, of a
Magistrate, and not only of a Casuist; and secondly, that we are not wont to
require the dictions of the New Testament, which have so much of the Old
Testament Hebrew idiom in them, to be tried by Attical heathen Greek writers,
yet shall I not now need to refuse that trial which is here offered. Two only
places there are produced (or in the margent appointed to be consulted with) to
purpose, Eustathius and Didymus in Hom. II. (...), and Inscription. Isidis ap.
Diod. Sic. l. 1. These two places I have with all attention considered, and
shall truly report what I have found in them.

Eustathius brings several interpretations of these words in Hom. the first of
which is, that (...) may signify (...), i. e. (...); which that you may
understand, you must know the occasion of Homers speech, it was this; Patroclus
was slain, and Achilles knew not how to help him, or avenge his death, for
which he has very passionate sorrow, even to wish he were dead himself,
because he could not avenge that death of his, this he thus expresses in Homers
language: (...)
(...)
(...).
I would, or, O that I might presently dye, in that I was not able to avenge
the death of my Companion! He dyed far from his country, and Mars, or the Fate
of war has bound, or hindered, or restrained me from being avenger of his
blood: where it must be observed, that Mars did not give any precept or
interdict to Achilles not to avenge Patroclus, or declare that it was unlawful,
but only that the fate of the war had not so far favored him, as that he could
find any means to do it, which he calls binding or hindering him; and therefore
Didymus, to whom we are referred, renders it (...), hindered, and explains the
whole matter by this paraphrase: (...). The fight having deprived me of my
Arms, would not suffer me to go out and help Patroclus; and so it seems the
forbidding, by which they render (...), is only that of hindering or stopping
(which is a natural effect of the vulgar notion of the word, as it signifies
hinding, he that is bound being hindered or stopped from his course or action) not
of prohibiting or interdicting. But then moreover you must consider, that the
same Eustathius and Didymus observe in that last verse many different lections,
as for example, one especially, in stead of (...) Mars in the Nominative case,
(...) hurt, or mischief in the Genitive, which reading they reject not, but
accordingly explain the place, and render (...), damni averruncatorem* and
(...), Patroclus had need of me, to avert that mischief from him; and this,
says Eustathius, the ancients thus paraphrase (...), Mars wanted my action, or
the help which might have come by me; and Aristarchus somewhat to the same
purpose, (...), he wanted me to avert the danger of the war; and agreeably
Didymus, (...): which different lection thus explained by them, takes off all
color, or pretense of affirming that binding signifies prohibiting, or
interdicting in that place, but only standing in need of, which is another
sense of the word (...), and so still it is apparent, that (...) may signify
somewhat else in that place, and if it do signify binding, and that be
rendered (...) to forbid, that yet it must not be taken in that sense, that
forbidding signifies preceptive interdiction, especially not the bare
pronouncing a thing unlawful, (the sense which it is brought to prove, and
which alone is against our pretensions) but only forbidding, as when the matter
forbids, hindering, or restraining, or binding from a possibility of doing it,
and just so the Hebr. (...) by which Philip de Aquin. renders (...) binding,
ordinarily signifies to hinder.

As for the other place referred to, the Inscription of Isis, thus Diodorus
Siculus, l. 1. p. 16. of Stephanus's Edition. (...), I am Isis the Queen of the
whole Region, educated by, or under Mercury, and whatsoever I shall bind, no
body can loose. What advantage can be taken at these words thus lying (and not
restrained, by either antecedents, or consequents) toward the justifying or
approving of the forementioned interpretation, or acception of the phrase, for
declaring, or pronouncing of the unlawfulness of a thing, I do not fully
discern; for why may not the later words pass for an interpretation of the
former, and so the sense be, that she being Queen of the whole region had all
power in her hands, to do, or constitute (not only what laws, but) what
punishments she would, and then, that no body had power to undo whatsoever she
thus did, to rescind, or loose, or absolve what she so bound? In as wide a
sense as this, I could produce many places in Greek Authors, particularly a
passage of Proclus out of Plato in his sixth Discourse about the Eternity of
the world; where to prove the world cannot be dissolved by the Creator of it,
and yet by none but the Creator, he expresses it often in these two words,
(...) [(...)] meaning by binding, the composing the whole compages of the
world, and by loosing the destroying, or, as we say, the dissolution of it:
this, I confess, is nothing to our sense of the words, (and as little to that
other) and yet very near as much as the place now cited. Being left to guess
what was the occasion of producing this place to that other purpose, I shall
think it possible that it was occasioned by this, that in the margent Stephanus
has set (...), in stead of (...), which if it were conceived to be a Scholion,
might be taken to be a testimony, that binding signifies making of laws, as
far as that Scholiasts authority would reach. For the present, I shall suppose
that this is it, because I cannot think of any other way to help this medium to
infer the desired conclusion in any degree, and yet make no question but
there was some: But then, if that be it, I must interpose, 1. That that in the
margent is not a Scholion, but an emendation, or various lection, as the mark
prefixed signifies; and then seeing it is assured, that Diod. Sic. or the
inscription it self which he sets down, had not both these readings, it will
thence follow, that either it was truly (...), (and then there is no authority
from thence for any signification of (...)) or else that it was (...), and then
there is no appearance of proof, that (...) signifies there (...); and this is
sufficient to the matter in hand, which part soever of the dilemma be accepted.

ex abundanti my opinion of the importance of that inscription, viz. that Isis
the Queen of that region, was taught or instructed by Mercury in the (...),
hidden philosophy* (...), dark representations of truth, (...), the enigmatical
wisdom which their theology was full of, mentioned by Edit. Paris. p. 354. B.
Plut. de Is. and Osir. and that no body was able to reveal, or expound her
riddles or mysteries. The ground of this my interpretation is, an inscription
of Isis's temple mentioned by Plutarch, immediately upon his discourse of that
enigmaticall theology in the place forementioned. (...). The temple of Minerva
(which they take for Isis) in Saos had such an inscription (not literally this,
but such an one, or to this purpose) I am every thing that has been, and that
is, and that shall be, and my veil (or what I shall think fit to conceal) no
mortal has ever been able to discover. This seems to be a paraphrase of that
other inscription in Diodorus, and then though the words differ (which the
(...) [not the very same, but such an one] intimates) yet the sense of the one
seems to be fully expressed by the other, and then the conclusion will be this,
that as (...) in Diodorus, signifying no more then (...) to reveal in Plutarch
(as to loose a riddle, a secret, is to reveal it, to which the Key of Knowledge
in the Scripture may also refer,) belongs not at all to the matter in hand,
or declaring a thing to be lawful, so the contrary (...) is not applyable to
that purpose of forbidding, or declaring a thing to be forbidden* and so much
for that testimony also.

To all this which has been said the Reader may farther add, Suidas,
Hesychius, and Phavorinus have no other notion of (...)* then that of binding
in bands, and therefore render it by (...), and (...) Only in Hesychius in one
place I find these words, (...): which words stand in need of some emendation
(as a very great part of that book does) and may be thus set right, (...), A
man bound by law, i. e. a prisoner; or (...), bound, i. e. a prisoner of the
law; or else this seems to be the design of them, that the word (...) is used
in a sense proportionable to that wherein (...) law, is (...) a band, as indeed
every law is a band to all those that are under it: but then you may observe,
that this is a very distant sense of the word from that which was cited from
the Talmudists, (where the thing bound is said to be forbidden,) for here (...)
signifies bound, or commanded, and so this (beside that it gives the Church a
power from Christ, of commanding and making laws, to which in any probability
the power of punishing would be consequent) is little to our present
disquisition.

position sufficiently, unless unto the consideration of the former
objections, I add also some few words in taking notice of what the Socinians
have resolved to this matter; which I shall transcribe out of Volkelius, de
ver. cel. l. 6. c. 4. Where having expressed the power of binding and loosing, to
be the power, Alios quidem reatu peccatorum quodammodo constringendi, alios
vero ab illo absolvendi; of binding some in some manner under the guilt of
sins, but of absolving others, he resolves this to consist in this only, ut
pro authoritate muneris, quod tanquam Christi ligatus sustinebat, aliis quidem
nempe omnibus in Christum credentibus, atque ex animo ei obtemperantibus,
remissionem peccatorum, ipsius nomine offerret, aliis vero poenas sempiternas
denunciaret. That by authority of that office which he sustains as an
Ambassador of Christ, he should offer in his Name remission of sins to some, to
wit, to all that believe in Christ, and cordially obey him, but denounce unto
others eternal punishments. So that in effect the power of binding and loosing
should be only the power of offering remission of sins to penitents, that is,
preaching the Gospel, and no more.

poison, or danger, will easily be dispelled by an antidote, which the very
same shop in another box will yield us, and that is another very distant
interpretation of that power of binding and loosing, c. 15. of that book (how
fallen from the same pen of him that had before said in eo tantum fuisse
constitutam, ut remissionem offerret, etc. that it consisted only in the
offering of remission, etc. or, by what means reconcilable with that sense, I
will not go about to conjecture) where affirming the power of exterminating
impious Christians, to be entrusted to the Church, he proves it, 1. from the
words of St. Paul about the excommunicating the incestuous Corinthian; then
from this, that Christ speaking of the contumacious trespasser refusing to obey
the Church, and thereupon commanding him to be accounted as a heathen, and a
publican, in coelo ratum esse dicit, quicquid Ecclesia in terris ligat, aut
solvit, affirms that to be ratified in heaven, whatsoever it is the Church on
earth binds or looses, i. e. quoscunque vel a fidelium commercio segregat, vel
in eorum numerum reponit, whomsever the Church separates from the commerce of
the faithful, or restores to the number of them: where I conceive it apparent,
(unless some very close sophisme lie hid under plain words) that binding
signifies disterminating, excommunicating, segregating from the commerce of the
faithful, which I willingly embrace, as the concession of that man, and the
sense of his fellows, very fit to be confronted to his former negation,
especially being backed, as it is, with a conjecture of his (which I have long
thought to be most probable) that St. Paul forbidding Timothy, to lay hands
suddenly on any man, 1 Timothy 5.22. lest he partake of other men's sins, refers to
the reception of penitents that had been formerly excommunicate. For such, he
truly says, were wont to be received into the Church again by imposition of
hands.

Evidences of that custom he brings from the narrations of Victor, about the
Vandalick persecution, l. 2. Qui nobis poenitentiae manus collaturi sunt, and
reconciliationis indulgentiam, obstrictos peccato peccatorum vinculis soluturi:
Who confer on us the hands of penitence, and favor of reconciliation, loosing
from the bands of sins, those which are bound by sin. Where the poenitentiae
manus, the hands of penitence, and loosing from bands of sin, belong to those
which were bound, but now are reconciled: and the like from the 5th Canon of
the Council of Carthage, did. 50. Presbyteris ac Diaconis, si quando de gravi
aliqua culpa convicti a ministerio remoti fuissent manus non imponerentur, ut
poenitentibus, vel aliis ex fidelium laicis. That Presbyters and Deacons, when
upon conviction of any grievous fault they are removed from the Ministry,
should not have imposition of hands, as penitents, etc. and out of Fulgentius,
Ep. 1. de conjug. Illa aegrota accepta manus impositione poenitentiam secundum
morem, quem habet Christiana religio, peregit; she performed her penance by
receiving imposition of hands according to the manner observed in the Christian
Religion. To these you may add that of Alcimus Ep. 24. Manus impositionem
adhibete converso ab haeresi; They that were recovered from heresy, were to
have imposition of hands, a sign of absolution. Interdicta nominis ejus in
posterum, si ex cord convertitur, mentione; and his name no longer to be
mentioned in the bedrole of the heretics. p. 148.
And the Author contra Praedestin. l. 3. Non ausi sunt Ecclesiarum Pontifices
manum imponere poenitenti, nisi confessionem voluntariam ostendenti. The
Bishops durst not impose hands on the penitent, unless he expressed a voluntary
confession; and many the like. And in the Chron. of Jo. Gerundens. speaking of
the Arrians Synod of Toledo, congregated by Leovigildus, one of the Canons is,
De Romana religione ad nostram Catholicam fidem venientes non debere baptizari,
sed tantummodo per manus impositionem and communionis perceptionem ablui. They
which came over to them from that which they counted heresy, should only have
imposition of hands, etc. and not baptism anew, and many other passages there
are of that kind. This is a very probable interpretation, as ancient as S.
Cyprian, and may, by the way, farther be attested not only by the analogy
between absolution, and healing diseases, of which Imposition was the ceremony,
but also by the context it self, where v. 19. is set down the proceeding, by
way of Censure, against a Presbyter, and the public checking of sinners, v.
20. a charge to do all (...), v. 21. without prejudging, and (...), nothing by
favor or inclination; and then immediately follows, lay hands on no man
suddenly; Absolution very properly annexed to Censures, (and I conceive a
caution, that by knowing men's sins, he be not brought to partake with them,
but that he keep himself unpolluted, in the remainder of that verse, upon which
the 23. verse may follow pertinently, though as in a parenthesis, that Timothy
may drink a little wine for his health, and not incur that danger of
partaking of other men's sins) and then v. 24. a rule of direction for that
whole matter, that as some men's sins are conspicuous beforehand, and so bring
them per modum meriti praecedentis, by way of precedent merit, to censure; and
in some other men the sins follow after censure also, as when there is no
reformation upon censures, (in which case there must be no absolution) so in
like manner also men's good works (in case they do reform upon censure) are, or
must be manifest before absolution, (and therefore the ancient Canons require
the (...) good works or almsdeeds in the penitent to prepare for absolution)
and those that are not so, ( i. e. their not bringing forth such worthy fruits
of repentance) cannot be concealed, and so by that means Timothy may discern
who are fit to be absolved, who not, and so all the context clearly belongs to
this matter. But this by the way.

Only having so pregnant an opportunity, I shall add what imposition of hands,
Heb. 6.2. joined there with the doctrine of Baptismes. The Apostle there had
mentioned (...), the discourse of the beginning of Christ, i. e. the first
things that we read of in the Gospel; and he refers them, as I conceive, to
four heads, 1. Repentance, or change from dead works; 2. Faith on God: These
two he calls the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of the Imposition of hands, either
by way of (...) (of which I gave you Cap. 1. sec. 10.
examples in the sacred style) and then the Doctrine of Baptismes will be
appropriated to Faith on God, unto which men are baptized, and the doctrine of
Imposition of hands to repentance, which is the preparatory to absolution; or
else both of these together, Faith and Repentance, must be affirmed to be the
doctrine both of Baptismes in the plural, and of Imposition of hands too, and
that both as it denotes confirmation, Act. 15.41. parallel to Christ's blessing
(of those which had been baptized before) with laying his hands on them, and
absolution too, parallel to his laying hands on the sick, Luke 4. when he
healed them, which is called loosing (...) from a band, Luke 13.16. and all
this will be proper: for both the Baptism of John, and of Christ, required of
them that came to it, Repentance and Faith; and Confirmation being but a kind
of sealing, and repetition of the Covenant, and the promises made in baptism,
(without water, only by laying on of hands) was so too; and Absolution, though
it peculiarly required Repentance, yet it included also Faith on God, and
peculiarly that branch of it, the believing remission of sins upon repentance.
Besides these, there follow two doctrines more, the Resurrection, and Eternal
judgment, which may be also reduced to these two heads, The Resurrection to
that of Faith in Baptism, of which it was a peculiar part, (the trina
immersio, the three dippings, so ancient in the Church, referring distinctly to
his rising the third day, and so perhaps the (...), 1 Cor. 15. i. e. in S.
Chrysostomes opinion, being baptized into the Faith, or belief of that Article,
intimated, or briefly expressed by (...) the Dead) and Everlasting judgment to
that of Repentance from dead works, which if not repented from, i. e. forsaken,
would bring that judgment upon men. But this by the way, and a^ a conjecture
incident, and agreeable to the former.

viz. of Erastus's structure, and all that he has said of this matter; but
this would require so intolerable a length, that if I should apply my self to
it, I should both tire the most patient Reader, and leave the rest which I have
to say on the other points at first proposed, to be overwhelmed or lost under
the shade of so vast a (...). Some prudence therefore there will be need of for
the compounding of this business, that I may neither too much despise, nor too
largely prosecute this objecter: And the most convenient middle betwixt these
two extremities, I suppose, will be, 1. To bring you acquainted with the
Person, 2. To give you an account how he fell out, or on what occasion his
quarrel to Excommunication began. 3. To view the place, and the weapons, at
which we are likely to meet, i. e. to follow him (...)^ so far, till we see
directly what the state of the question is, wherein the point of the difference
between us consists; and then to put off the combat, till the spectators are
ready to call for it, and shall profess themselves armed with patience to fit
it out.

Physic in Geneva, who having fallen on an age when novelties were in fashion,
(the Bishop turned out, and a Government brought in, which within few years
before was acknowledged so new, that Calvin was fain to write to the
Protestants in Helvetia, that they would but signify their approbation of it,
and could not obtain that neither, though soon after, it undertook to be the
only divine Model in the world since Christ's time) thought it not unreasonable
to step out of his profession, and offer to the world his novelty too; and
having in his own profession expressed in some particulars, a zeal, which others
of his faculty will affirm to have been without knowledge, (as when he speaks
of the preparation of Stibium, or crocus metallorum, and the Antinomian
receipts, he resolves that no man can salva conscientia, with a safe Conscience
administer them, which yet every Physician knows now by daily experience to be
very useful and safe) it will not be matter of wonder, if he committed the like
mistake in the business of Excommunication (a medicine more out of the proper
rode of his studies) and conceived that poisonous noxious recipe in the Church,
(judging, it seems, at a first view, that they which were most wicked needed
rather to be invited to the Church, then driven from it) which the experience
of all Christian Churches, and the advice of Christ himself, as a Physician of
Souls, have concluded to be very harmless and medicinal. I shall say no more
of his person, but that he does not seem by his book to have considered much of
Divinity, save only of this one head, and in order to that present
controversy. And then though I should not make an objection against an Author,
that his book and he were of diverse Professions, and faculties, because he that
is not a Divine by profession, may yet, if he have no calling, have spent his
whole time on Divinity, and if he have undertaken another profession, may yet
neglect that, that he may spend his time in this nobler faculty, or may have
those excellent abilities, that he may attain to as great an height in two
faculties, as others of meaner parts may do in one, yet, if it appear by any
sure (...) that that Physician which writes in Divinity, has studied little
more Divinity then at that time a few months could help him to, and thinks
this provision sufficient to furnish him, to write contrary to the whole
judgment of the Church before him, I may as safely commend a Divine, that when
he is sick first of a disease, then, through impatience of his Physician, shall
by looking over some Physick-hooks take confidence to control his Physician,
and that he may do so the more authoritatively, cast off all the ancient
Masters of that faculty before him, or affirm that in them he finds nothing
contrary to his opinion, when they that have read them all, know there is
nothing more contrary. This I have said, because this Doctor makes his
complaint of the opposition, and contempt, I^ Praef.
and affronts put upon him by those friends, to whom before the setting out he
had communicated his book, objecting, says he, nothing against him, but that
he was besides his calling, which therefore with him, I confess, to be an
unsufficient argument against his book, if it have no other to join with it;
and I rather conceive, that it was a civility in his friends which used it,
then an entire and sole objection, designed by them as a means to take him off
from a confidence that he had done well (by telling him, he was no competent
judge whether he had or no, and advising him, that being a stanger in that
faculty, he should not depend too much upon his own judgment) rather then an
acknowledgement, that they had nothing else to object to him. And if civilities
be apt to be thus mistaken, the truth is, a little plain dealing were a more
friendly office. I shall therefore have no necessity of replying to his answers
to those friends: That [ Scrutamini Scripturas] and [ Probate spiritualia]
[Search the Scriptures] and [ Try the things that are spiritual] were a
sufficient comminssion to him for that attempt, especially if 'twere true which
he adds, Si stipendio conductus theologica docerem, nihil sec. ipsos ab
officio, and muncre in hac part alieni facerem. P^aes.
that if he had had a stipend to read Divinity, this fact of his would then
have nothing in it, in their opinion aliene from his office or duty. Where yet,
I suppose, the office might be distinguished from the stipend; and though the
money be not apt to inspire, as a (...) or grace, yet sure the mun^s, or
calling to the office may go for a (...), to which we may hope for the annexion
of Gods blessing, more then to the (...), (the meddling in faculties, or
studies that belong not to us,) we have any promise to authorize us to expect.

occasion of his quarrel against Excommunication, I shall give you no other
account, then what from himself I have received (who, I suppose, was able to
speak the bottom of the truth, and nothing else) and while I do so, shall
desire the Reader to observe, how certain it is, that the fabric of the Church
of England, I mean the ancient structure, as it stands by Law, and the
doctrines thereof, would never have provoked him to this enmity, if he had
lived here under the best, or perhaps worst days of our Episcopacy; and then
as his Hippocrates in his excellent tract (...), will tell us of a mighty
influence, that the place, the air, or some such accidental circumstance may
have upon the bodies first, and through them, the minds of men, so will the
Read^r find, that his having changed the air, had been excellent effectual
Physic for him, and in all probability, might have made a shift to have
changed his opions also.

The first thing, which, says he, cast him on those considerations
Excommunication, was the unseasonablenesse of the time for the administering of
such purging Physic. There was then says he, a great paucity of Protestant
Professors, and the number of Papists extremely overtopt them in those parts;
and of the Protestants scarce the thirtieth part understood, and approved the
doctrine; and therefore it must be, in his opinion, a strange improper season
for the setting up this course of severe ruggid discipline, which would exclude
from the Sacrament so many of the few Protestants, that it would both unpeople
their assemblies, and necessarily cause a dangerous scissure in the multitude.

The second thing was his having observed the unfitness of the (their
Ministers and Lay Elders) fit, says he, neither for age, nor experience, nor
wit, nor judgment, nor manners, nor authority, to be esteemed able to sustain
so great an office with dignity.

The third thing (and that which advanced him in his conceit state of the
Commonwealth and Church among the Jews, God having said, Deuteronomy. 4. that that
people had Laws and Statutes so just and wise, that the institutions of no
Nations, the sanctions of no Commonwealth, no Ordinances, though never so
wisely thought on, could compare with them, and therefore that that Church must
needs be best, and most wisely disposed, which came nearest to the Jewish form.
A consideration indeed, that it seems, was of great weight with him, not
observing that that comparison in Deuteronomy. was made only betwixt the Jewish, and
other heathen nations of the world at that time, and only in relation to their
present state, and not to the prejudice of Christ's institutions after, when
that nation and religion was destroyed; and that if that argument were of
weight, (besides that he must be bound to prove his Model out of the Mosaicall
Law) he must be obliged also to bring back all the Sacrifices, Passover,
Circumcision, Ceremonies of the Jews into the Christian Church, and turn both
the Lords Day, the Sacraments, and the very Religion of Christ the (...), the
Law of Faith, out of it.

The fourth thing, says he, and that which set him on writing was, an accident
that he then observed, An English man which at that time had quitted this
Kingdom on the dislike of Ceremonies, and came to Geneva, and proposed his
Thesis there de adiaphoris and vestibus, of things indifferent, and of
vestments; particularly, the Surplice, etc. he was, says he, not permitted to
maintain them publicly, ne Anglos offenderent, that they might not offend the
English; This man therefore changing his purpose, chose a new Thesis, In quavis
recte instituta Ecclesia hanc servari procurationem, in qua ministri c^m suo
delecto ad eam rem Presbyterio jus teneant quosvis peccantes etiam Principes
excommunicandi: That in every well o der'd Church this government was to be
observed, in which the Ministers with their Elderships chosen to that purpose
should have power of Excommunicating all offenders, even Princes themselves:
and this Thesis, says he, he was permitted to maintain. I hope, he did not
believe, that the English would be better pleased, or less offended with it,
then with that other about Surplices, but only that 'twat a doctrine, wherein
that Commonwealth of Geneva was more concerned, and so did not so much
consider how the English might take it from them, as in the other, where they
were less interessed, they had leisure to do. That the doctrine of the
Anglican Church, and constant practice of it, is utterly abhorrent from this
dangerous sacrilegious excess, I shall not be so wary or humble, as to think
it necessary to demonstrate, but confess that he which saw that doctrine so
confidently, and so early avowed by the Disciplinarians, had a great temptation
to write against their Excommunication, though no ground of assurance, that all
which he should say against that subject, would therefore prove true, because
that one doctrine of those which asserted it was so far from being such. Mr
Hooker has given a very good judgment of his enterprise; that Beza and he
divided the truth betwixt them, neither of them saying all truth, nor all
falsehood, each of them (...), disguising, and allaying, and drowning a little
of wholesome doctrine, with a great deal of the contrary. And let me say, to
conclude this point, that both in the taking up his opinion, and in maintaining
it, Erastus has more to impute to Beza's and the Genevan's errors, and
innovations, and excesses and extravagances (which upon inquiry into the
ancient Church records, he truly says, he could not find avowed, or
authorized) then to his own grounds, or arguments against Excommunication.

The last motive, which, he confesses, perfected the work, and i. e. in effect,
the opinions and good advises of all men that saw his Theses, and could by no
means like them: but this has been occasionally mentioned already, and only
gives the Reader occasion to admire, and bewail the infelicity of passionate
men, who cannot receive any benefit by their friends, are in the unluckiest
condition of all men living, (beyond which no enemy can wish them a greater
curse) sure to be the worse for that, which God meant us for the most
inestimable blessing, I mean the (...), their telling us truth, and (out of
desire of doing us good) admonishing us of our miscarriages; which he that
cannot make any other use of, then to interpret those hugest obligations for
affronts, those friendships for rudenesses, and therefore resolves to publish
his conceits, because all his friends to whom he communicates them, advise him
by all means to suppress them, may well be allowed to write a volume against
all kind of Excommunication, being already, it appears, so far from being able
to bear such strong Physic, that the most private prudent, first, or second
admonition of single persons, or (...), the joint act of a College of friends
and Physicians do but make him more incurable.

I come now to my third undertaking, i. e. to view his Theses and follow him
step by step, till we have sprang the point of the difficulty between us; and,
I think, that part of the progress will sufficiently discover the weakness of
his fabric; at least how little appearance of advantage he has against us,
that are not for the Geneva-Presbytery, how well soever ad homines he may be
thought to have disputed.

His Th. 1. Excommunicationis nomen videtur ex 1 Cor. 10. desumptum esse, atque
amotionem significare a communione illa, quae ibidem corpus Christi nominatur.
first Thesis lays the ground of his discourse, and of his Excommunication] he
will have taken from 1 Cor. 10. which is false, and not endeavored to be
proved, and upon the back of that error, another falsity, viz. that Communion
is there called Corpus Christi, The body of Christ; all that is there said
toward that matter, is, that the wine is (...), The Communication (not
Communion) of the blood of Christ, the bestowing his blood upon us, a means or
a pledge of making us partakers of that rich mercy, that blood that was shed
for us. That that is the right rendering of (...), is undertaken in another
discourse upon the Sacrament, and needs no further to be repeated here, the
notion of the word Excommunication being most clear and uncontroverted, that it
is the sequestring of an offender from the Sane nunc excommunicatio ab omnibus
definitur exclusione e societate and communione fidelium. Ib.
Communion, i. e. the visible Society of Christians, without ever thinking to
cut him off, but on the contrary desiring to engraffe him the more firmly into
the invisible, and then also again into the Church, the visible (but mystical)
body of Christ. And therefore,

Communion in the Th. 2. Est autem duplex fidelium Societas, interna, sc. ^c
spiritualis, externa seu visibilis ac politica.
second Thesis, into internal and external, visible and invisible, we say
that one only member of the distinction belongs to the point in hand according
to our stating of it. (And if the adversary of Geneva did press the other, we
do not defend him in it) viz. the external and visible Society of Believers or
Christian Professors, from which only we affirm any man to be cut off by the
act of Excommunication; and if he that is so cut off from that, be also finally
cut off from the other, this is but accidental, and very extrinsecall to that
act, and distant from the design and end of it, being the effect only of his
sin, which, before he was excommunicated for it, is supposed to have concluded
him under the wrath of God and of his Contumacy, which will not permit this
most fatherly punishment of the Church to work any good upon him; to which
though it be consequent indeed, that this censure obtaining not the desired
effect, shall tend to his greater condemnation, yet will this consequent no
more be chargeable on that censure, then on any other the methods of mercy or
chastisement, by God used on purpose for his Reformation.

In Th. 3. Tantum vero inter utramque discrimen est, ut qui in alterutra
continetur, non etiam comprehendatur in altera necessario. Nam ut membrum
Christi esse potest qui injuste ex visibili aliqua Ecclesia ejectus est, aut
inter infideles latere habitar^ve cogitur, ita qui in visibili c^tu num^rantur
non omnes etiam membra viva sunt Christi, ex quo sequitur discrepare res illas
posse, quae uni nos conjungunt non alteri, and ab una nos abjungunt and non ab
altera.
the third Thesis it is by us acknowledged true, that internal go not always
together; and the consequents which Erastus builds on that, are true, and
acknowledged in an unjust Excommunication, but these belong nothing at all to a
just, nor consequently infer any thing against the institution, which giving
rules that it may, and commands that it should be always exercised justly, may
be permitted to suppose it is so; or if by error or miscarriage it be not, it
does not exclude him from that inward Communion, that was not before excluded,
(supposing that he behave himself meekly and Christianly under that unjust
censure) and if there be (as indeed there is) great difficulty to judge,
whether the person thus to be excommunicated, be first excluded from the inward
communion or no, yet will not this conclude the censures unlawful, because if
he be not quite out before, this puts him not out (nor is occasion of doing so,
any more then chastisement from God, which may possibly work impatience and
blasphemy in the person, but is not of necessity, or in any propriety of
causation to do so) but rather is a means of keeping him in, of setting him
upon his guard, of awaking or rescuing him from the danger of falling out of
it, (and then abundans cautela non nocet, he that is awake already will be
never the worse for calling) and withal of exercising some Christian virtues
in him, which might possibly lie useless by him, if they were not thus
employed, and called out to practice.

To the Th. 4. Membra quidem Christi efficimu^, i. e. internae spiritual^que
Christi societati conjungimu* per solam fidem, quae per charitatem est efficax,
and ^adem hac per solam infidelitatem excidimus, pro^nde non potest nos huic
insercre, aut cadem excludere, nisi qui fidem donare, eandemque nobis iterum
au^erre potest.
fourth Thesis we say, that No man thinks, or according internal Communion of
Christ and the faithful, i. e. beget faith in any (nor consequently cut off any
from it) unless ministerially, as (...) and (...), workers under, and with
Christ, and so only by power d^rived from him, we pretend to do what in the
censures is done toward it.

Th. 5. Externae vero visibilisque Ecclesiae conso^tes reddimur ejusdem fidei
professione ejusdemque doctrinae approbatione, denique corundam sacramento^um
usurpatione; in quo tria haec insunt, in tantisper dum ei insunt, inter membra
externi fidelium coelus computatur, etiamsi ad eternam spiritus and mentis
communionem non pertingat.
the fifth Thesis, we answer that there is a mistake, for we are made consortes
externae and visibilis Ecclesiae, Partakers of the external and visible Church,
not only by those three as they are the acts of the man who is so partaker,
but to those three must be added a second notion of the third of these, which
seems not here to be taken notice of, (though also the words are so set, that
it is not excluded) and that is the act of the Church, first according to
Christ's commission to the Apostles, in receiving them into the Church by
Baptism, and when for lapses and returns into sin they are excommunicate,
restoring them by absolution, and at all fit times allowing them the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, in charity supposing them (as long as they are in the
Church) such members as ought not to be denied that privilege, and if they be
not unworthy, effectually sealing to them the benefits of Christianity. From
whence it is clear that such the usurpatio Sacramentorum may be, ( viz. if he
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper that is Though Sacramentorum
usurpatio, in proper speaking, suppose Baptism, which is one of those
Sacraments; yet Sacramentorum participatio, These. 6. signifying only receiving
the Lords Supper, I have reason to suppose it may do so here too, and therefore
I put in this.
not baptized, or that is justly excommunicate) that 'twill be perfectly an
usurpation, and not sufficient to give him right to be reckoned inter membra
externi fidelium coetus, among the members of a visible Church.

Th. 6. Th. 6. Ergo qui ex Ecclesiae communione extern^ ejicitur ( i. e. qui
excommunicatur) vel ab omnibus his^e tribus, vel a duobus, vel ab uno tantum
removetur, sed a duobus primis, nempe a confessione fidei, and a Christianae
doctrinae app^obatione (sub qua volo verbi and doctrinae auditionem
comprehendi) repelli nullus debet, quin potius huc invitandi and quavis ratione
adducendi sunt omnes. Quocirca relinquitur, ut qui excommunicatur, a sola (ex
tribus commemoratis) sacramento^um participatione prohibeatur. Huic, utrum
inseparab^l^ter cohaereat privati commercii negatio, an separari possit, postea
considerabitur. Alias poenas non pertinere ad substantiam excommunicationis
hujus certum est* Etenim possit eadem etiam non excommunicat^^ infligi, and
excommunicatis non infligi.
In the first part there is need of a distinction: for the Confession of Faith,
and approbation of Christian Doctrine may be 1. Either Cordial, or
Hypocritical. 2. Either Private or Public. If it be Cordial, then 1. it makes
me partaker of the inward Communion with Christ and his members, and supposes a
man to be in that state, in which he that is, ought not to be Excommunicate,
and so it is not (...) it belongs not to this matter. If it be Hypocritical (as
it will appear, if he that acknowledges Christ, and approves his doctrine with
his mouth, denies it with his actions) then is it fit to bring the censure upon
him, which he most hates and fears, to cast him out of the Church, which is
only his disguise and vizard, or turn him out of that hypocritical confession
of Christ, to display and lay open his hypocrisy, that he may be ashamed, and
think good to reform, and to that end, to deny him the public hearing of the
Word, which it seems has wrought so little good upon him, and to assure him
that he shall not be accounted a Christian, unless his actions accord with his
profession; All which you may mark is so far from deterring him from the
cordial Profession, that it is the most probable means to invite him to it. So
again for private confession and approbation, (which belongs more to the
internal communion again, then to the external) we drive no man from that by
Excommunication* but only from public performance of it in the Congregation
(under which, and which only, the public hearing of the Word read or preached
is contained.) And by so doing we separate him from that visible Church on that
charitable one purpose, that he may see how he has abused that benefit, and
timely learn to make better use of it, though again we do not invite him to
that bare empty oral public or private confession, or that oral approbation,
which his hands, i. e. his actions confute, or that unprofitable hearing, which
will only heap judgment on him; yet on the other side are f^r from deterring
him from the real public confession, etc. but by thus dealing with him we show
him the necessity of it, and so by beating him out of his false holds, which
will do him no good, drive (which is more then inviting) him to the true refuge
or Sanctuary, the real confession, the effectual approbation, and profitable
hearing. To which head I must add, that I much wonder why all this while in the
number of the constitutives of external communion, public prayer is not
mentioned (not so much as reductively, as here hearing of the Word is:) This
ought to have been added, and then I shall add of it, that though that be a
duty that men would be invited to, as vehemently as to any, yet it is lawful to
exclude any from this benefit in public, when that exclusion may be a means
most probable to awake a lethargick sinner.

By this it appears how groundless the last part of the sixth Th. is, That
excommunication is only excluding from the Sacrament; for it is also from
prayer, and hearing, (viz. in public) as well as from the Sacrament: when that
is thought expedient to reform any. Thus Tertul. mentions exclusion a
communicatione orationis, and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii, Apol. c.
39. from partaking of Prayer and all sacred commerce: and generally the (...)
anciently was from all: (though the manner of receiving in penitents being
first by admitting them to hearing, and then to partaking in the prayers, which
were before those that are joined with the communion; and after, to those
prayers also, and in time to the Communion it self) it was after thought fit
that some of the censures should not be total to the excluding from all, but
only setting them inter audientes, or Catechumenos, which were not yet admitted
to the Sacrament, of which only the practice which he sets himself against
seems to be an imitation. What follows therefore in the conclusion of that
Thesis, that, [ quod aliae poenae non pertinent ad substantiam
excommunicationis certum est. It Is certain that other penalties belong not to
the substance of excommunication] is very false, and proceeds from an
ignorance, or willingness to deceive, as if the word Excommunication denoted
only the keeping from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (to which end, it now
seems, it was, that the first Thesis was designed, and against whatsoever it is
argumentative 'twill not be against us) whereas it denotes the excision from
all, or any degree of Communion in sacris, and is a generical word, of which
there be different species according to the several kinds of holy things (the
Word, the Prayers, the Sacraments) from which one may be excommunicate; And
that of exclusion from the Sacrament is one degree of exclusion, and the
exclusion from either or both of the other also is an addition to that, never
inflicted upon any but those to whom the Sacrament was denied. So far from
truth is that which is added, that those other punishments possunt non
excommunicatis infligi, may be inflicted upon those that are not excommunicate
in his sense of excommunicatus, for one excluded from the Sacrament: for no man
was denied prayers and hearing, that was admitted to the Sacrament, (nor is it
rational that one should, for sure he that is thought worthy of the highest
dignity and benefit in a Church, must be wronged i^ he be denied and thought
incapable of the lowest) though the other part upon this reason be confessed to
be true, that these punishments of exclusion from prayers and hearing, may
sometimes excommunicatis non infligi, be not inflicted upon them that are
excommunicate; as he that is thought unworthy the Priests office, may yet be
allowed to be one of the Nethinim or door-keepers, as in the ancient Church, he
that was suspended from the sacerdotal function was yet suffered to
communicate, ut Laicus, as a Laick.

By which the answer is clear to the Th. 7. Male Pontificii propter hanc
excommunicationem (quam ipsi minore appellarunt, ac sola sacramentorum
negatione recte definierunt) aliam insuper addiderunt, quam majorem and
anathema vocarunt: atque contra apertam Scripturam interdictione templorum,
privati, comercii, and actus cujusvis lici. i definierunt, quoniam Apostolus 1
Cor. 14. palam ostendit neque ethnicos, neque alios quoslibet, a divini verbi
auditione, lectione, gratiaru^ actionibus, ac precibus Christianoru^ prohibites
fuisse.
next Thesis as far as interdictio templorum, exclusion out of the Church (and
for the other two, that of the private commerce, and actus cujusvis liciti, of
doing any lawful act, we interpose not) i. e. from all the parts of the public
service, which that it was brought into the Church by the Pontificians, or that
it is contra apertam Scripturam, against manifest Scripture, is certainly so
very far from truth, that no man that has read any part of antiquity, can
doubt of this practice and usage, before the tyranny of Popery is affirmed by
any to have come into the world; and for the second, what that aperta Scriptura
is, I shall not divine, but resolve that if it be that which is named in the
end of the Thesis, 1 Cor. 14. there is nothing at all conc^uding from thence.
The verse that seems to be referred to (for we are left to divine) is v. 23. or
24. where the speaking in the Church, praying or prophesying, etc. in an
unknown tongue, is by St Paul proved to be improper, and not to tend to
edification, because prophesying, i. e. explaining of Scripture, praying,
singing of Psalms, etc. being designed for the use of the believers, and no
others, are in any reason to be in a known tongue, that they may understand.
and join in them, v. 16. the unknown tongues being designed, either only as a
sign, v. 22. i. e. a miracle to convert unbeleevers to the faith, when they s^e
illiterate men all Jews speak all kinds of languages, or as a means of
preaching to men of every country in their own language, from whence, says the
Apostle, it is consequent that if unknown tongues were used in a congregation of
believers, unlearned men that understand not those tongues, or unbelievers that
have no reverence to the Congregation, and do not at all discern any miracle in
their speaking with diverse tongues, but look only upon the ridiculousnesse of
the action, as of a gabbling of that which no man understands, will resolve that
this is a direct madness thus to do. Whereas on the other side that of
Prophesying, interpreting of the doctrine of Christ intelligibly, and the other
parts of the Church Service in a known language, will be apt to convince, or
instruct those unbeleevers or ignorants; This, and no more but this, is the
direct rational importance of those verses; wherein though there be mention of
unbeleevers coming in, yet that being only by way of supposition [ if they come
in, etc.] I might justly say, that that is no plain affirmation of Scripture,
that heathens, and alii quilibet, any others that will, are not prohibited the
hearing of Gods word, etc. For, 1. it is an old rule, that suppositio non ponit,
the supposing (if they do) does not suppose they do, much less that lawfully
they may: and 2. that text names only ethnicks and ignorants, and belongs not
at all to the alii quivis, any other that will, as that contains the impenitent
Christians, which are the only persons, to which our Excommunication belongs;
and of them the Apostle is far from affirming or supposing, that they might not
be so excluded, and if they should by way of reduction be forced into that
verse, the Apostles reasons would be spoiled, for they being supposeable to
understand that unknown tongue (as they may do for all their impenitence) at
least to know what belongs to the gift of tongues, and to what use they were
designed, would not think them mad presently that used it; which being said, I
may further add, that those heathens coming into the Church, or the not
prohibiting them to enter, is a very distinct thing from the admission of the
impenitent Christians, when they are by Church censures prohibited, because the
Apostle himself which prohibits Communion with the brother (that is, the
Christian) which is a fornicator, does yet not prohibit it with an heathen or
fornicator of this world; and the end of Excommunication being only on design
of charity, to make the Christian offender by that means ashamed, and
reformable, would be utterly cast away upon an heathen, who would rather be
made obdurate by that means; and indeed 'twere ridiculous to turn out them who
are not so forward to come in, and are not by St Paul here supposed so, unless
tanquam exploratores, to see how Christians behave themselves there, and if
they can find any such madness amongst them, as he there mentions, would be
likely to charge it home upon them; though on the other side if they find such
a regular frame, and beauty of all things there, they may possibly be
convinced, and wrought on by that admirable order, and doctrine, as St Austin
was by St Ambroses Sermon, though he came thither on a quite d^stant arrant.
And so sure all this while this is a feeble text to be relied on, as the only
argument to conclude Apostolical practice to be contrary to the excluding of
any a Verbi Divini auditione, etc. from prayer, or from hearing the Word in
public, the place being quite extrinsecal to this matter, and saying nothing
at all to it.

That which has been said, sufficiently arms us against the Th. 8. Ex dictis
liquet excommunicationem nihil aliud esse, quam publicam and solennem
sacramentorum, p^aesertim coenae dominicae (quam privatim Apostolus communionem
((...)) appellat, ut de principio dictum fuit) interdictionem, praeeunte
seniorem cognitione: quo peccantes resipiscant, rursusque ad sacramentorum
perceptionem admittantur.
Th. 8. is inferred from the premises, and therefore there is no need of saying
more to it; save only this, that in this Thesis there are some little mistakes
committed, which I shall only name, 1. (that which is to the matter in hand,
and on which his conclusion stands, or falls, and had been mentioned and is by
us answered before in the 1. Th.) that ((...)) 1 Cor. 10. signifies Communion,
whereas, I say, it signifies indeed (from (...) communico) communicatio, and so
belongs there (quite to another matter then that, to which it is here applied)
only to the affirming the wine, etc. in the Sacrament to be the communication,
or the making us partakers of the blood of Christ, not to our Communion one
with another in sacris, which is the thing from which excommunication cuts us
off, as is noted by that definition of it, which These. 1. is by the author
produced, that it is exclusio a societate and communione fidelium, an exclusion
from the society of believers. A second mistake (besides that which is
consequent to the former, a new definition of it by only Sacramentorum
interdictio, Interdiction of, or exclusion from the Sacraments, which should
more unlimitedly have been Sacrorum, from holy things) that Sacramentorum is
put in the plural number, which must needs be either not like a Divine, or not
like a Protestant; for if it note Baptism as well as the Lords Supper, then
it is not like a Divine, for no Divine would say that Excommunication is an
Interdiction of Baptism; for till they are once baptized, they are out of the
Church, are not capable of Excommunication; and when they are once baptized,
though they were not excommunicate, they should be baptized no more. But if by
that plural, he mean any other Sacraments besides these two, that is not like
a Protestant, for such acknowledge no more. Having mentioned these two
mistakes, I shall not add a third, that in this interdiction, the persons to
whom this cognizance belongs, are not rightly named, because though it be true,
that they are not, yet the men against whom he wrote were of that opinion; and
I am a little persuaded, that if it had been an Episcopal audience, that
should have had this cognizance, he had never written this book, nor been put
upon those arts to evacuate the Church Censures. One thing only I may have
leisure to commend in that Thesis, that he defines Excommunication by publica
and solennis interdictio, a public solemn Interdiction, and praeeunte
cognitione (I suppose he means legitima) with a legal cognizance preceding it,
and shall add, that they quite deform the Primitive Institution, who deny the
Sacrament to whole Congregations at once without any charge laid to all or any
part of them, (save only that they are a mixed Congregation, wherein there are
some evil men, which yet is not legally proved neither) and they also who deny
it to particular men sufficiently catechized, without any public cognizance of
their crime, or process of admonition first, and second, or that design that
exclusion to any other end, then ut peccantes resipiscant, the reducing sinners
to repentance: and therefore no small petty trifle is a sufficient matter for
this, but contumacious continuing in some scandalous sin after admonitions,
from which when they return again by a sincere a^proved repentance, they are to
be absolved.

Th. 9. Hicjam o^itus quaestio, u^rum aliquis propter commissum peccatum aut
vitam impure actam, siquidem usurpare Sacramenta cum cae^eris Christianis
cupiat, ab eorundem usu and perceptione sit r^^^vendus? quaestio de ^o
p^oponitur, qui candem fidem nobiscum profitetur, Ecclesiae per baptismum
insertus est, atque doctrina ab ead^m non dissentit (ut in Th. 5. posuimus) sed
in sola ^ita and moribus errat. Hoc ergo quaeritur, utrum in S. literis vel
mandatum vel exemplu^ aliquod extet, quo tales jubeantur aut doceantur a
Sacramentis submoveri?
Th. 9. is the proposing of the question in the terms, wherein it is to be
handled, wherein I shall only interpose for perspicuity sake, that the phrase [
an removendus sit?] may have a little ambiguity in it, for perhaps it may
(though less properly) be set to signify this, Whether it be lawful to
remove such an one? (for if it be but so, then he that pretends to write
against excommunication, and to pretend it unlawful, will be sufficiently
concluded) and then I answer, that for any but for the Governor of the Church,
to whom the cognizance of his ill life belongs, and who has had a legal
cognizance of it, and proceeded legally by the several degrees of
Ecclesiastical process against him, it is not lawful: but for the Bishop, or
Prefect, or lawful Governor succeeding to that power which Christ gave his
Apostles with the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, it is lawful, and by the
commission of [ Ego dabo] and afterward [ ego mitto] they are sufficiently
authorized to do this: and upon this issue, if this be it, we will join most
willingly. But then secondly, the ( An sit removendus) may perhaps (and to that
the words more incline) denote a necessity of doing it, and then the question
will be, whether he must be removed? To which I then answer, that there lies
not any such necessity on this, as arises from any pollution that will accrue
to others that communicate with him, if he be not prohibited, any further then
the example of his sin, and the impunity may extend, and this the Fathers
maintained against the Nova^ians. Nor thirdly, any necessity lying on the
Minister that administers, for he having admonished (according to our Church
Orders in our Liturgy) every such sinner to go home, and repent, and not to
approach to that table, is in charity to believe (being not able to search the
heart) that he, that after that so comes, is a true penitent. Only if in
prudence he think it unlikely, and therefore out of care to a poor man's soul,
and for the preventing of the sin of unworthy receiving, he think fit to
admonish him more privately, or particularly to that end, or to do any thing
else, which in prudence may contribute to it, this is but his duty to an erring
brother, and when that is done, any farther emergent guilt lies upon the
receiver, and he is not (in case of the man's unworthy receiving) partaker of
that sin.

All the necessity then that is in this matter, lies first upon the and upon
the Bishops, or Governors of the Church, that when charity to souls requires
it of them, they fail not thus to proceed, that when mercy and friendly
admonitions prevail not, they then take in severity, the Apostles rod in the
season for a rod, in stead of his Spirit of mercy, and meekness, and to that
end be watchful over the flock, that they fall not into such dangers, and
infections, by their neglect or mercifulness.



conveniences have at last helped him to some company) And him again not very
much used to the weapon (I mean Divinity) which he has undertaken to trust to,
and beside having an advantage against him, which he did not foresee, we of
this Church being not the men against whom his reasons were framed, and so not
so like to be pressed by them, (the arguments designed against Beza and his
Presbyterians being utterly unconcludent against us) I must confess my self to
be under a temptation to make use of the present advantage, and to prosecute
this trial to the uttermost; but I must in justice consider, what a chasme and
rent it would make in this discourse, what an unweildy bulk it would swell it
to, and therefore must recover so much constancy of mind, as not to be thus
passionately hurried out of my resolution, but leave it, till I have a louder
call to it, being ready to give any man an account of what I now say in this
matter.

p. 369.
that of another Gentleman, who though he strive not to take Excommunication
out of the Church any more then Baptism, but moreover acknowledges also, p.
363.
that it belongs to the future Pastors as well as to the then present Apostles;
yet having first resolved, p. 357.
that Ecclesia and civitas Christianorum are all one, he then concludes that
the cognizance, and judgment of any fault, whether it be such or no, p. 367.
belongs to the Church in that notion of his, i. e. to the City or
Commonwealth, (which with him also signifies the civil Magistrate, or, as he
says, judicem summum, the supreme judge;) and that the power of binding and
loosing (as that also of baptizing, which says he, p. 369.
is all one with it) is no farther in the Pastor, then that he eject those out
of the Church, whom the Church in his notion has condemned; and receive into
it, whom the Church judges worthy of absolution. I shall not labor to multiply
differences, but at this time make my exceptions only to one part of this
Scheme, viz. that the Church in his notion, i. e. the judex summus, the civil
Magistrate, has the power of judging who are to be excommunicated, who
absolved. The proofs that I can collect from him of that assertion, are only
two; First, that Mat. 18. Christ bids, p. 367.
in case the trespasser hear not the two or three, (i. e. says he, either deny
the fact, or confessing it deny it to be a trespass) then dic Ecclesiae, that
it should be told the Church; [Quare autem Ecclesiae, nisi ut ipsa judicet an
peccatum sit, necne? Why should the Church be told it, but that that may judge
whether that be a sin or no?] and if he obeyed not, then let him be to thee a
Publican, etc. Non dicit, Dic Apostolis, It is not, says he, Tell the
Apostles, to note that the sentence or judgment, whether it be a sin or no,
belongs not to them, but to the Church; and consequently that this power was no
more, then to bind those whom the Church had before judged impenitent. p. 368.
His second argument is from the practice and words of St Paul, who asks the
Corinthians [Do you not judge them that are within?] yet himself pronounces the
fornicator excommunicate. To the former of these, I shall answer only this one
thing, that there are other reasons very prompt, and pertinent, why the matter
should be told the Church, though the Church be taken in a notion wherein it is
not supposed to judge of it: as either, 1. the [ densare inculcationibus] in
Tertullians phrase, the fortifying the former successlesse reprehensions with
this addition of authority from the number, that as the two or three might be
more likely to work upon the offender, then the injured person alone, so now
the (...) or the (...), the many, or the Church in the loosest notion of it,
for any assembly or meeting of many Christians together, (supposing that it do
not signify the Governors of the Church, as the Ancients yet say it does, and
is far more probable, and asserted on stronger grounds, then that it should
signify the Civitas or summus judex) might probably be more effectual; or 2.
The [ pudefacere coram multis] formerly cited out of the Rabbis, the making
the offender ashamed when his fact is thus published, and to do that is by us
acknowledged the end of the admonitions, and censures; or 3. If there be need,
the using the multitude as a cloud of witnesses to convince him of the fact, or
sinfulness of it, which the text refers to before, (that in the mouth of two
or three witnesses every word may be established) and in all reason may be a
commodious sense here also, this third being but the ascending to an higher,
and more probable convincing course, when the former had miscarried. Either of
these three, much more altogether, will be a sufficient ground of Telling it to
the Church, and so from thence there is no necessity to conclude that the
judgment is the act of the Church, or Civil Magistrate in that place. And
indeed it will be hard to suppose that possible at that time, when it is clear
the Civil Magistrate was not Christian, and therefore unfit not only for the
title of the Church, but much more to be appealed to as the judge by
Christians, who, it is certain, are bound by Christ to use all other means
possible (and telling it to the Church in our notion is one of those possibles)
to get satisfaction for trespasses, before they proceed to any heathen
tribunal, to implead their fellow-Christian there. Nor will it, I conceive, be
reasonable to reply, that Christ's speech belongs to aftertimes, when the
Magistrate should be Christian; For then, 1. he must acknowledge that till
then, it was to be in the Church in our notion, and consequently that the
Ecclesiastical Governors were the Judge at that time, and then by his own
doctrine (that data est potestas ligandi, p. 363.
etc. futuris pastoribus eodem modo quo praesentibus Apostolis) it will still
belong to the Ecclesiastical Superior. And 2. though it may very justly be
extended to that future state, (as what was said to the Apostles was not
personal, but belonged to their successors also) yet there will be no probable
argument that the Apostles then present should be themselves excluded. For,
besides that this must lie on him to prove, if he will assert it against all
antiquity, it will also be a little unreasonable to affirm; for that were for
our Savior to give all the power, and direct all the speech to the Successors,
not to the Apostles, as a Prophecy only, or a prediction, no Evangelical
instating on these to whom he spoke. This I suppose a sufficient answer to this
proof, without proceeding to any deeper search or examination of that which in
the argument is taken for granted, viz. that the Church signifies the Summus
judex, which yet is as far from being formerly convincingly inferred, as it is
from the sound of the words, or the notion, wherein all the ancient Church have
uniformly taken it, (which will, I hope, be considerable in this matter) for
that Christ did not take upon him to be a Judge, or introduce any change in
civil Government, as it is by us acknowledged most true, so will it not belong
to this of binding, etc. which is but a spiritual, not civil punishment, only a
denying them that, which Christ brought into the world, and gave those
Messengers of his the sole power of disposing it, and endowed them with power
from on high, particularly for the exercise of it. As for the second argument,
it is certainly a mistake, if it be thought to conclude that the Apostle did but
pronounce the judgment of the Church in that matter of the incestuous, or that
the judgment of the civil state was preparative to his. For sure the Apostle
had, (before the using of those words of [ Do not you judge them that are
within? 1 Cor. 5.12.
] in the end of that Chapt.) past his sentence definitive on that incestuous in
the beginning of it, ver. 3. For I have already (not ego autem, but (...) as
absent in body, but present in spirit, judged him that has thus done this
thing (...), I have judged this evil doer: Judged, I say, and what is the
sentence? Why, In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you and my spirit being
met together (the Apostle and his Presbytery, or he in the face of the Church)
with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one to Satan, etc.
And this at a time when it is clear, the Church had not passed sentence on him,
for v. 2. They were puffed up, as he complains, and through an opinion of their
own deeper wisdom (a leaven, v. 6. i. e. a doctrine either of the heathen
philosophers, or of the Gnostics among them) took it for an indifferent thing,
and did not mourn for him that had done it, The ceremony used by the Church,
when any was to be excommunicate, and notes that they should have so joined
together in mourning, in complaining to the Apostle, and prayer to Christ, that
this censure might pass on such an one, but that they did not do it, nay, it
seems proceeded not so far as to fraternal correption which was infallibly
their duty toward him. As for the words cited, [ Nonne vos judicatis?] they
come in no another incidental occasion (not directly to this first matter) to
make the distinction betwixt the dealing with the Christian and heathen
fornicators; the Apostle restraining his prescription of not conversing with
fornicators, v. 9. to the Christian fornicator, whom, says he being within the
Church, it is reasonable to conclude within the Churches censures, (...)* Do you
not judge them that are within? not you emphatically or in opposition to the
Apostle, but you (...) as a general title of Christians, who use not to judge
any but Christians, all other being left to Gods judgment, the Church having
nothing to do with them. It is clear enough, that the context looks wholly
that w^y, and consequently there will be little reason to extend these words
any farther then this, that the Church judges, Christian not heathens; and the
Church in the notion only wherein it is opposed to God, not in which it is
opposed to St Paul, but in which in any reason it includes the Apostle or
Governor of it; For sure he may judge them that are (...), within the Church,
(for so he does, v. 3. and no part of the context of that Chapter seems to say any
thing to the contrary) though them that are without he cannot; which is the
only thing the Apostle had in hand to say at that time.

Having briefly answered the reasons, I shall by way of compounding the
Controversy with this Gentleman, most willingly acknowledge, that somewhat the
Church in his notion, or more clearly the supreme Magistrate, being supposed
Christian, may have to do in this business of Censures, praecedaneous to the
judgment of the Apostle, or before the Pastor or Ecclesiastical Governor
proceed to them, As 1. in the choosing or nominating him to that office; 2. In
the setting of rules, or laws by which he ought to proceed in hearing or
judging: No question, this may and in Christian Commonwealths very reasonably
ought to belong to the Civil Magistrate; and truly this discouse does not
pretend to, or desire any unlimited, or arbitrary power in the Bishop, but only
that, the rules being prudently set by those to whom the power of making laws
belongs in every Commonwealth, he should have the cognizance in such causes,
as regularly belong to his audience, and according to that rule, and not
otherwise, give sentence on the offender* and that only thus far, that he shall
be turned out of Christian society, or received into it again: (which, beside
that this is, and has always been taken for an institution of Christ's, which
it is reasonable we should obey, and not dispute, is also in it self simply
considered, far from any degree of unreasonable, no man in ordinary reason
being more fit to judge who is fit to enjoy the privileges of the Church, who
likely to be reformed by being deprived of them, then he that has studied that
great skill of winning souls, and is entrusted by Christ with the charge of
them.) Again 3. it will be granted that the Church in the ordinary notion, as
it signifies the whole diffusive Christian Society in any place, may so far be
interessed in this matter, as that these only shall be liable to these
Censures, who have offended others by their notorious sins, and are by the
Proxyes, as it were of those others, I mean, by their chosen officers, or by
the public fame, the voice again and interpreter of their sense, delated, or
complained of to the Governors of the Church, as those that have wronged the
Church, and defamed that Christian Profession, to which they had given up their
names; and this is a kind of judging (in large or loose speaking, as to be
infamous offenders signifies to be conceived and judged such by the community
among whom they live, for otherwise they are not infamous) but yet in strict
propriety, is only a preparative to the sentence of the Judge, and an accusing
or impleading rather, and is not, I suppose, the thing for which this Author
does pretend, or if it were, would not to us be matter of contention with him.

The truth is, the power of binding, etc. which we contend for, as the office
more then privilege of Bishops, (in the careful exercise of which they minister
most charitably to the good of the souls entrusted to them) is another manner
of thing, then what this Gentleman seems to have conceived it (both here, and
especially when of it he concludes, Vnusquisque si mentis compos sit obediat in
omnibus simpliciter ei, p. 407.
cujus arbitrio credit se salvandum aut damnandum esse.) God knows they pretend
to no such arbitrium in the saving or damning of any man; It is only an engine
of Christ's invention to make a battery and an impression on the obdurate sinner
to win him to himself to Act. 3.26.
bless, not to triumph over him, (which very thing he has in one place
excellently expressed, Finis hujusmodi disciplinae erat ut destituti ad tempus
gratia and privilegiis Ecclesiae spiritualibus, humiliarentur ad salutem. p.
407.
The end of this discipline, says he, is by depriving men for a time of the
favor and spiritual privileges of the Church, to humble them to salvation,)
much less to invade any part of civil Judicature, or loosen the bands thereof
by these spiritual pretenses, but to leave the Government of the world just in
the posture that it was before Christ's coming, or as it would be supposed to
be, if he had never left any Keys in his Church. And therefore, when in an
Annotation affixt to his last Edition he was pleased to extend his observation
of the Doctrinae quaedam quibus imbuti cives obedientiam civitati negari, and
contra Principes summos, summasque potestates pugnare, idque jure posse, imo
oporte^e arbitrantur. p. 101.
Doctrines that might disturb Government, not only to that power which many
attribute to the Pope of Rome in other men's dominions, and to the liberty
usurpt by the cives infimi, under pretense of Religion, but also to that which
alicubi extra Ecclesiam Romanam Episcopi in civitate sua sibi postulant, I must
hope that it was a mistake, or which I rather think (being persuaded of the
uprightness of his affections to our established Government) that his [ alicubi]
did not in any wise refer (as I was apt to fear it did) to the constitution of
Episcopacy in this native Kingdom of his and mine. For that this, since it
departed from the Roman Church, has been perfectly free from any degree of
that guilt, is that of which we are so far persuaded, that we neither fear, nor
deprecate any Historians instance, nor can imagine what one particle of the
doctrine, or constitution of our Church there is, on which a rational man can
by any consequence build such a Nam quod bellum civ^le in O^be Christiano
unquam extuit, quod ab (...) ortum atque alitum non fuerit? p. 102.
charge; Of which nothing can make Us capable, but leaving the [ non] out of
it; and that makes me a little confident, that either [ Episcopi] in that place
signifies not in the known vulgar Christian sense, or that the [ alicubi] looked
not on this Kingdom or Church of ours (as it has long stood established by
Law) which most cheerfully acknowledges the truth of his many other
observations, (particularly that of Obedience due to the Moses's, p. 190.
not Aarons chair, of Abi^thar the High Priest being no way exempt from the
command of Solomon, p. 192. p. 371 372.
of his three axioms also concerning Excommunication, that neither the
Commonwealth, nor the supreme Magistrate, nor all the persons in any
Commonwealth can be excommunicate) and resolves that no man shall ever deprive
her of this glorying, that she is pure from the blood of all men, has
entertained no one principle, or doctrine in any degree incompetible with the
civil power, or peace in the utmost extent, in which the most loyal author ha^h
designed to establish it. And if it must be Arminianism (as one has lately
confuted it under that title) to teach Errant primo Arminian. qui Magistratus
Politico Ecclesiasticum regimen subjectum esse docebant.
that the Ecclesiastical power is subjected to the Civil Magistrate, who in all
causes over all persons is acknowledged by us supreme under Christ, we must be
content to lie down under that envy, and not excuse or renounce that piece of
Loyal Arminianism.

I have thus far proceeded in this matter for the removing of loosing depending
wholly from the consideration of binding) I shall in the first place examine
what images of binding we have in the Scripture, and those we shall refer to
two heads: first, those that belong to the power, and practice Apostolical, (in
the time and persons of the Apostles;) secondly, those that after the Apostles
persons, (and ever since) were to continue in the Church, which we shall call
Ecclesiastical Discipline (as distant from Apostolical) exercised (the one, as
the other) upon offenders either public and scandalous, or whose crimes
otherwise came unto their cognizance, and consisting either in separating and
removing to some distance, or in casting them totally out of the Church, or
Congregation of visible Professors here on earth; answerable unto which, [
loosing] must consequently be a delivering from those censures, the absolving
of him, who was formerly separated, or excommunicated, restoring him to the
visible Church; or any part thereof (to the privileges of a Christian, and the
comforts of the Word, and Services, and Sacraments) who was before legally cast
ou^ of it, and deprived of them.

For the understanding of which, and specially of the former, the Apostolical
power and practice (or as it was discernable among the Apostles) it will not be
amiss to do these three things: 1. To give you a view of the several sorts of
Excommunication among the Jews, to which some phrases in the New Testament
refer: (because I see there is some controversy raised concerning them.) 2. To
mention some of those places in the New Testament, which seem to refer to
these; And then 3. to observe the phrases in the New Testament, which are more
purely Christian, i. e. which more distinctly and peculiarly respect the use of
these Censures among Christians.

Execration, a more solemn Excommunication (with curses out of Moses Law and
execrations added to it, a (...) of which we have Act. 8.20.) inflicted on him
who after the (...) first for 30 days, and then being allowed 30 days more
(which is doubling of the (...)) still continued in that contumacy, for then,
say the Jews (...), they anathematize him without defining any limited ^ime, as
before in Niddui they did. The third is (...) a kind of Proscription and
delivering to desolation and destruction; or to the coming of the Lord in
judgment against him, noted by (...) (added to the anathema) (...) in the
Oriental tongues signifying Dominus; whence in Etruria the Kings are called
Murani, says Servius in Aen. 12. and the Syrians now Maranitae, because they
call Christ (...) our Lord Agreeable to which it is, that in Epiphanius, GOD is
by the Gazari called Marnas, and by the Cretians their virgins (...), i. e
(...) Ladies, as among the Spaniards the form has been used, Sit anathema
Marano, and excommunicatus, or (...) Let him be excommunicate from the hope of
the Lord: (and though he that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ be not 1 Cor.
16.22. appointed to be excommunicated by that phrase, yet does it refer to
the use of the phrase among the Jews, though there it be by way of
accommodation set to signify another matter, that higher more direful sentence
of ( Go you cursed, etc.) Of these three species thus set down (...), I should
not add much more, but that again I see two things resolved on by a
forementioned learned Author, contrary to what has been generally received in
this matter, and the latter of them apt, if believed, to divest the Church of
all kind of discipline, even of such as was instituted on no other design but
to bring sinners to heaven, and which we desire should be used only to that
end. They are these, 1. That there are but two species of Excommunication among
the Jews, Niddui and Cherem, and that Schammatha is all one with Niddui. 2.
That these punishments among the Jews belonged not to exclusion from sacred,
but only from civil society.

For the first of these, that which I find produced to disprove species, is, 1.
The promiscuous use of Niddui and Schammatha among the Talmudical writings.
Secondly, the derivation of Schammatha from (...) which among them signifies no
more then to separate and to abdicate: and thirdly, that Elias Levita, and
David de Pomis, which are for these three species, were not Lawyers, but
Grammarians, and so did oscitanter negligently and drowsily make three species
of Excommunication, when they should have made but two. To all which I answer,
that those learned men which maintain the three species may very well do it for
ought these objections enforce to the contrary. For it will not be necessary
for us to affirm that the Talmudists should use these several words constantly
according to their distinct, proper, peculiar, critical importance; there is
nothing more ordinary then for words that are used in foro to lose their native
proper significations, and to be used (...), for somewhat else of affinity, and
near signification with them; and therefore it will be worth observing, that as
Schammatha in the Talmud is sometimes taken only for separation (which is the
reason that they which are against the three species make Schammatha to be all
one with Niddui, and to set down Niddui and Cherem for the two:) So in other
places Niddui is set to denote Schammatha as a higher degree then Cherem, p.
2467.
as will appear (to any that cannot otherwise pass judgment on it) by the
places which Buxtorf has produced in his Rabbinical Lexicon, which show
clearly that Schammatha is a heavier degree of Excommunication, and yet that
Niddui is by them put for Schammatha, which indeed will be a proof that Niddui
and Schammatha are used promiscuously, and sine discrimine among those writers,
but not at all, that there are but two degrees or species, Niddui and Cherem,
but clearly the contrary, that Cherem is a middle species, beyond which there
is Schamatha, (which they sometimes improperly call Niddui) as well as below it
Niddui, which they sometimes call Schammatha; and therefore Jo. Coch which is
cited to prove that Niddui and Schammatha are all one, says withal, that
(...) and (...), non tantum de leviori, sed and de graviori indifferenter
usurpantur, ex^. Gem. San. p. 146. both used for the greater, as well as both
for the lighter Excommunication. To which I shall add, that the Hebr. writers
are so far from speaking constantly, and exactly, and critically in this
matter, that they sometimes put Cherem, or anathema lowest, and ad Schammatha
to that, and then set Niddui as the last of the three, as in Jelammedenu sect.
(...) speaking of the Samaritans* the species of Excommunication are thus
enumerated, (...) and they anathematized, and schammatized and excommunicated
him, by which it will appear, how promiscuously those words have been used
among Hebr. writers, (to which purpose may be again remembered, what was even
now produced of the phrase in Spain, Sit anathema marano, and excommunicatus,
excommunicatus after the highest anathema) but it will not be a proof of any
validity, against the three species of Excommunication, or the order or
difference of them, when they do speak exactly.

Schammatha from (...), which, says he, signifies no more then to separate or
abdicate, I desire this may be noted, that there is no such ancient Hebrew word
as (...) but only of later use among the Rabbis, and Talmudists, which to me
is an argument convincing that that verb may come from Schammatha, and not
Schammatha from the verb; and therefore Buxtorf, when he meets with it, renders
it Schammatizare, as a verbal from that noun, not willing to affix any other
Interpretation to it, but this, that so he might leave it to signify in the
same latitude (as a verb) that belongs to schammatha, as a substan^ive, i. e
sometimes to be taken properly and strictly to denote the third species,
sometimes improperly, to be all one with Niddui, or the first species.

suppose will be easily granted me, that every compound or derivative Hebrew
word, is to be reduced to some original Hebrew root or roots, from which it is
derived, or of which compounded consequently that the same must be resolved of
(...) which that it is not a derivative from (...) I conceive is sufficiently
evinced, because (...) is no primitive Hebrew word to be found in the Bible, or
other authentic Hebrew writing (which he that will not trust his own
observation, but survey Schindler and Buxtorf, will acknowledge with me) but
only among the Rabbis and Talmudists, and may rather be thought to come from
(...) then Schammatha from that; this is not my conjecture, but the direct
words of the learned Buxtorf, in his institution of Hebrew Epistles p. 58. in
these words, Talmudiei ex nomine (...) verbum faciunt (...) pros^ribere,
proscriptionis poenam in aliquem fer^e the Talmudists from the noun Schammatha
make the verb Schammeth, to proscribe, etc. and though Buxtorf in his
Rabbinical Lexicon place the verb before the noun, yet is that no argument of
disagreement between these two writings, but is only caused by a care of
observing his wonted litteral method of setting the verb of the three letters
before the noun of one letter more.

If it be demanded of me from whence then the noun comes, verb come from that)
I answer that learned Jews have given it several originations, some bringing it
from (...) Dominus venit, the Lord comes, making it all one with (...), 1 Cor.
16.22. (but the dagesh in (...) makes me that I cannot consent to that
Etymology) others from (...) ibi mors, there is death; others from (...)
desolatio erit, there shall be desolation. Of these two latter I know not which
to choose, 1. having little objection aginst either of them, and 2. finding
them both avowed in the Gemara Moed Katon, in these words, what is Schammatha?
Rab answered (...) there is death, and Samuel said, (...) there shall be
desolation, etc. and 3. finding the sense of both those originations to come to
the same purpose of death, or desolation, or destruction, noting that kind of
offender to be by that censure given up to divine vengeance, which is generally
the notion of that 3 degree of Excommunication, which makes it to be taken for
the same with Ma^anatha in the Apostle, that God comes as a judge or avenger to
such an one. For let me add to this matter this one thing, that this third
degree of censure among the Jews at Christ's time, was proper to him, that under
Moses Law had deserved death, but by reason that the power of capital
punishments was taken from the Jews, could not by them be so punished, and
therefore was by this way thus delivered up to Gods hands, to inflict vengeance
upon him, which they say did very frequently befall them in a remarkable
manner; and S. Austins observation is to this purpose, quaest. super Deu. l. 5.
c. 38. Hoc nunc agit in Ecclesia excommunicatio, quod agebat tunc interfectio.
Excommunication does the same among Christians, that killing did among the
Jews. As for the third proof of the objection, taken from the lessening of the
authority of Elias Levita, and David de Pomis, it will be sufficient to say, 1.
That to make that argumentative, it ought to have been (but is not) proved,
that others which have called the three species in question, are of greater
authority then these. 2. That Grammarians (if they be such indeed, as those
have been allowed that reputation) are (...). Mosc.
Critics also, and so as fit to be hearkened unto in such a matter of ancient
custom among the Jews, as if they had been Lawyers, they would have been;
more, I am sure, then any other Lawyers, which had not been so good
Grammarians; and yet that any Jewish Lawyer has avowed the contrary opinion,
is not, that I know of, as yet pretended: And 3. For the negligence or
oscitance of these Grammarians, that has not with any proof or confirmation
been laid to their charge, and if it were, it is as possible that Jewish Lawyers
might have been guilty of it as they, nay it were more reasonable to accuse
them of oscitancy, that make but two, and them of double diligence that have
discerned one species more then they. To this Topic ab authoritate I shall add
only, that Aloysius (whom the Reader is by this Gentleman advised to turn to
Sched. sacro prof. l. 7. c. 10.) does affirm in these direct words, Sunt apud
Hebraeos plures excommunicationis gradus, Niddui, Cherem, Schamatha; there are
several degrees of excommmunication among the Hebrews, those three by name,
though he enlarge not to explain the third, as he does these two former: and so
much for the first particular.

Now for the second thing, that these species of excommunication were only to
exclude from civil society, and had nothing to do with sacred, I shall venture
it to the judgment of intelligent indifferent men, who shall but examine what
they meet with on this subject, if it be but at second hand in Instit. ep. he^.
p. 55.
Buxtorf, etc. out of the Hebrew writers. It is his observation of Niddui the
lowest species, that it is remotio ab aliorum congressu quam sacro, quam
politico, and domestico, ad 4 passus; separation not only from civil commerce,
but from sacred also. Now that which I conceive has caused this mistake in
this first kind (and from thence perhaps without any new cause extended it to
the rest) is that such an one that was separated by Niddui, was allowed to come
to the sacred meetings, to be present at Common Prayers, to teach others* and
to be taught with others, as the same author affirms; but then this concludes
not against us, for the same Buxtorf still adds, sed semper sub dicta lege
remotionis, always under the forementioned law of remotion, and distance. And
so these two (...), it seems are reconcilable thus: Niddui is not a total
remotion or separation neither from sacred, nor from civil society, (being you
know but the first degree or species) but only ad 4 passus, that none can come
within the distance of four paces of him that is under the censure; and this
degree of separation being extended to sacred as well as civil assemblies, yet
excluded him not either from praying with the Congregation, or learning, or (if
he were a Doctor) teaching in it; only a mark was set upon him, to
discriminate him from others, which were under no censure; this is described in
R. Eliezer, c. 17. King Solomon, says he, when he built the house of the
Sanctuary, made two gates, one for bridegrooms, another for mourners and
excommunicate persons, by which they went into the Temple.

And to these two gates and sorts of men the Apostle may seem Romans 12.15. and 1
Cor. 7.30. when he speaks of weeping with them that weep, and rejoicing with
them that rejoice; and no question the (...) which we render bewayling, 1 Cor.
5.2. refers to that style of mourners, and denotes the solemnity usual among
the Jews of putting on mourning habit, and wailing over them that were
excommunicate, according to that of the author of the Constitutions under
Clements name, (...), l. 2. Let the incurable be put out of the Church with
sorrow and wailing. These mourners, or excommunicate in that Rabbi were those
under Niddui, who it seems were admitted to the temple, but appointed to come
in at a door peculiar to them, and with some such mark of discrimination, that
they that saw them might pray for them in this form, Qui inhabitat domum hanc,
consoletur te, indatque animo tuo ut obtemperes, etc. He that dwells in this
house, comfort thee, and give thee a heart to obey; by which I am forced to
confess, that Niddui did not separate from all society in sacris, but only
remove to such a distance; and yet the Reader will be forced to confess also,
that this separation or rather remotion belonged ad sacra, as well as ad
politica, and in the same degree that it restrained the one kind of society, it
restrained the other also; and so says Jo. Mich. Dilherr. Elector. l. 2. c.
10. having premised that Niddui est hominis ab aliorum conventu tam sacro, quam
politico, and domestico, ad 4 usque cubitus sive passus per dies 30 remotio,
etc. A remotion from sacred, civil, domestic commerce, to the distance of
four paces for 30 days, a deprivation of the marriage bed, of shaving, and
washing, and such other commodities, he adds that (...) he that is under this
censure, may be present at sacred meetings, but so many paces off from the rest
of the company.

Niddui is not meant an ejection out of the Church, but only a deprivation of
that liberty of civil society within four paces, and applies to it that sense,
wherein the Poet calls the Britains, toto divisos orb, divided from the whole
world, not that they are totally divided from the rest of the world, but to
denote a peculiar situation of those Islands in the Ocean, I shall acknowledge
the observation so far as it denies a total separation, but not as it
intimates a greater separation in civilibus, then in sacris, as the words [
peculiari illa civilis inter suos consortii libertatis deprivation?] would seem
to import, and as the intention of the writer is by himself demonstrated to be.
The matter is sufficiently clear that Niddui is but a lighter censure, remotion
or restraint for such a degree, but not a total separation either from sacred,
or civil society, yet still as much from sacred as from civil, in both limitedly
30 days, and for the distance of four Cubits.

Cherem the second degree, that is defined by Lexicon Rab. p. 827.
Buxtorf, exclusion from the sacred assemblies, casting out of the Synagogue
with all the curses of Deuteronomy. 28. (to which, say Dilherr. elect^ l. 2.
others, was added the Ceremony of putting out the Candles, to signify him
deprived of the light of heaven) and he has proof for it out of Maimonides in
Madda, c. 7. Muchram non docet neque discit cum aliis. He that is under the
second censure, is excluded from hearing the law in public; And, as Ep. Hebr.
instit. p. 56.
Buxtorf elsewhere adds, o Synagoga, conventibus, negotiis, publicis, sacris,
and politicis omnibus exclusus, donec resipiscat; which may further appear by
the form of this anathema, which he brings out of an ancient Hebr. manuscript.
Sit in anathemate sanctorum excelsorum, in anathemate, Seraphim, and Ophunnim,
in anathemate totius Ecclesiae, etc. Now from this, the third species differs
only in this, that as that was a total separation, donec resipiscat, til he
repent, but reversible upon repentance, total for the present, but not
irremissible, so this was both total and final too, and so undoubtedly (not
remitting of the severity of the second but adding to it) extended to the
separation in sacris also; and therefore whatsoever may be said of Schammatha
in the wide Rabbinical acception of it, as it goes indifferently for Niddui,
there will be little doubt, but the Schammatha peculiarly so called, or that
which is called (...) and (...), the Schammatha of the Lord, or of the God of
Israel, is, as the learned define it, Ea qua quis totaliter and finaliter ab
Ecclesia (as that notes coetum sacrum, as well as civilem) segregatus, divino
judicio sit devotus, and cum ea mors and exitium; so Dilherr. l. 2. of
Maranatha (which he supposes to be al one with it) Est proscriptio extrema, and
absque spe veniae irrogata, qua reus omnibus humanae societatis juribus,
legibus, and officiis exclusus, judicio divino committitur, and ad extremam
desolationem condemnatur. A perfect proscription, without hope of pardon, by
which the offender is excluded from all privileges, and offices of humane
society, and committed to the judgment of God, and condemned to extreme
desolation. I shall abstain from adding more to the proof of this truth in the
several species, conceiving that I have sufficiently proved or vindicated in
the lowest, and showed the (...), the cause or the occasion of their mistake,
who deny it; and then there will be little need to confirm it any further in
the other two degrees, which do add to that lowest, but cannot be thought to
come short of it.

And having thus cleared the first thing which we proposed, viewed the several
sorts of Excommunication among the Jews, I proceed now to the second, to those
places of the New Testament which seem to refer to them: In which matter I
shall not be confident or dogmatical, but deliver my thoughts as for the
present it seems to me, and show you the grounds of my so seeming. And 1. that
place Luke 6.22. does appear to belong to Excommunication among the Jews, but
whether to one only or more species of it, I am uncertain; (...) surely belongs
to the first kind, that of Niddui, which cannot be more literally rendered in
Greek then by (...), separation, or remotion, 4 paces off, and perhaps that
with (...) added to it, signifies to do it contumeliously; But yet because it is
possible, that (...) may have a greater force in it, and be a notation of
cursing and execration, not only in this but in other places of the Gospel,
therefore I conceive that word (set immediately after (...)) may denote the
second degree, that of Cherem, and then to the same will belong that third
phrase also of (...) to cast out your name as evil, for an Hebraism there is in
these words, which though a very learned man conceive to consist in this; 1.
that (...) shall be all one with (...) (as indeed sometimes it is) 2. that as
(...) is to bring up an evil report, (...) shall signify the same thing; yet I
shall take leave to interpose, 1. that the phrase used for bringing up an evil
report, Number. 14.36. is, (...) not (...), but (...), nor (...), but (...), and
in brief, that I cannot find any where (...) or (...) in the translators of the
old, or writers of the new Testament, for bringing up an evil report. 2. That
(...), to cast out your name as evil; 1. [(...) yours] then [(...) as] added,
will be somewhat another kind of phrase then (...) or (...) as [ to bring up an
evil name or report] is in our language a very intelligible phrase for
defaming, but [ to bring up your name or report as evil] is not so; and
therefore I shall venture to propose my conjecture, that the Hebraism is not in
the word [(...)] but in the [(...)] and [(...):] so that 1. (...) shall
signify no more then your persons, or you (as Mat. 1.23. [(...)] is no more
then he (as (...), Act. 1.15. signifies persons of men) shall be (not he shall
be named by that name) a God with us, or God incarnate) and then (...) shall
signify [as scandalous] or offensive, or abominable, as (...) is by the 72.
sometimes rendered (...) being ashamed (whence perhaps our English bashful and
abash) sometimes (...), to abominate, sometimes (...) to be evil or wicked,
Genesis 34.24. Esd. 4.12. and so [ to cast out your names as evil] will clearly
signify to cast you out as wicked, shameful, abominable persons, a denotation
of the (...) which was not only separating or removing to a distance, but
total casting out, and that with reproaches, curses, and execrations, such as
in Moses are denounced against greater malefactors; whether these circumstances
of this text do thus denote, I am not confident, and therefore have only
proposed a conjecture, but that the (...), and (...) do refer to the Niddui
and Cherem I doubt not, nor if you mark it, does H. Grotius who has enlarged
on that subject of Excommunication, in his Annotations on that verse.

No more do I find my self moved by the arguments of that to be turned out of
the Synagogue, Joh. 9.22.12.42.16.2. refers to the second of these species
among the Jews, for that (...) and (...) do sometime signify a civil
Congregation or assembly, and not always a sacred (as when the hypocrite is
said to pray standing, (...) in places of public concourse and corners of the
streets, as the most visible places, Matthew. 6.) I shall easily grant, and yet
not think my self thereby concluded, or obliged to yield, but that it may also,
at other times, note the holy assembly, or meeting for the performance of
sacred duties, out of which it was sure no news for the Jews (after that
capital judgments were taken away from them) to eject notorious malefactors,
particularly heretics, false prophets, or their sectators, and disciples, as
these here for preaching of Christ, whom the Jews acknowledged not; in like
manner as in the time of the Captivity, Esd. 10.8. the order is given, that
whoso^ver appears not upon summons (...), all his estate shall be (forfeited we
render, the word is (...) noting the Cherem which we now speak of) devoted,
anathematized, as an evidence of that kind of Excommunication which follows
in the next words, (...), he shall be separated from the Church or Congregation
of the captivity, not only from Civil, but Ecclesiastical society with them,
for so Cherem was formerly demonstrated to signify; nay, it may with some
reason be conceived in that place from Ecclesiastical only, in case of Cherem
or total ejection; for it is more probable, that the King under whom they were
captive, allowing them some liberty for the exercise of their religion, but in
civil matters keeping them as captives and servants, should permit them to
punish one another by that way of casting out of their Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, then by that other of civil interdict, especially if it be
conceived to extend to banishment, etc. which would entrench upon his
Prerogative, and be a kind of turning the captive out of his captivity.

second species, and so to casting out of the society in sacris, is the
distinct affirmation of the learned Instit. Ep. He. p. 56.
Buxtorf in these words, Haec est illa excommunicatio (speaking of Cherem) de
qua in Evangelio Iohannis, cap. 9.22.12.42. etsi ab eo tempore Rabbini quaedam
ipsi adjecerint: and the intimation of Exc. Gem. Sanhedr. c. 1. p. 149.
John Coch also in these words, Qui simpliciter excommunicatus est, (...) est
ille quidem separatus a coetu, ita ut pro vero membro Ecclesiae non habeatur,
non tamen videtur esse (...) quia doctrinae particeps est. From which words of
that very learned man, I observe these two things contrary to what I see lately
affirmed. 1. That (...) does not belong to Niddui, but to Cherem. 2. That it is
an ejection not only ab Ecclesia, Synagoga, as that notes rempublicam Judaicam,
but from sacred Assemblies, noted by doctrinae particeps, according to that
rule in Maimonides. Devotus nec docet nee docetur, such an one is excluded from
both, it seems, and so from those holy Assemblies, where that was wont to be
done.

Jo. 16.2. (...), etc. but (or yea) the hour comes that every man that kills
you shall seem, or be thought to do God service, or to offer a sacrifice to
him; whereon I shall interpose a conjecture, that those words may possibly
denote the third degree, that of Schammatha, at least a consequent of it, for
so says Ep. Heb. insti. p. 58.
Buxtorf of that species, Mortem dicit, quia cujusvis manibus ejus vita
exposita est, and euilibet eum interficiendi libera potestas: It is so called,
because such a man's life is exposed to any ones hands, every one having a free
power of killing him: and so to that he applies the Maranatha which is added to
Anathema, 1 Cor. 16.22. a form of extreme proscription, delivering up the
sinner to divine revenge, in which case whosoever killed him, conceived himself
to perform an act of execution of justice, and service to God.

Some other places there are in the New Testament belonging Judaical censures,
fit to be explained; but I have chosen to insist only on those because, I
lately find them otherwise rendered, but yet discern no reason to recede from
what I have now delivered, that they do belong to those species of
Excommunication not only from civil but from sacred assemblies, though one in
an higher degree then another. To which I shall only add, that they which
have applied these places to Christian excommunication, any otherwise then only
by way of accommodation, shall not be pleaded for by me, who acknowledge that
they belong to the Jews, and to their usage of Christians, and not to some
Christians dealing with others; but then sure there is as little reason on
their side who will not allow that way of accommodation, which would not be at
all unreasonable, though those phrases among the Jews were supposed to belong
only to civil commerce; It being ordinary for Christ to ordain some things in
his Church, which were answerable to civil not sacred customs among the Jews
(as the Lords Supper, sure an Ecclesiastical rite among us, was to their
post-coenium, which was not so, and many the like,) to transplant from their
forum to our Church, and therefore no way unfit for the Apostles and following
Church to appropriate those words to Ecclesiastical senses, though they were
supposed to be among the Jews of a greater latitude: Of which sort, because I
formerly promised it, I shall now specify in some instances.

This may be discerned in the word (...), which if any man should prove to have
no other sense among Christians, then that of a meeting together in a Town
hall, upon no other way of probation, but that the Hebrew words answerable to
that, are by the Talmudists, yea even in the Scripture of the Old Testament
taken in this sense, this would be a little strange; the matter of fact being
most evident to the contrary, and it being most prompt and proper, that words
used either among the Greeks or Hebrews in forinsecal senses, may be bent by
Christian Writers to a sacred.

Jews, and that word denoted among them some offices, which if they may in any
respect be counted Ecclesiastical, are yet very distant from the Christian use
of it: such was that of the Messengers sent out to demand and bring in the dues
to the Temple, which cannot without the help of accommodation be applied to
the Christian acception of the word; and such again was the proxy in
contracting or marrying two persons, for he was called (...) i. e. Apostolus
also, an intercessor or internunce betwixt them, which as a sponsor, undertook
for one to the other, the (...), such as Samson had Judge. 14.20. i. e. in
Varinus his definition (...), of whom he says that when the Bridegroom
himself must not go into the Fathers house, (viz. in a (...), Phavor.
second marriage, such as that was of God with the Gentiles, who had before
espoused the Jews) (...), he sends one of his friends: To which m^tion of the
word (according to one punctation of the place) the Apostle may seem to
refer, 2 Cor. 11.2. when he expresses his Apostleship by (...), I have
espoused you to one husband, according to that sense of (...) acknowledged by
(...). 3. c. (...)
Julius Pollux, (...), making the (...), or sponsor all one with (...), and
(...) to signify the interceding or mediating a marriage, all one with that
word (...) there used by St. Paul, agreeable to which the word (...) is by
Pollux further extended to the mediators of any kind of league, (...); (...).
1. c. (...).
and then according to that notion also, is the Apostles pacifick office,
praying and beseeching us in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, all which
are very convenient accommodations, but far from requiring the Christian word
to the very kind of sense that the Hebrew (...) did import.

So again, (...), Bishops in the Christian Church, do in office, particularly
that of imposition of hands, (peculiar to them above the Presbyters even in St.
Jeromes confession) refer to the (...) the Princeps Synedrii, who imposed
hands upon those that were elected into the Sanhedrim, but in respect of the
name they refer to the use of the word (...) among the Jews, and accordingly
the very word (...) is both 1 Mac. 1.53. and in Josephus, set to signify them
that are set over any public business, the (...) that set men a work, and
require an account of the performance, and yet are by way of accommodation
brought both in the New Testament, and in all Sacred Writers since, to signify
an office parallel to this, but purely Ecclesiastic.

So the word (...), though in the Old Testament Elders of the people either in
a common notion, or as members of their Sanhedrim, not any body, or single
persons peculiarly Ecclesiasticke, (though by the way it is most clear, that
the high Priests were not only of that number, part of their Sanhedrim, or
(...) or (...), but also the chief of them, and therefore in the New Testament
the mention of the high Priests and Elders comes often together in point of
judicature; and the business of that Court, being all kind of affairs, Civil
as well as Ecclesiasticke, it was most reasonable that some persons of both
conditions should be entrusted with them, and there being so, no wonder that
there was no other Court, or Tribunal merely Ecclesiastical) yet does it
unquestionably belong, both in many places of the New Testament, and in the
constant acception of primitive and after-writers, to an order of
Ecclesiastics, as is most apparent both by Clemens, and Ignatius, and is
confessed by them, which assert the (...) of Bishops, and Presbyters: which makes
it not very reasonable to consent to the way of arguing, twice used by that
learned Writer, who from the Talmudical writings of the Creation of the Jewish
Elders, would conclude how little, or how nothing there is in the Creation of a
Presbyter among Christians, more then of a Doctor of Law, etc. But this by the
way.

Deacons in the Christian Church are directly parallel to the (...) under the
Synagogue, called by Epiphanius (by a light inflexion or change of the Hebrew)
(...), the (...) or treasurers, (...) in Philo, (...) in Josephus) which I
wonder a Rivet. Grot. disc. (...). page 475.
learned man should carpe at, only upon this exception, because it was not
proved they were in synagogis praefecti, ut ministrarent mensis, when it is
clear that the (...) in the Acts, noting first the ministering to them in the
(...), that common table for the poor and rich, does in universum signify [
providing for the poore] and that is as clearly parallel to the office of those
treasurers among the Jews, as if they had literally in the Synagogue served
tables.

third proposal, the phrases which are purely Christian, but that I conceive it
not unfit to take notice of one difficulty (which we have not yet mentioned,
nor shall have occasion to mention among the phrases purely Christian) and to
give some account of that in this place. And it is, to examine what was the
condition, 1. Of Heathens. 2. Of Samaritans. 3. Of those that are called
Sinners. 4. Of Publicans among the Jews; being tempted to that (if it be an
extravagance) by another Parenthesis in a learned Author before mentioned.

For Gentiles, they were of three sorts; either 1. Proselytes who were
circumcised, and undertook their whole law, and these were allowed to live
among them, to enjoy all liberty and privileges, that any Jew did, differing
from them in nothing but their Gentile-birth. Secondly, Proselytes of the
Gates, which were converted so far by them, as to receive the precepts of the
sons of Adam and Noah, but not to be circumcised, etc. and these were also
permitted to live freely among them in civii society, and to come to the temple
(Gods house being a house of prayer to all people, i. e. to all such Gentle
worshippers, or godly men of the nation) but that with a mark of difference
from the Jews, and perfect Proselytes, there being a court provided on purpose
for them, called the court of the Gentiles, divided from the court of the Jews
by a little partition called by the Apostle (...), by Josephus (...) or (...),
on which was written (...), that no such Gentile proselyte might go in i. e.
beyond their own, into the Jews court; and so these though admitted to
society in sacris, yet were so removed or separated by law, the whole body of
them, that they were in a manner under the censure of niddui, or (...),
separated from them for some small space, proportionable to that of four
paces, but this not by any act of excommvnication, but by a general law or
tradition, thus discriminating them from Jews in this particular.

Thirdly, there were the Gentiles continuing still utterly society at all (not
only in sacris, for there was no need of interdicting that, they would not
join with them and for them to join in the Gentile sacrifices were downright
Idolatry) but to separate from them, for fear their company and conversation
should infuse their Gentiles sins into them, wherein they were so strict,
that they would not go into the praetorium, where the band of Roman (i. e.
such Gentile) soldiers were, Joh. 18. ver. 28. counting it a Pollution, if
they had so done. So you see what was the condition of the Gentiles among the
Jews, and all this by law or standing custom among them, without any
interposition of any degree of excommunication, as having nothing to do to
judge them which are without, i. e. the last kind of Gentiles, and having set
rules for the other two.

Samaritans, they are almost, if not quite, in the same case with the last sort
of Gentiles, no conversation allowed between the Jews and them, as you see
Joh. 4. ver. 9. (...), the Jews have not common commerce with the Samaritans,
no not so far, as that one should give the other meat or drink in his want,
or help him to it, as appears by the former part of that verse, Do thou
being a Jew ask to drink of me being a Samaritan? they might not (...), eat
together, which was proportionable to the Niddui, (that being a separation, to
the distance of four paces, a congressu domestico, Buxt. Ep. Heb. instit. p.
55.
as well as sacro and civili, and a prohibition of eating and drinking together
promiseuously) and not only so, but an interdicting of acts of common
humanity, as helping to necessaries of life, like the proscription among the
Romans; but this is not by way of excommunication again, (but by standing law
or custom) for the Samaritans used not the same place of worship with the
Jews, came not to Jerusalem, Joh. 4. ver. 20. and so could not be
excommunicated by them. Nay, Matthew. 10. ver. 5. you shall see the Samaritans
and the Gentiles joined together in opposition to the Jews, when the Apostles
are commanded to go neither to the way of the Gentiles, nor to the City of
Samaria, but only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; that is, first to
them, before either Samaritans or Gentiles were preached to, which were all one
in effect, the Samaritan being called (...) an aliene, Luke 17.16.

In the next place, the word sinners is in the New Testament an equivocal word;
for it may signify either Gentiles, as Gal. 2.15. sinners of the Gentlles; or
else scandalous offenders, infamous persons, harlots, etc. these (it seems) it
was unlawful to eat with, Mat. 9.11. If taken under the first notion, the case
will be clear upon the same account, as before we gave you of the Heathens: but
under the second notion, if sinners signify notorious offenders, then are they
considered either as men under the punishment of excommunication, or at least
worthy to be under it, and that either under niddui or cherem, the lowest of
which would make them incapable of familiar conversation, and eating together
with other Jews; and upon that ground, the Jews might quarrel with Christ for
eating with them, and S. Paul speaking of the incestuous person might refer to
the Jewish custom, and thereupon command (...), not to eat with him, (that
remotion in niddui for the distance of four cubits, being unreconcileable with
familiar eating together) and so the Pharisee, when the (...), Luke 7.37. came
with her cruse of ointment, and anointed and kissed Christ's feet, resolves that
if Christ knew what she were, he would not admit of so near a commerce with
her, and concludes him no Prophet, that he did not know it.

Lastly, for the Publicans, who were also thought unfit for eat and drink with,
I conceive that is not again from any of the Jewish censures past upon them,
but only because either they were Gentiles, and so incapable of that commerce,
or else being Jews, yet being officers of the Romans, they were supposed to
commerce ordinarily with Gentiles, and so to be polluted by that means, and by
the law of legal pollution interdicted that familiar reception among the Jews;
notwithstanding which, it appears, the Publican, Luke 18, 10. went up to the
Temple to pray, as well as the Pharisee; and if the Parable be argumentative,
it seems the Pharisee and the Publican were in the same Court of the Temple,
(as maybe guest by the Pharisees pointing him out, This Publican) and so that
the Publican enjoyed all the same privileges of access that the other did,
(though still he continued afar off, and that in a most humble posture, as if
he he were ander niddui, that lowest degree of excommunication) but because it
may be subject to mistake, to argue from Parables, I shall not do so, but leave
the Publican joined with the sinner, as one Heathen with another, both by the
Jewish laws, forbidden to converse with, and not expelled by any censure of
excommunication.

These conjectures being thus obiter and in passage premised, only on purpose
to discard some less pertinent places, which some others perhaps have taken
liberty to make use of, and not out of design to make any special advantage of
this explication of them, in order to my present purpose, or in opposition to
any; I come now to the last thing proposed even now, to show you the phrases
more purely Christian: Such are, 1. To deliver unto Satan, (...), 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. answerable to Cherem among the Jews, so far as belonged to the
society in sacris, a turning the blasphemer out of the Church of Christ. This
was the frequent style of excommunication, because it was the depriving the man
of those every-day means which are in Christianity afforded, as ordinarily
useful to eject Satan and the power of his Kingdom out of the heart: Such are,
1. The Prayers of the Church. 2. The public use of the Word or Doctrine of
Christianity: (for so he that is under Gherem, nec docet nec docetur, neither
teaches nor are taught, and in the ancient Christian Church it appears they
were excluded from that, and upon repentance received for the first three years
among the (...), or hearers in the porch, (...), says Zonaras, which being the
first degree of their return to communion, argues that before they were
excluded from it) and thirdly, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in which
respect scandalous sinners are by S. Jude called spots in their feasts, or
agapae (which being annexed to the Lords Supper denoted the whole action) i. e.
unfit, as blemished sacrifices to be received there. The use of which means
being in the economy of the Gospel designed to so much advantage to the Soul,
for the casting Satan out of it, consequently the banishing from, or depriving
of the use of those means is properly styled the delivering to Satan, though in
Gods gracious disposal of all things, that be d^signed by him also to the same
gracious end, to cast Satan out of him, on whom nothing else can be able to
work.

Apostles times a sad consequent there was of this tradition or
excommunication, proportionable to the dirae or execrations in the Jewish
cherem, which, say they, raro effectu carebant, seldom wanted the effect, to
wit, corporal power and possession, and inflictions of Satan on those, who were
delivered up to him, as to a lictor or carnifex (in like manner as we read
befell Saul after his defection from God, when the evil spirit came upon him,
1 Samuel 16. verse. 14.)

For it must be remembered, that about Christ's time, and a little devil was
permitted to have such a ranging unlimited power, that he did ordinarily obtain
leave to tyrannize over the bodies of mortal men, laying all kinds of diseases
upon them, (as indeed there is scarce any kind of disease, but some resemblance
of it you may find in some or other of those described in the Gospel) which is
sometimes called (...), Satan's buffeting, 2 Cor. 12.7. sometimes (...), racking
or tormenting, as of the Paralytick, Mat. 8.6. grievously tormented, and so
Mat. 4. v. 24. that condition of men is described by (...): we render it, taken
with diverse diseases and torments, the word (...) (as (...)) is used ordinarily
for those, that are possessed with devils, and so here of those consequents of
such possessions, and therefore follows, (...), and possessed with devils. And
sometimes (...), to bind, as Luke 11.13. in the story of the woman which had
the spirit of infirmity, verse. 11. ( i. e. a devil or evil spirit that
inflicted a strange infirmity or disease upon her) 18. years, bowing her
together, that she was not able to look up; It Is said of her, (...), that Satan
had bound her, ver. 16. and the curing her is called loosing her from her
infirmity, ver. 12. (...), from her bond, ver. 16. agreeable to the phrase of
binding and loosing in this business, Mat. 16.19. and 18.10. Hence it is that
the Apostles delivering to satan, is said to be (...), 1 Cor. 5.5. to the
destruction of the flesh, i. e. by way of pain or disease, a special part of
Apostolical discipline. Thus in Ignatius Epistle to the Romans, we have (...),
the punishment of the devil, which I conceive in that place must belong only
to temporal inflictions, because he wishes it were upon himself, (...), that he
may by that means obtain or come to Christ, of which eternal would deprive him;
and, perhaps S. Paul's wish extended no farther, Romans 9. then to be thus
excommunicate from the Church of Christ, and to be under those temporal evils
that attended it, which was an exuberance of love also to his brethren.

Romans there was banishment, and interdictio ignis and aquae, offenders were
interdicted the necessaries of life: and as in Josephus, the Esseni [(...) etc.
cast out from their congregation such as are taken in notorious offenses, and
they that are thus cast out, come many times to miserable deaths, consumed with
hunger, etc. or as Heliodorus, 2 Mac. 3. in his sacrilegious enterprise was
scourged by two Angels in the shape of young men, v. 26. and hardly came off
with life. So the Apostolical Excommunication, or Anathema, was attended with
these adversaries of life, diseases, pains, and grievous torments, to lay a
necessity on them of returning, or being reformed by that means. And this I
conceive is the rod which the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor. 4.21. the power of
inflicting death, as on Ananias; or diseases, blindness on Elymas, and the
like; the Heb: (...) there rendered (...), rod, being Isa. 10.24. (...), a
plague, all one with (...), Mar. 3.10. and so very capable in that place of
this interpretation, and by the matter of the choice there proposed to the
Corinthians most fitly applied to it.

delivering to Satan, and in it that Apostolical censure of excommunication,
and its attendant, corporal inflictions of diseases and pains.

Cains condition described, Genesis 4. is very applyable, (by way of accommodation
at least) ver. 14. Behold, thou have driven me out from the face of the earth;
answerable to v. 11. Thou art cursed from the earth, theor (...) Anathema to
which the cursing there is answerable, being a species of excommunication
higher then Niddui or (...), even a driving or casting out, the English of
(...) before mentioned, Luke 6.22. i. e. either from the Church (as anon you
shall see (...) signify) or which is all one, from that part of the earth,
where Adam and his other children dwelt, as the sole Church then existent, and
thereupon immediately it follows, and from thy face shall I be hid: Gods face
typically noting the Church, where God had always a peculiar presence, to
which refers the (...) the bread of faces; or shewbread in the Temple, showing
or signifying the presence of God there, and I shall be a fugitive and vagabond;
and then finally it shall come to pass, says he, that every one that finds
me, shall stay me; there is the (...) or (...) death, (...); excision, from
which though God freed him, v. 15. yet the other he lay under, as appears by v.
16. Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, went out, i. e. was turned out
(as (...), Mat. 25.46. is all one with (...), chap. 8.12.) of the presence of
the Lord, i. e. out of the Church, or visible congregation of Gods servants,
the place where God is pleased peculiarly to exhibit himself, i. e. out of
Adams family or the place where he dwelt, for it follows, Cain dwelt in the
land of Nod on the East of Eden, but this only as an image or accommodation.

One thing I desire here to interpose as in a Parenthesis, Of Consc. 8.34.
Papers, but will be here seasonably set down more at large, as peculiarly
pertinent to the matter now in hand of delivering to Satan, and it is this, that
this act of the Church in delivering up to Satan, is but an Image of Gods real
dealing, who is wont upon occasion tradere Satanae, to deliver men unto Satan.
The ground of this affirmation you may discern by compounding these Scripture
Truths together. 1. That Satan is our adversary before God, and therefore
called Satan (...) which signifies so, and also (...) enemy, and (...) set
against us, etc. Secondly, that one main act of his Satanship is expressed in
accusing us before God, Rev. 12.11. and thence he is called peculiarly (...),
i. e. an opposite, (...), in court of judicature, 1 Pet. 5.8. and that either
1. upon some false suggestion, no real crime, as particularly that of
unsincerity (or serving God only as long as God used him well, allowed him the
(...)) in the case of Job, Chap. 1. verse. 9.11. in which respect he is
peculiarly called (...) a calumniator; and it is observable that the 72. do
most what render (...) by that word, noting this act of calumnia^ing Gods
servants to their Master, to be a special piece of his being our adversary; Or
else, secondly, upon the real commission of some sin, which advantage he will
be sure not to omit, when he can take it, for sure he that will accuse falsely,
will not spare to accuse when he has true matter of accusation allowed him. To
which purpose he is styled observator calcanei, an observer of the heel, in the
vulgar Latin, Genesis 3.15. (agreeable to the Septuagints (...), unless (which I
easily believe) that be a falls print for (...)) an observer of the heel of
Christ, i. e. of Christians, or one that goes up and down, to and fro in the
earth, Job 1.7. to find out matter of accusation, and in this sense he is
called (...), i. e. an accuser (as that differs critically from a (...) or
calumniator) of the brethren, i. e. Christians, or believers, when they fall
into a fault. An example of this, I conceive, we have in the case of S. Peter,
Luke 22.31. where Satan's desiring to have Peter, seems to be founded upon some
previous or precedent accusation of him for some criminal commission, perhaps
that of striving with the other Disciples for superiority, immediately
preceding. v. 24. (as his successor at Rome has done ever since) or for some
other sin, which Satan saw, though we do not at this distance.

third place, his expetivit ut cribraret, Luke 22.31. his desiring to winnow,
his solemn petition to God that he that has so offended, may be delivered
unto him; parallel to which our English Bibles make that other place (...),
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. which is there plainly attributed to
him, as he is (...), a plaintiff or adversary in a Court, impleading, or
accusing, or delivering to the Judge, Matt. 5.25. that so he may deliver him
back, again as to a tormentor; and then if this Satanical course or (...)
prevail, if this accusation be received, this petition be granted, as it was
(though with limitation) Job 1.12. the result is, a man delivered up to Satan,
to have as Job had, so many assayes of his malice practiced upon him. To which
purpose you may please to observe what Psellus has given us in his Scholia on
the Chaldean Oracles on that text [(...), Page 93.
the devils have the power of binding men] (...). These punitive envious devils
do bind, and even strangle the souls of good and (as we say) regenerate men:
and from thence it follows, says he, that we often see (...), Many of pure and
holy conversations falling into unexpected calamities: according to that of the
Apostle, For this cause are many sick and weak among you, etc. And perhaps it
may on this ground be farther observable, that when men are thus by God
delivered up into Satan's hand; and he by that permission designs them any
mischief, he is able to foretell it to his instruments, and so sometimes does
foretell such future events, to get a reputation in the world of fore-knowing
all things.

Now this being the condition of the Apostolical censure or delivering that who
were thus delivered, satan corporally tormented them, brought them to deaths
door, and sometimes killed them, it must follow on the other side. 1. That the
Apostles by the power of the Keys, must be enabled together, both to cast out
devils, and to heal diseases, and so they were, Mat. 16.17. In my name they
shall cast out devils, and 18. They shall lay their hands upon the sick, and
they shall recover. 2. That whom the Apostles absolve from the Censure of
excommunication, they might and should also cure of diseases, the consequents
of that censure then (though not always now, and therefore perhaps only the
first power belongs to the Governors of the Church now, to wit, that of
absolving, not of curing) and so every where in the Gospel we read forgiveness
of sins, and healing of diseases, or casting out devils, joined together, as
Mat. 9.2. Christ says to the sick of the palsy, Son be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee, and then v. 6. Arise, take up thy bed and walk, (the
style and ceremony of Christ's cure) and the curing of that disease, an argument
in Christ's own Logic convincing and demonstrative, that he had power to
forgive sins on earth, for though in Mat. and Luke it be (...), and so the
(...) on earth either applyable to son of man, or to the power of the son of
man on earth, as probably, as (...), to forgive sins, yet in the parallel place
in Mar. 2.10. it is distinctly (...), to forgive sins on earth, which is not
subject to that ambiguity, i. e. to absolve in the Church, because those
diseases being consequent to Gods delivering up to Satan, which is the Idea of
the Churches binding, the sinner must be first loosed (i. e. his sin forgiven)
before he could be cured, and therefore the phrase was critically exact and
proper of the woman with the spirit of infirmity, (...), to be loosed from her
bond, to express the cure of that disease. So Jam. 5.15. (which if it strictly
belong not, may yet commodiously be applied to this matter) you find together
the ((...)) saving or recovering the sick, and [(...)] remission of his sins
also: yea and it is observable what S. Cyprian says so many years after, that
baptism the seal of pardon of sin, freed those from evil spirits, that were
before troubled with them; (Whence sure it was, that the Catechists that
prepared Converts for baptism, are in the Canons of the Councils called (...),
Exorcists) and if after baptism they relapsed to sinning, the evil spirit
returned again; by which it is manifest, says he, that the Devil in baptism is
turned out by the faith of the believer, and his faith failing, returns again.

Joh. 5.16. [(...)] a sin unto death, (in which the faithful are not bound to
pray for him that is guilty of it, or in which case there is no promise that
their prayers shall be heard) i. e. a sin of such a nature, as to which the
delivering up to Satan the (...) the (...) belongs, the committer of which
(though he might in general be prayed for, yet) as long as he continued
impenitent and obdurate he was deprived of the prayers of the Church, at least
was fit to be excluded out of the Church, where men prayed in common one for
another, as many as were present; nay perhaps the Apostles, having the power of
discerning of spirits, might possibly discern some man impenetrably obstinate,
and so irrecoverably gone, and so give over all praying or interceding for him,
(as on the other side [(...)] if any man without that spirit of discerning, see
his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask or pray, etc. nay
on the contrary pray for his excision in some cases, as the after-Church
judging, though with an humane (and so possibly fallible) judgment, of Julian
the Apostate, banished him out of their prayers, (and rather prayed for his
cutting off) to which yet I make no doubt they would have given him a return,
if they should have discerned any probability of his return unto the faith.

The second thing which I shall add hereby way of appendage, anathema maranatha,
1 Cor. 16.22. which is as if it were (...) and (...), the second, and (...) (
the Lord comes) the third sort of the Jewish censures) compacted or put
together into one, perhaps not to signify in that place any peculiar kind of
censure among Christians instituted (as some would think) in these words
against those that have committed the sin against the holy Ghost. For the
[(...), loves not] there, will not properly signify that sin, nor indeed any
other, of which the Church can have cognizance, (loving, or not loving being a
secret of the heart, til it break out into some actual virtue or sin, and then
it puts off that title of the affection, and is called by the name of the
action) but by way of accommodation, to apply to the state of such a man the
two last degrees of excommunication among the Jews, the one noting total, the
other final, irreversible excision; and by that terrible representation, as by
a clap and a flash of thunder and lightning together, to give a through sense
of the danger of that state to set an amazing formidable mark or character upon
those that love not the Lord Jesus: whether they be hypocrites, who whatsoever
else they are, are certainly no lovers of Christ, at least not lovers (...), in
sincerity, Ep. 6.24. or whether haters of him, as al vicious persons are, and
then the [(...), let him be] is not always a legal form of censure, but either
a Prophetic or Apostolical denunciation, importing but this, that the
hypocrite or hater of Jesus Christ shall undoubtedly be damned.

By that which has been said on occasion of this first phrase) will appear
distinctly, wherein this power of binding in the first branch of it, as
peculiar to the Apostles from after ages, consists, peculiarly in the power of
delivering up to corporal inflictions, diseases, etc. The other phrases will
express the matter as it is common to the Apostles times with all after ages,
the ecclesiastical discipline, not as it differs from, but as it is al one with
the Apostolical, divested only of that one consequent among them, the corporal
inflictions.

In this rank is the (...) I will not spare, 2 Cor. 13.2. explained, v. 10. by
(...), abscision, and (...), sublition, taking away, or turning out of the
Church; for I conceive the ver. is thus to be paraphrased. These things I, now
being absent, write to you, that when I come, I may not be forced to use acts
of severity, according to the power which is given to me for edification (which
I rather desire to make use of) and not according to the power which was given
to me for destruction or excision.) So again, the (...) 1 Cor. 5.9. the
Apostles command of not communicating or associating with such. It has much
troubled some scrupulous enquirers, where or when it was that S. Paul had thus
written unto them, phansying it necessary to resolve that he had written some
other Epistle to the Corinthians before this First. But sure the beginning of
the Chapter will lay this scruple, for to that (and not to any other farther
off) the [(...), i. e. (...), I have written in this Epistle that you should
not company, etc.] does belong, and that the [(...)] I have now written, verse.
11. will enforce, for so in 3, 4 and 5. verses we read, I verily, as absent in
body, but present in spirit, have judged already as though I were present,
concerning him that has done this deed; in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
when you and my spirit are gathered together with the power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan, etc. The Apostle though absent, yet
having an Apostolic ruling power or jurisdiction over them, passes censure
(as formally, as if he had been amongst them) upon that fornicator or
incestuous person: and by that spirit or power of his, whereby he was present
in their Assemblies, does therein pronounce this censure of excommunication or
delivering up to Satan against him, that by this means he may reduce that
notorious offender (that is the importance of those 3. verses) and that others
be not tainted by his example, verse 6. etc. And then verse 9. (having a little
digrest, v. 7, 8.) he resumes his matter again, and says it over briefly in
another phrase, with an (...), i. e. this then was it I wrote to you in, or, by
Epistle, (because I was not present) that you should not company with such. By
which it appears that the delivering a man to Satan, and the commanding (...),
are all one (or one but a light addition to, or variation from the other) all
other men being so far concerned in such a ones being so delivered, as not to
company with him; yet that not so much (as men now a days think) lest they
should be polluted by him, ( i. e. by that act of communion with him, as under
the Law by touching an unclean thing) as to help discipline him, that the
insensate sinner may see himself left alone to no society but Satan's (avoided,
abandoned by all) and so be brought to a sense of his detestable dangerous
condition, (and others kept from thinking his actions exemplary or fit to be
imitated by them) And therefore though this discipline be not used upon sinners
cut of the Church, ver. 12. for they will not be wrought on by the Christians
abandoning their company, yet says St. Paul verse. 11. with a professor of
Christianity, one that lives in the Church, and yet is guilty of this sin, or
the like, (...), (for so I conceive the words must be joined, all betwixt being
in a Parenthesis) neither to company nor eat with him, in stead of which, 2
These. 3.14. it is (...) simply, only with a (...) (which it seems is a
preparative to it) set a mark, or brand upon him, and do not company with him)
which in either place whether it belong only to exclusion from communion in
sacris, or be to be extended to interdiction of ordinary civil society, I
profess my self not over-confident; For the former only this may be said. 1
That although the sound of the words (...) (especially as we render it, no not
to eat) seem to contain the latter also, yet perhaps the aequipollence of that
other phrase [ delivering to Satan] may restrain it to the former. 2. Because
the interdiction of conversing or eating with Christian offenders might (now at
least) make it necessary for a man to go out of the world, as w^ll as the
interdict of heathen-fornicators company would have done then. 3. Because the
phrase [(...)] which in the close of the Chapter is set to express the former
censure, is by the Canons of the Councels solemnly applied to these
Ecclesiastical censures, suspension either from the Church or from office in
it.

And yet on the other side the Jews were so severe to some, eat or familiarly
to converse with them, as Samaritans, Publicans, heathens and sinners (so
called (...), i. e. notorious sinners) and a notable evidence and example of
that practice of theirs we have in the 3. book of Maccabees, where speaking of
the (...), deserters, or those that fell off to any notorious breach of their
law, the author says, (...), (...), they did express a detestation of them,
judging them as enemies of the Nation, and denied them the civility of common
converse or good usage, al friendly entertainments, etc. and the same is called
after in that place, (...), a separating from them, (...), (though it be read
corruptly, and without sense, (...)) aversation, and expressed by (...), they
appeared enemies to them: and even the Jewish nidui or first degree of
excommunication, being a remotion ad 4. passus, not suffering any man to come
within four paces of him that was so censured, was an interdiction of familiar
conversation or eating with him. And therefore perhaps some of that their
discipline may be here imitated, and retained; but then again for the former
opinion, Christ by his contrary practice seemed to dislike that custom of
theirs, and though he brought excommunication into the Church or in sacris,
it is not necessary he should continue that other that extended to civil
commerce, and therefore still perhaps may not.

society in Sacris; but yet sometimes the state of affairs so requiring, and
when some other defect may be so supplied, The Governors may proceed to the
second interdict, that no man shall talk familiarly, or entertain, or eat with
them, that all men shall avoid their company, discountenance them, and not so
much as say God speed, allow them ordinary Christian civility, by this means to
besiege, and starve them up, and so, if possible, humble and reduce them. To
which purpose it is observable what the learned and judicious Hugo Grotius
(...) has noted concerning this matter, that in a Christian Church where
either through the recentnesse of their plantation communes conventus non sunt,
there are no constant common assemblies of the Christians in it, or whereupon
the same occasion there is no settled Government in the hands of a Bishop and
assistent Presbyters, or where the Church is torn asunder by Schisms, (as in
Corinth, when this first Epistle was written, chap. 11.18. whence it follows,
v. 31. That judgments or censures were neglected, and upon that neglect,
diseases and deaths among them, (I would, I could not say among us also)
whereas at the writing of the second Epistle, the discipline together with a
quiet judicature was restored, 2 Cor. 2.6.) there in stead of exclusion from
communion in sacris, that other interdict of private commerce, or avoiding of
private familiarity has been thought useful by the Apostle; To this you may
apply, Romans 16.17. where the Apostle beseeches them, to mark and avoid such as
cause divisions and offenses among them, and so 2 Thessal. 3.14. just now
mentioned, if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and
have no company with him, etc. And if in this respect, Mat. 18.17. may be
extended to this sense also, 'twill no way contradict or prejudice our present
pretensions, it being very reasonable for private Christians to constrain
themselves toward those who have expressed such a contradiction to all fraternal
methods of charity, and by outward behavior to show a dislike of their
contumacie and obduration, especially when an Apostle at a distance shall pass
that judgment on any particular man, and the present state of the Church leaves
no place for expectation of formal censures, the law of the heathen Charondas
being not unreasonable in this case* (...), That no man converse with a wicked
man or woman, or bring a reproach on himself, as if he were like him.

Another phrase to express this censure is (...), Tit. 3.10. After a first and
second admonition, avoid him; which that it belongs to the method directed to
by Christ, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. it is clear at the first sight: but seeing there
be three admonitions before censure, Mat. 18. the first of the injured person
alone, the second of the two or three, the third of the Church the difficulty
will be, which 2. of those 3. are the (...) first and second here? my opinion
of it, with submission, is, that the first and second here are the very same
with the first and second in S. Mat. 1. that of one alone, and then of that
one, with one or two more with him. And if it be objected, that then the
excommunication must not follow immediately upon that second, I answer that
those words, being spoken to Titus Bish. of Creet by S. Paul, telling him what
he should do, must needs make a difference from what it would be, if 'twere a
private man; It appeared probable before that the admonition of the Church
signified that of the rulers of the Church and therefore when they have
admonished, there is no place for appeal to the Church, nor consequently for
that third admonition, and therefore in this case, where the Governor (who is
representatively the Church it self, a public, no private person) after a
first and second admonition (and the second with one or two, perhaps with some
or all of the College of Presbyters joined with him) comes to be despised, the
(...) follows, or proceeding to censure without any third admonition
interposing. Which will appear to be the practice, if you look 2 Cor. 13.2.
where immediately after the second admonition, in the (...), characterized v.
11. by [ in the mouth of two or three, etc.] he tells the offenders, (...), I
will not spare, i. e. I will proceed to censure: and ver. 10. he tells them,
that this admonition is; (...), that I may not proceed to excision, or cutting
off, (for so (...), or (...), which we render sharpness, signifies) which is
there called (...), taking away, in the end of the verse; the very word which
is so ordinary in the ancient Canons, (...), tollatur, for the censure of
excommunication.

admonitions of the Church or rulers thereof (...), is a perverse wilful
sinner, (...), being self-condemned, i. e. I conceive by that non-submission to
the Churches admonitions, he withdraws and divides himself from that
comm^nion, and so inflicteth that punishment upon himself, which the censures
of the Church are wont to do on malefactors, for that is (...), 2 Cor. 13.10.
and (...), cut^ing off from the Church, which he being an heretic does
voluntarily without the judges sentence, his verv (...), heresy being a
willing (...) or excision. So says S. Jerome, whereas fornicators, etc. are
turned out of the Church, the hereti^k inflicts this on himself, suo arbitrio
ab ecclesia recedens, going of his own choice from the Church; which departing,
propriae conscientiae videtur esse damnatio, seems to be the censure of ones
own conscience: So in the Council of Laodicea, Can. 40. after an order that no
Bishop shall disobey a citation, when he is called to a Co^n^el, it is added
(...), if he contemn, he shall be conceived to acc^se himself, which is the next
degree to self-condemnation. So in the 22. Can. of the African Codex, (or in
Justellus his Account, the 19.) the words are clear of a Bishop that being
accused before a Council appears not, (...) (...), he shall be judged to have
pronounced sentence of condemnation against himself, and so even in
Philostratus. l. 7. c. 7. it is a saying of Apollonius, (...) he that shall
decline a judicature, how shall he avoid the being thought to have condemned
himself? So in the 12. Tables, Praesenti litem addicito, i. e. that he that
absents himself, be always cast; and so the Franks have always observed it,
ut absens causa caderet, ni Sonnia nuntiasset, that the absent should be
always condemned, unless he gave a just excuse of his absence. And the
Regulae ab Abbate Floriacensi constitutae add, Qui non comparuerit, tanquam
convictus judicabitur, he that appears not, shall be judged as convict, i. e.
(...): If you would see this Interpretation more fully confirmed, I must refer
you to Marculsi formul. l. 1. c. 37. and Bignonius on them, to Stephan.
Fornerius rerum quotid. l. 6. c. 21. and out of him, Justellus in the Notes on
Cod. Ecclesiae universae, p. 38. But enough of this.

I shall take in no more places to examine for this point power, save only
those in the Gospel (with which this discourse began) which, as we have once
gone over in relation to the first enquiry, so we shall now again in order to
the second.

First, then, Mat. 16.19. (...), I will give you the keys of the kingdom of
heaven] where 'twil be no news to him that is versed in the New Testament, if I
tell him that (...), the kingdom of heaven, signifies the Church of Christ
here below Militant, being not a disparate body but a fellow-member of Christ,
with the other triumphant in heaven. I could weary my Reader with places to
this purpose, ready at every turn to justify this interpretation, as when it is
said of St. John the Baptist, Matt. 11.11. that though from the beginning there
had not risen a greater then he, (a more then Prophet in pointing out rather
then prophesying of Christ, (...), Behold the Lamb of God) yet (...), he least
in this new Church, (this (...) -- the age to come, as the Septuagint, Es. 9.6.
call it, and so Heb. 2.5 (...) the world to come, and perhaps Heb. 6.5. (...),
the powers of the age to come, i. e. of Christianity, and (...) (...) the
coming kingdom, as the phrase in S. Mark. 11.10. may I conceive, be rendered
absolutely thus, (...), Blessed in the name of ehe Lord of our father David, be
the coming kingdom; or Blessed in the name of the Lord be the coming
kingdom of our father David; this Church or kingdom of Christ here on earth,
not hereafter in heaven) the least believer, at least teacher of the Gospel
here (not Saint there) is greater then he. So Mat. 8.11. upon the Centurions
coming to Christ, and expressing so great measure of faith, that he professes
not to have found the like in any Jew, he adds that Many shall come from the
East and West, all parts of the heathen world, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, i. e. as that Centurion did,
believe in Christ (and become one Church with the Jews, of whom Abraham the
father of the faithful was the first) and the children of the kingdom (they
that were till then the only Church, to wit, the rebellious unbelieving Jews)
should be cast out. So clearly Chapter 13.24. (...), the kingdom of heaven, the
Church here below, not the kingdom above, is likened, etc. For sure there are
no enemies to sow, nor tares to be sown in heaven, which in this kingdom are
there said to be, ver. 15. (as Rev. 12.7. the war that is mentioned in heaven
may be an argument that heaven in that place signifies the Church here below,
which only being Militant can be said to have war in it) and so in the other
Parables in that Chapter. I have named enough for an hint to any to observe
many more in this Gospel, Chap. 18.1, 3, 4. chap. 19.24, 25. chap. 20.1. chap.
21.43. and (which is a little nearer to the phrase in this place) chap. 23.13.
the Pharisees shutting up the kingdom of heaven before men, i. e. keeping men
from entering the Church, from becoming Christians, and the like also in the
other Gospels. If this notion of the kingdom of heaven do yet seem alien, or
forced, or less proper for this place, then you may but please to observe,
that a key refers to a lock, a lock to a door, or entrance to any place, and
then the Church being supposed the door or gate, the only way of passage to
heaven, these keys of heaven it self must be the keys of the Church below, as
of the door that leads thither, and then that will return to the same issue
still.

So then, Peter, and in him the rest of the Apostles and successor-governors of
the Church had the keys of the Church given them, i. e. clearly a power of
shutting out, or receiving in to the visible Militant Church, of removing the
contumacious by censure of Excommunication, and receiving in the humble
penitents by absolution, and so of binding and loosing, (as it follows) (...),
here below, upon the earth, answerable to that exception of the (...) (for the
Church) premised, and just agreeable to the phrase, Mark. 2.10. (...), to
forgive sins on earth, which (it appears by the mentioning of the keys as the
foundation of this power) signifies receiving men into the Church,
disexcommunicating, and therefore the binding is there peculiarly the censure
of Excommunication, and nothing else; (...), the thing we undertook to show
from hence.

From whence by the way may be understood the meaning of Mat. 12.32. it shall
not be forgiven him, ((...), impersonally) he shall not receive absolution,
either in this world, i. e. in the Church from the Ecclesiastic censure, nor
at the day of judgment, i. e. in the world to come, the phrase seeming to me
to refer to that rule among the Jews mentioned before out of (...) ^r. de
excom. Si quis juret in hunc modum, etc. If any man swear after this manner,
[If this be not true, let me be excommunicated in this world, and in the other]
and be perjured, he cannot be absolved by any: and then how ridiculous are they
that ground a Purgatory on this place?

We shall not need to make any distinct survey of the second chap. 18.18.
because (as to the matter of this power, our present enquiry) it is verbatim
(only the number and some little unimportant circumstances changed) the same
with this former place, (...), binding and loosing in the earthly part of the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Church below. One thing only it will not be amiss
again to add as an appendage common to these two places (though we mentioned it
before) and it is this, that [the (...)] the mention of absolution is (in both)
an attendant of the (...) or binding precedent, as indeed loosing generally
presupposes a band, and therefore Act. 2.24. where we read, (...)) and render
it, ( loosed the pains of death) it is sufficiently clear, and confessed that
(...) are there taken for (...) or (...) (by the equivocalnesse of the Hebrew
word (...) which signifies both, and is rendered by the 72. sometimes (...), a
band, sometimes (...), a pang of travail) and so should be rendered in that
place, bands of death, in relation to which it follows, he could not be holden,
etc. which intimates absolution to be in universum, or absolutely necessary
only to those that have been bound, and so only after excommunication, the
absolution proportioned to the precedaneous censure, and that the only thing
that lies upon any, necessitate praecepti here, or medii in any other respect,
all other absolution without this precedent binding censure, being (though it
may be allowed very useful and profitable for the comfort and satisfaction of
the penitent, yet) neither commanded, prescribed the Priest to give, nor the
penitent to receive (at least by either of these two places.)

Joh. 20.26. (which by some is thought to belong to somewhat else, rather then
those censures of the Church, 1. Because the phrases are other, (...) and
(...), remitting and retaining, in stead of (...) and (...), binding and
loosing. 2. Because the (...), [ remit] is before (...), [ retain.] And 3.
because this is delivered to all the Apostles together, whereas the two other
were spoken, one personally to Peter, the other of the Church) I in humility
conceive, that as before we showed that this place in S. John belonged to the
same persons to which the other two belonged, to wit, the Apostles and their
succeeding rulers of the Church, so it is perfectly parallel to them also in
respect of the matter of the Commission; and my reasons are these: 1. Because
the phrases, though (as the first reason pretends) other in sound, are yet
directly synonyma's with the former in Scripture-stile. I say that (...), to
remit, is al one with (...), to loose, and (...), to retain, with (...), to
bind. And therefore Theophylact uses together (...), power of remitting and
binding, confounding the two places in S. John and S. Mat. together, and
rendering (...), to retain, by (...), to bind; and (...), to loose, by (...), to
remit, in Mat. 16.19. and so promiscuously in other Writers. If there be the
least difference it is only this, that (...) signifies to bind, and (...), to
bind, and also to keep bound; in which respect (...) is more proper here in S.
John, because the order is inverted, and (...), retaining, put after (...),
remitting, and so the word which signifies also [ to keep bound] or to
not-remit, is more perfectly and critically agreeable, then (...) to bind would
have been; and yet when binding is mentioned first, (...) as exact as (...), as
in the other places: But yet for all this light accidental difference, I shall
not retract saying, the words are in use perfectly synonymous; (...), remit,
and (...), loose; especially as applied to sin; both signify forgiving of it;
the first as sin is taken under the notion either of a debt, or a thraldom,
(for (...) is in the N. Test. applied to both, to the one in the Lords Prayer,
to the other Luke 4.18. and both directly opposed to (...)) the second, as of a
band; so in the Septuagints Translation of the Old Testament, Genesis 4.12.
((...), perhaps false copied for (...), My sin is greater then can be forgiven)
or more clear^y, Exodus 32.21. (...), If thou will, (or, O that thou would)
forgive them that sin; and in diverse other places ((...), remit) taken for
forgive, and so in like manner (...) to loose, Job 42.9. (...), (a Translation
of the words which are in Hebrew (...) God accepted the person of Job praying
for them) he forgave them that sin by Job, i. e. by his mediation. There (...)
[to loose] is taken for [to forgive.]

So also for (...), and (...), to bind, and to hold or retain, the Jer. 33.1.
and (...), Dan. 10.8. and 11.6. and so Act. 2.24. [(...)] being holden, is set
opposite to ((...)) loosing of bands, and so must signify keeping bound, (and
in almost all other places it signifies to hold fast, or take hold of, Mat.
18.28.21.46.26.4, etc. and is sometimes joined with (...), as holding fast is
precedaneous, and preparative to binding, Mat. 14.3. (...), laying hold on him,
bound him, and Apoc. 20.2. (...), held and bound) and so (...), though rendered
to retain, is taken for (...) to bind also, (or if there be any difference, it is
this, that it signifies less then binding, rather then more, and so will not
conclude any thing which the former places were not able to conclude.) And so
you may observe in the Fathers, viz. S. Basil, speaking of the freedom of
Christians in their bands, he says they are (...), bound, but not capable of
binding; and many the like.

Secondly, because the inverting of the order of words is too light and casual
a thing to be argumentative, and therefore the second reason is of little
force, being taken only from that change, for which yet some reasonable
account also may be given from the variety of the words, which caused this
inversion, and consequently no more argument will be deducible from this change
of order, then from the change of words would be just to deduce: If the change
of the words would argue ought, then I confess the inverting of the order,
caused by that, would per modu^ accumulationis do so too; but that being once
cleared to import no new thing, this which is only attendant on that, cannot
be thought to do so, and so there will be no need of farther answer to that,
when the former has bin sufficiently answered.

Peter's person, (as it is ordinary for Donations made to Communities to be
delivered to one of that number for the use of all) as is acknowledged by all
but those, whose pretended interest in S. Peter has bribed them to inflame
his, and lessen the other Disciples prerogative, as much as they can. And the
second in plain words with a preface of (...), Verily I say to you, i. e. to
the Disciples with whom the discourse had continued by way of mutual colloquie
from the beginning of the Chap. This I am sure is the affirmation of the Greek
Fathers, particularly Theophylact on Mat. 13. where he affirms that promise of
the power of binding and loosing to be fulfilled in those words of Christ in S.
John, Whose sins you do remit, etc. the place was formerly set down at large,
and need not be repeated; and if you examine the word (...) throughout the N.T.
you will have no temptation to doubt it.

power, these censures, and occasionally interweaved the interpretation of some
places which I conceive to depend on this matter, it were now a fit season to
proceed to the writings of the ancient Church, and draw down the history of
this practice through the first and purer times: But that has been so
faithfully performed by many others, De rep. Eccl. l. 5. c. 7. and 9.
particularly by Spalatensis, that it would be a great insolence to attempt to
do it better. Only it will be worth our rehearsing, (though we only refer you
to that Magazin for all farther explication of it) that there were some nice
differences observed in this matter between the binding which was a censure,
and the other which was only a punishment, the one conceived to bind in
heaven, the other not. 2. Betwixt the binding of the refractory impenitent, and
the humble confitent penitent: the first for the cure and removing the scandal
of some notorious crime; the second on his voluntary confessing his crime, and
submitting himself to be bound by way of penance, that so by being loosed
again, he might be the more sure of that pardon in heaven, which is promised to
those which are absolved on earth, and so propter majorem cautelam, to satisfy
the trembling conscience, and assure it that God has forgiven him.

These are excellent profitable subjects, in which I desire the Reader will
satisfy himself out of those judicious Collections of that very learned
unhappy man. And if it be now demanded of me, whether private absolution be not
contained under the importance of these places? I answer, that this last
distinction has in effect answered this question, and defined, that in case of
private binding it does come under it, and that that, though in some sense it
be left ad libitum, or voluntary to the penitents will or choice, is yet
necessary to every one whose conscience either is not able to perform and go
through the work of inward repentance with God alone, or is not able to
satisfy it self with such performance without the Ministers assistance called
in.

To which purpose I shall desire that that may be considered second Exhortation
before the Communion, in these words: Because it is requisite that no man
should come to the holy Communion but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and with
a quiet conscience; therefore if there be any among you, which by the means
aforesaid (which were to examine their lives by the rule of Gods commandments,
and wherein they shall perceive themselves to have offended, either by will,
word, or deed, there to bewail their own sinful lives, and confess themselves
to Almighty God with full purpose of amendment; and if their offenses be also
against their neighbors, then to reconcile themselves to those, with
readiness to make restitution and satisfaction for wrong done, and to forgive
others that have offended them) cannot quiet his own conscience, but requires
farther comfort or counsel, then let him come to me, (i. e. his lawful Pastor)
or some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods Word, and open his grief,
that he may receive such ghostly counsel, advice, and comfort, as his
conscience may be relieved, and that by the ministry of Gods Word he may
receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution, to the quieting of his
conscience, and avoiding all scruple and doubtfulnesse. All which being an
exhortation of the Church belonging to a particular case, [ when a man by the
use of all helps which are within his own reach, cannot attain to quiet of
conscience, or be satisfied that he is fit to receive the holy Communion;] as
they do imply that those foresaid means may happily serve the turn, without
opening his case to the Minister, and consequently without receiving
absolution; so are they a fervent exhortation to all, in case those means prove
not successful, to seek out, and make use of those auxiliaries, which
whosoever in that case shall neglect, will be guilty of great unkindness to his
own soul, and may well be thought to have betrayed it to great and needless
danger. And it is worthy our noting from hence, that receiving of comfort, and
the benefit of absolution are by our Church here conjoined, to signify this
absolution to be beneficial to him that once wanted comfort, as a means of
confirming that comfort which the Minister had now given him. To which end
certainly it is very proper and seasonable: for when a discreet and learned
Minister, having had the survey of my soul, (the cognizance of my offense
first, and then of my repentance) shall from the word of God give me assurance,
that (if I am what to him I appear to be) my estate is good, and thereupon
pronounce me absolved, as a true penitent, from all my sins; This will, 1. seal
me a right of Gods promise of forgiveness in heaven, as it were solemnly and
in the Court; and 2. extremely quiet me, and confirm to me that comfort, i. e.
that comfortable opinion of my good estate, and hope of my future happiness,
which he had given me, when I see him who has no reason to be partial to me,
and whom I cannot suspect of ignorance, or passion in this particular, (both
which perhaps I may upon enquiry discern in my self) and beside, who is set
over me by Christ to this purpose, pronounce so clear a sentence of me, and
that (as the precedent words are) by the ministry of Gods word, i. by applying
peculiar parts of that infallible truth to the present condition of my soul,
and from thence pronouncing my absolution. And that this is the meaning of the
absolution there, it is evident by that which is the second thing, which I
thought worthy our observing from hence, viz. what is added in conclusion, as
the ultimate end of that comfort and absolution, the quieting of conscience,
and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulnesse; which whether they be distinct,
so that the quieting of conscience may be the completion of the comfort, and
the avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulnesse, the end intended in, and
obtained by absolution, or whether both together indiscrete belong to both
together, the product will be still the same, that in case a man be not able to
satisfy his own scruples and doubts concerning himself, the Presbyter will be
able to stand him in good stead, by the Word of God applied to his case to give
comfort, and by pronouncing absolution to him to seal that comfort, and
persuade him to a greater confirmation of mind, that that comfort is not
groundless, and so take away doubts and scruples concerning that matter which
before molested him, and made him unfit for the Communion, which was the only
occasion of the exhortation.

Beside this, it is also true, that in case of sickness S. James' advice (if
not command) is punctual, that the Presbyters of the Church be called for, and
that they shall anoint the sick (a ceremony used in those days by Christ and
his Apostles in the curing of diseases, and casting out devils, not so much as
a viand toward our last great journey, as among the Romanists it is continued,
but either as a sign of our Spiritual cure, or as a means sanctified by prayer
to cure the sick, to deliver from the disease in the beginning of the verse)
(...) and if he be that have committed sins, absolution shall be given him; for
so that phrase will be most grammatically rendered, not [ they shall be forgiven
him] for then it would be (...), nor that [ God shall forgive him] for then it
would be (...), to agree with, (...) immediately precedent, the Lord shall
raise him, but impersonally remittetur ei, he shall have absolution. Of which
absolution 1. There is little question, but that it is a very proper
preparative to curing of his disease which is often sent to awake some drowsy
sinner, and is not removed til it have done the work in some measure, Ecclus.
38.9, 10. and therefore the ordinary preface to Christ's cures, is [ Son thy
sins are forgiven thee] as 2. Mac. 3. when Heliodorus had been so scourged for
his sacrilegious enterprise, and the high Priest offered sacrifice for his
recovery, verse 32. the Priest is said to have made an atonement, and
thereupon God granted him his life, verse 33. and so Ecclus 2.11. before Gods
delivering in time of tribulation, there is first his (...), remitting of sins,
before releasing from the pressure; and secondly, that absolution, as it is the
Ministers act peculiarly, and an act of benediction in him, contrary to the
execration in the cherem, or anathema, may well be thought in common reason to
have benign influence on the Patient, as the curses of Parents are generally
believed to be fattal curses (...) in Orpheus, the curses of Parents are shrewd
furies that haunt a man where ever he goes on the earth, have an inauspitious
influence on all his earthly prosperities, devour and eat out his patrimony;
and so also by the rule of contraries, the blessings of Parents, Eccl. 3.9. may
avail toward the removing of temporal calamities, and so consequently, the
prayers and blessings, and absolution of the Presbyter the spiritual father.
Thirdly, there will be as little question who shall be the Minister of it, when
it is considered that there is no supposition or presumption in that place of
the presence of any, but only of the (...), the Presbyters of the Church, and
as little will there be of the fitness, and exceeding expedience, that the
sins of which he is so peculiarly to receive absolution should be confessed,
and bewailed before him, from whom the absolution is expected. One thing only
the context may perhaps farther import, that this Presbyterial absolution may
not be (by force of that place) so absolutely necessary to all sick persons,
but only to the (...), to him that has (formerly, and so as upon examination
of himself, he may reasonably impute his sickness to it) committed sins,
either as the word (...) denotes greater sins, or as sins contrary to our duty
toward God, whose Minister the Presbyter is, or as (...) signifies to live
indulgently in sin, and so as it is not reconcilable with a He that is born of
God, (...), does not commit sin, 1 John 3.9.
regenerate estate, as long as it continues. For it is worth observing what
follows in that place, James 5.16. Confess (...) your transgressions (...) to
one another, one brother, i. e. Christian to another, the sick to them in
health, as (...), Be ye all subject to one another, 1 Pet. 5.5. i. e. all that
are inferiors, to all superiors. Where, whether (...) signify a trespass
peculiarly against our brethren, or whether (as it is resolved by Grammarians)
lapses, or lighter sins, it seems to be here set in a distance from (if not
opposite to) (...), the greater sins, or those against God; and then as the
confession of them to the Presbyter, Gods officer, will in any reason be most
proper, to obtain comfort on safe grounds, and the benefit of absolution upon
sincere repentance; so in those sins of an inferior rank confession to the
wronged brother, or to whatever fellow-Christian, may possibly be sufficient;
and assuredly not unuseful or unnecessary, if it be but for the obtaining of
the brothers united prayers, to help to remove the sickness, if that be
inflicted (as often sicknesses are) as a punishment for any such trespasses. In
which case as the promise is there given of recovery to the sick upon those
other men's prayers, and not otherwise, so there is little hope that God will
accept thy private prayers for removing that punishment, till thou go and
reconcile thy self unto thy brother, and desire and obtain his prayers for
thee, (as Job's for his friends) when thy injuring of him had cried to haven,
and fetched down that infliction on thee.

Nay thirdly, there will be little matter of doubt, or controversy, private,
frequent, spiritual conference betwixt Fellow Christians, but especially (and
in matters of high concernment and difficulty) between the Presbyter and those
of his charge, even in the time of health; and peculiarly, that part of it
which is spent in the discussion of every man's special sins and infirmities,
and inclinations, may prove very useful and advantageous (in order to spiritual
directions, reproof and comfort) to the making the Man of God perfect. And to
tell truth, if the pride and self-conceit of some, the wretchlesnes of others,
the bashfulnes of a third sort, the nauseating, and instant satiety of any good
in a fourth, the follies of men, and artifices of Satan had not put this
practice quite out of fashion among us, there is no doubt, but more good might
be done by Ministers this way, then is now done by any other means separated
from the use of this, particularly then by that of public preaching, (which
yet need not be neglected the more when this is used) which has now the fate
to be cried up, and almost solely depended on, it being the likelier way, as
Quintilian says (comparing public and private teaching of youth) to fill
narrow-mouthed bottles, (and such are the most of us) by taking them single in
the hand, and pouring in water into each, then by setting them altogether, and
throwing never so many buckets of water on them.

binding and loosing, and how it belongs peculiarly to the public censures of
the Church, the binding by way of excommunication, or depriving of the common
benefits of Christians, (together with that branch of corporal discipline, or
inflictions on men's bodies, peculiar to the Apostles times and power) and the
loosing, in restoring the excommunicate person upon repentance to the Assembly
of the Saints. And by this perhaps may be received some satisfaction to that
question agitated sometimes, Whether Absolution in the Church be only
declarative, or moreover ministerially authoritative? which question will not
now have so much place, the matter being thus stated. For the Churches
absolution being not the actual eternal pardon of sins in Heaven, (which is
left to be Gods work, none but he justifyng sinners, except by way of
consequent upon this promise of Gods) but peculiarly the freeing the penitent
from Ecclesiastical censures here below, and from that other farther obligation
that arose from the Churches binding, there will be no matter of doubt, but as
the Governor of the Church authoritatively by commission from Christ,
preaches the Word, administreth Sacraments, and inflicts censures, so he may
authoritatively too, absolve on earth, free from punishments in the Church
inflicted on sinners, without any necessity of interposing or meddling (save
only indirectly, or as I said by way of consequence) with that which is due
from God to them in another world; to which purpose it is ordinarily observable
in the Canons of the Councels, that a pace Ecclesiae arceri, being driven from
the peace of the Church, Council. Eliber. Can. 61. Can. 47.
is the expression of being excommunicated, and pacem dari, is to be received
into communion again. In other places we find both together, communio pacis,
communion of peace, all noting that, which excommunication deprived them of, to
be the peace or favor, or pardon of the Church peculiarly, and not Gods peace,
or pardon, or favor directly, but either by supposing the person fit to be so
dealt with, to be formerly deprived by God of that, or by way of consequence
accidentally, more surely fastening him under Gods disfavour, if this wrought
not on him the good desired effect of reformation.

To all which, by way of Corollary I shall add, that the bare binding of the
Church (abstracted from our contempt of, and perverse standing out against it)
cannot damn any which is not otherwise (and if he were not thus bound) in a
damnable estate that is, has not any real influence on his damnation (save
only to bind him farther to it, in case he does not submit to it) distinct from
that which proceeds from his sin, upon which he is bound, and from his
refractarinesse continued in, in despite of this censure, (which no doubt may
make his case more highly dangerous, as the Word is the savor of death to them
that believe not) but is rather a means tending, as it is designed, to the
saving of him, as in the next Chapter shall appear.

On the other side loosing on earth, or the absolution of the Church shall not
free any impenitent unreformed sinner, in foro coeli, i. e. obtain pardon for
any that is not contrite, (much less turn attrition into contrition, as the
Romanists, or a votum poenitentiae, a wishing we were penitent into penitence,
as others dream) but will rather be a means of damning him the deeper, of
betraying him to, and hardening him in an impenitent estate, who is absolved, or
freed from under that discipline before he be reformed; which therefore the
Church in pure Charity to the man is bound not to do, but to continue him under
the punishment till it produce the reformation.

CAP. V.
the end or use to which this binding is designed, etc. there will not be so
much occasion to enlarge; it is speedily stated by answering, that the whole
end, aim, design in inflicting of public Church Censures, may be reduced to
these three heads; 1. (...), for reformation of the offender: 2. (...), the
repairing, or making up the honor of the Church, which suffered by him: and 3.
(...), that others may be warned by the example of his punishment, and not
corrupted by example of his sin, but especially to reform those by these
sharper methods, which no other calmer means of admonitions will work on, to
cut off that member that balsams will not cure, or keep from gangrening,
according to that of the writer of the Answers Ad Orthodox: (...), when by
long-suffering offenders are not reformed, then excision to them which are not
corrigible, is more useful then clemency. For both those distant ways, 1. Of
application of plasters; and 2. Of excision, are the same Physicians methods
of preserving the whole, and proportionably to them the ministration of the
Word and Sacraments are the Churches first method, and when that fails to
produce its effect, this other of censure is the second, (and upon the good
working of that, Absolution) wherein the Governors of the Church are truly
(...), or co-workers with Christ, to bring back sons unto God, as they are to
beget them in the preaching of the Word.

Apostle constantly adds to his sentences of binding, or excommunication, or
delivering up to Satan, (...), 1 Cor. 5.5. the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved, etc. So of Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. I
have delivered them up to Satan, (...), that they may be disciplined,
instructed, taught not to blaspheme, or resist contumaciously; whence the word
(...) (which we render taught) in a common notion, may perhaps be more
critically taken in a notion peculiar to this purpose, by way of reference to
the punishments amongst the Jews. For of the four punishments put into Esdra's
hand by Artaxerxes, Esd. 7.26. the second (rendered by us banishment, but in
Heb. eradication, i. e. says Schindler, casting out of his inheritance) is in
the Septuagint (...), and so vulgarly (...) for discipline or punishment, but
there peculiarly for distermination, and so the fitter to express this turning
out of the Church, this Church-banishment, or distermination, So 2 These. 3.14.
(...), the end of Excommunication is again, that he may be ashamed, that he may
see himself alone, no company but the devil thought bad enough for him, and so
be brought to sense and shame of his own vileness, which is the most necessary
preparative to reformation; and therefore to signify it an act of mercy and
charity, of all other the greatest, (though under the show of severity and
wrath) it follows in that place, v. 15 (...), Count him not an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother; and therefore Mat. 18.18. the doctrine of binding,
etc. is used as a means of exemplifying that great Evangelical truth, verse. 11.
that Christ came (...) to save, rescue, deliver, reduce that which was lost, i.
e. impenitent sinners, or those, that the soft ministry of the Word would do
no good on.

For there being (among others) two principal means of Christian profession,
or the bare being Christians (however qualified, or demeaning themselves) will
stand them in stead, and prove sufficient; or if not so, yet the
creditablenesse of an unchristian impious life, so long as they may be allowed
but the Christian name (men's general design being to get the praise of men,
not of God.) 2. In others a mistaking sorrow or attrition, or any the most
slight wish that they were penitent, for that repentance which Christ calls for,
and accepts and crowns: It follows hence, that unless men may be driven out of
these falseholds, they will never set themselves aright in the way to that
great work: and therefore proportionable to these two heads, are the two
exercises of the power of the keys designed; the first to turn the Christian
professor, that will go on in sin, quite out of all society of Christianity,
not allowing him the privileges of his Christianity, the Word, the Sacraments,
etc. unless he will walk worthy of so honorable a vocation, the second to set
him his task of repentance, to prescribe him some (...) and probations, by
which he shall be discerned whether he be in earnest contrite and willing to
make his peace with Heaven, to take any the most laborious course to approve
himself to Christ. The former of these in the act of excommunication, the
latter in imposing the penance, upon which he shall be received again, and both
together to bring sinners to repentance.

obstinacy provoke God, it is his manner to withdraw his grace, to deliver them
up to themselves, (a worse kind of devil or Satan) that by this means they may
see their former forlorn condition, their vileness first, and then their
danger; and so he uses to bring the secure, proud sinner to humility, to the
use of prayer, and wrestling with God, to caise him out of this sad estate. And
so the Church in like manner by Christ's direction withdraws the benefits and
privileges of Christians, from those whom it judges contumacious, delivers
them up to plain barbarousnesse and heathenisme, deals with them as God did
with Nebuchad-nezzar, driving him from the Court into the Wilderness,
transforming him into the shape of a very beast; and all to this end, that his
understanding might by that means return to him, the field teach him lessons of
piety, whom the palace could not. Agreeable to which is that of Pletho upon
Zoroaster, (...). The revengefull devils or furies do gripe men to bring them
off from sin, and set them on virtue.

afflictions are one of Gods engines and stratagems to besiege, enter, and take
the soul, ( when he flew them, they sought him, says the Psalmist) So among
the Apostles were those corporal inflictions, diseases, etc. superadded on
purpose to make the impression more violent, and to work more effectually on
their hearts.

penitents in the ancient Church, namely (...), whom we find weeping and
howling in the Church Porch, not permitted to come in, lying without, for them
that entered to tread on in their passage, which was certainly a means to make
them prize those benefits more dearly, which they saw themselves interdicted,
and others partakers of, and withal to read them a Lecture of their own
unworthiness, seeing themselves of the number of those dogs, and evil workers
that are without.

The second end which I named, was the repairing the honor which consisting in
the purity of the lives of Christian professors, is necessarily lost both in
the opinion of God, and men (especially those which are without) by the
impieties and unchristian actions of any which are called by Christ's Name,
which is therefore by the Apostle said to be blasphemed or evil spoken of, when
Christians fall into any notorious sins, and then there is no way to recover
the reputation of the Church, and even of the Christian Religion, and in a
kind, of Christ himself, but by expressing the wrath and displeasure of the
Church against those who walk th^s inordinately, and so proclaiming unto all,
that Christianity is not a Doctrine (as Zozimus, and Celsus, and Julian mistook
it) of security or impunity to any sort of impenitents, but of strict, precise,
exact purity, though some ungracious persons walk contrary to those
prescriptions: This is the only tabula post naufragium, plank or means of
relief, when the same and good name of the Church is thus ship-wrackt, and so
fit to be designed in the second place.

A third gain and profit designed by these censures is the warning of others;
not lest they should be polluted by presence among the profane, as they that
touched the unclean thing were polluted under the Law, (any farther then by the
spreading, leprous quality of their example) which is the common error of the
proud fastidious Pharisees of all ages, and is clearly confuted by St. Paul, 1
Cor. 5.10. where the (...) is not extended to heathen fornicators, which sure
would be able to pollute by society, as much as Christian sinners) and by
Clemens or that ancient Author under his name, Constit. Ap. l. 2. c. 14. who
has a notable place to fortify against this mistake, speaking of those which
((...)) unmercifully affirm that men ought not to pollute themselves by
accompanying with sinners, nor converse with them, ((...) (...)) For such
reasonings savor of men that know not God and his providence, of unreasonable
judges, and untamed beasts. For they observe not that the communion with
sinners that must be avoided, is not that of conversing with, but imitating of
them, not speaking, but doing with them.

brand upon such sins, which otherwise might happily be thought imitable, and
insensibly grow into fashion, and so infect, and pollute, were not men thus
told of their ugliness, showed their deformity, and fore-warned of their
danger, which is sure another act of mercy to all easy, seducible spectators,
to the Church it self, and to him whose scandalous sins are by this means
hindered from being damners of other men.

censures themselves, so the inexorablenesse, or at least, difficulty of some
Ages, (of Canons, of Councils, and practice of Churches) in granting of
absolution to penitents, that also has been designed out of pure charity to
help multiply their fruits of repentance, to set a value on Gods Ordinances, to
quicken their zeal, to demonstrate their sincerity both to others, and to their
own souls, each of which might perhaps be missing, if absolution were
over-easily obtainable.

institution of Christ's, (besides that, as it is so, it ought not to be
neglected) is an act of special Christian charity in not suffering sin upon thy
neighbor, but in any wise rebuking him, Lev. 19.17.) the more reproachful will
it be to this age of ours, the more bitter Pasquin, and lasting (...), when it
shall be told in Gath and Askalon, that for some years the arts of some
uncharitable men have so prevailed, that all exercise of this institution of
Christ has been cast and kept out of this Church of ours; the first, I think,
that is recorded since Christ's time to have continued any considerable space
without liberty of using that power of the keys in excommunication, left unto
the Church by Christ. The Lord be merciful to us in this matter.

secular advantage, or accruement either of power or gain to the rulers of the
Church, and so as a carnal design or engine disguised in the shape of a
spiritual institution, and on that ground either are willing by their calumnies
to help rend it out of the hands of the Church, or being themselves in place,
either by passion, or mistake, or sloth betray it to the odium and censure of
other men (whose shortness of discourse cannot separate the order from the
person, or the abuse from the institution) I shall suppose they will change
their minds, and their practices, when I shall have given them one advertisment,
which I may hope to do more effectually, not only by putting them in mind of
S. Chrysostoms judgment, who in this very matter having resolved (...), etc.
that the sacerdotal dignity in pardoning and retaining of sins is very great,
expresses that presently by this only way of probation, that a Priest if he
live never so well himself, if he be not accurately careful of other men's
lives, (...), he bears those wicked men (which he reformed not) company to
hell; and often when he is not betrayed by his own, he perishes by others men's
sins, if he have not done all things rightly, which may tend to their recovery,
and in that, founds all the respect and obedience that St. Paul requires to be
paid to the (...), But also, and especially if I present it to them in a brief
paraphrase of one place of Scripture, which by mistake and rash judgment, is
wont to be produced against all exercise of power in Churchmen, but being
rightly weighed, as it does not take away the power which we only plead for,
that of exercising charity, of disciplining, reforming, i. e. doing the
greatest good to those that are placed under us so will it teach every man (to
whom that power is entrusted to learn nothing but meekness and diligence, and
all kind of Christian temper from the condition and peculiarity of this
honor, and authority of his.

The place is that known Text Mat. 20. I shall deduce it from V. 21. The mother
of Zebedees children (having heard by her sons of the promise made to the
Disciples by Christ, Mat. 19.28. that they should have the dignity of so many
(...), which among the Jews, was a dignity next unto the Regal) petitions
Christ in the behalf of her two sons, whom she conceived favored by him above
all the rest, judging it by the expressions to them two, and S. Peter; and her
petition was this; That (seeing in the equality of that dignity promised to
all, there might be yet, nay if (it were according to the old Jewish pattern,
where the (...) belonged to Judah and Joseph) must be some kind of inequality,
at least a precedence of some before others) her Sons that he had showed such a
special kindness to, might have that favor by Jesus represses her demand by
telling her, she is mistaken in the kind of dignity, that should be instated
upon his disciples, 'twas not such a one as in any worldly respects would prove
very desirable, but as a place of great burden, so subject to great
persecutions, and even death it self, of which Histories testify they did. If
this would not satisfy her, then let her know her importunity should gain
nothing; for (...). It is not mine to give, save to whom it is prepared, etc.
the disposing of any such honors, was to be according as God the Father had
determined it, and although all power were conferred upon the Son by the
Father, yet there was small hope that the Son should thwart God ^he Fathers
destination in any such act of dignifying any. This was fully satisfactory to
the woman, and therefore she (nor her sons) reply not; But the rest of the
Disciples indignation of the Disciples (not now to the ambitious request of the
mother, or brethren) he accommodates an answer; that they need not be offended
at the ambition of those brethren, for if they had had their desires, they had
been but small gainers by i^; for in Christ's Kingdom preeminence signified (or
brought along with it) no great secular felicity, (such as was to be among
Heathen Emperors (the great ones) and Princes, that being under them, and over
others, were served and benefited by their subjects, which is meant by (...) v.
28. used their power in order to their own profits and pleasures, and pride,
(...), behaving themselves as lords and masters over so many servants, like
those Nehem. 5.15. where the following word (...) is used) but quite contrary,
burden, and pains, and humility, and doing of service, (as S. Mark reads it
more clearly, not (...), but (...), chap. 10.43. shall be your Minister) and he
that will have that preeminence, must provide himself for that task, by the
qualifications which are most agreeable to that, and count of that way both of
acquiring and enjoying it, for otherwise it will not be had; (and upon these
terms you need not envy them it) as you may guess by Christ himself, whose
kingdom in this world was of this nature, not administered in that way as might
bring in splendor or profit to himself, but in acts of charity, ministering of
all kinds of grace, enduring, and serving, and dying for his people, and not
requiring that service, those offices from them, as other Kings have done.

This excludes not Disciples of Christ from power, (for he King of kings and
Lord of lords, but as (...), had all power given unto him in heaven and in
earth, and in this his state of condescension here, he was a Master over his
Disciples; and when he was called Good master, although he asked, why he called
him good? yet the title of Master he disclaims not, nay tells them clearly that
they did well, who called him Master, and (...), Lord, Joh. 13.13.) but shows
the lot that was like to befall them, the same it did him, whose greatness was
expressed in humility, and charity, and patience, and offices of servitude; and
so the greater any of them should be, the greater portion of these should be
expected from them, as the appendage of their greatness; which consideration
fully makes up the (...), or rational importance of the place, which was to be
answer satisfactory, 1. to the ambition of the two brethren, by disabusing
them; 2. to the envy or indignation of the rest, by showing, that preeminence
was no fit object for any ones envy, but pity rather.

As for the use of (...), 'twil be best rendered to lord it, lord, and the
importance of that, discerned by the word (...) that follows v. 28. or if you
will by comparing it with 1 Pet. 5. v. 3. where it is explained by that which
precedes in the same sense, ver. 2. by feeding, or governing, (for so (...)
signifies) (...), by force or violence, (...) to make gain, filthy, unlawful
gain, of the flock, which is all one with (...), (as in the Gospel, heathen
Kings did over their people) and contrary to that, is ruling them by
persuasion, (...), and (...), making them willing and ready to do, what they
ought, and that by his own exemplary obedience, setting them patterns to
transcribe, which certainly is the Clergy man's duty, (and best way of ruling,
if it may possible prevail) (...), who must be no striker, no covetous person,
Titus 1.17. and to the same purpose, 1 Timothy 3.3, 4, 5. and so sure 2 Cor. 1.24.
(...) signifies imperious behavior in any kind, as there over men's faith,
very contrary to meek, gentle persuasion, the method that S. Paul and all
followers of him ought to use, and I shall never excuse them if they do not.

authority so) to limit and regulate the use of that, and determine it to that
one Christian spiritual end, the reforming and winning, and saving of souls; a
thing of all other, the most contrary to oppressing or violating, invading or
tyrannizing over them, in brief (to them which have need of it) the only
seasonable Mercy and Charity in the World, thus in any wise to reprove, and not
hate or suffer sin upon my brother.

enquiry, who are the objects of these censures, subjected to the power of the
keys by Christ, I answer, 1. Negatively, that the supreme Magistrate in every
Kingdom is exempted from it, and not only a posteriori, because the offering
him up to shame and contumely (which is the work of excommunication) would be a
certain means to expose him to the contempt of his subjects, and so be in
danger to dissolve and shake the peace and settled Government of a Kingdom,
(which I suppose to have been the design of that pestilent Romish
Heildebrandine or Gregorian Doctrine, that the Subjects of an excommunicate
Prince were discharged from their allegiance, which was but a small encreas of
the former doctrine (if that were supposed true) of Christ's placing a power in
the hands of the Church to excommunicate Princes; for from the concession of
that, the other would generally follow of its own accord, and need no new
doctrine to help it forward, the universal distemper of men's passions being a
sufficient encouragement to the many, to cast off allegiance to those persons
which they conceive themselves taught by Christ, and so by Christianity appointed
to despise;) but also a priori, because Christ found the world disposed by his
Father, in a regular subjection of all men to the powers placed over them (and
those higher powers at the time of Christ's birth, as far as stories will help
us to discern, were all Regal or Monarchical through the whole world) and was
so far from changing that course by any new law of his, that he labored by all
means possible, to settle and confirm it on that basis, and not so much as to
accept, when it was offered him, the exercise of any Sec^lar or civil power,
but to submit himself, and consequently all his, and so all that can plead or
pretend any title from him, ((...), etc. say the Fathers) to the (...), the
supreme power in any Kingdom. For the practice and opinion of the Church to
this matter, through all times, infinite testimonies might be alleged. I
shall refer the reader to David Blondel in this book, de formula Regnante
Christo, P. 187, 188, 189, etc.
and not endeavor a further dis^roving of that Doctrine which he thought more
worthy of an exclamation in the language of Saint Athanasius, ad Epist (...);
Who ever in the Church or among Christians, heard or taught, or learnt that
Gregorian Doctrine? What an hell was it which vomited it out? I shall add no
more to the negative part, which being supposed, and to be remembered in that
which follows.

I answer,

In the second place, positively, That the objects of this Church-charity or
Church Censures are, Every open, notorious offender, (whose crimes come to our
cognizance, whether by complaint of others, by notoriety of the action, or by
his own confession) that lives, and indulges himself in any grievous crime, any
wilful sin; Every such I say is to be bound by the Church, when after
admonition first less, then more public, he continues refractory,
unreformed, and not till then. The more shame for the easy denouncers of that
censure, that either inflict it on every trivial commission, without
consideration whether repented of or no; or that use this sovereign recipe,
this generos^m medicamentum, (that, say artists, must not be cast away, either
on the wanton or the desperate patient, but only on those whom we see to want
it, and hope it may do some good on) this strong physic, this last and most
generous medicament so Hence Avitus Alcimus, Ep. 61. to Constantius the Bishop,
Illud monere praesumo ne propter leves causas, and non ad Deum, sed saeculum
pertinentes, ne Laici quidem, non dicam Clerici, sancta communione priventur,
quia nescit cujus dignitatis sit ipsa communio, qui non eam omni animositate
seposita and cum magno dolor suspendit, and cum maxima festinatione restituit.
vid. Can. 2. Council. Aurel. 5. and Leon. magn. Ep. 89. taxing Hilary for that
fault.
unadvisedly and uncharitably, so for any other end, rather then reforming of
profane men.

loosing, who is capable of that, is agreed in general, the greatest sinners,
upon approbation of their repentance: As for Novatus who denied absolution to
the Lapsi, he himself was censured and punished for that severity, as you may
see in the 8. Can. of the Nic. Council, on which says Zonaras (...), he was
cast out and anathematized in a council at Rome, Cornelius being Pope, and
Decius Emperor, (...), Though he offended not in matter of faith, yet for his
want of compassion and kindness to the brethren.

But then, what degree of approbation will serve turn, what time of
humiliation, what fruits and evidences of repentance may be thought sufficient
to give capacity of this loosing; the judgment of Councils and Churches have
much varied in that particular, the Vid. Gro. in Heb. p. 820.
Roman being anciently milder then any other Churches; and how much these
latter ages have been more favorable to the guiltiest sons of the Church, then
the most merciful of the first ages had learned to be, even those very
Councils that condemned the severity of Novatus and the Cathari, are able to
testify; I will give you but an hint or two out of the Canons of the Council
of Nice, (before quoted against Novatus) Can. 11. the Council speaking of them
that fell in the time of Licinius his Tyranny, (...) without any violence, or
plundring, or danger of either, the censure is upon true and unfeigned
repentance, (...), Three years shall they continue among the Audients (i. e.
says Zonaras, (...)) stand without the Church in the Porch so long, and only
partake in hearing the holy Scriptures. Then (...) ( i. e. says Zonaras,
(...), etc.) for the space of seven years more they have leave to be admitted
within the Church, but to be behind a pillar, near the door, and go out with
the Catechumeni. Ten years already, you see, and yet farther, (...), Two years
shall they join in prayer with the people, but without the oblation: i. e.
says Zonaras, they shall not yet be vouchsafed the participation of the holy
things, till these two years be over. This approbation of their repentance cost
them, it seems, no less then 12. years.

But then the same Council speaking of others, that having Christian valor,
like dogs returned to their vomit again, Can 12. resolves, (...), After the
three years in the porch among the audients, they must be ten years at the
pillar; the seven years it seems are improved into ten, and it is probable the
two years of communicating (...) still behind, and so the probation fifteen
years long.

One^y the Bishop had power left him of the remitting of this severity, if he
saw them ((...), by humility and tears, and patience, and almsdee^s,
demonstrate their conversion to be sincere, not fained. And so Alcimus to
Victorius the Bishop, Authoritatis vestrae est, errantium compunctione
perspecta severitatis ordinem temporare; It Is the part of your authority, when
you perceive the compunction of those that have sinned, to temper the order of
severity, i. e. to receive him earlier into the Church, Epist. 16.

That which might be added in this point out of the ancient Canons, would be
endless to relate, he that would see a particular description of the several
degrees of these penitents, may have it very clearly set down in Zozomens
History, l. 7. c. 17. and I shall not so much as enquire what grounds our
latter ages have had to remit so much of the ancient discipline, till at length
it be crumbled and moultred away into a nothing, or a mere formality: what is
amiss in it, I beseech God may be reformed.

I shall only add to this Chapter, that there have beeen in the Church, (I say
not grounded in those Texts of the Gospel) two sorts of binding; One temporary
or penitential when the person confesses himself penitent, and desires the
Absolution of the Church, at least when there is hope of repentance, in which
case the custom has been to impose for some set time the (...), such works as
are agreeable to that repentance, and proportioned to the former sin, and not
to absolve til what is imposed be performed. This the Nicene Fathers express
by this style, [(...)] for whose penance the time is defined, and the season
set, Zonaras by ((...)) the space determined for the penance of those that had
fallen: And Alcimus by propositis observationibus interim ab Ecclesia
sequestrari, to be appointed some observances, and in the mean time to be
sequestered from the Church: and notae excommunicationis indictio donec publica
poenitentiae professione desuescant, setting a mark (answerable to the (...) in
Saint Paul) of excommunication upon him, till by public profession of
repentance he disuse his former course, a kind of Niddui, or temporary
remotion; The second absolute, and sine praefinito tempore, without any certain
definition of time. When men are refractory, and give no hope of amendment, and
that is a kind of Schammatha, Alcimus's irrevocable anathema, the binding over
for ever, perennis excommunicatio, Turon. Council. 2. c. 20. Paris. Conc. 3.
can. 5. or usque ad reformationem, for ever if they reform not. The former of
these is sometimes, but not always, an exclusion, or abscission from the
Church, (but sometimes on the other side a command to frequent the prayers of
the Church, or the Sacrament, every Lords day for such a space, has been the
penance or discipline) nor consequently is it a binding that man so, that his
sin is not yet pardoned on earth, but it is designed for other uses, for
satisfaction to the Churches edification, etc. But they of the second sort are
truly under that band, and cut off from the communion of the Church and by no
means admitted to the services of it.

CAP. VI.
THere is but one enquiry now behind, i. e. what is the real effect of binding
and loosing, or what conjunction it has with binding and loosing in heaven.
Which though it be the weightiest consideration of all the four, yet shall I
have occasion to say least to it, and indeed only this, That a censure of the
Church is a venerable thing, not only casting a Christian out of the Church,
wherein he is appointed to seek salvation, and of which as long as he is
thought unworthy, he is incapable of heaven; but withal a superaddition to the
band in heaven, by which that sin is made indissoluble before God, til^ it be
absolved on earth, or that absolution duly sought from the Church; Christ
having affirmed of him, that in this case his sins shall not be pardoned there;
as on the other side, that being by repentance returned to that capacity,
heaven shall return again to be his portion, and that pardon by the promise of
Christ become due to him.

The plain reason of it is, The denunciation is irreversible, and universal,
[Except you repent you shall all perish] and the promise as infallible and
immutable [He that confesses and forsakes, shall have mercy.] Now the
binding, if it be as it should be ( clave non errante) supposes the man
impenitent and refractory, and so to continue till he use means to return to
the peace of the Church again; and then without controversy, whosoever is so
bound on earth, (cast out of the Church for an impenitent and refractorie, and
continuing so) is bound in heaven, cast out from all title to that by God also.
To which purpose is that known ancient passage in Tertullians Apol. speaking of
these censures. Judicatur cum magno pondere ut apud certos de Dei conspectu.
Summumque futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit, ut a
communicatione orationis and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii relegetur.
c. 39. The judgments of the Church are exercised with great weight, as being
among them that are certainly resolved that they are in the sight of God. And
it is but a preparative pronouncing or passing of the future judgment, if any
man offend so highly, that he be banished from communication or partaking of
prayer, of Church-meetings, and all holy commerce.

repentance, and approbation of that to be sincere, is ( clave non errante,
still) let into the Church again, is ipso facto supposed to have right, (and by
his absolution that right sealed to him visibly, and Christ's promise particular
for it) to heaven.

repentant sinner once bound by the Church be not presently loosed in heaven,
i. e. pardoned and forgiven at the first minute of his repentance, without (or
before he receive) absolution from the Church? I answer, that in case of
public or scandalous crimes, the reformation must be public and notorious
also. And to that purpose confession and satisfaction before the congregation,
and him that bound, i. e. the Governor of the Church (to repair the injury
done to the former by the ill example, and to testify the sincerity of the
repentance to the latter) is necessarily required to the approving of this
repentance even to God, without which non remittetur peccatum, there is no more
possibility of loosing in Heaven, then hope of absolution on earth. But on the
sincere performance of this, as there is no doubt but God will have mercy, will
loose in Heaven, will justify and pardon that (such a) penitent sinner; so is
the Church-ruler on earth bound to loose him here below, to restore him to the
Church also, as soon as by his submission to his penance he approves himself
to him to be such; and though it is possible he may be sincerely penitent in
Gods sight, before he appear so to the Church, yet is he obliged to seek thus
to approve himself to the Church, if his case have come under her cognizance,
or in case he desire to have any of that assurance which is to be had from the
Church, or by title to the promise in those texts.

keys is not to be conceived so absolutely necessary, that none can be damned
without that seal of damnation, or binding, or non-forgivenesse, nor again that
none can be saved, or forgiven without the seal of remission; For sure the
neglect of the Bishop in the first case, his not-performing his office of
excision, is no way able to rescue the impenitent from the eternal guilt and
punishment of his sins, but rather a means to leave him remediless unto it
(his binding being indeed such a remedy, if it be made use of) and the bare
want of the remission or absolution, so it be joined with readiness to perform
all that is preparative to it, and an hearty desire to be partaker of it, is in
the merciful, gracious court of Gods audience sure to be accepted, when there
is no space or room for more. For the words of Christ (whatsoever you shall
bind, etc.) though they be universal, binding all in Heaven that are bound on
earth, yet are they not exclusive, so as none shall be bound in Heaven, but
such as are bound on Earth, or in the Church below. Nor on the other side, [
whatsoever you shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.] It Is [
Whatsoever ye, that I] but not [ Whatsoever not ye, that I] and consequently,
this double affirmation of Christ may be perfectly true; Whosoever stands bound
here, stands bound there, and whosoever are absolved here, are absolved there;
and yet for all that, are many bound in Heaven which are not bound in the
Church, and loosed in Heaven which are not absolved by the Church. And if the
phrase used in Saint John, [whatsoever ye retained, it is retained] seem to any
to have an exclusive sense, thus, that what we absolve not here, we do retain;
and consequently, that whom we absolve not, God will not absolve. I answer,
that this is a mistake, arising from the equivocalnesse of the word [ retain]
which in the Greek (...) (as we showed) signifies no more in this place then
(...), or binding in the other Gospels; in which, because that intimates not
any exclusive power, neither will it be reasonable that this shall. And so much
for the fourth particular also.

To which, before we part from it, it will not perhaps be unseasonable (though
I hope I shall not be obliged to justify the truth of the relations) to annex
a passage or two out of the latter stories of the Greek Church, (believed
generally by them, and mentioned on affirmation of particular knowledge by some
which have come from them to this place, and lived amongst us) which will
acquaint us with the awe, and signify the opinion which it seems they have of
the real efficacy of these censures of the Church. It is related (says
Crucius in Turco-graecia) in the Constantinopolitan histories, that the Sultan
Mahomet among other things concerning the Christian Religion, asked the
Patriarch Maxims, (...) concerning Excommunication of which he had heard (...),
That if the high Priests, and Priests of the Christians should excommunicate
any person upon just cause, the body of that man dissolves not into the earth,
but remains entire and whole; and when the sepulcher of any such is opened,
they appear like drums or timbrels, and black, i. e. the body swelled, but
whole, and withal much discolored: And that upon absolution the body is
dissolved to dust. In the truth of which tradition the Sultan desired to be
confirmed by the Patriarch, who upon search made, found (says he) that a
certain loose woman having defamed a former Patriarch, Genadius Scholarius, was
by him excommunicate, and so dyed. Her Sepulcher Maximus caused to be opened,
and ((...), O the wonders of God, says he) (...), She was found as she was at
the time of her burial, only swell^a and black. This (says he) was certified
to the Sultan, who sent some of his Nobles to view it, which they did with
admiration, and caused the corpse to be sealed up in a Coffin with the Imperial
Seal, and returned at a set day Then the Patriarch opened it, and (...),
officiated and read the prayer of absolution: Whereupon the joints of her hands
and feet were immediately loosed. They sealed it up again, and returning after
three days found all turned to dust. This they reported to the Sultan, who
wondered, and was astonished, and said, (...), That this Religion and faith of
the Christians was wonderful and true. This same story is related again at
large, l. 2. Turco Gr.. 32. In the Patriarchial History of Emanuel Malaxus in
vulgar Greek. A like example there is also of one Arsenius, who dyed
excommunicate, l. 2.. 43. p. 151. and also of Johannicius, a Pseudo-patriarch,
l. 2. p. 156. of whom, says he, (...) the excommunicate was found hard and
swelled as a drum or timbrel. The truth of the passages, I hope it will not be
expected of me to assert or confirm (nor can I any further then the
forementioned authority will bear) I shall rather give the reader ^y conjecture
how this persuasion became so general, and these stories so confid^ntly
reported among them. It was, I suppose, from the observing, but not
understanding in the Gospel the phrases of binding and loosing, which not
knowing to what they belonged (for the modern Graecians are far from being very
learned) they may have applied them to the dissolving, or not dissolving of
men's bodies in the earth, which they there express by (...), and (...), and
(...), the word of the Evangelist. If this be not it, I have no more to say of
it, but that it was a (...).

And now having taken this license a little to expatiate, I shall
excommunication among Jews and Christians, proceed yet farther, ex abundanti,
and by way of appendix, show the consent of others, even of Heathen people in
this matter, by that means (if not to confirm, as by an instance, that ancient
truth of Clemens so often repeated by him, (...), The Grecians knowledge and
solemn practices are generally stolen from the Jews, yet) to show the opinion of
other men, imbued with other principles of Theology, by which the design of
this former Treatise may with a rational man, who is not a Divine, be somewhat
established, I shall instance but in two particulars (because it is but (...),
or as ex abundanti, that I say any thing of it.) The first, of the ancient
Grecians, as I find it mentioned by Diod. Si^ulus. Bibl. 16. in the discourse
of the (...), Edit. Rhodoman p. 425.
the sacred War betwixt the Phocenses and Lacedaemonians on one side, and the
Thebans, etc. on the other; of which there is mention in Thucydides, L. 1. p.
73. p. 425.
but a full narration in Diodorus Siculus in the place forecited. From that
one Author in one Page these few things may be learnt by way of story. 1. That
on occasion of sacrilege or invasion of the rights of their gods, ((...)) as
the plowing up a piece of sacred ground called Cirrhaea (which was the crime of
the Phocenses) or the taking in War, and seizing on the like place called
Cadmea (which was the Lacedaemonians fault) the Senate of the Amphictyones upon
complaint of the (...) or recorders of holy things, did devote or Anathematize
even a whole Country or Region at once, as that of the Lacedaemonians, and that
other of the Phocenses. 2. That what was thus done, was confirmed by the
Grecians generally, (...), etc. 3. That though Sacrilege was the occasion of
this devoting, yet was it not the immediate cause or crime wherein it was
founded, but their not submitting to some former punishments, not paying the
mulcts which had been inflicted on them by the same Judges for that crime. The
punishments of those first crimes are there mentioned to have been great sums
of money laid on the offenders, ((...)) and upon the not paying of that, this
devoting follows. 4. The nature of this punishment consisted, 1. In the shame
that it brought upon the offenders, such as Philomelus tells his Phocenses,
(...), it is the part of unmanly persons not to lay it to heart, or consider it.
2. In the consequents of it, in that it would (...), bring danger and
subversion to all their lives, and that in two respects. 1. In respect of God,
to whose vengeance they were thus devoted, (answerable to the (...)
forementioned, added to the (...)) in which respect it is, in order to the
Phocenses, called there (...), being consecrated or devoted. 2. In respect of
men, to whose mischief also they were exposed, (parallel to what we read of
Cain when he was cast out of Gods presence; Any man, says he, that meets me,
will kill me) and therefore in order to the Spartans, it is called there (...),
an exposing them to the common hatred of all men. 5. That for them that were
under any such sentence, there was no way, but to obey the mulct that was
formerly inflicted on them, i. e. to reform their contumacie, which they that
were not able to do, or not willing, and therefore pretend they were not able
((...)) have no way left, but endeavor to null the sentence, by proving it
unjust, ((...)) by showing that it was no fault, on which the former
punishment, (to which their contumacie had been expressed) was inflicted. And to
make good this plea, their best and indeed only way was that of force, viz. to
make Philomelus their General, and to provide him an Army, which was
accordingly done, and after some three or four prosperous sights on that side,
the conclusion was, that at last agreeably to the cause, in the sight of his
prosperous impiety he was routed and slain. Page 432.
And so you have a brief of the first passage. The other is that known one of
the Druids among the ancient Galls, mentioned by Caesar de Bell. Gal. l. 6. the
sum of it is this. Among the Galls two only sorts of men there are, says
he, qui in aliquo sunt numero and honor, which are of account and honor among
them, The Druids, and the Equites, or Noblemen, all the rest being pezants and
slaves. The former of these are thus described, by their offices or
employments, Illi rebus divinis intersunt, sacrificia publica and privata
procurant, religiones interpretantur, ad hos magnus adolescentium numerus
disciplinae causa concurrit, magnoque ii sunt apud eos honor; nam fere de
omnibus controversiis publicis privatisque constituunt, and si quid est
admissum facinus, si caedes facta, de haereditate, de finibus controversia est,
iidem decernunt, praemia poenasque constituunt: Si quis aut privatus, aut
populus, eorum decreto non steterit, sacrificiis interdicunt. Haec poena apud
eos est gravissima; Quibus ita est interdictum, ii numero impiorum ac
sceleratorum habentur, ab iis omnes decedunt, aditum eorum sermonemque
defugiunt, ne quid ex contagione incommodi accipiant, neque iis petentibus jus
redditur, neque ullus honos communicatur. His omnibus Druidibus praeest unus,
etc. They are the men employed in all the service of God, perform the public
and private sacrifices, instruct the youth, and are honored by them, are the
Judges in wel-nigh all both public and private controversies; if any outrage
or murder be committed, any difficulty about bounds or inheritance, they decree
and determine both rewards and punishments; If any private person or people
stand not to their decrees, they forbid him their sacrifices. This is of all
other the most grievous punishment, they that are under this interdict, are
accounted as impious and enormous persons, all men refuse their company, come
not near them, nor discourse with them, lest the contagion hurt them; they
receive no advantage by the Laws of the Kingdom, nor are capable of any honor
in it. Of all these Druids there is one Prefect or President, etc. And it seems
this custom and institution among them was conceived to have had its original
from Britain. Disciplina in Britannia reperta, atque inde in Galliam translata
esse existimatur, and nunc qui diligentius eam rem cognoscere volunt, plerunque
illo discendi causa proficiscuntur. This discipline was found in Britain, and
thence brought unto the Galls, and they that are willing to have any exact
knowledge of it, do now ordinarily go thither to learn it. The story being in
it self thus clear and full, will have little need of my comment or observation
on it; all that I meant to do was to show you the consent of other Religions,
and Nations, and by that to conclude, that the heathens thought not that
unreasonable, which now Christ has by standing law established in his Church,
and many that are called Christians, are so willing to cast out of it. And so
much so this (...) also.

CAP. VII.
utility of this piece of discipline, if with another preparatory to it, it
might by the Governors of every Church be carefully exercised: That other
preparative which I mean, is that, if not Apostolical, yet Ecclesiastical
institution of Confirmation. The intention of which, and design of our Church
in it, every man sufficiently knows (although it have been much and with very
ill consequence of late neglected) and therefore I shall not here insist on it;
and besides it has been set down at large in Vindic. of Lit.
another Discourse. This whole office of Confirmation, and the necessary
preparatives of it, that of the Ministers Catechizing (and thoroughly
instructing all the youth of both sexes, and of all sorts within his cure, and
explaining to the understanding of each, and laying home to his heart all the
duties undertaken in his Baptism) being solemnly premised, according to the
rules and intention of our Church, and all duties performed and observed by the
Curate, the Child, and the Bishop (and none permitted to come to the Lords
Table that has not laudably past through this course) would (in the opinion of
a goldy and learned man, who did much study the ways of advancing piety and
learning) tend most probably to the keeping men at least within bounds of
Christian civility, from falling into enormous sins, which they had in their
own persons so solemnly (...) against. And therefore the use of that
discipline, were extremely to be wished for, that it were revived in each
Christian Commonwealth: And if it should be objected, that having been so long
neglected in this, it cannot now possibly be recovered again, because of the
vast number of those that have been either not at all, or else but formally,
and perfunctorily, or without precedent preparation confirmed: I answer, that
that argument proves not the impossibility, but only difficulty of doing it, or
if the difficulty be so great, as to advance into a kind of moral
impossibility, yet ought it not therefore to be left unattempted, (we are
required to endeavor the doing of things which appear morally impossible to be
done; because God may enable us to do that, which, till we try, we conceive
impossible; and though the not performing may not be damning, yet the not
endeavoring may) or if still the difficulty of an universal reformation in
this kind, discourage even from attempting it, yet may it be reasonable and
feacible for every Pastor, now to begin with all the youth of his Parish,
which have not yet come to the Lords Supper, and keep them to this probation;
and so for ever hereafter constantly to continue; and then, though the elder
sort of this present age come not under this method, nor consequently this
means of reformation; yet perhaps the example of, and instructions bestowed on
those under them, may work somewhat on them: and howsoever the stock of the
succeeding age will now be wrought on, and so Posterity be mended, though the
present age cannot, which to every good Christian will be worth considering.
This course being thus taken for the planting, and rooting all good
resolutions, and obtaining the blessing of God, upon the young and tender, (by
the prayers of the Church, and the purport of Christ's promise of habenti
dabitur) together with the use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
attention to reading, and preaching of the Word, might very probably hope to be
successful; but then because possibly it may not, (some Christians will be
perjured and impudent, rather then be chaste and conscientious, after all this)
therefore comes in the use and utility of the censures of the Church, as a
Tabula post naufragium, a means of bringing him to repentance, that by the
former means could not be kept innocent; of reducing him by the rod, that the
crook could not keep from straying. And if 'twere thus used, if every one that
fell after confirmation, were first admonisht by one, then if it served not, by
two or three, and then upon refractarinesse, or indulgence in sin, delivered up
to Satan, turned out of all Christian Communion without any partiality, or
respect of persons, this would be as propable a means as the wit of man could
invent, either by the fear and expectation of this censure to deter them, and
prevent those enormities that are now so ordinary among Christians, or else by
shame, and other consequent inconveniences, as by Causticks to work the cure.
For it cannot but be observed, what force shame, and credit have on the minds
of men. A sin that is gotten into some countenance or reputation, though it be
destitute of all other loveliness or ability to tempt any, does yet carry all
before it without resistance; the fear of shame makes men vicious, that
otherwise are not inclined to it, and certainly the same means would be able to
commend virtue to us: there is not that infinite natural aversation against all
goodness in the minds of men (unless as that word signifies the passions, or
carnal affections) as that men would be very wicked to lose by it; afflictio
dabit intellectum, and such afflictions as these that fall upon the fame, are
not the most easily supportable, and therefore may possibly help even a sensual
man to some understanding; and though the certain truth of this observation
cannot otherwise be proved, but by our resolution to make experience of it; yet
seems it to me to have the Authority and Testimony of Saint Paul himself in
these words, (though usually, by those that are led by the sound of them,
otherwise applied) 2 Cor. 10.4. the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, (or to God, or (by an hebraisme very ordinary) very or
exceeding mighty) to the pulling down of strong holds, etc. which words that
they belong to the point in hand, will 1. be probable by the Context, where the
Apostle speaks of proceeding against offenders, which he calls (...), being bold
toward them, v. 1.2. and (...), to revenge or punish disobedience, v. 6. and
this according to the (...) or authority which the Lord had given him for
edification or instruction, and not for destruction (which before I showed you
belonged unto the power of censure) and then he adds a caution to remove a
prejudice, that unreformed sinners had against him, his letters were severe,
and so he, when he was absent; but far from all such severity, when he came
amongst them, (...); vile or tame, or unconsiderable, when he was among them,
i. e. that he threatened to excommunicate, but when he came would not do it,
which he calls (...), terrifying by letters, v. 9. and (...), weighty or
powerful letters, v. 10. i. e. severe and terrifying, which yet he threatens
shall be equalled by his actions, when he comes among them, ver. 11. and so all
along you see the business is about censures. And then 2. this sense of the
words will be more then probable, by weighing the words themselves, wherein
(...) signifies confestly the Apostles Ministry, as it does so in the only
other place, where it is used in the New Testament, 1 Timothy 1.18. That thou
might war a good warfare, i. e. discharge the duty of thy Ministry, as thou
ought, according to the importance of the Hebrew (...), which is sometimes
rendered (...), warfare, sometimes (...) Ministry [then (...), the weapons of
that warfare] are the means to discharge that duty in the Ministry, of which
nature though there be many more, preaching, catechizing, administration of
Sacraments confirmation, etc. yet the context, or antecedents, and consequents
of this place belonging, as was showed to the business of censures, will
restrain it in this place peculiarly to those. Then, that these are not [(...),
carnal] signifies that they are not weak, for so (...) at every turn in these
Epistles signifies weakness, (and from thence oftentimes the law, because it
was so weak, so unable to give strength to any disciple of Moses to perform it,
as in the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians it is insisted on) and so to omit
more places of Testimony, in the next precedent verse, though we walk in the
flesh, i. e. though we are weak, as men, and have no power over you, yet as
Ministers, we are not, our Ministry is with power, and therefore it follows,
as a explication of [(...), not carnal] but (...), mighty, or powerful,
through, or to God, or exceeding powerful. And wherein does this mightiness or
power express it self? Why, (...), we render it, pulling down of strong holds,
and so it may literally be rendered, as the end of excommunication, pulling down
of all fortresses, that maintain or secure a man in sin; but more critically,
the word (...) signifies excommunication it self, both ver. 8. and Chap. 13.10.
and generally in the Canons of the Councils, and then (...), strong holds, may
signify all impenitent obdurate sinners, that will not otherwise be wrought
upon, and are called, ver. 15. Every high thing, that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, i. e. against piety or Christianity; and so the words
being thus interpreted in the retaile, and then put together again in the
gross, will run thus: [ The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds:] i. e. the censures of the
Church are exceeding powerful, and that power consists in excommunicating
pertinacious offenders. The truth of which observation, if not interpretation,
will be undoubted to him that does but remember, what this discourse has so
often inculcated, that excommunication was delivering a man to Satan, and a
consequent of that in those first times, corporal inflictions, diseases, (and
sometime death it self) which, if any humane thing, would most probably work
upon one. Only it may be objected, that that consequent was peculiar to the
Apostles times, and is not now in use, and consequently that a great part of
the power of Ecclesiastical censures is now lost, and so now the weapons of our
warfare may be carnal, our censures unsufficient to perform their task, to
reduce impenitents, though theirs were not. To which I answer, by confessing
the objection, that indeed it is so; and very reasonable it should, Christian
Princes having now taken the tuition of the Church into their hands, and so
those keen weapons in the spiritual hand not so necessary; as you know the
Manna ceased to be rained from heaven, when the people were come into the
promised land, flowing with milk and honey. Only I shall then reply, that
therefore it is more then fit, that some means should be used, in case of any
discernable defect, to interpose by way of supply, and add the more then moral
persuasive power of some other fit engine beside that of the censures of the
Church, especially in cases of enormous, infamous crimes, which may be done by
the Secular arm, in such cases (when the Ecclesiastical censures persuade not)
the impression of inflicting penalties, severe enough, as may be found
expedient, usque ad reformationem, until they make themselves capable (by
testimonies of amendment) to receive release both from God and man; that so by
that means, as God supplied the want of humane aid, by his extraordinary from
heaven; and when the Secular Magistrates discharged not their duty, exercised
not the power given them to the purging of the Church from rotten, vicious,
profane, incorrigible members, God gave this power to the Apostles of
inflicting diseases on Malefactors; so now that extraordinary power being
withdrawn from the Church, the Magistrate should think himself most strictly
obliged to perform his duty, for which if it should be required, that we
produce the express commands or directions of Christ and his Apostles, or
Primitive presidents; I answer, That will be unjust to require of us, 1.
Because in Scripture times, there were other means to supply that want, the
Devils corporal inflictions on them that were delivered to him, and so any
other might be spared: 2. Because this duty naturally belongs to the
Magistrate, who alone has ordinarily (...), compulsive jurisdiction, which as
it was practiced by the Kings in the Old Testament, so was it not interdicted
by Christ in the New, but all left in that matter by him as he found it; which
being granted, it may be said, that as Christ or the Apostles give no
directions for this, so they needed not to give any. 3. Because both then, and
in the Primitive Church, the Secular power was not Christian, and therefore the
assistance could not be expected from them, which now most reasonably may, to
awake, and hazen, and drive those that will not be allured and drawn, that so
even in this world, there may be no peace, quiet rest, tranquillity; or security
to the wicked.

Isa. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make you clean, etc.
THE END.

