A Second DEFENSE Of the Learned HVGO GROTIVS, OR A vindication of the
Digression concerning him, from some fresh EXCEPTIONS. By H. Hammond, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivy lane,
1655.

A DEFENSE OF THE Learned HVGO GROTIVS.
1. WHat has newly been suggested, in an Epistle Dedicatorie to the
Oxford-heads, by way of Reply to my Digression about the Learned Hugo Grotius,
will receive punctual answer within the compass of very few leaves. But for
the Readers thrift and ease, I shall first set down the words, wherein the
suggestion is delivered.

2. From thence, whence in the thoughts of some, I am most likely to suffer, as
to my own Resolves, I am most secure. It is in meddling with Grotius his
Annotations, and calling into quaestion what has been delivered by such a
Giant in all kinds of literature. Since my engagement in this business, and
when I had well-nigh finished the vindication of the Texts of Scripture
commonly pleaded, for the Demonstration of the Deity of Christ, from the
exceptions put into their Testimonies, by the Racovian Catechism, I had the
sight of Dr. H's Apology for him, in his vindication of his dissertations
about Episcopacy, from my occasional Animadversions, published in the Preface
of my Book of the Perseverance of the Saints. Of that whole Treatise I shall
elsewhere give an account. My Defensative as to my dealing with Grotius his
Annotations, is suited to what the Doctor pleads in his behalf, which
occasions this mention thereof.

This very Pious, Learned, Judicious man (he tells us) has fallen under some
harsh censures of late, especially upon the account of Socinianisme, and
Popery. That is, not as though he would reconcile those extremes, but being in
Doctrinals a Socinian, he yet closed in many things with the Roman interest:
as I no way doubt, but Thousands of the same persuasions with the Socinians, as
to the person and offices of Christ, do live in the outward Communion of that
Church (as they call it) to this day; of which supposal I am not without
considerable grounds, and eminent instances for its confirmation. This (I say)
is their charge upon him. For his being a Socinian (he tells us) Three things
are made use of to beget a jealousy in the minds of men of his inclinations
that way. 1. Some parcells of a Letter of his to Crellius. 2. Some Relations of
what passed from him at his Death. 3. Some passages in his Annotations. It is
this last alone wherein I am concerned. And what I have to speak to them, I
desire may be measured and weighed by what I do promise. It is not that I do
entertain in my self any hard thoughts, or that I would beget in others any
evil surmises of the Eternal condition of that man, that I speak what I do.
What am I, that I should judge another man's servant? He is fallen to his own
Master. I am very slow to judge of men's Acceptance with God, by the
Apprehension of their understandings. This only I know, that be men of what
Religion soever, that is professed in the world, if they are Drunkards, Proud,
Boasters, etc. Hypocrites, haters of good men, persecutors and revilers of
them, yea if they be not regenerate and born of God, united to the head Christ
Jesus, by the same spirit that is in him, they shall never see God.

But for the passages in his Annotations, the substance of the Doctors plea is,
that the passages intimated are in his posthuma, that he intended not to
publish them, that they might be of things he observed, but thought farther to
consider: and an instance is given in that of Col. 1. 16. which he interprets,
contrary to what he urged it for, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. But granting what is
affirmed as to matter of fact, about his Collections, (though the Preface to
the last part of his Annotations will not allow it to be true) I must needs
abide in my dissatisfaction to these Annotations, and of my resolves in these
thoughts give the Doctor this account. Of the Socinian Religion there are two
main Parts; the first is Photinianisme, the latter Pelagianisme. The first
concerning the person, the other the Grace of Christ. Let us take an eminent
instance out of either of these heads: Out of the first, Jam vero sciendum est,
multo quidem citius, quam nunc d^mum temporis eam resumi absolvoque potuisse,
and quominus id jampridem factum sit, per eum non stetisse virum, cujus fideli
curae opus integrum ab Authore ipso primum creditu^ fuit and sedulo
commendatum. Praemon: ad Lect.
their denying Christ to be God by Nature. Out of the latter, their denial of
his satisfaction.

For the first, I must needs tell the Apologist, that of all the Texts of the
New Testament and Old, whereby the Deity of Christ is usually confirmed, and
where it is evidently testified unto, He has not left any more then one (that
I have observed) if one, speaking any thing clearly to that purpose. I say, if
one, for that he speaks not home to the business in hand on Joh. 1. I shall
elsewhere give an account: perhaps some one or two more may be interpreted
according to the Analogy of that. I speak not of his Annotations on the
Epistles, but on the whole Bible throughout, wherein his expositions given, do
for the most part fall in with those of the Socinians, and oftentimes consist
in the very words of Socinus and Smalcius, and always do the same things with
them, as to any notice of the Deity of Christ in them. So that I marvel the
Learned Doctor should fix upon one particular instance, as though that one
place alone were corrupted by him, when there is not one (or but one) that is
not wrested, perverted, and corrupted to the same purpose. For the full
conviction of the truth hereof, I refer the Reader to the ensuing
considerations of his interpretations of the places themselves. The condition
of these famous Annotations, as to the satisfaction of Christ, is the same; not
one Text of the whole Scripture, wherein Testimony is given to that sacred
truth, which is not wrested to another sense, or at least the Doctrine in it,
concealed, and obscured by them. I do not speak this with the least intention
to cast upon him the reproach of a Socinian: I judge not his Person: his Books
are published to be considered and judged. Erasmus I know made way for him in
most of his Expositions about the Deity of Christ but what repute he has
thereby obtained among all that honor the Eternal Godhead of the son of God,
let Bellarmine on the one hand, and Beza on the other, evince. And as I will by
no means maintain or urge against Grotius any of the miscarriages in Religion,
which the Answerer of my Animadversions undertakes to vindicate him from; Nor
do I desire to fight with the Dust and Ashes of men; yet what I have said, is,
if not necessary to return to the Apologist, yet of tendency, I hope, to the
satisfaction of others, who may inquire after the reason of my calling the
Annotations of the learned man to an Account in this Discourse, shall any one
take liberty to pluck down the Pillars of our Faith, and weaken the grounds of
our assurance, concerning the person and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
shall we not have the boldness to call him to an account for so sacrilegious an
attempt? with those then, who love the Lord Christ in sincerity, I expect no
blame or reproach for what I have indevoured in this kind; yea that my good
will shall find acceptance with them, especially if it shall occasion any of
greater leisure and abilities farther, and professedly to remark more of the
Corruptions of those Annotations, I have good ground of expectation. The truth
is, notwithstanding their pompous show and appearance (few of his Quotations,
which was the Grotius in lib. 5. de veritat. Relig. in notis R. Sell. Aben Ezra
and Onkelos adducit, sed alienis oculis hic vidit, aut aliena fide retulit
(forte authoribus illis aut non intellectis, aut propter occupationes non
inspectis) aut animositati and authoritati suae in citandis authoribus, and
referendis dictis aut factis, ut ipsi hoc usui veniebat, nimium in scriptis
Theologicis indulserit. Vet: disput: de Advent: Mess.
manner of the man, being at all to his purpose) It will be found no difficult
matter to discuss his Assertions, and Dissipate his Conjectures.

For his being a Papist, I have not much to say; let his Epistles (published by
his Friends) written to Dionysius Petavius Reverende Domine, saepe tibi
molestus esse cogor, sumpsi hanc ultiman operam, mea antehac dicta and famam
quoque a ministris all^tratam tuendi, in eo Scripto siquid est, aut Catholicis
sentent^is discongruens, aut caeteroqui a veritate alienum, de co abs te viro
Eruditissimo etc. cujus judicium plurimi facio moneri percupio. Epist: Grot; ad
Dionys: Petav: Epist: 204.
the Jesuit, be perused, and you will see the character which of himself he
gives: As also what in sundry writings he ascribes to the Pope.

3. The first thing that I am here to clear, is the meaning of plain words. I
said that Grotius was sometimes calumniated, as a Socinian, sometimes as a
Papist, and as if he had learnt to reconcile contradictories, or the most
distant extremes, sometimes as both of them together. And here I am told that
the harsh censures under which he has fallen, are not as though he would
reconcile those extremes -- And sure I never said, or intimated they were, but
that the Socinian and Popish doctrines were so contradictorie one to the other
(the one affirming, the other expressly denying the Eternal Divinity and
satisfaction of Christ, and many the like) that it was impossible for the same
man to be both Socinian and Papist, without being a greater artificer then yet
ever was in the world, one that had learnt to reconcile contradictories etc. i.
e. (if I must farther construe plain words) to believe together things most
incompetible, and impossible to be believed together by the same person, the
affirmations and the negations of the same Enunciations, that Christ was, and
was not Eternal God, made, and made not satisfaction for our sins; For this
work of wonder, above what either nature or divine power can extend to, is
necessarily required to the verifying of that part of the calumny.

4. The 2d is, his stating the jealousy, as far as it is owned by him, viz.
that H. Grotius being in Doctrinals a Socinian, he yet closed in many things
with the Roman interest; where the Distinction being made between Doctrinals
and interest, it is visible, 1. That this does not so much as pretend that he
was a Papist, for it is the doctrines only (such is that of the Popes
Supremacy, etc.) which can give any man that denomination, and for closing in
many things with the Roman interests, the Anabaptists and other such
Sectaries, the most distant from Popery, may and often are as guilty of that, as
any. 2. There is no color for this suggestion, as far as Grotius's writings
give us to judge (and farther then those I have no perspective to examine his
heart) For the fomenters of the divisions in Christendom, being the only
persons whom he professed to oppose, the irreconciliabiles, and qui aeterna
cupiunt esse dissidia, it is consequent, that the Pacificatorie interest was the
only one espoused by him, and pursued most affectionately; and I could never
yet discern by any pregnant indication, that this is the Roman Interest.

5. The 3d is, his manner of proving his thus stated suggestion. 1. By his bare
affirmation, without the least tender of proof for the truth of it; 2. by his
confident undoubted assurance, that thousands of the same persuasions with the
Socinians, as to the person and offices of Christ, do to this day live in the
outward communion of the Church of Rome. Whereas, 1. This could have no force
to infer the conclusion, as it concerned Grotius, who never lived a day, or
died in the communion of the Church of Rome, nor is by his most unkind
adversaries affirmed to have done so, but is known to have professed his
willingness to communicate with the church of England; and 1 it is not imaginable
how any one Doctrinal Socinian, should after his having espoused those
Doctrines, if his practices be consonant to his persuasions, live in outward
Communion with the Church of Rome, if by living in the outward Communion, be
meant either joying in the offices, or receiving the Sacrament with them, when
(beside many other obstacles in the way, the Athanasian Creed, and the like)
the very Sedendo vel stando potest celebrari. Geniculari est Idololatricum.
Socin: deus: and fin: coen: Dom: p. 115:
receiving the Eucharist kneeling, is by Socinus defined to be Idololatrical,
and most strictly required by the Papists from every Communicant.

Fourthly, when he has premised his profession that he would not beget in
others any evil surmises of the eternal condition of that man (who is (blessed
be God) out of the reach of such darts) with a [what am I, that I should judge
another man's servant?] and yet adds in the next words [He is fallen to his own
master,] I cannot but think these words so far contrary to his profession, as
may be apt to beget evil surmises in others. The foregoing words are evidently
taken from Romans 14. 4. and judging there, and here, is used in the sense of
condemning, which is, at the best, surmising of the eternal condition, and
[falling to his own Master] is in like manner taken from the same verse, and so
marks by the Italick letter, and [falling] there evidently signifying that Lot,
to which the precedent [judging] determines it, and to which the subsequent
[standing] is opposite, what can this regularly infer, but that he which is
fallen to his master, is fallen under condemnation? But if by [fallen] he meant
no more then death, as I yet hope, and desire the reader in charity to believe
he did, I heartily wish, he would hereafter be more careful in using of
Scripture style in a sense so distant from the known importance of it in
Scripture, without any character to discriminate it; and withal, that when he
speaks of so nice a point, as is the eternal salvation of one that is dead, he
will not deliver his mind in such general Aphorisms, as those (which the
jealousy or mallce of any man may interpret, to the inferring the most
sanguinarie conclusion) that the men of what religion soever, if they are
Drunkards, Proud, etc. shall never see God. For though I have all reasons to
believe that this Learned man was regenerate and born of God, and united to the
head Jesus Christ by the same Spirit that is in him, and withal, neither
lived, nor dyed, in any one or more of those wasting guilts (I hrartily wish
all men living were as guiltless as he) yet who knows what surmises may be
infused into those, that are willing to believe ill or have no grounds of
knowledge to pronounce any thing that is good, of him, when they find such
Aphorisms as these (comprehending so many sorts of sinners, which shall never
see God) made use of to conclude a discourse, which purposely treated of that
person, and cannot discern with what propriety, they could be directed to that
place, if they did not relate to him.

7. Fifthly when he says, that the Praeface to the last part of Grotius's
Annotations will not allow that to be true, which I said of his Posthuma, viz.
that they had not been formed by him, or fitted for the public, etc. I answer,
that that Preface of the Publisher, if it be supposed to have set down the
whole truth, has yet nothing contrary to what I said. It says the Opus
integrum was by the Author committed and earnestly commended to the faithful
care of (...). But what was the Opus integrum? not that last part or volume of
Annotations thus completed, and so made Integrum entire by his own hand (though
for as much as concerned the Apocalypse I think it had received from his own
pencil, by occasion of the contests he met with about his tract De Antichristo,
the very lineaments and colors, wherein it appears) but Opus integrum, the
whole volume, or volumes which contained all his (...) adversaria on the New
Testament, which it seems were thus committed to a friends hands, or else they
had never come to ours. And this is perfectly consonant to what I said, and (I
suppose) exemplyfied, and evidenced concerning those Annotations.

8. Sixthly when he says, that H. Grotius has not left any more then one text
of the New and Old Testament whereby the Deity of Christ is usually confirmed
and where it is evidently testified to] I refer him briefly to one place in
his Annotations on S. John's Gospel, which alone will be able to discover, what
weight there is in this affirmation. There having by way of Preface observed,
that S. John did more expressly, then any other of the Evangelists and more
early in the very first words of his writing, set down the divine nature of
Christ, ipso initio Dei nomen ei assignandum -- existimans, in the very
beginning of his Gospel assigning him the name of God, accordingly, in his
explication of the first verse, he makes the [(...) In the beginning was] an
expression of Christ's eternity, applying to it the place in the Proverbs
concerning wisdom c. 8. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. 27. The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old, I was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning, or ever the earth was, when there was no depths I was
brought forth, when there were no fountains abounding with water, before the
mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth, while as yet he
had not made the earth nor the field, nor the highest part of the dust of the
world, when he prepared the heavens, I was there -- (and in his notes on the
Old Testament, Prove. 8. 27. he expressly refers to this, Joh. 1. 1. and by so
doing manifestly defines that eternal wisdom to be Christ) and on this
occasion he brings the most express affirmations of the ancients Justine and
Athenagoras, the former affirming Christ's praeexistence before the word (...),
and p. 851. (...), he was God before the worlds; the latter his eternity, and
that from the beginning God being an eternal mind (...). Then out of the old
Testament from the Chaldee Paraphrast he brings several places where God is
interpreted by God and his word, making and founding the heavens and earth,
Isa. 45. 12. and 48. 13. and according and consenting thereto, 2 Pet. 3. 5.
which again are so many more evidences set down by him, of Christ's eternal
deity, and then on v. 3. to testify that all things were created by this
eternal word, he appeals to the place, which before I produced from him, Col.
1. 16. by him were all things created --

9. This I hope without farther search, may suffice to prove, that he has left
more then one text of the Old and New Testament speaking home and clearly to
this purpose; For what can be more clear and home, then this, that Christ was
God before the world was (whereas Socinians make the beginning Joh. 1. 1. to be
the beginning of the Gospel) and that by him the whole world was created.

10. In a word, If one text acknowledged to assert Christ's eternal divinity,
will not suffice to conclude him no Socinian in that point, who was not so
Atheistical, as to doubt of the truth and authority of that one place, and so
cannot be doubted to believe, what from one place (if there had been no more)
he did believe; 2 If six verses in the Proverbs, two in Isaiah, one in S.
Peter, one in S. Paul, added to many in the beginning of S. John, will not yet
amount to above one text; or lastly, If that one may be doubted of also, which
is by him interpreted to affirm Christ eternally subsistent with God, before
the creation of the world, and that the whole world was created by him, I shall
despair of ever being a successful Advocate for any man.

11. And then how, still, he that affirmed positively that he has not left
more then one, and presently adds his doubting of this one [not more then one,
if one] and after [not one, or but one,] can first enlarge the catalogue, that
[perhaps some one or two more may be interpreted according to the analogy of
that one] and then presently contract it again, that [his Expositions always
do the same things with Socinus and Smalcius] who it is certain do not permit
that one to be understood of Christ's eternal divinity, and yet at length
profess, that he speaks not with the least intention to cast on him the
reproach of a Socinian, or to urge against him any of those miscarriages in
Religion, which the Answerer of his Animadversions undertakes to vindicate him
from (and Socinianisme was, one of them) acknowledging that Erasmus made way
for him in most of his Expositions about the Deity of Christ, (which is to make
him an Erasmian, rather then a Socinian) and after that still adhere, that his
attempt is sacrilegious, even to pluck down the pillars of our Faith --
concerning the person and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, how, I say, he can
reconcile, all these contrary appearances, I have not the skill, and therefore
shall not have the curiosity to divine, or conjecture.

12. Seventhly when he marvels the Doctor should fix upon one particular
instance, as though that one place only were corrupted by him] I answer that
he misinterprets my words, and misrepresents my design and aim in producing
that particular instance; It was not to give example what place of Scriptures
those notes had corrupted, or misinterpreted, but to evidence that those
Annotations, under his name, agreed not with his sense, of which as this was
one eminent and pertinent instance, interpreting this place, Col. 1. 16. after
his death, to the Socinians mind, which in his lifetime he had interpreted
expressly against it, and as one instance thus explicit, is as concluding to
this matter, as many more could be, so elsewhere I have added many instances
more to the same purpose, which I shall not here collect unseasonably.

13. What places in the Old Testament, wherein the Deity of Christ is evidently
testified to, are corrupted, wrested or perverted by this learned man, H. Gr. I
profess not to divine, nor shall, it seems, come to the full conviction of the
truth thereof without reading over this, whole (which is a great) volume where
their confutation lies scattered, and is not, as I discern, put together in any
part of the work, save only in the title page, and to this larger travail my
prospect does not invite me, having already by what I have recited from
Grotius's notes on Joh. 1. compared with this Authors suggestions, a competent
(...), what I am to expect from any farther inquiry.

In lieu hereof, I shall only add these two suppletory considerations. 1.
That the word of God, being all, and every part of it equally of undoubted
truth, that doctrine, which is founded expressly on five places of divine
writ, must by all Christians be acknowledged to be as irrefragably confirmed,
as a hundred express places would be conceived to confirm it. 2. That this
charge of disarming the Church of her defenses against the adversaries of the
faith, by diverting those places of Scripture, which have formerly been used to
assert the great mysteries of Salvation, to other and inferior ends, though it
be a very popular one, and that which is most apt to divolve an odium on him,
which shall be represented guilty of it, and may therefore probably be chosen,
as the field of declamation against Grotius, by any that can gladly expatiate
on that subject, yet will it upon inquiry be found in some degree, if not
equally, chargeable on the learned and most valued of the Reformers,
particularly upon Mr. Calvin himself, who has been as bitterly and unjustly
accused, and reviled, on this account, (witness the book entitled
Calvino-Turcismus) as ever Erasmus was by Bellarmine or Beza, or as probably
Grotius can be.

14. 8thly. For the doctrine of the satisfaction of Christ, and the
interpretation of those Scriptures, that belong to it, I cannot imagine any
surer measure can be taken of Grotius's sense, then by that perspicuous and
judicious treatise which he has written purposely on that subject, against
Socinus himself, and which I believe will be found a surer Antidote against
that poison, among considering men, then has been mixed by any other the most
skilful hand, since that controversy has been agitated in this last age, more
especially the places of Scripture are by him there vindicated * Edit. Lugdun.
p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc.
from the perversions of Socinus, and a great cumulus of texts brought forth to
testify to the doctrine of Satisfaction, which I shall not recite, that I may
leave on the Reader an engagement to survey the book, and commit the judgment
to his own eyes.

15. Only because I have heard the signal place Isa. 53. taken notice of by
some, as that wherein his Annotations are most suspected, I shall there fasten
a while. From 1 Pet. 2. 24. having inferred that Christ so bare our sins, that
he freed us from the punishment of them, and so that we are healed by his
stripes, he at length urges as parallel to this, Isa. 53. 11. my righteous
servant * p. 12.
shall justify many, and shall bear their iniquities, (...) iniquity says he,
signifying the punishment of iniquity 2 Kin. 7. 9. and (...) to bear, the
bearing of punishment, and thence concluding, Deserte ergo hic dicitur Christus
laturus poenas eorum qui justificantur, It is therefore here distinctly said,
that Christ shall bear the punishments of those who are justified, and
according to this specimen he gives the mystical sense of that whole chapter
(and refutes the Socinian arts of evading it) and at last from v. 12. concludes
the punishments which Christ endured for our sins to be the foundation and
merit of his dividing the spoil, and interceding, decere enim ut is qui
peccata multorum tulerit, jus habeat pro iis intercedendi, for it was fit that
he that bare the sins of many, should have the right of interceding for them;
and' much more to the same purpose, defining positively against all the
adversaries (...), that Peccata far patiendo, at que ita ut inde liberentur
alii, aliud indicare non potest quam poenae alienae susceptionem, to bear sins
by suffering, and so that others may be freed by that means, cannot signify
any thing else, but the undergoings of other men's punishment, annexing Isa. 53.
6. The Lord has laid on him, the iniquity of us all -- and refuting all the
evasions, that wete there interposed by Socinus.

16. And when to this, and the * From p. 12. to p. 18.
many pages more which are there subjoyned for the vindicating that one
chapter, and the several express testimonies therein, I shall add two things
more for preventing all possible mistake or jelousie of his after-change in
this matter, I shall have no motive farther to enlarge this consideration.

17. First, the Annotations of that Learned man on the Old Testamen, published
a little before his death, are very brief, and especially respect the first and
literal interpretation; As in the Prophets, where there is one immediate
completion of each Prophecy among the Jews of or near that time, wherein it
was written, another more remote and ultimate concerning Christ, or the times
of the Gospel (this might be exemplified in several instances, applied by the
New Testament to Christ, having had before a literal completion [Out of Egypt
have I called my sonne] and many the like) there generally his care is, to set
down most distinctly the first, or literal sense, as that is terminated in the
immediate completion (and this, I suppose, because it was most neglected by
other interpreters, who were more copious in rendering the mystical notation)
And accordingly on Isa. 53. conceiving the Jews usage of the Prophet Jeremie,
and Gods regard to him, to be literally predicted there, he interprets every
verse of that chapter to that sense (which was not so easily discoverable, or
vulgarly taken notice of) omitting to enlarge on that other, more sublime
completion in Christ, which the New Testament had so clearly expressed, all
Commentators enlarged on, and himself in the tract de Satisfact. so evidently
set down, and vindicated, that all that was needful to be added, was easily
said by him by way of introduction to that whole chapter, in these few words,
Hae notae in Jeremiam quidem congruunt prius, sed potius, sublimiusque, saepe
and magis (...) in Christum. These characters agree indeed first to Jeremie,
but to Christ more principally and eminently, and oftentimes more according to
the very letter or diction.

18. The 2d thing that I have to add for the clearing of his constancy, or no
change in these doctrines, will be such, as I think will leave no place of
Jealousy, his own express words protesting his opinion, when he was accused
of changing it. This he has publicly done in his Disscussion (written a
little before, and not published till after his death) p. 17. by setting down
the occasion and author of that defamation, and for the removing of it,
referring the reader to what he had in many places of his Annotations on the
Gospels written coucerning the eternity of the Word, the blood of Christ given
for our redemption etc. And this I have before my eyes at this time, more
clearly testified under his own hand in a letter of his written to a friend of
his of this nation, who then held a correspondence with him, in these words,
Poteris autem, vir optime, omnibus, qui nos norunt, affirmare, me de iis quae
contra Socini admiratores defendi, non modo nihil discedere, sed and illorum
aliquos mea opera adductos ad meliorem sententiam. Quo magis gratias tibi habeo
de edito nostro libro de Satisfactione Christi, In quo argumento illos a
proprietate verborum tam multorum in sacris literis, and a manifestissime
antiquitatis consensu, positionibus quibusdam inanibus abstractos non dubito.
Giving him authority to assure all that know him, not only that he has no
whit departed from what he had maintained against the Socinians, but also that
some of them had by his endeavor been reduced from the Socinian errors,
charging them with the vanity of their positions, and departure both from the
Propriety of many words in the Scriptures, and from the most manifest consent
of antiquity, and expressing himself very well pleased that his Book de
satisfactione was reprinted at Oxford. And all this long after the publication
of Crellius's Book against him, which is the thing supposed to have wrought the
change in him. Upon these plain words I shall add no Descants, but leave them
that have entertained contrary surmises, to consider them:

19. 9thly. For the character given of this Person, with whose dust and ashes
he yet desires not to fight, viz. that few of his quotations are at all to his
purpose; and the grounds of that character, the words of Voetius disputing
against him, and affirming that it was customary with him to indulge too much
to his own authority in citing authors or relating speeches or facts] I shall
say but this, 1. That these two things are different, to miscite, which was the
thing Voetius spoke of, and not to cite to the purpose; A false citation is one
thing, an impertinent or unseasonable citation, or such as is not at all to his
purpose, is another, and so this citation from Voetius is guilty of the
infirmity it accuses, is not to his purpose that cited it. 2dly. That
adversaries testifications of the faults of those, whom they find it useful to
asperse, are not valid testimonies, nor competent to affixe (or justify) ill
characters on any, and that Voetius was such, is known to many, and, I doubt
not, to him that cited him. 3dly. That whosoever shall be willing to profit by
that man's writings, will find that as he writes with great consent, so is he
observable to bring the most pertinent testimonies of any man, and seldom to
omit any, which the most diligent observer shall take notice of. And if in so
large a field he be found sometimes to have mistaken, or miscited a testimony,
there are so many innocent ways to such kind of errors, that until it appear
that his were not such, they cannot with reason affixe an ill character on him;
and 4thly. That if this character were true, it yet infers not the point in
hand, that he was either Socinian or Papist, those two Sects having not the
enclosure, or Monopoly from all other sects, of writing or quoting what is not
to their present purpose.

20. Lastly, for the little which he has to say to prove him a Papist, and 1.
For his Epistles written to Dionysius Petavius a Jesuit, and in them the words
set in the margin, I answer, 1. That it being willingly acknowledged that he
wrote five very short Epistles to Dionysius Petavius, which are put together in
the two last leaves of his Epistles ad Gallos, there is this obvious account to
be given of it, which will no way reflect ill upon him.

21. Petavius was both a very learned, and a very moderate Papist, fit to be
joined with Jac. Sirmundus, a Jesuit also, yet both these of such abilities
and affections to the good of learning, of such diligence in the search and
study of antiquity, and withal of so much temper above what is generally
expected from that Society in other kingdoms, that it can be no prejudice to
him who so earnestly desired, and labored to advance the peace of the
universal Church, to have a particular respect unto, and acquaintance with one
of these, and as his living so long in Paris, where Petavius was an eminent
person, makes it no miracle, that he should be thus acquainted with him, so his
Pacificatory design could not but render it profitable and desirable, he must
have been an unskilful manager, if intending to reconcile distant interests,
he did not acquaint himself with the utmost of both their pretensions; And what
means was more commodious to that end, then this, of receiving advertisements
from Petavius.

22. The words of Grotius himself, when he was by Rivet accused for commending
Jesuits, are here worth reciting, Jesuitas * Discuss. p. 61.
non omnes laudavit Grotius, sed quorum and mores and eruditio laudem merentus,
Eos vero qui in Gallia sunt, pro talibus habet, quales eos Reges Galliae volunt
existimari, i e. pro bonis civibus, and quid magis necessarium est pacem
Ecclesiasticam restituere cupienti, quam eruditorum audire consilia, eorum
maxim quibus and praesens Ecclesiae status and antiquior historia percognita
sunt. He commends only those Jesuits whose manners and learning deserve
praise, the French Jesuits, whom he takes to be such as the Kings of France
account of them, i. e. good Subjects to their Prince -- And what can be more
necessary to one that desires to restore the peace of the Church, then to hear
the advises of those especially who have the perfectest knowledge of the
present state of the Church, and of ancient history. And to the same purpose
again, p. 91. affirming that he had great reasons to believe that some of that
Society, Petavius no doubt, were seriously willing as well as able to
contribute very much toward the peace of the Church.

23. 2dly, For the words here cited from his Epistle, that if there were any
thing in that answer to Rivet, which agreed not with Catholic doctrine, or
were otherwise distant from truth, or (which he adds in that place, but is
here left out) minus idoneum ad pacem, less fit for Peace, he desired to be
admonished by Petavius.] The result is no more then what all his controversy
with Rivet professes, that he was one, that desired the return of all
Catholic truth and peace into the Christian world (and he must renounce his
part in Christ's Legacy [peace I leave with you] that is not in this
particular affected like him) And then what wonder he should desire to be
admonished by a sober learned man of the Romish Communion, if he wrote any
thing which was not ordinable to that end?

24. The same design, and way of pursuing it, will be yet more visible in the
200th Epistle, where he has these words to the same Petavius, Liceat mihi tua
open addere, demere, corrigere quae opus erit ad verum pacemque promovendam,
Give me leave by your help to add, to take away, to mend what is needful
toward truth and the advancing of peace, viz. such an advancement of peace, as
was perfectly consistent with truth.

25. The 2d and last suggestion in this matter is taken from what Grotius has
said in sundry writings concerning the Pope] to which I have already spoken
somewhat in the answer to the animadversions, as sar as concerned that passage
in his Discussio, which I discerned to be most accused of inclination to the
Popes interest. As for the Papal power, whatsoever passage can be brought from
him, must sure be interpreted by analogy with those rules, which he premiseth
in his Discussio, requiring that it may be confined and limited sec. Canones,
according to the ancient Canonical rights allowed the Pope by the Councels, and
so as the authority of Scripture, the rights of the Catholic Church, of
Councels, of Patriarchs of the East, of Primates, and Metropolitanes, and other
Bishops be preserved entire, as also all the just rights of all Christian
Princes in their own Dominions. See Discuss. Riv. Apol. p. 18, 19, 20. And
against this, or on this head, here being no one place produced, to support
this indefinite charge, I cannot reply by Divination, and so have thus briefly
discharged my present undertaking.

26. What is briefly touched on with reflection on my self in the end of that
Dedication, of the softness and gentleness of the leaves of my Answer to his
Animadversions, of the illness of my cause, wherein I am engaged against him,
and the illness of my Principles in managing a good cause, in the Treatise of
Schism and some others (which he has not pleased to name) I am no way
qualified to judge of, till his severer sheets instruct me, by discovering the
infirmities of my cause, and till by his managery of a dispute with a Romanist,
he shall approve his Principles to be such as will hold out against all
gainsayers. At the present having no more to add, I willingly take leave of
him.

The End.
ERRATA.
Page Line. Read. 2 14 premise 3 the marginal note belongs to p. 2. l. 32. 7
absolvig 4 4 Sol: 9 Voet: 6 7 2 26 lest 8 25 world 25 (...)


