Some Profitable DIRECTIONS BOTH FOR PRIEST and PEOPLE, In Two SERMONS Preached
before these EVIL TIMES: THE ONE To the CLERGY, THE OTHER To the Citizens of
London.

By H. Hammond, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. F. for R. Royston at the Sign of the Angel in Ivy-lane,
MDCL VII.

To the READER.
MY fear that these Additional Notes may fall into some hands, which for want
of sufficient acquaintance with the larger Volume, may miss receiving the
desired fruit from them, has suggested the affixing this Auctarium of two
plain, intelligible discourses, the one prepared for an Auditory of the Clergy,
the other of Citizens or Laity, and so containing somewhat of useful advice for
either sort of Readers, to whose hands this Volume shall come. That it may be
to both proportionably profitable, shall be the prayer of

Your Servant in the Lord, H. HAMMOND.

THE PASTORS MOTTO.
A Sermon Preached to the Clergy of the Deanery of Shorham in Kent, at the
Visitation between Easter and Whitsuntide, An. Dom. 1639. held at S. Mary-Cray.
2 COR. 12. 14. For I seek not yours, but you.
THis Text has somewhat in it seasonable both for the assembly, and the times
I speak in; For the first, It is the word, or Motto of an Apostle, Non vestra
sed vos, not yours but you, transmitted to us with his Apostleship, to be
transcribed not into our rings, or seals of Orders, but our hearts, there, if
you please, to be engraven with a diamond, set as the stones in our Ephod, the
jewels in our breast plate, gloriously legible to all that behold us. And for
the 2d consider but the occasion, that extorted from our humble Saint this so
magnificent elogie of himself, you shall find it that which is no small part of
the infelicity of his successors at this time, the contempt and vileness of his
ministry, a sad, joyless subject of an Epistle, which would have been all
spent in superstruction of heavenly doctrine upon that precious foundation
formerly laid, in dressing of those noble plants, that generous vine, Is. 5.
that had cost him so much care to plant, but is fain to divert from that to a
comfortless (...), a parenthesis of two or three chapters long, to vindicate
himself from present danger of being despised, and that even by his own
children whom he had begotten in the Gospel, but other pseudo's made up all of
lying, and depraving, had debauched out of all respect to his doctrine, or
estimation to his person. I should have given a S. Paul leave to have hoped for
better returns from his Corinthians, and now he finds it otherwise to have
expressed that sense in a sharper strain of passion, and indignation, than
Tullie could do against Antonie, when on the same exacerbation he brake out
into that stout piece of eloquence, quid putem? contemptumne me? non video quid
sit in moribus aut vita mea, quod despicere possit Antonius. But there was
another consideration, which as it composes our Apostles style, so it inlarges
it with arguments, all that he can invent, to ingratiate himself unto them,
because this contempt of their Apostle was a most heinous provoking sin, and
withal, that which was sure to make his Apostleship succesless among them; And
then though he can contemn reputation, respect, any thing that is his own, yet
he cannot the quaero vos, seeking of them, that office that is instructed him
by Christ, of bringing Corinthians to heaven; Though he can absolutely expose
his credit to all the Eagles and Vultures on the mountains, yet can he not so
harden his bowels against his converts, their pining, gasping souls, as to see
them with patience posting down this precipice; by despising of him,
prostituting their own salvation; And therefore in this extatick fit of love
and jealousy in the beginning of c. 11. you may see him resolve to do that,
that was most contrary to his disposition, boast, and vaunt, and play the
fool, give them the whole tragedy of his love, what he had done, and suffered
for them, by this means to raise them out of that pit, force them out of that
hell, that the contempt of his ministry had almost ingulph'd them in. And
among the many topickes that he had provided to this purpose, this is one he
thought most fit to insist on, his no design on any thing of theirs, but only
their souls; Their wealth was petty, inconsiderable pillage, and spoil for an
Apostle in his warrefare, too poor, inferior gain for him to stoop to; A
flock, an army, a whole Church full of ransomed souls, fetched out of the
Jaws of the Lion and the Bear, was the only honorable reward for him to
pitch design on, Non quaero vestra sed vos, I seek not yours, but you.

In handling which words, should I allow my self license to observe, and
mention to you the many changes that are rung upon them in the world, my Sermon
would turn all into Satyr, my discourse divide it self not into so many parts,
but into so many declamations, 1. Against them that are neither for the vos nor
vestra, the you, nor yours. 2. Those that are for the vestra, but not vos, the
yours but not you. 3. Those that are for the vos, you, but in subordination to
the vestra, yours, and at last perhaps meet with an handful of gleanings of
pastors, that are either for the vestra, yours, in subordination to the vos,
you, or the vos, you, but not vestra* yours. Instead of this looser variety, I
shall set my discourse these strict limits, which will be just the doctrine and
use of this text, 1. Consider the (...), the truth of the words in S. Paul's
practice. 2. The (...), the end for which they are here mentioned by him. 3.
The (...) how far that practice, and that end will be imitable to us, that here
are now assembled, and then I shall have no more to tempt or importune your
patience.

First of the first, S. Paul's practice in seeking of the vos, you. That his
earnest pursuit of the good of his auditors souls, though it have one very
competent testimony from this place, v. 15. (...), most willingly will I spend
and be spent for your souls, even sacrifice my soul for the saving of yours,
yet many other places there are, which are as punctual and exact for that, as
this in this text, nay it is but a (...) seek here, but you shall find it an
(...) contend] in many other places* all the agonistical phrases, in use among
the ancient Grecians, culled out, and scattered among his Epistles, fetched
from Olympus to Sion, from Athens to Jerusalem, and all little enough to
express the earnest holy violence of his soul in this (...), good fight; he
calls his ministry, running and wrestling with all the difficulties in the
world, and no (...) or (...) price, or reward of all that industry, and that
patience, but only the (...), you, gaining so many colonies to heaven. But
then for the non vestra, not yours, his absolute disclaiming of all pay for
this his service, this text and the verses about it are more punctual, than any
that are to be met with; In other places he can think fit the Soldier, i.e.
minister, should not war at his own charges, that the oxes mouth should not be
muzzled, and that the labourer should be thought worthy of his reward, and a
double honor for some of those laborers, the (...), elder brothers portion,
the privilege of primogeniture for some, and that consisting not only in a
(...) precedence, but (...) double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. and that of maintenance
too, as well as dignity. But in this chapter to these Corinthians the Apostle
renounces receiving, or looking after any such revenue, or encouragement to his
Apostleship* what he says here, (...), I seek not, for the present, he
specifies both for time past and to come, (...), I have not, v. 13. and (...),
I will not, v. 14. i.e. says Hesychius, that best understood the Hellenists
dialect, (...), it signifies to lay burdens on others, and the Apostle in that
very word. v. 16. (...), I have not laid weights on you, and yet farther, v.
17. (...), I have not coveted, all to this same purpose, that S. Paul, on some
special considerations, would never finger one penny of the Corinthians wealth,
but still used some other means to sustain himself, that he might be sure not
to be burdensome to them. What these means were, will not be easy to say
exactly, yet I think one may collect them to be one or more of these three. 1.
Laboring with his own hands, earning his maintenance on the week days by his
trade of making tents, as we read, Acts 18.3. and that particularly at Corinth.
v. 1. 2dly. Receiving pensions of other Churches, which furnished him with a
subsistence, though he had none from Corinth, and that is more than a
conjecture, he mentions it himself, c. 11.8. and calls it the robbing of other
Churches, taking wages of them to do you service, and perhaps, 3dly. Being
releeved by some Christians, that accompanied and ministered to his necessities;
for that was the practice of other Apostles, whatever it was of S. Paul; and
that I conceive the meaning of that mistaken phrase, 1 Cor. 9.5. have we not
power, (...), to carry about a believing or a sister woman, or matron (for so
(...) a brother, is every where a believer, and (...) sister is but the varying
the gender, or sex) as many others did, to maintain and defray the charge of
their journey, that so they might (...), v. 6. forbear working, and yet eat and
drink, v. 4. not starve themselves by preaching the Gospel. Such an one was
Phaebe, Romans 16.1. who therefore is called (...), a servant of the Church of
Cenchrea, i.e. one that out of her wealth, (...) ministered to the Apostles, and
sustained them, and particularly S. Paul at Corinth, as will appear, if you put
together that second verse of Romans 16. and the date or subscription in the
conclusion of the Epistle. In v. 2. she is called (...), i.e. (...),
entertainer and succourer of many, and of S. Paul himself, and this it seems at
Corinth, for there she was with him, and from thence she went on S. Paul's
errand, to carry this Epistle to the Romans, as it is in the subscription. The
same he affirms distinctly of the brethren, i.e. the faithful that came from
Macedonia, (...), c. 11.9. they supplied my wants. And so still the Corinthians
had the Gospel for nothing; By these three means, the Apostle kept himself from
being burdensome to them. But you will wonder perhaps why S. Paul was so
favorable to these Corinthians, so strictly and almost superstitiously careful
not to be burdensome, or chargeable to them: This I confess was a receding
from a right of his Apostleship, and more than will be obligatory of exemplary
to us, nay more than he would yield to, as matter of prescription to himself,
in other Churches, for there, it is apparent, he made use of that privilege; But
then it is still the more strange, he did it not at Corinth; The reason I can
but guess at to be this; The Church of Christ in other parts at that time,
particularly in Jerusalem, was in some distress, and 'twas committed to S.
Paul's trust to get a contribution out of all other parts for them; This
contribution is called by an unusual phrase, (...) grace, I know not how many
times, in c. 8. of this Epistle, which I conceive the very word, which in
Latin and English is called charity, charitas, (...) (in a sense that
Aristotle uses (...), (...).
Rhet. 11.7.) and as it is all one with (...), v. 4. communication,
distribution, ministering to the Saints, and as in the benediction, (...) grace,
and (...) communion, are words of the like importance. Where by the way let me
put you in mind of one special part of the ministers charge, wherever he
officiates by doctrine, and by cheerful example, (by preaching the duty and the
benefits and setting them lively copyes of it) to raise up the charity of his
people, and from that to see to the liberal provision of all that are in want
in that place, yea and if need be, that it overflow its own banks (if they be
narrow) and extend to the watering of others also. In the primitive times the
Offertorie was the constant means of doing this, no man of ability ever coming
to the sacrament without remembering the Corban, and out of that treasury the
(...) or priest being enabled, Just Mart. Apol. 2.
(...), became the common guardian of all that were in want; The weight of
which task was so great in the Apostles times, that they were fain to erect a
new order in the Church, to assist them particularly in this, (...), to furnish
tables, i.e. distribute maintenance out of that bank to all that were in need,
Act. 6.2. I wish heartily our care and our practice may not fall too short from
such a venerable example. Well, there being need, more than ordinary, at that
time, for our Apostle to quicken his Corinthians liberality to the poor
brethren of other Churches, was the reason, I conceive, of his renouncing all
part of their liberality himself, inflaming their charity by that means,
showing them first in himself a pattern and example of bounty, bestowing the
diviner food of their very souls upon them, as freely as the sun extends his
beams, or the stars their influence, pouring down heaven upon them in a
shower, and yet to exceed the clouds in their bounty, never thinking of any
means to exhale from them to his own sphaere any the least tribute out of their
fatness, abundantly satisfied, if those clods, that have been so enriched by
him, will melt or swet out some of their charity to others, give poor
Christians leave to be the better for their fullness. Having given you an
account of the Apostles practice in this non vestra, renouncing, disclaiming
any profit, or gain from his labors among the Corinthians, I proceed to
enquire, why he boasts of it in this place, and keeps it not secret betwixt
himself and God, but in several phrases mentions it over and over again, (...),
I have not overcharged you, I have not burdened you, I have not coveted any
thing from you, and (...), I seek not yours.

The plain truth is, the Apostle is fain to boast, to recite, and rehearse his
merits toward them, to demonstrate how, above what strict duty exacted, he has
obliged them, and all little enough to vindicate his ministry, to bring them
into any tolerable opinion of him: He had been reproached by them, counted
weak, a fool, in the former chapter, and by that means he is compelled thus to
glory, v. 11. The thing that I would have you make matter of meditation from
hence, is, the constancy of the devil, and his indefatigate perseverance in
this grand (...), artifice of deceit, in stealing away men's hearts from their
Apostles and Pastors, and the mighty successfulness that this meets with,
debauching whole nations and Churches at once, particularly all Corinth, (a
most numerous populous city of forward Christians, and Metropolis of Achaia)
from all love, respect and estimation of their spiritual father, and that
within few years after their spiritual birth, by that very Paul begotten in the
Gospel. Thus is the present ministry of this Kingdom, that very same
subordination of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, that so near the Apostles, as
in Ignatius time, could not be violated without profaneness, and even
disclaiming of Christianity, (by him most clearly and distinctly set down
almost in every of those Epistles, which Vedelius at Geneva, a severe
Aristarchus, could not doubt but they were his) that ministry of ours, the very
same that planted the Protestant Religion among us, watered it with their
blood, (our Paul's and our Apollos's too) to whom God by that prolifical teeming
martyrdom of theirs, has since raised up a most numerous, learned, Orthodox
seed, ready, I doubt not, in defense of our Religion, to fill up the sufferings
of their fathers, to die their garments in the same winepress, to run, if
occasion should be, and crowd into that fiery chariot, and there like the
ancient (...) in Athenaeus, fight, and shoot out of those warm seats, (...)
and contend earnestly for that faith that was once delivered to the Saints in
this kingdom: This so learned, puissant, Orthodox ministry of ours, yet how
is it by the sons and daughters of their love, their sweat, their prayers,
their tears, their lungs, their very bowels, sorry am I to say, by some sons
of the very prophets, defamed, and vilified? I speak not this either to raise,
or invenome any passion in my fellow-brethren, but, God knows, out of two
other more useful designs, 1. From the common fate of others, and even this
Apostle before us, to leave off wondering at this act of Gods providence, in
permitting, and Satan's malice in attempting it. Think it not strange, says the
Apostle, concerning the fiery trial, this I cannot call by that title, it is
rather the aerie trial, a blast of poisonous vapor, that Satan in a kind of
hypocondriacal fit has belched out against the Church, yet are we to think as
little strange of it; It Is as familiar for that mouth of hell to breath out
smoke, as fire; slanders, as slaughters against the Church; Christ was defamed
for a glutton, and one that had a devil, crowned with reproaches, as well as
thorns, first wounded with the sword of the tongue, and then after with nails
and spear, made viler, then Barabbas by the peoples cry, before condemned to
the cross by Pilate; And when the Master of the house has been patient to be
called Beelzebub, well may a disciple of his retinue digest the title; And
therefore, me thinks, S. Paul can write it calmely, we are become, (...) as the
offscouring, and (...), it is a phrase of mighty intimation, like a man, that
in a plague-time is chosen out, the vilest, unsavoryest in the city, carried
about in the guise of nastiness, then whipped, then burnt in a ditch, or cast
into the sea, every man giving him a [(...), and (...)] Let the curse of the
whole city light on thee; And thus, says the Apostle, are we become, we
Apostles, we Ministers; Yea and (...), a spectacle to the world and angels and
men, (...) the theater for all the (...), as some (I say not how well) have
lightly changed the phrase, 1 Cor. 15.32. combating with men, as with lions,
and bears, or else (...), the stage, and scene for the whole world of fiends
and men, to act their tragedies upon, and no manner of news in all this. Even
among the heathen, the Grammarians tell us, that never any Comedy of
Aristophanes took so well, as his Clouds, that was spent all in reproaching of
Socrates, and under that title involved the whole condition of learning; Though
through Alcibiades's faction excidit, it miscarried, mist its applause once or
twice, yet when men were left to their own humors, 'twas cried up extremely.
And therefore not to think it strange, that is the first thing; Yea, and 2dly.
To make it matter of rejoicing and triumphing, of a (...), Mat. 5.12. a plain
shouting for joy, or, as we render it, exceeding gladness, that they are worthy
of this degree of Christian preferment, to suffer shame for Christ's name; That
woe of Christ's we have been generally secure, and safe from, Luke 6.26. Woe
unto you when all men speak well of you, we have had in all ages friends good
store, that will not let this curse light on us; And blessed be God, if it
prove (...), we of the last age peculiarly, that that great blessing is
reserved for, Mat. 5.11. (...), blessed are ye when men shall revile and
persecute and say every evil word against you; But withal let us be sure to
take along with us the (...) falsely] that follows, that it be our innocence
that is thus reviled: The devil is most ready to do it then, being (...),
accuser of the brethren, the best Christians, that he may exercise two of his
attributes at once, accuser and liar both; If he do not so, I am sure twill be
small matter of rejoicing to us, small comfort in suffering as a thief, says
the Apostle, though all joy in suffering as a Christian, and so small comfort
in the (...) being reproached unless the (...) falsely] be joined with it; And
therefore you must add that caution to your comfort, that they be your good,
at least your justifiable deeds, that be evil spoken of, or else it will not be
a sic prophetas, the prophets were used like you. The Clergyman that in such a
time as this, when the mouth of hell is open against us, shall think fit to
open any other mouth, to join in the cry against the Church, to give life, or
tongue to any scandalous sin, and set that to its clamans de terra, crying from
the ground; that shall with any one real crime give authority to all the false
pretended ones, that are laid to the charge of our calling, that by drunkenness
or incontinence, by luxury or sloth, by covetousness or griping, by insolence
or pride, by oaths or uncomely jesting, by contention or intemperate language,
by repaying evil for evil, or railing for defamations, shall exasperate this
raging humor, and give it true nourishment to feed on, what does he but turn
broiler and boutefeu, make new libels against the Church, and by that means
persuade credulous, seducible spectators, that all are true, that have been
made already; I know not what climax or aggravation of woes is heavy enough for
that man, all the lamentations and (...) in the Bible, Alas my brother] will
not reach unto it, that of the millstone about the neck, or the Melius si
nunquam nasceretur, it had been better if he had never been born] are the
fittest expressions for him. S. Paul for the vindicating his ministry from
vileness, was fain to mention all the good deeds he had ever done among them: O
let not us bring our evil to remembrance, by acting them over afresh, but think
it most abundantly sufficient, that we have already thus contributed to the
defaming of our calling; He that has done so formerly, that by the guilt of
any one scandalous sin (and it need not be of the first magnitude, to deserve
that title in a Minister) has contributed ought to the vilifying of the whole
Order, it is now time for him to see what he has done, been a troubler of
Israel, set the whole kingdom in an animosity against the Clergy, and when
will he be able to weep enough in secret, to wash out this stain, incorporate
into the very woofe of our robe? I shall no farther aggravate the sin upon him,
than to prepare him to seek out for some remedy, and to that end to bear me
company to my last particular, how far we are concerned in the transcribing S.
Paul's pattern, how far that practice, and that end is imitable by us, that are
here assembled.

This practice consists of two parts, a positive, and a negative. The positive
part of this practice, the (...), but you] has no case of scruple or
difficulty in it; The You] are the Corinthians souls; As in other places the
souls signify the persons, so many souls went out of Egypt, i.e. so many men;
so here, by way of exchange or quittance on the other side, you, i.e. your
souls, according to that of Pythagoras of old, (...), thy soul is thou; And
then add the (...) I seek] to it, and it gives you the uncontradicted duty of
a Minister, to be a seeker of souls, the spiritual Nimrod, the hunter before
the Lord, hunter of men, hunter of souls, and that indeed as wild, and
untameable, subtle a game, as any wilderness can yield, so unwilling to come
into our toils, so wise in their generation to escape our snares, so cunning
to delude all our stratagems of bringing them to heaven, that a man may
commonly labor a whole night and catch nothing. He that wins, or takes
souls is wise, says the wise man, Prove. 11.30. A piece of wisdom it is, not
suddenly learned, a game, wherein all the wisdom of the world, the (...), the
prudence of the flesh, and the cunning of hell are all combined in the party
against us, for this (...), as Synesius calls the soul, this stake betwixt God
and devils; and the game must be very carefully played, and dexterously managed
on our side, if we think ever to win it out of their hands. The manner of
pastors, as of shepherds among us, is much changed from what it was in the
Eastern parts of the world, in Greece and in Jurie; The sheep, says the
Philosopher in his time, would be lead by a green bough, and follow
whithersoever you would have them; and so in the Scripture is still mention of
leading of sheep, and of the people like sheep, Psalm. 77. but now they must be
driven and followed, yea, and sometime by worrying brought into the fold, or
else there is no getting them into the fairest lovelyest pasture. The sheep
were then a hearing, and a discernig sort of creatures, could hear the
shepherd, and know his voice from all others, and when the thief and robber
came, the sheep did not hear them, Joh. 10.8. but now it is quite contrary,
either not hearing at all; profaneness and dissoluteness has possessed our
souls with the (...), spirit of slumber, torpor, absolute deafness, that all
our hearing of Sermons is but a slumber of such a continuance, or else having
no ears for any but the thief and robber, if any come on that errand, to rob
us of our charity, of our obedience, of our meek and quiet spirits, and infuse
calumnies, animosities, railings, qualities that ipso facto work metamorphoses
in us, change sheep into wolves, his voice shall be heard, and admired, and
deified, like Herod's, the voice of God and not of man, though nothing be so
contrary to God or godlyness, as that voice. In this and many other
considerations it is, that the (...) I seek] here is so necessary; All our
pains and industry, diligence and sagacity are little enough, to bring men
into the true way to heaven, so many by-ways on every side inviting, and
flattering us out of it, so much good company persuading, nay so many false
leaders directing us into error, that a Minister had need fasten himself into
the ground (like a Mercuries post in this division of ways) and never leave
hollowing, and calling and disabusing of passengers with a -- This is the way,
walk in it; or in the Apostles words, Follow peace with all men ((...) pursue
and follow it) and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; Peace and
holiness, two such strangers, such prodigies in the world, (having taken their
leaves so solemnly with Astrea for heaven) that unless they be followed with a
(...) full speed, as in an hue and cry, there is small hope of overtaking or
bringing them back again to the earth, And yet without them, heaven must be
fain to turn an unhabitable part of the world, pars globi incognita, as empty
of Saints, as it is full of glory, without them Nemo Deum, no man shall see
God. Could I imagine it possible for me to be instrumental to you in this work,
to advise or direct you in this course, this method of seeking your peoples
souls, so that God might one day find them in this temper, in pace and
Sanctitate, in peace and holiness, I should put off all the reverence, that I
bear to this assembly, all consideration of the business of this day, and
venture to be unseasonable that I might be useful to you in this point; But I
know there be no general rules, that can promise themselves such a
successefulness; the variety of tempers must have different accommodations, and
well if after using of all means, we can be able to save any. The way most
probable in my conceit is the bringing men acquainted with the difference
betwixt the first and second Covenant; then pitching on the second, as that
that belongs to us Christians, to show them the condition of this covenant in
the gross, the (...), law of faith, made up of commands as well as promises all
the Gospel-precepts that join together to complete that Codex, that law of
Repentance, self-denial, Charity, the New creature, which S. Paul interprets
(...), Faith consummate by love, or, as S. James, (...), perfected by works,
sincere, impartial, constant, though not unsinning, perfect obedience; And
then, if you will have it in the retaile, the Sermon in the mount, in the 5th
and 6th of Matthew will give it you completely; were men but possessed that
those duties there mentioned, with the ego autem, but I say to you] were duties
indeed not only phrases, and forms of speech, that they are not only by
grace made possible to a Christian (an easy yoke, light burden, and a command
nigh unto thee, Romans 10.8. i.e. (...), as the 72. render that place of
Deuteron. from whence it is cited) but also most indispensibly necessary,
without which nemo Deum, none shall see God, Gods oath being gone out against
all others, with a nunquam introibunt, they shall never enter into his rest. It
would, I conceive, within a while be found necessary either to give over
pretending toward heaven, or else to observe those gesses, that alone of all
others can bring us thither; and so the world of Christians be once more
divided, as Epiphanius says it was in the first ages, not into Orthodox and
heretical (for those are titles, that every man will apply as he lists, the
one to himself and his adherents, the other to all others that he disphansies:)
nor again into spiritual and carnal, (for those were abused too in Tertullians
time, as soon as ever he turned Montanist, then strait nos spirituales, we
spiritual, and all others animales psychici, mere animal men) but into (...),
godly and ungodly livers, and so impiety, injustice, and uncharitableness be
the grand heresies, to be anathematized, and peace and holiness the most
Orthodox Christian tenets in our Religion. But then for the atchieving this
aim, let me tell you, that men must have more than Sermons to lead them, the
visible preachings of your lives must (...) cooperate, and join in the work of
drawing sinners to God, or else 'twill hardly prove successeful: you know the
story in Gellius, when that excellent counsel was given at Lacedemon by one
that was vita defamatissimus, infamous for a very ill life, they were to take
the counsel out of his mouth, and appoint a good man to deliver it, though a
worse Orator, Lib. 18.3. Two things the Gospel was first planted by, teaching,
and miracles, and those miracles in Scripture phrase are called works, and
mighty works; Now though the miracles be outdated, yet the (...) works, in
the other sense must never be antiquated, it is they that the (...) power
belongs to, the efficacy, and force and mightyness of our preaching, which if
it be not added to our Sermons, our threats will be taken for Mormo's, our
promises for delusions, our exhortations out of Scripture for acts of tyranny
and oppression, laying those burdens on other men's shoulders, which we will
not touch with our own fingers; But if our lives bear witness to our doctrine,
by letting them see us write those copies with our own hands, which we require
them to transcribe, then as Polybius says of Philopoemen, that good Orator,
and good man, (and the goodness of the man was the special piece of his
oratory) (...), we shall not only persuade but enforce our auditors; This is
the only honest way of insinuating our selves into our peoples affections, by
letting them see how hearty our exhortations are, by our zeal to observing
them our selves, by showing what miracles of reformation the Gospel is able to
work on them; by an essay of its efficacy on our own breasts; And if this
positive part of S. Paul's practice be perfectly con'd, the negative will
follow, the non vestra not yours.] He that heartily and affectionately se^ks
the souls of his auditors, will never pitch design on any thing else, that is
theirs, the crown that belongs to him that converteth many to righteousness, is
too rich to receive luster or commendation from any inferior accession, or
acquisition from any thing that the vestra yours] can signify; He that has
any consideration of the vestra, yours] in this work of a Pastor, is the (...),
the mercenary hireling, that Christ so prejudiceth with the (...) and (...), he
flies, and he cares not for the sheep, from no other topic of proof, but
only, (...), because he is an hireling, Joh. 10.13. And of what ill
consequence 'twas foreseen this would be in the Church, you may conjecture by
that one act of the administration of Gods providence in this behalf,
constantly observable through all ages. That no Minister of Gods might be
forced to such viler submissions, driven out of that Apostolical, generous
ingenuity (Freely have you received, freely give,) into Gehezi's meanness, and
mercenariness, selling and bartering that sacred function, the gifts of the
holy Ghost, or the exercise of those gifts; it is, no doubt, that Gods
providence has in all ages so liberally provided for endowing of the Church;
Among that people where he himself so immediately presided, that, says
Josephus, it could not be called by the style of any other nation, monarchy,
aristocracy, but (...), neither administered by Kings or Senates, but
immediately by God himself; there the Levites, without any of their own arts or
pursuits, were much the richest Tribe of the twelve, lost nothing by having no
portion among their brethren; Not to mention their parts in sacrifices and
offerings, and their forty eight cities with suburbs, made over to them, Number.
35. the Lords being their inheritance, i.e. the instating the tithes upon them,
was demonstratively as large a revenue to them, as (supposing an equal
division) the remainder could be to any other Tribe, yea and larger too, as
much as the twelve tenth parts which they received, exceeded the nine, that
remained to each Tribe after the decimation, i.e. by one third part of what was
left to any Tribe. And among Christians in the infancy of the Church, before
the ministry was endowed with any certain portion, yet sure the (...), the
Christians selling their lands, and bringing the price of them to the Apostles
feet, though not for them to enclose, yet for them to partake of, as well as to
distribute, kept them from any necessity of the quaero vestra, seeking that
which was other men's. Nay where that provision was not to be expected, as in
their travailes, and journeyings, yet the staff and the scrip are interdicted
the Apostles, Mat. 10.10. and under those two phrases, the quaero vestra, the
making any gain by the Gospel, the staff in that place was according to the
custom of the Jews, baculus paupertatis, the staff of poverty, which Jacob
intimates, when he says, with my staff I went over Jordan, i.e. in another
phrase, a poor Syrian ready to perish, particularly (...) (...) the sign of a
Mendicant, (which the Germans call at this day, baetell stab, from the Greek
(...), this begging or craving staff) and this, with the scrip, was forbidden
the Apostles in S. Matthew, though in Marks relation, another kind of staff,
the staff for travail be permitted them; To show Gods absolute dislike of the
quaero vestra] in Apostles, even before any certain provision was made for
their maintenance, God, that feeds the young ravens, sustains the destitute
(and believe it, his Exchequer is no contemptible bank, his table in the
wilderness is served with quails and manna) undertaking to provide for them
sufficiently by some other means; And since by that same providence the Church
is now endowed again in most parts of Christendom, and Gods severe
denunciations against sacrilege set as an hedge of thorns about Levi's
portion, sure to prick, and fester, and rankle in his flesh, that shall dare to
break in upon it, what is this but still a continued expression of Gods
dislike of the quaero vestra, who has therefore made over his own portion on
us, that therewith we might be contented, and provided for, without the (...),
v. 17. without letting loose our hands, or our appetites on other men's
possessions? You see then, by the way, the error of those, that from this
practice of the Apostle are ready to prescribe us absolute poverty, that will
have all the lawful proper revenues of the Church prohibited, under the
vestra, and then claiming of tithes or any other Ecclesiastic indowment shall
get under that style, and the Apostles non quaero] urged for a president
against us; with how little law, or logic you will perceive, when you
remember, that the tith, or what else is consecrated, is by the very laws of
this kingdom (to derive the pedigree no farther) as much the Ministers own,
held by the same tenure of Donation first, then of Parliamentary confirmation,
that any man's inheritance descends unto him, and therefore to demand them, is
no more a quaero vestra, than to demand a rent of a tenant, in a word, a direct
mea, not vestra, a right, and not a gratuity. Nay the learned Jews have gone
farther ( R. Bechai on Deuteronomy. 14.) that if the tith be not paid, the whole heap
becomes Gods portion, and cite it as a speech of Gods, that if thou pay the
tithe it is thy corn, if not, it is Gods corn, and therefore, says he, it is
said, Hos. 11.9. therefore I will return and take away my corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof; like that land that is held in
capite, with a rent reserved, the non-payment of the rent, or homage, is the
forfeiting of the tenure. But I desire not to follow this Jew in his
meditation, but rather to come home to our selves, and not only to interdict
our selves, the quaero vestra, but even regulate us in the quaero nostra, purge
out of this assembly whatever may savor of the Jew, all griping, or rigor, or
sowreness, or summum jus, even in the quaero nostra, seeking that that is our
own. To this purpose in the first place not to seek all that is our own; Though
'twere not a fault in the Lay-Pharisee, Mat. 23.23. (...), to pay tithe of
cumin, and the smallest herb, yet perhaps it may be in the Priest to require
it; A fault not of injustice, or the quaero vestra, but of sordidness, and
meaneness in the quaero mea: Eth. 4.1.
Aristotle I am sure would condemn it under that style of (...), too much
pooreness and tenuity of mind, (...), though not in desiring other men's, the
quaero vestra in the text, yet in want, or defect of that liberality,
ingenuity, that is required of the moral man, which he there specifies by the
(...), exactness even to the partition of a Cumin seed, a fault, if observable
in a heathen, then sure censurable in a Christian, and in a Minister vile, and
scandalous. When this is resolved against in the first place, as illiberal,
degenerous and beggarly, contrary to that generosity, and superiority of mind,
that our profession should be thought to infuse into us. The next thing I must
require of you in the quaero mea, is a general unconcernedness in the things of
this world, using the world as if we used it not, possessing the wealth we
have, but not being possessed by it (for then it turns our devil or familiar)
as able to part with it at Gods call, as to receive it at his gift, pouring it
out upon every his intimation, seeking, and projecting for advantages to be the
better for this false Mammon, by being rich in good works, and when we see it a
parting from us of its own accord, taking a cheerful unconcerned leave of it,
retaining so much of the Sceptick, as the (...) amounts to, an untroubledness
with these inferior events, and of the Stoic, or wise man in Antoninus, as
(...), to act no passionate, lugubrious, tragical part, whatever secular
provocation cross us on the stage. Then 3dly, An entire contentedness with our
lot, that duty of the last commandment, which is absolutely required to the non
quaero vestra, or as our Apostle interprets himself, the (...), not, as we
render it, not making a gain, but not desiring, coveting any thing that is
another. To this purpose excellently Epictetus of old, that he that tastes, and
carves to himself of those dishes only, that are set before him, reaches not
after those that are out of his distance, (...), is fit for a guest at Gods
table, which you may make, if you please, a periphrasis of a Minister; Did I
not fear that this were a duty of too great perfection for some of my auditors,
an unusquisque non potest capere, every one cannot receive it, I should go on
with that divine Philosopher, that he that abstains from that which is set
before him, contemnes that riches, that comes knocking at his door, (...), is
not only a guest at his board, but a companion in his throne, and that is the
pitch, that I would commend unto you, if I might hope, you would endeavor
after it. But then 4thly, and lastly, the minimum quod sic, (that that I must
not leave you till you have promised me, wrestle till break of day, except you
will thus bless me) the lowest degree, that can be reconcilable or competible
with an Apostle, is the not suffering your quaero vestra, your hope, or
design, of secular advantages, gaining of gratuities, gaining of applause, to
have any the least influence on your preaching, to intermixe never so little in
your seeking of souls; This is the (...), dashing, or imbasing the word of God,
corrupting it with our unworthy mixtures, making it instrumental to our gain,
or popularity, the meanest office, the vilest submission in the world. I
remember a note of Procopius on 2 Kings, that Elisha sending his servant to
cure the Shunamites child, forbids him to pass any complement with any by the
way; I had thought it had been for speed, but he says, (...), he knew his
popular humor, and that popularity hinders working of miracles; and then by
the same reason we may conclude, that that must needs enervate the word of God,
and make it hartless and liveless in our hands, and the Minister that is given
to it, will hardly ever work wonders in the curing, or recovering of souls. But
that servant you know had another fault, (...), desire of money is (...), the
mother-city whence all wickedness comes forth, said Bion of old, and Timon puts
them both together, (...), insatiate love of wealth and honor are the elements
of evil; and it is strange to see how truly those wise men were called vates,
what Prophets they were, what direct Satyrs those words of theirs are against
the times we live in; Our (...) and (...), covetousnes^ and popularity, are the
elements of all the ruin, the seeds of all the desolation that is threatened
against this Church, some of us by the notorious scandalous guilt of those two
crimes, tempting rash, uncharitable spectators to resolve that those sins are
the formalis ratio of a Clergy man, accidents of the essence, and inseparable
from the order (and it is not the illogicalness of the inference, that will
excuse them, that have joined with Satan in temptation to make that conclusion,
nor deliver us from the destruction that follows it. Others of us on the
contrary side, but from the same principles, decrying all due either of
maintenance, or respect to the Clergy, devesting themselves of all, but
contempt and drudgery, hoping (we have just reason to suspect) by flying both
to be courted by them both, to have them more sure at the rebound, than they
can at the fall, to run from them here most violently, that they may have them
alone to themselves when they meet at the Antipodes. What imprudent bargains
such men are likely to make, if they should be taken at their words; what
skittish things popular benevolence, and popular applause have been always
found to be, experience has taught others. I desire even they that make that
choice may never pay so deer for that knowledge; But whatever the error prove
in the transitory commodities of this world, it matters little, for wealth and
honor are, sure, things, that we may go to heaven without, and so, for as much
as concerns our individuals, are not necessary to us, as Christians; yet can I
not assure you, but that they are necessary to us in some degree as Ministers,
wealth in a competence to rescue us from contempt; and respect, at least so
far, as a nequis te despiciat, let no man despise thee, to keep us from being
utterly unprofitable; some revenue of our own, to keep us from the quaero
vestra, and some authority of our own, to enable us for the quaero vos,
somewhat of either from the character of our office, that we be not tempted to
seek either by unlawful means to purchase the vestra, by the sale of vos, to
acquire the favor of our auditors by the exposing of their souls. Think but
how probable a fear this may be, when things come to such a complication, that
he that has a sin to be preached against, has a benevolence to be preached
for; he that has a wound to be cured, is able to be thankful, if he may be
kindly used, yea, and to mulct the Surgeon, if he be too rough, when he that
has somewhat to mend, has also somewhat to give, a commutation to escape his
penance, whether this may not prove a temptation to him that has no other
livelihood to depend on, and consequently whether rankling and gangrening, may
not be looked for, as an ordinary title in our weekly bills, when the skinning
of wounds is become the gainful craft, and compliance and popularity the great
Diana, that trade by which men have their wealth. But perhaps the most of this
is an extravagance, I wish and pray it may prove an unnecessary one.

There is yet one branch of the application behind; the end why S. Paul
delivered this text of mine, that I told you was the vindicating his ministry
from contempt, the gaining some authority with the Corinthians; And let that be
our method also, to come to that end by the non vestra sed vos, not to acquire
that thin blast of air, that Camelions are wont to feed on, but that solid
substantial estimation, that dwells only in the account of God and the hearts
of true Corinthians; That that may disperse those fumes of prejudices, that
Satan is wont to blast the Minister with, when any saving effect is to be
wrought by his ministry, that unblemished reputation here, that when it is to
be had, is a precious blessing, very instrumental to the edifying of others,
and is a kind of coronet here in this life, preparatory to that crown
hereafter; And sure there is no work of ours, that we can justly hope God will
think fit to reward with such a crown, but the sincere laboring in the word
and doctrine, filling our souls with the earnest desire of saving others,
espousing it as the sole felicity of our lives, the one promotion that we
aspire to, to people heaven with Saints, to send whole colonies of inhabitants
thither. 'Twas the excellence and pride of the ancient Jews, yea, and the craft
peculiar to them, says Josephus, (...), getting of children, propagating
miraculously, and the barren was the most infamous person among them, Behold I
go childless, the saddest lamentation, and Give me children or else I die, and
Take away our reproach, most pathetical Scripture expressions; yea, and among
the Romans the jus trium liberorum, the right of three children, you know, what
a prerogative it was: This is our trade, my brethren, to beget children to
heaven, and according to the Law of the Goel in Deuteronomy. now our elder brother
(Christ) is dead, we are the men, who by right of propinquity are obliged to
raise up seed to our elder brother. O let it not be our reproach to go thus
childless to our graves, at least our guilt, and just accusation to bereave our
Savior of that seed he expects from us, you know what a sin it was to repine
at that duty; let not us be wanting to Christ in this so charitable a service,
charitable to Christ, that his blood may not have been shed in vain, charitable
to others, whom we may by Gods blessing convert unto righteousness, and the
charity will at last devolve on our selves, who by this means shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever.

THE POOR MAN'S TITHING, A SERMON Preached in St Paul's Church BEFORE THE LORD
MAYOR* AND ALDERMEN OF THE City of London on the 12th of April, Anno Dom. 1640.

By H. Hammond, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane.

THE POOR MAN'S TITHING.
DEUTERONOMY. 26.12, 13. When thou have made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase the third year -- Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God --
THat the first sound of this text may not possess you with an expectation of
a Vicars plea, a discourse of tithes, and querulous invective against
sacrilege; and consequently by this prejudice, your ears and hearts be
fortified impenetrable and impregnable against the speaker, and the Sermon;
that I may reconcile the choice of this text with the imploring and hoping for
your patience, I shall immediately deliver you from your fears, by assuring
you, that the main of this text is (and the total of my discourse shall be)
bent quite toward another coast, that which in the sincerity of my heart, I
conceive may best comply with your designs, either as Christians, or as men,
most tend to your serving of Christ, and enriching of your selves, with the
increase of your wealth here, and glory hereafter. And when I have told you
this, I can not choose but say, that I am your friend, and for that may claim
not as an act of favor, but justice, the payment of this debt, the return of
your patience in receiving, and care in practicing what shall be delivered.

There was a double tithing among the Jews, the every years tithing, and the
third years tithing; the every years tithing you know whose patrimony it was;
but after that was set apart (and presented unto the owners) every third year
there was another to be raised, over and above, for the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, as you may see it enacted, c. 14. v. 29. this was
called by the Rabbines the second tithing, and in another respect the third by
some of them, (the tithe for feasts, Deuteronomy. 14.23. going for the second, and the
tithe of the tithes, which the Levites paid the High priest, going for the
fourth, in that account) but most significantly (...) the tithe for the poor,
(...) in Josephus the poor man's tithing, or in the words of this text, the
compleveris decimare anno tertio, the making an end of tithing the third year;
Till this were done, there wanted a compleveris, what ever other dues were
paid, the work was incomplete, and upon the performance of that, here is a
stock of confidence toward God for him, that has done it, a right invested on
him to all the abundance of Canaan, v. 15. a justifiable pretension to all
temporal blessings, which he may depend on, and challenge at Gods hand, 'twere
but a cold expression to say, he might expect by petition, I will add, he may
require by claim, and produce his patent for it here in my text, Cum
compleveris, etc. When thou have made an end, etc.

This text I have upon advice resolved not to divide into parts, but my
discourse upon it I shall, by setting it these bounds, and limits; 1. That it
present unto you the duty of almes-giving, by occasion of these words, Cum
compleveris decimare anno tertio, when thou have made an end of tithing -- the
third year. 2. The benefit arising from the performance of this duty, from the
rest, Dicas coram Domino, then thou shall or may say, i.e. have right and
power to say, before the Lord thy God. In our progress through the first of
these, we shall observe these gesses; 1. We shall begin with the (...),
consider almes-giving simply, deducing the practice of the Jews down to us
Christians, and so in a manner give you the history of almes-giving. 2. We
shall look into the (...), what portion ought to issue out of every man's
revenues, taking our rise from the practice of the Jews, a tithe of all
increase every third year. 3. We shall proceed to the (...), consider it as a
duty, and then we shall have done with the first general.

In the second general we shall show you, 1. In thesi, that confidence or
claiming any thing at Gods hands, must take its rise from duty in performance,
Then thou may say; then, but not before. 2. In hypothesi, show you the
connection between this confidence and this performance, claiming of temporal
plenty, upon giving of alms. These are the several posts and stages of my
future discourse, the Monogramme drawn in cole, as it were, wherein you may
discern the lines and lineaments of the whole body; I must now descend to the
filling them up, and giving you them a little more to the life, taking them in
the order proposed, very loosely, and very plainly, making provision for your
hearts, not your ears, for your future gain and not your present sensuality,
and begin with the first general, and in that, the (...), or almes-giving
simply considered, deducing the practice of the Jews down to us Christians,
and so give you in a manner the history of almes-giving.

Though we assert not an equality of worldly riches from any decree either of
God or nature, find not any statute of (...), any law of community in any but
Plato's institutions, and those never reduced to practice in any one city in
the world (attempted once by Plotinus, through his favor with Gallienus, who
promised to reside in his Platonopolis, but soon altered his purpose again, In
Vit. Plotin.
as Porphyrie tells us) yet I may suppose it for a granted maxim, that the
extreme inequality, that is now so illustriously visible in the world, is not
any act of Natures primary intention, or Gods first and general providence;
Aristotle may tell us of some (...), some that Nature has bored through the
ear to be slaves for ever, and we may believe him, if we can find any ground
for it, but of any (...) colonies of men, sent into the world without any claim
or right to any part of the worlds goods, he has not left us any thing upon
record. Nor has the book of Creation in the Scripture, the Beresith, or
natural philosophy of the Bible given us any hint for such a resolution, that
some should be born to riot, and others to famish, some to be glutted, and
others to starve, that mankind should be thus dichotomized into such extreme
distant fates, some to reign in Paradise for ever, others to be thrown over the
wall, as out of the Adamites stove, to pine and freeze among thorns and
briers. This were an absolute decree of election and reprobation, improved
farther than Predestinarians have ordinarily extended it. As we are wont to say
of sin, that it is not to be found in Gods Hexameron, no fruit of his Six
days labor, but a production of a later date, engendered betwixt the serpent
and the woman, that Incubus and Succuba, the devil and the lower soul; so may
we say of extreme want and poverty, that its nativity is of the land of Canaan,
its father an Amorite, and its mother an Hittite: Satan and covetousness
brought it into the world, and then God finding it there (whose glorious
attribute it is to extract good out of evil) as he did once a (...) out of an
(...), redemption of mankind out of the fall of Adam, and so made the Devil an
instrument of bringing the Messiah into the world; so has he in like manner by
his particular providence ordered and continued this effect of some men's
covetousness, to become matter of others bounty, exercise of that one piece of
man's divinity, as Pythagoras called liberality, and so ex his lapidibus, out of
these stones, out of the extreme want, and necessity of our brethren, to raise
trophies and monuments of virtue to us, of charity, liberality, and
magnificence, of mercy, and bowels of compassion, that most beautiful
composition of graces, that most heroical renouned habit of the soul. So that
now we may define it an act of Gods infinite goodness to permit, though before
we could not allow it reconcilable with his infinite justice, to decree the
extreme inequality of earthly portions, the poor man gasping for food, that the
rich may have a storehouse or magazine, where to lay up his treasures; the
careful labourer, full of children, suffered to wrestle with two extremities at
once; hunger on the one side; and natural compassion to the helpless creatures
he has begotten, on the other; that thou by thy wealth may be that Elijah
sent from heaven to the famishing forlorn widow, that Godlike man dropped out of
the clouds to his relief, and by the omnipotent reviving power of thy charity,
usurp that attribute of Gods given him by the Psalmist, that feeds the young
ravens, exposed by the old ones, sustain that destitute sort of creatures, that
call upon thee. Admirable therefore was that contrivance of Gods mercy and
wisdom, mentioned to the Jews, not as a threatening, but a promise of grace,
one of the privileges, and blessings of Canaan, the poor shall never cease out
of the land, Deuteronomy. 15.11. that thou may always have somewhat to do with thy
wealth, some sluice to exhaust thy plenty, some hungry leech, to open a vein,
and prevent the access of thy fever, and withal, that thy wealth may ennoble
thee, as Xenocrates told his benefactors children, that he had abundantly
requited their father, for all men spoke well of him for his liberality to
Xenocrates, or as benefactors among the heathen were adored and deified, that
thus thy faithless, fading falsehearted riches (which the Evangelist therefore
styles Mammon of unrighteousnes, only as (...) is opposed to (...), to true
durable wealth) may yield thee more profit by the profusion, than by the
possession (as silver does by melting, than by continuing in the wedge or
bullion, according to that of Pedag. l. 3* c. 6.
Clemens, (...), the rich is he that distributes, not he which has and
possesses; and L de just. cap de offic. viri justi.
Lactantius, Divites sunt non qui divitias habent, sed qui utuntur illis ad
opera justitiae, the rich are they, not which have riches, but use them to
works of righteousness) purchase thee by being thus providently laid out, a
revenue of renown here, and glory hereafter. You see then the pedigree and
genealogy of almes-giving, how it came into the world; Covetousness and
oppression and rapine, brought in emptiness, and beggary, and want, then Gods
providence and goodness, finding it in the world, resolves to continue it
there, to imply the treasures, and exercise the charity of others.

Now for the practice of the world in this great affair, we cannot begin our
survey more properly, than from the text, there to behold Gods opinion, or
judgment, in this point, by the rules he has given to be observed in this
city of God, his own people of the Jews, whilst they were managed by God
himself. The priesthood was the peculiar lot of God, and therefore may well be
allowed the (...), feeding first at Gods feast; And the poor next after them
were taken care of by God himself, Lazarus, as it were, in Aarons, as once in
Abraham's bosom, next to the priest in the temple as to the Patriarch in
heaven; a tithing for the priest, and when this was done, every third year, a
tithing for the poor: The withholding of the former was sacrilege, and of the
latter, furtum interpretativum, say the Schools, interpretative theft, and the
Casuists to the same purpose, that though our goods be our own, jure
proprietatis, by right of propriety, yet they are other men's, jure charitatis,
by right of charity; the rich man's barn is the poor man's granary, nay murder
too as we may conclude from the words of the wise man, the poor man's bread is
his life (and that is sometimes thy dole, on which his life depends) and then,
as there it follows, he that deprives him of it (so does the unmerciful, as
well as the thief) is a murderer. Nay farther, that murder one of the deepest
dye, a fratricidium, like Cains of Abel his brother, and therefore as that is a
clamans de terra, crying for judgment from the ground, so has this a clamet
ad Deum contra te, cry to God against thee, Deuteronomy. 15.9. I will add, at least
so long as the state of the Jews lasted, it was sacrilege too. Shall we proceed
then, and ask, when the state of the Jews expired, did almes-giving expire
with it? was charity abrogated with sacrifice? turned out of the world for an
antiquated, abolished rite, for a piece of Judaisme? The practice of some
Christians would persuade men so, that the sword that Christ brought into the
world, had wounded charity to the heart, that he had left no such custom
behind him to the Churches of God, that Christianity had clutch'd men's hands,
and frozen their hearts into an (...), as Arrian calls it, inverted that
miracle of Christ's, returned the children of Abraham into stones. Physicians
tell us of a disease converting the womb into a firm stone, and the story in
Crollius of a (...), a child of a perfect stony substance, is asserted by many
others. Now the unhappiness of it is, that the Hebrew (...) that signifies a
womb, by a little varying of the punctation, signifies mercy also, and bowels
or compassion, whereupon Hos. 1.11. the Septuagint instead of (...) have put
(...), instead of mercy, a womb; and alas the same disease has fallen upon the
(...) in that other sense, the bowels of mercy in many Christians are
petrified, transubstantiate into stones, pure mine and quarrey, and so we
Ministers, damnati ad metalla (that old Roman punishment) condemned to dig
in those mines, and by all the daily pains of preaching and exhortation, able
to bring forth nothing but such (...), stones instead of bread.

But I hope, my brethren, the practice of those some shall not be accepted as
authentic evidence against Christ, to defame and dishonor our most glorious
profession, whose very style is [ Brethren] whose livery [Charity] and
Character that they love one another. I know not how unmerciful and hardhearted
the Christian world is now grown in its declination, as covetousness is
generally the vice of old age, I am sure, 'twas open-handed enough, in its
youth, witness that most ancient primitive Apostolical institution of the
Offertory in the Sacrament, that which was so considerable a part of that holy
rite, that it gave denomination to the whole, the Eucharist styled (...)
communion, distinctly from this custom of bringing every man out of his store,
and communicating to the necessities of the Saints, as it is 2 Cor. 8.4. (...),
the communion, or fellowship as we render it, more fully the communicativeness,
or liberality of administering to the Saints, and is therefore by us rendered
liberality, 1 Cor. 16.3. Many excellent observations might be presented to you
on this occasion, necessary for the understanding many places in S. Paul,
especially of c. 11. of 1 Cor. but you will easily forgive me the sparing this
pains, in this place; Let it suffice that we find in that chapter, that at
those holy meetings there was always a table furnished out of the bounty of
communicants, for a common feast unto all the faithful; the rich might have
leave to bring more than his poorer brother, but not to take place by that
bounty, not to pretend any propriety to what he had brought, which is the
meaning of the (...) every man his own supper, and the (...), taking precedence
of others in eating, the rich to eat all, and the poor none, one to be hungry,
and the other drunken, the fault which he there found with the Corinthians; Nor
did the custom of liberality, annexed to the Sacrament in those days, expire
or vanish with the Apostles; The practice rather increased, than abated among
their successors; Witness that (...) or oblation, first of all the fruits of
the season, as an offering of first fruits; afterward only (...), of bread
and wine mingled with water, which the brethren or faithful, i.e. in the
ancient style, the Communicants are said to bring, and present at the altar or
table of the Lord, for the furnishing of the table with part, and refreshing
the poor with what was left. These are the (...) oblations in the l. 2, c. 55.
Constitutions, at least one sort of them, one being for the Priest, the other
for the poor, and again, (...), the doing good to them that want, the very word
in S. Paul (...), to do good and communicate, Heb. 13.16. and Chapter 25.
(...), voluntary oblations for the poor; These are contained under his general
head of (...), bringing of fruits, of which he has a Lib. 7. c. 30.
Chapter, and Ib c. 29.
(...), the Lords offerings, and c. 7.
(...), alms, and other where (...), voluntary gifts distributed to the poor;
And observable it is from those, and other ancient constitutions, that 'twas a
punishment for some men, used in the Church, not to receive them to the
Offertory, who yet were not so great malefactors, as to be kept from some other
privileges of Christians; This was called, (...), communicating without the
offertory, frequently in the Ancyrane and Nicene Councils; and therefore
Epiphanius having mentioned the faults, for which offenders were
excommunicated, as (...), fornication, adultery, etc. he adds, (...), the
Church receives not offerings from the injurious, etc. but from just livers,
noting that all but the (...), those that live justly were interdicted the
privilege of offering or giving to the Corban. Thus in Clemens was not the
oblation received from the unjust publican who exacted (...), above what was
appointed, and so for executioners, whose oblation being the price of blood was
not suffered to come into the Corban, no more than the thirty pieces of silver,
that Judas took to betray Christ, Mat. 27.6. An excellent consideration for us
to meditate on, that the being excluded from the Offertory, being denied the
privilege of giving alms or being bountiful to the poor, went for a very great
punishment; and so sure the duty, a special part of piety and public service
of God. And therefore the custom being either neglected, or intermitted at
Constantinople, S. Chrysostom took care for the restoring it again, and
thereupon made that excellent oration upon that subject, where from antiquity
he proves the use of the Offertory on the Lords day, and mentions the Corban,
or treasury, where 'twas wont to be put. I have been the more large on this
particular, because it has in all ages been accounted a prime piece of
Christianity, (a special part of divine worship, says Aquinas) the observation
of which is yet, thanks be to God, alive among us, especially if that be true,
which Pamelius cites out of Honorius, that instead of the ancient oblation of
bread and wine, the offering of money was by consent received into the Church,
in memory of the pence in Judas sale. Only 'twere well, if we were a little
more alacrious, and exact in the performance of the duty, and more care taken
in the distribution, especially that that notorious abuse of this most
Christian custom, which they say (I hope unjustly) some part of this city is
guilty of, in converting this inheritance of the poor into a feast of
entertainment for the Officers of the Church, may be branded, and banished out
of kenn. It is yet but a sin, which like some in Aristotle, has never a name,
had never yet the honor to be forbidden, if it should chance to live to that
age, thrive and prove fit for an (...) the imposition of a name, let me have
the favor to Christen it, A newfound sacrilege, a most inhumane at once, and
unchristian profanation; And if you want an emblem for it, that ancient piece
of Nathans designing will serve the turn, the rich man feasting on the poor
man's ewe lamb, his luxury maintained by the others blood. 'Twere an admirable
work of Ecclesiastic discipline, some way or other to bring the Corban in such
favor with us, that it might prove a bank or storehouse in every parish, able
to supply the wants of all; but much better, if we would fall in love with it
our selves, as a way of binding up both the tables of the Law into one volume,
of ministering both to God and man, by this one mixed act of charity and piety,
of mercy and of sacrifice, and so, in the wise man's phrase, to lay up our
riches in Gods storehouse, without a metaphore. But if it please you not, that
any body (though in the resolution it be Christ himself) should have the
disposal of your alms, as charity now adays is a pettish wearish thing, ready
to startle, and pick a quarrel with any thing that comes to meddle with it,
then shall I not pursue this design any farther. So thou art really, and
sincerely affected to the setting out of the third years tithing, thou shall
have my leave to be thine own Almoner, have the choice of the particular way of
disposing, and ordering it thy self. And yet three things there are, that I
cannot choose but be so pragmatical, as to interpose in this business; 1. For
the quando, when, this tithe should be set out; Let it not be deferred, till
the Will be a making, till death forces it out of our hands, and makes it a non
dat sed projicit, only a casting over the lading, when the ship is ready to
sink, nor yet till our coffers be ready to run over, till a full, abundant
provision be made for all that belong to us, for that is to feed the poor, like
the dogs, only with the orts of the childrens table; but as other tithes are
paid, just as the increase comes in, presently after the whole field is reaped,
so must the poor man's tithing also; set out, I say, then, dedicated to that use
that we may have it by us at hand, told out ready, when the owner calls for it.
'Twas a thing that Antoninus recounts as matter of special joy, and that which
he numbers amongst the felicities, for which he was beholden to the Gods, that
he was never asked of any, that he thought fit to give to, that he was answered
by his Almoner, (...), that there was not store at hand to perform his will. A
most joyous, comfortable thing, in that heathen Emperors opinion, and yet that,
that will hardly be attained to, unless we take some such course, as this,
mentioned in terminis by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 16.2. Upon the first day of the week
let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him, that there
be no gathering when I come; a weekly provision laid in, and ready in numerato
for this purpose, that you be never surprised on a sudden, and so disabled to
perform this duty. 2. For the quibus, I would answer to all, whom Christ has
made our neighbors and brethren, and I know not any that are excluded from
this title. But you would then think I were set to solicit against the laws
of this realm, and plead the cause of the idle wandering beggar, that most
savage, barbarous, unchristian trade among us, set, a man would think, in the
streets by the devil, on purpose to pose, and tire, and nonplus men's charity,
to dishearten, and weary them out of this Christian duty. No, we have a
countermand from the Apostle against these (...), disorderly walkers, 2 Thessalonians.
3.7. that if any would not labor, neither should he eat, v. 10. the best
alms for them, the seasonablest provision, and charity to such, is the careful
execution of laws upon them, to set them every one single in an orb to move
in, by that means perhaps to teach them the skill in time to be almes-givers
themselves, at least to become fit to be receivers; For such, of all others, is
the fixed, stationary, diligent, laboring poor man, whose motion is like that
of the trembling sphere, not able to advance any considerable matter in a whole
age, be they never so restless, whose hands, with all their diligence, cannot
give content to the mouth, or yield any thing but stones many times, to the
poor child that calls for bread. All that I shall interpose for the quibus,
shall be this, that seeing a do good to all, is now sent into the world by
Christ, and that but little restrained in any Christian kingdom, by an
especially to the household of Saints, (all Christians being such) and seeing
again, no man has hands, or store to feed every mouth, that gapes in a
kingdom, or particularly in this populous city, we may do well to take that
course that we use in composing other difficulties, referatur ad sort^m, let
the lot decide the main of the controversy, and reserving somewhat for the
public, somewhat for the stranger, somewhat for common calamities, somewhat as
'twere for the universal motion of the whole body, somewhat for excentrickes
and epicycles, let the place, whereon our lot has cast us, be the principal
orb for our charity to move in, the special dioecess for our Visitation. And
when that is done, and yet, as it is in the parable, there be still room, store
left for others also, then to enlarge, as far as we can, round about us, as
motion beginning at the center diffuses it self uniformely, sends out its
influence and shakes every part to the circumference; and happy that man, who
has the longest arm, whose charity can thus reach farthest. The third thing
is that that my text obliges me to, the how much out of every man's revenues may
go for the poor man's due, which brings me to the second particular, the (...)
here mentioned in these words [ tithing all the tithes of thy increase the
third year.]

That there was a (...) defined by God to the Jews charity, a proportion for
every man, not which they might not exceed (for there were other ways of vent
for their charity mentioned, beside this) but which no man was to go under, is
manifest by the text, and c. 14. of this book; the proportion you see a tithe,
or tenth part of all the increase, not yearly, but only every third year, to
raise a bank, as it were, for the maintenance of the poor, till that year came
about again. This if we would dissolve into a yearly rate, and so discern the
Jewish (...) more perfectly, it is equivalent to a thirtieth part every year;
the Jew whose yearly revenue amounted to thirty shekels, was every third year
to pay three of them to the use of the poor, that is in effect one for every
year, the triennial tenth being all one with an annual thirtieth: The account
is clear, and no man but has Arithmetic enough to conclude, that a thirtieth
part is the third part of a tenth, and so a tenth every third year, is all one
with a thirtieth every year. I shall insist on this no farther, than to tell
you that Gods judgment in this affair is worth observing, that almes-giving
or mercifulness being a dictate of nature, but that like other such Laws,
given only in general terms, for the (...), but not so as to descend to
particular cases; It pleased God to his people the Jews, to express his
judgment at that time, in that state, for the (...), how much was by Law to be
laid aside for that use out of every ones increase.

Now if I should press this practice of the Jews as matter of obligation, or
prescription to Christians, that you are not in conscience to do less, than the
Jews were bound to do, every man to set apart a thirtieth of his yearly
revenue, or increase, for the use of the poor brethren. I know not how you
would take it; many would startle at the news of the doctrine, many more when
they came to the practice of it, many quarrels you would have against it; He
that were merciful already, would think his gift would become a debt, his
bounty duty, and so he wronged and robbed of the renown of his charity, by this
doctrine; and the covetous, that were not inclined to giving at all, would
complain that this were a new kind of ghostly stealth, a way of robbing him out
of the pulpit, of burthening his conscience, and lightning his bags, and both
join in the indictment of it for a Judaical, antiquated doctrine, that has
nothing to do with Christians. And therefore to do no more, than I shall
justify from the principles of the Gospel; I shall confess unto you, that this
precept, as it was given to the Jews, is not obliging unto Christians, and
therefore I have not yet told you it was, but only gave you to consider, what
Gods judgment was for the (...) to his own people. Only by way of application
to our selves, give me leave to add these four things, which I shall deliver
in as many propositions; 1. That mercifulness or charity or giving alms is no
part of the Ceremonial Law, which is properly Judaisme, but of the eternal law
of reason and nature, part of the oath or Sacrament, that is given us, when the
fiat homo is first pronounced to us, a ray of Gods mercifulness infused into us
with our humane nature; in a word, that mercifulness is all one with humanity,
a precept of the nature, the God, the soul we carry about with us. 2. That
being so, it comes within the compass of those Laws, that Christ came (...),
not to destroy but to fulfill, i.e. as the Fathers before S. Augustine,
generally interpreted it, to improve it, set it higher, than it was before,
require more of Christians, than ever was exacted of the Jews or heathens by
the Law of Moses or of Nature. Thus ^. ^. c. 37.
Irenaeus, mentioning Christ's improvement of the Law, pro eo quod est, Non
moechaberis nec concupiscere praecepit, for, Thou shall not commit adultery,
thou shall not look to lust, he adds, pro eo quod est decumare, omnia quae
sunt pauperibus dividere, instead of tithing (this third years tithing) thou
shall divide all thou have to the poor, give them some plentiful part of it.
And this says he, an act of Christ, non solventis, sed adimplentis,
extendentis, dilatantis legem, not loosing, but filling up, extending, dilating
the Law. And Tom 8. p. 226. A.
S. Hierome, on 2 Cor. 8.20. avoiding this that no man should blame us --
explains it thus, lest any should say, how did Christ fill up or fulfill the
Law, cum videamus Christianos non tantam eleemosynam facere quantam fieri in
lege praeceptum est, when we see Christians not give so much alms, as was by
the Law of Moses prescribed to be given. 3dly. That there were among the Jews
two sorts of mercifulness, the first called literally righteousness, and by the
Septuagint, when it belongs to works of mercy, is rendered sometimes (...)
righteousness, sometimes (...) mercy, and this is that mercifulness that
Moses's Law required of the Jews, and so was part of their righteousness, he
was a breaker of the Law, that did neglect it, and so opera justitiae in
Lactantius, the works of righteousness, meaning works of charity, by that
phrase. The second was mercy, i.e. an higher degree of charity, rather
benignity, mercifulness, being full of good works and this was more than their
Law exacted, and therefore was styled goodness, as that was more than
righteousness. 4thly. That by force of the second proposition, and by the
tenure of Evangelical perfection, that Christ commended to his disciples, this
highest degree of mercifulness among the Jews is now the Christians task, and
that, to him that will be perfect, yet in an higher degree, not only that
degree, which the Law required of the Jew, a little raised, and improved by us,
for that will be but the Christians righteousness, but even the benignity of
the Jews, abundance of mercy, improved and enlarged by us also. And from these
premises if I may in the name of God take boldness to infer my conclusion, it
can be no other than this; That the proportion to be observed by the Christian
almes-giver, to speak at the least; must be more in any reason than the
thirtieth part of his revenue or increase; The thirtieth is but equivalent to
the third years tithing of the Jews, which was their righteousness, that which
they were bound to do by the Law, the Pharisee, did as much, and Christ tells
us, that except our righteousness, (...), the very word that signifies the
legal almes-giving many times in the Bible, and who knows but it may do so
here, of this there is no doubt, but it belongs to charity, or duty toward men
in its latitude, of which almes-giving is one most special part, and except
our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees we
shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven, the text, on which that
heavenly Gospel-Sermon was preached upon the Mount. If we have any design
toward Evangelical perfection, toward the Christian pitch, the abundance of
goodness and mercifulness, as that is improved by Christianity, than this third
years tithing will prove but a beggarly, thin proportion, that, that a Jew, if
he were a religious one, would have been ashamed of. But be our aims never so
moderate, if a door-keepers place will serve our turn, to be one of the
Nethinim, of the meanest rank in the kingdom of heaven, yet still we must
exceed that proportion of the Jews righteousness, their third years tithe,
that they were bound to, or else we are strangely mistaken in Christianity. I
am unwilling to descend to the arraigning, or indicting, or so much as
examining any man here, for the omissions of his former life in this kind; my
humble lowlyest request is, that you will do it your selves, and if either
through ignorance you have not reckoned of it as a duty, or through desire to
thrive in the world, you have omitted to practice it heretofore, you will now
at last at this instance, take it into your consideration, and remember that
there is such a thing, as charity, (a pale, wan, despised creature) commended
to Christians by Christ, not to suffer it any longer to go for one of those
Magicians Serpents, which faith like Moses's rod is appointed to devour, if it
do, know this that that rod is the verier serpent of the two; and for the
quickening that resolution in you, I shall proceed unto the third particular,
the (...), to consider it as a duty, and so to make an end of my first general.

In this slothful, but confident age of the world, 'twere admirably worth ones
pains, to instruct men, what duty is, now under the Gospel, what the very word
signifies in a Christian Nomenclature. There are so many descants of
fantastical brains on that plain song of the Apostles, We are not under the
law, but under grace] that it is scarce agreed on among Christians, what it is to
be a Christian, nothing more unresolved, than what it is, that's now required
under the second Covenant, as necessary to salvation. One thinks that the
believing all fundamentals is the (...), the only qualification for a
Christian, and what has duty to do with that? Another makes the Gospel consist
all of promises of what shall be wrought in us, and on us by Christ, and so
gives an absolute Supersedeas for duty, as a legal out-dated thing, that is
utterly antiquated by grace. Another contents himself with purposes and
resolutions, thin, aerie inclinations to duty, and is utterly indifferent for
any performance, doubts not bat to pass for a Christian, as regenerate as S.
Paul, when he wrote, c. 7. to the Romans, though he never do the good that he
resolves, live and die carnal and captived and sold under sin. A fourth
dissolves all to a new found faith; A full persuasion, an absolute assurance,
that he is one of Gods elect, is abundantly sufficient to estate himself in
that number, a piece of magic, or conjuring, that will help any man to heaven,
that will but phansy it, enroll their names in the book of life, in those
sacred eternal diptyckes, by dreaming only that they are there already. Others
there are, that seem kinder unto duty, are content to allow Christ some return
of performances for all his sufferings, yet you see in the Gospel, it is in one
but the patience of hearing him preach, A [ Lord thou have taught in our
streets] we have heard so many Sermons, passes for a sufficient pretension to
heaven, in another, the communicating at his table, [ We have eat and drank in
thy presence] a sufficient viaticum for that long journey, a charm, or amulet
against fear or danger; In a third, the diligence of a bended knee, or solemn
look of formal-outside-worship, must be taken in commutation for all other
duty, and all this while religion is brought up in the Gentleman's trade, good
cloths and idleness, or of the Lilies of the field, vestiri and non laborare,
to be clothed and not labor; duty is too mechanical a thing, the shop or the
plough, the work of faith, or labor of love are things too vile, too sordid
for them to stoop to; heaven will be had without such sollicitors. Shall I
instance in one particular more? that Satan may be sure that duty shall never
rescue any prey out of his hands, one thing you may observe, that most men
never come to treat with it, to look after, to consider any such thing, till
indeed the time comes that no man works, till the tokens be out upon them,
till the cry comes, that the bridegroom is ready to enter, that judgment is
at the door, and then there is such running about for oil, as if 'twere for
extreme unction, and that a Sacrament to confer all grace ex opere operato on
him, that has scarce life enough to discern, that he received it; The soul
sleeps in its tenement, as long as its lease lasts, and when it is expired,
then it rouseth, and makes as if 'twould get to work, the Christian thinks not
of action, of duty, of good works, of any thing, whilst life and health
lasts, but then the summons of death wake him, and the prayers which he can
repeat, while his clothes are putting off, shall charm him, like opium, for a
quiet sleep. Thus does a deathbed repentance, a deathbed charity, a parting
with sins and wealth, when we can hold them no longer, look as big in the
Calendars of Saints, stand as solemnly and demurely in our diptyckes, as
judgment and mercy and faith, that have born the heat and burden of the day;
Our hearts are hardened, while it is to day, against all the invasion of Law or
Gospel, judgments or mercies, threats or promises, all Christ's methods and
stratagems of grace, and just at the close of the evening, the shutting in of
night, we give out that the thunderbolt has converted us, the fever came with
its fiery chariot, and hurryed us up to heaven; Surdus and mutus testamentum
facit, quite against Justinians rule; he that has sent out most of his senses
before him, and retains but the last glimmering of life, is allowed to make his
Will and reverse all former acts by that one final. Satan has all the man has
to give, under hand and seal, all his life time, the spring especially and
verdure of his age, the children pass through the fire to Moloch, and just as
he is a dropping out of the world, he makes signs of cancelling that will, and
by a dumb act of revocation, bequeaths his soul to God, and his Executor must
see it paid among other legacies, and all this passes for legal in the Court,
and none of the Canons against the ancient Clinici can be heard against them;
The greatest wound to duty, that ever yet it met with among Christians. Thus do
our vain phansies, and vainer hopes join to supplant duty and good works, and
dismiss them out of the Church, and if all or any of this be orthodox divinity;
then sure the duty of almes-giving will prove a suspected phrase, haeretici
characteris, of an heretical stamp, and then I am fallen on a thankless
argument, which yet I must not retract, or repent of, but in the name of God,
and S. Paul, in this way that these men call heresy, beseech and conjure you
to worship the God of your fathers. For this purpose shall I make my address to
you in Daniels words, Dan. 4.27. Break off your sins by righteousness and your
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, righteousness and mercy, the two
degrees of almes-giving, that I told you of; I hope that will not be suspected,
when he speaks it. Shall I tell you what duty is, what is now required of a
Christian, and that in the prophet Micha's phrase, Mich. 6.8. And now what does
the Lord thy God require of thee but to do justice, and to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God, justice and mercy, the two degrees of almes-giving
again, that I told you of, and I hope it will not prove offensive, when he
speaks it. 8hall I tell you of a new religion, and yet that a pure one, and the
same an old religion, and yet that an undefiled (for so the beloved disciple
calls this duty of charity, a new Commandment, and an old Commandment, 1 John
2.) it shall be in S. James his words, Jam. 1.27. Pure religion and undefiled
before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. Shall I tell you in
one word, that though heaven be given us freely, yet almes-giving is the
consideration mentioned in the conveyance, that men are acknowledged the
blessed of God, and called to heaven, upon the performance of this duty, that
although it pretend not to any merit, either ex congruo, or condigno, yet it is
a duty most acceptable in the sight of God, that almes-giving is mentioned,
when assurance is left out, charity crowned, when confidence is rejected? I
love not to be either magisterial, or quarrelsome, but to speak the words of
truth and sobriety, to learn, and if it be possible to have peace with all men;
only give me leave to read you a few words, that S. Matthew transcribed from
the mouth of Christ, Mat. 25.35. Then shall the King say to them on his right
hand (who should the King be, but Christ himself?) Come ye blessed of my
Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For I was an hungered and ye gave me meat. Tell me in the name of truth and
peace, who now were they, for whom the Kingdom was prepared from the
foundation of the world; who were there the objects of that great doomesday
election, his venite Benedicti? If Christ do not tell you, neither do I, the
text is of age let it speak for it self; For I was an hungered and ye gave me
meat. If all this will justify the doctrine, and make this text Christian,
persuade your judgments, that charity may be the queen of heaven (maxima autem
harum charitas, the greatest of these is charity) without affront, or injury
done to any other grace; I hope it will be seasonable for your practice also,
as it has been for your meditation, become your hands as well as it does now
your ears.

And to infuse some life, some alacriousness into you, for that purpose, I
shall descend to the more sensitive, quickening, inlivening part of this text,
the benefit arising from the performance of this duty, Dicas coram Domino, then
thou shall or may say before the Lord thy God. And in that I promised you
two things; 1. To show you in thesi, That confidence or claiming any thing at
Gods hands, must take its rise from duty in performance. 2. In hypothesi, to
give you the connection betwixt this confidence, and this performance, claiming
of temporal plenty, upon giving of alms.

1. In thesi; That confidence, or claiming any thing at Gods hands must take
its rise from duty in performance.

If there be any doubt of the truth of this, I shall give you but one ground of
proof, which I think will be demonstrative, and it is that, that will easily be
understood, I am sure, I hope, as easily consented to; That all the promises of
God, even of Christ in the Gospel, are conditional promises, not personal, for
the Law descends not to particular persons (and in this the Gospel is a Law
too, (...) the Law of faith) nor absolute, as that signifies irrespective or
exclusive of qualifications or demeanure, for that is all one with personal,
and if either of those were true, then should Christ be what he renounces, a
(...) an accepter of persons and individual entities, and so the mercies of
heaven, belong to Saul the persecuter, as truly as Paul the Apostle, Saul the
injurious, as Paul the abundant labourer, Saul the blasphemer, as Paul the
martyr: It remains then, that they be conditional promises, and so they are
explicitly, for the most part, the condition named, and specified, 2 Cor.
6.17. Come out and be you separate, and touch not the unholy thing; the
condition you see set foremost in the Indenture, and then, I will receive you
-- and therefore most logically inferres the Apostle, in the next words the
beginning of c. 7. Having therefore these promises let us cleanse our selves
from all filthyness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. Had the promises been of any other sort, but the (...), these i.e.
conditional promises, the Apostles illation of so much duty cleansing and
perfecting, had been utterly unconclusive, if not impertinent. So Romans 8.28.
All things work together for good; to whom? to them that love God, (...), to
them that are called according to purpose, the word [ called] a noun in that
place not a participle, noting a real, not only intentional passion, those
that are wrought upon by Gods call, and are now in the catalogue of the (...),
the lovers of God, and that is the condition in the subject; and then to them
that are thus qualified, belongs that chain of mercies, predestination,
vocation to a conformity with Christ, justification, glorification, immediately
ensuing. You see the proof of my ground by a taste or two. Now what condition
this is, that is thus prefixed to Gospel-promises, that is not obscure neither;
Not absolute exact, never sinning, perfect obedience, that was the condition of
the first covenant, made in paradise, when there was ability to perform it,
but a condition proportioned to our state, sincerity in lieu of perfection,
repentance in exchange for innocence, evangelical instead of legal
righteousness, believing in the heart, i.e. cordial obedience to the whole Law
of Christ, impartial without hypocrisy or indulgence in any known sin,
persevering and constant without apostasy, or final defection, and at last
humble, without boasting. If you will come yet nearer to a full sight of it,
sometimes regeneration or new life is said to be the condition, Except you be
born again you can in no wise enter. Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision,
but a new creature. Sometimes holiness, without which nemo Deum, no man shall
see the Lord: Sometimes repentance in gross, nay but except you repent;
sometimes in the retaile, repentance divided into its parts, he that confesses
and forsakes shall have mercy; sometimes repentance alone, but now commands
all men every where to repent, as if all duty were contained in that; sometimes
in conjunction with faith, repent you and believe the Gospel, sometimes faith,
sometimes love, sometimes self-denial, sometimes mercifulness, sometimes hope,
but that an (...), a [ this hope] that sets us a purifying, every one of these,
when you meet them single, goes for the only necessary, the adequate condition
of the Gospel, to teach you to take them up all, as you find them, leave never
an one neglected, or despised, lest that be the betraying of all the rest, but
make up one jewel of these so many lesser gemmes, one body of these so many
limbs, one recipe compounded of so many ingredients, which you may superscribe
(...), Catholicon, or the whole duty of man. From this general proposition,
without the aid of any assumption, we may conclude demonstratively enough,
promises of the Gospel are conditional promises, therefore all confidence must
take rise from duty. Duty is the performance of that condition, and to be
confident without that, is to conclude without premises, and consequently to
claim justification, or pardon of sins, before sanctification be begun in the
heart, to challenge right to heaven, before repentance be rooted on earth, to
make faith the first grace, and yet define that assurance of salvation, to
apply the merits of Christ to our selves the first thing we do, and reckon of
charity, good works, duty, as fruits and effects, to be produced at leisure,
when that faith comes to virility and strength of fructifying. What is all or
any of this, but to charge God of perjury, to tell him that impenitents have
right to heaven, which he swears have not, or to forge a new lease of heaven,
and put it upon Christ? the calmest style I can speak in, is, that it is the
believing of a lie, and so not faith, but folly, an easy cheatableness of
heart, and not confidence but presumption. Hope a man may without actual
performance of duty, because he may amend hereafter, though he do not now, and
so that possibility, and that futurity may be ground of hope, but then this
hope must set us presently upon performance, He that has this hope purifies
himself, or else, it is not that grace of hope, but an (...) a youthful
daringness of soul, a tumor, a disease, a tympany of hope, and if it swell
farther than it purge, if it put on confidence before holiness, this hope may
be interpreted desperation, an hope that makes ashamed, an utter destitution
of that hope which must bestead a Christian. O let us be sure then, our
confidence, our claims to heaven improve not above their proportion, that we
preserve this symmetry of the parts of grace; that our hope be but commensurate
to our sincerity, our daringness to our duty. A double confidence there is, pro
statu, and Absolute; pro statu, when upon survey of my present constitution of
soul, I claim right in Christ's promises for the present, and doubt not but I
shall be blessed, if I be found so doing: Absolute, when at the end of life,
and shutting in of the day, I am able to make up my reckonings with S. Paul, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, a crown of
felicity. I have done what I had to do, and now (...) there is nothing behind,
but to receive my pay.

I have been too long upon the general consideration of the connection between
confidence and duty, if it were an extravagance, I hope 'twas a pardonable one;
I descend with speed to the hypothesis, the connection betwixt this confidence
and this performance, claiming of temporal plenty upon giving of alms, my last
particular. And that I shall give you clearly in this one proposition; That
almes-giving or mercifulness was never the wasting or lessening of any man's
estate to himself or his posterity, but rather the increasing of it. If I have
delivered a new doctrine, that will not presently be believed, an unusquisque
non potest capere, such as every auditor will not consent to, I doubt not but
there be plain texts of Scripture, more than one, which will assure any
Christian of the truth of it. Consider them at your leisure, Psalm. 41.1, 2.
Psalm. 112. all to this purpose, Prove. 11.25. and 12.9. and 19.17. and 28.27.
Add to these the words of Christ, Mar. 10.30. which though more generally
delivered of any kind of parting with possessions for Christ's sake, are applied
by S. Hierome to the words of Solomon, Tom. p. 88. c.
Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters and yet increases, quia centuplum
accipient in hoc tempore, because, says he, they receive an hundred fold in
this world. And that no man may have any scruple to interpose, it is set in as
large, and comprehensive a style, as the art, or covetous, scrupulous wit of
man could contrive for his own security. There is no man who shall not --

All which being put together must (to my understanding) make it as clear to
any, that acknowledges these for Scripture, as if the (...) daughter of voice
were come back into the world again, and God should call to a man out of heaven
by name, bid him releeve that poor man, and he should never be the poorer for
it. It Is not now to be expected of me in conscience having produced this kind
of proof, the express texts of Scripture, to add any second to it. I might
else farther evidence it from examples, not such as Moschus's (...) will
furnish you with, for I know not of what authority they are; nor yet from S.
Hieromes observation, who is said to have turned over histories on purpose, and
never found any merciful man, which met not with some signal blessing in this
world, as the reward of that virtue; but even by appealing to your selves, and
challenging any man here present to bring but one instance of a prudent
almes-giver, that has yearly or weekly consecrated some considerable part of
his revenue or increase to that use, and can say that ever he found any real
miss of that, any more than of the blood let out in a pleurisy, nay, if he
have done it constantly, and sincerely from the one true principle, compliance
with the command and example of God, let him speak his conscience, if he do not
think, that all the rest has thrived the better for that, as Phlebotomie has
saved many men's lives, letting out some ounces of blood been the securing of
the whole mass, that it has had a secret, blessing influence, a vital,
auspicious infection upon the remainder, by this art of consecrating our
estates, intitling God to the fence, and safeguard of them, as of his temples,
and altars, that thieves, and oppressors, and devils, conceive a reverence due
to them, and a kind of sacrilege to approach, or purloyne from them, as they
that put the crown into their intaile, do thereby secure it to the right heir,
that it can never be cut off. The poor widow of Sarepta, what a strange trial
made she of this truth? When the last of her store was fetched out to make the
funeral feast for her self and family, that they might eat and die, that very
last cake, that all that was left, she gives to Elijah in his distress, and
this is so far from ruining her, that it brought a blessing on her barrel and
her cruse, that she and all hers were not able to exhaust; I might add the
poor widow in the Gospel, that, if we may believe Christ, cast in all that she
had into the Corban, even her whole substance; the Christians, that sold all
and laid it at the Apostles feet, and yet we never read of any of these, that
brought himself to distress by this means. But these are ex abundanti, more
than is required for the vouching of my present proposition, and of a higher
strain, than what I design for your imitation.

It Is time that I begin to retire, and wind up with some application, which you
cannot imagine should be any other, after all this preparation, but a Go and do
thou likewise. And if you can but believe this one thing, that I have brought
many witnesses from heaven to testify, that your goodness shall not impair
your plenty, that your store shall never be lessened by so giving, I doubt not
but you will be as forward to go, as any man to have you. The only hold-back
is the affection and passionate love, that we bear to our wealth, that lust, or
sensuality of the eye, as the Apostle calls it. It Is ordinarily observed of
young men and dissolute, that they have many times a great aptness and
ingeniousness and withal patience to any speculative knowledge, the
Mathematics, or any such the abstrusest studies, but for moral precepts, rules
of good life, they will not be digested; And, my brethren, give me leave to
tell you in the spirit of meekness, that the like, in another respect, is
observed of this auditory, anything wherein their wealth is not concerned, is
most readily entertained, none more attentive, ingenious auditors; but when
their profit is entrenched on, their beloved golden idol (of which I may say
with Moses, O this people have committed a great sin, made them Gods of gold)
when this, I say, begins to be in danger, as the silver shrines at S. Paul's
preaching, Act. 19. then, as it follows in that place, the whole city is
filled with confusion: like that young man in the Gospel, that would do any
thing that Christ would require, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life! So far as that Jesus loved him, when he beheld him; Yet when
Christ proceeds to the (...), one thing is wanting to thee, go sell, give to
the poor, then follows the (...), and (...), he went away sad and sorrowful,
sighing and groaning, as if he had been to part with blood and bowels; And this
is the ground of Christ's most considerable observation, (...) how hard (and
(...) how impossible) is it for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of heaven, for
a worldly minded man to be a Christian? Could you but reduce into order this
one mighty exorbitant humor, purge out this (...), as S. Peter calls it, this
overflowing of the gall, this choler and bitterness, that lies cak'd upon the
soul, that (...), as he goes on, in the aggravating of covetousness, we English
it, band of iniquity, but it signifies a complication of wickedness bound up
all in one volume, mingled into one hypostasis, this legion of earthly devils,
that came out of the tombs to enter into thee, and there continue crying and
cutting thee with stones; I should then proceed with some heart and spirit, and
tell you that, that every man knows but such demoniackes, that almes-giving is
in it self a thing that any man living, if he have but the relics of
unregenerate nature, and the notion of a Deity about him, would take pleasure
in it, were he but satisfied of this one scruple, that 'twould not hinder his
thriving in this world. It Is more blessed to give than to receive, is the
Apophthegme of S. Paul quoted from Christ, though it be not rehearsed in the
Gospel, and (...). l. 3. c. ^.
Clemens has turned it into a maxim, (...), it is giving not possessing that
signifies a man to be happy; and this happiness the highest, and most divine
sort of happiness, it is a blessed thing to give. And of the same inclination in
the worst of you, I will no more doubt, than I do of your being men, of your
having humane souls about you, could you be but fortified against this one
terror, were but this one trembling spirit exorcised, and cast out, this
apprehension of impairing your estates by that means: Now of this an ordinary
Jew makes so little doubt, merely upon authority of the places of the Old
Testament, which I cited, that he may read thee a lecture of faith in this
particular. Paulus Fagius assures me of the modern Jews, who have not been
observed to be over-liberal, that they still observe the payment of the poor
man's tithe, merely out of design to enrich themselves by that means, and tells
us of a Proverb of Perk Avo^. c. 3. p. 56.
Rabbi Akiba, (...) tithes are the hedges to our riches, and on the contrary,
Ibid. c. 5^
that there be seven kinds of judgments that come upon the world for seven
prevarications, and the first is famine upon not tithing, and the second again,
another kind of famine upon another not tithing, and that second plainly
belongs to the poor man's tithing, when (as it p. 105*
follows) some are full, and others are famished, and the third is a plague
upon not obeying the Law concerning the fruits of the Sabbatical year, which
you know, were to be left to the poor, And again that there are four seasons,
wherein the plague was wont to rage especially, in the fourth year upon the non
payment of the poor man's tithe the third year, on the seventh, upon the like
default in the sixth, in the end of the seventh, upon default concerning the
seventh years fruits, that were to be free and common, and the last yearly, in
the close of the feast of tabernacles, upon the robbing of the poor of those
gifts that at that time were left unto them, the p. 109, 110*
gleanings of the harvest, and vintage, the corners of the field, the fallings,
etc. Add to this one place more of Rabbi In Deuter. 26.
Bechai, Though, says he, it be unlawful to prove or tempt the Lord, for a man
must not say, I will perform such a commandment, to the end, I may prosper in
riches, yet Mal. 3.10. and Prove. 3.10. there is an exception for payment of
tithes and works of mercy, intimating that on the performance of this duty we
may expect even miracles to make us rich, and set to that performance on
contemplation and confidence of that promise. And it is strange, that we
Christians should find more difficulty in believing this, than the griping
reprobated Jews; strange, that all those books of Scripture should be grown
apocryphal, just since the minute, that I cited those testimonies out of them.
This I am resolved on, it is want of belief, and nothing else, that keeps men
from the practice of this duty, whatsoever it is in other sins, we may believe
aright, and yet do contrary (our understanding has not such a controuling
power over the Will, as some imagine) yet in this particular, this cannot be
pretended; Could this one mountain be removed, the lessening of our wealth that
almes-giving is accused of, could this one scandal to flesh and blood be kicked
out of the way, there is no other devil would take the unmerciful man's part, no
other temptation molest the almes-giver. And how unjust a thing this is, how
quite contrary to the practice at all other Sermons, I appeal to your selves.
At other times the doctrine raised from any Scripture is easily digested, but
all the demurre is about the practical inference; but here when all is done,
the truth of the doctrine still [ that we shall not be the poorer for
almes-giving] is that, that can never go down with us, lies still crude
unconcocted in our stomachs; A strange prepossession of worldly hearts, a
petitio principii, that no artist would endure from us. I must not be so
unchristian whatsoever you mean to be, as to think there is need of any farther
demonstration of it, after so many plain places of Scripture have been
produced; Let me only tell you, that you have no more evidence for the truth
of Christ's coming into the world, for all the fundamentals of your faith, on
which you are content your salvation should depend, than such as I have given
you for your security in this point. Do not now make a mockery at this
doctrine, and either with the Jew in Cedrenus, or the Christian in Palladius,
throw away all you have, at one largess, to see whether God will gather it up
for you again, but set soberly, and solemnly about the duty, in the fear of
God, and compliance with his will, and in bowels of compassion to thy poor
brethren, that stand in need of thy comfort, those Emeralds and Jacinths, that
Pallad. Hist. Laus* cap. 5.
Macarius persuaded the rich virgin to lay out her wealth upon; and this out of
no other insidious or vainglorious, but the one, pure, Christian forementioned
design, and put it to the venture, if God ever suffer thee to want, what thou
have thus bestowed. Bib. Pa^^. Graec. vol. 2. p. 837. E*
Dorotheus has excellently stated this, (...). There are, says he, that give
alms, (...), that their farms may prosper, (...), and God blesses and
prospers their farms; There be that do it for the good success of their
voyage, and God prospers their voyage; some for their children and God
preserves their children; yea and some to get praise, and God affords them
that, and frustrates none in the merchandise he designed to traffic for, but
gives every one that which he aimed at in his liberality. But then all these
traffickers must not be so unconscionable, as to look, for any arreare of
farther reward, when they are thus paid at present, they must remember (...),
they have no depositum behind laid up with God for them, and therefore it is
necessary for a Christian to propose to himself more ingenuous designs, to do
what he does in obedience to, and out of a pure love of God, and then there is
more than all these, even a kingdom prepared for him. Mat. 25.

I must draw to a conclusion, and I cannot do it more seasonably, more to
recapitulate, and enforce all that has been said, than in the words of
Malachy, c. 3.10. Bring you all the tithes into the storehouse (no doubt but
this comprehends the duty in the text, the compleveris anno tertio, the poor
man's tithing) that there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and
pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. If
this will not open the misers hand, unshrivel the worldlings heart, I cannot
invent an engine cunning, or strong enough to do it. Thou that have tired, and
harassed out thy spirits, in an improsperous, succesless pursuit of riches,
dug and drudged in the mines, thy soul as well as thou, and all the
production of thy patience, and industry crumbled and mouldered away bewixt thy
fingers, thou that would fain be rich, and can not get Plutus to be so
kind to thee, art willing to give Satan his own asking, thy prostraveris, for
his totum hoc, to go down to hell for that merchandice, and yet art not able to
compass it, let me direct thee to a more probable course of obtaining thy
designs, to a more thriving trade, a more successful voyage, not all the
devotions thou daily numbrest to the devil or good fortune, not all the
inventions, and engines, and stratagemes of covetousness managed by the most
practiced worldling, can ever tend so much to the securing thee of abundance in
this life, as this one compleveris of the text, the payment of the poor man's
tithing. And then suffer thy self for once to be disabused, give over the
worldlings way, with a hac non successit, reform this error of good husbandry,
this mistake of frugality, this heresy of the worldling, and come to this new
Ensurers office, erected by God himself, prove and try if God do not open thee
the windows of heaven -- shall I add for the conclusion of all, the mention
of that poor, unconsidered merchandice, the treasures of heaven, after all this
wealth is at an end, the riches of the celestial paradise, which like that
other of Eden is the posing of Geographers, pars terrae incognita, undiscovered
yet to the worldlings heart. Me thinks there should be no hurt in that, if such
friends may be made of this Mammon of unrighteousness, this false-hearted,
unfaithful wealth of yours, that when you fail, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations, sure this may be allowed to join with other motives to
the performance of a well-tasted, wholesome duty. In a word, If earth, and
heaven combined together, be worth considering, the possession of the one, and
reversion of the other, abundance and affluence here, the yearly wages of
almes-giving, and joys and eternity hereafter, the final reward of
almes-giving, a present coronet, and a future crown, a Canaan below, and a
Jerusalem above, if the conjunction of these two may have so much influence on
your hearts, as in contemplation of them to set you about the motion, that
nature it self inclines you to, and neither world, nor flesh have any manner of
quarrel to feign against it, then may I hope, that I have not preached in vain,
that what I have now only, as a precentor, begun to you, the whole chorus will
answer in the counterpart, what has been now proclaimed to your ears, be
ecchoed back again by your hearts, and lives, and the veryest stone in the
temple take up its part, the hardest impenetrablest, unmercifullest heart join
in the (...).

And this shall be the sum not only of my exhortation, but my prayer, That
that God of mercies will open your eyes first, and then your hearts to the
acknowledgement, and practice of this duty, direct your hands in the
husbandring that treasure entrusted to them, that mercy being added to your
zeal, Charity to your devotion, your goodness may shine as well as burn, that
men may see, and taste your good works, glorify God for you here, and you
receive your crown of glory from God hereafter.

The End.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, London.
I. Books written by H. Hammond, D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Test. by H.
Hammond, D. D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of H. Hammond, D. D. in two volumes in 4o. 3. Dissertationes quatuor,
quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur,
contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum, Authore Henrico Hammond, D. D. in
4o. 4. A Letter of Resolution of six Quaeries, in 12o. 5. Of Schism. A Defense
of the Church of England, against the Exceptions of the Romanists, in 12o. 6.
Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to Practice, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 12o.
7. Paraenesis or seasonable exhortatory to all true sons of the Church of
England, in 12o. 8. A Collection of several Replies and Vindications Published
of late, most of them in defense of the Church of England, by H. Hammond, D. D.
Now put together in three Volumes. Newly published in 4o.
II. Books and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D. D. viz.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the Year; together with a
Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. The History of the Life and death of the
Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2d Edition, in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises of
holy living, in 12o. 4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12o. 5. The
Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the week,
together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12o. 6. The Doctrine and
Practice of Repentance rescued from Popular Errors, in a large 8o, Newly
published.
III. Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce, Rector of Brington.
A Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees, especially of
Reprobation. The 2. Edit. Now at the Press with some Additionals. The Sinner
impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great discouragements
from Sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self. The Divine
Philanthropie defended.
IV.
A Compendious Discourse upon the Case as it stands between the Church of
England, and those Congregations that have divided from it, by Hen. Fern, D. D.
New. Certain Considerations of present Concernment, touching our Reformed
Church of England, by Henry Fern, D. D. in 12o. The History of the Church of
Scotland by Joh. Spoteswod Archbishop of S. Andrews in fol. New. Dr. Cousins
Devotions, in 12o. The Quakers wild Questions objected against the Ministers of
the Gospel, and many sacred Acts and Offices of Religion, etc. by R. Sherlock,
B. D. in 4o. New. The persecuted Minister, in 4o. New. The Excellency of the
Civil Law, by Robert Wiseman* Dr. of the Civil Law.

