A Map of Judgment, Or a Pattern for JUDGES. Delivered in a Sermon. at the
Assizes holden at Guildford in Surrey; July. 23d. 1666. BEFORE Sr. Orlando
Bridgeman; Knight. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, AND Sr. Samuel Brown, Knight.

By W. Hampton; Rector of Blechingley. in the same County.

2. Chron. 19. 6; 7. And he said to the Judges; take heed what ye do; for ye
judge not for man, but for the Lord; who is with you in the Judgment:
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it; for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts. LONDON; Printed by R. I. for H. Brom over against the Crane in
Little-Brittain. 1667.

TO The Honorable Sr. Orlando Bridgeman; Knight. Lord Chief Justice of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Sr. Samuel Brown; Knight. another of his
Majesty's Justices of the said Court. Grace, Mercy, and Peace, with all
happiness in this World, and everlasting blessedness in that which is to come.
Reverend and Honorable Sirs;
THis Sermon being Preached in your hearing, and received with the good liking
of that numerous auditory then present (as I understand) and as appeared by
their more than usual attention while it was delivering; for what was said of
our dear Savior, I may without ostentation say of my poor self, The eyes of
all that were in the Synagogue were fastened on him. Luke 4.20. And being
importuned by some worthy friends to make it more public, I have condiscended,
hoping it may add some few mites to the public treasury, for the Churches
good. And I assented chiefly upon these reasons.

First, Because it was so well approved and accepted by such pious, learned,
and judicious Worthies, as your Honors, great assertors of piety, equity, and
right, by whom, this Circuit has for some years, been honored, as well as
blessed, in the Administration of Justice.

Secondly, Because I have some hopes, it may put, at least a stop to that great
inundation of Sin and Profaneness, which is gone forth into the Land, by
animating his Majesty's Commissioners in all places, to a diligent discharge of
their duties in so good a work.

Thirdly, That it may stand as a lasting evidence of my humble and cordial
thankfulness to that supreme Moderator of all things, for enabling me, a poor
worm, to labor so long in his Vineyard, and to bring forth some fruits both in
Youth and Age, and to perform such a task twice, at such a distance of time,
the interval of more than ten Olympiads intervening. I cannot think of meeter
persons to Devote it to, than your Honors, who so well approved both the
manner of delivery, and the matter delivered; which I humbly beseech you to
accept in good part, and to shelter it under your Patronage. It is Printed,
almost verbatim, as Preached, only in the last point some little enlargement is
made, which I was forced then to omit, least prolixity should have impeded your
most weighty business.

Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldness, commending this poor Work to the
blessing of God, for the glory of his Name, and good of his People, I commit
you to his safe Protection, who am,

Your Honors most humble Servant in the work of the Lord, William Hampton.
From my Study in Blechingley. Aug 13. 1666.
A Map of Judgment, or, a Pattern for JUDGES.
GENESIS. 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?
IT was the saying of our Savior, Mat. 13.52. Every Scribe which is instructed
for the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a man that is an Householder, which
brings forth out of his treasure, things new and old. The same with Gods
help, I hope to do now. It was full forty years ago, the seventh of this month,
(the Lords holy Name be praised) that I spoke something upon this Text, on the
like occasion, and in this County, at the Assizes holden at Riegate, July 7.
1626, and if I should happen to harp upon some of the old notes, I dare say,
most, if not all here present, would keep my counsel; It will be new to them;
and yet I doubt not, but to bring forth some things new, as well as old. It is
true, we are to live Praeceptis non Exemplis, by Precepts not by Examples; and
yet experience proves, Exemplis magis quam praeceptis, we are apt to be led
rather by pattern than by precept, and in framing the course of our lives,
Example for the most part more prevails than Exhortation. Wherefore, this being
a time allotted for Judgment, I have made choice to set before you a Map of
Judgment, the Pattern and Example of a great Judge, the Judge of Judges, the
Judge of all the world; in his place you sit, he lends a part of his honor to
you, and invests you with his power, he vouchsafes his name unto you, dixi dii
estis; whom then should the Servant imitate but his Lord, the Subject but his
Sovereign, the Little Gods of the earth, but the great God of Heaven and Earth?
the Judges of a Land, or little world, but the Judge of all the world? Zeno
being asked by his friends how they might keep themselves to right, when he was
gone, answered, si me presentem semper putetis; if you imagine me to be always
present with you, the beholder of your actions. And surely a stronger motive
you cannot have to keep your selves to equity and right, quam Deum presentem
semper cogitare, than to have this great Judge always before your eyes, the
pattern and spectatour of all your proceedings: he sees our works, he hear our
words, he knows our thoughts; if we do ill, will not he punish us? if we do
well, will not he reward us? if we do right, will not he applaud it? if we do
wrong, will not he revenge it? Yes verily: For shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right?

The words were uttered by Abraham upon this occasion, when the Almighty was
minded to destroy the City of Sodom, whose sins cried to his Throne for
vengeance; he first after the manner of men, pawsed on the matter, and was
loath to do it, till he had taken advice of a friend, and made Abraham (whom
St. James calls the friend of God) privy to his purpose; Shall I hide from
Abraham the thing which I do? Abraham being hereby assured of Gods love and
favor, began to argue the matter, and became an humble suitor for his sinful
neighbors, and knowing them to be in misericordia provero clamore, puts up his
petition into the Chancery of Gods boundless mercy, that if there could be
fifty good men found within the City, he would be pleased to spare the whole
for their sake. The Lord grants his petition; Abraham goes straight way with a
privy search through the City of Sodom, and after his labor lost, he makes
return unto God, with a non est inventus; yet he proceeds on in his suit, and
craving pardon for his boldness, he obtains a Writ Admelius inquirendum, and
then falls from fifty to forty five, from forty five to forty, from forty to
thirty, from thirty to twenty, from twenty to ten, which small number had that
populous City afforded, he would have spared all for their sakes; I will not
destroy it for tens sake. And he brings these words as a convincing Argument,
that it stood not with the reputation of the Almighty, who is the great Lord
chief Justice of the world, to do injustice, to burn innocents, with nocents,
to flay the righteous with the wicked. Will thou also destroy the righteous
with the wicked? Peradventure there shall be fifty righteous within the City,
will thou destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are
therein? That be far from thee, to do after this manner, to slay the righteous
with the wicked, and that the Righteous should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee: shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Not that Abraham in
this expostulation does make any doubt of the Justice of God; for this
Interrogation is indeed a vehement asseveration; so that in this negative
question is emphatically employed an affirmative position, as if he had said, I
know the Judge of all the world will do right. Frequent in holy Writ, by
interrogations in the negative, to affirm the more earnestly. So Elisha to
Gehuzi, Went not my heart with thee, etc. Yes, I know all thy tampering and
juggling well enough. So here, Shall not the Judge of all the world do right?
is all one, as if he had said, I am sure the Judge of all the Earth will do
right. The words being thus resolved, you may note in them three parts. A
Judge, his Circuit, and his Judgment. The Judge is the Lord; his Circuit very
large, All the Earth; His Judgment most just and right, or rather, if you
will, as the Text has four words, so I will put four quaeries to be briefly
discussed: Quis? Quos? Quando? Quomodo: First, Quis, Who this Judge is? and
that is Christ the Lord of the World; he it was that here talked with Abraham,
that appeared to the Patriarchs, and Fathers in the Old Testament. Secondly,
Quos, Whom he shall judge; All the Earth, or the whole World. Thirdly, Quando,
When he shall Judge; The time is to come at the end of the World, noted in the
Particle, shall. Fourthly, Quomodo, How he shall judge; Not according to the
corrupt Fashion of the world; Sed secundum norman Justitiae, according to the
Rule of Justice, according to equity and right: Shall not the Judge of all the
world do right?
And

First, I begin with him, who is (...) and (...), the beginning and the end of
all our actions, yea of all things, and that is, Quis, who this Judge is?
namely Christ the Son of God, God and man, the Messiah, the Savior and
Redeemer of the world; he is made Lord Chief Justice of all the world; and he
has it by Commission: hear his own Testimony for it, and we know that his
Testimony is true, John 5.22. The Father Judges no man, but has committed all
Judgment unto the Son, because that all men should honor the Son even as they
honor the Father. Upon which place St. Austin Tractat. 19. in Johan. moves a
doubt, whether the Father shall be excluded in the last Judgment, which he
resolves by comparing these words, with the 27th verse, He has given him power
to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of Man. The Father (says he) shall
not be seen coming to Judgment, but yet he shall not be excluded from giving of
Judgment, he has the same power with the Son, for the power of all the three
persons is coaequal. The Son only shall be seen in Judgment; The Judge shall
appear in a visible shape, forma humana, in a humane form; They shall see him
only whom they have pierced; He shall come to judgment, and sit on the Throne
of judgment, and pronounce judgment in the very same body wherein he
suffered and dyed; That Form shall be Judge, which stood before a Judge; and
he shall judge that was judged; and hoe shall judge justly, that was judged
unjustly; For the Father has given him power to Execute Judgment, because he
is the Son of man; that is, because he did so far condescend and debase
himself, as to come into the world, and assume our Nature to his Godhead, to
be greatly humbled, to do and suffer so much for our Redemption, therefore the
Father will so highly exalt him, that in the same nature, in the same form, in
the same body he shall sit to judge the world: He has appointed a day, in the
which he will judge the world in Righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained, Acts 17.31.

But does not the Apostle say, that the Saints shall judge the world? 1 Cor.
6.2. and Christ to his Apostles, Ye which have followed me in the Regeneration,
when the Son of man shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit
upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Matthew. 19.28.

These places are to be understood, either of judging the world. 1. By their
Doctrine, or, 2. By their good examples and holy lives, as Christ said, that
the Queen of the South, and the Ninevites should rise up in judgment against
the men of that generation, and Condemn them: or, 3. Of the attestation and
approbation which they shall give to the righteous judgment of Christ, Rev.
19.1, 2. They shall sit Assistants with him, and be by his side, (like privy
Counselors to the King.) As we see here at an Assize, there be many inferior
Justices, who sit on the Bench, and are Assistants to the Judge, not that they
give sentence in any matter; for that belongs to the Judge, but they sit as
approvers and testifiers of the just proceedings; So shall it be with the
Saints; they shall sit as Assistants with Christ, to approve and applaud the
righteous dealing of that great Judge, but to him alone belongs the pronouncing
of Sentence.

1. O what a strong consolation may this be to all the Faithful people of
Christ, in that he who saved them, shall judge them! he who is flesh of their
flesh, and bone of their bone; he who gave his flesh, and body, and blood, and
life, and all to redeem them? No comfort like this to a guilty person arraigned
at the Bar, as to have the Judge to be his friend; to speak for him, to plead
for him, to defend, to protect him: But so it shall be with the faithful at
that day; they shall have their friend to be their Judge; their Head, their
Husband, their Kinsman, their Brother; their Redeemer, their Intercessor, their
Savior: Surely it must needs go well with them; their cause shall be heard
before him, who loved them so dearly, that he dyed for them; The great Judge of
all the world shall acquit them, who then shall lay any thing to their charge?
It is God that Justifies (says St. Paul) who then shall Condemn? It is Christ
that Judges, there is therefore no Condemnation to them that are his.

2. And this also shall strike confusion to his enemies; They shall see him
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, and sitting on the Throne of Glory, whom they
pierced; Whom they pierced with their bands, with their sins, with their
tongues, with their oaths, with their blasphemies, and impieties, he whom they
despised, whose call they neglected, whose Gospel they rejected, whose Word
they contemned, whose Mercy they abused, whose Ministers they slighted, whose
Ambassadors they wronged; he shall be their Judge: For he is of such
omnipotency, that he shall force his enemies, and all to appear before his
Tribunal. And thus having briefly discussed the first quaerie, Quis, who this
Judge shall be; I pass to the second, Quos, whom he shall Judge? All the
Earth. A very large Circuit; other Judges are Judges of but some small Circuit
or corner of the Earth; Judges of earth, and Judges, who (when their breath
goes forth) must fall to the earth, and turn to a little lump of earth as well
as others; but this is the Judge of all the Earth; Judex totius mundi, the
Judge of all the world: All the world, yea, all the men of the world must
appear before his Tribunal, We must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. Before him shall be gathered all Nations, Mat. 25.32. All
Nations and Countries, all People and Languages, all men, of what estate or
condition soever: The King that Rules, the Judge that Judges, the Lawyer that
pleads, the Client that sueth, the witness that swears, the Jury that,
censureth, the Pastor that speaks, the people that hears, high and low,
rich and poor, young and old, we must all appear before this mighty Judge; He
is Judex vivorum and mortuorum, Judge of the living and the dead; Those who are
found alive at his coming, shall in a moment be changed, those that dyed
before, shall in a moment be raised, all shall appear; All that are in the
graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they shall conse forth,
they that have done good to the Resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil to the Resurrection of condemnation, John 5.28, 29. All that are in the
Graves, yea, and more than all that are in the Graves; all that have dyed since
the beginning of the world; though they have been drowned in the Sea; and
devoured by fishes; though they have been burned in the fire, and consumed to
Ashes; though their flesh has been made a banquet to the beasts of the field,
and fowls of the Air; yet at the Trumpet of the Archangel, at the voice of the
Son of God, they shall all revive; the Trump shall sound, and the dead shall
rise, and come to judgment; There shall not miss one man, woman, or child
from the beginning of the Creation; All shall appear, every one propria
persona, in his own proper person; no Proxy, no Atrourney shall serve the
turn at that day. Thus much St. John affirms, Rev. 20.12. Where was revealed
to him, the Majesty of this mighty Judge, and the manner of this grand Assize.
I saw a great white Throne, and one who sat upon it, from whose Face fled
away, both the earth, and the Heaven; and I saw the dead both great and small
stand before God; for the Sea gave up her dead, which were in her, and death
and Hell delivered up the dead that were in them, and they were judged every
man according to their works.

But some may say, shall all be judged, as well the Godly, as the Godless, as
well the faithful as the faithless? have we not the Judges own Word and Warrant
for the contrary, confirmed with a double Seal, that the faithful who hear and
obey his Word, and believe in him, shall not be judged; Amen, amen dico vobis,
etc. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in
him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Judgment, but
passes from death unto life, Joh. 5.24.

To which I answer, That the word (...) which properly signifies judgment, is
sometimes taken for, (...) which signifies condemnation, as (...) for (...) to
Judge, for to condemn, often in the Scripture: So that when Christ says, the
faithful shall not come (...) into judgment, the meaning is, into
condemnation, as St. Austin well notes on the place; There is (says he)
Judicium absolutionis, and Judicium condemnationis, the Judgment of
absolution, and the Judgment of condemnation: Or as Aquinas aptly
distinguishes, in the last Judgment are two things, discussio peccatorum, and
retributio praemiorum, a discussion of sins, and a retribution of rewards. All
shall appear, both the faithful and the faithless, though to a different
judgment: The faithful to the judgment of absolution, ad retributionem
praemioruns, to partake of the reward; the wicked to the judgment of
condemnation, ad discussionem peccatorum, to answer for their sins: Their sins
shall be discussed, searched and sifted most narrowly; their most secret sins
shall be laid open to the view of the whole world, before that great assembly
both of Men and Angels; and not only laid open, but laid to their charge; the
Book of Conscience shall be opened, and accuse them more than a thousand
witnesses: and according to their sins, shall a fearful doom be pronounced, an
everlasting separation from that most beatifical Vision of the Deity, to a
terrible Habitation, and association with wicked Devils; Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.
But as for the Godly and Faithful, who are reconciled to their Heavenly Father,
by the blood of Jesus Christ his blessed Son, though they appear also at this
great Assize, yet it shall be to the Judgment of absolution, to be acquitted,
pardoned, saved, There shall no discussio peccatorum pass upon them; their sins
shall not be laid open, nor laid to their charge, nor hamed, nor mentioned, nor
brought forth at that day, so much as to accuse them, or grieve, or shame them,
much less to condemn them; but they shall all be washed away in the blood of
the Lamb, blotted out, forgotten and forgiven, as if they had never been; For I
will forgive their iniquities, and I will remember their sin no more, Jer.
31.34. and again, Jer 50.20. In those dates, and at that time, says the Lord,
the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the
sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon them whom I
reserve. So shall the Prophecy of Balaam be fulfilled; He shall see none
Iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel, Numb. 23.21.

Their sins indeed shall be sought for; Satan that (...) most envious enemy of
humane happiness, shall labor to accuse them, to bring forth their sins
against them, and lay them to their Charge; but the true (...), the lover of
men will not suffer him, he will throw them all into the bottom of the Sea,
cast them behind his back, nail them to the Cross, bury them in the grave of
his Son, drown them in his blood, and remove them further than the East is from
the West; that they shall not be found, nor remembered, nor brought forth
against his faithful people at that day: So that though they appear, it shall
not be ad discussionem peccatorum, to have their sins discussed, sifted,
examined, censured like the wicked; but ad retributionem praemiorum, to have
their labors and good works rewarded; yea, to have the works of Christ, which
are now appropriate to them, and made theirs by imputation, Crowned with a
Diadem of Glory, and Immortality in the Kingdom of Heaven.

If any shall demand with the Disciples, (...), but tell us, when shall these
things be? I answer, Here ye pose me indeed: These things shall so come to
pass, I am sure, but when, or how soon, I cannot tell; It is the next quaerie
to be discussed, Quando, When he shall Judge, noted in the future sign shall:
the time is to come, at the end of the World.

That there shall be such a day is most certain, most uncertain when it shall
be: we have the Word of God to confirm the certainty of it; Our God shall come,
and shall not keep silence; there shall go before him a consuming fire, Psalm.
50.3. The Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel, 2 These. 1. We have his promise for it, Behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, to give to every man according as his work shall be, Rev.
22.12. We have his Oath for it; The Mighty Angel lift up his hand to Heaven,
and swear by him that lives for ever and, ever who Created Heaven, and the
things that are therein, and the Earth, and the things that are therein, and
the Sea, and the things which are therein, that time should be no more, Rev.
10.6. We have the Justice of God to confirm it; it stands with his Justice,
that there should be such a day; God is most just, he will show mercy to the
Godly, and judgment to the wicked; he will (as Sr. Paul says) reward every
man according to his works: but he does not always so in this life; for the
wicked enjoy as many outward blessings as the Godly, All things come alike to
all, and the same condition is to the Just, and to the unjust, to him that
Sacrifizeth, and to him that Sacrifizeth not: etc. says the Preacher. Yea, the
wicked in this world, for the most part, enjoy more felicity, than Gods
Children; they laugh, when these weep; they sing when these sigh; they prosper,
when these are persecuted; they flourish, when these are afflicted; they are in
pomp and jollity, when these are in want and misery: sic fuit a principio,
from the beginning it has been so; Abel, righteous Abel, lies dead at the feet
of his wretched Brother Cain: Chaste Joseph is fettered in the Dungeon, while
his lewd Lady flourishes in her braverie: the Hebrews groan under their heavy
burdens, sweat in the Brick-Kills, while the Egyptians live at ease,
domineering over them: Elias faints in the Desert, while Jezabel painteth in
her Closet: Daniel quaketh in the den of Lions, but the proud King Belshazzer
quaffeth among his boon Companions: The holy Prophets of God are mocked,
scourged, sawn asunder, slain with the Sword, while their cruel Persecutors
swell, and sway, and triumph, in their sorrows: John's head lies bleeding in
the Platter, while Herod is smiling at his Revels, and Dancing among his
Damsels: Lazarus Famisheth, while Dives Feasteth. Therefore, there must needs
be a general day of Judgment; when God will give to every man his right; when
good men shall be rewarded according to their sufferings, and wicked men
punished according to their deservings.

If we do but hear two or three Malefactors receive their doom from the Judge,
and see them led forth to Execution, we may thence conclude, that there shall
be an universal doom; for it is not to be thought (says St. Chrysostom) that
seeing we have all one God, who is an upright Judge, that he would punish some
men for their sins in this world, and let others escape, which have offended as
much or more than they, unless he had reserved certain punishment for them also
in the future World, at the day of judgment: and this is that which the
Apostle hinteth to us, 1. Tim. 5.24. Some men's sins are open before hand, and
go before unto judgment, but some men's follow after. The sins of some are
known and manifest to the world, they are brought to Judgment, and they suffer
for them here, their bodies are punished, that their souls may be saved: but
the sins of some are close, secret, unknown to the world, yet there will come a
time, when they shall be revealed, when they shall be punished; their sins are
upon the score, and kept in store, till the great day of reckoning; though they
escape the judgment of this world, yet they shall not escape the judgment of
the world to come; their sins shall follow after them, they shall accompany
them to judgment.

Now as it is most certain such a day shall come, so most uncertain when it
shall come. Some have rashly and presumptuously undertaken to guess at the
time, and define when it shall be, as though they had been in the bosom of
God, and were the Secretaries of Heaven. To whom it may be said, as the Cynick
to an ignorant and arrogant fellow, prating of Heavenly matters beyond his
capacity, (...), pray sir, how lately came you from Heaven, that you know these
things so well, or as St. Austin tells of one who answered that busy
Inquisitor, who would know what God did before he made the world; fecit
Infernum, curiosa scrutantibus, he made Hell to punish those who are too
curious in prying into his secrets. Our Savior tells us that when that day
shall be, no man knows, no not the Angels of Heaven, which have far more
excellent knowledge than we; no, not he himself; that is, as man, he was
ignorant of it, or had no commission then to reveal it; or, as Aquinas, Dicitur
nescire, quia non facit scire; he is said not to know, because he will not make
us to know. Therefore let no man presume above his reach; secret things belong
to the Lord, revealed things to us, and to our Children; only this we are sure
of, the time cannot be far off, it is even at hand; It was near in the
Apostles time, much more in our time; all the signs preceding foretold by our
Lord, and his holy Apostles, being fulfilled, except the calling of the Jews,
which how soon, when, and in what manner it shall be, we know not. Behold the
Judge stands even at the door; Yet a very little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. The world is now in decrepito
statu^, in a declining condition, drawing the last breath, at the last cast, at
the last gasp. As man who is (...), a little world, so the world which is
(...), a great man, (as the Philosopher speaks) has its infancy, childe-hood,
youth, middle age, old age: The time (says St. Austin) from Adam to Noah, was
the worlds infancy; from Noah to Abraham its childe-hood; from Abraham to
David, its youth; from David to the Captivity of Babylon its middle age; from
the Captivity of Babylon unto Christ, its old age; from Christ unto the end of
all things, its dotage; for ever since, the world has as it were gone upon
Crutches, and therefore, now cannot stand long: if St. John's age were ultima
hora, the last hour, surely our times are the last minute of the hour. (...),
says St. Paul, the time is short, the sails are wrapped up, the Ship is even
at hand, let us therefore use this world, as if we used it not. Let this
shortness and speediness hasten us to a speedy preparation; the uncertainty of
this day, to a daily and continual preparation; for that which St. Austin said
of the day of death, may as well be said of the day of Judgment; why did God
hide from us the day of our death? was it not that every day we should be
prepared? ideolatet ultimus dies, and observer un c^mis dies; The last day is
concealed, that every day may be observed. So if any demand, why has God hid
from us this day of Judgment, why does no man know when it shall be? I answer,
It is because we should always watch and wait for it; and as St. Jerome
speaks, so lead the course of our lives every day, as if to morrow should be
Doomsday. This Application let us make of it; always to Prepare: Because then
God will deal with every man according as he finds him; he that is found
smiting his fellow Servants, eating and drinking with the drunken, shall be cut
in pieces, and have his portion with the Hypocrites; but he that is found doing
the command of our great Master, shall enter into eternal joy; for then God
will deal to every man his right, and reward him according to his deservings:
And so I come to the last querie, or part of my Text, Quomodo, How he shall
Judge? and that is secundum norman justitiae, according to the rule of justice,
according to equity, according to right; Shall not the Judge of all the Earth,
do right?

Righteous is the Lord in all his judgments; with righteousness shall he judge
the world, and the peole with equity. Psalm. 98.10. Some Examples of his
Justice, he gives in this present world, as forerunners of his upright dealing
in the future world: rewarding the wicked according to the nature and quality
of their sins, paying them just as they have deserved, measuring to them the
same measure they have measured, and punishing them in the same kind, wherein
they offended. It is said, Wisd. 11.15, 16. That for their foolish devices, in
worshipping Serpents void of reason, and vile Beasts; God sent a multitude of
unreasonable beasts upon them for vengeance: that they might know, that
wherewithal a man sins, by the same also shall he be punished, So Hab. 2.8.
Because thou have spoiled many Nations, all the remnant of the people shall
spoil thee, and Jer. 30.16. All they that devour thee shall be devoured; and
they that spoil thee shall be a spoil; and all that prey upon thee, will I give
for a prey; And for proof of this, I might bring a cloud of witnesses, and
Examples: Sodomiticae illae civitates, etc. says St. Austin, Those Sodomitical
Cities, that burned with filthy lusts, were justly burned with fire from above;
and as they made a Hell upon earth by their beastliness and uncleanness, so
Gehennam misit e Coele, (as Silvianus speaks) he sent a Hell out of Heaven to
consume them for it. Pharaoh that caused the silly Infants to be drowned in the
River Nilus, was himself and all his Host drowned in the Red Sea. Adonibezeck
that caused seventy Kings, having the Thumbs of their right hands, and great
Toes cut off, to gather crumbs under his Table, was served with the same sauce
by Judah; As I have done, so has God rewarded me, Judges 1.7. Judah did it,
yet he confesses Gods Justice in it. The Dogs ear the flesh of Jezabel,
because she made them lick the blood of Nuboth. Haman hangs on his own Gallows,
which he prepared for Mordecai. As Agags sword had made many women childeless,
so was his Mother by the sword made childless among women. Maxentius falls into
the same trap which he laid for Constantine his Lord and Master. Pope Alexander
the sixth, by the mistake of his Butler, was poisoned with the same Bottle,
wherewith he intended to dispatch his Cardinals. That brand of Hell, Pope
Hildebrand, Agent, was slain with the same instrument, wherewith he was hired
to slay Henry the Emperor: This Emperor being at Rome, used every morning to
pray in St. Mary's, on Mount Aventine. Hildebrand suborned a wicked villain
secretly to convey up to the rafters of the Church great and massy stones, and
so to dispose them, that as the Emperor was kneeling at his devotions, they
might fall down upon his head, and dash but his brains: but as this wretch, the
minister of Popish cruelty, was hastening his design, and sitting a massy
stone for the execution of his Treason, the stone fell down, and beat him down
withal, which falling on the pavement by the just Judgment of God, dashed in
pieces the carcass of that traitorous workman.

How miraculously does he reveal murders, revenging blood with blood? how
frequently does he give them their fill of blood, who delight in blood? As it is
written of Cyrus, King of Persia, who had been the occasion of much bloodshed,
that being taken by Tomyres Queen of Scythia, she struck off his head, and put
it into a hogs-head of man's blood, with this exprobration of his cruelty,
satiate sunguine quem fuisti and cujus insatiabilis fuisti. Glut thy self, and
take thy fill of blood which thou have always thirsted after, and of which
thou have been unsatiable. The like almost we read of Joab, a man of blood who
shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle at was
about his joins, and in the shoos that were on his feet; basely (...)
treacherously killing Honer the Son of Ner, and Amasa the Son of Jether: and
though by his power and greatness he long escaped vengeance, yet his hoar-head
was not suffered to go down to the grave without blood, 1 King. 2.5, 6. How
justly does he scourge Whoremongers and Adulterers with the not and canker,
even in those parts wherein they offend? do we not ever and anon hear of some
notorious drunkards drowned in ditches and puddles; or taken away by some
sudden disaster in the midst of their disorder, when they have neither wit, not
will to repent, nor to cry so much as Lord have mercy upon us? I have read of a
Thief strangled, and so executed by the sheep that he stole; tying it by the
legs, and carrying it on his head, and sitting down to rest upon a great
stone by the way, the sheep struggling, pulled him over the stone, and choked
him; so that he was found dead in the morning, and the sheep alive (at Ailton
in Huntingtonshire. Dr. Beard, Judge. page 570.)

So he does punish those with disobedient children, who have been disobedient
to their Parents. Erasmus writes of one that did beat his own Father, and
being reproved as guilty of so vile a fact, he answered, when he was as I am,
he did beat his Father; and I make no doubt, but there stands one (pointing to
his Son, then a child) who will hereafter do the like to me. Therefore by the
nature of our punishment, we may know the nature of our sin; for commonly the
same measure is returned, that we have measured. Do we find men ungrateful to
us? let us search, have not we been ungrateful to our God? if so, no marvel if
men be so to us. By this means Alphonsus King of Arragon, came to see his sin;
I have (said he) advanced many to honor and preferments, and heaped great
favors upon them, and yet I still find them to be ungrateful: but searching
mine own heart, I do not much wonder at it, for I find that I my self being
advanced by God, and having received great blessings; from him, have been
unthankful to his heavenly Majesty: and it is but just that men should make
such a return to me, as I have made to my God. Are we punished with the loss of
our worldly goods and substance? Is it not because we have set our hearts too
much upon them? or with sickness? did not health make us wanton, and forgetful
of our frail condition? Let, us thus, by the kind of punishment, search out our
sin, that repenting, we may obtain pardon.

Thus have I showed, that God does sometimes use martial Law against the
wicked, by remarkable strokes of his Justice upon them, in this world; because
otherwise men would think there were no God, or at least, that, he were not
Just: but these, examples are but now and then; if he should punish all in this
world, men would think there were no Judgment to come, but that all were
dispatched here, and after this life, no more ado; therefore he defers the main
execution of his Justice, till the end of the world, and then he will do right
to every man: he will (as St. Paul says) render to every man according to his
works, Romans 2.6. both secundum qualitatem, and secundum quantitatem, according
to the quality, and according to the quantity thereof.

First, He will judge us according to the quality of our works; he will render
good for good, and evil for evil; not evil for good, not good for evil: To them
who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, he will give eternal life. But unto them that are contentious, and
do not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Greek, Romans 2.7, 8, 9. The good Tree that brings forth
good fruit, shall be cherished and preserved: The evil Tree that brings forth
evil fruit, shall be cut down and burned.

O the vanity and folly of many worldlings, who go on in all sin and
wickedness, and yet hope to have a reward in Heaven, as well as the best I but
God is an upright Judge; as he will not requite good with evil, so he will not
reward evil with good. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? If
a man sow Tares, can he expect a crop of Wheat? or if he sow Cockle, can he
look for a harvest of Barley? Be not deceived, says the Apostle, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap; he that sows to
his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8.

Secondly, He will judge us according to the quantity of our works; they that
have most sins, shall be adjudged to most torments; they that have most good
works, to most glory. The sentence is past already on the Whore of Babylon,
quantum in diliciis fuit, for so much pleasure, give her so much pain: so much
for so much; a most righteous Judge. The ignorant servant shall be adjudged to
few stripes, the negligent servant to many stripes, Luke 12.47, 48. Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye devour Widows houses, and for a
pretense make long prayers; therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation,
Mat. 23.14. So that some shall have greater damnation than others.

See here the pitiful folly of some desperate wretches, who being given over
to a reprobate sense, to commit all filthiness with greediness, and being
reproved and admonished to run better courses, and showed the danger of their
ways, how they will bring bitterness at last; sollace themselves with this
miserable comfort; oh we know the worst of it, we can be but damned! Alas,
alas, they know not, consider not what it is to be damned; an horrid, hideous,
unexpressible, irrecoverable mischief to be damned; and how there are degrees
of damnation too: the more sins, the more stripes; and how that those who sin
against light, knowledge and conscience, careless and wicked Christians, shall
be thrust deeper into Hell, and scorched in hotter flames than Infidels and
Pagans; for our Lord assures us in the Gospel, That it shall be easier for
Tyrus and Sydon, than for Bethsaida and Corazin, at the day of doom: and that
sinful Sodom shall speed better than proud Capernaum at the last day. Doubtless
Tyrus, and Sydon, and Sodom, shall be damned, and have most dreadful
punishments in Hell, in that lake which never shall be quenched, where the worm
dies not, and the fire never goes out: But Bethsaida, Corazin, Capernaum,
shall have more dreadful punishments, more fearful torments: why? because
Bethsaida, Corazin, Capernaum, had means of salvation, heard Christ, and saw
Christ; heard his Doctrine, and saw his miracles, and yet repented not,
believed not; whereas Tyrus, Sydon, Sodom, had no such means; therefore their
punishment shall be lighter, the others heavier.

He will also reward our good works, according to their quantity, so much for
so much, though he will not reward us, to speak properly, propter opera, for
our works, yet secundum opera, according to our works, as a Father says;
though not for the mere merit of them, yet according to the meet measure of
them: our good works shall be the rule by which he will proportion out the
heavenly reward: the more good works of grace we have, the more abundant will
be our reward of glory. Every man shall receive his own reward, according to
his own labor, 1 Cor. 3.8. He that uses five Talents well, shall be Ruler
over five Cities; he that uses ten Talents well, shall be Ruler over ten
Cities, Luke 19.17.19. They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; but they that turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars
for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. And as our Lord says, tune fulgebunt Justi
tanquam Sol, Then shall the Just shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father, Mat. 13.43. In Heaven among the Saints, there shall be degrees of
glory; as there is difference now among the stars of Heaven in beauty: One star
differs from another star in glory, says the Apostle: There is one glory the
Sun, another of the Moon, another of the Stars; so shall it be with the Saints
in the Kingdom of Heaven; every Saint shall have glory enough, yet some more,
some less, according to the proportion of their faith and good works. As all
behold the Sun, yet not according to the same perfect brightness; but some
more, some less, according to the diversity of their sight: so the Saints in
Heaven shall all have the beatifical Vision of God, yet some in more perfect
manner than other, according to the measure of their graces here: Or, as if a
man cast diverse Bottles into the Sea, of several capacities, some greater, some
less; every one will be filled, yet the greatest will receive most: So, though
all the Saints shall be filled with glory, and every one have as much as he can
contain, yet those who do most abound in faith and good works, shall have most
glory.

1. This may admonish us how careful we ought to be of our works; to be
practical and working Christians, to add to our faith good works; as Saint
Peter exhorts Believers, 2 Pet. 1.5. Giving all diligence, add to your faith
virtue, etc. godliness, brotherly kindness, charity. Though we allow not the
merit of works, yet we teach the necessity of good works, as consequences,
fruits, and evidences of true faith; and because the reward of glory shall be
proportioned out according to our works; look what our works be, such shall be
the verdict that shall pass upon us at the great day. Therefore, says James,
cap. 2. Show me thy faith by thy works: Thou say thou have faith, and
talkest much of it, but let it appear by the fruits, evidence a right faith by
a righteous life. It is said, Luke 5.20. That Christ saw their faith: and
healed the man of the Palsy: he saw not only with the eye of his Divinity, but
by their works, by the effects and fruits of it, he saw their faith: for they
laid the sick man on a bed, brought him after Christ, and when they could not
come near him for the multitude, they opened the roof, and let him down in his
Couch before him: when Christ saw their faith, by these not able works, he
healed the sick man. If thou will have Christ to heal thee, to save thee, thou
must let him see thy faith by thy works. We read, Genesis 27.21.22. That old Isaac
would not bless Jacob by his speech or voice only, but feels and handles him
first; Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee my Son, whether thou be my
very Son Esau or not; and when he found they were Esau's hands, he blessed him.
So Christ will not pronounce his blessing upon us by out voice or words only;
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. He will
handle and seel us, and if he find working hands, that we have been
open-handed to his poor Saints, he will bless us, and give us the inheritance
of his heavenly Kingdom. How should the remembrance of this stir us up to the
practice of good deeds, to be always abounding in the work of the Lord? for it
is (...), according to our practice that Christ will reward us at the last day.
So it is in the Evangelist, Mat. 16. 27. The word is for the most part taken in
a good sense, and notes an acting after the precepts of good manners; as a
learned Critic notes, Keck. in Ethic.(...), according to our works: So it is
in Paul, Romans 2.6. Therefore I will conclude with the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.
18, 19. Do good, and be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, and that ye may lay hold on eternal life.

2. Let the consideration of this also, turn our worldly ambition into an holy
ambition; our earthly covetousness, into heavenly covetousness: we do contend
and cover, who shall be chief here on earth; who shall sit highest at our
Feasts, and have the chief place in the Synagogue; who shall outstrip others
in gay Apparel; and who shall have most wealth and riches, and who shall have
the stateliest houses. Oh then let us be as covetous, contentious and ambitious
for heavenly glory, who shall have the highest seat, the chiefest place there,
the fairest Mansion there: for there be many Mansions; In my Fathers house are
many Mansions; there be upper rooms, and there be lower rooms; there be higher
seats, and there be lower seats, there is greater glory, and there is lesser
glory: Let us therefore strive, who shall be most zealous of Gods glory here,
so shall we be sure to have the more glorious reward here after; For God is a
most just Judge, he will give to every man his right, he will render to every
man according to his works; Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

Let me crave your honorable patience to add a few words for application, and
I have done: you have heard how we must all appear before this Almighty Judge,
where wrong shall be righted, and right rewarded. Let this move us all in our
several Callings and stations, to keep a good Conscience, and take heed to the
thing that is right, which will bring peace at last; for if any man do wrong,
he shall receive for the wrong he has done, and there is no respect of persons
with God.

In the first place, reverend and honorable Sages, ye who now sit on the
Throne of Judgment to judge others: remember the day will quickly come, when
ye must appear before a Judgment seat to be judged your selves: have that
great Judge still before your eyes, his fear in your hearts, (as I doubt not
but ye always have) and let all your Actions be such, that ye may stand before
him without fear, with joy and comfort at that day. Let not friends nor favor,
passion nor affection cause you to decline to the right hand or to the left,
remember the judgment is the Lords, in whose place ye sit; whose vicegerents
ye are on earth, let his example be the square of all your proceedings, your
judgment like his, secundum norman Justitiae, according to the rule of
Justice, equity and right; your charge is great, being well discharged, your
reward's the greater: As St. Paul said, the Elders that Rule well, so the
Judges that judge well, are worthy of double honor, they deserve it in this
world; they shall be sure to have it in the future world; this impartial Judge
will do right, and recompense them according to their works.

In the next place, worshipful and worthy Commissioners, ye which now sit
Assistants on the Bench, let your actions be such, that ye may also sit
assistants with this Heavenly Judge at the last day, and be in the number of
the Saints (which the Lord in mercy grant.) St. Austin laid it to the charge of
the old Romans, that they were more tender of their own honor, than of the
honor of their Gods; if any one had wronged a Senator, but in a word, he was
sure to smoke for it; but they suffered their Poets to quip and whip their
Gods, and never questioned them for it. I hope you are free from any such
imputation; of being more forward in revenging your own wrongs, than Gods
wrongs. Yet give me leave, humbly to put a case to you; If Drunkards,
Blasphemers, Swearers, Adulterers, Riotous, Debauched, Atheistical, profane
persons, who forget the God that made them, and deny the Lord that bought them,
who kick at his Word and worship, who scorn at holiness, and scoff away
Religion, and jest away holy Scripture, or directly cry it down, daring to
Blaspheme and say, it is the voice of man, and not of God, as in truth it is, I
These. 2.13. whose madness is manifest enough to all, and deserves a severe
check. who swear away our mercies, and curse away our blessings, and drink away
their healths, by drinking healths; and do what in them lies to damn their
precious souls, having God damn me, more often than Lord have mercy, in their
mouths; who show their sins like Sodom, and commit them with an Harlots face,
without shame or blushing, by whom God is more dishonored, than by any other;
shall swarm in your several Divisions, perhaps in some of your Families, and
yet be seldom or never questioned, censured, or punished, at least by some of
you: Are ye not too slack in vindicating Gods honor? I appeal to your own
hearts. Surely, a heavy clog will at last lie upon their Souls and Consciences,
by whose connivence sin is nurtured and increased, when it is in their hand to
restrain it. If ye will not do justice on them, the time is coming, when the
great Lord-Chief-Justice of the world, will do justice both on you and them; on
them for sinning, and on you for suffering them. For Shall not the Judge of all
the World do right? A sad thing it is, (and sorry I am, I must speak this, to
our shame) That a greater restraint should be put upon sin, and foul
enormities, under the usurped powers, than under the true, just and lawful
powers: Will ye so requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not he
thy Father, that has bought or redeemed and established thee? said Moses to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 22.6. And shall we thus requite the Lord for the signal mercies,
the great things, the wonders he has done for us in the blessed restoration
of our King, our Religion, Laws and liberties? God forbid. For this the mouth
of the Adversary is open against us; (though they see not their own sins of
stubbornness, disobedience, murmuring, Schism, Heresy, as vile in Gods sight,
though not so visible to the world.) Yea, I fear, the Lord has a Controversy
with our Land for this, for this his fierce anger is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still, For this gird thee with sackcloath, O England,
weep and howl; and let thine eyes run down with tears, night and day, and let
them not cease. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation, till it
be reformed.

But do ye desire to redress these abuses (as I hope you do?) then let me
humbly commend to you, two or three directions. 1. Put in Execution the good
laws more duly. 2. give good example your selves more sincerely. sincerely. 3.
Lessen the occasions thereof more effectually; by taking away clandestine,
blind, and superfluous Alehouses, the Pest-houses of the Nation. Let them not
be like the head of Hydra, when one is cut off, two to start up in the place
thereof. I have read of a certain street in Rome, called Vicus Sobrius, the
sober street, perhaps because there was never a tippling-house in it; which is
hard to be said of any street in England; but surely both our Towns, Streets,
and Villages, would be more sober, if the number of these needless houses were
diminished. The King of Meth, sometime in Ireland, asked one how certain
noisome birds, that came flying into his Realm, and bred there, might be
destroyed; who answered, nidos eorum ubique destruendos; that the only way to
rid them out of the Land, was to destroy and pull down their nests. Do you
desire to lessen the number of those noisome birds, and unclean beasts, that
defile our Land? your best way is to pull down the nests, where they are
brooded, the dens, where they are harbored; blind and base Alehouses, which
are the nests and Nurseries of all vices: There quarrels are bred, murders
occasioned, oaths coined, robberies plotted, thieves harbored, whoredoms
committed; and to conclude, they are the very dens and cages of all uncleanness.

Let me add one Word to Gamaliel, the learned of the Law, and all who relate to
it; remember, the hour is coming, wherein they who plead for others, shall not
plead for themselves; where unless they now work the Judge to be their friend,
by keeping faith and a good conscience, they shall have none to plead for them.
I say not to you, as our Savior to those in his time, Woe be to you Lawyers, I
hope better things of you and such as accompany salvation. Only give me leave
to make a supposition, if there be any which blow up the coals of dissension
among neighbors, to warm their own fingers at the fire; who tell their Client,
his Cause is good, when in their conscience they know it to be stark naught;
who say good is evil, and evil good; who put light for darkness, and darkness
for light; sweet for bitter, and bitter for sweet; who make truth falsehood, and
falsehood truth; whose tongues cannot move nimbly, and so by silence smother the
poor man's right, because he has but one Angel to move the waters; any
Ambidexters, that can take fees on both sides; or for a larger fee, prove
turn-coats, and go to the other side; vae illis, woe be to them! the time is at
hand, when they will find it no profit to gain a world, and lose a soul. There
is one on high, that looks into their hearts, and sees their shuffling and
juggling, their deceit and fraud, though never so secret from the world, and
will discover all to their shame and confusion. I have heard of a certain kind
of writing, so cunningly framed in Paper, without any appearance, that it
cannot possibly be read unless one hold it against the fire; then the letters
and characters appear plain to the sight. Imagine this Paper to be a man's
heart, the letters written therein, his thoughts, intents and purposes; which
perhaps none can now discover, for no man knows the things of a man, but the
spirit of a man that is in him: yet when we come to the fire at dooms day, all
shall be laid open; when the heart and conscience shall be laid to the fire of
the last Judgment, which shall try every man's work; the most reserved thoughts
and aims thereof shall be made manifest; then God will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart, 1 Cor.
4. 5. Yea, then he will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 16.
For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, neither hid that
shall not be known. Luke 12. 2.

In the next place, Jurymen, stand forth and hear your charge; all good men
and true, see ye be, look to your oaths, see you break them not; let not favor
or affection, spleen or passion, draw you aside: perjury, a sin most dangerous,
almost unpardonable, because the perjured person does mortgage his soul to
eternal damnation; desiring God so to help him, as he swears truly; so that
if he fail in his oath, by not performing, if promissory; by not speaking the
truth, and whole truth, if assertory, he desires no favor, no mercy at Gods
hands; and then what a fearful case is he in? no favor he desires; and God
will give him according to his desires, and to his deserts; let him be sure of
it; for will not the Judge of all the earth do right?

Therefore in the last place, witnesses, and you that come to give evidence in
any matter, be well advised, look before ye leap: if by a false oath, or false
evidence, the innocent be oppressed, and Justice perverted, will not the Judge
of all the world revenge it? yes surely, he is a just Judge against false
witnesses, and false swearers; and threatens himself against false swearers, to
be a swift witness, Mal. 3.5. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 8. Eccles. hist. relates a
memorable example in this kind, upon three shameless Varlets, who falsely
accused Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, of a heinous crime, confirming it with
desperate imprecations? the first wished, if it were not true, that he might be
burnt to ashes; the second, that he might dye of the Jaundies; the third, that
he might lose both his eyes. Innocent Narcissus, not being able to resist them,
fled and hid himself: but shortly after God gave them their right; the first,
by the fall of one spark of fire in the night, had himself and all his family
consumed to ashes: the second was surrounded and tormented in his whole body,
with the disease he wished, and dyed miserably; the third seeing their ends,
and fearing vengeance, confessed the mischief, and mourned and wept for it,
till at length he lost both his eyes: or if ye should escape in this world,
will not vengeance attend you in the other? if ye sin against knowledge and
conscience, is it not a double sin? and will it not be repaid with a double
torment? yes, be sure it will; for the Judge of all the earth will do right.

I will shut up all with the Epilogue of Solomon, to his Book called
Ecclesiastes, the two last verses. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter; fear God, and keep bis Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man;
for God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good, or whether it be evil.

FINIS.

