A TRUE ACCOUNT OF The Proceedings, Sense and Advice of the People called
QUAKERS. At the Yearly Meeting of Faithful Friends and Brethren, begun in
London on the 28 th of the 3 d month, 1694. and held by Adjournment unto the 11
th of the month following, In order to put an end to the Divisions and
Differences among some of the People called Quakers in America. To which is
added, An account of the Proceedings of the Yearly Meeting at Burlington,
relating to the said Differences; showing the Dis-harmony of the two said
Meetings. As also. Some Queries to that Party of the Yearly Meeting at London,
who gave the aforesaid Judgment.

LONDON, Printed for R. Levis, MDCXCIV.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
THE following account of the People called Quakers is recommended to thy
Impartial Judgment, wherein thou may find a Party of them of the Yearly
Meeting at London, are proved guilty of endeavoring to Cloak and cover the
Antichristian Errors, and persecuting Practices of there Apostate Brethren in
Pensilvania, as will further appear by these following Queries, given forth by
an offended Christian Quaker, against the partial proceedings of Six Days
Controversy, and their False Judgment.

Prove* 17.15. He that Justifies the Wicked, and he that Condemns the Just,
even they both are Abomination to the Lord,

Robert Hannay.

ERRATA.
Page 3. line 19. for impatiently read in patiently.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF The Proceedings, Sense and Advice of the People called
QUAKERS. At the Yearly Meeting of Faithful Friends and Brethren, begun in
London on the 28 th of the 3 d month, 1694. and held by Adjournment unto the 11
th of the month following, In order to put an end to the Divisions and
Differences among some of the People called Quakers in America.
WHereas by Agreement of this Meeting, all Epistles directed to this Meeting,
should be read openly therein; and thereupon some Epistles from America, being
read in course, in which the differences between Geo. Keith, and others were
mentioned, and upon Notice thereof given him, he came into the Meeting and
desired to have a Paper Read, and to be heard in his own defense; which the
Meeting tenderly condescended unto; and whereas the said Geo. Keith did before
that, in the public Meeting of the Brethren belonging to this yearly Meeting,
openly and tenderly signify his earnest desire of Union, and that he might not
be cast off, and that the Breach might be made up, and that he would rather lay
down his Natural Life, then it should not be made up; with other Expressions of
the like Import, which did tenderly affect many Brethren; and also his open
confessions in diverse Meetings to the power and presence of God amongst us, and
with our Ministry. -- And also there being a General sense in this Meeting, of
a great and tender Compassion (as well as condesention) in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, with earnest Breathings and supplications to God, both with Regard to
Geo. Keith's help and preservation, and also with great respect to the peace of
the Church of Christ, and prosperity of the holy Truth, and great work of the
Lord God in our day, and the honor of his great and glorious Name, and our
Christian Reputation, as a Chosen people gathered by his divine Power and
Goodness to show forth his praise in our Age and Generation; and to Remove and
prevent Reproaches and Scandals, that tend to affect us, to our sorrow and
Grief, as a Christian Society and People; that the Mouth of Iniquity may be
stopped, and our Enemies, that seek occasion to blaspheme the holy Truth, and
reproach us, may be confounded by the great power of the Lord our God, for his
Name and Truths sake, which we are deeply concerned and Zealous for.

And we understand the Christian care and tender endeavors of our Friends and
Brethren here in London, has not been wanting, since they heard of the
Divisions, by Friendly and tender Advice, in the Love of God, in their
Epistles, in order to stop and Remove this Unhappy difference, and to Reprehend
these unsound and Erroneous Expressions, and show their dislike to these heats
that have been among some of them, Exhorting them to Brotherly Love, and
Christian Tenderness, and Warning them against Separation, or that Spirit that
would lead thereto, and expose the same to Reproach.

This Meeting also taking tender Notice of the Request of our Friends and
Brethren of the 6 weeks Meeting in London, for this Meeting to be concerned, in
order to hear and end the said differences, which they had in part heard
before, but had not oppertunity to hear fully: It was thereupon, in Brotherly
Love, assented unto by this Meeting, that as many Friends and Brethren of the
six Weeks Meeting as were formerly deputed by the six Weeks Meeting; and all
other Members of the same Meeting that should desire it, might be present and
Assistant with this Meeting, for the good ends aforesaid. And this Meeting
agreed, that after all the other public affairs should be over, as many
Members of the yearly Meeting as could attend the service, together with all
public faithful Friends that are free, should Remain and continue the yearly
Meeting, to hear, judge and determine, and endeavor to Quiet all the
differences between Geo. Keith and others concerned therein.

Proceedings thus far agreed to by this Meeting, in order to a full hearing of
Geo. Keith and others concerned in the said differences, much of six days were
spent, impatiently hearing the said differences, so far as they were related,
or made out unto us, both by the public Reading of several Printed Books and
Papers from G. K. and his Friends, relating to the differences, particularly
one book, entitled, A True Copy of Three Judgments, etc. another, entitled,
The Plea of the Innocent, etc. another, entitled, Some Reasons and Causes of
the late Separation, And also by Epistles, Papers and Certificates (from many
concerned on both sides) out of America, besides the great Patience of this
Meeting toward him, in frequently hearing him in his Defense and Complaints,
Allegations and Arguments; as also in diverse passages both by G. K. with his
Friend Tho. Budd; And Sam. Jennings with T. Ducket, on the other side, were
several times patiently heard Face to Face, insomuch that G. K. diverse times
acknowledged the Moderation of the Meeting.

The foregoing Causes and Reasons, How this Meeting came to be concerned in
this Weighty Affair, together with the manner of Proceedings, thus far being
sincerely related, we proceed likewise to give the true Sense, and Christian
Advice of this Meeting thereupon.

Concerning the Printed Books from G. K. and others of his Friends, relating to
those Differences and Divisions in some parts of America, it being proposed to
this Meeting, That Friends concerned might singly declare their Sense; which
they had liberty freely to do in the Fear of the Lord, whose Power was over the
Meeting. Thereupon many Weighty Testimonies were given in great Fear and
Tenderness of Spirit, That the exposing the Differences in Print to the World,
to the View of our Enemies, both in America and Europe, has been of great
dis-service to the Truth, and given great occasion of Offense and stumbling to
many, and of great Sorrow and Grief to us, and many Faithful Friends, opening
the Mouths of our Adversaries, Professors and others, to reproach the Truth and
Friends thereof. And it is the clear and general Sense of this Meeting, That G.
Keith, and the rest therein concerned with him, were not acted in God's Wisdom
and Counsel therein, and that they ought to have had more regard to God's
Glory, and the Reputation of our Christian Society and Profession. And although it
appears that some few persons have given Offense, either through Erroneous
Doctrines, unsound Expressions, or Weakness, Forwardness, Want of Wisdom and
Right Understanding; yet the spreading thereof in Print, and in that
aggravating manner as they are, and sending them over into England, and other
parts of the World (unconcerned in the differences) appears not to be in God's
Peaceable Wisdom, nor consistent with the good Order of Truth among us, since
we were a People. And therefore it is the tender Advice and Counsel, That G.
Keith should either call in these Books, or at least publish something
Innocently, and effectually to clear the Body of the People called Quakers, and
their Ministers, from those Gross Errors charged on some few in America; and
retract the bitter Language in them, so far as he is concerned, which seems to
have too much appeared in some few particular persons on both sides, thereby
giving occasion to Truth's Adversaries to asperse us, and to look upon the
Quakers rendering Reviling for Reviling one against another; which is of an ill
savor, and to be removed by God's Power and Truth, and the Root and Spirit
thereof, in whomsoever it is.

And as to the Separation among Friends in America, arising from the unhappy
differences, and the dividing some Meetings there; It has been, and is to the
great reproach of Truth and Friends, and dishonor of our holy Professions, and
hinderance of Truth's Prosperity, and the great Grief and Trouble of Faithful
Friends, both in England and other parts of the World. And how far soever G.
Keith has been concerned therein (which the general Sense of Friends here is,
does lie at his door;) He ought now sincerely to use his utmost Endeavors, and
Interest with his Friends concerned, to remove it, and to help forward a
Re-uniting and Amicable composure for the holy Truth's sake, and the Clory of
God, and Peace of his People.

And wherein G. Keith apprehends himself injured, or aggreived by any
particular persons, he ought to exercise a Spirit of Forgiveness, as he would
for Christ's sake be forgiven of God and his People, accordingly as he himself
has sometimes openly declared. And we desired the same in all others concerned
toward him, as in relation to personal Injuries or Offenses.

And as concerning those few late Magistrates (professing the Truth) concerned
against G. Keith, in their Sessions-Proceedings, and Order of Sessions
published against him, and in their fining him, and some few others (professing
the Truth) about words of Reflection, or such like; It is the Sense of Friends,
That G. Keith, and others with him, had been, and were under an hour of
Temptation and Provocation; And those Magistrates concerned, did too much let
in the Provocation over them, and did too highly resent Reflection; and it had
been better they had not meddled with it, but quietly have born it, and passed
it by; and had they kept in the Wisdom of God, these things might have been
prevented. There appears to us to have been too much height of Spirit on both
sides, and both had need to be deeply humbled, both Provokers and Provoked. Tho
the Legality, or Illegality of the Proceedings, according to Men, it appears
not proper for this Meeting to meddle with, howbeit the Book of the Printed
Trial of the Proceeding, where Quakers are represented to persecute Quakers,
has done great hurt in this Nation, and other parts, and occasioned great
Reproach upon the said People in this Nation, whereby many of our Enemies
insult over us, as if we were a People swayed by a persecuting Spirit, saying,
We knew what the Quakers would do if they had power in their hands. And
therefore Friends ought to be cleared from that Reproach; howbeit the said Book
appearing scandalous in diverse parts of it, Inquiry was made in this Meeting,
who was the Author and Owner of it; and G. Keith disowned it to be his; but he
owned that part of it which concerned his Trial, and T. Budd said, he was not
willing to discover the Author's Name.

Therefore our Sense is, That the Publishers of that Book (if they profess
Truth) should call it in, and condemn its publication, and sending it over
hither, to our great Reproach, and Injury of the Truth and people of God.

We understand from diverse Epistles and Testimonies from many of our Friends in
America, corresponding with us in Brotherly Love, That they appear to be in a
Spirit of Love, and of a sound Mind and Judgment in the things of God, in the
Faith of Christ, and principle Doctrines of Christianity; and particularly,
besides other Epistles, we observe one bearing date the 17 th of Month 4. 1692.
signed with near 30 Names, from a Meeting of Ministering Friends, wherein they
do appear sincerely to believe and confess their Faith in Christ, according to
the Scriptures, both as to his Conception, Birth, Life, Sufferings, Miracles,
Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession, and that all he did and
suffered, was to complete our Redemption; and that they expected Salvation by
no other Name than by the Name of Jesus, to which every knee shall bow, and
Tongue confess; and that of the Resurrection and General Judgment, they believe
them according as they are declared in Scripture* Thus far they. Nevertheless,
if there be any such Gross Errors, False Doctrines, or Mistakes, held by any
professing Truth in America, as are either against the Validity of Christ's
Sufferings, Blood, Resurrection, Ascension, or Glory in the Heavens, according
as they are set forth in the Scriptures, or any ways tending to the denial of
the Heavenly Man Christ; such persons ought to be diligently instructed and
admonished by Faithful Friends in those parts, and not be exposed by any to
public Reproach; and where the Error proceeds from Ignorance, and darkness of
their Understanding, they ought the more meekly and gently to be informed But
if any shall wilfully persist in Error, in point of Faith, after duly informed,
then such to be further dealt with according to Gospel Order, that the Truth,
Church and Body of Christ may not suffer by any particular pretended Member,
that is so corrupt.

It was very observable in this our solemn Meeting, that G. Keith, in order to
remove some scruples, that might be in the Minds of some concerning his belief,
or Doctrine about the Sufficiency of the Light within, did voluntarily Declare
in these words, viz. I know no man upon the face of the Earth, that professes a
Belief of the Sufficiency of the Light within to Salvation, more than I profess
or hold, and have always professed since I came among Friends, viz. That the
Light within, being God, the Word and the Spirit in every Man, is sufficient to
Reveal to every Man all that is needful to his Eternal Salvation: Which
Confession did appear to have a tendency to the Satisfaction of the Meeting in
that respect; and it is earnestly desired, and tenderly advised by this
Meeting, that G. Keith have a tender regard to our Ancient Testimony, for the
Sufficiency of the Light, the Word of Faith, the Immortal Seed and Spirit of
Truth within, and to the plainness and simplicity of the Preaching of it from
the beginning, whereby many have been turned to God; which Testimony and
Ministration the Lord has signally blessed and prospered by his power and
presence, for the Gathering, confirming and Building up of many thousands of
his People, in the most holy faith; Whereof there are many Living Witnesses yet
Remaining.

Also this Meeting, in true and tender Love, for Christ's sake, desire and
admonish the said Geo. Keith (and even for the peace of his own soul) to watch
against his Human Infirmity, and Weakness appearing therein, and against such
passionate Behavior, as thence appeared diverse times in this Meeting, to the
trouble and Grief of many Ancient and faithful Friends; and humbly to Wait upon
God, to feel his power, to subdue his own Passions, and to be very Watchful
against the same, and against the Enemy that takes Advantage thereupon to hurt
him, or at any time to hurry him into disorder of Spirit at unawares; which we
pray God make him truly sensible of, and watchful against, for his own Inward
peace, and for Good Example and behavior in the Church of Christ. Howbeit, we
do declare, that the said Geo. Keith did diverse times openly acknowledge his
Passions, Weaknesses and Infirmities; so that this Meeting did the more
Exercise Compassion, Charity and Patience toward him.

And this Meetings tender Advice to G. Keith also is, to live in Peace and
Charity among Friends and Brethren here in this City, Nation, and else where,
and to avoid all public and apparent Reflections upon Ministering Friends, or
their Ministry; and likewise all Ministering Friends to forbear the like toward
him, that no occasion of stumbling or Reproach may be given thereby, nor any
Brother Hurt in his Testimony. And as G. Keith shall apptove himself in Charity
and Reconciliation with Friends and Brethren here in London and elsewhere, they
are desired accordingly to be tender and kind to him, as he sincerely approves
himself to be a Man of Peace and Charity toward all, and Answers our Christian
Advice herein.

And lastly, This our Solemn Meeting, in the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, does Exhort and Charge all them that have separated, to meet together
with other Friends, in the Love of God, and humbly to wait for his Power to
Repair the Breach, Reconcile and Reunite them in his tender Love, and earnestly
Supplicates the God of all our Mercies, to remove all Prejudice and Offenses
out of their Minds, and to Effect this good End, which our Souls have deeply,
and in great Humility and Brokenness of Heart, Traveled for in this Meeting,
and are still in a Travel for, that the great Reproach may be removed, Gods
Truth Exalted, and his Churches Peace Restored and preserved.

And if any man think himself a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge, we
have the Mind of Christ in these Matters, to whom we Recommend you, and in
whose Love we Salute you all.

The God of Peace be with you, and bruise Satan under your Feet.

Signed on behalf of the said Meeting and their Appointment. By Benj. Bealing.

Some Queries to that Party, or Faction, of the Yearly Meeting at London, who
gave the aforesaid Judgment.
Friends,
I Being deeply sensible of the renewed burdens, and afflictions, and grief of
Spirit, which your Paper of False Judgment will bring upon many Hundreds of the
poor despised, persecuted Witnesses of the Crucified Jesus, in Pensilvania and
elsewhere; I thought my self obliged in Conscience, to publish in Print the
Judgment given forth by the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, against the Twenty
Eight False Judges, together with these following Queries. By all which it will
be discovered to all Impartial and Unprejudiced Readers, which of the Two
Yearly Meetings were guided by the Wisdom and Counsel of God, and Infallible
Spirit of Christ; the Judgment given by them of Burlington, or the other given
by that Party or Faction of this Yearly Meeting at London, they being so
Opposite and Contradictory, in matter of Fact, the one to the other, viz. That
of Burlington, being signed by Seventy Friends of Known Integrity and Good
Conversation, wherein there does appear a more convincing Demonstration and
Ground of Truth, that they were acted in, and by the Light of a tender
Conscience, as Impartial and Unprejudiced Men, who had not set their Hands to
any Papers of difference on either side. The other, viz. that Party of this
yearly Meeting at London, giving Just Cause of Suspicion that they were not
acted by the Counsel of God, as partly appears by their refusing to set their
Hands to their own Judgment, when much importuned thereto by us, but too
Pharisee-like, laying that heavy burden upon the Back of their Hired Clerk,
which they themselves would not touch with one of the least of their Fingers.
(so as to Sign it.)

Query I.
WHether that Party or Faction of this Yearly Meeting, have not discovered
themselves to be too like unto their Persecuting Brethren in Pensilvania, by
endeavoring to cover and lessen their Crimes?

Query II.
Whether it has not been sufficiently proved that some of your Brethren in
America, are guilty of holding such Damnable Errors and Doctrines of Devils,
that no Protestant Society would tolerate? (If this you deny) the Letters and
Papers Writ and Signed by their own hands which were read in your yearly
Meeting, may be Printed to further Demonstrate, and prove the same.

Query III.
Why are you so partial as to order George Keith and Friends to call in their
Printed Books, and not also to order Samuel Jennings, and his Brethren, to call
in the false and rash Judgments given forth by them against George Keith and
Friends, without any due Conviction, Hearing or Trial, especially that of the
twenty Eight Ministers, that being the rotten basis and foundation on which all
the rest are built?

Query IV.
And how do you make it appear, that that part of your yearly Meeting, that
have blamed G. K. and Friends, was led by the Spirit of Truth, and that yearly
Meeting at Burlington that were unanimous in clearing G. K. were not led
thereby, but by the Spirit of Error; unless ye will say that the Meetings in
America have a dependence on the Meeting here, as Samuel Jennings openly
affirmed to you in your and our hearing, and to erect to your selves a new
Rome, or Metropolitan Church in London, which G. K. openly opposed in your and
our hearing, saying, The Meetings in America, or any where else, had no more
dependence on you here, than ye had on them; nor had ye any more promise of
Infallibility annexed, or Intailed to you, than any other Meeting of Friends;
and G. K. blaming the word Dependence, W. P. bid retract that word Dependence,
and call it Relation; to which G. K. replied, He did own all Meetings every
where related one to another, but without any Dependence of one another, and
did own our giving and receiving Advice to and from one another; but the
Dependence of all must be upon Christ, on whom God has Promised, He will hang
all the Glory of his Fathers House, and all the Vessels of small and great
quantity, (read Isa. 22.24.) and another of the Ministers said in his
Declaration in one of these yearly Meetings, in your and our hearing, that this
Meeting was the Mother of Churches, without having any check given him by any
of you; but we believe that Jerusalem above is that Mother of Churches, and not
the yearly Meeting at London, nor any where else upon Earth.

Query V.
How could you lay the Separation on us, seeing Thomas Lloyd went away twice
from the Monthly Meeting, and taking a skirt of the Meeting with him, and
denying the Monthly Meeting to be a Meeting, and their Judgment to be a true
Judgment, tho ye your selves cannot deny it to be a true and seasonable
Judgment. See a true Copy of it in Reasons and Causes of Separation. (page 10.)
And seeing it was sufficiently proved that Thomas Lloyd, and his party did
first Separate from their Brethren, by leaving of the Bank Meeting eight
Months; and that the Publishing of the False Judgment of the 28, and their
forcing the Reading of it in Monthly Meetings, against the consent of many of
the Principal Members of said Meetings, did occasion the dividing of the other
Meetings.

Query VI.
Why should you refuse to sign your Paper of false Judgment, and lay it on your
hired Clerk, who was mostly absent from these Meetings, and therefore extremely
Ignorant of the matter of fact? Was it not because you know that it was only a
prejudiced party of you that are the Authors of it, and not the yearly Meeting;
for it cannot be thought that all the Members of so solemn Assembly should be
so greatly blinded, as to consent to the Publishing of such a paper, that is so
full of Errors and Mistakes.

Query VII.
Why have you so readily and heartily received, owned and commended your
Brethrens Scriptural Confession of Faith, seeing it does not appear they have
Condemned their Antichristian Errors, and unsound Notions, which they should
have first done, before you had received them into Communion, and owned them
Sound in the Christian Faith; otherwise they may be still guilty of these gross
Errors, notwithstanding their Confession according to Scripture; for the
Papists, as well as they, will confess in Scripture Words, but differ in the
true Sense of it, from sound Christians; something of which will appear by the
following Query.

Query VIII.
Why do you not tell your Brethren in Pensilvania what those Errors are which
you reprehend, and would have them disown, seeing they were read to you in the
Meeting, out of many of their own Manuscripts and Papers, signed by their own
hands (as namely) that of John Dellaval, who charged G. K. of being guilty of
Heresy, in denying a Fundamental Doctrine of the Quakers, his Heresy being,
That the Light within is not sufficient to Salvation, without something else;
G. K. meaning by that, something else, the Man Christ Jesus, etc. and John
Dellaval defining Heresy by a Popish Definition. (not saying with all sound
Protestants,) that it is repugnant to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, (but
to the Church) meaning his Brethren.

Also John Humphrey's saying, He is grieved to hear some say, they expect to be
Justified by that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem; and further saying, Is not
this to divide Christ; to use that Term Christ within, and Christ without, and
diverse other blasphemous Expressions of his read in your hearing.

Likewise Jacob Tallnar his charging G. K. with impious Blasphemy, and denying
the Lord that bought him; for his saying in his Catechism, That Death both
Spiritual and Temporal was the Effect of Adam 's Fall; in which said Paper he
positively asserteth gross Antinomian Doctrines and Principles, as that men's
sins are forgiven them when Christ died on the Cross; and blaming G. K. for not
giving all that belongs to Christ without; as others of his Party blame G. K.
for not giving all that belongs to Christ within.

As also the Record of their Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, that clears
Thomas Fitzwater of his charging G. K. of saying, the Light [ within] is not
sufficient to Salvation, without something else; with diverse other Vile Errors
and Blasphemies, contained in diverse other of their Papers, signed with their
own Hands; the Original Copies whereof were read at one of the said Meetings in
your hearing.

Query IX.
Why are ye so partial, to leave out these Material, and very Necessary Words
of G. K. his Declaration in your hearing, after he had said, He believed that
the Light within, being God, the Word and the Spirit, in every Man, is
sufficient to reveal to every Man all that is needful to his Eternal Salvation,
viz. not excluding the Man Christ Jesus, his Death, Sufferings, etc. and
Intercession, etc. from being jointly concerned in our Salvation; as also his
telling you, That the Faith of him, as he died for us, etc. is necessary to our
Christianity and Salvation.

Query X.
Why are you so partial, so to misconstrue G. K. his Godly Zeal and
Earnestness, in defense of his Christian Testimony, calling it Passionate
Behavior in your Meeting; whereas ye take no notice not only of the greatly
Passionate Behavior of diverse of you toward him, often interrupting him in his
Just Defense, and in diverse of you speaking to him at once, nor of other diverse
gross Abuses he met with from some of you, whom he did prove manifestly had
falsely accused him in your hearing; Nor of Samuel Jennings attesting the Name
of God to a Lie, as G. K proved to you in your hearing, from a Paper signed by
Samuel Jennings his own Hand? Do ye indeed speak Righteousness, O Congregation?
Do ye judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? Psalm. 58.1, 2.

Robert Hannay.

From the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh
Days of the Seventh Month, Anno 1692.
To our Friends and Brethren in the Truth, both in Pensilvania, East and
West-Jarsey, and elsewhere, as there may be occasion, to be Read in their
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, as they in the Wisdom of God shall see meet.
WHEREAS there has been an Unhappy Difference, of late, between our Friends,
Geo. Keith, and the rest concerned with him, and our Friends Thomas Lloyd, John
Simcock, Sam. Jennings, and others joined with them, which has tended to the
Great Reproach of Truth and Friends, and Dishonor of our Holy Profession. And
whereas there has been a Paper signed by Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jennings, John
Simcock, and others joined with them, being in Number Twenty eight, of those
who have opposed George Keith, and the Friends joined with him, whereby he is
condemned, as a Person unfit and unqualified to be a Minister of Christ, and as
a Person without the fear of God before his eyes, etc. And whereas the said
Paper of Condemnation has been the occasion of setting up many separate
Meetings, as well as of other Confusion and Disturbance, (both privately and
publicly) in these Parts. And whereas the said George Keith, and others joined
with him, being offended with the said Judgment, have appealed to the Spirit of
Truth and true Judgment of all faithful Friends at this Yearly Meeting, and
have requested (by a Second Paper sent to the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest
concerned with him) That they might have a fair Hearing and Trial before
impartial Friends, (who have not taken part to the signing Papers sent to each
other, on either side) the Second Day of the said Meeting, about an hour after
the breaking up of the Meeting for Public Worship; and we whose Names are
hereunto subscribed, being extremely grieved and troubled, under a sense of the
Reproaches the Truth has met withal, by reason of the said unhappy Difference,
yet having not concerned our selves actually in the said Difference on either
side, being met at the said Meeting House, with true Desires to the Lord, that
he would make us instrumental to put an end to the said Difference, and truly
make up the said Breach, before it grow wider, according to the Request of the
said George Keith, and the rest of the Friends joined with him in their said
Appeal: And the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest concerned, (though again
desired, by two Messengers from the Meeting, to appear, and they) refusing the
Meeting, adjourned till an hour after the Public Meeting the next day; and
then being assembled, and the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest concerned still
refusing to come (although the said Thomas Lloyd, had lately before advised the
said George Keith, to make Application to the Yearly Meeting in this Case, (as
Diverse of us can witness) and the said George Keith, and the rest concerned,
laying their Complaint before us, and the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest
concerned, not appearing, (though again desired several times) our Expectations
and Desires, (with respect to that effectual and absolute healing the said
Breach) is in some measure frustrated. Notwithstanding whereof, having heard
the Papers on both sides read, and having weightily and deliberately considered
them, do give it as our Sense and Judgment, That the said George Keith, and his
Friends concerned in the said Paper of Condemnation, are not guilty of the
Charges and Censures therein contained; and that therefore, for the Honor,
Prosperity, and Welfare of Truth, and Peace and Quietness of the Churches of
Christ in these Parts, and elsewhere, the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of
the said Twenty eight Persons, forthwith Re-call their said Paper of
Condemnation, and that they condemn the same by a Writing under their Hands,
directed to all the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, whereunto the said Paper
was directed; And that they forbear offering to speak, by way of public
Testimony in Meetings, till they have so done. And we do also give it as our
Judgment, That those Public Friends who are charged with Misdemeanors, and
Ill Behavior in their Lives and Conversations, do forbear speaking in Public
Meetings by way of Testimony, till they clear themselves, and make Satisfaction
to their Brethren: And that all Public Friends on both sides, forbear all
Railing and Reviling one another, either publicly or privately, which has
only this tendency, to dishonor Truth, and lay Stumbling Blocks in the Way of
the Weak; but that in such Case they observe the Primitive Churches Order,
established by Christ and his Apostles, and practiced among Friends.

Signed by Us, in behalf of Our Selves, and many more Friends, who are one with
us herein. Robert Turner, Elias Burling, John Reid, Charles Read, Thomas
Coborne, Harmon Vpdengraves, Thomas Powel; Nathaniel Fitzrandal, Joseph
Richards, Edmund Wells; Thomas Kimber, John Neall, Anthony Woodward, Andrew
Smith, William Hixon, John Panceast, Henry Burcham, Thomas Hearse, John Jones,
Joseph Willcox, Thomas Godfrey, John Budd, Roger Park, Caleb Wheatly, Edward
White, Thomas Gladwin, Thomas Rutter, Edward Smith, Benjamin Morgan, Joseph
Sharp, William Thomas, John Bainbridge, John Snowden, William Black, William
Snowden, Abraham Brown, John Hampton, Daniel Bacon, Joseph Adams, Edward Guy,
Barnard Devonish, Samuel Ellis, Thomas Cross, James Moore, Thomas Jenner, John
Harper, Robert Wheeler, Nathaniel Walton, Robert Roe, Peter Boss, Thomas
Bowls, William Budd, James Silver, Samuel Tailor, Griffith Jones, William
Righton, Thomas Kendal, Samuel Houghton, Emanuel Smith, Peter Daite, Richard
Sery, George Willcox, William Wells, Isaac Jacobs van Bibet. Cornelius Scevers,
William Snead, David Sherkis, John Carter. Henry Paxon, Thomas Tindal.


FINIS.

