THE LAST WORDS OF THE Reverend, Pious, and Learned Dr. HAMMOND.

Being Two PRAYERS FOR THE Peaceful Resettlement OF THIS CHURCH and STATE.

LONDON, Printed for Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard* 1696.

Prayers for the Church and State.
Prayer I.
O Blessed Lord, who in thine infinite mercy did vouchsafe to plant a
glorious Church among us, and now in thy just judgment have permitted our sins
and follies to root it up; be pleased at last to resume thoughts of Peace
toward us, that we may do the like to one another. Lord, look down from
Heaven, the Habitation of thy Holiness, and behold the Ruins of a desolate
Church; and compassionate to see her in the dust. Behold her, O Lord, not only
broken but crumbled, divided into so many Sects and Fractions, that she no
longer represents the Ark of the God of Israel, where the Covenant and the
Manna were conserved, but the Ark of Noah, filled with all various sorts of
unclean Beasts: and to complete our misery and guilt, the Spirit of Division
has insinuated it self as well into our Affections as our Judgments; that
Badge of Discipleship which thou recommendedst to us, is cast off, and all the
contrary wrath and bitterness, anger and clamor, called in to maintain and
widen our breaches. O Lord, how long shall we thus violate and defame that
Gospel of peace that we profess? How long shall we thus madly defeat our
selves, lose that Christianity which we pretend to strive for? O thou which
make Men to be of one mind in an House, be pleased so to unite us, that we
may be perfect^y j^^n'd together in the same min^, and in the sam^ (...)ent.
And now tha^ (...) Civil Affairs there seems some aptness to a co^posure, O let
not our Spiritual Disserences be more unreconcileable Lord, let not the
roughest winds blow out of the Sanctuary, let not those which should be
Ambassadors for Peace, still sound a Trumpet for War: but do thou reveal thy
self to all our Eliahs in that still small Voice; which may teach them to echo
thee in the like meek treating with others. Lord, let no unseasonable stissness
of those that are in the right, no perverse obstinancy of those that are in the
wrong, hinder the closing of our wounds; but let the one instrust in meekness,
and be thou pleased to give the other repentance to the acknowledgment of the
truth. To this end do thou, O Lord, mollify all exasperate minds, take off all
animosities and prejudices, contemp^ and heart-burnings, and by uniting their
hearts prepare for the reconciling their opinions: And that nothing may
intercept the clear sight of thy truth, Lord, let all private and secular
Designs be totally deposited, that gain may no longer be the measure of our
Godliness, but that the one great and common concernment of Truth and Peace may
be unanimously and vigorously pursued. Lord, the hearts of all Men are in thy
hands, O be thou pleased to let thy Spirit of Peace overshadow the minds of all
contending Parties; and if it be thy will, restore this Church to her pristine
state, renew her days as of old; let her escape out of Egypt be so entire, that
not an hoof may be left behind: but if thy wisdom see it not yet a season for
so full a deliverance, Lord, defer not, we beseech thee, such a degree of it,
as may at least secure her a being; if she cannot recover her Beauty, yet, O
Lord, grant her Health, such a soundness of Constitution as may preserve her
from dissolution. Let thy Providence find out some good Samaritans to cure her
present Wounds: and to whomsoever thou shall commit that important Work, Lord,
give them skillful hands and compassionate hearts; direct them to such
applications as may most speedily, and yet most soundly heal the hurt of the
Daughter of Sion; and make them so advert to the interests both of Truth and
Peace, that no lawful condescension may be omitted, nor any unlawful made. And
do thou who art both the wonderful Counselor and Prince of Peace, so guide and
prosper all Pacifick endeavors, that all our distractions may be composed, and
our Jerusalem may again become a City at unity in it self; that those happy
Primitive days may at length revert, wherein Vice was the only Heresy; that
all our intestine cententions may be converted into a vigorous opposition of
our common Enemy, our unbrotherly Feuds into a Christian Zeal against all that
exalts it self against the obedience of Christ. Lord hear us, and ordain peace
for us, even for his sake whom thou have ordained our Peace maker, Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Prayer II.
O Most gracious Lord, who do not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children
of Men, who smitest not till the importunity of our sins enforce thee, and then
correctest in measure; we thy unworthy Creatures humbly acknowledge that we
have abundantly tasted of this patience and lenity of thine. To what an
enormous height were our sins arrived, ever thou began'st to visit them! and
when thou could no longer forbear, yet mastering thy Power, thou have not
proportioned thy vengeance to our crimes, but to thy own gracious design of
reducing and reclaiming us. Lord, had the first stroke of thy hand been
exterminatings, our guilts had justified the method; but thou have proceeded by
such easy and gentle degrees, as witness how much thou desired'st to be
interrupted, and show us, that all that sad weight we have long groaned under,
has been accumulated only by our own incorrigibleness. It Is now, O Lord, these
many years that this Nation has been in the Furnace, and yet our dross wastes
not, but increases; and it is owing only to thy unspeakable Mercy, that we, who
would not be purified, are not consumed; that we remain a Nation, who cease not
to be a most sinful and provoking Nation. O Lord, let not this long-suffering
of thine serve only to upbraid our obstinacy, and enhance our guilt; but let it
at last have the proper effect on us, melt our hearts, and lead us to
repentance. And, O that this may be the day for us, thus to discern the things
that belong to our Peace! that all who are (yea, and all who are not) cast down
this day in an external humiliation, may by the operation of thy mighty Spirit
have their Souls laid prostrate before thee in a sincere contrition! O thou who
can out of the very stones raise up Children unto Abraham, work our stony
flinty hearts into such a temper as may be malleable to the impressions of thy
Grace, that all the sinners in Sion may tremble; that we may not by a persering
obstionacy seal to our selves both temporal and eternal ruin, but instead of
our mutinous complaining at the punishments of our sins, search and try our
ways, and turn again to the Lord. O be thou pleased to grant us this one grand
fundamental Mercy, that we who so impatiently thirst after a change without us,
may render that possible and safe by this better and more necessary change
within us; that our sins may not, as they have so often done, interpose and
eclipse that Light which now begins to break out upon us. Lord, thy Dove seems
to approach us with an Olive Branch in her mouth: On let not our filth and
noisomness chase her away; but grant us that true repentance which may atone
thee, and that Christian Charity which may reconcile us with one another. Lord,
let not our breach either with thee, or among our selves, be incurable, but by
making up the first, prepare us for the healing of the latter. And because, O
Lord, the way to make us one Fold is to have one Shepherd, be pleased to put us
all under the conduct of him to whom that charge belongs; bow the hearts of
this People as of one Man, that the only contention may be, who shall be most
forward in bringing back our David. O let none reflect on their past Guilts, as
an Argument to persevere, but repent, and to make their return so sincere as
may qualify them, not only for his but thy Mercy. And, Lord, be pleased so to
guide the hearts of all who shall be entrusted with that great Concernment of
settling this Nation, that they may weigh all their deliberations in the Balance
of the Sanctuary, that Conscience, not Interest, may be the ruling principle,
and that they may render to Coesar the things that are Coesar's, and to God the
things that are God's; that they may become healers of our breaches, and happy
Repairers of the sad Ruins both in Church and State: And grant, O Lord, that
as those sins which made them are become National, so the repentance may be
National also, and that evidenced by the proper fruits of it, by zeal of
restoring the rights both of thee and thine Anointed. And do thou, O Lord, so
dispose all hearts, and remove all obstacles, that none may have the will, much
less the power, to hinder his peaceable restitution. And, Lord, let him bring
with him an heart so entirely devoted to thee, that he may wish his own Honor
only as a means to advance thine. O let the precepts and example of his blessed
Father never depart from his Mind; and as thou were pleased to perfect the one
by suffering, so perfect the other by acting thy will; that He may be a blessed
Instrument of replanting the power in stead of the form of Godliness among us,
of restoring Christian virtue in a profane and almost barbarous Nation. And if
any wish him for any distant ends, if any desire his shadow as a shelter for
their riots and licentiousness, O let him come a great, but happy defeat to all
such, not bring fuel, but cure to their inordinate appetites; and by his
example as a Christian, and his Authority as a King, so invite to good, and
restrain from evil, that he may not only release our temporal, but our
spiritual Bondage, suppress those foul and scandalous Vices which have so long
captivated us, and by securing our inward, provide for the perpetuating our
outward Peace. Lord, establish thou his Throne in Righteousness; make him a
signal iustrument of thy glory and our happiness, and let him reap the fruits
of it in comfort here, and in bliss hereafter, so that this Earthly Crown may
serve to enhance and enrich his Heavenly. Grant this, O King of Kings, for the
take and intercession of our Blessed Mediator Jesus Christ,

THE END.

