A SERMON Preached at the Church of St. Mary le Bow, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR
Reformation of Manners, December 26. School.

By JOHN HANCOCK, D. D. Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of Bedford.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1699.

TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners, In the Cities of London and
Westminster.
Gentlemen,
I Am sensible this Discourse is too mean to deserve the good Opinion you
seemed to have of it, when you desired it might be Printed. However since you
were pleased to think, it might be in any measure subservient to that Noble
Design you have in hand, I submit to your Judgment; and such as it is, I here
present it to your and the Public View. All I can say for it is, that I hope
it is hearty (as I my self am) for that good Work you have Undertaken: Which
that it may, through the Blessing of God, prosper in your Hands; that you may
have all Encouragement from the Civil Magistrate; that other Places may so far
follow your Example, that not only this City, but the Nation, may find the
happy Effects of your Pious Zeal; and that your selves may be rewarded for it,
even in this World, as I doubt not you will be in another, is the earnest
Desire and Prayer of,

Your Faithful Servant in the Lord, John Hancock.


JER. V. 29. Shall I not visit for these Things? Shall not my Soul be avenged
on such a Nation as this?


IN this Chapter the Prophet makes a very lively Representation, and doleful
Complaint, of the general defection of Jerusalem from their Duty.

This he expresses first in general Terms. Ver. 1. Run ye to and fro through
the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if ye can find a Man, if there be any that executes Judgment, and I
will pardon it.

Which words, I suppose, must be understood as an Hyperbolical Expression, of
the great Wickedness of that Age. That is, there were very few that lived a
Religious Life, in comparison of the very great numbers that gave themselves up
to all Impiety.

And those few that were Religious, were so discouraged, and overborn by the
reigning Impieties of the Times, that they durst scarce appear; they were not
to be found.

The Case was much the same with respect to Impiety then, as it was with
respect to Idolatry in the time of Abab. The Prophet thought there were none
that kept to the Worship of God, though God had reserved to himself Seven
Thousand that had not bowed the Knee to the Image of Baal.

But though the Prophet could find no Religion in the Streets, and broad Places
of Jerusalem, among the Common People, he imputes this in some measure to their
Ignorance; yet it seemed reasonable he should expect other Things among the
more knowing and better sort of People. Ver. 4, 5. Then I said, These are poor,
they are foolish; for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the Judgment of
their God. I will get me to the great Men, and will speak unto them, for they
have known the way of the Lord, and the Judgment of their God: But these have
altogether broken the Yoke, and burst the Bonds.

It Is sad to hear, (and yet more sad it should be suffered,) the Oaths and
dreadful Imprecations, that grate our Ears, as we walk the Streets, from the
Mouths of the meanest sort of People; but it is some Excuse that some of them
perhaps know no better. But that the Rich, and wise, and Noble, that have more
Knowledge, and better Breeding, should stoop so low, as to be guilty of such
mean Vices, is a Wonder, and ought to be for a Lamentation. If such will
neither consider their Obligations to God, to their Country, or to their own
Honor: If they break the Yoke of God's Law, and burst the Bonds of their great
Obligations to him; they as well as others, must one day bear their own burden.

Then the Prophet gives a black Roll of the Impieties of those Times. Some of
which I shall take notice of.

First, Their Idolatry, ver. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy Children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. God be thanked we have
not yet so far forsaken God, as to swear by a false God, (or notwithstanding
the late Hopes of our Enemies,) to worship the true God, in an Idolatrous way.
But if false and vain Swearing, by the Name of the true God, be Crimes of the
blackest dye, the one we see, and the other we have reason to fear, have got
too great a footing among us.

Secondly, Their Adultery, ver. 7, 8. When I had fed them to the full, they
assembled themselves by troops in the Harlots houses. This I doubt is but too
true a description of our Times.

But we are called from the Thoughts of this with the amazing News of some
among us, that are sunk into the deepest mire with the very worst of Heathens,
as the Apostle gives their Character, Romans 1. that are resolved to be Wicked,
not only in spite of Reason, and Religion, but of Nature too. If any more of
these can be discovered, may they receive from the just Indignation of the
Civil Magistrate, that Recompense of their Error which is meet.

Thirdly, To mention no more, He reflects upon their incorrigibleness under all
God's dealings with them; neither his Judgments, nor his Mercies, had their
kindly work upon them. Not his Judgments; ver. 3. Thou have stricken them, but
they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive Correction. Not his Mercies; ver. 24. Neither say they in their heart,
Let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives Rain, the former and the latter
Rain in his season.

This is too much our own Case. We see but little effect as to all the various
Dispensations of God to these Nations; neither his Mercies have as yet lead us,
nor his Judgments frighted us unto Repentance.

So that we have just Reason to fear, be may say of us, as he did here of the
Jews, Shall I not visit for these things? Shall not my Soul be avenged on such
a Nation as this?

Shall I not visit for these things?

When at any time Sin and Impiety becomes common and almost universal; When it
grows bold and impudent; When Men declare their Sin as Sodom, and hide it not;
When they are so far depraved in their Judgments as to defend it, and are come
to Sin upon Principles; When they scoff at Religion, and attempt by pouring the
utmost Contempt upon it, to drive it out of the World, especially when there is
too general an insensibility of the Debauchery of the Times; we may think it
high time for God to appear in vindication of his own Honor, from the Contempt
of an ungodly World.

And we may be sure, sooner or later, he will do it. It Is very fit we should
expect this, whether we consider the Declarations of his Word, or the Methods
of his Providence.

1. The Declarations of his Word. Solomon says, Righteousness will exalt a
Nation; but Sin is the Reproach, and will be the Ruin of any People. The
Prophet Esaias tells the Jews, Isa. 1. If they be willing and obedient, they
shall eat the Good of the Land; but if they refuse and rebel, they shall be
devoured with the Sword. But Scriptures to this purpose are so numerous, that
it is needless to insist upon them.

It Is true the Sins and Impieties of wicked Men, have of themselves (at least
many of them) a most pernicious Influence upon the Public Good. Saint James
tells us, most of those Wars and Confusions, that infest the World, spring
originally from Men's Lusts, that war in their Members. For Instance;

A prodigal and profuse way of Living, when it grows in Fashion, begets
Poverty; that improves into Discontent; which often ends in some Public
Disturbance. How often do Ambition and Covetousness, upon very small occasions,
disturb Government, and destroy the Peace and Quiet of the World.

But if this were not so, as long as there is a just God in Heaven, the bold
Impieties of Men on Earth, must meet with condign Punishment. Public
Debaucheries will seldom fail to draw down Public Judgments.

2. This is agreeable to the Methods of God's Providence. The History of all
Ages, is but one continued Confirmation of this Truth. We find it has been so,
and we may well conclude it will be so still. We read in the Book of Judges,
that when the Israelites sinned against God, he raised up the most contemptible
People to be their Oppressors. So that as it is very fit that God should, so we
see he has, and may be sure sooner or later he will, visit for the Wickedness
of a People.

Well if these Things be so, how justly may we of these Nations expect the
sharpest Visitation! How may we wonder at the Goodness and Patience of that God
that is yet pleased to prolong our Tranquillity.

God, after all his other Gracious Dispensations, has lately given us an Happy
Peace. He seems inclined to try us a little longer, whether the milder Methods
of his Mercy will work upon us to a general Repentance and Reformation.

But it is to be feared we shall do as we have often done before, not become the
better, but rather the worse, for his Mercy.

'Twas too obvious to observe, after our Deliverance from the late unhappy
Civil Wars, pardon me if I say, we ran mad with our Joy; and too many of us,
because Religion had been made a pretense by some, threw off all pretense to
it. A sad perversion this of that Goodness of God, the proper End of which was
to engage us to Obedience.

I heartily wish our late Deliverance, and our present Peace, may have a better
influence upon us. As yet God knows there is little sign of it. Skepticism and
Impiety go hand in hand, and it is to be feared, get ground upon us. If that of
the Apostle Phil. 3. were ever true of any Age, I fear it is of this; Men's God
is their Belly, their Glory in their Shame, they mind Earthly things. I wish
our End may not be Destruction too.

We want not indeed, in this Age, an useful and practical way of Preaching, and
such as may recommend it self to the Reason, as well as work upon the Passions
of Mankind. We have the great Things of another World lively laid before us,
and the absolute necessity of a good Life daily pressed upon us.

But the Age is Proof against the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely. We are boldly told by some, they look upon the great Things of our
Religion but as idle Tales, with public allowance. And a great many others,
though they do not speak out, yet plainly live, as if they had the same Opinion
of them.

So that I fear, Infidelity is spread further than we are aware of; and if
there should be thus a fault in the Spring, there is like to be no regular
Motion in the whole Machine. And no wonder if the generality of Men swim down
the stream of Popular Wickedness, and follow a Multitude to do Evil.

In such a Case as this, it is highly necessary to call in the Assistance of the
Civil Magistrate, and it is very much his Interest, as well as Duty, to maintain
the Cause of Religion, and to punish open and scandalous Impiety.

If the Terrors of the Lord will not prevail with Men to become good
Christians, the Terrors of the Law may make them tolerable Men. And though the
inflicting of Legal Penalties may not make Men so Good as they should be, yet
it is something if it restrain them from being so bad as they would be.

Nor does this imply the weakness and insufficiency of Religion, that it needs
the Support of the Civil Power; but only argues the Corruption of Humane
Nature, that will not be kept in Bounds without it.

The Sun is not dark, though Men may shut their Eyes, and not see the Light of
it: Nor are Things really sweet to be accounted bitter, because they may taste
so to some vitiated Palates.

The great Things of Religion are such as are apt to work upon Reasonable Men:
But if Men, either through Prejudice, do not believe, or through Carelessness do
not consider them, no wonder if they do not prevail upon them.

The laying Penalties upon plain and scandalous Sins, is so far from being
unsuitable to the Nature of Religion, that it is a Debt the Civil Power owes to
the Honor of God, and the Peace of the World.

Saint Paul, Romans 13. tells us, That Rulers are not a Terror to Good Works, but
to the Evil; and that he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath
upon him that does Evil. That is, a good Ruler, one that answers the Design of
his Office, will be so.

How this can be, without the enacting and inflicting of some Penalties,
something that is terrible to Humane Nature, is not easy to imagine. For the
bare Command of them, that we are sure either cannot, or will not hurt us, is
not very dreadful.

And here we may thankfully acknowledge our Happiness, that the Law is yet a
Guard to the Practice of Religion: And the Legislative Power has given its
Testimony, against Vice and Irreligion, by making it Penal to be guilty of it.
For this, I may refer you to the many Acts of Parliament made against
Profaneness, particularly that against Swearing, and other Vices, ordered to be
read, once a Quarter, in our Churches.

His Majesty likewise has been graciously pleased to show His Zeal, for the
work of Reformation, not only by issuing out His Royal Proclamations, strictly
requiring inferior Magistrates, to put the Penal Laws, against Vice and
Profaneness, in execution: But by recommending it, more than once, to the
Consideration of the Parliament, to take yet a more effectual Course to stop
the Growth of Irreligion.

This so needful work of Reformation therefore lies in a manner at our own
doors.

Two Things therefore are requisite in this Case.

1. That those that have any Power or Authority should Conscientiously use it,
to the Countenancing of Religion, and to the Punishment of Vice and
Profaneness. 2. That all of us, in our several Stations, and according to our
Opportunities and Abilities, should concur with them, and put our Hands to this
good Work.
Under the First Head, I must reckon Parents in the Family, and Inferior
Magistrates in the Commonwealth.

As to Parents, I cannot forbear to say, I am apt to believe, that their
Neglect in the Education of their Children, is one, at least, of the most
universal Causes of that Impiety that reigns among us. This (as some Physicians
speak of the Natural Body) is that Error in the first concoction, that is not
to be thoroughly amended in the second. When Families, that are the Elements of
the Body Politic, are so much neglected, and so far corrupted, the
Constitution of it must needs be very crazy. And on the contrary, did Parents
take that Care, they ought to give their Children a timely sense of Religion,
of their Duty to God and Man, and bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition
of the Lord, the work of the Civil Magistrate would be in a great measure done
to his Hand, and we should need fewer Laws, and less Courage and Resolution in
the execution of them.

2. I will make bold to speak a word to those that are subordinate Magistrates
in the State. That they would, with Zeal and Vigor, put those good Laws we
have in execution against the scandalous Vices of the Age. That they would take
all Occasions, and lay hold on Opportunities, to stop the Growth of Impiety and
Irreligion: At least that, if they think it not incumbent on themselves to seek
for Informations, they would readily and cheerfully receive them, and not
discourage those whose Pious Zeal prompts them to be Instrumental to bring
Enormous Offenders to Punishment. And that they would take care to live such
innocent and inoffensive Lives themselves, that they may set a good Face upon
the Punishment of Offenders.

But I will not insist too long on this. I shall only very briefly remind them,
how much the Honor of God, and of the Government, is concerned in this matter.
That they are under the Oath of God. That the execution, and by consequence,
the good effect of those wholesome Laws we have against Profaneness, lies in a
manner wholly in their Hands, and the miscarriage will, in a great measure, lie
at their Doors. That they have an Opportunity of doing an act of the greatest
Charity to the Public; nay, and as it may happen, to the Offenders themselves.
And lastly, the immortal Honor that will accrue to themselves. If they
signalize themselves by their Zeal in this good Work, not only this, but the
next Generation, may rise up, and call them blessed.

2. It is the Duty of every one of us, in our several Stations, to put our
helping Hand to this good Work.

And that we may be the better induced to do this in good earnest, let us be
deeply sensible of the Sins of the Times. Let us often think how sad the
consequence will be, of such a general defection from the Duties of Religion.
Let us be heartily sorry we can do no more toward the Work of Reformation.
'Twas not below David, though a King, even to weep for the Wickedness of other
Men. If we have any sense of Piety to God, we cannot but be heartily concerned
at his Dishonor. If we have any Charity for Men, it cannot but grieve us to
see them running so fast, in the ready way, to Ruin and Destruction. If we
have any concern for the Public, we must needs be apprehensive of the Danger
we are in, to be overwhelmed by these Floods of Ungodliness.

If we could do nothing else, yet we should, at least, secretly bewail the
Impieties of the Times we live in. But this inward sense will naturally prompt
us to do our best, not only to stem the tide of Sin our selves, but to turn it
toward a Reformation.

(1.) Then let us make a free, open, public, and avowed Profession of the
Truths and Rules of our Religion. We need not be ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, while we are sure, it is the Power of God unto Salvation. While we have
both the Law of God and Man to justify us, why should not we be as bold for
Religion, as the most professed and impudent Sinner can be against it? How
indecent is it, while Sin puts on a Whores Forehead, that Religion should creep
into a Corner.

Mistake me not, I am not now persuading you to pretend to more than you have,
to make an Hypocritical and Pharisaical Pretense to Piety, but only that you
would openly avow the Obligations that lie upon you to an Holy Life. And
therefore,

(2.) Be sure your Practice keep pace with your Profession, and that you really
be what you pretend to be, Good Christians; and make this appear before the
World in the whole tenor of your Conversation.

Our Blessed Savior, who blames the Pharisees, that they did all their Works
to be seen of Men (and 'twas no better than Hypocrisy, while their whole
Design was the Praise of Men) yet in another place bids us, Let our Light so
shine before Men, that they may see our good Works, and glorify our Father
which is in Heaven. That is, be so strictly Holy, that the World cannot choose
but take Notice of it; though for any value we set upon the Praise of Men, we may
not care much whether they do or no.

We see Examples have a mighty Power and Influence upon the Lives of Men. They
are apt to follow a Multitude, though it be to do Evil. O that we could once
see it as Fashionable to be Virtuous and Religious, as it has too long been to
be Loose and Vicious; or at least, Negligent and Lukewarm. Let us do God and
Religion, and our selves, the Honor, (if I may so speak,) to begin the Mode,
and do our best to bring Religion into Fashion.

And who can tell how far some considerable number of Religious Examples,
shining as Lights in the midst of this crooked and perverse Generation might
enlighten the World.

And though there might some Hypocrisy creep in, yet methinks that is much to
be preferred before open Profaneness; and 'twere better that God and Religion
should be (though it were but seemingly) honored, by some Pretenders to
Religion, than openly affronted by Profane and Loose Men.

Let us then by an open and avowed Profession, and Practice of a substantial
and unaffected Piety, declare against the Wickedness of the Age, and by our
Examples, at least, lead the way to a Reformation.

(3.) Let us by our Advice, Admonition and Reproof, do what we can to reform
others too. It Is pity this is so much disused, that it is almost counted a
piece of Rudeness, to make any approaches toward it. This Fraternal Correption
is very well consistent with Civility, and is an act of the greatest Charity
too. Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart: Thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. Not to rebuke him,
is to suffer Sin upon him; and this is in effect to hate him.

Should we see our Brother infected with a dangerous Disease, it would be very
uncharitable not to warn him of it. Should we see him running on a Precipice,
Humanity would oblige us to stop his course. And yet we can see him infected
with the mortal Plague of Sin, and running on the Precipice of Eternal
Destruction, and not kindly admonish him of his Danger.

There is scarce any one with whom we converse, but when there is occasion, we
might this way be serviceable to Religion. If he be an Inferior we might
rebuke him sharply. If he be an Equal, we might admonish him freely as a
Brother. If he be a Superior, we might at least humbly entreat him as a
Father. And this practice would no doubt give some check to Sin and Wickedness.

But it must be confessed, that it is not all Sinners that are fit Objects of
this compassionate Admonition. There are many too hardy to be dealt with by
such mild and gentle Methods. Our Savior, who no doubt designed we should take
all prudent and likely ways to reform our Brother, yet bids us not to cast our
Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet.

This is, I doubt, the Case with too many; and then it very well becomes us to
tell it to the Civil Magistrate, whom the Law impowers and requires to punish
Evildoers.

It Is true, the Name of Informer sounds somewhat odious, and may seem not very
agreeable to the Spirit and Temper of a Christian. And indeed to lie at catch,
to ensnare our Brother, in some minuter things that the Law has made Penal,
where the Honor of God, and the Good of Society, are not much concerned, is to
be condemned.

But there is a great difference between those Things that have neither Good
nor Evil in them, but as the Law commands or forbids them, and those that are
Evil in themselves. Again, there is a considerable difference among those
things that are Evil in themselves, some are more private, and chiefly affect
the Person that commits them; others more immediately tend to debauch others,
affect Society, and spread Irreligion. Again, some Sins are committed more
openly, and consequently are a greater Scandal to Religion, Dishonor to God,
and Affront to Authority.

Now in gross and enormous Sins, especially when they are committed openly, and
so are a greater Scandal to Religion, when they grow bold and are often
repeated, when they spread and grow infectious; then it is absolutely necessary,
by Temporal Punishments, to put a stop to them. And it is for the Honor of God,
for the Good of Society, for the Safety of other Men, nay, and may be for the
Good of the Offenders themselves, that they come under the Lash of the Law. And
it is well becoming the Piety of a Christian, to be Instrumental in bringing
them under the Inflictions of Legal Punishments.

Indeed common Swearers, notorious Drunkards, Adulterers, and other such like,
are mostly got beyond all milder Methods: They are many times set in the Seat
of the Scorners; they despise and laugh at sober Admonitions, and there is no
other way to deal with them, but by touching them in their most sensible part.
Por if they can but save their Bodies and Estates, they have little care of
their Souls.

Now it may be an act of Charity to make such People smart for their Sins. When
they are stopped in the career of their Lusts, it may set them a thinking of
their Folly, and bring them to a better Mind. Or if it do not, it will at least
be some restraint upon their Wickedness.

However this (as I have partly hinted before) is necessary upon many other
accounts.

It is for the Good of the Body Politic that such noxious Humors may be
purged out, or kept under, that the whole Mass of Blood be not corrupted. It Is
for the Honor of God that Justice should be done upon such open and notorious
Sinners as have highly affronted him, and disparaged Religion. It Is necessary
to bear Testimony against such crying Sins, that we become not partakers with
them; and if possible may prevent those heavy Judgments of God, that we may
justly fear may be doomed against the Nation for them, and we are sure are
justly deserved by them.

It Is further to be considered that most Men allow themselves the liberty of
appealing to the Civil Magistrate, upon every little and trifling Interest that
concerns themselves: If their Neighbor but touch their Bodies, they call it an
Assault and Battery; or if he call them an hard Name, or give them a
disparaging or reviling Word, they must presently have the Peace, or the Good
Behavior, or bring an Action against him, or, it may be, send him a Challenge,
for Satisfaction: But the Sacred Name of God may be daily profaned by Oaths and
Hellish Imprecations, his Majesty affronted by the most horrid Blasphemies; and
if any call for Justice on such impudent Sinners, there are enough will think
him more busy than wife in so doing. This is the grossest partiality, and I
doubt such Men's Judgments are too much bribed and biased by their Lusts.

I would ask such Men; do they indeed believe it fit the Magistrate should let
every one do what is Good in his own Eyes, affront God and Religion as he
pleases?

If it be a Pious Act in the Legislative Power to Enact Laws for the Guard of
Religion; and in the King, to make choice of such Subordinate Magistrates as
will be zealous in the execution of them; and in such Magistrates impartially
without Fear or Favor, to inflict the Penalties by Law appointed on Offenders
when Information is given; it must equally be so in any private Man to give
such Information: For without Information given, there can be none, or very
little, execution of the Law; and without that, it is all one as if neither Laws
were made, nor Magistrates appointed for that purpose. Well then, this work of
informing against notorious Sinners is so far from being to be blamed, that (if
I may make bold to say so) I think it a defect in our Law, that it is not made
Penal not to give Information. We know it is so in cases of Treason; he that
does not discover it, is so far a partaker in it, as to be guilty at least of
Misprision of it.

If we were as truly concerned for the Honor of God, as we justly are for the
Honor and Safety of the King, methinks there would some such thing be done.
And every one that hears the horrid Oaths and Imprecations that are so common
among us, that knows of those that haunt naughty Houses, or those that make a
practice of carousing in Taverns or Alehouses when they should be at Church,
should be liable to some severe Penalties, if they do not give in Information.

It were to be wished some such Course could be taken, that a Pious and Sober
Man might come in Company, walk the Streets, and go about his Business, without
hearing God and Religion so impudently affronted as usually they are.

But alas how shall this be done? What single Man dares undertake so hard a
Task, or make any attempt toward a Reformation? When the Offenders are so
many, the work of reforming like to meet with the spite and obloquy of the
Bad, the Censure of some of the better fort, and the Approbation and
Encouragement of so very few; when there is so general a Slackness in the
Magistrates, and such Insensibility in the People, as to the Work of
Reformation, what shall we think of it?

This Work, or Trade, of Reformation (pardon me if I call it so; though 'twill
be no gainful one to them that take it up) is so new, and out of the common
Road, it is like to meet with so much opposition from the Devil's Factors, and
requires so great a stock of Zeal, and Christian Courage and Resolution, that
it is never like to thrive in a few single Hands: If ever it be carried o^ to
purpose, it must be by a Company.

What I have already said, abundantly justifies the Pious Zeal of those, in and
about this City, that have thought of this Expedient, and are in several
Societies combined together for the carrying on of so good a Work.

We hope this has, and will, at least in some measure, strike a damp on the
daring Impiety of the Times.

The good Example of those who have already begun this Work, may not only
encourage others to join in it, but may in time spread it self throughout the
Nation. And it is to be hoped the good Effects of such Religious Combinations as
these, will recommend them, in a little time, even to those who have been a
little jealous of what might be the Consequence of them.

It is apparent enough there is great need of this, or some such Expedient, to
give check to the growth of Debauchery among us.

If I be not much mistaken, there is a sort of Men that are not only resolved
to give themselves up to all manner of Wickedness, but make it their Business
to proselite all they can to their Irreligion, and to make all they converse
with as Bad as themselves.

I have been told there are some Clubs in this City, where the very professed
Design of their Meeting is, by obscene Discourse and other ways, to promote
Lewdness and Debauchery. These (if it be true,) are Devilish Combinations
indeed; and it is high time, for those that have a true Zeal for God and for
Religion, to join their Hearts and Hands to break these Bonds of Wickedness.

Give me leave, before I conclude, to give a word of Advice to those of you
that are entered into any such Society for Reformation, and it shall be briefly
this.

1. That you would be very careful how you live your selves. The World will
have their Eye upon you: And there will be those that will watch for your
halting.

How much would it dishonor God, disparage your selves, and hinder that good
Work you go about, if any of you, that pretend to reform others, should at any
time be guilty of the same Crimes, or as bad your selves?

2. That you would join Prudence with your Zeal. Perhaps some would think it
more prudent to let the whole Work alone; but this, I hope, you do not think is
my meaning: But that you take care to go no further than the Law will back you;
and that you would manage every circumstance of your Proceedings with as much
Caution and Discretion, as is consistent with the doing of the Work you go
about.

3. That you be Impartial in this Business, as to Persons and Parties; and that
in your whole procedure you make it appear, as far as may be, that it is not
Interest or Faction, or private Grudges and Resentments, by which you are
acted, but by a true and disorder Zeal for God, for Religion, and the Good of
your Country; yea, and even of the Offenders themselves.

4. When you have done this, that you would be Humble and Modest, and not
presently think too highly of your selves; nor despise others, (so they live
well,) as Men of no Religion, because they are not come up to your pitch, or do
not show their Zeal for Religion in the same way with your selves; (nay, though
they should seem a little jealous of your Societies,) but be content that time
should show (as I hope it will) the Uprightness of your Intentions, and the
Wisdom of your Undertakings.

While you observe these, and the like Cautions, that your Christian Prudence
may dictate to you, go on in the Name and Strength of God, and be not
discouraged by all the Difficulties you are like to meet in your way to
Reformation.

The Honor of God, and the Good of Men, the promoting of Religion, and the
Safety of your Country (Things so nearly concerned in this Work of Public
Reformation) are such Great and Glorious Things, as will make an ample amends
for all the Expense of Cost or Pains you can be at in the pursuit of it, and
for all the Reproach and Obloquy you can meet with for it.

And such you must expect to meet with; and therefore should make account of
it, and prepare for it, and not overmuch value what Men may say of you.

Some perhaps will call you busiebodies; others will tell you it is a mean and
disparaging Thing to turn Informers; a third sort will think you surly and
ill-natured Men. These, and the like truly ill-natured Imputations, you must
expect to meet with, and prepare your selves to bear.

But while you are conscious to your selves, that what you do is not out of any
delight in the Sufferings of other Men, nor with an Eye to any by and base
Interest of your own, but out of pure Zeal for God and Virtue, and Charity to
Men, and out of a due sense of the odiousness and danger of those horrid
Impieties that reign among us; the Conscience of this your Sincerity will bear
you up under the obloquy and opposition of any that shall appear against you,
and you will even rejoice, as we read the Apostles did, if you should suffer
Shame for the Name of God, and the sake of Religion.

If you go on courageously in this Work, it is to be hoped it may be a good step
to a General Reformation.

Or if the Wickedness of the Age be grown too big for that, it may abate the
Impudence of Sin, and drive the Works of Darkness (where if any where, they
ought to be,) into private corners, that Wickedness may not any longer, as it
has too long done, ride triumphant through our Streets And this will prevent a
great deal of the Scandal of it, and be a guard and security to that little
Religion that is yet left among us.

Or if this cannot be done, it will be a public Testimony against the
Wickedness of the Age, and we hope may, in part, appease the Wrath of God, and
for some longer time prevent his heavy Judgments upon the Nation.

Or if the Decree be gone out against us, and the Case be with us as it was
with Judah, that the Reformation attempted in the Reign of Josiah, could not
avert the Destruction doomed against them for their former Wickedness: Yet it
may be hoped, those that have so vigorously appeared for God and Religion, may
deliver their own Souls by their Righteousness.

Or if such an overflowing Scourge must pass through the Land, as will involve
the best in the common Ruin, those that have first reformed themselves, and
done what they could in their several Stations to reform others too, will have
the Comfort of it in the Day of Visitation. Such Good Men will have an inward
Calm and Serenity amidst the greatest outward Troubles here, and their Pious
Zeal will meet with an abundant Recompense in the World to come, from that God
in whose Cause they have appeared. To Him be all Honor, and Glory, now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

