SERMONS PREACHED BY THAT EMINENT DIVINE, Henry Hammond, D. D.

PUBLISHED According to the AVTHORS own Copies.

How shall they hear, without a Preacher? And how shall they Preach, except
they be sent? Romans x. 14, 15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature. St. Mark xvi. 15.



LONDON, Printed for ROBERT PAWLET, at the Bible in Chancery Lane near
Fleet Street. MDCLXXV.

A TABLE OF THE SERMONS.
A Sermon on Ezekiel. 16. 30. The work of an Imperious Whorish Woman. Page 1 A
Sermon on Philip. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens
me. p. 19 A Sermon on Prove. 1. 21. How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity? p. 33 A Sermon on Matt. 1. 23. Emmanuel, which is by
Interpretation, God with us, p. 48 A Sermon on Luke 9. 55. Yo know not what
manner of spirit ye are of. p. 61 A Sermon on Ezekiel. 18. 31. For why will ye
die? p. 76 A Sermon on Jer. 5. 2. Though they say, The Lord lives, surely they
swear falsely. p. 91 A Sermon on Luke 18. 11. God I thank thee, that I am not as
other men, etc. p. 105 A Sermon on Matthew. 3. 3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord.
p. 130 A Sermon on John 7. 48. Have any of the Pharisees believed on him? p.
147 A Sermon on Matt. 10. 15. It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom
and Gomorrah, etc. p. 165 Two Sermons on Acts 17. 30. And the times of this
ignorance God winked at, etc. p. 180. and p. 196 A Sermon on Romans 1. 26. For
this cause God gave them up unto vile affections. p. 213 A Sermon on Gal. 6.
15. But a new Creature. p. 237 Two Sermons on 2 Pet. 3. 3. Scoffers, walking
after their own lusts. p. 244. and 258 Two Sermons on 1 Timothy 1. 15. Of whom I
am chief. p. 271. and p. 284
Imprimatur,

Ex Aed. Sabaud. Apr. 24. 1663. GEO. STRADLING, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Patr.
Dom. GILB. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

The I. Sermon.
EZEKIEL. XVI. 30. The Work of an imperious Whorish Woman.
NOt to chill your ears by keeping you long at the doors; not to detain you one
minute with a cold unprofitable Preface: This Chapter is the exactest History
of the Spiritual estate of the Jews, i. e. The elect of God, and the
powerfullest exprobration Heaven can present to our eyes. From the first time I
could think I understood any part of it I have been confident, that never any
thing was set down more rhetorically, never more (...) and (...), more
affection and sublimity of speech, ever concurred in any one writing of this
quantity, either sacred or profane. 'Twere a work for the solidst Artist to
observe distinctly every part of Logic and Rhetoric that lies concealed in
this one Chapter, and yet there natural sinful estate of the Jews, being
premised in the five first Verses: 2. The calling of them in this condition, in
their pollutions, in their blood, and bestowing all manner of spiritual
ornaments upon them, following in the next ten Verses; the remainder is most
what spent in the upbraiding and aggravating their sins to them in a most
elevated strain of reproof; and highest pitch of it, is in the words of my
Text, The work of an imperious Whorish Woman.

For the handling of which words, I first beg two postulata to be granted and
supposed, before my discourse, because I would not trouble you to hear them
proved.

I. That the elect chosen people of God, the Jews, were degenerate

II. That what is literally spoken in aggravation of the Jews sin, is as fully
applicable to any other sinful people, with whom God has entered Covenant, as
he did with the Jews.

And then the subject of my present discourse, shall be this, That Indulgence
to sin, in a Christian, is the Work of an imperious Whorish Woman. And that 1.
Of a Woman noting a great deal of weakness; and that not simple natural
weakness, through a privation of all Whore, noting unfaithfulness and falseness
to the Husband. 3. Of an imperious Whore, noting insolency and an high pitch of
contempt.

And of these, briefly and plainly; not to increase your knowledge, but to
enliven and inflame the practical part of your souls; not to enrich your brains
with new store, but to sink that which you have already down into your hearts.

And first of the first, That Indulgence to sin, in a Christian, is the work of
a Woman; an effect and argument of an infinite deal of weakness, together with
the nature and grounds of that weakness: The work, etc.

And this very thing, that it may be the more heeded, is emphatically The work
of a Woman, in my Text, a poor, cowardly, pusillanimous part that any body
else, any one that had but the least spark of valor or manhood in sluggish and
unprofitable, and at last, even quite perished by difusing. As the weakness of
Women, below Men, proceeds not only from their constitution and temper, but
from their course of life; not from want of natural strength, but of civil
manlike exercise, which might stir up and discipline, and ripen that strength
they have: For if their education were as warlike, and their strength by
valiant undertaking, so set out; Virago's and Amazons, would be Gods graces.
Then in the first How weak is thy heart?] noting it to be a degree of weakness
below ordinary; as we call one a weak man, that has done any thing rashly or
unadvisedly, which, if he had but thought on, he could never have been so
sottish, his ordinary reason would have prompted him to safer counsels. In
brief, Any frequent, indiscreet actions, argue a weak fellow: Not that he wants
strength of discretion How weak is thy heart?] Thy heart, i. e. The principal
part of the Man, (as the Brain is the speculative) the fountain of good and
evil actions, and performances. Now the word (...) in the Original, signifying
the heart; being naturally of the Masculine Gender, is here set in feminine,
out of order, perhaps emphatically, to note an unman-like impotent, effeminate
heart; all its actions are mixed with so much passion and weakness, they are so
raw and womanish, that it would grieve one to behold a fair, comely, man-like
Christian in show, betraying so much impotency in his behavior, (even like the
Emperor a spinning) one who had undertaken to be a Champion for Christ, led
away, and abused and baffled by every pelting paultry lust. It Is lamentable to
observe what a poor, cowardly, is in most Christians; with how slender assaults
and petty stratagems, they are either taken captive, or put to flight; how
easily in their most resolute undertakings of piety or virtue, they are either
vanquished, or caught. The ordinariest, coursest, had-favouredst temptation that
they can see, affects and smites them suddenly; they are entangled, before they
are wooed; and the least appearance of any difficulty, the vizard or picture of
the easiest danger is enough to fright them for ever from any thought Religion,
or hope of Heaven.

For a mere natural man that has nothing but original sin, or worse in him,
that has received nothing from God and his parents, but a talent in a broken
Vessel, a soul infected by a crazy body, diseased as soon as born; for an
Heathen that has nothing to subsist on but a poor pittance of natural reason,
but one eye to see by, and that a dim one; for a mere Barbarian or Gentile to
be thus triumphed over by every Devil, (as an Owl by the smallest Bird in the
air) might be Philosopher, and mere Stoic would be able to meet and vanquish:
And therefore it is not so much natural, as affected weakness, not so much want
of strength, as sluggishness and want of care; not so much impotency, as
numbness and stupidity of our parts, which has

The truth is, we are willing to conceive that our natural abilities are quite
perished and annihilate, and that God has no ways repaired them by Christ,
because we will not be put to the trouble of making use of them: We would spare
our pains, and therefore would fain count our selves impotent, as sluggards
that personate and act diseases because they would not work; or the old
Tragedians which could call Stage at any time, to consummate the impossiblest
Plot, and therefore would not put their brains to the toil of concluding it
fairly.

Certainly the decrepitest man under Heaven (if he be but a degree above a
Carcass) is able to defend himself from an ordinary Fly; It Is one of the
Devils titles to be Beelzebub the Prince of Flies; and such are many of his
temptations; He that has but life in him, may keep Muscaest animal insolens,
and the Devil is frequent in these temptations, and though you could repel them
as fast as they come, yet 'twould be a troublesome piece of work; it will be
more for your ease to lie still under them, to let them work their will: So in
time Fly-blows beget noysomness and vermin in the soul; and then the life and
death of that man becomes like that of the Egyptians, or Herod, and no plague
more finally Flies and Lice. I am resolved there be many temptations which foil
many jolly Christians, which yet a mere natural man that never dreamed of
Scripture, or Gods Spirit, might, if he did but bethink himself, resist, and
many times overcome. Many acts of uncleanness, of intemperance, of contempt of
superiors, of murder, of false-dealing, of swearing and profaning, that
cheap, unprofitable, that untempting, and therefore unreasonable sin. Many acts
I say, of these open, abominable sins, which either In Phol. p. 915.
as Methodius calls it, that Law born with us; Natural judicatorium, Wiggers,
pr. ma secundae, page 160.
says Austin against Pelagius; Lux nostri intellectus, say the Schoolmen out
of Damascen; Nay, (...), A^ian. Epict. l. 2. c. 9.
says the Stoic, the promise that every one makes to nature, the Obligation
that he is bound in when he has first leave to be a man, or as Hierocles on
the Pythagorean Verses, (...), That Oath that is coaetaneous, and co-essential
to all reasonable natures, and engages them (...), etc. not to transgress the
Laws that are set them. (...), (...) (...), l. 1. p. 12. and lib. 2. p. 36.
(...), l. 4. p. 50.
This is I say, enough to keep us in some terms or compass, to swathe and bind
us in, to make us look somewhat like men, and defeat the Devil in many a
skirmish. But how much more for a Christian, who if it were by nothing but his
Baptism, has certainly some advantages of other men: For one that, if he
acknowledge any, worships the true God; never went a fooling being given up to
vile affections, Romans I.
Romans 1. for one that lives in a civil Country among people that have the
faces and hearts of men and Christians, made as it were, Wisd. II.
to upbraid his ways, and reprove his thoughts; for one that is within the
sound of Gods Law, and Light of his Gospel, by which he may edify more than
ever Heathen did by thunder and lightning; for one that cannot choose but fear
and believe, and love, and hope in God, in some measure or kind, be he never so
restraints, and perhaps some inward twinges of Conscience, to curb and moderate
him, to be yet so stupid under all these helps, as never to be able to raise up
one thought toward heaven, to have yet not the least atome of Soul to move in
the ways of godliness, but to fall prostrate like a Carcass, or a Statue, or
that Idol Dagon with his feet stricken off, not able to stand before the
slightest motion of sin; or if a lust, or a fancy, or a devil, be he the
ugliest in Hell, any thing but God appear to him, presently to fall down and
worship. This is such a sottish condition, such an either Lethargy or
Consumption of the Soul, such an extreme degree of weakness, that neither
original sin, that Serpent that despoiled Adam, nor any one single Devil can be
believed to have wrought in us; but that (...) (as the Platonicks call it) A
popular under a multitude of Tyrants, which have for so long a while, wasted
and harassed the Soul; so that now it is quite crest-faln, Mark V. 3.
as that legion of Devils, Mar. V. 3. which dwelt among the Tombs in a
liveless, cadaverous, noisome Soul; or more truly that evil spirit, Mark I. 23.
Mark I. 23. that made the man disclaim and renounce Christ and his mercies,
when he came to cure; Let us alone, what have we to do with thee? By which is
noted, That contentedness and acquiescence in sin; that even stubborn,
wilfulness, and resolvedness to die, habit, and long service and drudgery in
sin. But then, as a ground of that, you may take notice of another, a fancy
that has crept into most men's hearts (and suffers them not to think of
resisting any temptation to sin) that all their actions, as well evil as good,
were long ago determined and set down by God; and now nothing left to them, but
a necessity of performing what was then determined. I Stoics, revived indeed
among the Turks, concerning the inevitable production of all things; that fatal
necessity, even of sins, should yet never have gotten any footing or
entertainment among Christians; but that by a little experience in the practice
of the world, I find it among many a main piece of their faith, and the only
point that can yield them any comfort; that their sins, be they never so many
and outrageous, are but the effects, or at least, the consequents of Gods
decree; that all their care, and solicitude, Catalogue; that unless God be
pleased (...); to come down upon the Stage, by the irresistible power of his
constraining spirit, as with a Thunderbolt from Heaven, to shake and shiver to
pieces the carnal man within them, to strike them into a swoon as he did Saul,
that so he may convert them; and in a word, to force and ravish them to Heaven:
(...).
Unless he will even drive and carry them, they are never likely to be able to
stir; to perform any the least work of reason, but sins in the world, nay, even
into the bottom of that pit of Hell, without any stop, or delay, or power of
deliberating in this their precipice. This is an heresy that in some
Philosopher-Christians has sprouted above ground, has showed it self in their
brains and tongues; and that more openly in some bolder Wits, but the Seeds of
it are sown thick in most of our hearts, I fear in every habitual sinner
amongst us, if we were but at leisure to Lord give us a heart to be forewarned
in this behalf.

To return into the rode: Our natural inclinations and propensions to sin, are
no doubt, active and prurient enough within us, somewhat of Jehu's constitution
and temper, they drive very furiously. But then to persuade our selves, that
there is no means on earth, besides the very hand of God, and that out of our
reach, able to trash, or overslow this furious driver; that all the ordinary
clogs that God has provided reason and natural conscience, as Men; our
Knowledge, as Christians; nay, his restraining, though not sanctifying graces,
together with the Lungs and Bowels of his Ministers, and that energetical
powerful Instrument, the Gospel of Christ, Which is the power of God unto
salvation, even to every Jew, nay, and Heathen, Romans 1. To resolve, That all
these are not able to keep us in any compass, to quell any the least sin we are
inclined to; that unless God will by force make Saints of us, we must needs
presently be Devils, and so leave Gods omnipotent working, and never make use
of those powers, with which he has already furnished us. This is a monstrous
piece of unchristian divinity; a way, by advancing the Grace of God, to destroy
it, and by depending on the Holy Ghost, to grieve, if not to sin against him;
to make the corruption of our nature equal to nay, surpassing the punishment of
the Devils; a necessary and irreversible obduration in all kinds and measures
of sin.

This one practical Heresy will bring us through all the prodigies
Philosophical Sects, from Stoics to Epicurism, and all sensual Libertinism,
and from thence to the (...) of the Pythagoreans. For unless the soul that is
now in one of us, had been transplanted from a Swine, or some other the most
stupid, sottish, degenerous sort of Beasts, it is impossible that it should
thus naturally, and necessarily, and perpetually, and irrecoverably, delight
and wallow in every kind of sensuality, without any check or contradiction,
either of Reason, or Christianity. If I should tell you that none of you, that
has understood pondered the Will of God, wants abilities in some measure to
perform it, if he would muster up all his forces, at time of need; that every
Christian has grace enough to smother lusts in the Womb, and keep them, at
least, from bringing forth; to quell a temptation before it break out into an
actual sin, you would think perhaps that I flattered you, and deceived my self
in too good an opinion of your strength. Only thus much then, It would be
somewhat for your edification to try what you could do: Certainly there is much
more in a Christians Arrian, That we are the sons of God, (...), Let us not
have too low and degenerous an opinion of our selves. Do but endeavor
resolutely original (a branch of which are evil motions) and of omission; yet I
will undertake, that thou shall have an easier burden of actual commissions
upon thy soul, and that will prove a good ease for Tophet of obduration and
despair. Final obduration being a just judgment of God, on one that has filled
up the measure of his iniquities, that has told over all the hairs of his
head, and sands of the Sea in actual sins; and a necessary consummation of
that, despair; the first part, the Prologue and Harbinger to that worm in Hell.

'Twere easy to show how faith might afford a Christian sufficient Spouse, We
shall more opportunely handle that in the next Part, where we shall consider
Indulgence in sin, as the work of a whorish Woman; where whoredom, noting
adultery, presupposes wedlock, and consists in unfaithfulness to the Husband,
the thing in the next place to be discovered: The Work, etc.

Christ is offered by his Father to all the Church for an Husband; that he
waits, and begs, and sends presents to us all to accept of the proposal, the
whole Book of Canticles, that Song of spiritual love, that affectionate wooing
Sonnet will demonstrate: That every Christian accepts of this Match, and is
Sacramentally espoused to Christ at his Baptism; his being called by the
Husbands Name imports: Isai. IV. 1.
For that is the meaning of the phrase, Isai. IV. 1. Let us be called by thy
Name, i. e. marry us. That Faith is the only thing Christian, and all others,
Jews and Infidels, betwixt the Spouse, and either the destitute Widow, or
barren Virgin; the ground of which is only Faith.

So then, every Christian at his Baptism being supposed a Believer, and thereby
espoused sacramentally to Christ, and so obliged to all the observances, as
partaker of all the privileges of a Wife: does Adultery, but by indulgence in
it, is downright a whore; i. e. either one that came to Christ with an
unchaste, adulterous love to gain somewhat, not for any sincere affection to
his person, but insidious to his estate; and having got that, is soon weary of
his person: or else one that came to him with pure virgin

Thus shall you see an handsome, modest, maidenly Christian, espoused to Christ
at the Font, and fully wedded by his Ring at Confirmation: Nay, come nearer yet
to him, and upon many solemn expressions seal of his very heart in the
Sacrament of his Blood: Another that has lived with him a long while in
uniform, constant loyalty, noted by all the neighborhood for an absolute Wife;
a grave solemn, matronly Christian: yet either upon the allurements of some
fresh sprightful sin, or the solicitations of an old-acquaintance lust, the
insinuations of some wily intruder, or a specious show of a glorious glittering
temptation; or when these are all wanting, upon the breaking out of an evil
heart (which some outward restraints formerly kept in) departing from the
living God, profess open neglect and despite against the Husband which before
they so wooed, and flattered and made love to. 'Twere long to number out to
you, and give you by tale a Catalogue of those defections and adulterous
practices which Christians are ordinarily observed to be guilty of, (which
whether they go so far as to make a divorce betwixt the soul and Christ, or
whether only to provoke him to jealousy, whether by an intercision of Grace
spiritual whoredom, of treacherous unfaithful dealing, to be light, unconstant,
and false to Christ; whose Spouse they are esteemed, whose Name they bear, and
Estate they pretend title to. And so indeed it is, for what greater degree of
unfaithfulness can be imagined? What fouler breach of Matrimonial Covenants,
than to value every ordinary prostitute sin, before the precious Ephesians. vi. 16.
sufficient to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. vi. 16.
or, as the Greek has it, (...) that wicked one, the Devil, methinks there is
a kind of moral influence from Faith on any wise and prudent heart, enough to
enliven, and animate, and give it spirit, against the force or threatenings Turk
is so affected with the expectation of his carnal Paradise, those Catholic
everlasting Stews, which he fancies to himself for heaven, that he will scarce
taste any wine all his lifetime, for fear of disabling and depriving him of
his lust; he will be very stanch from sin, that he may merit and be sure to
have his fill of it. And then certainly one clear single apprehension of that
infinite bliss which the Eye of Faith represents to us, were enough to ravish a
world of love of Christ to us, ever suffered to come into our hearts, (as
Species to the Eye by introreception) had we but come to the least taste and
relish of it, what would we not do to recompense, and answer, and entertain
that love? what difficulty would it not ingratiate to us? what exquisite
pleasure, or carnal rival, would not be cheap and contemptible in its presence?
If thou have but faith to the size of a grain of Mustard Seed, mountain, and it
shall be removed, the tallest, cumbersome, unweildy temptation which all the
giants in Hell can mould together, (as once they are feigned to do the Hills to
get up to Heaven, Pelion Ossae, etc.) if thou do but live, or breath by
Faith, shall vanish at the least blast of thy nostrils. The clear
representation of more valuable pleasures, and more horrid dangers than any the
flesh can propose, certainly attending the performances, or breach of our Vow
of Wedlock, is enough to charm and force us to perpetual chastity; husband of
ours a confluence of all infinite imaginable delights, which whosoever has but
once tasted, but from a kiss of his mouth, he is not unconstant, but sottish,
if he ever be brought to any new embraces. But then openly to contemn, to
profess neglects, to go a wooing again, to tempt and solicit even
temptations, to give gifts to all thy lovers, to hire them that they may come
unto thee on every Verse. 33.
verse. 33. of this Chapter; This is a degree of stupidity and insolence, of
insatiable pride and lust, that neither the iniquity of Sodom, nor stubbornness
of Capernaum, nor the Rhetoricall'st Phrase almost in the very Scripture can
express, but only this in my Text, which comes in the last place with a
mavelous Emphasis, Imperious.] The work, etc.

In which one Epithet many of the highest degrees of sin are contained. 1.
Confidence and shamelesness in sinning, an imperious Whore, mulier one that is
better acquainted with lust, than to blush when she meets with it; modesty and
coyness are but infirmities rather than good qualities of youth; effects of
ignorance and tenderness and unexperience in sin, a little more conversation in
the world, will season men to a bolder temper, and in time instruct them, that
this modesty is the only thing they ought to be ashamed of. It Is not ingenuity
but cowardice, a poor degenerous, pusillanimous humor, to go fearfully armor
only, but even the complexion of every man-like spirit. He is not fit for the
Devils war, that is so poorly appointed either with courage or munition, as to
be discomfited by a look; it is part of his honor not to fear disgrace, and his
reputation, not to stand upon so poor a thing as reputation.

2. Imperious,] taking all authority into her own hands, scorning to be afraid
either of God or Devil, quae regno posita neminem timeat, having fancied her
self in a throne, never thinks either of enemy to endanger, or of superior to
quell her; but sins confidently, and in Cathedra, Psalm, I. 1. in state, in
security, and at ease, Psalm. I. 1.
and never doubts or fears to be removed.

And this is most primarily observable in the Jews, depending on their carnal
Prerogatives, as being of Abraham's seed; and yet thus decree of Election to
their persons, and individual entities, without any reference to their
qualifications, or demeanors; others by a premature persuasion that they are in
Christ, and so in such an irreversible estate, that all the temptations, all
the Devils, nay, all the sins in Hell, shall never dispossess them: Others
resolved, That God can see no sin in his children, in imitation of Marcus in
Irenaeus, whose Heresy, or rather Fancy it was (...), that by the redemption
they were become invisible: Upon these I say, and other grounds (how true, I
will not now examine) do many rash presumers abuse the grace of God unto
wantonness; never fear to sin, because they need not fear to be punished; never
cease to provoke God, because they are sure he is their friend; and being
resolved of him as a Savior, contemn him as a Judge. Multiad sapientiam
pervenissent, etc. says he, Many had come to learning enough, had they not
believed too soon they had attained it. No such hindrance to heaven on such
slight grounds, such as not a solemn examination of themselves, but some gleams
of their fancy had bestowed upon them; it is no wonder if all the effects of
their assurance be spiritual security, and supine confidence in sinning: they
have hid their heads in heaven by their vain speculation, and then think their
whole caput inter nubila] their head is in the clouds, there is no danger or
fear of drowning, be it never so deep or myrie. This was Laodice as estate,
Rev. III. 17.
Rev. III. 17. She fancied her self great store I am rich and am increased in
goods, and have need of nothing: any more accession, even of the graces of God,
would be but superfluousand burdensome, not knowing all this while, That she
was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. There is not a
blessing upon earth, that can any way hope or seem to parallel a sober
wellgrounded assurance here, that in time we shall be Saints in Heaven; it is
such a Paradise upon Earth, that Heaven it self seems but a second part of it,
differing Patent of Heaven to engage us further in the deep, to keep us not
from the Devils works, but from his attachments; only as a protection to secure
our misdemeanors, not to defend our innocence: for a man thus appointed to
venture on a Precipice, as the Turks, says Busbequius, Ep. 3.
are wont to try the goodness Christ is said to descend thither to triumph over
him) to besiege and set upon Hell, presuming of our interest in Heaven, as of a
Magical Charm, and (...) to keep us safe from death or maims in the midst of
enemies, nay of friends; this is a piece of spiritual pride of Lucifer's own
inscribing, an imperious majestic garb of impiety, a triumphant or
processionary pomp, an affected stately gate in sin; that nothing but a violent
rending Fiduciary as this, which has even defiled Heaven by possessing it,
such an Hellish Saint is like to be torn out of the third Heaven into which his
speculation has rapt him, and after a long dream of Paradise, find himself
awake in Hell. And from this degree of religious profaneness, this confidence
in sinning on presumption that we are under grace; from this premature
resolution, that no sin, no Devil can endanger us; from this imperious Good
Lord deliver us.

3. Imperious] signifies more distinctly a tyrannical Lording behavior,
usurping and exercising authority over all. And this the Apostate Jew and
Christian Libertine does: 1. By tyrannizing over himself, i. e. his faculties
and estate: 2. Over all that come near him. Over himself, by urging and driving
on in a carnal course; not patient of any regrets and resistances that a tender
disposition, motions of Gods Spirit, or gripes of Conscience can make against
it, goading stone when it is kept violently from the ground, being held in a
man's hand, or the like, press and weigh toward the Earth incessantly, as if it
were naturally resolved Hell. The sinner is never at quiet with himself, Instat
and imperat; He is urgent and importunate upon himself, to satisfy every
craving lust. Not the beggarliest affection, or laziest, unworthiest desire of
the flesh, but shall have its alms and dole, rather than starve, though it be
an atome of his very soul, to the utter undoing and

And for his tyranny over his estate, whether Temporal or Spiritual, his goods
of Fortune, or gifts of Grace, they must all do homage to this carnal Idol. All
his treasures on Earth are richly sold, if they can but yield him the fruition
of one beloved sin. And for Spiritual Illuminations, or any Seeds of Grace, he
will lose them all; and even shut himself for ever into the darkness of Hell,
rather than ever be directed by their light, out of those pleasing paths of
death.

A restraining grace was but a burdensome, needless encumbrance; and a gleam
of the Spirit, but a means to set Conscience a working, to actuate her malice
and execution on sin; and it were an happy exchange, to get but one loving
delight or companion for them both. Let but a sin be coy and stanch, not to be
gained at the first woing, and all these together, like Jacob's present out of
all his goods, shall be all little enough for a sacrifice or bribe, to
solicit, or hire it. And this the Prophet notes here distinctly, Verse. 33.
and 34. Thou art contrary to Verse. 33. and 34.
In other places Men give gifts to all Whores, but thou give gifts to all thy
lovers. None follow or bribe thee to commit whoredoms: Thou give a reward,
and no reward is given to thee; therefore thou art contrary.

The sinner in my Text, scorns to set so low a value on sin, as that profit or
advantage should ingratiate it to him; it is so amiable in his eyes of it self,
he will prize it so high, that any other treasure shall not be considerable in
respect of it: It is part of his loyalty and expression Devil, to become a
bankrupt in his cause, to sell all that he has, both God, and fortunes to
follow him. It is the art and cunning of common Whores, to raise men's desires
of them, by being coy, Difficultate augere libidinis pretium, to hold off, that
they may be followed. Verse. 34. But this sin is not at so artificial, her
affections are boisterous and impatient of delay; she is not at so much leisure
as to windlace, or use craft to satisfy them; she goes downright a woing, and
if there be any difficulty in compassing, all that she has is ready Lust.

Lastly, Imperious over all that come near him, either men or sins: Everyman
must serve him, Psalm. I. 1.
either as his pander or companion, to further or associate him. I told you he
sinned in Cathedra, Psalm. I. 1. that is also doctorally and magisterially;
every spectator must learn of him, it school for it, his practices are so
commandingly exemplary, that they do even force and ravish the most maidenly
tender conscience. And then, for all inferiors, they are required to provide
him means and opportunities of sinning, to find him out some game; and no such
injury can be done, as to rouse or spring a sin, that would otherwise have
lodged in his walk. It was part of the Heathenish Romans quarrel against the
Primitive Christians, says Tertullian, that they drove away their Devils:
These Exorcist-Christians had old familiars out of the Kingdom, which they were
impatient to be deprived of. And thus careful and chary are men of their helps
of opportunities to sin; it is all the joy they have in the world, sometimes to
have a temptation, and to be able to make use of it; to have the Devil continue
strong with them, in an old Courtier's phrase, It is their very life; and he
that deprives them of it, is a murderer.

And for the sins themselves, Lord, how they tyrannize over them; limb of a
sin, that they may multiply it into infinites, and sin as often at once, as is
possible? Adam in the bare eating of an Apple, committed a multitude of sins.
Leo, Epist. 86. August. lib. 21.
Leo in his 86 Epist. August. de Civit. Dei. and other of the Fathers, will
number them out to you.

And thus far this tyrant over Impiety and Lust, will be a Pelagian, as to
order all his deviation by imitation of Adam's. Every breach of one single Law
shall contain a brood or nest, into which it may be subdivided; circumstance in
the Action shall furnish him with fresh matter for variety of sin.

Again, How imperious is he in triumphing over a sin, which he has once
achieved? If he have once got the better of good nature and Religion; broke in
upon a stubborn, sullen vice, that was formerly too hard for him; how often
does he reiterate and repeat, that he may perfect his conquest, that it may lie
prostrate and tame before him, never daring to resist him? And if there be any
Virgin modest sins, light, either of the Sun, or Nature, not coming abroad but
under a veil, (as some sins being too horrid and abominable, are fain to appear
in other shapes, and so keep us company under the name of amiable or innocent
qualities) then will this violent imperious sinner, call them out into the
Court or Market place; tear away the veil, that he may commit them openly; and,
as if the Devil were too modest for him, bring him upon the stage against his
will, and even take Hell by violence and force.

glorying in the highest impieties, and expect some renown and credit, as a
reward for the pains they take about it; and then certainly, honor is grown
very cheap, when it is bestowed upon sins, and the man very tyrannical over his
spectators thoughts, that requires to be worshipped for them. This was a piece
of the Devils old tyranny in the times of Heathenism (which I would fain
Christianity has out-dated) to build Temples, and offer sacrifice Venus,
Priapus, and the like; that men that were naturally (...), superstitious
adorers of Devils, or anything that was called God, might account Incontinence
Religion, and all impieties in the World a kind of adoration. Thus to profess
whoredoms, and set up trophies in our eyes, to build their eminent place in the
head of every way, in the verse next to my Text, was then the imputation of the
Jews, (and pray God it prove not the guilt of Christians) from whence the whole
Church of them is here An imperious, etc.

Thus has the Apostate Jew been represented to you, in his picture and
resemblance, the Libertine Christian; and Ezekiel become an Historian as well
as Prophet. Thus has indulgence in vice among Professors of Christianity been
aggravated against you, 1. By the weak Womanish condition of it; nature it
self, and ordinary man-like reason is ashamed of it. 2. By the Adulterous
Unfaithfulness, 1. Want of Faith, 2. Of Fidelity bewrayed in it, 3. By the
imperiousness of

Now that this discourse may not have been sent into the air unprofitably;
Xerxes his stripes on the Sea, on inanimate senseless bodies; it is now time
that every tender open guilty heart begin to retire into it self; every one
consider whether he be not the man that the parable aims at, that you be not
content to have your ears affected, or the suburbs of the Soul filled with the
sound, unless also the heart of the City be taken with its efficacy. Think and
consider whether, 1. This effeminacy and womanishness of heart, and not
weakness, but torpor Cato or Aristarchus amongst an Assembly that are all
Judices to reprehend the learned and the aged, and to chide my teachers: You
shall promise to spare that thankless task, and to do it to your selves. It
will be more civility perhaps, and sink down deeper into ingenuous natures,
fairly to bespeak and exhort you; and from the first part of my Text only,
(because 'twould be too long indulgent sinners, to put you in mind of your
strength, and the use you are to make of it* in a word and close of Application:

We have already taken notice of the double inheritance and patrimony of
strength and graces, which we all enjoy, first, as Men; secondly, as
Christians: And ought not we, Beloved, that have spent the liveliest and
sprightfullest of our age and parts, in the pursuit of Learning, to set some
value on that estate we have purchased so dear, and men for being Scholars?
Shall not this deserve to be esteemed some advantage to us, and a rise, that
being luckily taken, may further us something in our stage toward Heaven? That
famous division of Rational Animals in Jamblicus out of Aristotle, into three
different species, That some were Men, others Gods, others such as Pythagoras,
will argue some greater privileges of Scholars above other men: That indeed
the deep Learneder sort, and especially those that had attained some insight
(...) in were in a kind of a more venerable species, than ordinary ignaro's.

And for the benefits and helps that these excellencies afford us in our way to
Heaven, do but consider what a great part of the world overshaded in Barbarism,
brought up in blind Idolatry, do thereby but live in a perpetual Hell, and at
last, pass not into another kind, but degree of darkness; Death being but an
officer to remove them from one Tophet to another; or at most, but as from a
Dungeon to a Grave. Think divine knowledge is to be esteemed; even such a one
as seems, not only the way, but the entrance; not only a preparation, but even
a part of that vision which shall be for ever beatifical: And therefore it will
nearly concern us to observe, what a talent is committed to our husbanding, and
what increase that hard Master will exact at his coming. For as Dicaearchus in
his Description of Greece, says of the Chalcidians, That they were (...),
born, as it were, which they spoke being Greek, even sucked the arts from their
Mothers Breasts, at least were prepared for, and initiated in them by nature;
and therefore it would be a great shame for them, not to be Scholars. So most
truly of those of us, that are learned, full, illuminate Christians; the very
language that we speak, and air we breath in, does naturally infuse some sacred
instincts into us; does somewhat enter us in this Spiritual, Heavenly Wisdom;
will be some munition for Sophister. And if for all these advantages we prove
dunces at last, it will be an increase, not only of our torments, but our
shame; of our indignation at our selves, at the day of doom; and the reproach
and infamy superadded to our sufferings, will scarce afford us leisure to weep
and wail, for gnashing of our teeth. And therefore, Josephus of the Jews, Cont.
Ap. l. 2.
That they prayed to God daily, (...), etc. not that he would bestow good
things on them; for he did that already on his own accord, pouring out plenty
of all in the midst of them: But (...), that they might be able to receive and
keep what he bestowed. So will it concern us to pray, and labor mainly for the
preserving, that we be the better for this great bounty of Gods: That neither
our inobservance of his gifts, suffer them to pass by us unprofitably, and
neglected, Lord to call in the talent entrusted to us already, because unworthy
of any more.

It was a shrewd, though Atheistical speech of Hippocrates, That sure, (...).
if the Gods had any good things to bestow, they would dispense them among the
rich, who would be able and ready to requite them by Sacrifices: But all evil
presents, all Pandora's Box should be divided among the poor, because they are
still murmuring and repining, and never

The Eye of Nature, it seems, could discern thus much of God and his gifts,
that they are the most plentifully bestowed, where the greatest return may be
expected: And for others, from whom all the liberality in the world, can extort
no retribution, but grumbling and complaints; it is not charity or alms, but
prodigality and riot to bestow on them. These are to be fed not with bread but
stripes; they are not (...), but (...) rather beggars than poor, like Pharaohs
lean Kine, Gospel, From them shall be taken away even that which they have. And
therefore, all which from God, at this time, and for ever, I shall require and
beg of you, is the exercise and the improvement of your talent; that your
learning may not be for ostentation, but for traffic; not to possess, but
negotiate withal; not to complain any longer of the poverty of your stock, but
presently to set to work to husband it. That knowledge of God which portion to
set up with, is ample enough to be the Foundation of the greatest estate in the
World; and you need not despair, through an active, laboring, thriving course,
at last to set Heaven as a Roof on that Foundation: Only it will cost you some
pains to get the materials together for the building of the Walls, it is as yet
but a Foundation, and the Roof will not become it, till the walls be raised;
And therefore every faculty of your Souls and Bodies must turn Bezaleels and
Aholiabs, Spiritual Artificers for the forwarding

It is not enough to have gotten an abstracted Mathematical Scheme or Diagram
of this Spiritual Building in our Brain; it is the Mechanical laboring part of
Religion that must make up the edifice; the work and toil, and sweat of the
Soul; the business not of the Designer, but Carpenter; that which takes the
rough, unpolished, though excellent materials, and trims and fits them for use;
which cuts and polishes the rich, but as yet deformed jewels of the Soul, and
makes them shine indeed, and sparkle like stars in the Firmament. That ground
or sum of Pythagorean Philosophy, as it is set down by Hierocles in his (...),
if it were admitted into our schools or hearts, would make us Scholars and
Divines indeed; that Virtue is the way to Truth: Purity of affections a
necessary precursory to depth God, which does ennoble the Soul unto the
condition of an (...) or (...), of an heroical, nay sacred person, is first to
have been the person of a man aright, and by the practice of virtue to have
cleared the eye for that glorious Vision. But the divinity and learning of
these times floats and hovers too much in the brain, has not either weight or
sobriety enough in it to sink down, or settle it in the heart. We are Clemens
calls it; (...).
the art of sorting out, and laying in order all intellectual store in our
brains, tracing the Councils of God, and observing his methods in his
secrecies, but never for the (...), the refunding and pouring out any of that
store in the alms, as it were, and liberality of our actions. If Gerson's
definition of Theology, that it is scientia effectiva non speculativa, were
taken into our consideration at the choice of our professions, we should
certainly have fewer pretenders to Divinity, but it is withal hoped more Divines.

The Lacedaemonians and Cretians, says Josephus, brought up men to the
practice, (...). l. 2. p. 946.
but not knowledge of good, by their example only, not by precept or law: The
Athenians, and generally the rest of the Grecians used instructions of laws
only, but never brought them up by practice and discipline: But of all
Lawgivers, says he, only Moses, (...), dispensed and measured both these
proportionably together. And this, beloved, is that for which that policy of
the Primitive Jews deserved to be called (...), by a special name, the
Government of God Himself. This is it; the combination of your knowledge with
your practice, your learning with your lives, which I shall, in fine, commend
unto you, to take out both for your selves and others. 1. For your selves, that
in your study of Divinity you will not behold Gods Attributes as a sight or
spectacle, but as a Copy, not only to be admired, but to be transcribed into
your hearts and lives; not to gaze upon the Sun to the dazzling, nay, destroying
of your eyes, burning-glass, contract those blessed sanctifying rays that flow
from it, to the enlivening and inflaming of your hearts. And 2. In the behalf
of others; so to digest and inwardly dispense every part of sacred knowledge
into each several member and vein of Body and Soul, that it may transpire
through hands, and feet, and heart, and tongue; and so secretly insinuate it
self into all about you; that both by Precept and Example, see, and follow your
good works, and so glorify here your Father which is in heaven: that we may
all partake of that blessed Resurrection, not of the learned and the great, but
the just; and so hope and attain to be all glorified together with him
hereafter.

Now to him, etc.

The II. Sermon.
PHIL. IV. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.
THose two contrary Heresies, that cost S. Austin and the Fathers of his time
so much pains; the one all for natural strength, the other for irrecoverable
weakness; actions of the ordinary Christian have some tincture of one of these:
Scarce any sin is sent abroad into the World, without either this, or that
inscription. And therefore parallel to these, we may observe the like division
in the hearts and practical faculties between pride and sloth, opinion of
absolute power, and prejudice of absolute impotence: The one undertaking all
upon its own credit, the other suing, as it bankrupts upon record; that so they
may come to an easy composition with God for their debt of obedience: The one
so busy in contemplation of their present fortunes, that they are not at
leisure to make use of them, their pride helping them to ease, and if you look
nearly to poverty too, Revel. iii. 17.
Revel. iii. 17. the other so fastened to this Sanctuary, this religious piece
of profaneness, that leaving the whole business to God, as the undertaker and
proxy of their obedience, idleness shall be deemed devotion, and their best
piety sitting still.

These two differences of Men, either sacrilegious or supine, imperious or
lethargical, have so dichotomized this lower sphere of the Word, almost into
two equal parts, that the practice of humble obedience, and obeying humility,
the bemoaning our wants to God, with Petition to repair them, and the observing
and making use of succors which God in Christ has dispensed to us; those two
foundations of all Christian duty, providing between them, that our Religion be
neither (...), nor (...), Neither the virtue of the Atheist, nor the prayer of
the Sluggard, are almost quite vanished out of the World: As when the Body is
torn asunder, the Soul is without any farther act of violence forced out of its
place, that it takes its flight home to Heaven, being thus let out at the
Scissure, as at the Window; and only the two fragments of carcass remain

For the deposing of these two Tyrants, that have thus usurped the Soul between
them, dividing the Live child with that false Mother, into two dead parts: For
the abating this pride, and enlivening this deadness of practical faculties;
for the scourging this stout Beggar, and restoring this Cripple to his Legs,
the two Provisions in my Text, if the order of them only be transposed, and in
Gods method the last set first, will, I may hope and pray, prove sufficient. I
can do, etc.

1. Through Christ that strengthens me.] You have there, first, The Assertion
of the necessity of grace; and secondly, that enforced from the form of the
word (...), which imports the minutely continual supply of aids; and then,
thirdly, we have not only positively, but exclusively declared the person thus
assisting; in Christo confortante, it is by him, not otherwise, we can do thus,
or thus. Three particulars all against the natural confidence of the proud
Atheist.

2. The (...), I can do all things.] First, The (...), and secondly, the (...).
1. The power; and 2. the extent of that power: 1. The potency; and 2. the
omnipotency; and then 3. this not only originally of Christ that strengthens,
but inherently of me, being strengthened by Christ. Three particulars again, and
all against the conceived or pretended impotence, either of the false spy that
brought news of the Giants Anakims, Cannibals, in the way to Canaan, xiii. 32.
Numb. xiii. 32.
Or of the Sluggard, that is always affrighting and keeping himself at home,
with the Lion in the streets, some (...) or other difficulty or impossibility,
whenever any work or travel of obedience is required of us, Prove. xxvi. 13.
Prove. xxvi. 13.

It will not befit the majesty of the subject to have so many particulars, by
being severally handled, jointly neglected. Our best contrivance will be to
shorten the retail for the increasing of the gross, to Propositions.

I. The strength of Christ is the Original and Fountain of all ours; Through
Christ that, etc. strength of a Christian, from Christ derived, in a kind of
Omnipotency, sufficient for the whole duty of a Christian. Can do all things,
etc. III. The strength and power being thus bestowed, the work is the Work of a
Christian, of the suppositum, the Man strengthened by Christ. I can do, etc.
Of these in this order, for the removing only of those prejudices practice of
piety in the heart. And first of the first.

The strength of Christ is the Original and Fountain of all ours. The strength
of Christ, and that peculiarly of Christ the second Person of the Trinity, who
was appointed by consent to negotiate for us in the business concerning our
Souls. All our tenure or plea, to grace or glory, to depend not on any
absolute, respectless, though free donation, but conveyed to us in the hand of
a Mediator; That Privy Seal of his annexed Patent, or else of no value at that
Court of Pleas; or that Grand Assizes of Souls. Our Natural strength is the
gift of God, as God is considered in the first Article of our Creed, and by
that title of Creation we have that privilege of all created substances, to be
able to perform the work of nature, or else we should be inferior, to the
meanest creature in this; for the least stone in the street is able to move
downwards by its own principle of nature: And therefore, all that we have need
of in the performing of these, is only Gods concurrence, acts of choice, the
government and direction of our will, by his general providence and power.
However, even in this Work of Creation, Christ must not be excluded, (...) Gods
in the Plural, all the Persons of the Deity, in the whole work, and peculiarly
in the Faciamus hominem, are adumbrated, if not mentioned by Moses. And
therefore God is said to have made all by his Word, that inward, eternal Word
in his bosom, an articulation, and, as it were, incarnation of which, was that
Fiat and Longin. (...)
which the Heathen Rhetorician so admired in Moses for a magnificent sublime
expression. Yet in this Creation, and consequently this donation of natural
strength, peculiarly imputed to the first Person of the Trinity, because no
personal act of Christ, either of his satisfaction or merit, of his humiliation
or exaltation, did conduce to that; though the Son were consulted about it, yet
was it not (...), delivered to us in the hand of a Mediator. Our natural
strength we have of God, without respect to Christ incarnate, without Heaven, 2
Cor. iii. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, i. e.
says Parisiensis, Any thing of moment or valor, according to the Dialect of
Scripture, that calls the whole man by the name of his soul, (so many souls, i.
e. so many men, and so (...) the Pythagoreans word, thy soul is thou) counts of
nothing, but what tends to the salvation of that. But then our supernatural
strength, Grace and Christian strength, that is of another date, of another
tenure, of another allay; founded in the promise actually exhibited in the
death and exaltation of the Messiah, and continually paid out to us, by the
continued daily exercise of his Offices. 1. The Covenant sealed in his Blood,
after the manner of Eastern Nations, as a counterpart of Gods, to that which
Abraham had sealed to before in his Blood at his Circumcision. 2. The Benefits
made over in that Covenant, were given up in numerato, with a kind of Livery
and Exaltation; Epes. iv. 8.
which is the importance of that place, Ephesians. iv. 8. Psalm. lxviii.
out of the lxviii. Psalm, Thou have ascended on high] There is the date of it
upon Christ's inauguration to his Regal Office: As (...) and (...) and (...),
in Gr.
Thou have led captivity captive.] There is the evidence of conveyance unto
him, as a reward of his victory, and part of his triumph: Thou have given
gifts] or as the Psalm received, Gifts for men.] Both importing the same thing,
in diverse relations, received from his Father, (All power is given to me) that
he might give, dispense, convey, and steward it out to men; in the hand of a
Mediator. And then that which is thus made over to us, is not only the gift of
Grace, the habit by which we are regenerate: But above that account, daily
bublings out of the same Spring, minutely rays of this Sun of Righteousness,
which differ from that gift of Grace, as the propagation of life from the first
act of Conception, conservation from Creation; that which was there done in a
minute, is here done every minute; and so the Christian is still in fieri, not
in facto esse: or as a line which is an in suo indivisibili; the first called
by the Schools, Auxilium gratiae per modum principii, the other Per modum
concursus. And this is noted by the word (...), givings, Jam. i. 17. Jam. i. 17.
neither (...) as the Heathen called their virtues, as habits of their own
acquiring; nor again so properly (...), gifts, because that proves a kind of
tenure after the receipt, Data, eo tempore quo dantur fiunt accipientis, says
the Law: But properly and critically (...), givings, Christ always a giving,
confirming minutely not our title, gift; or else that as minutely ready again
to return to the crown. All our right and title to strength and power, is only
from Gods minutely donation. And the (...) in the Present tense implies, all
depending on the perpetual presence and assistance of his strength. Hence is it
that Christ is called the Father of Eternity, Isai. ix. 6. i. e. of the life to
come ((...) say the LXX, the age to come) the state of Christians under the
Gospel, and all that belongs to it; The Father] which does not only beget the
Child, but educate, provide being it self; and therefore it is Proclus his
observation of Plato, that he calls God, in respect of all Creatures (...) a
Maker; but (...) a Father in respect of Man. And this the peculiar title of
Christ, in respect of his Offices; not to Maker only, the Architect of that age
to come, of grace and glory, but peculiarly the Father which continues his
Paternal Relation for ever; yea, and the exercises of Paternal Offices by the
pedagogy of the Spirit, all the time of nonage, minutely adding and improving,
and building him up to the measure and pitch of his own stature and fullness.
And so again that sovereign Title of his Jesus, i. e. Mat. i. 21.
(...), Matt. i. 21. This title and office of Physician is peculiar to the
second person, to repair the daily That Sun of righteousness is said to have
his healing in his wings; i. e. in those rays which it minutely sends out, by
which as on wings, this fountain of all inherent and imputed righteousness, of
sanctifying and justifying Grace, takes its flight, and rests upon the
Christian Soul; and this still peculiarly, (...), not in God (...), but (...),
in Christ; In Christ that strengthens.

The not observing, or not acknowledging of which difference, between the gifts
of God, and the gifts of Christ, the endowments of that first, and this second
foundation, the hand of God, and the hand of a Mediator, is I conceive the
ground of all those perplexing controversies about the strength of nature, and
patrimony of grace, Pelagius very jealous and unwilling to part with his
natural power, left any thing in the business of his Salvation should be
accounted due unto Lib. 1. Dial. ad Pelag.
they are his own words, if Jerome may be credited, Mihi nullus auferre poterit
liberi arbitrii potestatem, ne si in operibus meis Deus adjutor extiterit, non
mihi debeatur merces, sed ei qui in me operatus. Socinus again denying all
merit and satisfaction of Christ, making all that but a Chimaera, and so
evacuating or antiquating that old tenure by which we hold all our Spiritual
Estate. The Romanists again, at least some of them, Bernard. in Sen. Sermon. 61.
Art. 1. c. 8.
bestowing upon the blessed Virgin after Conception, such Jurisdiction in the
temporal procession of the Holy quibus vult, quomodo, quando, and per manus:
Ibid. and Art. 2. c. 10.
That she is the neck to Christ the Head, cant. vii. 4. and Vieg as in Apoc. c.
12. com. 2. sect. 2. number. 6.
Sublato Virginis patrocinio, perinde ac halitu intercluso, peccator vivere
diutius non potest: and store enough of such emasculate Theology as this. And
yet others that maintain the quite contradictory to all these, acknowledging a
necessity of supernatural strength to the attaining of our supernatural end,
and first a natural power; (or if you will call it natural grace, the Illius
est gratiae quod creatus est, Ep. 139.
S. Jerome; Gratia Dei qua fecit nos, In Pla. cxliv.
S. Austin; and Crearis gratia, De gratia and lib. arbit.
S. Bernard: and that properly styled, the strength of God, but not of Christ,
enabling us for the works of nature.

And then above this, is regularly superstructed the strength of Christ,
special supernatural strength made over unto us, not at our first but second
birth; without which, though we are men, yet not Christians, Live, says
Clemens, (...), a kind of embryon, of a child in the womb, of the gentle dark
uncomfortable being, a kind of first draught, or ground colors only, and
monogram of life. Though we have Souls, yet in relation to spiritual acts or
objects, but weak consumptive cadaverous souls (as (...) the Old Testament word
for the Soul, and (...) in the 72, signifies, a carcass or dead body, Numb. v.
2. and otherwhere) and then by this accession of this strength of Christ, this
dead Soul revives into a kind of omnipotency; the Pygmie is sprung up into a
Giant, this to think any thing, is now able to do all things; which brings me
to my second Proposition.

The strength of a Christian, from Christ derived, is a kind of Omnipotence,
sufficient for the whole duty of a Christian, (...), Can do all things.

The clearing of this Truth from all difficulties or prejudices, will duty of a
Christian in the proposition: which two being of the same importance, the same
hand will unravel them both. Now what is the whole duty of a Christian, but the
adequate condition of the second Covenant? upon performance of which salvation
shall certainly be had, and without which salvare nequeat ipsa si cupias salus,
the very sufferings and saving mercies of Christ will avail us nothing. As for
any Exercise of Gods absolute Will, or Power, in this Christ's Kingdom, I think
we may fairly omit to take it into consideration; for sure the New Testament
will acknowledge no such phrase, nor I think any of the Ancients that wrote in
that language. Whereupon perhaps it will be worth observing, in the confession
of the Religion of the Greek Church, subscribed by Cyril the present Patriarch
of Constantinople, where having somewhat to do with this phrase, Of Gods
absolute Dominion so much talked on here in the West, he is much put to it to
express it in Greek, and at last fain to do it by condition of the second
Covenant, Three things will require to be premised to our present enquiry.

Condition, and that an adequate one, of the same extent as the promises of the
Covenant; something exacted at our hands to be performed if we mean to be the
better for the demise of that Indenture, As many as received him, to them he
gave power, etc. Joh. i. 12. Joh. i. 12.
to these, and to none else, positively and exclusively. To him that overcomes
will I give, Rev. ii. 7.
Rev. ii. 7. I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy iv. 7.
etc. 2 Timothy iv. 7. henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown; Then begins the
title to the Crown, and not before: when the coelum rapiunt, God challenged on
his righteousness as a Judge; not on ground of his absolute pleasure as a Lord,
which will; but upon supposition of a Pact or Covenant, which limits and
directs the award and process, for according unto it God the righteous Judge
shall give. Mark xvi. 16.
And Mark xvi. 16. in Christ's farewell speech to his Disciples, where he seals
their Commission of Embassage and Preaching to every creature; He that
believes not shall be damned; this believing whatever it signifies is Matthew.
To observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: A belief not of brain or
fancy, but that of heart and practice, i. e. Distinctly Evangelical or
Christian obedience, the (...) in my Text, and the whole duty of a Christian in
the proposition; which if a Christian by the help of Christ be not able to
perform, then consequently he is still incapable of Salvation by the stante
pacto, but those that perform the condition of it, that irreversible Oath of
God, which is always fulfilled in kind without relaxation, or commutation, or
compensation of punishment, being already gone out against them; Heb. iv. 3.
I have sworn in my wrath that they shall not enter into my rest. And therefore
when the end of Christ's mission is described, Joh. iii. 17. Joh. iii. 17.
That the world through him might be saved; there is a shrewd [ But] in the
next Verse, But he that believes not is condemned This was upon agreement
between God and Christ, that the impenitent Infidel should be never the better
for it, should die unrescued in his old Condemnation. So that there is not only
a logical possibility, but a moral necessity of the performing of this (...),
or else no possibility of Salvation. And then that reason of disannulling the
old, and establishing the new Covenant, because there was no justification to
be had by the old, Gal. iii. 21.
rendered Gal. iii. 21. would easily be retorted upon the Apostle thus, Why
neither is any life or justification

The Second thing to be premised of this Condition is, That it is an immutable,
unalterable, indispensable Condition. The 2d. Covenant standing this must also
stand, that has been proved already, because a condition adequate, and of the
same latitude with the Covenant.

But now secondly, this second, both Covenant and Condition, Everlasting
Covenant, Ez. xvi. 60.
Ezekiel. xvi. 60. No possibility of a change, unless upon an impossible
supposition, there should remain some other fourth Person of the Deity to come
into the World. The Tragic Poets, says Tully, when they had overshot
themselves in a desperate Plot, that would never come about, ad Deum
confugiunt, they were fain to fly to a God, to lay that unruly spirit that
their fancy had raised. Upon Adam's sin and breach of the Condition of the
First Covenant, there was no possibility in the wit of man, in the Fabulae
exitum explicare, to come off with a fair conclusion, had not the Second Person
of the Trinity, that (...), come down in his tire, and personation of flesh,
not in the stage Clothes or Livery, but substantial form of a servant upon the
stage. And he again having brought things into some possibility of an happy
conclusion (though it cost him his life in the negotiation) leaves it at his
departure in the trust of his vicegerent, the Spirit of his power, to go through
with his beginnings; to see that Condition of the Second Covenant. The Spirit
then enters upon the work, dispatches Officers, Ambassadors to all Nations in
the World (...), Mar. xvi. 15.
to every creature, Mark xvi. 15. And himself to the end of the World, goes
along to back them in their Ministry: And then the next thing the Scripture
tells us of, is the coming to Harvest, after this Seeds time, and he that
believes not, shall be damned; and so that Sacred Canon is shut up.

The Issue of this second Pracognitum, is this, That if there still remain any
difficulties, any impossibilities to be overcome; so they are like to remain
for ever, unless there be some other Person in the Godhead to be sent, to make
up Pythagoras his (...), there is no new way imaginable to be found out; and
that perhaps is the reasons of those peremptory denunciations of Christ against
them that sin against the Holy Ghost, against that administration of grace
entrusted to him, That there shall be never any remission for them, in Either
by way of Justification here, or Glorification at that grand Manumission
hereafter. And that may serve for a second proof of the Proposition, That if
for all, the duty of a Christian is not feasible, it must remain so for ever;
an adumbration thereof you may see set down Heb. x. Heb. x 16, 26.
comparing the 16 with the 26 Verse. In the sixteenth you have the Second
Covenant described, and the condition of it in the Verses following; and then
Verse 26. if after this we sin wilfully, then our estate becomes desperate,
There remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation; and he that takes not then quarter, accounted
an adversary for ever: The Apostate, whether he renounce his faith, in fact or
profession, must be a Castaway.

Wherein this condition of the second Covenant consists; and that is not in any
rigor of legal performance (that was the bloody purport of that old obligation,
that soon concluded us all under death irreversibly) nor in any Egyptian
Pharaoh's tasks, a full tale of Bricks, without Straw, without any materials to
make them; no Pharisaical burden laid on heavy, and no finger to help to bear
it; Mat. xi. 30.
but an easy yoke, a light burden, Mat. xi. 30. and not only light, but
alleviating: He that was laden before, is the Take my yoke, and you shall find
rest. And therefore Christ thinks reasonable, not to lay the yoke upon them as
an injunction (as the worldly fashion is) but to commend it to them, as a thing
that any prudent man would be glad to take up, in the beginning of the Verse,
Take my yoke upon you.

In a word, it consists in the embracing of Christ in all his Offices, the
whole Person of Christ; but especially as he is typically described in Zachary,
Zac. vi. 11, 13.
a crowned Jesus, a Priest upon a Throne; his Scepter joined Ephod, to rule and
receive tribute as well as sacrifice, and satisfy and reconcile: Consilium
pacis inter ambo ea, those two Offices of his reconciled in the same, our
Priest become our King, That being delivered, we may serve him (in the other
Zacharie's phrase, Delivered without fear, serve him) in holiness and
righteousness: the performance of that duty that Christ enables to perform;
Luke i. 74.
the sincerity of the honest heart; the doing what our Christian strength will
reach to. and humbly setting the rest on Christ's score. And then when that
which can Parisiensis says, D^ t^nt.
even the habit of Grace, in the regenerate heart, is as long as a man carries
flesh about him as an armed man, Positus in lubrico, set to fight in a slippery
place, all his armor and valor will not secure him from a fall; or again, as
the General of a Warrior on a tender mouthed horse, impatient of Discipline, or
check, is fetched over sometimes for all his strength and armor: Because, I say,
there is none but offend sometimes, even against his power; there is therefore
bound up in this new Volume of Ordinances, an (...), a New Testament, a Codicil
of Repentance, added to the Testament; that Plank for Shipwrackt souls, that
City of Refuge, that Sanctuary for the Manslayer sincere obedience be all that
is required, and that exclude no Christian living, be he never so weak; but the
false, faithless Hypocrite, if repentance will repair the faults of that; and
that exclude none but him, that lives and dies indulgent in sin, the common
prostitute, final impenitent infidel: If whatsover he wanting, be made over in
the demise of the Covenants; and whatsoever we are enabled to do, accepted in
the condition of it; then certainly no Omnipotence of the Christian, his
sufficiency from Christ to perform his whole duty: Which is the sum of the
conclusion of the second Arausican Council held against Pelagius, Vid. Vos^.
Hist. Pel. p. 315.
c. ult. Secundum sidem Catholicam credimus, quod accepta per Baptismum gratia
omnes Baptizati Christo auxiliante and cooperante quae ad salutem pertinent
possint and debeant (si fideliter laborare voluerint) adimplere. The not
observing of in via, can fulfill the Law of God: Of that collision concerning
merits, concerning venial and mortal sin, justification by works, or Faith, or
both; all which upon the grounds premised, will to any intelligent sober
Christian, a friend of truth, and a friend of peace, be most evidently
composed. To bring down this thesis to these several Hypotheses, this time or
place will not permit; I shall be partial to this part of my Text, if I pass
Proposition.

That the strength and power being thus bestowed, the work is the work of a
Christian, of the Suppositum, the Man strengthened and assisted by Christ. I
can, etc. I, not I alone, abstracted from Christ, nor I principally, and Christ
only in Subsidiis, to facilitate that to me which I was not quite Pelagius
himself, that was first only for nature, at last to take in one after another,
five Subsidiaries more; but only as so many horses to draw together in the
Chariot with nature, being so pursued by the Councils and Fathers, from one
hold to another, till he was at last almost deprived of all; acknowledging,
says S. Austin, Divinae gratiae adjutorium ad posse; and then had not the
Devil stuck close to him at the exigence, and held out at the velle and
operari, he Heretic.) But I] absolutely impotent in my self to any
supernatural duty, being then rapt above my self, strengthened by Christ's
perpetual influence, having all my strength and ability from him, am then by
that strength able to do all things my self. As in the old Oracle, the God
inspired and spoke in the ear of the Prophet, and then the Vates spoke under
from thence, called (...), ecchoed out that voice aloud which he had received
by whisper, a kind of Scribe, or Crier, or Herald, to deliver out as he
principal, (...), a God, or Oracle; the Prophet (...) an inspired Enthusiast,
dispensing out to his credulous clients, all that the Oracle did dictate; or as
the Earth, which is cold and dry in its elementary constitution; and therefore
bound up to a necessity of perpetual barrenness, having neither of those two
procreative heat or moisture, in its composition; but then by the beams of the
Sun, and neighborhood of Water, or to supply the want of that, rain from
Heaven to satisfy its thirst, this cold dry Element begins to teem, carries
many Mines of treasure in the Womb, many granaries of fruit in its surface, and
in event, (...), contributes all that we can crave, either to our need, or
luxury. Now though all this be done by those foraign aids, as principal, nay
sole efficients of this fertility in the earth to conceive, and of its strength
to bring forth, Heb. vi. 7.
Heb. vi. 7. as to the immediate parent of all. Thus is it God's work (...),
says Cyril, Ca. 1. p. 26.
to plant and water, and that he does mediately by Apollos and Paul: yea, and
to give the increase, that belongs to him immediately; neither to Man, nor
Angel, but only ad Agricolam Trinitatem, In. Jo. tr. 80.
says S. Austin; but after all this (...), though God give the increase, thou
must bring forth the fruit. The Holy Ghost overshadowed Mary, Mat. i. 18.
and she was found with child, Mat. i. 18. Holy Ghost the principal, Indulgin.
de Incarn. and gra. c. 20.
nay sole agent in the work, and she a pure Virgin still: and yet Luke i. 31.
it is the Angels Divinity, That Mary shall conceive and bring forth a Son. All
the efficiency from the Holy Ghost, and partus ventrem, the work attributed,
and that truly to Mary, the subject in whom it was wrought; and therefore is
she called by the Ancients not only officina miraculorum, and (...), The shop
of Miracles, and The Workhouse of the Holy Ghost, (as the Rhetoric Councils,
(that were more careful in their phrases) (...), not only the Conduit through
which he past, but the Parent of whose substance he was made. And thus in the
production of all spiritual Actions, the principal sole efficient of all is
Christ, and His Spirit; all that is conceived in us, is of the Holy Ghost: The
holy Principle, holy Desire, holy Action, the posse, Phil. ii. 12.
and velle, and operari, all of him, Phil. ii. 12. But then being so
overshadowed, the Soul it self conceives; being still assisted, carries Mary
was the Mother of God, so the Christian Soul is the Parent of all its Divine
Christian Performances; Christ the Father, that enables with his Spirit; and
the Soul the Mother, that actually brings forth.

And now that we may begin to draw up toward a conclusion* Two things we may
raise from hence by way of inference to our Practice.

1. Where all the Christians non-proficiency is to be charged, either 1. Upon
the Habitual Hardness, or 2. The Sluggishness, or 3. The Rankness of his own
wretchless heart.

1. Hardness, That for all the seed that is sown, the softning dew that
distills, and rain that is poured down, the enlivening influences that are
dispensed among us, yet the (...), the hardness (...), that dry unnutrifying
Earth in the Philosopher's, or in Christ's dialect, Stony-ground, resists all
manner of Conception, will not be hospitable, yield any entertainment, even to
these Angelical guests, though they come as to Lot's house in Sodom, only to
secure the owner from most certain destruction. This is the reason that so much
of Gods Husbandry among us, returns him so thin, so unprofitable an Harvest,
ceciderunt in petrosa; and it is hard finding any better tillage now adays; the
very milk and honey of Canaan is degenerate, they say, into this Composition;
and herein is a mavelous thing, that where God has done all that any man, if
it were put to his own partial judgment, would think reasonable for him to do
for his Vineyard, gathered out stones, those seeds of natural hardness, and
which deserves to be marked, Isa. v. 2.
built a Wine Press, Isa. v. 2. a sure token that he expected a vintage in
earnest, not only manured for fashion, or to leave them without excuse; yet for
all these, Labruscas, wild, juiceless tot genera labruscarum, so many wild
unsavory fruits, is the best return he can hear of.

One thing more let me tell you; It Is not the original hardness of Nature to
which all this can be imputed, for, for the mollifying of that, all this
gardening was bestowed; digging and gathering out, and indeed nothing more
ordinary, than out of such stones to raise up children But it is the long habit
and custom of sin which has harrast out the Soul, congealed that natural
gravel, and improved it into a perfect quarry or mine; and it is not the
Preachers Charm, the Annunciation of the Gospel, that Power of God unto
Salvation, unto a Jew or Heathen; it is not David's Harp, (that could exorcise
the evil Spirit upon Saul) not the every day eloquence, even of the Spirit of
God, that can in holy Esdras his phrase, persuade them to Salvation.

2. Sluggishness, and inobservances of God's seasons and opportunities, and
seed-times of Grace. God may appear a thousand times, and not once find us in
case to be parlyed with: Christ comes but thrice to his Disciples from his
Prayers in the Garden, and that thrice he finds them asleep, Mart. xxvi.
Mat. xxvi. Christ can be awake to come, and that in a more pathetical
language, Sic non potuistis hora una, as the vulgar most fully out of the
Greek; Were you so unable to watch one hour? The Pharisee can be awake to Plot,
Judas to betray, their joint Vigils Proparasceve to that grand Passover the
slaying of the Lamb of God, and only the Disciples they are asleep, for their
eyes were heavy says the Text; and this heaviness of eyes, and heaviness of
heart (whereupon (...) in the LXXII is ordinarily set for sinners) is the
depriving us many times, not only of Christ, but his Spirit too. So many
apologies, and excuses to him when he calls, A little more sleep and slumber,
and folding of the hands: Such drowsiehearted slovenly usage when he comes,
that no wonder if we grieve him out of our houses: Such contentedness in our
present servile estate, that if a Jubilee should be proclaimed from Heaven, a
general Manumission of all servants from these Galleys of sin, we would be
ready with those servants for whom Moses makes a provision, to come and tell
him plaingly, We will not go out free, Ex. xxi. 6.
be bored through Ex. xxi. 6.

3. Rankness, and a kind of spiritual sin of Sodom; Pride and fullness of bread,
abusing the Grace of God into wantonness; either to the ostentatious setting
themselves out before men, or else the feeding themselves up to that high flood
of spiritual pride and confidence, that it will be sure to impostumate in the
soul. Some men have been fain to be permitted to sin, for the abating this
humor in them by way of phlebotomy; S. Peter, I think, is an example of that.
Nebuchadnezzar Paul, I am sure, had a Messenger sent to him to that purpose, by
way of prevention, that he might not be exalted above measure; and when he
thought well of it, he receives it as a present sent him from Heaven, (...),
reckons of it as a gift of Grace, or if you will, a medicinal dose, or recipe,
but rather a plaster, or outward application, which per antiperistasin would
drive in his spiritual heat, and so help his weak digestion of grace, make him
the more thriving Christian

The Issue of this first Inference is this, That it is not God's partial or
niggardly dispencing of Grace; but either our unpreparedness to receive, or
preposterous giddiness in making use of it, which is the cause either of
Consumption, or Aposthume in the Soul, either starving or surfeiting the
Christian.

The second Inference, how all the Christians diligence is to be placed; what
he has to do in this wayfare to his home: And that is Travelers have, first,
to be always upon his feet, advancing minutely something toward his next stage.
See that we be employed, or else how can God assist; we must (...), or else he
cannot (...); and see that we be employed aright, or else God must not, cannot
assist. The Sluggards devotions can never get into Gods presence; they want
heat and spirit to lift them up, and activity to press and enfore them when
they are there. It was an impression in the very Heathen, Porcius Cato in the
History, That watching, and acting, Gods help is obtained, Ubi socordiae atque
ignaviae tradideris, frustra Deos implores. Hier. in Aug. car. Pyth.
And Jerome to the same purpose, that their sacrifice are but (...), food for
the fire to devour; and their richest offerings to the Temple, but a spoil to
the sacrilegious to prey on: And the sinners devotions must not be entertained
there; they would even profane that holy place. He that Joh. ix. 31.
saw thus much, Joh. ix. 31. Now we know that God hears not sinners; but if
any be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him does God hear.

And then secondly, to get furnished, whatever it cost him, of all provision
and directions for his way; and so this will conclude in a double Exhortation,
both combined in that of David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. xxii. 16. 1 Chronicles. xxii. 16.
when all materials were laid in, and Artificers provided for the building of
the Temple, and wanted nothing but a Leader to actuate and enliven them, Arise
therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

1. To set about the business as thine own work, as the task that will not be
required of the Spirit of God, of the Scripture, of the Preacher, but of thee.
When it is performed, thou would be loath that God should impute all to
himself, crown his own Graces, Ordinances, Instruments, and leave thee as a
cipher unrewarded: And therefore, whilst it is a performing, be content to
believe, that somewhat Talent; and in a word, of faithful service to show here,
or else when the Euge bone serve is pronounced, thou will not be able, (...). v.
confidently to answer to thy name. (...), said the Milesians to Brutus. All
the Weapons in the world will not defend the man, unless the man actuate, and
fortify, and defend his weapons. Thy strength consists all in the strength of
Christ, Exhortation of the Apostles, would never have been given in form of
Exhortation to the Christian, but of Prayer only to Christ, Stand fast, quit
your selves like men, 1 Cor. xvi. 13.
be strong, 1 Cor. xvi. 13.

Lastly, Or indeed that which must be both first and last, commensurate to all
our diligence, the Viaticum that you must carry with Prayers of humble gasping
Souls: Humble, in respect of what grace is received; Be sure not to be exalted
with that consideration. Gasping for what supply may be obtained from that
eternal unexhausted Fountain; and these Prayers not only, that God will give,
but, as Josephus makes mention of the Jews Liturgy, (...) That they may
receive: And as Porphyry, of one kind of Sacrifice, (...), That they may use;
and every of us fructify in some proportion answerable to our irrigation.

Now the God of all Grace, who has called us into his eternal glory in Christ
Jesus; after that you have obeyed a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you.

To him, be glory and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

The III. Sermon.
PROVE. i. 22. How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity?
THat Christ is the best, and Satan the worst chosen Master, is one of the
weightiest, and least considered Aphorisms of the Gospel. Were we but so just
and kind to our selves, as actually to pursue Heaven the principle of our
motion) but only think never the worse of a worldly temporary bliss, not
quarrel against it for being attended with an eternal: Were we but patient of
so much sobriety and consideration, as calmly to weigh and ponder what course,
in all probability, were most likely to befriend and oblige us here, to make
good its promise of helping us to the Christ might carry it from all the World
besides, our Savior from all the tempters and destroyers; and (besides so many
other considerable advantages) this superlative transcendent one, of giving us
the only right to the reputation and title of Wisdom here in these Books, be
acknowledged the Christians, i. e. the Disciples monopoly and enclosure: And
Folly, the due brand and reproach and portion of the ungodly.

wisest Man, beside Christ, that was ever in the World, you may see by the
Text, had this notion of it, brings in Wisdom by a prosopopaeia ( i. e. either
Christ himself, or the saving doctrine of Heaven, in order to the regulating of
our lives, or again, Wisdom in the ordinary notion of it) libelling and
reproaching the folly of all the sorts of sinners in the World, posting from
the [ without in the streets] Verse. 10. to the Assemblies of the greatest
renown [ the chief place of concourse,] i. e. Clearly their Sanhedrim, or great
Council in the 21. from thence to the places of judicature; for that is [the
openings of the gates] nay, to [ the City] (...) the Metropolis and glory of
the Nation; and crying out most passionately, and bitterly against all in the
loudest language of contumely and satyr, that ever Pasquin or Marforius were
taught to speak: And the short of it is, That the pious Christian is the only
tolerable wise; and the World of unchristian sinners, are a company of the most
wretched, simple Atheistical fools, which cannot How long, ye simple ones, will
ye love simplicity? And ye scorners, etc.

The first part of this Verse, though it be the cleanest of three expressions,
has yet in it abundantly enough of rudeness, for an address to any civil
Auditory: I shall therefore contain my discourse within those stanchest limits,
How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And in them observe only
these three particulars.

1. The character of the ungodly man's condition, contained in these two
expressions, Simple ones, and simplicity; How long, ye simple, etc.

2. The aggravation of the simplicity, and so heightning of the character, and
that by two farther considerations.

First, From their loving of that which was so unlovely, That they should be so
simple as to love simplicity.

Secondly, From their continuance in it, that they should not at love
simplicity so long.

3. The passion that it produces in the speaker (be it Wisdom, or be it
Christ, or be it Solomon) to consider it; and that passion, whether of pity,
That men should be such fools; or of indignation, That they should love and
delight in it so long. How long etc.

I begin first with the first, The character of sin and sinners, i. e. Of the
ungodly man's condition, contained in these two expressions: Simple ones, and
simplicity. How, etc.

Four notions we may have of these words, which will all be appliable to this
purpose: You shall see them as they rise.

First, As the calling one simple, is a word of reproach, or contumely; the
very same with the calling one (...), Matthew. v. i. e. Empty, brainless person,
the next degree to the (...), or thou fool, in the end of that and this Verse.
And then the thing that we are to observe from thence, is, What a reproachful
thing an unchristian life

A reproach to Nature first, to our humane kind, which was an honorable
reverend thing in Paradise, before sin came in to humble and defame it; a
solemn, severe Lawgiver, (...), in Clemens; the Systeme or Pandect of all
Rational notions, (...), Rev. xxii. 15.) put to shame and rebuke, dishonored
and degraded, as it were. Not all the ugliness and poison of the toad, has so
deformed that kind of creatures, brought it so low in genere entium, as the
deformed malignantcondition of sin has men, making them (...), the children,
i. e. the objects of all the wrath, and hatred in the World.

2. A reproach to our Souls, those immortal vital Creatures inspired into us by
Heaven, and now raised higher, superinspir'd by the Grace of Christ; which are
then as Mezentius's invention of punishment, bound up close with a Carcass of
Sin, tormented and poisoned with its stench, buried in that noysomest Vault, or
Carnel-house. Pythagoreans, the (...), what a restraint of sin it would be, if
a man would remember the reverence he ought unto himself, and (...), was their
own explication of it; the Soul within thee is that self to whom all that dread
and awe, and reverence is due. And O what an impudent affront, whatan
irreverential profaning of that sacred Celestial Beam within thee (that (...),
as the Philosophers call it) is every paultry Oath, or Rage, or Lust, that the
secure sinner is so minutely sin, say the Schools, being in this respect a kind
of Idolatry, an incurvation and prostitution of that Heavenly Creatute
(ordained to have nothing but Divinity in its prospect) to the meanest, vilest
Heathen Worship, the Crocodile, the Cat, the Scarabee, the Dii Stercorii, the
most noisome abominations under Heaven.

3. A reproach to God, who has owned such scandalous Creatures, has placed us
in a degree of Divinity next unto Angels, nay Christ, that by assuming that
nature, and dying for it, has made it emulate the Angelical Eminence, and been
in a manner liable to the censure of partiality in so doing; in advancing us so
unworthy, dignifying us so beyond the merit of our behaviors, honoring us so
unproportionably above what our actions can own, Whilst those that are in
scarlet embrace the dunghill, Lam. iiii. 5.
as it is in the Lamentations, those that are honored by God, act so
dishonourably. 'Twas Plato's affirmation of God in respect of men, that he was
a Father, when of all other Maker; and it is Arrian's superstruction on that,
Lib. 1. c. 3.
that remembering that we are the Sons of God, we should never admit any base
degenerous thought, any thing reproachful to that stock, unworthy of the
grandeur of the Family from whence we are extracted: If we do, it will be more
possible for us to profane, and embase Heaven, than for the reputation of that
Parentage of ours to ennoble us: the scandal that such a degenerous,
disingenuous Progeny Sacrilege to Heaven, a violation to those sacred mansions,
a proclaiming to the World what colonies of polluted Creatures came down from
thence, though there be a nulla retrorsum, no liberty for any such to return
thither.

Lastly, It Is a reproach to the very Beasts, and the rest of the Creation which
are designed by God, the servants and slaves of sinful Man; which may justly
take up the language of the slave to his vicious Tune mihi Dominus? Art thou my
Lord, who art so far a viler Bondslave, than those over whom thou tyrannizest?
a slave to thy Passion, thy Lust, thy Fiends, who have so far dethroned thy
self, that the beast becomes more beast when it remembers thee to have any
degree of soverainty over it.

Put these four Notions together, and 'twill give you a view of the first
intimation of this Text, the baseness and reproachfulness of the sinners
course: and unless he be the most abject, wretchless, forlorn sot in the whole
Creation, unless he be turned all into earth, or phlegm; if he has in his
whole Composition, one spark of Ambition, of Emulation, of ordinary sense of
Honor; the least warmth of Spirit; impatience of being, the only degenerous
wretch of the earth now, and of Hell to all Eternity; if he be not absolutely
arrived to Arrian's (...), L. 1. c. 5.
(his practical as well as judicative faculty, quite quarr'd and petrifi'd
within him) to that (...) in the Gospel, Mar. iii. 5.
that direct ferity and brutality, in comparison of which, palsy or lethargy
of Soul, were Dignity and Preferment; if he be not, all that is deplorable
already, and owned to be so for ever; he will certainly give one vital spring,
one last plunge, to recover some part of the Honor and Dignity of his
Creation; break off that course that has so debased him, precipitated him into
such an abyss of filth and shame, if it be but in pity to the Nature, the Soul,
the God, the whole Creation about him; that like the seven importunate Women,
Isai. iv. 1.
Isai. iv. 1. lay hold on this one insensate person take away our reproach. And
let that serve for a first part of the Sinners Character, the consideration of
his reproachful, scandalous offensive state, which might in all reason work
some degree of good on him, in the firstplace.

A second Notion of this Phrase, and degree of this Character, is the giddiness
and unadvisedness of the Sinners Course; as simplicity ordinarily signifies
senselesness, precipitousness, as Trismegistus defines it (...), a species of
madness in one place, and (...), a kind of drunkenness in another, a wild
irrational acting, and this does express it self in our furious mischieving our
selves, in doing all quite contrary unto our own ends, our own aims, our own
principles of action: and this you will see most visible in the particulars, in
every motion, every turn of the sinners life. As

malices, wherein he breaths forth such Aetna's of flames against others, you
may generally mark it he hurts neither God nor man but only himself. In every
such hellish breathing, all that malignity of his cannot reach God, he is
(...), untemptable by evil in this other sense, I mean impenetrable by his
malice: All that was shot up toward God, comes down immediately on the sinners
own head; and for the Man against whom he is enraged, whose blood he thirsts
after, whose ruin he desires, he does him the greatest courtesy joy and
exultation) is hereby become his portion; and that is the reason he is advised
to do good to him by way of gratitude, to make returns of all civility and
acknowledgments, not as to an Enemy, but a benefactor, to bless and pray for
him by whom he has been thus obliged: Only this raving mad man's own Soul is
that against which all these blows and malices sufferer all this while: First,
in the very meditating and designing the malice, all which space he lives not
the life, but the Hell of a Fiend or Devil (that (...), that enemyman, as he is
called) his names-sake, and parallel: And again secondly in the executing of
it; that being one of the basest, and most dishonorable employments; that of
an (...), an Angel or Officer of Satan's, (to buffet some precious Image of
God) which is to that purpose filled out of Satan's fullness, swollen with all the
venomous humor lastly, After the satiating of his wrath, a bloated, guilty,
unhappy Creature, one that has fed at the Devils table, swill'd and glutted
himself in blood, and now betrays it all in his looks and complexion. And as in
our malices, so, Secondly, in our loves, in our softer as well as our rougher
passions, we generally drive quite contrary to our own ends and interests; and
if we obtain, we find it experimentally, the enjoyment of what we pursue most
vehemently, unsatisfactory, but grating, has to the vanity, the addition of
vexation also; not only the (...), no manner of fruit, then at the point of
enjoying, an empty paultry nothing, but over and above the (...), shame, and
perturbation of mind (the gripings and tormina of a confounded Conscience)
immediately consequent; and 'twould even grieve an enemy to hear the Apostle go
on to the dear payment at the close, for this sad nothing, the (...), ex
abundanti, and over and above the end of those And oh what a simplicity is
this! Thus to seek out emptiness and death, when we think we are on one of our
advantageous pursuits, in this Error of our ways, as the Wise man calls it, is
sure a most prodigious mistake, a most unfortunate error; and to have been
guilty of it more than once, the most unpardonable simplicity.

From our loves proceeding to our hopes, which if it be any but 1 John iii. 3.
than this hope on him, 1 John iii. 3. i. e. hope on God, and that joined with
purifying, it is in plain terms the greatest contrariety to it self, the
perfectest desperateness; and for secular hopes the expectation of good, of
advantages from this or that staff of Egypt, the depending on this, whether
profane, or but ordinary innocent auxiliary, it is the forfeiting all our
pretensions to that great aid of Heaven (as they say the Loadstone draws not,
when the Adamant is near) it is the taking us off from our grand trust and
dependence, Romans i. beside, or in separation from the Creator, is (and God is
engaged in honor, that it should be) struck presently from Heaven, eaten up
with worms like Herod, when once its good qualities are deified: broken to
pieces with the brazen Serpent, burnt and stamped to powder with the golden
Calf: Isa. i. 31.
and the strong shall be as tow, Isa. i. 31. Paul and Barnabas are fain to run
in a passion upon the multitude that meant to do them Worship, with a Men and
Brethren, etc. and the very Angel to St. John, Rev. xxii. 9.
in Rev. xxii. when he fell down before him; vide ne feceris, see thou do it
not; for fear if he had been so mistaken by him, he might have forfeited his
Angelical estate by that unluckiness; so certainly the most honorable
promising earthly help, if it be once looked on with a confidence, or an
adoration;

And it were well when our worldly hopes have proved thus little to our
advantage; our worldly fears in the next place, might bring us in more profit.
But alas! that passionate perturbation of our faculties stands us in no stead,
but to hasten and bring our fears upon us, by succors which were present to
our rescue; Wisd. xvii. 12.
the passion most treacherosly betraying the aids which reason, if it had been
allowed admission, was ready to have offered; but perpetually anticipating that
misery, which is the thing we fear, the terror it self being greater disease
sometimes, constantly a greater reproach and contumely Indian sacrifice to a
Sprite or Mormo, ne noceat, to escape not a real evil, but only an
apprehension, or terror; this is a piece of the most destructive wariness, the
(...), the greatest simplicity that can be.

I shall not enlarge the prospect any further, as easily I might, to our
Unchristian Joys, that do so dissolve, our Unchristian Sorrows, that do so
contract and shrivel up the Soul; (and then as Themison, and his old sect of
Methodists resolved, that the laxum and strictum, the immoderate rejoicing at
the Mischiefs of other men; (which directly transform us into fiends and
furies, and reak no malice on any but our selves, leave us a wasted, wounded,
prostitute, harrast Conscience, to tire and gnaw upon its own bowels, and
nothing else.) I have exercised you too long with so trivial a subject, such an
easy every days demonstration,

The Third notion of Simplicity, is that of the Idiot, the Natural, as we call
him, he that has some eminent failing in his intellectuals, the laesum
principium, the pitcher or wheel, in that 12. of Ecclesiastes, I mean the
faculty of understanding, or reason broken or wounded at the fountain or
cistern; and so nothing but animal, sensitive actions to be numbering; I mean
not that of saying numbers by rote, (for that is but an act of sensitive
memory) but that of applying them to matter, and from thence that of
intellectual numbering, i. e. of comparing and measuring, judging of
proportions, pondering, weighing discerning the differences of things by the
power of the judicative which two, seem much more probably the propriety and
difference of a man from a beast, than (that which the Philosophers have
fancied) the power of laughing or discoursing. To reckon and compute, is that
which in men of an active clear reason, is perpetually in exercising per modum
actus eliciti, that naturally of its own accord, without any command or
appointment of the will, pours it self out upon every object. We shall often
deprehend our selves numbering the panes in the Window, the sheep in the Field;
measuring every fool, the (...), whether you render it the animal or natural
man, is guilty of; that pitious laesum principium, that want of the faculty of
weighing, pondering, or numbering; that weakness, or no kind of exercise of the
judicative faculty, from whence all his simplicity and impiety proceeds. The
Hebrews have a word to signify a wise man, which has a near affinity with
that of weighing and pondering (...) which has no difference in found from
that which signifies ponderavit, whence the Shecle, the known Hebrew word is
deduced, to note as the Psalmist says, that He that is wise, All the folly and
Unchristian Sin, comes from want of pondering; and all the Christian Wisdom,
Piety, Discipleship, consists in the exercise of this faculty. Whatsoever is
said most honorably of Faith in Scripture, that sets it out in such a
grandeur, as the greatest designer and author of all the high acts of Piety,
Heb. xi.
Heb. xi. and as the Conqueror over the World, 1 John v.
1 John v. 4. is clearly upon this score, as Faith is the Spiritual Wisdom, or
Prudence; (for so it is best defined) and as by comparing, and proportioning,
and weighing Gospel on one side, with the Promises, the Prescriptions and
Terrors of the World on the other, it pronounces that Handwriting on the Wall
against the latter of them, the Mean tekel upharsin. They are weighed in the
balance, and found most pitifully light, in comparison of those which Christ
has to weigh against them; and so the Kingdom, the usurpt Supremacy (that they
have so long pretended to in the inconsiderate simple precipitous world) is by
a just judgment, departed from them.

Will you begin with the Promises, and have but the patience a while to view
the Scales, and when you have set the Beam Even, removed the carnal or secular
prejudices (which have so possessed most of us, that we can never come to a
right balancing of any thing; the beam naturally enclines still as our
customary wonts and prepossessions will have it:) when, I say, you have set the
beam impartially, throw but into one scale the Promises of Christ, those of his
present, of his future Such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor entered
into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. ii. 9.
1 Cor. ii. 9. prepared for them that love God, and that at the very minute of
loving him (the word (...), referring to the manna of old; the Hebrew deduced
from (...) praeparavit, and therefore described by the Author of the Book of
Wisdom, Wisd. xvi. 20.
according to that literal denotation of the Hebrew, (...), bread baked, as it
were, and sent down ready from heaven to the true Israelite) the gust of every
Christian duty, being Israelites feast, the Quails and Manna, being become the
Christians every day ordinary diet, you will allow that to good conscience in
the scale before you: But when to that, you have farther cast in the glory,
honor, immortality, which is on arrear for that Christian in another life; that
infinite, inestimable weight of that glory laid before us, as the reward of the
Christian, for his having been content, that Christ should show him the way to
be happy here, and blessed eternally: And when that both present and future
felicity is set off, and heightened by the contrary, by the indignation, and
anger, and wrath, that is the portion of the Atheistical fool, and which
nothing could have helped us to escape, but this only Christian Sanctuary; when
the bliss of this Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, is thus improved by the news of
the scorching of the Dives in that place of torments; and by all these
together, the scale thus laded on one side, I shall then give the Devil leave
to help you to what weight he can in the other scale, be it his totum hoc, all
the riches and glory of the whole world (and not only that thousandth part of
the bracteata felicitas, in Seneca; (...) in Naz. Epist. 115.
A little fictitious felicity, a little paultrey trash, that nothing but the
opinion of men, has made to differ from the most refuse stone, or dirt in the
Kennel; the richest gems totally beholding to the simplicity and folly of men,
for their reputation and value in the World. Besides these, I presume the
phansies expect to have liberty to throw in all the pleasures and joys, the
ravishments and transportations of all the Senses; and truly, that is soon
done, all the true joy that a whole age of carnality affords any man, if you
but take along with it (as you cannot choose but do in all conscience) the
satieties, and loathings, and pangs, that inseparably accompany it (the Leaven,
as well as the Honey, under which, the pleasures of sin are thought to be
prohibited, Levit. ii. 11.) it will make but a pitiful addition in the scales,
so many pounds less than nothing, is the utmost that can be affirmed of it; and
when you have fetched out your last reserve, all the painted air, the only
commodity reputation and honor of a gallant vainglorious sinner, that some one
fool or madman, may seem to look on with some reverence; you have then the
utmost of the weight that that scale is capable of; and the difference so vast
betwixt them, such an inconsiderable proportion of straw, stubble to such whole
Mines and Rocks of Gold and Silver, and precious Stones, that no man that is
but able to deal in plain numbers (no need of Logarithms or Algebra) can
mistake in the judgment, or think that in gaining the whole world, if
accompanied with the least hazard or possibility of losing his own soul: And
therefore the running that adventure, is the greatest idiotism, the most
deplorable, woeful simplicity in the World.

The same proportion would certainly be acknowledged in the second place,
betwixt the commands of Christ on one side, high, rational, venerable commands,
that he that thinks not himself so strictly obliged Royal and a gallant Law,
whilst all the whole Volume or Code of the Law of the Members, has not one
ingenuous dictate, one tolerable, rational proposal in it, only a deal of
savage drudgery to be performed to an impure tyrant (sin and pain being of the
same date in the world, and the Hebrew (...) signifying both) and the more such
burdens undergone, the more mean submissions still behind; no end of the tale
of Brick to one that is Egyptian Kiln and Taskmasters.

And for the terrors in the last place, there are none but those of the Lord,
that are fit to move, or to persuade any: The utmost secular fear is so much
more impendent over Satan's, than God's Clients (the killing of the body, the
far more frequent effect of that which had first the honor to bring death into
the world: The Devil owning the title of destroyer, Abaddon, and (...), and
inflicting diseases generally on those whom he possessed; and Christ, that other
of the (...) Physician and the Savior, that has promises of long life annexed
to some specials of his service) that if it were reasonable to fear those that
can kill the body, and afterward have no more that they can do, ( i. e. Are
able by the utmost of their malice, and Gods permission, but to land thee safe
at thy fair Haven, to give thee Heaven and bliss before thy time, instead of
the many lingering deaths that this life of ours is subject to) yet there were
little reason to fear or suspect the fate in Gods service, far less than in
those steep Devil leads us through. And therefore to be thus low-bell'd with
panick frights, to be thus tremblingly dismayed where there is no place of
fear, and to ride on intrepid on the truest dangers, as the Barbarians in
America do on Guns, is a mighty disproportion of men's faculties; a strange
superiority of fancy over judgment: That may well be described by a defect in
the power of numbering, that discerns no difference between Ciphers and
Millions, but only that the noughts are a little the blacker, and the more
formidable.

There is yet a fourth notion of simplicity, as it is contrary to common
ordinary prudence, that by which, the politician and thriving man of this
world, expects to be valued, the great dexterity and managery of affairs and
the business of this world; wherein let me not be thought to speak Paradoxes,
if I tell you with some confidence, that the wicked man is this only impolitick
fool, and the Christian generally the most dextrous, prudent, politic person
in the world; and the safest Motto, Virtutem violenter retine, the keeping
virtue with the same violence that Heaven is to be taken with: Not that the
Spirit of Christ infuses into him the subtleties and crafts of the wicked,
gives him any principles, or any excuse for that greater portion of the
Serpentine wisdom; but because honesty is the most gainful policy, the mok
thriving through prudence, that will carry a man farther than any thing else.
That old principle in the Mathematics, That the right line comes speediliest
to the journeys end, being in spite of Machiavel, a Maxim in Politics also:
and so will prove, till Christ shall resign and give up to Satan the economy
of the World. Some examples it is possible there may be of the Prosperum
Scelus, the thriving of villainy for a time, and so of the present advantages
that may come in to us by our secular contrivances; but sure this is not the
lasting course, but only long life in a Canaan of Milk and Honey, that the Old
and New Testament both have ensured upon the meek disciple.

And I think a man might venture the experiment to the testimony and trial of
these times, that have been deemed most unkind and unfavorable to such innocent
Christian qualities; that those that have been most constant to the strict,
stable, honest principles, have retributions, but this. Whereas it is most
scandalously frequent and observable, that the great Politicians of this world
are baffled and outwitted by the Providence of Heaven; sell their most precious
souls for naught, and have not the luck to get any money for them; the most
unthrifty improvident Merchandise, that (...) folly, Psalm. xlix. 13. which the
scandal; the most pitious offensive folly, the wretchedst simplicity in the
World.

You would easily believe it should not stand in need of a farther aggravation,
and yet now you are to be presented with one in my Text, by way of heightning
of the Character, and that was my second particular, that at first I promised
you, made up of two farther considerations; First, The loving of that which is
so unlovely; secondly, The continuing in the Passion so long, How long you
simple

First, The degree and improvement of the Atheists folly, consists in the
loving of it, that he can take a delight and complacency in his way; to be
patient of such a course, gainless service; such scandalous mean submissions
had been reproach enough to any that had not divested himself of ingenuity and
innocence together, and become one of Aristotle's (...), Natural slaves (which
if it signify any thing, denotes the fools and simple ones in this Text, whom
nature has marked joy and voluptuousness in the employment, to dread nothing
but Sabbatick years and Jubiles, and with the crest-fallen slave, to disclaim
nothing but liberty and manumission, i. e. in effect, Innocence, and Paradise,
and Bliss; to court and woo Satan for the Mansions in Hell, and the several
types and praeludiums of them, the (...), the initial pangs in this life,
Platonic lover of stripes and chains, without intuition of any kind of reward,
any present or future wages for all his patience, and as it follows, to hate
knowledge and piety; hate it as the most treacherous enemy that means to
undermine their Hell; to force them out of their beloved Satan's embraces: This
is certainly, a very competent aggravation of the simplicity And yet to see how
perfect a character this is of the most of us, that have nothing to commend, or
even excuse in the most of those ways, on souls, but only our kindness;
irrational passionate kindness and love toward them; and then that love shall
cover a multitude of sins, supersede all the exceptions and quarrels that
otherwise we should not choose but have to them. Could a man see any thing
valuable or attractive in Oaths and Curses, in Drunkenness and Bestiality (the
sin, that when a Turk resolves to be guilty of, he makes a fearful noise unto
his Soul to retire all into his feet, or as far off as it is possible, that it
may not be within ken of that bestial prospect, Busbequius tell us.) Could any
man endure the covetous man's sad galling Mules, burdens of Gold, his Achans
Wedge that cleaves and rends in sunder Nations,(so that in the Hebrew, that sin
signifies wounding and incision, Joel ii. 8.
Joel ii. 8. and is alluded to, by his piercing himself through with diverse
sorrows, 1 Timothy vi. 10.
1 Timothy vi. 10.) his very Purgatories, and Limbo's, nay, Hell, as devouring and
perpetual as it; and the no kind of satisfaction so much as to his eye, from
the vastest heaps or treasures, were he not in love with folly and ruin; had he
not been philtres and charms; had not the Necromancer played some of his prizes
on him, and as S. Paul says of his Galatians, even bewitched him to be a fool.
would we but make a rational choice of our sins, discern somewhat that were
amiable, before we let loose our passion on them, and not deal so blindly in
absolute elections of the driest unsavory sin, that may but be called a sin
(that has but the honor of affronting God, and damning one of Christ's
redeemed) most of our wasting, sweeping sins, would have no manner of
pretensions to folly and madness of these simple ones, that they thus love
simplicity.

The second aggravation, is the continuance and duration of this fury, a
lasting chronical passion, quite contrary to the nature of passions, a flash of
lightning, lengthned out a whole day together, That they should love simplicity
so long.

It is the nature of acute diseases, either to have intervals and
intermissions, or else to come to speedy crises; and though these prove mortal
sometimes, yet the state is not generally so desperate, and so it is with sins:
Many the sharpest and vehementest indispositions of the Soul (pure Fevers of
rage and lust) prove happily but flashing short furies, are attended with an
instant smiting of the heart, a hating and detesting our follies, a striking on
the thigh in Jeremy, and in David's penitential style, a [ So foolish was I,
and ignorant; even as a beast before thee.] And it were happy if our Fevers
had such cool seasons, such favorable ingenuous intermissions as these. But for
the hectic continual Fevers (that like some weapons (the (...)) barbed shafts
in use among the Franks in Agathias, being not mortal at the entrance, do all
their slaughter by the hardness of getting out) the Vultures that so tire and
gnaw upon the Soul, the (...) that never suffer the sinner fool, to make any
approach toward his wits, toward sobriety again: This passionate love of folly,
improved into an habitual, steady course of Atheisticalness, a deliberate,
peremptory, final reprobating of Heaven (the purity at once, and the bliss of
it) the stanch demure covenanting with death, and resolvedness to have their
part to run their fortune with Satan, through all adventures; this is that
monstrous brat, That (as for the birth of the Champion in the Poet) three
nights of darkness more than Egyptian, were to be crowded into one (all the
simplicity and folly in a Kingdom) to help to a being in the Wisdom, if she
break out into a passion and exclamation of pity first, and then of
indignation, How long, ye simple ones, etc. My last particular.

The first debt, that Wisdom, that Christ, that every Christian Brother ows and
pays to every unchristian liver, is that of pity and compassion; which is to
him of all others, the properest dole. Look upon all the sad moanful objects in
the world, betwixt whom all our compassion is wont to be divided; First, the
Bankrupt rotting in a Gaol; secondly, Soldier, wounded by the Sword of War;
thirdly, the Malefactor howling under the Stone, or gasping upon the Rack or
Wheel; and fourthly, the gallant person on the Scaffold or Gallows ready for
execution; And the secure, senseless sinner, is the brachygraphy of all these.

You have in him, 1. A rich patrimony and treasure of grace (purchased dear,
and settled on him by Christ) most prodigally and contumeliously misspent and
exhausted. 2. A Soul streaming out whole Rivers blood and spirits, through
every wound, even every sin it has been guilty of; and not enduring the Water
to cleanse, much less the Wine or Oil to be poured into any one of them; the
whole Soul transfigured into one wound, one (...) congelation and clod of
blood. Then thirdly beyond this all the racks and pangs of a tormenting
conscience, his only present exercise: And lastly, all the torments in Hell
(the Officer ready hurrying him to the Judge, and the Judge delivering him to the
Executioner) his minutely dread and expectation, the haunts and hounds him. And
what would a man give in bowels of compassion (to Christianity? or but) to
humane kind, to be able to reprieve or rescue such an unhappy creature; to be
but the Lazarus with one drop of water to cool the tipof the scalding Tongue,
that is engaged in such a pile of flames? If there be any Charity left in this
frozen World, any Beam under this cold uninhabitable Zone, it will certainly
work some meltings on the most obdurate heart; it Recipe, says Themist. (...),
That supplies the place, and does the work of the burnings and scarifyings) A
cry to stop him in his precipitous course; a tear, at least, to solemnize, if
not to prevent so sad a fate. And it were well, if all our bowels were thus
employed, all our kindness and most passionate love, thus converted and laid
out on our poor lapsed sinner-brethrens souls, to seize upon those fugitives,
as Christ is said to do, (...) Heb. xi. 16. to catch hold and bring them back,
ere it be yet too late; rescue them out of the hands of their dearest espoused
sins, Solon.
and not suffer the most flattering kind of death ((...) in Gal. de Athl. the
Devil in the Angelical disguise) the sin that undertakes to be the prime Saint
(the zeal for the Lord of Hosts) any the most venerable impiety, to lay hold on
them. Could I but see such a new fashioned Charity received and entertained in
the World; every man to become his brothers keeper, and every man so tame, as
keeper, this (...), this Guardian Angel, as an Angel indeed, as the only
valuable friend he has under Heaven, I should think this a lucky omen of the
worlds returning to its wits, to some degree of piety again. And till then,
there is a very fit place and season for the exercise of the other part of the
passion here, that of Indignation, the last minute of my last particular, as
the how long is an expression of Indignation.

Indignation, not at the men (for however Aristotle's (...) [ A man ought to
have indignation at some persons] may seem to justify it: Our Savior calls
not for any such stern passion, or indeed any but love, and bowels of pity, and
charity toward the person of any, the most enormous sinner; and S. Paul only,
for the (...), the restoring, setting him in joint again, that is thus
overtaken in any fault) but Indignation, I say, at the sin, at the simplicity
and the folly, that refuse reproachful Creature, that has the fate to be
beloved so passionately, Aristotle's season of indignation belong, the seeing
favors and kindness so unworthily dispensed (the upstarts, says he, and new
men advanced and gotten into the greatest dignities) knowledge to be profestly
hated, and under that title, all the prime, i. e. Practical Wisdom, and Piety,
and simplicity, i. e. folly and madness, and sin, to have our whole souls laid
out upon it.

O let this shrill Sarcasm of Wisdoms, the [ How long, ye simple ones] be for
ever a sounding in our ears. Let this indignation at our Paul's inventory, a
prime part of that (...), the durable, unretracted repentance, an effect of
that godly sorrow that works to Salvation. indignation it produces in us?
What displeasure and rage at our folly? to think how senselesly we have moulted
and crumbled away our souls; what unthristy bargains we have made? what sots
and fools we shall appear to Hell, when it shall be known to the wretched,
tormented Creatures, what ambitions we had, to be but as miserable as they?
upon what Gotham arrants? what Wild-goose chases, we are come posting and
wearied thither? O that a little of this consideration, and this passion,
betimes might ease endless woe and indignation; those tears and gnashing of
teeth, quit us of that sad arrear of horrors, that otherwise waits behind for
us. Lord, do thou give us that view of our ways; the errors, the follies, the
furies, of our extravagant Atheistical lives; that may by the very reproach and
shame, recover and return us to thee. Make our faces ashamed, O Lord, that we
may seek thy Law; Give us that pity, and that indignation, to our poor
perishing souls; that may at length, awake and fright us out of our Lethargies,
and bring us as so many confounded, temple of mercies, where we may retract our
follies, implore thy pardon, deprecate thy wrath; and for thy deliverance from
so deep an Hell, from so infamous a vile condition, from so numerous a tale of
deaths; never leave praising thee, and saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of
Hosts; Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory; Glory be to thee, O God, most
high.

To whom with the Son, and the Holy Ghost be ascribed, etc.

The IV. Sermon.
MAT. I. 23. Emmanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us.
THe different measure and means of dispensing Divine Knowledge to several ages
of the World, may sufficiently appear by the Gospels of the New, and Prophecies
of the Old Testament; the sunshine Incarnation of Christ. This has been the
Study and Theme, the Speculation and Sermon of all holy Men and Writers since
Adam's Fall; yet never plainly disclosed, Mat. iii. 3.
till John Baptist, in the third of Matthew. and the third Verse, and the Angel
in the next verses before my Text, undertook the Task, and then indeed was it
fully performed; then were One crying in the Wilderness, Isa. xl. 3.
Prepare ye the ways of the Lord, etc. Isa. xl. 3. Then did the cry, yea,
shouting of the Baptist, at once, both interpret and perform what it
prophesied; At the sound of it, Every valley was exalted, and every hill was
brought low: the crooked was made straight, Verse. 4.
and the rough places plain, v. 4. That is, the Hill and Groves of the Prophets
were levelled into the open champain of the Gospel; Jerusalem. Verse. 5.


Sun, from it self, being overcast and masked with a cloud; and also for the
clearing of my Text: For this entire passage of Scripture, of which these words
are a close, is the Angels message, or Gospel unto Joseph, and set down by S.
Matthew, as both the interpretation, and accomplishment of a Prophecy delivered
long ago by Isaiah; but Jews: to wit, That a Virgin should conceive and bear a
Son, and they should call his name Emmanuel.

Where first we must examine the seeming difference in the point of Christ's
Name, Verse. 21.
betwixt the place here cited from Isaiah, and the words here vouched of the
Angel, Verse. 25.
V. 21. and proved by the effect V. 25. Isa. vii. 14.
For the Prophet says, he shall be called Emmanuel, but the Angel commands he
should be, and the Gospel records he was named Jesus.

Gospel, we construe the words, but in Prophecies, the sense; i. e. we expect
not the performance of every Circumstance expressed in the words of a Prophecy,
but we acknowledge another sense beyond the literal; and in Isaiah with St.
Matthew, we exact not the same expressions, provided we find the same
substance, and the same significancy. So then, the Prophets [ and call his name
Emmanuel] is not as humane Covenants are, to be fulfilled in the rigor of the
Letter, that he should be so named at his Circumcision, but in the agreement of
sense; that this name should express his nature; that he was indeed, God with
us; and that at the Circumcision he should receive a name of the same power and
significancy. Whence the observation by the way Emmanuel, in effect, signifies
Jesus, God with us, a Savior; and from thence the point of Doctrine, that Gods
coming to us, i. e. Christ's Incarnation, brought Salvation into the World. For
if there be a substantial agreement betwixt the Prophet, and the Angel; if
Emmanuel signify directly Jesus; if God with us, and a Savior be really the
same title of Christ; then was there no Savior, and consequently no Salvation,
before this presence of God with us. Which position we will briefly explain,
and then omitting unnecessary proofs,

In explaining of it, we must calculate the time of Christ's Incarnation, and
set down how with it, and not before, came Salvation.

We may collect in Scripture a threefold incarnation of Christ; 1. In the
Counsel of God, 2. In the Promises of God, 3. In a Personal open exhibiting of
him unto the World; the effect and complement Counsel and Promises.

1. In the Counsel of God, Rev. xiii. 8.
so He was as slain, so incarnate, before the foundation of the World Rev.
xiii. 8. For the word slain, being not competible to the Eternal God, but only
to the assumption of the humane nature, presupposes him incarnate, because
slain. God then in his Prescience, surveyingbefore he created, and viewing the
lapsed, miserable, sick estate of the future Creation; in his Eternal Decree,
foresaw, and preordained Jesus, the Savior, the Author and Finisher God, to
whom all things to come are made present, Emmanuel and Jesus went together; and
no Salvation bestowed on us, but in respect to this, God with us.

2. In the Promises of God; and then Christ was incarnate when he was promised
first in Paradise, Genesis iii. 15.
The seed of the Woman, etc. and so he is as old in the flesh, as the World in
sin, and was then in Gods Promise first born, when Adam and mankind began to
die. Afterward Abraham's time; Genesis xii. 3. xviii. 18. xxii. 18.
In thy seed, etc. and in Moses his time; when at the addition of the
Passover, a most significant representation of the incarnate and crucified
Christ, Exodus xiii.
he was more than promised, almost exhibited. Under which times, it is by some
asserted, that Christ in the form of Man, and habit of Angel, appeared sundry
times to the Fathers, to give them not an hope, but a possession of the
Incarnate God, and to be praeludium incarnationis, a pawn unto them, that they
Christ, in the Promise of God, did perpetually accompany, or go before
Salvation: not one blessing on the nations, without mention of thy seed;] not
one encouragement against fear, or unto confidence, but confirmed and backed
with an I am thy shield, etc. i. e. according to the Targum, my Word is thy
shield; i. e. my Christ, who is (...), the Word, in the first of Joh. i. Not
any mention of Righteousness and Salvation, but on ground and condition of
Jesus which was then in promise, Emmanuel, God with us.

3. In the Personal exhibiting of Christ in form of flesh unto the World, dated
at the fullness of time, and called in our ordinary phrase his Incarnation; then
no doubt was Emmanuel, Jesus; then was he openly showed to all people in the
form of God a Savior, which Simeon, Luke ii. 30.
Luke ii. 30. most divinely styles God's Salvation; thereby, no doubt, meaning
the Incarnate Christ, which by being God with us, was Salvation.

Thus do you see a threefold Incarnation, a threefold Emmanuel, and
proportionably a threefold Jesus.

1. A Savior first decreed for the World, answerable to God, incarnate in Gods
Counsel, and so no man was ever capable of Salvation, but through God with us.

Savior promised to the World answerable to the second God with us, to wit,
incarnate in the Promise, and so there is no Covenant of Salvation, but in this
God with us.

3. A Savior truly exhibited and born of a Woman, answerable to the third
Immanuel; and so also is there no manifestation, no proclaiming, no preaching
of Salvation, but by the birth and merits of God with us.

To these three, if we add a fourth Incarnation of Christ, the assuming
Immortal Flesh, which was at his Resurrection, then surely the Doctrine will be
complete, and this Emmanuel incarnate in the Womb of the grave, and brought
forth clothed upon with an incorruptible seed, is now more fully than ever
proved an Eternal Jesus; For when he had overcome the sharpness of Death, he
opened the kingdom of Heaven to all believers, as it is in our Te Deum; as if
all that till then ever entered into Heaven, had been admitted by some privy
key; but now the very gates were wide opened to all believers: This last
Incarnation Christ, being accompanied with a Catholic Salvation, that Jesus
might be as Eternal as Immanuel, that he might be as Immortal a Savior as a
God with us. 'Twere but a superfluous work, further to demonstrate, that
through all ages of the World, there was no salvation ever tendered, but in
respect to this Incarnation of Christ; that the hopes, the belief, the
expectation of Salvation, which the Fathers lived and breathed by, under the
types of the Law, was only grounded upon, and referred unto these promises of
the future Incarnation; Covenant of Salvation: that all the means besides that
Heaven and Earth, and which goes beyond them both, the brain of Man, or Angel
could afford or invent, could not excuse, much less save any child of Adam:
That every Soul which was to spring from these loins, had been without those
transcendent mercies which were exhibited by this Incarnation of Christ's,
plunged in necessary desperate damnation: Your patience Application of the
point;

First, That you persuade, and drive your selves to a sense and feeling of your
Sins, those sins which thus plucked God out of Heaven, and for a while deprived
him of his Majesty; which laid an engagement upon God, either to leave his
infinite Justice unsatisfied, or else to subject his infinite Deity to the
servile mortality of Flesh, or else to leave an infinite World in a common
damnation.

gratitude which is possible, in answer to this Mystery and Treasure of this
God with us; to reckon all the Miracles of either common or private
preservations, as foils to this incomparable Mercy, infinitely below the least
circumstance of it; without which, thine Estate, thy Understanding, thy Body,
thy Soul, thy Being, thy very Creation, were each of them as exquisite Curses

Thirdly, To observe with an ecstasie of joy and thanks the precious
privileges of us Christians, beyond all that ever God professed love to, in that
we have obtained a full revelation of this God with us: which all the Fathers
did but see in a cloud, the Angels peeped at, the Heathen world gaped after,
but we beheld as in a plain at midday: For since the veil of the Temple was
rent, every man that has eyes may see Sanctum Sanctorum, Mat. xxvii. 51.
the Holy of Holies, God with us.

Fourthly, To make a real use of this Doctrine to the profit of our Souls, that
if God have designed to be Emmanuel, and Jesus an Incarnate God, and Savior to
us; that then we will fit, and prepare, and make our selves capable of this
Mercy; and by the help of our religious, devout, humble endeavors, not
frustrate, but further and promote in our selves this end of Christ's
Incarnation, the saving of our Souls; and this use is effectually made to our
hands in the twelfth to the Hebrews, Heb. xii. ult.
at the last, Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom that cannot being partakers of
the Presence, the Reign, the Salvation of the Incarnate God, Let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. And do
thou, O powerful God, improve the truth of this Doctrine, to the best advantage
of our Souls, that thy Son may not be born to us unprofitably; but that he may
be God, not only with us, but in us; in us, to sanctify and adorn us here with
his effectual grace; and with us, to sustain us here, as our Emmanuel, and as
our Jesus, to crown and perfect us hereafter with glory.

And so much for this point, That Jesus and Emmanuel import the same thing, and
there was no Salvation, till this presence of God with us: We now come to the
substance it self, i. e. Christ's Incarnation, noted by Emmanuel, which is by
interpretation, etc. Where first we must explain the word, then drive forward
to the matter. The Word in Isaiah, in the Hebrew, is not so much a name, as a
sentence, describing unto us the mystery of the Conception of the Virgin (...)
with us God, where (...) or (...) God is taken in Scripture, either absolutely
for nature of God, as for the most part in the Old Testament; or personally;
and so either for the Person of the Father in many places, or else distinctly
for the Person of the Son, Hos. i. 7.
so Hos. i. 7. And will save them by the Lord their God, (...) their God, i. e.
Christ: and so also most evidently in this place, out of Isaiah, where (...)
signifies the Son Incarnate, God man, (...), and many the like; especially
those where the Targum paraphrases, Jehovah, or Jehovah Elohim, by (...) the
Word of the Lord, i. e. Christ Jesus, i. 1. Joh. i. 1.
As for instance, Genesis iii. 22. that Word of the Lord said; and Genesis ii. 6.
Genesis iii. 22.
the Word created. Secondly, (...) which signifies in its extent near, Genesis ii.
6.
at, with, or amongst. Thirdly, the Particle, signifying us; though it
expresses not, yet it must note our humane nature, our abode, our being in this
our great World, wherein we travel, and little World, wherein we dwell; not as
a mansion place, to remain in, but either as an Inn to lodge, or a Tabernacle
to be covered, or a Prison to suffer in: So that the words in their latitude
run thus; Emmanuel: i. e. The second Person in Trinity is come down into this
lower world amongst us, for a while to travel, to lodge, to sojourn, to be
fettered in this Inn, this Tabernacle, this Prison of man's flesh; or briefly,
at this time, is conceived and born God-man, (...), the same both God and Man,
the Man Christ Jesus. And this is the expectation of the Fathers, and in this
begins and is accomplished, the hope and joy of us Christians, That which was
old Simeons warning to death, Luke ii. 28.
the sight and embraces of the Lords Christ, Luke ii. 28. as the greatest
happiness which an especial favor could bestow on him; and therefore made him
in a contempt of any further life, sing his own funeral, Nunc dimittis: Lord,
now let thou, etc.

Incarnation of Christ, our flesh is, or shall be cleansed into a Temple, for
the Soul to worship in, and in Heaven for a robe, for it to triumph in.

If ye will be sufficiently instructed into a just valuation of the weight of
this Mystery, you must resolve your selves to a pretty large task (and it were
a notable Christmas employment, I should bless God, for any one that would be
so piously valiant, as to undertake it) you must read over the whole Book of
Scripture and Nature to this purpose. For when you find in the Psalmist, the
news of Christ's coming, Then said I, lo I come; you find your directions how
to tract Psalm. xi. 7.
In the volume of thy book it is written of me, etc. i. e. either in the whole
book, or in every folding, every leaf of this Book: Thou shall not find a
Story, a Riddle, a Prophecy, a Ceremony, a downright legal Constitution, but
has some manner of aspect on this glass, some way drives at this mystery, God
manifest in flesh. For example, (perhaps you have not noted) wherever you read
Seth's Genealogies more insisted on than Cain's, Sem's than his elder brother
Ham's, Abraham's than the whole World besides, Jacob's than Esau's, Judah's
line of Christ, and make that the whole business of the Scripture: Whenever,
I say, you read any of these, then are you to note; that Shiloh was to come;
that he which was sent, was on his journey; that from the Creation, till the
fullness of time, the Scripture was in travel with him; and by his leaping ever
now and then, and as it were, springing in the Womb, gave manifest tokens
conceived, and would at last bring forth the Messiah. So that the whole Old
Testament is a Mystical Virgin Mary, a kind of Mother of Christ; Genesis iii. 15.
which by the Holy Ghost, conceived him in Genesis, Chap. iii. 15. And
throughout Moses and the Prophets, carried him in the Womb, Mal. iii. 4.
and was very big of him: And at last in Malachi, Chap. iii. 4. was in a manner
delivered of him. For there you shall find mention of John Baptist, who was, as
it were, the Midwife of the Old Testament, to open its Womb, and bring the
Messiah into the World. Old Testament brought him to his birth, though it had
not strength to bring forth; and the Prophets as Moses from Mount Nebo, came to
a view of this Land of Canaan.

For the very first words of the New Testament, being, as it it were, to fill
up what only was wanting in the Old, are the Book and History of his
generations and birth, Matthew. i.
Matthew. i. You would yet be better able to prize the excellency of this Work,
and reach the pitch of this days rejoicing, Heathen fluttered about this light;
what shift they made to get some inkling of this Incarnation beforehand; how
the Sibyls, Heathen Women, and Virgil, and other Heathen Poets in their
writings, before Christ's time, let fall many passages, which plainly referred
and belonged to this Incarnation of God. It is fine sport to see in our
Authors, how the Devil with his famous Oracles and Prophets, foreseeing by his
skill in the Scripture, that Christ was near his birth, did droop upon it, and
hang the wing; did birth of Christ, he plainly gave up the ghost, and left his
Oracular Prophets, as speechless as the Caves they dwelt in, their last voice
being, Plut.
that their gread god Pan, i. e. The Devil was dead, and so both his Kingdom
and their Prophecies at an end; as if Christ's coming had chased Lucifer out of
the World, and the powers of Hell Savior was born.

And now by way of Use, Can ye see the Devil put out of heart, and ye not put
forward to get the Field? can you delay to make use of such an advantage as
this? can ye be so cruel to your selves, as to show any mercy on that now
disarmed enemy? will ye see God send his Son down into the Field, to enter the
Lists, and lead up a Forlorn Troop against the Prince of this World, and ye not
follow at his Alarm? conquest, which Christ so lovingly offers you? It is a
most terrible exprobration in Hosea, Hos. xi. 3.
Chap. xi. 3. look on it, where God objects to Ephraim, her not taking notice
of his mercies; her not seconding and making use of his loving deliverances,
which plainly adumbrates this deliverance by Christ's death; as may appear
Matthew. ii. 15.
compared with the second of Mat. 14. Well, says God, I taught Ephraim to go,
taking them by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them. I drew them
with the cords of a man; an admirable phrase, (with all those means that use to
oblige one man to another) with bands of love, etc. i. e. I used all means for
the sustaining and strengthening of my people: I put them in a course to be
able to go, and fight, and overcome all the powers of darkness, and put off the
Devils yoke: I sent my son amongst them Verse. 1. And all this I did by way of
love, as one friend is wont to do for another, and yet they would not take
notice of either the benefit or the donor, nor think themselves beholding to me
for this mercy.

And this is our case, beloved, If we do not second these and the like mercies
of God bestowed on us; if we do not improve them to our Souls health; if we do
not fasten on this Christ incarnate; if we do not follow him with an expression
of gratitude and reverence, and stick Friend and Captain: Finally if we do not
endeavor and pray, that this his incarnation may be seconded with an other;
that as once he was born in our flesh to justify us, so he may be also born
spiritually in our Souls to sanctify us: For there is a spiritual (...), or
Mystical incarnation of Christ in every regenerate man, where the Soul of Man
is the Womb wherein Christ is conceived by the Holy Ghost. The proof of which
Doctrine shall entertain the remainder of this hour: For this is the Emmanuel
that most nearly concerns us, God with us, i. e. With our spirits, or Christ
begotten and brought forth in our hearts. Of which briefly.

And that Christ is thus born in a regenerate man's soul, if it were denied,
might directly appear by these two places of Scripture, Gal. ii. 20. Gal. ii.
20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Again, Ephesians. iii. 17. That Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith, Ephesians. iii. 17.
etc.

Now that you may understand this Spiritual Incarnation of Christ Real
Incarnation in the Womb of the Virgin; that so we may keep close to the
business of the day, and at once observe both his birth to the World, and ours
to Grace; and so even possess Christ whilst we speak of him.

And first, if we look on his Mother Mary, we shall find her an entire pure
Virgin, only espoused to Joseph; but before they came together, she was found
with child of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. i. 18. And then the Soul of Man must be
this Virgin. Matthew. i. 18.


Purity or Virginity of the Soul; First, An absolute one, such as was found in
Adam before his fall. Secondly, A respective, of a Soul, which like Mary, has
not yet joined or committed with the World, to whom it is espoused; which
though it have its part of natural corruptions, yet either for want of ability,
of age, or occasion, has not yet broke forth into the common outrages of sin.
Thirdly, A restored purity of a Soul formerly polluted, but now cleansed
repentance.

The former kind of natural and absolute purity, as it were to be wished for,
so is it not to be hoped; and therefore is not to be imagined in the Virgin
Mother, or expected in the Virgin Soul. The second purity, we find in all
regenerate infants, who are at the same time outwardly initiated to the Church,
and inwardly to Christ; or in those whom God has called, before they have
engaged themselves in the courses of Actual, heinous sins; such are well
disposed, well brought Saviors words, Have so lived, as not to be far from the
Kingdom of God. Such happily, as Cornelius, Acts x. 1.
Acts x. 1. and such a Soul as this, is the fittest Womb, in which our Savior
delights to be incarnate; where he may enter and dwell, without either
resistance or annoyance; where he shall be received at the first knock, and
never be disordered or repulsed by any stench of the carcass, or violence of
the Body of sin. The restared purity, is a right Spirit renewed in the Soul,
Psalm. li. 10.
Psalm. li. 10. A wound cured up by repentance, and differs only purity; as a
scar from a skin never cut, wanting somewhat of the beauty and outward
clearness, but nothing of either the strength or health of it. Optandum esset
ut in simplici Virginitate servaretur navis, Tertul.
etc. It were to be wished, that the Ship, our Souls, could be kept in its
simple Virginity, and never be in danger of either leak or shipwreck. But this
perpetual integrity, being a desperate, impossible wish, there is one only
remedy, which though it cannot prevent a leak, can stop it. And this is
repentance after sin committed, Post naufragium tabula, restored Virginity of
the Soul, which Christ also vouchsafes to be conceived and born in. The first
degree of Innocence, being not to have sinned, the second to have repented.

In the second place, The Mother of Christ in the flesh, was a Virgin, not only
till the time of Christ's conception, but also till the time of his birth,
Matthew. i. 25.
Matthew. i. 25. He knew her not till she had brought forth, etc. And farther, as
we may probably believe, remained a Virgin all the days of Eastgate of the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. xliv. 2. This gate shall be shut, Ezekiel. xliv. 2.
it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it, because the Lord the
God of Israel has entered in by it; therefore it shall be shut. A place, if
appliable, very apposite for the expression. Hence is she called by the Fathers
and Councils (...), a Perpetual Virgin, against the Heresy of Helvidius. The
probability of this might be farther proved, if it were needful. And ought not
upon all principles of nature and of justice, Virgin Soul, after Christ once
conceived in it, remain pure and stanch till Christ be born in it, nay, be
(...), a Perpetual Virgin, never indulge to sensual pleasures, or cast away
that purity which Christ either found orwrought in it? If it were a respective
purity, then ought it not perpetually retain and increase it, and never fall
off to those disorders recovered purity, hold it fast, and never turn again, As
a Dog to his vomit, or d Sow to her wallowing in the mire? For this conception
and birth of Christ in the Soul, would not only wash a way the filth that the
Swine was formerly mired in, but also take away the Swinish nature, that she
shall never have any strong propension to return again to her former inordinate
delights. Now this continuance of the Soul, in this its recovered Virginity, is
not from the firm, constant, stable nature of the Soul, Eusebius. Praep. lib. 13.
p. 412.
but as Eusebius From a more strong, able Band, the Union of Christ to the
Soul, his Spiritual Incarnation in it: Because the Lord, the God of Israel,
has entered in by it; therefore it shall be shut, Ezekiel. xliv. 2.
Ezekiel. xliv. 2. i. e. It shall not be opened either in consent or practice to
the lusts and pollutions of the World or Flesh; because Christ by being born in
it has cleansed it; because he the Word of God, said the Word, therefore the
leprosy is cured; in whom he enters, he dwells, and on whom he makes his real
impression, he seals them up to the day of redemption; unless we unbuild our
selves, and change our shape, we must be his.

In the third place, if we look on the agent in this conception, we shall find
it, both in Mary and in the Soul of Man, to be the Holy Ghost, that which is
conceived in either of them, is of the Holy Ghost, Mat. i. 20. Nothing in this
business of Christ's birth with us, to be imputed to natural power or causes,
the whole contrivance and final production of it; the preparations to, and
laboring of it, is all the workmanship of the Spirit. So that as Mary was
called by an Ancient, so may the Soul without an Hyperbole by us, be styled,
The Shop of Miracles, and The Workhouse of the Holy Ghost; in which every
operation is a miracle to nature, and no tools are used, but what the Spirit
forged and moves. Mary conceived Christ, but it was above her own reach to
apprehend the manner how; Luke i. 34.
for so she questions the Angel, Luke i. 34. How shall this be, etc? So does
the Soul of Man conceive and grow big, and bring forth Christ, and yet not it
self fully perceives how this work is wrought; Christ being, for the most part,
insensibly begotten in us, and to be discerned only spiritually, not at his
entrance, but in his fruits.

In the fourth place, That Mary was chosen and appointed among all the Families
of the Earth, to be the Mother of the Christ, was no manner of desert of hers,
but Gods special favor and dignation; whence the words run truly interpreted,
Luke i. 28. (...).
Luke i. 28. Hail thou that art highly favored; not as the Vulgar read, Gratia
plena, full of Grace. And again, V. 30.(...).
Verse. 30. Thou have found favor with God. So is it in the Man's Soul, there is
no power of nature, no preparation of Morality, no art that all the Philosophy
or Learning in the World can teach a man, which can deserve this grace at
Christ's hands, that can any way woo or allure God to be born spiritually in us;
which can persuade or entice the Holy Ghost, to conceive and beget Christ in
us, but only the mere favor and good pleasure of God; which may be obtained by
our prayers, but can never be challenged by our merits, may be perfection,
which Mary observed in her self, as the motive to this favor; but only the
mere mercy of God, which regarded the lowliness of his handmaid, Luke i. 48.
Luke i. 48.

Whence in the fifth place, This Soul in which Christ will vouchsafe to be
born, must be a lowly, humble soul; or else it will not perfectly answer Mary's
temper, nor fully bear a part in her Magnificat; lowliness of his handmaid.
But this by the way.

In the sixth place, If we consider here with John the Baptist his forerunner,
coming to prepare his way; and his Preaching repentance, as a necessary
requisite to Christ's being born, and received in the World: Then we shall drive
the matter to a further issue, and find repentance, a necessary preparation for
the birth of Christ in our hearts. For so the Baptist's Message set down, Isai.
xl. 3.
Isa. xl. 3. Prepare the ways, etc. Matthew. iii. 2.
Mat. iii. 2. Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand; As if this Harbinger
had no other furniture and provision to bespeak in the heart that was to
receive Christ, but only repentance for sins. I will not examine here the
precedence of Repentance before Faith in Christ; though I might seasonably here
state the question, and direct you to begin with John, and proceed to Christ;
first repent, then fasten on Christ: Only this for all, The promises of
Salvation in Christ, are promised on condition of repentance, and amendment,
they must be weary and heavy laden, who ever come to Christ, and expect rest,
Matthew. xi. 28. And therefore whosoever applies these benefits to himself, and
thereby conceives Christ in his heart, must first resolve to undertake the
condition required, to wit, Newness of life; which yet he will not be able to
perform, till Christ be fully born, and dwell in him, by his enabling graces:
For you may mark, that Christ and John being both about the same age, as
appears by the story, Christ must needs be born before John's Preaching: So Soul
there is supposed some kind of incarnation of Christ, before repentance or
newness of life; yet before Christ he is born, or at least, come to his full
stature and perfect growth in us; this Baptist's Sermon, that is, this
repentance and resolution to amendment, must be presumed in our Souls. And so
repentance is both a preparation to Christ's birth, and an effect of it: For so
John preached, Repent for, etc. Matthew. iii. 2. And so also in the same words
Christ preaches, Repent, etc. Matthew. iv. 17. And so these two together, John
and Christ, Repentance Faith, though one began before the other was perfected;
yet, I say, these two together in the fully regenerate man, Fulfill all
righteousness, Matthew. iii. 15.

In the seventh place, you may observe, That when Christ was born in Bethlehem,
the whole Land was in an uproar. Herod the King was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him, Matthew. ii. 3. Which whether we apply to the lesser city, the Soul of
Man, in which, or the adjoining people, amongst whom Christ is spiritually born
in any man, you shall for the most acknowledge the agreement: For the man
himself, if he have been any inordinate sinner, then at the birth of Christ in
him, all his natural, sinful faculties are much displeased, his reigning Herod
sins, and all the Jerusalem of habituate Lusts and Passions, are in great
disorder, as knowing, that this new birth abodes their instant Devil, Mark. i.
24. What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? Art thou come to
torment and dispossess us before our time? If it be applied to the Neighbor
Worldlings which hear of this new convert; then are they also in an uproar, and
consult how they shall deal with this turbulent spirit, Which is made to
upbraid our ways and reprove our thoughts, Wisd. ii,
Wisd. ii. Which is like to bring down all their trading and cousenage to a low
ebb, Acts xix. 24.
like Diana's Silver-smith in the Acts, Chap. xix. 24. which Paul, because the
attempt of his upstart doctrine, was like to undo the Shrine-makers: Sirs, ye
know that by this craft we have our wealth. And no marvel, that in both these
respects, there is a great uproar, seeing the spiritual birth of Christ is most
infinitely opposite to both the common people of the World, and common
affections of the Soul, two the most turbulent, tumultuous, wayward, violent
Nations upon Earth.

Christ, and that either in himself, in Wisdom and Stature, etc. Luke ii. 52.
or else in his troop and attendants, and that either of Angels to minister unto
him. Matthew. iv. 11. or of Disciples to follow and obey him; and then the
harmony will still go current. Christ in the regenerate man, is first
conceived, then born, then by degrees of childhood and youth, grows at last to
the measure of the and the Soul consequently from strength to strength, from
virtue to virtue, is increased to a perfect manhood in Christ Jesus. Then also
where Christ is thus born, he chooses and calls a Jury at least of
Disciple-graces, to judge and sit upon thee, to give in evidence unto thy
Spirit, That thou art the Son of God. Then is he also ministered unto, and
furnished by the Angels with a perpetual supply, either to increase the lively,
or to recover decayed graces. So that now Christ does bestow a new life upon
the man, and the regenerate becomes the daughter, as well as the Mother of
Christ; she conceives Christ, and Christ her; she lives, and grows, and moves
in Christ, and Christ in her. So that at last she comes to that pitch, and
height, and (...), that S. Paul speaks of, Gal. ii. 20. I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I live in the flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

And do thou, O Holy Jesus, which have loved us, and given thy Thus have we
briefly passed through these words, and in them first showed you the real
agreement betwixt Matthew and Isaiah, in the point of Christ's Name, and from
thence noted, that Jesus and Emmanuel, is in effect, all one; and that Christ's
Incarnation brought Salvation into the World. Which being proved through
Christ's several Incarnations, were applied to our direction: 1. To humble our
thankfulness. 3. To observe our privileges. 4. To make our selves capable and
worthy receivers of this mercy. Then we came to the Incarnation it self, where
we showed you the excellency of this Mystery by the effects, which the
expectation and foresight of it wrought in the Fathers, the Prophets, the
Heathens, the Devils; and then by way of Use, what an horrible sin it was, not
to apply and employ this mercy to our Souls. Lastly, We came to another birth
of Christ, besides that in the flesh, his Spiritual Incarnation God's Spirit,
and your Meditations to work on.

Now the God, etc.

The V. Sermon.
LUKE IX. 55. You know not what spirit you are of.
OF all Errors or Ignorances, there are none so worthy our pains to cure, or
caution to prevent, as those that have influence on practice. The prime
ingredient in the making up a Aristotle in his Metaphysics, is to be well
advised (...), what doubts must first be made, what ignorances earliest
provided for: and there is not a more remarkable spring and principle of all
the Scripture folly (that is wickedness) among men, than the beginning our
Christian course unluckily, with some one, or more false infusions, which not
only are very hardly ever corrected afterward, corn that was delivered out for
seed, has a peculiar mark of aggravation upon it; is not to be measured in the
garner, but in the field; not by the quantity of what was stolen, but of what it
would probably have proved in the Harvest: so the damage that is consequent to
this infelicity,

Of this kind, I must profess to believe the ignorance of Gospel Spirit to be
chief, an ignorance, that cannot choose, but have an influence on every public
action of the life. So that as Padre Paolo was designed an handsome office in
the Senate of Venice, to sit by, and nequid contra pietatem; so it were to be
wished, that every man on whom the Name of Christ is called, had some assistent
Angel, some (...); be it conscience, be it the remembrance of what I now say
unto him, to interpose in all, especially the visible undertakings of the life,
nequid contra spiritum Evangelii, that nothing be ventured on, but what is
agreeable to the spirit of the Gospel. Even Disciples themselves may it seems
run into great inconveniences for want of it; James and John did so in the
Text; ignem de coelo, fire from Heaven on all that did not treat them so well
as they expected; but Christ turned and reproved them, saying, You know not
what spirit, (...), what kind of spirit you are of; and that with an (...) on
(...), not (...), but (...), you Disciples, you Christians, You know not what
spirit you are of.

In the words it will be very natural to observe these 3. Particulars; 1. That
there is a peculiar Spirit that Christians are of, (...); 2. That some prime
Christians do not know the James and John, You know not, etc. 3. That this
ignorance is apt to betray Christians to unsafe, unjustifiable designs and
actions: You that would have fire from Heaven, do it upon this one ignorance,
You know not, etc.

I begin first with the first of these, That there is a Peculiar Spirit that
Christians are of: A spirit of the Gospel; and that must be considered here,
not in an unlimited latitude, but one as it is opposite to the Spirit of Elias,
(...); Will thou do as he did? It Gospel Spirit, by its opposition to that of
Elias, which is manifold for instance; First, Elias was the great assertor of
Law, upon which ground Moses and he appear with our Savior at his
transfiguration: So that two things will be observable, which make a difference
betwixt the Legal, and the Gospel spirit: 1. That some Precepts of Christ now
clearly (and with weight upon them) delivered by Christ, were, if in substance
delivered at all; yet sure not so clearly, and at length, and intelligibly
Matthew, in the opposition betwixt the (...), what was said by Moses to the
Ancients, and the (...), Christ's saying to his Disciples; which if they be
interpreted of Moses Law, (as many of the particulars are evidently taken out
of the Decalogue, Thou shall not kill, commit adultery, perjury,) Christ's are
then clearly superadditions unto Moses; or if they refer to the Pharisees
glosses, (as some others of them possibly may do) then do those glosses of
those Pharisees (who were none Moses Chair, and whatever they teach, that do,
for their learning most considerable) argue the Mosaic Precepts not to be so
clear, and incapable of being misinterpreted; and so still Christ's were
additions, if not of the substance, light and luster, and consequently
improvements of the obligation to obedience, in us Christians, who enjoy that
light, and are precluded those excuses of ignorance that a Jew might be capable
of: From whence I may sure conclude, that the Ego autem, of not retaliating, or
revenging of injuries, (for that is sure the meaning of the (...), which we
render resist not evil) the strict precept of loving, and blessing, and praying
for Enemies, and the like, is more clearly preceptive, and so more
indispensably obligatory to us Christians, revenge, or retributing of injuries;
nay that does not practice that high piece of (but necessary, be it never so
rare) perfection of overcoming evil with good; and so heap those precious
melting coals of love, of blessings, of prayers, those three species of sacred
vestal fire, upon Nescit qualis spiritus, He knows not what kind of spirit he
is of.

But there is another thing observable of the Law, and so of the Judaical Legal
Spirit; to wit, as it concerned the planting the Israelites in Canaan, and that
is the command of rooting out the nations; which was a particular case, upon
God's sight of the filling up of the measure of the Amorites sins, and a
judicial sentence of his proceeding upon them; not only revealed to those
Israelites, but that with a peremptory hate, and kill, and eradicate some of
those Nations. Which case because it seldom or never falls out to agree in all
circumstances, with the case of any other sinful people, cannot lawfully
prescribe to the eradicating of any other (though in our opinion never so
great) enemies of God, until it appear as demonstrably to us, as it did to
those Israelites, that it was the will of God they should be so dealt with: and
he that thinks it necessary to shed the blood of every enemy of God, whom his
censorious faculty Samaritans, the not receivers of Christ, is but as the
Rabbis call him sometimes one of the (...) and (...) sons of bloods, in the
plural number, and sons of fire; yea, and like the Disciples in my Text
Boanerges, sons of thunder, far enough from the soft temper that Christ left
them; Ye know not what kind of spirit ye are of.

In the next place, Elias Spirit was a Prophetic Spirit; whose dictates Peter,
(...), (I conceive in an agonistick sense) of their own starting, or
incitation, as they were moved or prompted by themselves, but as it follows,
(...), as they were carried by the Holy Ghost; not as they were led, but
carried (when the Lord speaks, who can but Prophecy?) And so likewise are the
actions Prophetic; direction, or influence of his grace, cooperating with the
Word, as in the breast of every regenerate man, (for the Spirit of
Sanctification, and the Spirit of Prophecy, are very distant things) but from
the extraordinary revelation of God's Will, many times against the settled rule
of duty, acted and animated not as a living creature, by a Soul, but moved as
Apostles time to continue constantly in the Church, any further, than to
interpret, and superstruct upon what the Canon of the Scripture has settled
among Christians; ( Christ and his Word in the New Testament, being that
Bath-Col, Friar in France, Pere Barnard.
pretends to ecstatical revelations, with the Enthusiasts of the last age, and
Phanaticks now with us, to ecstatical motions; Copinger or Artington.
that with Mahomet, pretends a dialogue with God, when he is in an Epileptick
fit, sets off the most ghastly diseases, sins, by undertaking more particular
acquaintance and commerce with the Spirit of God, a call from God's Providence
and extraordinary Commission from Heaven, for those things, which if the New
Testament be Canonical, are evaporate from Hell; and so first leads captive
silly women, (as Mahomet did his Wife) and then a whole Army of Janissaries into
a War, to justify and propagate such delusions, and put all to death that will
not be their Proselytes, is far enough from the Gospel Spirit that lies visible
in the verbum vehiculum spiritus, and the preaching of the Word (...)) and is
not infused by dream or whisper, nor authorized by a melancholy, or phanatick
fancy; and so (...), knows not what kind, etc.

In the third place, Elias was the great precedent and example of sharp
unjudiciary procedure with Malefactors, which from the common ordinary awards
on Criminals in that execution, proceeded Trial, and the Malefactor suffered
(...), without attending

Of this kind, two Examples are by Mattathias cited, 1 Macab. ii. one of
Phinees, (...), that zeal'd a zeal, and in that run through Zimri and Cozbi,
and so (as the Captain once answered for the killing the drowsy Sentinel)
reliquit quos invenit, found Then stood up Phinehas and prayed, in the Old, and
then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment, in the New Translations, may
perhaps give some account of that action of his, that upon Phinehas Prayer for
Gods direction what should be done in that matter, God raised him up in an
extraordinary manner to execute judgment on those offenders.) And the other of
Elias in the Text, and he with some addition, (...) In zealing the zeal of the
Law, called fire from Heaven upon those that were sent out from Ahazai, to
bring him to him. And this fact of his (by God's answering his call, and the
coming down of the fire upon them) was demonstrated to come from God also, as
much as the prediction of the Kings death, which was confirmed by this means.

It may very probably be guest by Matathias his words in that place that there
were no precedents of the zelotick spirit in the Old Testament, stoning of S.
Stephen, of St. Paul at Iconium, etc. yet all of them practiced by the Jews,
and not one that can seem to be blameless, but that of Christ (who sure had
extraordinary power) upon the buyers and sellers in the Temple; upon which the
Apostles remembered the Psalmists Prophecy, (...), zeal of Gods house carried
him to that act of (...), of indignation and punishment upon the transgressors.
And what mischief was done among the Jews by those of that sect in Josephus,
that called themselves by that name of Zealots, and withal, took upon them to
be the saviors and preservers of the City, but as it proved, the hastners and
precipitators of the destruction of that Kingdom, by casting out, and killing
the Highpriests first, and then the Nobles and chief men of the Nation, and so
embasing, and intimidating, and dejecting the Josephus, and any of the learned
that have conversed with the Jewish Writers will instruct the enquirer: And
ever since, no very honorable notion had of (...) in the New Testament; one of
the fruits of the flesh, Gal. v. of the Wisdom that comes not from Heaven, Jam.
iii. and in the same (...), a bitter zeal, a gall that will imbitter all that
come near it. The short of it is, the putting any man to death, or inflicting
other punishment upon any terms, but that Maimonides, him that curses God in
the name of an Idol, De Idol. c. 2.
the (...) that meet him, kill him, i. e. the zealots permitted, it seems, if
not authorized to do so. And this is the Spirit of Elias, that is of all
others, most evidently reprehended and renounced by Christ. The Samaritans no
very sacred persons, added to their habitual constant guilts, at that time to
deny common civility of entertainment Christ himself; and the Disciples asked
whether they might not do what Elias had done, call for fire from Heaven upon
them in that case; and Christ tells them, that the Gospel Spirit was of another
complexion from that of Elias, (...), turned to them as he did to Peter, when
he said, Get thee behind me Satan; as to so many fiery Satanical-spirited men,
and checked them for that their furious zeal, with an (...), etc. The least I
can conclude from hence is this, that they that put any to death, by any but
perfectly They know not what Spirit they are of.

Yet farther is it observable of Elias, that he did execrate and curse, call
for judgments from Heaven upon men's persons; and that judgments upon men's
future estates, the censorious reprobating Spirit, which though we find it not
in Elias at this time, yet is a consequent of the Prophetic Office, and part
of the burden received from the Lord, and laid upon those guilty persons,
concerning whom it has pleased Almighty God to reveal that secret of his
Cabinet; but then this rigor cannot, without sin, be pretended to by any else;
for in the blackest instances, charity believes all things and Pharisees, (this
Publican whose profession and trade is forbidden by that Law, and this people
that know not that Law, is cursed) so likewise in the Montanists, (nos
spirituales, and all others animals and Psychici) so in the Romanists (who
condemn all but themselves) and in all those generally whose pride and malice
conjoined, (most directly contrary to the Gospel Spirit of humility spiritual
assassinacy, this deepest dye of blood, the murdering of Souls; which because
they cannot do it really, they endeavor in effigy, anathematize, and
slaughter them here in this other Calvary, the place for the crucifying of
reputations, turning them out of the Communion of their charity, though not of
bliss; and I am confident, reject many whom the Angels entertain more
hospitably. Another part of this cursing Spirit Elias's, that of praying (and
so calling) for curses on men's persons; and that being upon the enemies of God,
and those appearing to Elias, a Prophet to be such, might be then lawful to
him, and others like him, David perhaps, etc. in the Old Testament, but is
wholly disliked and renounced by Christ under this state of Discipline, to
which Christians are designed by him in the New. I say, not only for that which
concerns our own enemies, for that is clear, When thine enemy hungreth, feed
him; and somewhat like that in the Old Testament, When thine enemies Ox, etc.
But I extend it even to the enemies of God himself, and that I need not do upon
other evidence than is afforded from the Text; the Samaritans were enemies of
Christ himself, and were barbarous and inhumane to his person, and they must
not be cursed by Disciples. And he that can now curse even God, can call for (I
say, not discomfiture upon their devices, for that is charity to them, to keep
them from being such unhappy Creatures as they would be, contrivers of so much
mischief to the world; but) Plagues and Ruin upon their persons, (which is
absolutely the voice of Revenge, that sulphur-vapor of Hell) he that delights
in the misery of any part of Gods Image (and so usurps upon that wretched
quality, of which we had thought, the Devil had gotten the Monopoly (that of
(...), mischief, if it were in his power, and now it is not, by unprofitable
wishes of execration, shows his good will toward it, is quite contrary to the
Gospel Spirit, and so (...), he knows not, etc.

Lastly, Elias was not only rapt to Heaven, but moved on Earth in a Fiery
Chariot, (...), says the Author of the Book of Macchabees; his zeal had fire
and fire again ((...) comes Gospel Spirit is directly contrary to this, an
allaying, quenching spirit, a gentle lambent flame, that sits on the Apostles
heads to enlighten and adorn; by its vital warmth, expelling partial hectic
heats, and burning Feverish distempers, that spiritual (...) mentioned in the
Gospel; and putting in the place, a cool, sedate, and equable temper, to have
and chiefly with our selves, (...), (an admirable phrase in St. Paul) to use as
much diligence to restore the Earth to peace again, as all the wind, or air, or
perhaps fire in its bowels (I mean, ambitious, contentious men) do, to set it a
shaking; and he that will not contribute his utmost to quench those flames;
that will not joyfully do any thing, that may not directly, or by consequence
include sin, toward the extinguishing a fire thus miserably gotten into the
veins and bowels of a calamitous Kingdom, is far Gospel Spirit, and so (...),
he knows not, etc.

I shall not clearly give you the Gospel Spirit, unless I proceed from its
opposition to Elias his act, to that other, the opposition to the motion of
those Disciples, considered in the particular circumstances. The case stood
thus, Christ was going up to Jerusalem, thereupon the Samaritans receive him
not; the Disciples will have fire from Heaven upon Samaritans. Jerusalem was at
that time the only proper place of God's worship, and may note to us as an
emblem, the true established Protestant Religion of this Kingdom: The
Samaritans were great enemies to this, enemies to Jerusalem; being, first,
Heretics in Religion, took in the Assyrian Idols into the worship of the true
God; they feared the Lord, and served their own gods, as it is in the story,
and continued their wont when they turned Christians, make up the first sort of
Heretics in Epiphanius his Catalogue. Secondly, They were Schismatics in an
eminent manner, fet up a new separation by themselves, on Mount Gerizim: And
farther yet in the third place, pretended to the only purity and antiquity,
they lived where Jacob once lived; and therefore, though Assyrians by
extraction, they boast they are Jacob's seed; and pretend more antiquity for
that Schism of theirs, because Jacob once worshipped in that Mountain, than
they think can be showed for the Temple at Jerusalem, which was but in
Solomon's time, of a latter structure: Just as they which pretended, though
never Christ; have still despised and separated from all others as Novelists,
which walked in the Apostles steps and practices; and so Samaritans under
guilts enough: First, Haters of Jerusalem. Secondly, Heretics. Thirdly,
Separatists. Fourthly, Pretenders (though without all reason) to the first
antiquity, and so arrogant Hypocrites too: And fifthly, beyond all, prodigious,
but still confident Disputers; and yet, sixthly, one higher step than all
these, Contemners and haters of all, even of Christ himself, on this only
Jerusalem, and looked as if he were a going thither, as if he had some favor
to the established Religion of the Land. I wish this passage did not hitherto
parallel it self; but seeing it does too illustriously to be denied, or
disguised, I shall imagine that that which follows, may do so too.

All this together, was temptation to two honest Disciples, to think fire from
Heaven a but reasonable reward for such Samaritans; and having flesh and blood
about them, compounded with Piety. You Christ, as being against the
Gospel Spirit; you know not what spirit you are of. Haters of the Church,
Heretics, Schismatics, Hypocrites, Irrational Pretenders, Enemies,
Contumelious, even to Christ himself, must not presently be assigned the Devils
portion, the (...), may be yet capable of some mercy, some humanity, not
instantly devoted to be sacrifices to our fury. The Gospel Spirit will have
thoughts of peace, of reconciliableness toward them. And let me beseech God
first, and then you Right Honorable; God, that he indue and inspire your hearts
with this piece of the Gospel spirit, so seasonable to your present
consultations: And you, that you would not reject my Prayers to God, but open
your hearts to receive Disciples of Christ, in that they are Boanerges; but
stay till the cool of the day, till you have them in a calmer temper, when
Christ's Word and Doctrine has stilled those billows, as once he did the other
tempestuous Element. It was Antonius his way to be revenged on his enemies,
(...) not to imitate them, whatever he did. And this was but an Essay or
obscure shadow of the Christian Magnanimity, that goes for poverty of spirit in
the World, but proceeding from the right principle of unshaken of constant
unmovable meekness, of design to be like our Royal Master-sufferer. (Father
forgive them that crucify me, and go and preach the doctrine of the Kingdom to
them, after they have crucified me. And you know all, we Ministers ever since
are but Ambassadors of Christ, to ingrate, crucifying enemies, Praying them in
Christ's name and stead, that they would be reconciled, that they that have done
the wrong will vouchsafe to be friends.) What is it, but that eminent piece of
Gospel Spirit, which they that can be persuaded to part with for all Revenge
can promise or pretend to bring in unto them, are unhappily ignorant of the
richest Jewel, that ever came within their reach: They know not, etc.

I have as yet given you the Gospel Spirit, in one color or notion, that of
its opposition to Elias first, and then to the Boanerges. It will be necessary
to add somewhat of the Positive consideration of it, though that must be
fetched from other Scriptures. And this will be but necessary to this Text,
because that which is here mentioned, is the Disciples offended, were
destructive to the Gospel Spirit, Malum ex quolibet defectu, yet) all the
several branches of it, are required to integrate or make up the Gospel Spirit,
Bonum ex essentia integra. And what these branches are, I cannot better direct
you, than by putting you in mind of these few severals. First, Christ's badge
or cognizance, By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, Nazar. Sosp.
Not of one opinion, but of love. Add, Nunquam laeti sitis, etc. as Jews rend
Garments at Blasphemy; so we at Uncharitableness. Secondly, Christ's legacy,
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Thirdly, Christ's copy, Learn
of me; what is beyond all his other perfections, I am meek. Fourthly, The Nature
of that Wisdom which comes from above, Jam. iii. First pure, then peaceable.
Fifthly, The quality of the fruits of the Spirit, in St. Paul, Gal. v. Love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, Sixthly, The gallantry
of meekness in St. Peter, Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit. Seventhly,
Titus's charge, that all Christians are to be put in mind of, Tit. iii. 1. To
be subject to Principalities, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good
work, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, (...) no fighters, but
gentle, showing all meekness to all men. Things, that it seems nothing but
Christianity could infuse; For we our selves were sometimes fools, dis^bedient,
etc. then room for this Spirit.

I cannot give you a readier Landscape to present them all to your view
together, than that excellent Sermon of Christ upon the Mount, that (...), as
Chrysostom calls it, That top pitch of Divine Philosophy, worthy to be
imprinted in every man's heart; and of which, he that has not been a pondering
student, and resolved to regulate his practice by it, as much as his Faith by
the Apostles yea, and to lay down his life a Martyr of that Doctrine, though he
has all Faith, I cannot promise my self much of his Christianity. If you will
have the Brachygraphy of that, the Manual picture that maybe sure, either in
words or sense, never to depart from your bosom, but remain your constant
Phylactery or Preservative, from the danger of all ungospel spirits, then take
the Beatitudes in the front of it: And among them (that I may, if it be
possible, bring the whole Iliads into a Nutshel) those that import immediately
our duty toward men; for in that the Gospel Spirit especially consists,
increasing our love to Brethren; whose flesh Christ now assumed, and in whose
interests he has a most immediate concern. And if you mark, in the Chapter
following, all the improvements mentioned except only that of swearing, belong
to the commands of the Second Table. And then the integral parts of this
Gospel Spirit, will be these four constantly, Humility, meekness, mercifulness,
peaceableness, and if need be, suffering too: Every of these four brought in to
us, with a checker duty toward God, of mourning betwixt humility and meekness,
hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, betwixt meekness, and mercifulness;
purity of heart betwixt mercifulness, and peaceableness, and persecution, and
reproaches, and (...) every Rabshakeh Topic of railing Rhetoric vomited out
upon us ( Blessed persecution, blessed reproaches, when our holding to Christ,
is that which brings them all upon us) the consummation and crown of all.

Having but named you these severals, Humility, meekness, mercifulness, and if
need be, patience of all stripes, both of hand and tongue; the sparkling gems
in this Jewel, blessed ingredients in this Gospel Spirit, you will certainly
resolve it full time for me to descend to my second particular, at first
proposed, That some Disciples there were, some prime Professors do not know the
kind of that spirit, (...), You know not what kind of spirit you are of.

James and John it appears were such Disciples, and that after Christ than to
leave their carnal prejudices and ignorances and obey him; especially those
that had such hold in their passions, (as revenge, they say, is the pleasingest
piece of carnality in the heap;) Peter himself, after a longer space of
proficiency, in that school, even at the time of Christ's attachment, had not
yet put off that ignorance, (...), say the Fathers, Peter was of an hot
Constitution, and Christ's Doctrine had not yet got down deep enough into his
heart, to allay or cool him; Nondum concipiens in se Evangelicam patientiam
illam traditam sibi a Christo, etc. says Origin; that Gospel-patience and
peaceableness Christ had commended to him, he had not it seems yet received
into an honest heart, and so he makes no scruple to cut off Malchus ear, when
he was provoked to it. I have heard of a Friar, that could confess that Malchus
signified a King, and yet after made no scruple to acknowledge him in that
notion, to be the Highpriests Servant. And secondly, to justify St. Peter's
act, and avoid Christ's reprehension, by saying that he was chid, not for doing
so much, but for doing no more; not for cutting off his Ear, but for not
directing the Christ did not reprehend St. Peter for that act) and by the
actions of others, I have little joy to represent to you; God knows, I love not
to widen breaches; only I am sure the Fathers are clear; that though formerly
St. Peter were ignorant, and from that ignorance and zeal together, ran into
that fury, yet Christ (...), Theoph. in. Mat. 26.
desirous to tune him though it were to avenge even God himself. And having
given you these proofs of this ignorance in three Disciples, I think it is
possible I might extend it to the rest of them, that they were in this
particular ignorant too* (as it seems they were in many other things) till the
Holy Ghost came according to promise to teach them all things, and (to thaw
their memories, that the words of Christ's, like the voice in Plutarch that had
been frozen, might at length become audible; or as Plato's Precepts were
learned by his Scholars, when they were young, but never understood till they
were Men of full age, and tamer passions:) I say, to bring to their remembrance
whatsoever Christ had in Person said unto them. And I wish to God it were
uncharitable to charge this ignorance still upon Disciples, after so many
solemn Embassies of the Holy Ghost unto Dove, but Vultur (tearing even the
flesh from us on purpose; that when we have less of that carnal Principle left,
there might be some heed taken to this Gospel Spirit) there were yet some
proficiency observable among us, some heavings of the (...), that has so long
been a working Gospel-Principles, and maintain it by the Gospel Spirit. I have
authority to think, that was the meaning of that Prophecy of Christ's turning
swords into plough-shares, not that he should actually bring peace, he tells
you that it would prove quite contrary; but because the fabric of the Gospel
is such, that would all men live by it, all wars and disquiets would be
banished out of the World. It was a madness in Machiavel to think otherwise,
and yet the unhappiness of the World, that Sir Thomas Moor's Book that designed
it thus, should be then called Utopia, and that title to this hour remain
perfect Prophecy, no place to be found where this Dove may rest her foot, where
this Gospel Spirit can find reception. No not among Disciples themselves, those
that profess to adventure their lives to set up Christ's Kingdom in its purity;
none so void of this knowledge, as they. Whether we mean a speculative or
practical knowledge of it, few arrived to that Spirit, or no. Some so in love
with nature, that old Pelagian Idol, resolve that sufficient to bring them to
Heaven, if they but allow their brethren what they can claim by that grand
Character, love of Friends, those of the same persuasion, those that have
obliged them; they have natures leave, and so are resolved to have Christ's, to
hate, pursue to death whom they can fancy their Enemies. And I wish some were
but thus of Agrippa's Religion, (...), so near being Christians, gratitude,
honor to Parents, natural affection, were not become malignant qualities,
disclaimed as conscientiously, as obedience and justice, and honoring of
betters. Others again so devoted to Moses's Law, the Old Testament Spirit, that
whatever they find practiced there, they have sufficient authority to
transcribe. And it is observable, that they which think themselves little
concerned in Old Testament Duties, (which have a long time past for
unregenerate morality, that faith has perfectly Old Testament Spirit, all
their pleas for the present resistance fetched from them, yea, and confessed by
some, that this liberty was hidden by God in the first ages of the Christian
Church, but now revealed we cannot hear where yet; but in the Old Testament,
and from thence a whole CIX. Psalm full of Curses against God's Enemies and
theirs, (and generally those pass for synonymous terms) the special devotion
they are exercised in; and if ever they come within their reach, no more mercy
for them, than seven nations, in rooting out of which, a great part of their
Religion consists. I wish there were not another Prodigy also abroad under the
name of the Old Testament Spirit, the opinion of the necessity of Sacrifice,
real bloody Sacrifice, (even such as was but seldom heard of among Indians, and
Scythians themselves) such sacrifices, Cannibal Cyclops Feasts may seem to have
been but attendants, (furnished with the (...), that come from such savage
Altars) sacrificing of Men of Christians, of Protestants, as good as any in the
World, to expiate for the blood shed by Papists in Queen Mary's days; and some
Prophets ready to avow, that without such Sacrifice, there is no remission, no
averting of judgments from the Land. What is this, but like the Pharisees, To
build and garnish the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and say, That if they had
lived and yet go on to fill up the measure of their Fathers? the very men to
whom Christ directs thee, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest, in the
present tense, a happy turn, if but the Progeny of those Murderers, and what
can then remain, but the Behold, your house is left unto you desolate,
irreversible destruction upon the Land. A third sort there is again that have
so confined the Gospel to Promises, and a fourth so persuaded that the Unum
necessarium is to right persuasions in Religion; i. e. of those that every such
Man is of, (for he that did not think his own the truest, would sure be of them
no longer) that betwixt those two popular deceits, that of the Fiduciary, and
this of the Solifidian, the Gospel spirit, is not conceived to consist in doing
any thing; and so still those practical Graces, Humility, Meekness,
Mercifulness, Peaceableness, and Christian Patience, are very handsomely
superseded; that one Moses's Rod, called Faith, is turned Serpent, and has
devoured all these for rods of the Magicians; and so still you see Men
sufficiently armed and fortified against the Gospel Spirit. All that is now
left us, is not to exhort, but weep in secret, not to dispute, but pray for it,
that God will at last give us eyes to discern this treasure put into our hands
by Christ, which would yet like a whole Navy and Fleet of Plate, be able to
recover the fortune and reputation of this bankrupt Island, fix this floting
Delos, to restore this broken shipwrackt Vessel to harbor and safety, this
whole Kingdom to peace again. Peace! seasonable, instant peace, the Vastation,
perfect Africa of nothing, but wild and Monster; and the Gospel Spirit, that
Christ came to Preach, and exemplify, and plant among men, the only way
imaginable to restore that peace. Lord that it might at length break forth
among as! the want of it is certainly the Author of all the miseries we suffer
under; and that brings me to the third and last particular, That this ignorance
of the Gospel Spirit, is apt to betray Christians to unsafe, unjustifiable
enterprises: You that You know not, etc.

It were too sad, and too long a task, to trace every of our evils home to the
original; every of the fiends amongst us, to the mansion in the place of
darkness, peculiar to it: If I should it would be found too true, what Du
Please is affirmed to have said to Languet, as the reason why he would not
write the story of the Civil Wars of France, drive such an action to the
Brothel-house, that came speciously and pretendedly out of a Church: Find that
to be in truth, the animosity of a rival, that took upon it to be the quarrel
for Religion; or as in Polybius often, the (...) to be a thing very distant from
the (...),the color from the cause.

In the mean it will not be a peculiar mark of odium on the embroylers State
and Church, to lay it at their doors, which I am confident never failed to own
the like effects in all other Christian States, the Ignorance (i. e. in the
Scripture phrase, Not Practicing) of those Christian Rules which the
Gospel Spirit presents us with.

I might tire you but with the names of those effects that flow constantly from
this Ignorance, such are usurping the Power that belongs not to us, which
Humility would certainly disclaim; such resisting the Powers under which we are
placed by God, to which Meekness judging and censuring men's thoughts and
intentions any further than their actions enforce, most unreconcileable with
the forgiving part of mercifulness; such the doing any kind of evil. that the
greatest or publickest good may come, designing of Rapine or Blood to the
sanctifiedst end, which S. Paul and Peaceableness would never endure; such
Impatience of the Cross, shaking a Kingdom to get it off from our own
shoulders, and put it on other men, diametrally opposite to the suffering and
patience of

To retire from this Common, to the Enclosure, and to go no farther than the
Text suggests to me, To call fire from Heaven upon Samaritans, is here
acknowledged the effect of the (...), the want of knowledge, or consideration
of the quality of their spirit.

And what may that signify to us? Why fire you know is the emblem of a Civil
War, which is called a (...), a combustion, or being farther broken out into
flames, a conflagration; and I conceive Peter, where we read the Fiery Trial.

Now fire you know, belongs most naturally to Hell; and therefore when the fire
and brimstone came down upon Sodom, the fancy of the Fathers calls it
Gehennam de Coelo: And so generally the Civil Fire, the Combustion in a State,
its original is from thence too; part of that wisdom that is not from above.
These Tares so apt for burning, are sowed by Satan, the Enemy-man. From whence
come Wars and (...), Wars of all sizes, are they not from your lusts, that war
in your flesh? says S. James. The lusts from the Flesh, but the War from Hell,
the Devil, the Spiritus sufflans that sets them a warring. Believe it, they
would not be able to do it in this manner, prove such fiery boutefeus, if they
were not inflamed beneath, if they were not set on fire by Hell. And therefore
to call fire from Heaven, to entitle God or Heaven to that fire, is to do both
of them great injury; nay, though it be on Samaritans, that are not so friendly
to Christ as might be expected: And so to call fire from Heaven upon
Samaritans, is (by accommodation at least) to pretend God, or Heaven, or
Religion, for the cause of War, which of all things has least to do it, if the
Gospel Spirit may have leave to be considered. Indeed, very few kinds of War
there are that will be Gospel-principles. It was truly said, (though by a rough
Soldier) That if the Lord of Hosts were permitted to sit in the Council of War,
there would soon be a cessation of Arms, and disbanding of Armies: Though that
all War is not unlawful will appear by John Baptists address to the Soldiers,
who gave rules to regulate their Militia, but did not disband them; and the
example of the Convert Centurion, a Centurion still after his Conversion: Where
yet this still remains as an infallible resolution, that Wars are to be used
like the Regia Medicamenta, Physician sees there is no other means available;
never upon the wantonness of the Patient, but command of the Physician, and
never but when peace appears to be impossible; for if it be possible, the
precept is of force, Follow peace with all men. And then to shed the blood of
Christians, when blood may be spared, what an hideous thing it is, you may
guess by that Emperor, that having beheaded a Christian, was by the sight of a
fishes head that came to his Table so astonished, phancying, that it was the
head of David in his pathetick expression, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O
Lord: A wonderful deliverance, it seems, to get clear from that. And what an
Ocean of fishes heads, may appear one day gaping on some Men, I have no joy to
tell: Deliver us from blood-guiltiness, O God.

I have done with my third particular also, and have now no more to importune
you with, but my requests to you, and to Heaven for the time past of all our
lives be sufficient to have spent in the will of the Gentiles, after the
dictates of that Heathen spirit, the natural or Jewish principles: That you be
content at length to go up to the Mount with Christ, and be auditors of his
Sermon; to that other Mount with the same Christ and be transfigured after him
to that spirit of humility, spirit of meekness, spirit of all kind of
mercifulness; that peaceable, patient spirit, which will give you a comfortable
passage through this valley of Achor here; yea, though it prove a Red of Blood,
and will fit you for a Crown, that true Olympic Olive Crown; the peaceable
fruits of righteousness, an eternal weight of glory hereafter. Which God of his
infinite mercy grant, through the merit and promise of his Son.

To whom with the Father, etc.

The VI. Sermon.
EZEKIEL. xviii. 31. For why will ye die?
SInce the Devil was turned out of Heaven, all his care and counsels have been
employed to keep us from coming thither; and finding Gods love very forward and
increasing toward us, he has set us upon all ways of enmity and opposition
against him. Babel, when man having fortified himself, and the arm of flesh
grown stout, began to reproach and challenge, and even assault the God of
Heaven. But the success of that boldness cost so dear, that we have ever since
been discouraged from such open proud attempts. Our malice and despite has
kept in somewhat more close and secretly, has retired and settled in the Soul;
the inward man has ever since erected its Babel; proud and high imaginations
out-bidding Heaven and God. These were a long while forged in the Brain, when
instead of the acknowledgment of one true God, all Monsters of Atheism filled
the understanding, sometimes with a multitude and shole of gods; sometimes
deprived it quite, and left it utterly void of any: But now at last, the Devil
and all the Atheism in the World, being at last exorcised and banished out of
the Brain, by the evidence and power of truth, has like the Legion, Luke viii.
which being cast out of the man, had leave to enter the Swine, Affections. All
the swellings, and tumors, and ulcers, that ever showed themselves in any
portion of the circumference, are now retired into the center: All the Atheism
or Heresy that ever soared or floated in the Brain, or surface of the Soul, is
now sunk heart; and there the Devil is seated at ease, there to set up and
fortify, and contemn God for ever. So that in brief, the issue of all is this,
There is an infinite opposition and thwarting, a professed combat and bandying
of forces betwixt the will of Man, and the Will of God; God doing, in a kind,
his best on one side, and Man on the other. God wonderfully willing and
desirous that we should live; man most perversely wilful to his own destruction.
This is a truth of a most dismal importance, that concerns you to be instructed
in, and will not Scripture, than the Text which I have read to you, Why will ye
die? It is God speaks it, and with an infinite emphasis and (...), to note his
passion and affectionateness in desiring our good, and willing that we should
live.

And then secondly, Why will ye die? Man's resoluteness and stubborn
wretchlesness toward his own ruin, rushing or tumbling as in a praecipice
violently to Hell, like the swine, which formerly our Luke viii. 33.
Luke viii. 33. running full speed down a steep place into the Lake. And these
are like to prove the parts of my ensuing discourse; First, Gods willingness
that we should be saved, Secondly, Man's wilfulness toward his own damnation.
And of these plainly to your hearts, not your ears; not so much to advance your
knowledge, which though it could be raised to the tallest pitch, might yet
possibly bear thee company to Hell: but rather to increase your zeal, to work
someone good inclination in you, to persuade you to be God's Willingness that
we should live.

Why will ye die?
Amongst all other prejudices and mis-conceits that our fancy can God, I
conceive not any so frequent or injurious to his Attributes, as to imagine him
to deal double with Mankind in his Word; seriously to will one thing, and to
make show of another; to deliver himself in one phrase, and reserve himself in
another. It were an unnecessary, officious undertaking to go about to be God's
Advocate, to apologize for him, to vindicate his actions, or in Job's phrase,
to accept the person of God. Our proceedings will be more Christian, if we take
for a ground or principle, that scorns to be beholding to an Artist word of God
is an argument of his Will; every action an interpreter of his Word. So that
howsoever he reveals himself, either in his Scripture, or his Works, so
certainly he wishes and intends to us in his secret Counsels. Every
protestation of his love, every indignation at our stubbornness, every mercy
conferred on us, and that not insidiously, but with an intent to do us good, are
but ways and methods to express his Will: are but rays, and emissions,
willingness of God that we should live, a priori, or by anything either in God
or us, preexistent as the cause of it, unless it be his love, which yet is
rather its genus than its cause, somewhat of larger extent, though otherwise
coincident with it. The more vulgar powerful convincing way, is to enforce it
to your hearts by its effects, and those diverse and familiar: some few of which
we will insist on.

And first, 1 John iv. 9.
and principally, The sending of his Son; 1 John iv. 9. In this was manifest
the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the
World, that we might live through him. Mark God's love to us in sending his
Son, that we might live through him; His love, the cause of his Mission; this
Mission, the manifestation and argument of that love; and that we live, the end
of both. Had God been any way inclined to rigor or severity, there had needed
no great skill, no artificial contrivance for a fair plausible execution of it;
It leaving of us in our blood, Ez xvi.
Ezekiel. xvi. and then Hell had presently opened its mouth upon us. We were all
cast out in the open field to the loathing of our persons, in the day that we
were born, Ezekiel. xvi. 5. ready for all the Vultures infernal to fix on, Eccles.
xiv. 12.
that hideous Old Testament, (...), Eccles. xiv. 12. The Testament of Hell, or
in the mercifullest construction, the Covenant of Grace had passed on us,
naturally then (what infidelity now makes us) condemned already; our damnation
sealed Devil had out of policy fallen before Adam, or rather descended, and that
in post, Luke x. 18.
like lightning, Luke x. 18. left if his journey from Heaven, had been to have
been performed after, some other Creature should have intercepted him of his
prey. But God's Bowels were enlarged above the size, wider than either the
covetous gates of Hell, or that horrid yawning head that is all mouth. 'Twas
not within the Devil's skill to fear, or suspect what a way of mercy and
deliverance God had Prophetic Arts, becoming now his Oracle; and even his
silence growing vocal to him: But all this could not declare the Mystery at
large; when Christ was born, he would have been rid of him betimes, musters all
his forces, Pharisees and People, Herod's and Pilots, Rome and Jerusalem, and
all the friends he had in the World, to make away with him; and yet when he was
just come to the push, to the consummation of his plot, he was afraid to act
it; as in the Epistle ascribed Ignatius the Martyr, Ep. ad Phil.
and directed to the Philippians, it is observed, that whilst he was at a pretty
distance, (...), the Devil hastened the structure of Christ's Cross, as much as
he could; set Judas and all the Artificers of Hell about the Work, (...), but
when all was even ready, Christ for the Cross, and the Cross for Christ; then
he began to put in demurs; shows Judas an Halter, frights Pilate's Wife in a
dream, she could not sleep in quiet for him; and in sum, uses all means
possible to prevent Christ's Crucifixion. Yet this, says Ignatius, not out of
any repentance, or regret of Conscience, but only being started with the
foresight of his own ruin by this means: Christ's suffering being in effect
the destruction of his Kingdom, his death our Triumph over Hell, and his Cross
our Trophy. By this you may discern what a Miracle of God's love was this
giving Son; the conceiving of which was above the Devil's reach, and wherein he
was providentially engaged, and (if we may so speak) (...), carried blindfold
by God, to be an Instrument of his own ruin, and in a kind, be a Co-worker of
our Salvation. Not to enlarge or expatiate upon Circumstances; Man being thus
involved in a necessity of damnation, and no remedy within the sphere, either
of his power or conceit left to rescue him; (nay, as some have been so bold to
say, that God himself had no other means, besides this in his Attributes) for
God then to find out a course that we could never prompt him to, being
solicited to it by nothing in us, but our sins and misery, and without any
interposition, any further consultation or demur, to part with a piece of
himself, to redeem us; Brachium Domini, The Arm of the Lord, Isa. liii.
as Isaiah calls our Savior, Isa. liii. Nay, to send down his very Bowels
amongst us, to witness his compassion; to satisfy for us by his own death, and
attach himself for our liberty; to undergo Enemies, to hate his Son: In brief,
to fulfill the Work without any aid required from us, and make Salvation ready
to our hands, as Manna is called in the sixth of Wisdom, (...), Bread baked,
and sent down ready from Heaven, Wisd. xvi. 20. to drop it in our mouths, and
exact nothing of us, but to accept of it: this is an act of love and
singleness, that all the malice we carry about us knows not how to suspect: so
far from Heathen, nay a Devil, I would bestow no other appellation on the
Christians God, than what the Author of the Book of Wisdom does so often,
(...), the friend, or the lover of Souls. But this is a vulgar, though precious
subject, and therefore I shall no longer insist on it. Only before I leave it,
would I could see the effect of it expressed in our Souls, as well as
acknowledged in our looks, your hearts ravished as thoroughly as your brains
convinced; your breasts as open to value tongues to confess it; then could I
triumph over Hell and death, and scoff them out of countenance; then should the
Devil be reduced to his old pittance, confined to an empty corner of the World;
and suffer as much by the solitariness, as darkness of his abode; all his
engines and arts of torment should be busied upon himself, and his whole
exercise to curse Christ for ever, that has thus deprived him of Associates
But alas! God desires our Salvation, because that Hell wheresoever it is,
(whether at the Center of the Earth, or Concave of the Moon) must needs be far
less than Heaven; and that makes us so besiege the gate, as if we feared
weshould find no room there. We begin our journey betimes, left we should be
forestalled, and had rather venture throng or crowd in Hell, than to expect
that glorious liberty of the Sons of God. It Is to be feared, that at the day of
Judgment, when each Body comes to accompany its Soul in torment, Hell must be
let out, and enlarge its territories, to receive its Guests. Beloved, there is
not a Creature here that has reason to doubt, but Christ was sent to die for
him, and by that death has purchased his right to life. Only do but come in,
do but suffer your selves to live, and Christ to have died; do not uncrucifie
Christ by crucifying him again by your Salvation, that even claims right and
title to you; and then the Angels shall be as full of joy to see you in Heaven,
as God is willing, nay desirous to bring you thither; and Christ as ready to
bestow that Inheritance upon you at his second coming, as at his first to
purchase it. Nothing but Infidelity restrains Christ's sufferings, and confines
them to a few. Were but this one Devil cast out of the World, I should be
straight of Origens Religion, and preach unto you Universal Catholic
Salvation.

A second Argument of God's good meaning toward us of his willingness that we
should live, is the calling of the Gentiles, the dispatching of Posts and
Heralds over the whole ignorant Heathen World, and giving them notice of this
treasure of Christ's blood. Do but observe what a degree of profaneness, and
unnatural abominations the Gentile World was then arrived to, as you may read
in all their stories; and in the first to the Romans, how well grown, and ripe
for the Devil, Christ found them; all of them damnably Superstitious and
Idolatrous unclean in their lives; nay, engaged for ever in this rode of
damnation, by a Law they had made; (...), never to entertain any new Laws, Dio.
or Religion: not to innovate, though it were to get Salvation, as besides
their own Histories, may be gathered out of Act. xvii. 18. And lastly, consider
how they were hooked in by the Devil, to join in crucifying of Christ, that
they might be guilty of that blood which might otherwise have saved them, and
then you will find no argument to persuade you 'twas possible, that God should
have any design of mercy on them. Peter was so resolved of the point, that the
whole succession of the Gentiles should be damned, that God could scarce
persuade him to go and Preach to one of them, Act. x.
Act. x. He was fain to be cast into a Trance, and see a Vision about it; and
for all that, he is much troubled about their profaneness and uncleanness,
that they were not fit for an Apostle to defile himself about their Conversion.

And this was the general opinion of all the Jews; they of the Circumcision
were astonished at the news, Act. x. 45.
Act. x. 45. Nay this is it that the Angels wondered at so, when they saw it
wrought at the Church by Paul's Ministry; never dreaming it possible, till it
was effected, as may appear, Ephesians. iii. 10.
Ephesians. iii. 10. This was the Mystery which from the beginning Verse. 9.
V. 9. One of God's Cabinet Counsels, a Mercy decreed in secret, that no
Creature ever wist of, till it was performed.

And in this behalf are we all (being lineally descended from the Gentiles)
bound over to an infinite measure both of humiliation and gratitude, for our
deliverance from the guilt and reign of that second original sin, that
Heathenism of our Ancestors, and Catholic damnation, that Sixteen hundred
years ago we were allinvolv'd in. Beloved, Shrines and Altars in our hearts to
every poor delight that our sottishness can call a God; if we are not called
out of their sins, as well as out of their ignorance; Interrogatory, whether
this calling the Gentiles has found any effect in your hearts, any influence
on your lives; whether your Conversations are not still as Heathenish as ever?
If you have no other grounds or motives to embrace the Gospel, but only because
you are born within the Church, no other evidences of your Discipleship, but
your livery; then God is little beholding to you for your service, The same
motives would have served to have made you Turks, if it had been your chance to
have been born amongst them: and now all that fair Christian outside is not
thank-worthy. It Is but your good fortune, that you are not now at the same work
with the old Gentiles, or present Indians, a worshipping either Jupiter, or the
Sun! 'Twas a shrewd speech of Clemens, that the life of every unregenerate Man,
Christ, we are all still Heathens; and the Lord make us sensible of this our
Condition.

The third, and in sum, the powerfullest Argument to prove God's he has
bestowed his spirit upon us; that as soon as he called up the Son, he sent the
Comforter. This may seem to be the main business that Christ ascended to Heaven
about; so that a Man would guess from the xvi. John xvi. 7.
Chapter of St. John and Verse. 7. that if it had not been for that, Christ had
tarried amongst us till this time; but that it was more expedient to send the
Spirit to speak those things powerfully to our hearts, which often and in vain
had been sounded in our ears. It Is a fancy of the Paracelsians, that God dealt
with us; first sent his Son, his Incarnate Son, his own Flesh, to feed, and
nourish us; and for all this, we die daily: he has now given us his own very
Life, and incorporeous Essence, a piece of pure God, his very Spirit to feed
upon, and digest, that if it be possible we might live. There is not a vein in
our Souls, unless it be quite pined and shrivel'd up, but has some blood
produced in it by that holy nourishment; every breath that ever we have
breathed toward Heaven, has been thus inspired; besides those louder Voices of
God, either sounding in his Word, or thundering in his Judgments: there is his
calm, soft voice of Inspiration, like the Night Vision of old, which stole in
upon the mind, mingled with sleep, and gentle slumber. He Pythagoras, (...), To
worship at the noise and whistling of the wind, had sense, and divinity in it,
that Iamblicus that cites it never dreamt of; that every sound and whispering
of this Spirit, which rustles either about our ears, or in our hearts, (as the
Philosopher says, Tecum est,) when it breaths, and blows within us, the
stoutest faculty of our Souls, the proudest piece of flesh about us should bow
down, and worship. Concerning the manner of the Spirits working, I am not, I
need not to dispute. Thus far it will be seasonable and profitable for you to
know, that many other Illuminations and holy Graces are to be imputed to Gods
Spirit, besides that by which we are effectually converted. God speaks to us
many times, when we answer him not, and shines about our eyes, when we either
wink, or sleep. Our many sudden Ejaculations toward Heaven, our frequent, but
weak inclinations to good, our ephemerous wishes, that no man can distinguish
from true piety, but by their sudden death; our every-day resolutions of
obedience, whilestwe continue in sin are arguments that God's Spirit has
shined on us, though the warmth that it produced God accompanies his Word, as
at this time, to your ears; if you will but open at its knock, and receive, and
entertain it in your hearts, it shall prove unto you according to its most
glorious attribute, Romans i. The power of God unto salvation: But if you will
refuse it, your stubborness may repel and frustrate God's Work, but not
annihilate it; though you will not be saved by it, it is God's still, and so
shall continue to witness against you word that was every darted from that
Spirit, as a beam or javelin of that piercing Sun, every atome of that flaming
Sword, as the word is phrased, shall not, though it be rebated, vanish: the day
of vengeance shall instruct your Souls, that it was sent from God, and since it
was once refused, has been kept in store, not to upbraid, but damn you.

Many other petty occasions the Spirit ordinarily takes to put off the Cloud,
and open his Face toward us: nay, it were not a groundless Spirit cannot hope
to melt them; the fire must come consubstantiate with some solid instrument,
some sound, corpulent, piercing judgment, or else it will be very unlikely to
thrive. True it is, the Spirit is an omnipotent Agent, which can so invisibly
infuse and insinuate its virtue through the inward man, that the whole most
enraged adversary shall presently fall to the earth, Act. ix. the whole carnal
man lie prostrate, and the sinner be without delay converted; and this is a
Miracle which I desire from my heart, might be presently

But that which is to my present purpose, is only this, That God has also
other manners and ways of working, which are truly to be said to have descended
from Heaven, though they are not so successful as to bring us thither; other
more calm, and less boisterous influences, which if they were received into an
honest heart, might prove semen immortalitatis, and in time increase, and grow
up to immortality.

elected, they shall be called and saved in spite of their teeth; every man
expecting an extraordinary call, because Saul met with one; and perhaps running
the more fiercely, because Saul was then called, when he was most violent in
his full speed of malice against Christians.

In this behalf, all that I desire of you is, First, to consider, that
regeneration be a miracle, yet there are degrees of miracles, and thou have no
reason to expect, that the greatest and strongest miracle in the world, shall
in the highest degree be showed in thy Salvation. Who art thou, that God should
take such extraordinary pains with thee?

Secondly, To resolve, that many precious rays and beams of the Spirit, though
when they enter, they come with power; yet through our neglect, may prove
transitory, pass by that heart which is not

And then thirdly, You will easily be convinced, that no duty concerns us all
so strictly, as to observe, as near as we can, when thus the Spirit, appears to
us; to collect and muster up the most lively, quick-sighted, sprightfullest of
our faculties: and with all the perspectives that spiritual Optics can furnish
us with, to lay wait for every glance and glimpse of its fire or light. We have
ways in nature, to apprehend the beams of the Sun, be they never so weak and
languishing, spiritual estate! then it were easy for those sparks which we so
often either contemn or stifle, to thrive within us, and at least, break forth
into a flame.

In brief, Incogitancy and inobservance of Gods seasons, supine numbness, and
negligence in spiritual affairs, may on good grounds be resolved on, as the
main or sole cause of our final impenitence and condemnation; it being just
with God, to take those away in a sleep who dream, and at last to refuse them,
whom he has so long solicited. He that has scorned or wasted his
inheritance, cannot complain if he dies a bankrupt; nor he that has spent his
candle at play, count it hard usage, that he is fain to go to bed darkling. It
were easy to multiply arguments on this theme, and from every minute of our
lives, to discern some pawn and evidence of Gods fatherly will and desire that
we should live. Let it suffice, that we have been large, if not abundant in
these three chief ones: First, The giving of Secondly, Dispatching the Gospel
to the Gentiles. And lastly, The sending of his Spirit. We come now to a view
of the opposite trenches, which lie pitched at the Gates of Hell* obstinate and
peremptory to besiege, and take it: Man's resolvedness and wilfulness to die, my
second part.

Why will you die?
There is no one conceit that engages us so deep, to continue in God's will is
a cause of all events. Though we are not so blasphemous as to venture to define
God the Author of sin; yet we are generally inclined for God's decree,
whatsoever we have done, could not be otherwise; all our care could not have
cut off one sin from the Catalogue. And so being resolved, that when we thus
sinned, we could not choose, we can scarce tell how to repent for such necessary
fatal misdemeanors; the same excuses which we have for having sinned formerly,
we have for continuing still, and so are generally better prepared for
Apologies than Reformation. Beloved, it will certainly much conduce to our
edification, instead of this speculation death either as it is the punishment
of sin, eternal death, or as it is the sin it self, a privation of the life of
grace, spiritual death, is wholly to be imputed to our wilful will. It is a
Problem in Aristotle, why some Creatures are longer in conceiving and bringing
forth than others, and the sensiblest reason he gives for it, is (...), the
hardness of the Womb, which is like dry earth, spiritual conception, and
production of Christ, that is, of life in us: The hardness and toughness of the
heart, the womb where he is to be born, that (...), that dry Earth, in the
Philosophers; or that way-side, or at best stony ground in Christ's phrase, is
the only stop and delay in begetting of life within us, the only cause of
either barrenness or hard travail in the Spirit. Be the brain never so soft and
pliable, never so waxy and capable of impressions; yet if the lust of the
flesh, 1 John ii. 15. 1 John ii. 15.
in its composition, it will be hard for the spiritual life to be conceived in
that man. For Faith, the only means by which Christ lives and dwells in us,
Ephesians. iii. 17.
Ephesians. iii. 17. is to be seated in the heart, i. e. the will and affections,
according to the express words, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.
So that, be your brains never so swelled and puffed up with persuasions of Christ
our Savior, be they so big that they are ready to ly-in, and travail of
Christ, as Jove's did of Minerva will, it is but an aerial or fantastical
birth, or indeed rather a disease or tympany; nay, though it come to some
proof, and afterward extend and increase in limbs and proportions never so
speciously, yet if it be only in the brain, neither is this to be accounted
solid nourishment and augmentation, but such as a Camaelion may be thought to
have, that feeds on air, and it self is little better, and in sum, not

So then if the will, either by nature, or custom of sinning, by familiarity
and acquaintance, making them dote on sensual objects, otherwise unamiable; by
business and worldly ambitious thoughts, great enemies to faith; or by pride
and contentment, both very incident to noble Personages and great Wits, to
Courtiers and Scholars: In brief, if this Will, the stronger and more active
part of the Soul, remain many, or, which is the snare of judicious men in
chief, of some one prime sin, then cannot all the faith in the world, bring
that man to Heaven, it may work so much miracle as Simon Magus is said to have
done, who undertook to raise the dead, give motion to the head, make the eyes
look up or the tongue speak; but the lower part of the man, and that the
heaviest, will by no charm or spell be brought to stir, but weigh and sink even
into Hell, will still be carcass and corruption; Ecclus. xx. 25.
Damnation is his birthright, Ecclus. xx. 25. ex hypothesi, the second
Covenant being now sealed, even for God himself, to save him or give him life.
It is not David's Music, that exorcised and quieted Readiness evil spirit, nor
Pythagoras's Spondees that tamed a man, (...) set him right in his wits for
ever, that can work any effect on a fleshy heart: So that Chrysostom would not
wonder at the voice that cried, O Altar, Altar, hear the voice of the Lord,
because Jeroboam's heart was harder than that; nor will I find fault with
Bonaventure that made a solemn

It were long to insist on the wilfulness of our fleshy hearts, how they make a
faction within themselves, and bandy faculties for the Devil; how when grace
and life appear, and make proffer of themselves, all the carnal affections,
like them in the Gospel, Join all with one consent to make excuses; Luke xiv.
18.
nothing in our whole lives we are so sollicitous for, as to get off fairly, to
have made a cleanly Apology to the invitations God's Spirit, and yet for a need
rather than go, we will venture to be unmannerly: We have all married a Wife,
espoused our selves to some amiable delight or other; we cannot, we will not
come. The Devil is wiser in his generation than we, he knows the price and
value of a Soul and will pay any rate for it, rather than lose his market; he
will give all the riches in the world, rather than miss. And we at how low a
rate do we prize it? it is the cheapest commodity we carry about us. The
beggarliest content under Heaven, is fair, is rich enough Spiritus non
ponderat, says the Philosopher; the Soul being a spirit, when we put it into
the balance, weighs nothing; nay, more than so, it is lighter than vanity,
lighter than nothing, i. e. it does not only weigh nothing, but even lifts up
the scale it is put into, when nothing is weighed against it. How many sins,
how many vanities, how many idols, i. e. in the Scripture phrase, how many
nothings be there in the world, each of which will outweigh and preponderate
the Soul?

It were tedious to observe and describe the several ways that our devilish
sagacity has found out to speed our selves to damnation, to make quicker
dispatch in that unhappy rode, than ever Elias his fiery Chariot could do
toward Heaven, Our daily practice is too full of arguments, almost every minute
of our lives, as it is an example, so is Theme, a close of Exhortation.

And that shall be by way of Treaty, as an Ambassador sent from God, that you
will lay down your arms, that you will be content to be friends with God, and
accept of fair terms of composition, which are, That as you have thus long been
enemies to God, proclaiming hostility, merciful will of his by that wilfulness;
so now being likely to fall into his hands, you will prevent that ruin, you
will come in; and whilst it is not too late, submit your selves, that you may
not be forced as Rebels and outlaws, but submit as Servants. This perhaps may
be your last parley for peace, and if you stand out, the battery will begin
suddenly, and with it the horrendum est, Heb. x. 31. It is a fearful, hideous
thing to fall into the hands of the living God: All that remains upon our
wilful holding out, may be (the doom of Apostates Christianity) a certain
fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation that shall devour the
adversaries, Verse. 27. And methinks the very emphasis in my Text, notes as
much; Why will you die? As if we were just now falling into the pit, and there
were but one minute betwixt this time of our jollity, and our everlasting hell.
Do but lay this one circumstance to your hearts, do but suppose your selves on
a Bed of sickness, laid at with a violent burning Fever, such a one as shall
finally consume the whole world; as it were battered thundering and lightning,
and besieged with fire, where the next throw or plunge of thy disease, may
possibly separate thy soul from thy body, and the mouth of Hell just then open
and yawning at thee; and then suppose there were one only minute, wherein a
serious resigning up thy self to God, might recover you to Heaven. O then what
power and energy! what force and strong efficacy, would there be in this voice
from God, Why will you die? I am resolved, that heart that were truly sensible
of it, that were prepared seasonably by all these ultimus conatus, this last
spring and plunge, would do more than a thousand heartless heaves in a lingering
sickness, and perhaps overcome, and quit the danger.

And therefore let me beseech you to represent this condition to your selves,
and not any longer be flattered or couzened in a slow security: To day if you
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. If you Tempus improbabilitatis, a
very improbable inch of time to build our Heaven in; as after death is
impossibilitatis, a time wherein it is impossible to recover us from Hell. If
nothing were required to make us Saints, but outward performances; if true
repentance were but to groan, and Faith but to cry, Lord, Lord; we could not
promise our selves, that at our last hour we should be sufficient for that;
perhaps a Lethargy may be our fate, and then, what life or spirits even for
that? perhaps a Fever may send us away raving, in no case to name God, but only
in oaths and curses; and then it were hideous to tell you, what a Bethlehem we
should be carried to: But when that which must save us must be a work of the
Soul, and a gift of God, how can we promise our selves, that God will be so
merciful, whom we have till then contemned, Adamant? Beloved, as a man may come
to such an estate of grace here, that he may be most sure he shall not fall, as
St. Paul in likelihood was, when he resolved that nothing could separate him:
So may a man be engaged so far in sin, that there is no rescuing from the
Devil. There is an irreversible estate in evil, as well as good, and perhaps I
may have arrived to that before my hour of death; for I believe Pharaoh was
come to it, Exodus Plague hardening his heart; and then I say, it is possible,
that thou that hitherto have gone on in habituate, stupid, customary
rebellions, may be now at this minute, arrived to this pitch, That if thou
run on one pace farther, thou art engaged for ever past recovery. And therefore
at this minute, in the strength of your age and lusts, this speech may be as
seasonable, as if death were seizing on you, Why will you die? At what time
soever thou repentest, God will have mercy; but this may be the last instant
wherein death shall come on thee insensibly; that the rest of thy life shall be
a sleep, or lethargy, and thou lie stupid in it, till thou find thy self
awake in flames. Oh, if thou should pass away in such a sleep! Again, I
cannot tell you whether a deathbed repentance shall save you, or no. The
Spouse sought Christ on her bed, but found him not, Cant. iii. 1. The last of
Ecclesiastes would make a man suspect, Cant. iii. 1.
that remembering God when our feeble impotent God has chosen to himself, Tit.
ii. 14.
a people Zealous of good works, Tit. ii. 14. And they that find not some of
this holy fire alive within them, till their Souls are going out, have little
cause to think themselves of God's election: So that perhaps there is something
in it, Matthew. iii. 8.
that Matthew. iii. 8. the Exhortation, bring forth fruits worthy of repentance,
is expressed by a tense that ordinarily signifies time past, (...), have brought
forth fruits. spiritual condition; death? Any slight fancy that Christ died
for us in particular, we take for a Faith that will be sure to save us.

Now there is no way to preserve our selves from this Error, but to measure our
Faith and Hopes by our Obedience; that if we sincerely obey God, then are we
true believers: And this cannot well be done by any that begins not till he is
on his deathbed; be his inclinations to good then never so strong, his faith
in Christ never death, and a conviction, that in spite of his teeth, he must
now sin no longer, that has wrought these inclinations, produced this faith in
him?

Many a sick man resolves strongly to take the Physicians dose, in hope that it
will cure him; yet when he comes to taste its bitterness, will rather die than
take it. If he that on his deathbed has made his solemnest, severest Vows,
should but recover to a possibility inclinations that either hover in the Brain
only, or float on the Surface of the Heart, are but like those wavering,
temporary thoughts, Jam. i. 6. Like a wave of the Sea, driven by the wind and
tossed; they have no firmness or stable consistence in the Soul; it will be hard
to build Heaven on so slight a foundation.

All this I have said, not to discourage any tender, languishing Soul, but by
representing the horrors of death to you now in health, to instruct you in the
doctrine of Mortality betimes, so to speed and hasten your Repentance: Now, as
if to morrow would be too late, as if there were but a small Isthmus or inch of
ground between your present mirth and jollity, and your everlasting earnest.

To gather up all on the Clue: Christ is now offered to you as a Jesus: The
times and sins of your Heathenism and unbelief, God winketh at, Acts xvii. 30.
Acts xvii. 30. The Spirit proclaims all this by the Word God knows if ever
again) commands all men every where to repent.

Oh that there were such a Spirit in our hearts, such a zeal to our eternal
bliss, and indignation at Hell; that we would give one heave and spring before
we die; that we would but answer those invitations of mercy, those desires of
God, that we should live with an inclination, with a breath, with a sigh toward
Heaven.

Briefly, if there be any strong, violent, boisterous Devil within God; if the
lower sensual part of our Soul; if an habit of sin, i. e. a combination or
legion of Devils, will not be over-topped by reason or grace in our hearts; if
a major part of our carnal faculties be still canvasing for Hell; if for all
our endeavors and pains it may appear to us, that this kind of evil spirit will
not be cast out, save only by Fasting and Prayer: Then have we yet that remedy
left, First, To fast and pine, and weak within, by denying him all foreign,
fresh Provision, all new occasions of sin, and the like, and so to block, and
in time, starve him up: And then secondly, To pray that God will second and
fortify our endeavors; that he will force, and rend, and ravish this carnal
Devil out of us; that he will subdue our wills to his will; that he will
prepare and make ready life for us, and us for life; that he will prevent us by
his grace here, and accomplish us with his glory hereafter.

Now to him, etc.

The VII. Sermon.
JER. v. 2. Though they say, the Lord lives, surely they swear falsely.
-NOt to waste any time or breath, or (which men in this delicate and
effeminate Age, are wont to patience unprofitably, but briefly to give you a
guess whither our discourse is like to lead you; We will severally lay down,
and sort to your view, every word of the Text single; and so we may gather them
up again, and apply them to their natural proper purposes.

First, then the particle, Though] in the front, and, surely] in the body

Secondly, the Pronoun, They] in each place, is in the letter, the Jews, in
application present Christians, and being indefinite, might seem to be of the
same extent in both places, did not the matter alter it, and make it universal
in the former, and particular in the latter: For Artists say, that an
indefinite sign, where the matter is necessary, is equivalent to an Universal,
where but contingent, to a particular. the Lord lives, was, and is necessary;
though not by any Logical, yet by a Political necessity; the Government and
humane Laws, under which then the Jews, and now we Christians live, require
this profession necessarily at our hands: But to swear falsely, not to perform
what before they professed, is materia contingens, a matter of no necessity, but
free will and choice, that no humane Law can see into; and therefore we must
not interpret by the rules of Art, or Charity, Verse. 1.
and as we may guess by the first verse of this Chapter, well nigh all of them.

Thirdly, to say] is openly to make profession, and that very resolutely and
boldly, that none may dare to distrust it; nay, with an Oath to confirm it to
jealous opinions, as appears by the latter words, Jer. iv. 2.
They swear falsely, while they do but say: and Jer. 14. 2. Thou shall swear,
The Lord lives, etc.

Fourthly, the Lord] i. e. both in Christianity, and Orthodox Judaism, the
whole Trinity.

Fifthly, Liveth] i. e. by way of Excellency, has a life of his own,
independent and eternal, and in respect of us, is the Fountain of all Life and
Being that we have; and not only of Life, but Motion, and Perfection, and
Happiness, and Salvation, and all that belongs to it. In brief, to say, The
Lord lives, is to acknowledge him in his Essence, and all his Attributes,
contained together under that one life, to believe whatever Moses and the
Prophets then, or now our Christian Faith, has made known to us of him.

Sixthly, to falsify and swerve from Truth, becomes a farther aggravation,
especially in the present instance; though they make mention of that God, who
is Yea, and Amen, and loves a plain veracious speech, yet they swear; though by
loud and dreadful imprecations, they bespeak him a Witness and a Judge unto the
Criminal; pray as Sin, as the most sober Penitent can do for its Pardon, yet
are they perjured, they swear falsely.

More than all this, they openly renounce the Deity when they call upon him;
their hearts go not along with their words and professions; though it be the
surest truth in the World that they swear, when they assert that the Lord
lives, yet they are perjured in speaking of it; though they make a fair show
of believing in the brain, and from the teeth outward, they never lay the truth
that they are so violent hearts; or as the Original has it, (...) in vanum, to
no purpose it is that they swear, no man that sees how they live, will give any
heed to their words, will imagine that they believe any such matter.

So now having paced over, and as it were spelled every word single, there will
be no difficulty for the rawest understanding to put it together, and read it
currently enough in this proposition; Amongst

In the verse next before my Text, there is an O Yes made, a Proclamation, nay,
a Hew and Cry, and a hurrying about the streets, if it were possible, to find
out but a man that were a sincere Believer; and Non est inventus, Though they
say the Lord liveth] a multitude of Professors indeed every where, yet surely
they swear falsely, there is no credit to be given to their words; infidelity
and hypocrisy is in their hearts; for all their fair believing professions,
they had an unfaithful rebellious heart, Verse. 23.
V. 23. and the event manifested it, they are departed and gone, arrant
Apostates in their lives, by which they were to be tried; Neither say they in
their hearts, Verse. 24.
Let us fear the Lord, V. 24. whatsoever they flourished with

Now for a more distinct survey of this horrible wretched Truth, this
Heathenism of Christians, and Infidelity of Believers, (the true ground of all
false swearing, and indeed of every other sin) we will first examine wherein it
consists, secondly, whence it springs; The first will give you a view of its
nature, the second its root and growth, that you may prevent it. The first will
serve for an ocular or Mathematical demonstration, called by Artists (...),
that it is so; the second a Physical (...), how it comes about: The first to
convince of the truth of it, the second to instruct you in its causes.

And first of the first, wherein this Infidelity, and to speak more plainly,
Perjury of formal Believers consists, Though they say, etc.

Since that rather fancy than Divinity of the Romanists, Schoolmen, and
Casuists, generally defining Faith to be a bare assent to the truth of God Word
seated only in the understanding, was by the Protestant Divines banished out of
the Schools, as a faith for a Chamaelion to be nourished Sorcery and Conjuring,
which will help you to remove Mountains, only by thinking you are able;
briefly, as a Chimaera or fantastical nothing, fit to be sent to Limbo for a
present. Since, I say, this Magical Divinity which still possesses the
Romanist, and also a sort of men, who would be thought most distant from them,
has been exercised, and silenced, and cast out of our Schools (would I could
say, out of our hearts) by the Reformation, the nature of Faith has been most
admirably explained; seat or subject of it, never clearly set down, (some
confining it to the Understanding, others to the Will) till at last it pitched
upon the whole Soul, the intellective nature. For the Soul of Man, should it be
partitioned into faculties, (as the grounds of our ordinary Philosophy would
persuade us) it would not be stately enough for so royal a guest: either room
would be too pent, and narrow to entertain at once so many graces as attend it.
Faith therefore, that it may be received in state; that it may have more
freedom to exercise brain sometimes as its gallery, to recreate and
contemplate; at another in the heart, as its parlour to feed, or a closet to
dispatch business; but if it be truly that royal Personage which we take it
for, it is repletive in the whole house at once, as in one room, and that a
stately Palace, which would be much disgraced, and lose of Prince of a whole
Nation, (not as a Tetrarch of Galilee, a sharer of a Saxon Heptarchy) and
described to us as one single act, though of great command; and defined to be
an assent and adherence to the goodness of the object; (which object is the
whole word of God, and specially the promises of the Gospel.) So then, to
believe, is not to acknowledge the truth of Scripture, and Articles of the
Creed, (as vulgarly we use knowledge) but to be affected goodness and Excellency
of them, as the most precious objects which the whole world could present to
our choice; to embrace them as the only desirable thing upon the earth; and to
be resolutely and uniformly inclined to express this affection of ours, in our
practice, whenever there shall be any competition betwixt them and our
dearest delights. For the object of our Faith is not merely speculative,
somewhat to be understood only, and assented to as true, but chiefly moral, a
truth to be prosecuted with my desires

So that he that is never so resolutely sworn to the Scriptures, believes all
the Commands, Prohibitions, and Promises never so firmly, if he does not adhere
to them in his practice, and by particular application of them as a rule to
guide him in all his actions, express that he sets a true value on them; if he
do not this, he is yet an Infidel; all his Religion is but like the Beads-mans,
who whines over his Creed task, to deserve his Quarterage, or to keep
correspondence with his Patron. Unless I see his belief expressed by uniform
obedience, I shall never imagine that he minded what he said. The sincerity of
his faith, is always proportionable to the integrity of his life; and so far is
he to be accounted a Christian, as he performs the obligation of it, the
promise of his Baptism. Will any man say that Eve believed God's inhibition,
when she ate the forbidden fruit? If she did, she was of a story, that she
heard God, but believed the Serpent; as may appear by her obedience, the only
evidence and measure of her Faith. Yet can it not be thought, that she that was
so lately a Work of God's Omnipotence, should now so soon distrust it, and
believe that he could not make good his threatenings. The truth is this; she saw
clearly enough in her brain, but had not sunk it down into her heart; or
perhaps she assented to it in the general, but not as Bird fluttering in the
Chamber, not yet confined to a Cage, ready to escape at the first opening of
the door or window; As soon as she opens either ears or eyes to hearken to the
Serpent, or behold the Apple, her former assent to God is vanished, and all her
faith bestowed upon the Devil. Pelagianism, to proceed and observe how the
condition of every sin, since this time has been an imitation of that. The
same method in sin, has ever since been taken, first to revolt from God, and
then to disobey; first to become Infidels, and then Sinners. Every murmuring of
the Israelites, was a defection from the Faith of Israel, and turning back to
Egypt, in their hearts.

Infidelity, as it is the fountain from whence all Rebellion springs, ( Faith
being an adherence, and every departure from the living God, arising Heb. iii.
12.) so it is also the channel where it runs; Heb. iii. 12.
Not any beginning or progress in sin, without a concomitant degree of either
weakness, or want of Faith. So that Heathens or Heretics are not the main
enemies of Christ (as the question de oppositis fidei is stated by the
Romanists) but the Hypocrite and Libertine, he is the Heathen in grain, an
Heretic of Lucifer's own sect; one that the Devil is better pleased with, than
all the Catalogue in Epiphanius, or the Romish Calendar. For this is it that
Satan drives at; Doctrine of Christ, (for himself believes it fully, no man can
be more firmly resolved of it;) but when we heed it not in our lives, when we
cleave not to it in our hearts; when instead of living by Faith, Heb. x. 38.
Heb. 10. 38. (...), we draw back, and cowardly subduce our selves and forsake
our Colors, refusing to be martialled in his ranks, or fight under his Banner.
Arian the Stoic Philosopher has an excellent discourse, concerning the double
Infidelity, of the brain, and heart, very appliable; (...), etc. There are two
sorts of this senselessness and stupidity, whereby Men are hardened into stones;
the first of the Understanding part, the second of the Practical. He that will
not assent to things manifest, his brain is frozen into a stone or mineral;
there is no more reasoning with him, than with a pillar. The Academicks (...),
never to believe or comprehend any thing, was a stupid Philosophy, like to have
no Disciples but Posts or Statues; and therefore long ago laughed out of the
Schools, as an Brutes, or Metamorphosis, not to instruct but transform them: he
could not remain a Man, that was thus incredulous. But the second Stupidity,
that of the Practical, Not to abstain from things that are hurtful, to embrace
that which would be their death; (the vice, though not doctrine of the
Epicures) though this were an argument, both in his, and Scripture Phrase, of a
stony heart; yet was it such an one, as the lustiest, sprightfullest men in the
World carried about with them. (...).
Nay, 'twas an evidence (says he) of their strength and And thus holds it in
Christianity, as it did then in reason: Not to believe the truth of Scripture,
to deny that the Lord lives, would argue a brain as impenetrable as Marble,
and eyes as Crystal: We sooner suspect that he is not a man, that he is out of
his senses, then such an Infidel. Some affected Atheists I have heard of, that
hope to be admired for eminent Deity. But to deny him in our lives, to have a
heart of Marble or Adamant, (...), says Arrian, A dead stupefied Soul, (...),
it is so frequent amongst us, that it is not worth observing. He is but a puny
in the Devils camp that has not a privy coat within him to secure his heart
from any stroke, that God or Scripture can threaten him with.

Thus you see wherein this Christian infidelity consists, in the not indulgence
to those practices which directly contradict his doctrine. So that though every
commission of sin be not incompetible with the habit of faith, so far as to
denominate him an infidel; yet is it from the not exercising of faith actually,
that I ever sin; and every man in the same degree, that he is a sinner, so far
is he an unbeliever. So that this conversible retrogradous Sorites may shut up
all. He that truly believes, assents in his heart to the goodness, as well as
the truth of Scripture: He that assents so in his heart, approves approves,
when occasion comes, makes an actual choice of God's Word before all other most
precious delights: He that actually makes the choice, performs uniform
obedience, without any respect of sins or persons: He that performs this
obedience, never indulges himself in sin. And then e converso, backward, thus:
He that indulges himself in sin, does not uniformly obey the Word: He that does
not so obey, does not actually make choice of it before all competitors:
choice, approves it not according to its real excellency above all things in
the world: He that does not so approve, assents not to the absolute goodness of
it in his heart: He that so assents not, does not truly believe; therefore
every indulgent sinner is an infidel. And then look about you, and within you:
Whosoever say, The Lord lives, and yet remain in your ways of sin, be you
never so stout or proud-hearted, my Prophet gives you the lie: If you are
incensed, and swear that you are in the truth, and stand upon Surely you swear
falsely; 1 John iii. 6.
every indulgent sinner is an infidel. 1 John iii. 6. Whosoever sins, has not
seen Christ, neither known him: But amongst Professors of the Gospel, there be
a multitude of habitual sinners go; of infidels, (...), The thing, which in the
first place, we undertook to demonstrate.

We now come to the next thing proposed, The root or fountain of this
hypocritical faith; where we are to enquire how it comes about, That they which
are so forward to profess, are so far from true belief. And higher in our
search we cannot go, than Adam's fall; for the spring head of all this
infidelity (as for God's absolute decree, in rejecting men's persons, and then
suffering and leading them to an acknowledgment of the truth of the Gospel,
only that they may be unexcusable, Adam had once the Tree of Life to have
eaten, and have been immortal; to have confirmed him and his posterity into an
irreversible estate of happiness: But since his disobedient heart preferred the
Tree of Knowledge before that of Life, the Tree of Life has never thrived
currantly with his progeny. All our care, and traffic, and merchandise, has
been for Knowledge, never prizing or cheapning so poor a commodity, as life.
Clem. Strom. 3.
(...), etc. All sin is from the Tree and that has rooted it so deep, and
given it so fair a growth within us.

As for the Tree of Life, seeing then we would not feed on it, we were never
since suffered to come within reach: The Cherubins and a flaming Sword, have
fenced it round about, Genesis iii. 34.
Genesis iii. 34. and that makes men grow so unproportionably into such monstrous
shapes, vast, strong, swollen heads; and weak, thin, crazy bodies, like Pharaoh's
lean kine, lank, and very ill-favored: Men for the most part, having God's
Commandments. As one far spent in a Consumption, who has his senses perfectly
enough, when he is not able to go. It is only the Effectual Grace of God (of
which that other Tree was but an emblem) which must give us life and strength
to practice what we know. And this amongst us, is so little cared for, finds
such disesteem and slight observance when it appears; meets with such resolute
miracle, if it ever be brought to submit it self to such course entertainment.

And this is the first and main ground of this Hypocritical faith, our corrupt,
immoderate desires of knowledge, and neglect of Grace. The second ground more
evidently discernable in us, is, The secret consent and agreement betwixt our
carnal desires, and divine knowledge; and the antipathy and incompatibleness of
the same with true Faith.

The first pair dwell many times very friendly and peaceably together,
Knowledge does seldom justle or offer violences to the desires of the flesh; a
man may be very knowing and very lewd; of a towering Brain, and a grovelling
Soul; rich in speculation, and poor in practice.

But for the other pair, they are like opposite signs in the Heaven, have but a
vicissitude of presence or light in our Hemisphere; never appear or shine
together. Faith lusts and struggleth against the flesh, and the flesh against
Faith. The carnal part is as afraid of Faith, as the Devil was of Christ: For
Faith being seated in the concurrence of the dictate of judgment, and (on the
other side) the sway of the affections: The one must either couch, or be
banished at the others entrance; and then it cries out in the voice of the
Devil, Mark i. 24.
Mark i. 24. What have I to do with thee; or, as the words will bear, (...).
What communion can there be betwixt me and thee? thou precious Grace of God,
Art thou come to torment and dispossess me before my time? O flesh, when faith
comes to take its throne in the heart; as at the news of Christ's Incarnation
corporal, so at his spiritual, Herod the King is troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him, Matt. ii. 3. Mat. ii. 3.
All the reigning Herod sins, and all the Jerusalem of habitual ruling lusts
and affections are in great disorder, as knowing, that this new King abodes
their instant destruction.

It was Aristotle's observation, Eth. 6. 8.
That the Mathematics being an abstract knowledge, had nothing in them contrary
to Passions; and therefore young men and dissolute, might study and prove great
proficients in them, if they had but a good apprehension; there was no more
required: And that perhaps is the reason that such studies as these, History
and Geometry, and the like go down pleasantest with those which have no design
upon Books, but only to rid them of some hours, which would otherwise lie on
their hands. The most studious of our Gentry, ordinarily deal in them, as
inoffensive, tame, peaceable studies, which will never check them for any the
most inordinate Morality (says he) and practical knowledge, a young man or
intemperate, is incapable: You may make him con the precepts without Book, or
say them by roat, (...), He cannot be said to believe a word of them, his heart
is so possessed with green, fresh, boisterous lusts; that he cannot admit any
sober precepts any farther than his memory. If you are in earnest with him, to
apply and practice what he reads, you exact of him beyond his years; he is not
solemn enough for so sad severe employment; and therefore it is concluded,
intellectual virtue, rather than prudence. This consists in a peaceable temper
of the mind; an Artist he may prove, and never live the better; suppose him one
of youthful luxuriant desires, and never think he will be taught to live by
rule; All the learning and study in Books, will never give him Aristotle's Moral
prudence, much less our spiritual, which is by interpretation, Faith.

And this is the second ground of Infidelity amongst Christians, the
competibility of knowledge, and incompatibility of true Faith, with carnal
desires. The third is, The easiness of giving assent to generalities, and
difficulty of particular Application.

A common truth delivered in general terms, is received without any opposition:
Should it be proposed, whether nothing be to be done, but that which is just?
whether drunkenness, were not a vice? whether only an outside of Religion,
would ever save a man? No man would ever quarrel about it. When thus Nathan and
David discoursed, they were both of one mind; the one could talk no more
against unconscionable (...).
than the other would assent to. If you propose no other Problems than these,
the debauchedst man under Heaven would not dispute against you. Arr. Epict. l.
1. c 22.
But all quarrelling, says the Stoic, is (...), About the Application of
general granted Rules, to personal, private cases.

Jews, and Assyrians, and Egyptians, and Romans, are all agreed, that holiness
is to be preferred above all things; but whether it be not impious to eat
swines flesh, and the like, which of them observes the rules of holiness most
exactly, there the strife begins.

Common general declamations against sin, are seldom ever offensive; and
therefore the Master of Rhetoricks finds fault with them, as dull, liveless,
unprofitable Eloquence, that no man is affected with. The cowardliest Bird in
the Air, is not afraid of the Faulcon, as long Ax that was carried about the
Wood, threatening all indifferently, shall be laid to the Root of the Tree: When
Nathan shall rejoinder with a Thou art the man,] and S. Paul come home to his
Corinthians after his declamation against Fornicators and Idolaters with, And
such were some of you,] 1 Cor. vi. 11. 1 Cor. vi. 11.
then their hearts come to the touchstone. This is a trial of their belief: If
they will forsake their sins, which before their judgment condemned at a
distance: If they will practice the holiness integrity which they were content
to hear commended. That famous War of the Trojans, and Iliads of Misery,
following it in Homer, were all from this ground.

The two great Captains at the Treaty, agree very friendly, that just dealing
was very strictly to be observed by all men; and yet neither would one of them
restore the Pawn committed to his trust, nor the other divide the spoils: Each
as resolute not to practice, as both before unanimous to approve.

Christ which are confessed to be the most precious under Heaven, should be
fitter for his turn, than this amiable, lovely sin, that now sollicites him.
That Scripture is inspired by God; and therefore in all its dictates to be
believed and obeyed, is a thing fully consented on amongst Christians. We are
so resolved on it, that it is counted but a dull, barren question in the
Schools, Preacher in a Sermon should make it his business to prove it to you,
you would think he either suspected you for Turks, or had little else to say.
But when a particular truth of Scripture comes in balance with a pleasing sin;
when the general prohibition strikes at my private lust, all my former assent
to Scripture is vanished, I am hurried into the embraces of my beloved delight.
Thus when Paul reasoned of temperance, righteousness, Act. xxiv. 25.
and judgment to come, Felix trembled, Acts xxiv. Paul's discourse; and as in
the Devils, Jam. ii. 29.
Jam. ii. 29. it was an effect of a general belief: But this subject of
temperance and judgment to come, agreed not with Felix his course of life. His
wife Drusida was held by usurpation; he had tolled her away from her husband,
the King of the Emiseni, says Josephus, and therefore he could hear no more of
it: Antiq. Jud. l. 20. c. 9.
He shifts and complements it off till another time, and never means to come in
such divorce from his two treasures; his Heathenism, and his Whore.

Thus was Agrippa converted from the shoulders upward, which he calls Almost a
Christian; or as the phrase may be rendered, (...), a little way, Acts xxvi. 28.
Acts xxvi. 28. convinced to the general truths in his brain; but the lower
half, his heart and affections, remained as Heathenish as ever.

And this is the third ground of practical unbelief, that generalities Trinity
can be received, and thwart never a carnal affection, as being an inoffensive
truth. Christ's sufferings and satisfaction for sin, by the natural man, may be
heard with joy; but particular application is very difficult: That our
obedience to every command of that Trinity, must be sincere: that we must forgo
all, and hate our own flesh to adhere to so merciful a Savior, and express our
love to the most contemptible Soul under Heaven, as he has loved majesty as a
Judge, whom we are content to hug and embrace in his humility as a Savior:
This is a bloody word, as Moses his wife counted the Circumcision, too harsh
and rough to be received into such pampered, tender, fleshy hearts.

The fourth ground is, a general humor that is gotten in the World, To take
care of nothing, but our reputations: Nor God, nor life, nor soul, nor any
thing can weigh with it in the balance. Now it is a scandalous thing, a foul
blot to ones name to be counted an Atheist, Christians; and therefore for
fashions sake we will believe, and yet sometime the Devil has turned this
humor quite the contrary way, and made some men as ambitious of being counted
Atheists, as others of being Christians. It will shortly grow into a gentile
garb, and part of courtship, to disclaim all Religion in show, as well as
deeds. Thus are a world of men in the World, either professed Atheists, or
Atheistical Professors, upon the same grounds of vainglory; the one to get,
the other to save their reputation Creed, upon the same terms as Gallants go
into the field; that have but small maw to be killed, only to keep their honor,
that they might not be branded and mocked for cowards. And yet certainly in the
truth, these are the veriest daftards under Heaven; no worldly man so fearful
of death, or pious man of hell, as these are of disgrace.

The last ground I shall mention, and indeed the main of all, is, The subtlety
and wiliness of the Devil. He has tried all his stratagems Religion, to get
their heads full of knowledge, that so they may think they have faith enough,
and walk to hell securely. The Devil's first policies were by Heresies, to
corrupt the Brain, to invade and surprise Christianity Leo, in all his writing)
within the first Five hundred years after Christ, observe him at this ward, Ut
quos vincere ferro flammisque non poterat, cupiditatibus irretiret, and sub
falsa Christiani nominis professione corrumperet. He hoped to get more by
lusts, than heresies, and to plunge men deepest in an high conceit of their
holy Faith. He had learned Lord, Lord, even seal them up to the day of
damnation; and therefore it is ordinary with Satan to give men the teather a
great way, left they should grumble at his tyranny, and prove Apostates from
him upon hard usage. Knowledge is pleasant, and books are very good Company; and
therefore if Christ, who was well affected with his service, but could not part
with his riches, Mat. xix. 22.
Mat. xix. 22. So then you shall have his leave, to know, and believe in God,
as much as you please, so you will not obey him; and be as great Scholars as
Satan himself, so you will be as profane. The heart of Man is the Devils
Palace, where he keeps his state; and as long as he can strengthen himself

Thus have you the grounds also whereupon true Faith (which is best defined a
spiritual prudence, an application of spiritual knowledge to holy practice)
should be so often wanting in men which are very knowing, and the fairest
Professors of Christianity.

Now lest this discourse also should reach no further than your Jews, only to
prove you perjured Hypocrites, swearing falsely, whilst you say the Lord lives;
we will endeavor to leave some impression upon your hearts, by closing all
with Application.

And that shall be in brief, meekly to desire you; and if that will not serve
the turn, by all the mercies of Heaven, and horrors of Hell, Whether you are
as good as the Jews here? Secondly, Whether you are not, the best of you,
altogether as bad?

For the first, the Jews here said the Lord lives, were very forward to
profess; and 'twere some, though but a low measure of commendation for us to be
no worse than Jews. Let there go a severe Royal Majesty, over the whole Court,
or at least from every particular man upon himself; and bring in an impartial
verdict, whether there be not some amongst you, that are not come thus far as
to say, The Lord lives. Some are so engaged in a trade of misshapen, horrid,
monstrous Vices; have so framed and fashioned the whole fabric of their lives,
without any blush, or lineament of God in them, that they are afraid ever to
mention him in earnest, for fear of putting them out of their course; they dare
not believe God, lest it should be their undoing; a little sense of him, would
take off many of their tricks of sinning, and consequently spoil their thriving
in the world; like Diana's Silver smith, Act. xix. 24. Act. xix. 24.
for by this craft they have their wealth. The least glimpse of God in these
men's hearts; nay, one solemn mention of him in their mouths, were enough to
bring them into some compass, to upbraid their ways, and reprove their
thoughts. Were these men taken to task according to the Canon Laws of our
Kingdom, and not suffered to Christians, till they understood clearly the
promise of their Baptism; till they durst come, and make the same Vow in their
own persons, before all the Congregation, which in their infancy their Sureties
made for them; were our Canon of Confirmation duly put in execution, and every
one, as soon as he were capable, either persuaded, or forced to fit himself for
the receiving of it, (as it is severely required by our Rubric, though much
neglected in the practice;) I doubt not, but there would be fewer sins amongst
us, God, and mentioning of his Name, without the help of Oaths, and
Blasphemies, to which God now is in a kind beholding that ever he comes into
our mouths. But now men having a great way to go in sin, and nothing in the
world to stop them, begin their journey as soon as they are able to go, and
make such haste (like the Sun, or Giant in the Psalmist) to run their course,
are so intent upon the task the Devil has set them; that they can never stay
to see or hear of God in their lives, which yet is legible and palpable in
Creed and Catechism, they have no other use for it, but to break jests, and
swear by; and would soon forget God's very Name or Attributes, did they not
daily repeat them over, (as School-boyes their parts) and often comment on them
by Oaths and Prophanations: and these are (...) in the Apostles phrase, Ephesians.
ii. 12.
Ephesians. ii. 12. without God in the world. Others there are of a prouder,
lostier strain, (...), and (...), that pitch Camp, and arm and fortify
themselves against that would fain be a forging some other Religion, they are
so weary and cloyed with this.

Thus have I heard of some that have sought earnestly for an Alcoran, and
profess an opinion, that all true Divinity lies there, and expect to be
esteemed great Wits, of a deep reach, for this supposal. Turcism, yet have
lusts enough to admire it, and the brave carnal Paradise it promises; and if
they cannot persuade themselves to believe in it, yet they fancy it notably;
and because they cannot expect to have it in another life, they will be sure of
it in this.

Hence do they advance to such a pitch of sensuality, as Heathenism was never
guilty of; their whole life is a perpetual study of the arts of death, and
their whole Souls an Holocaust, or burnt Sacrifice to diagram, the several Arts
that the god of this World has now taught men to vilify and reproach the God
of Heaven. Professed Atheism begins to set up; it comes in fashion, and then some
Courtiers must needs be in it. Profaning of Scripture, and making too cheap of
it, was never so ordinary; that holy Volume was never so violently and coursly
handled, even ravished and defloured by unhallowed lips. It Is grown the only
stuff in request, and ordinariest garment to clothe a chair of scorners, Psalm.
1. a sin of ease and pleasure: a man that uses it, that is once a merry
Atheist, seldom, if ever, proves a sad. sober Christian. Julian, and many
others, have gone scoffing to Hell, (like men whose custom of mocking has made
wry mouthed) scarcely composing themselves to a solemn Countenance, God grant
your own impartial Consciences may return you not guilty:) However this will
but prove you no worse than Jews, for they here acknowledge God in their brain
and tongues; they said, The Lord lives.]

Your second Interrogatory must be, Whether whilst you thus profess, you do not
also swear falsely? And then it is to be feared, that Hypocrites, to be turned
Puritans and pretenders to Holiness: yet this is it my Text must charge you
with; professing of Religion, and never practicing it; assenting to the truth
of Scripture in your brain, but not adhering to it in your hearts; believing in
Christ, and yet valuing him beneath the meanest sin you meet with. Look over
your Creed, and observe whether your lives do not contradict every word in it;
Hypocrisy, and Perjury, or, if you will have it, high Complementing with God,
to be thus profuse and prodigal in our professions, which we never mean to
perform? Then is it to be called belief, when it is sunk down into our hearts,
when it has taken root in a well-tempered soil, and begins to spring above
ground, and hasten into an ear. That which grows like Moss on the tiles of an
house, which is set no deeper than the fancy, will never prove either
permanent, or Goa i our manners; yet if you will be in earnest with your
selves, and apply the grounds premised to your serious Examination, your
meditations may thoroughly make up what here is likely to be omitted.

One thing take home with you for a Rule to eternity, That every indulgence in
any sin, is a sure argument of an Infidel: be you never so proud and confident
of your Faith, and Justification by it; be you Lord lives; yet if your
obedience be not uniform, if you embrace not what you assent to, surely you
swear falsely. Your particular failings I am not knowing enough to represent to
you; your own Consciences, if they be but called to, cannot choose but reflect
them to your sight. Your outward profession and frequency in it, for the
general is acknowledged; your Custom of the place requires it of you; and the
example of Piety that rules in your Eyes, cannot but extort it. Only let your
lives witness the sincerity of your Christian brain, be supported with bedridden,
mentionless Heathen limbs. Let me see you move and walk, as well as breathe,
that I may hope to see you Saints, as well as Christians.

And this shall be the sum, not only of my advice to you, but for you, of my
Prayers: That the Spirit would, sanctify all our hearts, as well as brains;
that he will subdue, not only the pride and natural Atheism of our
understandings, but the rebellions, and infidelity, and heathenism Faith, and
move by Love, and die in Hope; and both in Life and Death, glorify God here,
and be glorified with him hereafter.

The VIII. Sermon.
LUKE xviii. 11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men, extortioners,
etc. or even as this Publican.
Solomon's proverbs, without any seeming dependence on any thing before or after
it: which I tell you that he will avenge them speedily; and then abruptly,
Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith upon the earth?
And then immediately verse 9. he spoke another parable to certain that trusted
in themselves, where this speech in the midst, when the Son of man comes, etc.
stands there by it self, like the Pharisee in my Text, seorsim, apart, as an
(...) or Democritus his atoms, the casual concurrence of which he accounted
the principle and cause of all things.

That we may not think so vulgarly of Scripture, as to dream that any tittle of
it came by resultance or casually into the world, that any speech dropped from
his mouth unobserved; that spoke as both in respect of the matter of his
speeches, and the weight and secret energie of all accidents attending them, it
will appear on consideration, that this speech of his which seems an (...), or
(...) a supernumerary superfluous one, is indeed the head of the corner, and
ground of the whole parable, or at least a fair hint or occasion of delivering
it at that time. Not to trouble you with its influence on the parable going
before concerning perseverance in prayer (to which it is as an Isthmus or
fibula, Pharisee, the highest instance of this confidence, and brings his
righteousness to the bar sub hac forma.

There is like to be toward the second coming of Christ, his particular
visitation of the Jews, and (then its parallel) his final coming to judgment,
such a specious pompous show, and yet such a small pittance of true faith in
the world, that as it is grown much less than a grain of mustard seed, it shall
not be found when it is sought; there will be such gyantly shadows, and pigmy
substances, so much and yet so little faith, that no Hieroglyphick can
sufficiently express it, but an Egyptian temple gorgeously over-laid, inhabited
within by Crocodiles, and Cats and carcasses instead of gods; Sodom, that shows
well till it be handled; a painted Sepulcher, or a specious nothing; or which
is the contraction and Tachygraphy of all these, a Pharisee at his prayers. And
thereupon Christ spoke the parable, ver. 9.
verse 9. there were two men went up into the temple to pray, ver. 10.
the one a Pharisee, etc. verse 10.

Concerning the true nature of faith mistaken extremely now adays by those
which pretend most to it, expuls'd almost out of men's brains, as well as
hearts, so that now it is scarce to be found upon either in our lives or almost
in our books; there might be framed a seasonable complaint in this place, were
I not already otherwise embarked. By some prepossessions and prejudices infused
into us, as soon as we can conn a Catechism of that making, it comes to pass
that many men live and die resolved that faith is nothing but the assurance of
the merits of Christ applied to every man particularly; and consequently of his
salvation: that I must first be sure of Heaven, or else I am not capable of it;
confident of my salvation, Cornelius Agrippa being initiated in natural magic,
Paracelsus in mineral extractions, Plato full of his Idea's, will let nothing
be done without the Pythagoreans, brought up with numbers perpetually in their
ears, and the Physicians poring daily upon the temperaments of the body; the
harmony, In lib. 1. de anima.
the other a (...) says Philoponus. And so are many amongst us, that take up
fancies upon trust for truths, never laying any contrary proposals to heart,
come at last to account this assurance as a principle without which they can do
nothing; the very soul that must animate all their obedience, which is
otherwise but a carcass or heathen virtue; in a word, the only thing by which
we are justified or saved. The confutation of this popular error I leave to
some grave learned tongue, Faith if it be truly so is like Christ himself, when
he was Emmanuel, God upon the earth, (...), an incarnate faith, cut out and
squared into limbs and lineaments; not only a spiritual invisible faith, but
even flesh and Romanist seats it, but in the heart, as regent of the hand and
tongue in the concurrence of all the affections. Where it is not only a working
faith, an obeying faith, but even a work, even obedience Romans i. 5.
not only a victorious faith, 1 Jo. v. 4.
but even victory it self, 1 Jo. 5. 4. This is our victory even our faith: to
part with this as a (...), which is our only business, is sure an unreasonable
Thesis. Any faith but this, is a faith in the clouds, or in the air, the upper
region of the soul, the brain; or at most but a piece of the heart; a magical
faith, a piece of sorcery and conjuring; that will teach men to remove
mountains, only by thinking they are able; but will never be taken by Christ
for this faith upon the earth: if it weak Christian to fly from this (...), and
call for some light of their lawful pastors, to find out the deceit; and the
more knowing illuminate Christian, to examine sincerely and impartially by
feeling and handling it thoroughly, whether there be any true substance in it or
no. The Pharisee looking upon himself superficially thought he I fast, I tithe,
etc. verse 12. Verse 12.
has no other Liturgies but thanksgivings, no other sacrifice to bring into
the temple, but Eucharistical, and yet how foully the man was mistaken!

God I thank, etc.

The first thing I shall observe in the words is the (...), the rational
importance of them, as they are part of a rhetorical syllogism, an example or
parallel to show that in the last days, though men think that there is a great
deal, yet there is indeed like to be but little Faith upon the earth. And the
issue from thence is the Pharisees flattering favorable misconceit of his own
estate, and the parallel line to that, our premature deceivable persuasions of
our selves, that is ordinary among Christians.

The second thing is the (...), the natural litteral importance of the words,
and therein the concomitants or effects of those his misconceits.

1. Pride, 2. Censoriousness. Pride noted by his speech, I thank thee that I am
not; then his posture pluming up himself, standing by himself he prayed; as the
Syriack set the words, and many greek copies, some by making a comma after
(...), others by reading (...), standing by himself; as Beza soorsim, apart:
not as our English, he stood and prayed thus with himself, but as the words
will likewise bear it, he stood by himself thus; this posture signifying a
proud contemptuous behavior, whilst the Publican stood crouching humbly, and
tremblingly behind.

2. Censoriousness and insinuating accusations of other men's persons, even as
this Publican. To which we may add the occasion of all this, seeing the
Publican behind him, ( i. e.) comparing

And of these in their order, as powerfully and effectually to your hearts, as
God shall enable me. And first of the first, the Pharisees favorable
misconceits of himself, and parallel to these, our deceivable persuasions of
our selves, God I thank, etc.

The black sin that has dyed the Pharisees soul so deep, as to become his
characteristick inseparable property, a kind of agnomen, a perpetual accession
to his name, is hypocrisy. The proper hypocrisy, deceiving others; the second
himself. That by which he imposes upon others is the sin we commonly declaim
against, under that name, most fiercely, sometime by just reason, as having
been circumvented by such glozes, sometime in a natural zeal to truth,
preferring plain downright impiety, before the same Reatus impii pium nomen,
his being counted innocent is an accession to his guilt. But then sometimes
too, under this odious name we may wound sincere and pure devotion; as the
Primitive Christians were by the tyrants put in wild beasts skins that they may
be torn in pieces; men may be deterred from all the least appearance of purity,
for fear they should be counted hypocrites. However this first sort of
hypocrisy may deserve its seasonable reprehension, this parable in my text
first sort, were it not for some hurtful consequences, might for ought I can
gainsay, pass for an innocent quality in a sinner. For what great injury does
that man do to any other, or himself? what grand sin against God or the World,
by desiring to seem better than he is; by laboring to conceal those sins in
himself, which could not be known without

Not to justify his opinion, but apply it by accommodation: In like manner
arraign an hypocrite, and muster up all the sins Devils charge in the times of
heathenism; that he strove to bring sin in credit by building temples, and
requiring sacrifices to lust, under the name of Venus, Priapus, and the like;
that incontinence might as they do gay clothes, that they may be the better
counted of: Augustus his daughter, which being admonished of a sin that beasts
would never have committed, answered that that was the reason they omitted the
enjoyment of so precious a delight, because they were beasts; as if innocence
were more

But for the second kind of hypocrisy, this couzening of a man's own soul, this
tyring and personating in the closet, this inventing Devil, this civil
intestine treachery within, and against ones self; this is the grand imposture
that here the Pharisee is noted for. An easiness and cheatableness that costs
the bankrupting of many a jolly christian Soul. He, says Plutarch, that wants
health, (...). page ^^.
let him go to the Physicians, but he that wants (...) a good durable habit of
body, let him go to the (...) (the masters of exercise) otherwise he shall
never be able to confirm Hippocrates (...), the constitution of wrestlers;
without which health it self is but a degree of sickness, nourishment proves
but swellings, and not growth, but a tympany. Both these, says he, Philosophy
will produce in the soul not only teaching men (...) (where by the way he
repeats almost the whole decalogue of Moses, though in an heathen Dialect) to
worship the Gods, etc. which is (...), the health of the soul, but which is
above all, (...), not to be overjoyed or immoderately affected in all this.
This which he attributes to Philosophy in general, is, says Aristotle, an act
of intellectual prudence, or sobriety, (...), not to vouchsafe higher titles to
himself than he is worthy of; not to think himself in better health than he is,
which is not the dialect of a mere heathen, but the very language of Canaan,
Romans xii. 3.
Romans 12. 3. (...), the very word in Aristotle, which cannot be better expressed
than by that (...) to have a moderate sober equal opinion of ones own gifts;
not to overprize Gods graces in our selves, not to accept ones own person or
give flattering titles to ones self; in Jobs phrase. This Chrysostom calls
(...), c. 5. page 261.
a word near kin unto the former, when a man having attained to a great measure
of grace, and done great matters by it, and knows it too, yet (...) fancies
no great matter of himself for all this. As the 3. children in Daniel having
received a miracle of graces, which affected even the enemies of God, yet were
not affected with it themselves. Enabled to be martyrs, and yet live. Or as the
Poet of Callimachus that stood after he was dead -- Pantelius.
Which is Nebuchadnezzars phrase, walking in the midst of the fire and yet they
have no hurt. Yet in their (...) their Song of praise, all that they say of
themselves is this, Song of 3. child. ver. 9.
and now we cannot open our mouths, ver. 9. for this, says Chrysostom, we open
our mouths, that we may say this only, that it is not for us to open our
mouths. By this low modest interpretation every Christian is to make of his own
actions and gifts, you may guess somewhat of the Pharisees misconceits.

Angelical composition, yet the very reflecting on these excellencies, were
enough to make a devil of him. The Angels, says Gerson, tri. 1. in Magnif.
as the Philosophers intelligences; have a double habitude, two sorts of
employments natural to them; One upwards, in an admiration of Gods greatness,
love of his beauty, obedience to his will, moving as it were a circular daily
motion about God, their Center; (as Boethius of them, mentemque profundam)
another downward, of regiment and power in respect of all below, which they
govern and move and manage. Now if it be questioned, says he, which of these
two be more honorable, for the credit of the Angelical nature, I determine
confidently, that of subjection pulchriorem and perfectiorem esse, quam secunda
regitivae dominationis, it is more renown to be under God, than over all the
world besides, As the service to a King is the greatest preferment that even a
Peer of the Realm is capable of. And Angel should make a song of exultance to
set himself out in the greatest pomp, he would begin it as Mary does her
Magnificat, For he has regarded the low estate of his servant: So that the
blessed Virgins mention of her own lowliness, was not a piece only of modest
devotion, but an (...) of expression, and high Metaphysical insinuation of the
greatest dignity in the world. And then let the Pharisee be as righteous as
himself can fancy, come to that pitch indeed which the contemptuous
opinionative p. 162.
(...), in Tatianus, which is in the Church of Laodicaea's phrase, I am rich
and am increased in spiritual wealth, and have need of nothing; or the fools in
the gospel, St. Luke xvi. 19.
I have store laid up for many years; nay to St. Paul's pitch, rapt so high,
that the schools do question whether he were viator or comprehensor, a
traveller or at his journeys end; yet the very opinion of Gods graces would
argue him a humility and lowliness of mind, this useful and most ingenuous
virtue, always to think vilely of himself; not to acknowledge any excellence in
himself, though he were even put upon the rack. The Philosophers that Gers. tr.
10. in Magnif.
Modesty, like Dina, desiring never so little to be seen, is ravished. The
sanctifying spirit that beautifies the soul, ie an humbling spirit also, to
make it unbeauteous in its own eyes. And this is the first misconceit, the
first step of Pharisaical hypocrisy, thinking well of ones self on what ground
soever; contrary to that virgin grace Humility, which is a virtue required not
only of notorious infamous sinners (for what thanks deal of good success in the
spirit, yet (...), is not advanced a whit at the fancy of all this.

The Pharisees second misconceit is a favorable overprizing of glass, he sees
all far more glorious in that reflect beam than it is in the direct, all the
deformities left in the glass, and nothing but fair returned to him, a rough
harsh unpleasing voice smoothed, and softened, and grown harmonious in the
Echo: there is no such cheating in the world, as by reflections. A
looking-glass by showing some handsome persons their good faces, and that truly,
has often ruined them direct species of a thing, and the same reflected, the
Henry the fourth of France will teach you; where in a multitude of feigned
devices, a heap of painted, fantastical Chimaera's, which being looked on
right resembled nothing, being ordered to cast their species upon a pillar of
polish't metal reflected to the spectators Catoptricks enough to understand
the demonstrable grounds and reasons of it, may yet discern as much in nature,
by the appearance of a rainbow, where you may see those colors reflected by
the cloud, which no Philosopher will assert to be existent there. And all this
brings more evidence to the Pharisees indictment, and demonstrates his opinion
of his own actions or merits, to be commonly deceiveable

He sees another man's actions radio recto, by a direct beam, and if there be no
humor in his eye; if it be not glazed with contempt or envy, or prejudice, he
may perhaps see them aright. But his own he cannot see but by reflection, as a
man comes not to see his own eyes, but in the shadow, and at the rebound;
whereupon Alcinous the Platonic calls this act of the soul, (...), a dialogue
of the soul with it self, Page 8.
and the Pharisees fancy has the returning of it. He that with his own
clearest eyes could take a gnat for a taller unweildier creature than a Camel,
and thereupon strains at it, Mat. xxiii. 24.
Mat. xxiii. 24. What would he do if he should come to his multiplying glass?
He that when he sees a mote, and that radio recto, in others eyes, can mistake
it for a beam, how can he think you, improve the least atome of good when he is
to look on it in himself? How will his fancy and he; the one a cheat from the
beginning, the other full greedy of the bait, fatten and puff up a sacrifice,
that he himself has offered? O how fair shall it appear, and ready to devour
all the seven f^t ones, though Pharaoh's lean kine, lank and very ill favored?
how shall the reflection of his beggarliest rags return to his eye the picture
of a King? and the ordinariest vapor, or cloud of his exhaling be decked over
withal the beauty and variety of the Rainbow? What Aristotle said of the
Sophists that they did (...), Elench. l. 1.
though it be a p^zling place for the Critics, this Censor or Aristarchus in
my text, will interpret by his practice; he blows up himself, as they were used
to do their meat against a tribunes or a Sheriffs feast, that it may look the
fairer, and not deceive others only, but himself; forgets what he has done, and
now thinks it is his natural complexion: as the Carpenter in the 13. of Wisdom;
Wisd. xiii.
that piece of wood which himself had just now carved into an Idol, he
presently prays to and worships as a god: or as liars, that by telling a tale
often at last begin to believe themselves; so has he befooled himself into a
ver. 12.
he will call this fasting twice in the week, ver. 12. and avouch himself an
obedient abstemious subject and Christian, though good Friday be witness of his
unchristian Epicurism. If he benevolence far below that that his dues would
come to, which by taking of a jolly fine at first, is for ever after paired
into but a larger sort of quit-rents (though his extortion bring in no revenue
to any but the Devil and himself) he will yet be confident with the Pharisee, I
pay tithes of all that I possess.

A pittance of virtue in a Pharisee is like the Polypod's head, to which
Plutarch compares Poetry, Mor. lib. 1. page 25.
has some good, but as much or

And generally the more there is within, the less report they give of
themselves; as S. Matthew mentioning himself before his conversion, does it
distinctly, Matthew. 9. 9. by the name of Matthew, and his trade sitting at the
receipt of custom, Matthew the Publican, by that odious renaming of sin;
(whereas all the other Evangelists call him Levi, or the son of Alpheus) but
leaves out the story of his own feasting of Christ, (only as Christ sat at
meat Luke sets down exactly, ver. 10.
and Levi made him a great feast, Luke 5. 27. or as in the history of S.
Peter's fall and repentance in the Gospel, according to S. Mark; (which the
primitive Church agree that S. Peter had a hand in it) his denial is set down
with all the aggravating circumstances, more than in all Mar. 14. 71. he began
to curse, and swear, I know not this man of whom you speak: two Evangelists say
only he denied him the third time; to this S. Matthew adds, he cursed anasware,
saying, I know not the man. But he in his own witness, most exactly in
aggravating the sin, I know not this, etc. But when he comes to the mention of
his repentance, when the two other say, (...), he himself, or S. Mark from him,
only (...), he wept; always speaking as much bad, and as little good of
themselves

A little windy opinionative goodness distempers the empty brain, it is charity
must ballast the heart; and that is the grace according to holy Maximius his
opinion, (...).
that all this while we have required, but not found in the Pharisee, and
that is the reason that the brass sounds so shrill, and the cymbal tinkles so
merrily. And this is the Pharisees second misconceit, his overprizing his own
good deeds and graces. The third is.

the morrow must care for themselves; Prometheus or Epimetheus are profane
heathen names to him; he is all in contemplation of present greatness; like the
heathen gods which are represented to have nothing to do, but admire their own
excellencies. I thank God that I am not, etc. Plutarch, a man that is
honorably and freely born has a fair treasure of confidence, (...).
and so a natural advantage of other men; but bastards and men of a cracked
race (...), that have a great deal of copper or dross mix't with their these
men are born to be humble and shamefaced. But amongst these contemplations he
may do well to consider the Amorite his father, and his mother the Hittite, the
pollutions and blood he was clothed with in the day that he was born Ezekiel. 16.
Ezekiel. xvi.
the accursed inheritance as well of shame as sin derived unto him. For then
certainly he would never so plume himself in his present sunshine. If he have
not gotten in the (...), among the Adamites in Epiphanius, and there set Adams
sect before his fall, Haeres. 32.
or the Valentinians which called themselves the spirituals, and the seed of
Abel, who indeed never had any natural seed we hear of. If he will but grant
himself of the ordinary composition and race of men, come down from Adam either
by Cain or Seth, I am sure he shall find sins past enough either in his person
or nature to humble him, be he never so spiritual. And then for the time to
come, Christ certainly espoused to any soul, as to be bound to hold it for
better for worse. That if he find ought in that spouse contrary to the vow of
wedlock, he can (...) (the word used in divorces amongst the Athenians on the
husbands part) send the soul out of his house or temple; especially if she do
(...) (the phrase used on the woman's part) if she leave or forsake the husband,
if she draw back or subduce her self out of his house, Heb. x. 8.
Heb. 10. 38, etc. by an evil heart of unbelief, openly depart from the living
God, Heb. iii. 12.
Heb. Critics as an absurd ridiculous phrase in some authors, to call the
Emperors Divi in their life time, which says Rittershusius when the propriety
of the Roman tongue was observed, capitale fuisset, had been a grand capital
crime. And as absurd no doubt is many men's (...) and (...), their canonizing,
securing and besainting themselves in this life, upon every slight praemature
persuasion that they are in Christ. That which Aphrodisius on the Topics,
observes of the Vine and Fig and Plane tree, which have thin broad leaves, and
make the fairest show (...), do thereupon shed them presently: some few indeed,
the Olive, Bay and Myrtle, which have narrow solid leaves are able to keep them
all the year long (...) and (...), always green and flourishing. And God grant
such laurels may for ever abound in this Paradise, this garden of the land;
that the children of this her like olive plants round about her table; this
perhaps you will count an high thing to shed the leaf, but what think you of
extirpation, and rooting up? even this you shall hear denounced, and executed
on those that cast a fair shadow, either as on degenerous or unprofitable
trees; either for bad fruit, or none at all, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the
ground?

But to our purpose; When S. Paul therefore resolves that nothing should ever
separate him from the love of God, Romans viii.
Romans 8. sin is Jews thought their estate as irreversible as the Pharisees
here; and upon as good grounds as he can pretend; the very promise of God to
Abraham's seed indefinitely; and yet by that time this parable was spoken, they
can bring him word of the repeal of that promise, within a while sealed and
confirmed by their (...) their instant utter destruction;

It was a fancy of the Stoics mentioned by Plutar. Mor. l. 1. p. 43.
(...), that a wise man could do nothing amiss, that all that he did was wise
and virtuous. And they that will have Stoical necessity, now adays, may borrow
this fancy of the Stoics also: but Homer, says he, and Euripides long since
exploded it. I am sure S. Paul will fairly give any man leave, that takes
himself to be in a good estate now, to fear a bad before he die; to expect a
tempest in a calm; or else he would not have been so earnest with him that
thinks he stands to take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. x. 12.
1 Cor. 10. 12. It was the confidence of a Turk (i. e.) a Stoic revived, in
Nicetas Chon. that said he page 170.
on now for ever, as having got (...), an habit of conquering: and it was well
if this assurance did not take the pains to lose it him again. It is the
Rhetoric of discreet Captains to their Soldiers in Thucydides, and other
Historians, to exhort them to fight on comfortably and courageously, as having
overcome, in remembrance of their past victories as pawns, and pledges of the
future: but it is always on condition and presumptions of the same diligence
and valor, Fathers frequently furnish us with against our spiritual warfare,
but all rather to increase our diligence than security, to set us to work on
hope of success; not to nourish us in idleness in hope of a victory. If we
should suffer the Devil from this proposition, he will give his Angels charge
that a child of his shall not dash his foot against a stone; and then that
assumption, thou art the child of God, to conclude that thou Mitte te deorsum,
Cast thy self down to show what thou can do; and then if thou have not
another scriptum est to rejoinder, thou shall not tempt, (then this confidence
is tempting of God) I know not how thou will be able to escape a precipice, a
bruise if not a breaking. The Valentinian having resolved himself to be (...),
spiritual, confessed indeed that other men must get some store of faith and works
to help them to Heaven, lib. 1. p. 26.
(...), Iren. But they had no need of either, because of their natural
spiritualness; that which is spiritual cannot part with its spiritual
hypostasis what ever it do or suffer; no more than gold by a sink can lose its
luster; or the Sun beams be defamed by the dunghill they shine on. They commit
all manner of impurity, says he, and yet they are (...), seeds of the
election; the seeds indeed, deep set in the earth that take root downward, but
never bare fruit upward; they never Hell; nor sprout out any branch or stalk of
works, unless it be of darkness. These forsooth have grace (...) as their
proper possessions, all others but to use, and so it seemed, for they of all
others made no use of it. There was another like fancy in the same Irenaeus of
Marcus and his followers, that by the (...) a form of baptizing, that they had,
that they were become (...) invisible to the judge, mother of Heaven, and she
would send the helmet in Homer, that they should presently vanish out of their
hands. Thus have men been befooled by the Devil to believe that their sacred
persons could excuse the foulest acts, and, as it was said of Cato, even make
crimes innocent; thus have some gotten the art of sinning securely, nay
religiously, as he that in our English History would put his Neighbors in a
course to rebel legally. But I hope all these fancies Irenaeus and Epiphanius;
I trust they shall never be able to transplant themselves into our brains or
hearts. But pray God there be no credence of them scattered here and there
among hasty, ignorant, overweening Christians. A man shall sometimes meet
abroad some reason to suspect it, yet 'twere pity to fear so far as to set to
confute them. There may be indeed a state and condition of Christians so well
settled and riveted by Christ in grace, that their estate may be comfortably
believed election under oath, perhaps that mentioned by the Psalmist, I have
sworn by my holiness, I will not fail David; for spiritual blessings are
frequently in Scripture conveyed along with temporal. But it is much to be
doubted, that those men that have boldness to believe this of themselves, have
not ballast enough of humility and fear to make it good. Porphyry had so much
Divinity in him as to observe that (...) were the only (...), that perpetual
washings, and purgings and lustrations, were the only means to defend or
deliver from evil, either to come or present; the only Amulets and (...) in the
world; it is the rainbow in the Heaven reflected thither from a cloud of tears
below, that is, Gods engagement never again to drown the earth. But then there
must be also another bow in the heart, that must promise for that, that it
shall not be like a deceitful bow, go back again to folly, never again be
drowned with swinish, Exodus xvii.
bestial, filthy lusts. In the 17. of Exodus the Israelites prevailed against
Amalek, and that miraculously verse 16.
and verse 16. the promise is made for the future, that the Lord will fight
with Amalek for ever, where by the way the LXX. put in (...), God will fight
against Amalek as it were under hand, by secret hidden strength; which addition
of theirs (if it were inspired into the Translators, as S. Augustine is of
opinion, all their variations from the Hebrew are (...), and so Canon) then
happily that (...) may signify some secret infusion of supernatural power into
Moses his Amalek, by which grace Moses and the Christians have assurance to
prevail. And this may be ground enough for a Christian; Christ has prayed, and
God promised that your faith shall But then all this while, the story of the
day will tell us, on what terms this security of victory stood, if so be Moses
continue to hold up his hands; noting 1. the power of prayer; 2. of obedience;
3. of perseverence; and upon these terms even a Pharisee may be confident
without presumption: but if his hands be once let down; if he remit of his
Christian valor (for so manus demittere signifies in Agonisticks) Amalek
prevails, verse. 11.
verse 11. Just as it fared with Samson, he had an inconceivable portion of
strength, Nazarites vow ( i. e.) as the LXXII. render it Numb. Numb. vi. 2.
vi. 2. (...), a prayer as well as a vow; and that of separating or hallowing
purity and sanctity to the Lord; and his vow being broken, not only that of his
hair, but with it that of his holy obedience; that piece of Divinity presently
vanished, and the Philistines deprived him of his eyes and life. Numb. xv. 9.
And thereupon it is observable Numb. xv. 9. that performing a vow, is rendered
by the LXXII, (...), to magnify a vow, then is the vow or resolution truly
great, that will stand us in stead when it is performed. As for all others they
remain as brands and monuments of reproach to us; upbraiding us of our
inconstancy first, then of disobedience; and withal as signs to warn that Gods
strength is departed from us. I doubt not but this strength being thus lost may
return again before our death, giving a plunge, as it did in Samson, when he
plucked the house about their ears at last, Jude xvi. Jud. xvi.
But this must be by the growing out of the hair again, verse 22. the renewing
of his repentance and sanctity with his vow, ver. 22.
and by prayer unto God, verse 28. ver. 21.
Lord God, or as the LXXII. (...), Remember me I pray thee and strengthen me,
but for all this, ver. 19.
it was said before in the 19. verse his strength, and in the 20. verse the
Lord was departed from him. ver. 20.
And so now doubt it may from us, if we have no better security for our selves
than the present possession, Canon Law; that there be some faults excommunicate
a man ipso facto; one who has committed them the law excommunicates, though
the Judge do not: you need not the application, there be perhaps some sins and
Devils like the Carian Scorpions which Apollonius and Antigonus mention out of
Aristotle, hist. commen.
which when they strike strangers do them no great hurt, cap. 11.
(...), presently kill their own contrymen; cap. 19.
some Devils perhaps that have power to hurt only their own subjects; as sins
of weakness and ignorance, though they are enough to condemn an unregenerate
man, yet we hope, through the merits of Christ into whom he is ingrafted,
(...), shall do little hurt to the regenerate, unless it be only to keep him
humble, to cost him more sighs and prayers. But then, says the same Apollonius
there, Cap. 12.
your Labylonian snakes that are quite contrary, do no great hurt to their own
contrymen, but are present death to strangers; and of this number it is to
be feared may presumption prove, and spiritual pride; sins that the (...), the
Devils natives, ordinary habitual sinners need not much to fear; but to the
stranger, and him that is come from far, thinking himself, as S. Paul was,
dropped out of the third Heaven, and therefore far enough from the infernal
country, it is to be feared I say, they may Porphyry says of Plotinus in his
life, and that for his commendation; that he was not ashamed to suck when he
was eight years old, but as he went to the Schools frequently diverted to his
nurse; so will it concern us for the getting of a consistent firm habit of
soul, not to give over the nurse when we are come to age and years in the
spirit, to account our selves babes in our virility, and be perpetually a
calling for the dug, the sincere milk of the word, of the Sacraments, men in
Christ Jesus. And so much be spoken of the first point proposed, the Pharisees
flattering misconceit of his own estate; and therein implicitly of the
Christians premature deceivable persuasions of himself; 1. thinking well of
ones self on what grounds soever; 2. overprizing of his own worth and graces;
3. his opinion of the consistency and immutability of his condition, without
either Pharisee, yet in his parallel the ordinary confident Christian; as 1.
that Gods decree of election is terminated in their particular and individual
entities, without any respect to their qualifications and demeanors. 2. That
all Christian faith is nothing but assurance, a thing which I touched (...) in
the preface* and can scarce forbear now I meet with it again. 3. That the
Gospel consists all of promises of state of ease altogether and liberty, no
whit of labor and subjection; but the Pharisee would take it ill if we should
digress thus far, and make him wait for us again at our return. We hasten
therefore to the second part, the (...), or natural importance of the words,
and there we shall find him standing apart, and thanking God only perhaps in
complement; his posture and language give notice of his pride, the next thing
to be touched

Pride is a vice either 1. in our natures, 2. in our educations, or 3. taken
upon us for some ends: the first is a disease of the soul* which we are
inclined to by nature; but actuated by a full diet, and inflation of the soul,
through taking in of knowledge, virtue, Poets and Philosophers, the Giants
fighting with God, ( i. e.) the ambitious daring approaches of the soul toward
the unapproachable light, which cost the Angels so dear, and all Eve, when she
ventured to taste of the tree of knowledge. Then the fancy of the heathens
mentioned by Athenagoras, that the souls of those giants were Devils; page 28.
B.
that it is the Devil indeed that old serpent, that did in Adams time, and does
since animate and actuate this proud soul, and set it a moving. And Philoponus
says that winds and tumors ( i. e.) lusts and passions, those troublesome
impressions in the soul of man, are the acceptablest sacrifices, the highest
feeding to the Devils; nay to the Psalmist, Death gnaweth upon the wicked; is
perpetually a gnawing, but never devours or puts over.

Pride in our education is a kind of tenderness and chilness in the soul, that
some people by perpetual softness are brought up to, that makes them incapable
and impatient of any corporal or spiritual

The third kind of pride is a supercilious affected haughtiness, that men
perhaps meekly enough disposed by nature, are fain to Mahomet fain to take upon
him to be a Prophet, and pretend that 'twas discoursing with the Angel Gabriel
made him in that case, that his new wife might not know that he was
Epileptical, and so repent of her match with a beggar, and a diseased person.
And upon these terms Turcism first came into Mahomet was cried up (...), the
greatest Prophet (to omit other witness) as the Saracen fragments tells us,
that we have out of Euthymius. Thus are imperfections and wants, sometimes even
diseases both of body and mind assumed and affected by some men to get
authority to their persons, and an opinion of extraordinary religion; but
rather perhaps more oil to their cruise, or custom to their trading. But not to
flutter thus at large any longer, or pursue the commonplace Pharisees pride
here expresses it self in three things; 1 his posture, standing apart; 2. his
manner of praying altogether by way of thanksgiving: 3. his malicious
contemptuous eye upon the Publican. The first of these may be aggravated
against the schismatic that separates from the Church or customs, but
especially Service and Prayers of the Church. It Is pride certainly that makes
this man set himself thus apart, whereas the very first sight of that holy
place strikes the humble Publican upon the knees pomp of their souls,
commending themselves to God as we ordinarily use the phrase, commending indeed
not to his mercy, but acceptance; not as objects of his pity, but as rich
spiritual presents; not tears to be received into his bottle, but jewels for
his treasure. Always upon terms of spiritual exultancy, what great Paul, who
cannot name that word, sinners, but most straight subsume in a parenthesis, of
whom I am the chief, 1 Timothy i. 15.
1 Timothy 1. 15. and for the expression of the opinion he had of his own
sanctity, is fain to coin a word for the purpose, (...), a word not to be met
with in all Greek Authors again before he used it; Ephesians. iii. 8.
less than the least of the Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. And Jacob in a like phrase,
Genesis xxxii. 10.
I am less than all thy mercies, Genesis 32. 10. The Litany that begins and ends
with so many repetitions importuning for mercy, even conjuring God by all
powerful names of rich mercy that can be taken out of his Exchequer, to have
mercy upon us miserable sinners, this is set aside for the Publican; the in
transitu, not to insist on. The 3d. expression of his pride is his malicious
sullen eye upon the Publican, and that brings me to the next thing proposed at
first, the Pharisees censoriousness and insinuated accusations of all others. I
am not as other men, extortioners, etc. or even as this Publican.

'Twere an ingenuous speculation and that which would stand Pharisee.

easy natured man whose soul is relax't, and has its pores open to receive any
infection or taint, the devil presents a multitude of adulterers, drunkards,
etc. thereby to distill the poison softly into him; to sweeten the sin and
secure him in the commission of it, by store of companions: but to a Pharisee,
rugged, singular, supercilious person, he proposes the same object under
another color. The many adulterers etc. that are in the world not to entice,
but to incense him the more against the sin; not to Beelzebub prince of flies,
as seeing that they are not now for his game; but trouls and baits him with
Cato or Aristarchus, a severe disciplinarian, a grave Censor, or as his most
Satanical name imports, (...), an accuser and then the Pharisee bites
presently. He could not expect to allure him forward, and therefore drives him
as far back as he can; that so he may be the more sure of him at the rebound;
as a skilful woods-man, that by wind-lassing presently gets a shoot which
without taking a compass and thereby a commodious stand, he could never have
stratagem may not be thought proper to the Meridian only where the Pharisee
lived; Leo within 500. years after Christ, and other ut quos vincere flamma
ferroque non poterat, ambitione inflaret, virus invidiae infunderet, and sub
falsa Christiani nominis professione corrumperet: That they whom persecution
could not affright, ambition may puff up, envy poison, and a false opinion of
their own Christian purity betray to all the malice in the world. Thus have
Heretics and Sectaries in all ages by appropriating to themselves those titles
monopoly of it also. Thus could not the Valentinians be content to be (...)
themselves; but all the world beside must be (...) and (...), animal and
earthly. 'Twere long to reckon up to you the Idioms and characters that
Heretics have usurped to themselves in opposition and reproach, and even
defiance of all others; separati, Sadducees justi, Novatians (...), puri,
Messalians precantes. As if these several virtues, separation from the world,
love of justice, purity, daily exercise of prayer, were no where to be found
but amongst them. Even that judicious, learned, eloquent, yea and godly Father
Tertullian is caught in this pit-fall; as soon as he began to relish Montanus
his heresy, he straight changes his style, Nos spirituales, and all other
Orthodox Christians Psychyci animal, (...) Jejun.
carnal men. The Devil could not be content Montanism (an heresy which it is
confessed only a superlative care of Chastity, abstinence, and martyrdom, brought
him to) but he must rob him of his charity too, as well as his religion. Not to
keep any longer on the wing in pursuit of this censorious humor in the
Pharisee and Primitive heretics; the present temper and constitution of the
Church of God, will afford us plenty of observation to this purpose: amongst
other crimes with which the reformation charge the Romanists, what is there
that we so importunately require of them as their charity? that seeing with the
Apostolical seat, they have seized upon the Keys of Heaven also; they would not
use this power of theirs so intemperately, as to admit none but their own
proselytes into those gates, which Christ has opened to all believers. For
this cause, says Eulogius in Photius, were the Keys given to Peter, page 1600.
(...).
not to John or any other, because Christ foresaw Peter would deny him, that so
by the memory of his own failings, he Apostles, sfaith he, having never fallen so
foully, (...), migkt like enough have used sinners more sharply: but 'twas not
probable Peter would be such a severe Cato, and yet there is not a more
unmerciful man under Heaven than he that now tyrannizeth in his chair.
Spalatensis indeed, after his revolt from us could ingenuously confess, that he
could have expected comfortably, and perhaps have been better pleased, to have
been saved in the Church of England, with a 1000. l. a year, as in the Roman
with 500. l. But do not all others of them count this no less than heresy in
him thus to hope? Cudsemius the Jesuit denies the English Nation to be de desp.
Call. vini causa.
because they remain under a continual succession of Bishops. But alas! how few
be there of them, which have so much charity to afford us? What fulminations
and clattering of clouds is there to be heard in that Horizon? What
Anathematizing of heretics (i. e.) Protestants? what excommunicating them
without any mercy, 1. out of the Church, then out of the book of life; and
lastly, where they have power, out of the Land of the living? And yet, would
they be as liberal to us poor Protestants, Stews and Seminaries of all
uncleanness, then should we be stored with indulgences. But 'twas Tertullian's
of old, that there is no mercy from them to be expected, who have no crime to
lay against us but that we are true Christians. Apol.
If they would but allow one corner of Heaven to receive penitent humble
Protestants, laboring for good works, but depending on Christ's merit; if they
would not think us past hopes, or prayers, there might be possibly hoped some
means of uniting us all in one fold. Charity being now so quite perish't from
off the earth, what means have we left us, but our prayers to prepare, or
mature this reconciliation? Shall we then take heart also, and bring in our
action of trespass? Shall we sit and pen our railing accusation in the form
that Christ uses against the Pharisees, Mat. xxiii. 13.
Matthew. 23. 13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men, for you neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering This we might do upon better grounds, were we
so revengefully disposed; but we fear to incur our Saviors censure, Luke 9.
55. Luke ix. 55.
And he turned and rebuked them saying, Ye know not what manner of spirits ye
are of. We should much mistake our Christian spirit, if we should not in return
to their curses, intercede with God in prayer for them; First, that he will
bestow on them the grace of meekness or charity; then sincerity and
uprightness, without wilful blindness and partiality; and lastly, Romans xii. 20.
And this is the only way St. Paul has left us, Romans 12. 20. by returning them
good to melt them, hoping and praying in the words of Solomon, that by long
forbearing this great Prince of the West will be persuaded; and that our soft
tongues may in time break the bone. But whilst we preach charity to them, shall
we not betray partiality in our selves, by passing over that uncharitable fire
that is breaking out sons of fire amongst us as we have; who being inflamed,
some with faction, others with ignorant prejudice, others with doting on their
own abilities, fall out into all manner of intemperate censures (...) words of
the sword, all sharp contumelious invectives against all persons, or doctrines,
or lives that are not Photius out of Josephus observes among others to have
been one main cause or Prognostic of the destruction of Jerusalem, the civil
wars betwixt the (...) and the (...), the Zelots and the cutthroats, pray God
we find not the same success amongst us. Whilst the Zelots, says he, fell on
the Sicarii, the whole body of the city, (...), was bitterly and unmercifully
butchered betwixt them; and under one of those two names all the people were
brought to massacre. I desire not to chill or damp you with unnecessary fears,
or to suspect that our sins shall be so unlimited as utterly to outvie and
overreach Gods mercies. But, beloved, this ill blood that is generally
nourish't amongst us, if it be not a Prognostic of our fate, is yet an ill
Symptom of our disease. These convulsions and distortions of one member of the
body from another as far as it can possibly be distended, this burning heat,
and from thence raving and disquietness of the soul, are Symptoms. When the
Church and Kingdom must be dichotomiz'd, precisely divided into two extreme
parts, and all moderate persons by each extreme tossed to the other with
furious prejudice, must brand all for Heretics or carnal persons, that will
not undergo their razor. And then the contrary extreme censure and scoff at
their preciseness that will not bear them company to every kind of riot. These,
beloved, are shrewd feverish distempers, pray God they break not forth into
flame. When the boat that goes calmly with the stream, in the midst of two
impetuous rowers, shall be assaulted by each of them, for opposing or
affronting each; when the moderate Christian shall be branded on the one hand
for preciseness, on the other for intemperance, on the one side for a Puritan,
on the other for a Papist, or a Remonstrant; when he that keeps himself from
either extreme, shall yet be entitled to both; what shall we say is become of
that ancient Primitive charity and moderation? use, beloved, that I desire to
make of all this, shall not be to declaim at either; but only by this compass
to find out the true point that we must sail by. Eth. 2. 8.
By this, says Aristotle, you shall know the golden mediocrity that it is
complained on both sides, as if it were both extremes; that may you define to
be exact liberality, which the Apostles phrase, your moderation may be known
unto all men, by this livery and cognizance, that you are indicted by both
extremes. And if there be any such Satanical art crept in amongst us, of
authorizing errors or sins on one side, by pretending zeal and earnestness
against their contraries; as Photius observes that it was a trick of
propagating heresies, by P. 249. (...) 397. (...).
the Lord grant that this evil spirit may be either laid or cast out; either
fairly led, or violently hurried out of our coasts.

I have done with the Pharisees censoriousness, I come now in the last place to
the ground, or rather occasion of it; his seeing the Publican, comparing
himself with notorious sinners, I thank thee that, etc.

That verse 1 Cor. xv. 33. which St. Paul cites out of Menanders that wicked
communication corrupts good manners, is grounded on this moral essay, that
nothing raises up so much to good and great designs as emulation; that he that
casts himself upon such low company, that he has nothing to imitate or aspire
to in them, is easily persuaded to give over any farther pursuit of virtue, as
believing that he has enough already, because none of his acquaintance has
any more: thus have many good wits been cast away, by falling unluckily into
bad times, which could yield Pharisees fate in my text, that looking upon
himself, either in the deceivable glass of the sinful world, or in comparison
with notorious sinners, extortioners, adulterers, Publicans, sets himself off
by these foils, finds nothing wanting in himself, so is solaced with a good
comfortable opinion of his present estate, and a slothful negligence of
improving it. And this, beloved, is the ordinary lenitive which the Devil
administers to the sharp unquiet diseases of the conscience if at any time they
begin to rage, the only conserve that he folds his bitterest receipts in, that
they may go down undiscerned; that we are not worse than other men; that we
shall be sure to have companions to hell; nay, that we need not neither at all
fear that danger; for if Heaven gates be so strait as not to receive such
sinners as we, the rooms within are like to be but poorly furnished with guests;
the marriage feast will never be lame, and cripples in the street or hospital
be fetched in, to fill the table. But, beloved, the comforts with which the
Devil furnishes these men are, (if they were not merely feigned and
fantastical) yet very beggarly and lamentable, such as Achilles in Homer would
have scorned, only to be chief among the dead, or Princes and eminent persons
in Hell. We must set our emulation higher than so, somewhat above the ordinary
pitch or mark, Let champions and trophy-bearers of this holy martial field have
dealt in. It Is a poor boast to have out-gon Heathens and Turks in virtue and
good works; to be taller than the dwarfs, as it were, and Pygmies of the world;
we must not be thus content, but outvy even the sons of Anak, those tall,
gyantly Romanists. O what a disgrace will it be for us Protestants at the
dreadful day of doom! O what an accession not only to our torments, but our
shame, and indignation at our selves, to see the expectation of meriting in a
Papist, nay the desire of being counted virtuous in a Heathen, attended with a
more pompous train of charitable magnificent deeds, of constant magnanimous
sayings, than all our faith can show, or vouch for us! Shall not the Romanist
James his language, Jam. ii. 18.
Chap. ii. 18. Thou have faith and I have works, and all that we can fetch out
of St. Paul not able to stop his mouth from going on, Show me thy faith without
thy works, as our english reads it out of the Syriack and vulgar Latin, and I
will show thee my faith by my works? 'Twill be but a nice distinction for thee
then to say, that works are to be separated from the act of justification, when
they are found separated a supposito, from the person also. But not to digress;
the Pharisee seems here pretty well provided, No extortioner, no adulterer,
guilty of no injustice. And how many be there among you that cannot go thus far
with the Pharisee? Some vice or other perhaps there is that agrees not with
your constitution or education; drunkenness is not for one man's turn,
prodigality for another, and I doubt not but that many of you are as forward
as the Pharisee to thank God, or rather require God to thank them, that they
are not given to such or such a vice. But if you were to be required Pharisee
undertakes, if you were to be arraigned at that severe tribunal, I say not
concerning your thoughts and evil communications, but even the gross actual,
nay habitual sins; if a Jury or a rack were set to inquire into you thoroughly,
how many of you durst pretend to the Pharisees innocence, and confidence, that
you are not extortioners, unjust, adulterers? Nay, how many be there that have
all the Pharisees pride and censorionsness, and all these other sins too into
the vantage? Certainly there is not one City wherein you live. I am sorry I
have said this, and I wish it were uncharitably spoken of me; but though it
will not become me to have thought it of you, yet 'twill concern you to suspect
it of your selves, that by judging your selves prevent being judged of the
Lord. And here Saint Chrysostom's caution will come in very seasonably toward
a conclusion of all, that the Publicans sins be not preferred before the
Pharisees works, but only before his pride. It Is not his store of moral virtues
that was like to prove the Pharisees undoing, but his over-valuing them,
Arrian. in Epist.
(...), says the Stoic, appliable to this also. It Is not his innocence that
has so encumbred fasting and the tithing must not be cast away, because the
Pharisee was proud of them, this were a furious discipline which would down
with all violently, that had ever been abused to idolatry or sin; or with him
in Plutarch, that because Poetry had some ill consequences sometimes, would
have the Muses and their favorites dispatched into Epicurus his boat. Mor. l.
1. p. 26.
His counsel was more seasonable, that to prevent drunkenness, appointed them
to mix water with their wine, that Pharisees works from his pride; and then
borrow the Publicans humility from his works; that you come to the temple of
God with all the provision a Pharisee can boast of, and then lay it down all at
the Publicans feet, and take up his miserere, his sighs, his dejection, his
indignation at himself instead of it, then shall you be fit to approach to that
templum misericordiae which Gerson speaks of, sine simulachro, non sacrificiis
sed gemitibus, etc. not to be visited with sacrifices but sighs, not to be
filled with triumphant (...), songs of rejoicing and victories, but with the
calm and yet ravishing Rhetoric of the Publican, (...), Lord be merciful to me
a sinner. Even so, O Lord, deal thou with us, according to thy mercies, visit
us with thy salvation, draw us with thy mercies, and enlighten us with thy
spirit,

Now to him, etc.

The IX. Sermon.
MATTHEW iii. 3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord.
THat our preface may afford some light to our proceeding, prepare the way and
stand us in stead hereafter in our discourse of preparation, we will employ it
to observe that natural progress and method of all things, which consists in
steps and degrees: traveling on by those gifts which nature has set them from
one stage to another, from a lower degree of perfection to an higher, built
upon this ground of nature, that the first things are always least perfect,
necessary to the perfection of the last: and in sum, so much the more
necessary, by how much less perfect. Thus is the foundatin more necessary to an
house than the walls, and the first stone than the whole foundation, because
the walls are necessary only to the setting on of the roof, not to the laying
of the foundation; the foundation necessary both to the walls and roof, but not
to the first stone; because that may be laid without the whole foundation: but
the first stone necessary to all the rest, Arts and Sciences. So those general
principles that are most familiar to us, are the poorest and yet most necessary
rudiments required to any deeper speculation: the first stage of the
understanding in its peregrination or travel into those foreign parts of more
hidden knowledge is usually very short; and it is most requisite it should be
so, for beginning at home with some (...), and taking its rise at its own
threshold, thereby it advances the length, and secures the success of the
future voyage. Thus in Politics has the body of Laws from some thin
beginnings under Lycurgus, Solon, Phaleas, and the like, by daily accessions
and farther growth at last increased into a fair bulk; every age perfecting
Politics themselves as well as each Commonwealth have been observed to have
their infancy, youth and manhood, the last of which is the only perfect state,
which yet this body had never attained to, had it not been content to submit it
self to the imperfection of the former. Thus also in practical Philosophy there
be some praeambula operationis, some common precepts which must be instilled
into us, to work a consistency Aristotle learnt from Plato in the second of the
Ethics, (...), a skill of ordering those two passions aright, joy and sorrow,
an habit never to rejoice or grieve but on just occasion: which lesson we must
con perfectly when we are young; and then with years an easy discipline will
bring on virtue of its own accord. Lastly, in the transcendent knowledge of
Metaphysics, which Aristotle Aristotle has is in the third of Metaph. to
examine and inform our selves, (...), which things are chiefly worth doubting
of, and searching after: in which one thing if we would observe his counsel, if
we would learn to doubt only of those things which are worth our knowledge, we
should soon prove better Scholars than we are Iamblicus, Iambl Pro. trept. p.
36. and 37.
beyond all the rest most to the purpose prescribes retiredness and contempt of
the world, that so we might (...), ever live and be nourished by the excursions
of the mind toward God; where indeed he speaks more like a Christian than a
Pythagorean, as if he had learnt Christ, to deny himself and the world, and
follow him, and intended to come to that pitch and (...) which S. Paul speaks
of, Gal. ii. 20. The life which I now live in the flesh I live by faith, etc.
But to conclude this praecognoscendum, spiritual matters also, we are men
before we are Christians: there is a natural life, and there is a spiritual
life. And resurrection, 1 Cor. xv. 46. so also in the spiritual (...) of the
soul, first that which is natural, and after that which is spiritual: and in
the spiritual life there be also its periods, the infancy, the youth and
virility of the spirit, the first being most imperfect yet most necessary and
preparing the way to the last perfection. To bring all home to the business in
hand: thus did it not befit the Savior of the World to come abruptly into it:
to put on flesh as soon as flesh had put on sin: the business fullness of time
was to be expected. The Law had its time of paedagogy to declare it self, and
to be obeyed as his Usher for many years: and after all this he appears not in
the World, till his Baptist has proclaimed him: he makes not toward his Court
till his Harbinger has taken up the rooms. He comes not to inhabit either in
the greater or lesser Jewry, the World or man's heart, till the Praecursor has
Prepare ye the way of the Lord.

Instead of dividing the words I shall unite them, and after I have construed
them to you, contrive that into one body which would not conveniently be
dismembered. (...) signifies to fit, to prepare, to make ready. Ye] are all
those to whom Christ should ever come. The ways of the Lord] are whatsoever is
capable imperative, notes the whole complexum to be one single duty required of
all the Baptists and my Auditors, sub hac forma, that every man's heart must be
prepared for the receiving of Christ, or punctually to imitate the order of the
words in my Text, the preparation of the soul is required for Christ's birth in
us. For there is in every elect vessel a spiritual (...) or mystical
incarnation of Christ, where the soul like Mary is first overshadowed
preparation in general: 2. The preparation here specified of the soul; 3. In
order to Christ's birth in us.

And first of preparation in general: (...) prepare ye or make ready: the
necessity of this performance to any undertaking may appear by those several
precedaneous methods in common life, which have nothing in themselves to
ingratiate them unto us, but cost much toil and trouble, yet notwithstanding
Earth would answer the farmers expectation without any culture or husbandry, he
would never be so prodigal toward it. But seeing it has proposed its
fruitfulness under condition of our drudgery; we plow and harrow and manure and
drain and weed it, or else we are sure to fare the worse at harvest. The
variety of preparations in these low affairs was by Cato and Varro and
Columella accounted a pretty piece of polite necessary learning. And a
Christian if he will apply their rules Georgicks, the culture of his soul,
shall be able to husband it the better; and by their directions have a further
insight into those fallow-grounds of his own heart, Hos. x. 12.
which the Prophet speaks of. 'Twere a great, and perhaps unnecessary journey
to trace over the whole world of creatures to perfect this observation: almost
every passage of nature will furnish you with an example. Hence is it that they
that had nothing but natural reason to instruct them, were assiduous in this
practice, and never ventured series of preparations before the ancient
Athletica, as anointing, and bathing, and rubbing and dust, 'twere fit enough
for a sermon to insist on the exercise which they prepared for being reputed
sacred and parts of their solemnest worship; and the moral of them would prove
of good use to discipline and to bring us up to those spiritual Agones
mentioned in Scripture, as (...), Ephesians. 4. 14. (...), 1 Cor. ix. Wrestling,
cuffing and running, three of the five Olympian games adopted as it were into
the Church, and spiritualized by the Apostle for our imitation. But to pass by
these and the like as less apposite for our discourse, what shall we think? Was
it superstition, or rather mannerlyness that made the Grecian Priests so rub
and wash and scour themselves before they would meddle with a sacrifice? (...)
it was, and that we construe superstition; but indeed it signifies an awe and
reverence to the Deity they worship, and a fear and a care lest the
unpreparedness of the Priest should pollute their sacrifice; as it is much to be
feared that our holiest duties for want of this care are turned into sin: the
vanities and faults of our very prayers adding to the number of those guilts we
pray against, and every sacrifice even of atonement it self needing some
expiation. To look a while on the highest part, and as it were the Sacraments
Eleusinia sacra, resembling in one respect Christian Baptism, in another holy
Orders. What a multitude of rites and performances were required of every one
before his admission to them? For their (...) being divided into two classes,
the less or lower sort were praeludia to the greater, Plut. p. 48.
or as the Scholiast on Aristophanes has it more clearly to our purpose,
(...), a premundation or presanctification Baptism, Confirmation and a
Christian education in the Church, fits us for the participations of those
mysteries which the other sacraments present to us, so that it punctually notes
that preparation we here talk of: for before they were admitted to those grand
(...) and (...) they were (says Suidas) to spend a year or two in a lower
form, undergo a shop of purgations, (...), and many more; so that Tertullian
could not without wonder and praise of their solemnities tot suspiria
epoptarum, Init. l. i. in Valen.
and multam in adytis divinitatem. 'Twas no mean toil nor ordinary merit that
was required to make them capable of these (...), as Aristophanes calls them.
Plut. ibid.
The ground of all the ceremony we may observe to be the natural impurity which
the Heathens themselves acknowledge to be in every man: as may appear most
distinctly by Iamblicus, Protrept.
though they knew not clearly at what door it came in at: sure they were they
found it there, and therefore their own reason Clement, till it had by some
laborious prescribed means somewhat rid it self of its pollutions; and this the
Barbarian did (...) (says he) thinking the bare washing of the outward parts
sufficient: but the Graecians, whom learning had made more substantial in their
Worship, required moreover an habituate temper longam castimoniam and sedatam
mentem, that the inward calmness and serenity of the affections might perform
the promises of the outward purity. In sum, when they were thus qualified and
had fulfilled the period, or circle of their purgation required to their (...),
they were at length admitted intra adyta ad epoptica sacra, where all the
mysteries of their Theology were revealed to them. All which seems to me (as
much as can be expected from their dim imperfect knowledge) to express the
state of Eleusynia of theirs, at a Christians examination would prove nothing
but religious delusions, containing some prodigies of their mythical divinity;
in sum, but grave specious puppets and solemn serious nothing, yet hence it may
appear that the eye of nature though cheated in mystery, which was but a
prodigious vanity, yet kept it self constant in its ceremonies; would not dare
or hope to approach abruptly to any thing which it could believe to be holy.
Now shall we be more saucy in our devotions, and insolent in our approaches to
either the throne of Majesty true God, than they were to the unprofitable empty
(...), of their false? Shall we call the mannerliness of the Heathen up in
judgment against the Christian rudeness? 'Twill be an horrid exprobration at
the day of Doom, when a neat, washed, respectful Gentile shall put a swinish,
miry negligent Christian to shame; such a one who never took so much care to
trim himself to entertain the bridegroom, as the Heathen did to adore an empty
gaud, a vain ridiculous bauble. Yet is not their example prescribed you as an
accomplished pattern, as the pitch to aim at and drive no higher: but rather as
a (...) a sarcasm or contumely engraved in Marble to upbraid you mightily if
you have not gone so far. All that they practiced was but superficial and
referring to the body, and therein the washing of the outsides: yours must be
inward, and of the soul: which is the next word in the doctrine, the
specification of it by the subject noted in the Text by (...), the way, and
expressed in the latter Preparation of the soul.

This Preparation consists in removing those burdens, and wiping off those
blots of the soul which any way deface or oppress it; in scouring off that rust
and filth which it contracted in the Womb, and driving it back again as near
integrity as may be. And this was the aim and business of the wisest among the
Ancients, who conceived it possible fully to repair what was lost, because
Austin, puzzled themselves in a design of purging the soul per (...), and
consecrationes theurgicas, but all in vain, as Porphyry himself confesses; No
man, says he, by this theurgick Magic could ever purge himself the nearer to
God, or wipe his eyes clear enough for such a vision. They indeed went more
probably to work, which used no other reason, which the Moralist set up and
maintained against (...) and (...), the two ringleaders of sensuality. To this
purpose did Socrates the first and wisest Moralist furnish and arm the
reasonable faculty with all helps and defensations that Philosophy could afford
it, that it might be able to shake off and disburthen it self of those
encumbrances which naturally weighed and pressed it downward, Arist. 2. Phy. c.
23.
ut exoneratus animus naturali vigore in where if that be true which some
observe of Socrates, that his professing to know nothing, was because all was
taught him by his (...): I wonder not that by others his (...) is called (...),
and consecrated into a Deity: for certainly never Devil bore so much charity to
mankind, and treachery to his own kingdom, as to instruct him in the cleansing
of his soul: whereby those strong holds of Satan are undermined, which cannot
Socrates, the moralists ever since have toiled hard at this task, to get the
soul (...), as Iambl. phrases it, out of that corruption of its birth, that
impurity born with it, which the soul contracts by its conversation with the
body, and from which they say only Philosophy can purge it. For it is
Philoponus his observation, that that Canon of the Physicians, That the
inclinations of the soul necessarily follow the temper of the body, is by all
men set down Philosophy, for that study can reform the other, (...), make the
soul contemn the commands, and arm it against the influences and poisons and
infections of the body. In sum, the main of Philosophy was to this purpose, to
take off the soul from those corporeal dependences, and so in a manner restore
it to its primitive self; that is, to some of that divine perfection with which
it was infused, for then is the soul to be beheld in its native shape, when
it is stripped some scurf and foam and weeds that lie on the top of it. So then to
this spiritualizing of the soul, and recovering it to the simplicity of its
essence, their main precepts were to quell and suppress (...), as Maximus
Tyrius speaks, that turbulent, prachant common people of the soul, all the
irrational affections, and reduce it (...), into a Monarchy Philoponus, we do
not work like men but some other creatures. Whosoever suffer their lower
nutritive faculties to act freely, (...), these men are in danger to become
trees: that is, by these operations they differ nothing from mere plants. So
those that suffer their sensitive appetites, lust and rage to exercise at
freedom, are not to be reckoned men, but then only will our actions argue us
men, when our reason is at the forge. This was the aim and business of
Philosophy to keep us from unmanning our selves, to restore reason to its
scepter, to rescue it from the tyranny of that most atheistical usurper, as
Iambl. calls the affections; and from hence he which lived according to those
precepts of Philosophy was said both by them and Clement, and the Fathers
(...), and in Austin, Secundum intellectum vivere, to live according to the
guidance Plotinus, though by it in respect of divinity he was not perfect, yet
at last should be sure to find a gracious providence, first to perfect, then to
crown his natural moderate well tempered endeavor, as Austin cites it out of
him, L. 10. de civit. Dei. This whose course soul, through these Philosophical
preparations to spiritual perfection, is summarily and clearly set down for us
in Photius out of Isidorus, Philosophically observed to consist in three steps,
(...), etc. The first business of the soul is to call in those parts of it
which were engaged in any foreign fleshly employment, and retire and collect
it self unto its self: and then secondly, it learns to quit it self, to put off
the whole natural man, (...), its own fashions and conceits: all the notions,
thirdly, (...), it falls into holy enthusiasms and spiritual elevations, which
it continues, till it be changed and led into the calm and serenity above the
state of man, agreeable to the tranquillity and peace which the Gods enjoy. And
could the Philosophers be their own Scholars, could they exhibit that felicity
which they describe and fancy, they might glory in their morality was but
Theorical, to be read in their books and wishes far more legible, than in their
lives and their enjoyments. Yet some degrees also of purity, or at least a less
measure of impurity they attained to, only upon the expectation and desire of
happiness proposed to them upon condition of performance of moral precepts;
summum bonum; all, I say, not only rational agents, (...), as Andronicus says
on the Ethics, which have nothing but nature to incite them to it; the natural
man may upon a sight and liking of an happiness proposed on severe conditions,
call himself into some degrees of moral temper, as best suiting to the
performance of the means, and obtaining of the end he looks for; and by this
temper be said to be morally better than Philosophers, who were as far beyond
the ordinary sort in severity of conversation, as depth of learning; and read
them as profitable precepts in the example of their lives, as ever the Schools
breathed forth in their Lectures. Their profession was incompatible with many
vices, and would not suffer them to be so rich in variety of sins as the
vulgar: and then whatsoever they thus did, an unregenerate Christian may
restraints by which unregenerate men may be, and are curbed, and kept back from
sinning; and these, says Austin, God affords to the very reprobates, Non
continens in ira suas misericordias. Much to this same purpose has holy
Maximus in those admirable Sections, Fear of men. 2. Denunciation of judgments
from Heaven. 3. Temperance and moral virtues: nay sometimes other moral vices,
as (...), vain glory or ostentation of integrity. 4. Natural impressions to do
to others as we would be done to. 5. Clearness of judgment in discerning good
from evil. 6. An expectation of a reward for any thing well done. Lastly, some
gripes and twinges of the Conscience: to education, common custom of the
country where one lives, where some vices are out of fashion: nay at last the
word of God daily preached; not a love, but servile fear of it. These I say,
and the like may outwardly restrain unregenerate men from riots; may curb and
keep them in, and consequently preserve the soul from that weight of the
multitude of sins which press down other men to a desparation of mercy. Thus is
one unregenerate man less engaged in sin than less polluted; and so in all
likelihood more capable of the ordinary means of salvation, than the more
stubborn habituate sinner; when every aversion, every commission of every sin
does more harden against grace, more alien and set at a greater distance from
Heaven: and this briefly we call a moral preparation of the soul; and a purging
of it, though not absolutely from sin, yet from some measure of reigning sin,
and disposing of it to a spiritual estate: and this is no more than I
Bradwardine in his 16. de causa Dei, chapter 37. A servile fear, a sight of some
inconvenience, and moral habit of virtue, and the like, Multum retrahunt a
peccato, inclinant ad opera bona, and sic ad charitatem, and gratiam, and opera
vere grata praeparant and disponunt. And so I come to my last part, to show of
what use this preparation of the soul is, in order to Christ's birth in us, the
ways of the Lord.

I take no great joy in presenting controversies to your ears out of
propositions, of which some I shall only recite as conceiving them evident
enough by their own light; the rest I shall a little insist on, and then apply
and drive home the profit of all to your affections. And in this pardon me, for
certainly I should never have meddled with it, had not I resolved it a Theory
that most nearly concerned your practice, and a

1. No preparation in the world can deserve or challenge Gods sanctifying
grace: the Spirit blows where it lists, and cannot

2. The Spirit is of power to work the conversi^n of any the greatest sinner:
at one minute to strike the most obdurate heart and soften it, and out of the
unnatural womb of stones infinitely more unfruitful than barrenness and age had
made the womb of Sarah, to raise up children unto Abraham. According to the
(...) of Aristotle (...), Sect. 1. pro. 2.
diseases are sometimes cured when the patient is at the extremity or height of
danger

3. It Is an ill Consequence, that because God can and sometimes does call
unprepared sinners, therefore it is probable he will deal so with thee in
particular, or with unprepared men in general. God does not work in conversion
as a physical agent, to the extent of his power, but according to the sweet
disposition and counsel of his Will.

4. In unprepared hearts there be many professed enemies to grace, there is very
little hope that Christ will ever vouchsafe to be born in such polluted hardened
souls. For it is Basil's observation, that that speech of the fools heart, There
is no God, was the cause that the Gentiles were given over to a reprobate
sense, and fell headlong (...), into all manner of abominations. Hence it is
that Jobius in Photius observes that in Scripture some are called dogs, Mat.
xv. 26. some unworthy to receive the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
xiii. 11. that some hated the light and came not to it, Joh. iii. 20. as if all
those had taken a course to make themselves incapable of mercy, and by a
perfect hostility frighted Christ out of their coasts. In the liberal
dispensation of miracles in the Gospel you would wonder to see Christ a niggard
in his own country, yet so in respect of other places he was, and did not many
miracles Mat. xiii. 58. not that their incredulity had manacled him, had
shortened his hand, or straightened his power, but that miracles which when they
met with a passive willingness, a contentedness in the patient to receive and
believe them, were then the ordinary instruments of faith and conversion, would
have been but cast away upon obdurate hearts: so that for Christ to have
numbered miracles among his unbelieving Contrymen no way prepared to receive
them, had Paul, 1 Cor. xiii. 22. That some signs are only for unbelievers: for
even those unbelievers must have within them (...), a proneness or readiness to
receive them with belief, (...), etc. in Jobius, to open to the spirit knocking
by those miracles, and improve them to their best profit.

5. Though God needs not, yet he requires moral preparation of us, as an
ordinary means to make us more capable of grace: for Austin, Ne ipsa quidem
justitia nostra indiget Deus: yet according to Salvian's limitation, Fget juxta
praeceptionem suam, licet non juxta potentiam: eget secundum legem suam, non
eget secundum Majestatem. We are to think that God has use of any thing which
he commands, and therefore must perform whatever he requires, and not dare to
be confident of the end, without the observation of the means prescribed. It Is
too much boldness, if not presumption, to leave all to his omnipotent

6. Integrity and Honesty of Heart, Vid. Wisd. 3. 14.
a sober moral life, and chiefly humility and tenderness of spirit: in sum,
whatever degree of Innocence, either study, or fear, or love, or natural
disposition can work in us, some or all of which may in some measure be found
in some men not yet regenerate, are good preparations for Christ's birth in us;
so says Clement of Philosophy that it does (...), make ready and prepare the
way against Christ's coming, (...), cooperate with other helps that God has
given us; all with this caution, that it does only prepare not perfect;
facilitate the pursuit of wisdom to us, (...), which God may bestow on us
without this means. To this purpose has Basil a notable homily to exhort
scholars to the study of foreign, humane, especially Grecian learning, and to
this end says he that we prepare our selves (...), to the Heavenly spiritual
Philosophy. Fathers prescribe good works of charity, observing out of the xix.
of St. Matthew, that the distribution of all their substance to the poor was a
praeludium in the Primitive believers to the following of Christ, Prius vendant
omnia quam sequantur: from whence he calls alms deeds, exordia quasi and
incunabula conversionis nostrae. The like may be said, though not in the same
degree, of all other courses, quibus carnalium sarcinarum impedimenta
projicimus: for if these forementioned preparations be nature in us, as, some
would have them, then do they naturally incline the subject for the receiving
of grace when it comes, and by fitting, as it were, and organizing the subject
facilitate its entrance; or if they be works of Gods restraining preventing
grace, as it is most orthodoxally agreed on, then are they good harbingers for
the sanctifying spirit: good comfortable symptoms that God will perfect and
crown the work which he has begun in us.

7. Gods ordinary course, as far as by events we can judge of it, is to call
and save such as are thus prepared. Thus to instance in a few of the first and
chiefest. 'Twas appointed by God that she only should be vouchsafed the blessed
office of dignity of being the Christ's Mother, who was (...), says he in
Photius, fuller of virtues than any else of her sex could brag of. In like
manner, that the rest of the family, Christ's Father and brethren, in account,
on earth should be such whose virtues had bestowed a more eminent opinion,
though not place upon them amongst men: so was Joseph and his sons (...),
famous for very just men, James the brother of the Lord (...), holy from the
womb (as Eusebius cites it) Hegesippus which he interprets (...), the stay of
the people and justice it self. In brief; if a Cornelius be to be called from
Gentilism to Christianity, ye shall find him in the beginning of his character
Act. x. 1. to be a devout man and one that feared God with all his house, gave
much alms to the people, and prayed to God always: one cut out as it were (...),
to be the first-fruit of the Gentiles. Now though none of these virtues can be
imputed to Mary was a virtuous pure virgin before the Holy Ghost overshadowed
her, Joseph a just man before the Holy Ghost appeared to him, Mat. i. 19. James
holy from the womb, and Cornelius capable of all that commendation for devotion

8. The Conversion of unprepared hardened blasphemous sinners, is to be
accounted as a most rare and extraordinary work of Gods power and mercy, not an
every days work like to be bestowed on every habituate sinner: and therefore
it is commonly accompanied with some evident note of difference to point it out
for a miracle. Thus Paul called from the Chief of sinners, 1 Timothy i. 15. to the
chief of Saints, but with this mark that Christ Jesus might show forth all long
suffering, etc. which was in him, first, and perhaps last in that degree: that
others in his pitch of blasphemies might not presume of the like miracle of
mercy. And indeed he that is thus called must expect what Paul found, a mighty
tempest throughout him, three days at least without sight or nourishment, if
not a (...) or (...) a swoon, a ki^d of ecstasie of the whole wise men, the
city was straight in an uproar, Herod was much troubled and all Jerusalem with
him, Mat. ii. 3. for it seems they expected no such matter: and therefore so
strange and sudden news produced nothing but astonishment and tumult; whilst
Symeon, who waited for the consolation of makes no such strange business of it;
takes him presently into his embraces, and familiarly hugs him in his arms,
having been before acquainted with him by his faith. Thus will it at Christ's
spiritual (...), be in an unprepared heart, his reigning Herod- sins, and all
the Jerusalem and Democracy of affections, a strange tumult of repining old
habituate passions will struggle fiercely, and shake the whole house before
they leave it. If a strong man be to be dispossessed of house or abode, without
warning, Symeon's soul lays hold as soon as he hears of him, is already
organized, as it were, for the purpose, holds out the arms and bosom of faith,
and at the first minute of his appearance takes him into his spiritual
embraces. This very preparation either had denied the strong man entrance, or
else binds his hands, manacles that blind Sampson, and turns him out in peace,
and then the spirit enters into

Lastly, by way of Corollary to all that has been said, though God can and
sometimes does call blasphemous sinners, though nothing in us can facilitate
Gods action to him, though none of our performances or his lower works in us,
can merit or challenge his sanctifying there is far more hope of the just
careful moral man, which has used all those restraints which are given him,
that he shall be called and saved; of such a one we are to judge far more
comfortably, and expect more confidently than of another more habituate sinner,
negligent of the commands of either God or nature. And this I conceive I have
in some measure proved through each part of the former discourse, and so I that
of a mere moral man though never so severe a censor never so rigid an exactor
of all the precepts of nature and morality in himself; yet of this man there is
less hope, either that he shall be converted or saved, than the most debauched
ruffian under Heaven. The charity and purity of this Doctrine you shall judge
of, if you will accompany me a while, and first observe Tertullian objects to
the Heathen, expostulating with them why they did not deifie Themistocles and
Cato as well as Jove and Hercules, Quot potiores viros apud inferos
reliquistis? They leave many

Secondly, observe to what end or use this doctrine may serve, but as an allay
to civil honesty in a Commonwealth, and fair, just dealing, which, forsooth, of
late is grown so luxuriant, the world is like to languish and sink, it is so
overburthened with it: and on the other side an encouragement to the sinner in
his course, an engagement in the pursuit of vice to the height and (...), as
the Peter not till the third denial, and then called Paul when he was most mad
against the Christians: as if the nearest way to Heaven were by Hell-gates, and
Devils most likely to become saints; as if there were merit in abominations,
and none in the right way to Christianity, but whom Atheism would be ashamed
of; as if because the natural man understands not, etc. all relics of natural
purity were solemnly pro forma to be abandoned to make us capable of spiritual.
It Is confessed that some have been and are thus converted, and by an ecstasie
of the spirit snatched and caught like firebrands out of the fire; and though
some must needs find their spiritual joys infinitely increased, (...) by that
gall of bitterness, from which they were delivered, and are therefore more
abundantly engaged to God, as being not the objects only, but the miracle of
his mercy: But yet for all this shall one or two ruled case? Shall the rarer
examples of Mary Magdalen or a Saul prescribe and set up? Shall we sin to the
purpose, as if we meant to threaten God that 'twere his best and safest course
to call us? Shall we abound in rebellions, that grace may superabound? God
pardon and forbid.

Thirdly, consider the reason of their proposition, and you shall judge of the
truth of it, and besides their own fancies and resolution The mere moral man
trusts in his own rigteousness, and this confidence in the arm of flesh, is the
greatest enemy to sanctifying grace, which works by spiritual humility. To
which we answer distinctly, that the foresaid pride, trust or confidence, is
neither effect nor necessary adjunct of morality; but an absolute defection
from the rules thereof; and therefore whatsoever proceeds either as an effect,
or consequent per se, no more than the thundering or lightning is to be imputed
to my walking, because it thunders whilst I walk; or preaching to my standing
still, because whilst I stand still I preach; (...), says Aristotle in the
first Post. c. 4. It does not lighten because I walk, but that is an accident
proceeding from some other cause. To strive against the motions of the spirit,
and so to render conversion not to think more highly on ones own worth than he
ought, (...), Romans xii. 3. Do we not find it commended and dilated on by
Aristotle 4. Eth. 3. (...), etc. not to overprize his own worth, or to expect
an higher reward than it in proportion deserves? So that he that trusts in his
morality for Heaven, does eo nomine offend against morality, according to that
of Salvian, Hoc ipsum genus maximae injustitiae est, si quis se justum and
indeed Aristotle and Seneca could say as much: and so then the accusation is
unjust and contumelious; for to a moral man if he be truly so, this pride or
confidence is incompatible: for do we not find that treble humility, (...) of
the heart, (...) of the tongue, (...) of the actions, Ephesians. iv. 2. handled
also and prescribed by the Philosophers? In sum, that which in all moral
precepts comes nearest pride or highmindedness, is that (...), Eth. 4. 3. part
of which is setting value But if you observe, this goes no farther than (...),
honor or worldly pomp: as for the immortal blessedness of the soul, 'twas a
thing infinitely above the pitch of their hope or confidence: the most perfect
among them never pretended any jus meriti to it, and if they did, they had by
so much the less hopes to attain to it. Now if it be supposed, as I fear is too
true, that our moral men fall far short of the ancient Philosophers, if they be
now adays confident and trust in their works for salvation, then abusively and
notionally. And yet even these equivocal moral men seem to me in as good, if
not better case, than the other term of comparison, the careless negligent
debauched men. For upon their grounds is it not as easy for the converting
Lucifer, one proud Devil in the heart, otherwise pretty well qualified, as to
deal with a whole legion of blasphemous, violent, riotous, railing, ignorant
Devils? I have done all with the confutation of this loose groundless opinion,
which if 'twere true, would yet prove of dangerous consequence to be preached,
in abating and turning our edge, which is of it self blunt and dull enough
toward goodness: nay, certainly it has proved scandalous to those without; as
may appear by that Campian in his Eighth reason, where he upbraids us
Englishmen of our abominable Lutheran, licentious doctri^e, (as he calls it)
Quanto sceleratior es, tanto vicinior gratiae: and therefore I do not repent
that I have been somewhat large in the refuting of it; as also because it does
much import to the clearing of my discourse: for if the mere moral men be
farthest from Heaven, then have I all this while busied my self, and tormented
you with an unprofitable, nay injurious preparation, Hippocrates, (...), etc.
The strongest bodies are in greatest danger, and (...), the (...) and height of
a disease is the fittest opportunity for a miraculous cure.

But beloved, let us more considerately bethink our selves, let us study and
learn and walk a more secure probable way to Heaven; and for those of us which
are yet unregenerate, though we nature and reason, and our Christianity to
govern us, yet let us not contemn those ordinary restraints which these will
afford us: let us attend in patience, sobriety, and humility and prayers, the
good time and leisures of the spirit; let us not make our reasonable soul, our
profession of men, of Christians ashamed of us: let not the heathen and beasts
have cause to blush at us; let us remain men till it may please him to call us
into Saints; lest being plunged in habitual confident thirteenth Article, we
cannot please God, yet we may not mightily provoke him. Let every man be in
some proportion to his gifts Christ's Baptist and forerunner, and harbinger in
himself, that whenever he shall appear or knock, he may enter, lodge and
dwell without resistance. Lastly, after embryo's, nay abortives, rude,
imperfect, horrid, (...), that Philosopher dies in his nonage in whom Christ
was never born: The highest reach of years and learning is but infancy without
the virility and manhood Now to him which has elected us, has created and
redeemed us, etc.

The X. Sermon.
JOHN vii. 48. Have any of the Pharisees believed on him?
History with what difficulty Religion attempts to propagate, and establish it
self with the many: what Countenance and encouragement it has required from
those things which are most specious, and pompous in the World and the flesh
will afford it. Two main pillars which it relies on are Power and Learning, the
Camp and the Schools, or in a word, authority of great ones and countenance of
Scholars; the one to force and extort obedience, the other to insinuate belief
and assent, the first to ravish, the second to persuade. One instance for all:
if we would plant Christianity in Turkey, we must first invade and conquer them,
and then convince them of their follies: which about an hundred years ago
Cleonard proposed to most Courts of Christendom, (and to that end himself
studied Arabic) that Princes would join their strength and Scholars their
brains, and all surprise them in their own land and language, at once besiege
the Turk and his Alcoran, put him to the sword, and his religion to the
touchstone; command him to Christianity with an high hand, and then to show him
the reasonableness of our commands. Thus also may Reformation gets ground so
slow in Christendom, because the forces and potent abettors of the Papacy
secure them from being led captive to Christ; as long as the Pope is riveted so
fast in his chair, and as long as the rulers take part with him, there shall be
no doubt of the truth of their religion; unless it please God to back our
arguments with steel, and to raise up Kings and Emperors to be our Champions,
we may question but never confute his supremacy. Let us come with Paul and
Barnabas, all the demonstrations of reason and spirit, yet as long as they have
such Topics against us, as the authority of the Rulers and Pharisees, we may
dispute out our hearts, and preach out our Lungs, and gain no proselytes: all
that we shall get is but a scoff and a curse, a Sarcasm and an Anathema, in
the words next after my text, This people which know not the law are cursed,
ver. 49.
there is no heed to be taken to such poor contemptible fellows. To bring all
home to the Christ shall be left alone; rather than they shall speak in vain,
the Word it self shall be put to silence: and if they which were appointed to
take and bring him to judgment shall be caught by him they came to apprehend,
and turn their accusations into reverence, the Pharisees will not be without
their reply, they are doctors in the Law, and therefore for a need can be their
own Advocates: Then answered the Pharisees, are ye also deceived, have any of
the rulers and Pharisees believed on him?

Concerning the infidelity of the rulers in my Text, as being not so directly
appliable to my audience, I shall forbear to speak. My discourse shall retire
it self to the Pharisee, as being a professor of learning, brought up at the
University in Jerusalem, and God grant his vices and infidelity be not also
Academical.

The words we shall divide not into several parts but considerations, and read
them either as spoken by the Pharisee, or recorded by the Evangelist. In the
first, we have the (...), the rational of them as they are part of an argument,
that they which believed in Christ were deceived sub hac forma; he that would
judge of the truth of his life, is to look which way the greatest scholars are
affected, and then though in that case it concluded fallaciously, yet the
argument was probable, and the point worth our discussion; the judgment of
learning and learned men, is much to be heeded in matters of Religion.

In the second we have the (...) and (...), the rational sense of the words
being resolved, as affirmative interrogations are wont, into a negative
Proposition, Have any, etc. The Pharisees did not believe on him, i. e. the
greatest Scholars are not always the best Christians. And first of the first,
the authority of learning and learned men in matters of Religion, noted from
the logical force of the Have any, etc.

Amongst other acts of Gods Providence and wise Economy of all things, there
is not one more observable than the succession of his Church, and dispensation
of his most precious gifts attending it; you shall not in any age find the
flourishing of learning severed from the profession of Religion; and the
proposition shall be granted without exception: Gods people were always the
learned part of the world. Before the flood we are not so confident Deluge
made a great chasm betwixt us, and 'twould be hard for the liveliest eyes to
pierce at such distance through so much water; let those who fancy the two
Pillars, Joseph. lib. 1. cap. 4.
in which all learning was engraven, the one of brick, the other of marble, to
prevent the malice either of fire or water, please themselves with the fable,
and seem to have Adam. Thus far it is agreed on, that in those times every
Father being both a Priest and a King in his own Family, bestowed on his son
all knowledge both secular and sacred which himself had attained to: Adam by
tradition instructing Seth, and Seth Enoch in all knowledge as well as
righteousness. For it is Josephus his observation, Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 4.
that whilst Cain and his progeny employed themselves about wicked and
illiberal inventions, grovelling upon the earth, Seth and his bore up their
thoughts as conjunctions and oppositions and other appearances of the
luminaries, and so needing no successors to perfect his observations. Hence
Philo calls Abraham (...), and says his knowledge in Astronomy led him to the
notice of a Deity, and that his sublime speculation gave him the name of Abram
a high exalted Father, before his Faith had given the better Abraham, Father of
many Nations: hence from him, 1 Chaldaea, 2 Egypt, 3 Greece, came all to the
skill they brag of; so that Proclus made a good conjecture, that the Wisdom of
the Chaldaeans was, (...) a gift of some of the gods, it coming from Abraham
who was both a friend and in a manner an acquaintance of the true God, and far
ancienter and wiser than any of their false. In sum, all learning as well as
religion Hebrews, as may appear by Moses in his (...), the only true natural
Philosophy that ever came into the World: so that even Longinus, which took the
story of the Creation to be a fable, (...).
yet commends Moses his expression of it, Let there be light, and there was
light] for a speech admirably suited to a God; for the greatest (...) or
sublimity that any Rhetorician could strain for. And Demetrius Phalareus
commends the Pentateuch to Ptolomy (...), Eusebius. 1. p. 206.
as the most Philosophical, accurate discourse he had ever heard of. And if by
chance any scraps or shreds of knowledge were ever scattered among the
Gentiles, they certainly fell from the Chaldaeans table: from whence in time
the poor beggarly world gathered such baskets-ful, that they began to feed
full, and be in good likeing, and take upon them to be richer than their
Benefactors, and Athens at last begins to set up as the only University in the
World. But it is Austins observation, that 'twas in respect of Christ, and for
Jewry. Christ was to be preached and received among the Gentiles, and therefore
they must be civilized beforehand, lest such holy things being cast abruptly
before swine, should only have been trampled on: or as Moses his books falling
among the ^oets, have been only distorted into fables, turned also into
prodigies, Metamorphoses, and Mythical divinity. Cum enim prophetae, etc. Under
Abraham and Moses, whilst the learning and the but about Romulus his time,
when the Prophecies of Christ which belonged also to the Gentiles, were no
longer whispered, but proclaimed by the mouth of Hosea, Amos, Isaiah, Micah,
and Jonas from the reign of Uzziah, to Hezekiah Kings of Judah, then also began
learning to flourish abroad among the Nations, to dilate it self over the
World: Greece began to hearken after wisdom, and brag of its (...), Thales and
the like, ut fontes divinae and humanae sapientiae pariter erupisse videantur,
That then secular knowledge might dare to shed it self among the nations, when
Christ began to be revealed, the expectation of the Gentiles. 'Twere an
infinite discourse to present unto you the like proceedings through all ages,
the continual marriages, the Combinations, and never any divorce betwixt
Learning and Religion. The Fathers before mentioned are large in drawing it
down to our hands in tables of collateral descent throughout all generations;
Arabians in Physics and the Mathematics, all the Cabalisms of the Jews; in
sum, all the rather folly than wisdom, that either Asia, or Africa, pretend to?
what has all the world beside that dare look a Christian Europe where we live,
may challenge and put to shame, nay upbraid the ignorance of the learned
Mohammedan, and be able to afford some Champions which shall grapple with the
tallest giant, with the proudest son of Anak that Italy can boast of. I will
hope and pray, and again dare to hope, that as all Europe has not more
moderation and purity of Religion than this Kingdom, so it never had a more
learned Clergy; never more encouragement for learning from religion; at large
and in Thesi: we must descend lower to the (...) and hypothesis here; where
heed is to be taken to the Pharisee, to the Doctor in my Text. The Disciples
were but Fishermen and Mechanics, illiterate enough, and yet a word of theirs
shall more sway mine assent, and rule my faith, than the proudest dictates out
of Moses chair. And thus indeed are we now adays Shop as in the Schools, and
rely more on the authority of one lay-professor, than the sagest Elders in
theirs or our Israel. Learning is accounted but an ostentatious complement of
young scholars, that will never bring the Pastor or his flock the nearer to the
way toward Heaven. But to recall our judgments to a milder temper, we are to
learn from Clemens, that although the Wisdom of God, and Doctrine of the Gospel
be (...), able to maintain, and fence, and authorize yet even Philosophy and
secular learning is of use, nay necessity to defeat the treacheries and
sophisms, and stratagems of the Adversary: And although the truth of Scripture
be the bread we live on, the main staff and stay of our subsistence; yet this
exoterical learning, (...), as Sophronius calls them, this (...) of the Schools
must be served in (...), as cates and dainties to make up the banquet; nay they
are not only for superfluity, but solid and material uses. l. 1. p. 9.
says Dionysius Halic. to build cities (...), never far from some hill, or
mountain, that beside the natural strength, the hold from the foundation, they
may receive some security and safeguard from so stout and tall a neighbor:
thus will it stand us upon, so to build our faith upon a rock, that we may also
have some shelter near us to fence and fortify our fabric, when the wind or
tempest shall arise. Had not Peter indeed and the rest at Christ's call left
their ignorance with nets, and trades: had they not been made scholars as well
as Disciples, all trades promiscuously might justly have challenged and invaded
the pulpit, and no man denied to preach that was able to believe. But you are
to know that their calling was an inspiration, they were furnished with gifts
as well as graces; and whatever other learning they wanted, sure I am they were
the greatest Linguists in the world. Yea, the power and convincing August. de
^iv. De^, l. 5. c. 53.
which the heathen observed in Peter, made them get the Oracles to proclaim
that he had learnt Magic from his Master. To drive the whole business to an
issue in brief, take it in some few propositions.

1. There is not so great a dependence betwixt learning and religion in
particular persons, as we have observed to be in Ages and Countries: so that
though plenty of knowledge be a symptom or judiciary sign, that that Church
where it flourishes is the true Church of Cor. i. as the last part of our
discourse shall make evident.

2. Matters of Faith are not Ultimo resolubilia in principia rationis,
therefore not to be resolved any farther than the Scriptures; they are not to
beg authority from any other science; for this is the Metaphysics, (...), the
mistress and commandress of all other knowledges, which must perpetually do
their homage to it, as servants always to attend and confirm its proposals,
never to contradict it, as Aristotle has it, Met. 2. 2.

3. Though Faith depend not upon reason, though it subsist entirely upon its
own bottom, and is then most purely Faith when it relies not on reason, and
adheres wholly to the (...) of Gods word, yet does the concurrence, and
agreement, and evidence of reason add takes away all fears and jealousies, and
suspicious surmisings out of the understanding, and bestows a resolution and
constancy on it. For Faith, though in respect of its ground Gods word, it be
most infallible, yet in its own nature is, as the Philosopher defines it, a
kind of opinion, and in our humane frailty subject to demurs, and doubts, and
panick terrors, for fear it be false grounded, and therefore Aristotle faith of
it, that it differs from knowledge (...) as a sickly man or a strong, it is very
weak and aguish, subject to sweats, and colds, and hourly distempers: whereas
the evidence and assurance of sense and reason added to it, bestows a full
health and strength upon it, an (...), a perfect state that it shall never be
forced or frighted out of. In brief, where reason gives its suffrage, it
unvails faith, and to adherence super-adds evidence, and teaches us to feel,
and touch, and handle what before we did believe; to gripe, and hold, and even
believers in a manner elevated above an earthly condition, initiated to the
state which is all vision, Heb. iv. 13.
where every thing is beheld (...), naked and displayed, as the entrals of a
creature cut down 2 Cor. III. 28.
or with open face beholding as in a glass, 2 Cor. iii. 28.

4. There be some difficulties in Religion at which an illiterate understanding
will be struck in a maze; some depths of mystery where an Elephant can scarce
tread water, a Lamb must not hope to wade. Many above the apprehensions of the
most capacious brain, where reason being not able to express, must be content
to shadow, and describe in some rude lines what it cannot perform in
pourtraicture: and here, I say, learning, though it cannot reach, yet can heave
up point at; profit, though not perfect us, help us to some images and
resemblances, to conceive that which we cannot fully comprehend: so says
Philoponus, will Mathematical abstractions facilitate the simplicity of Gods
essence to our understandings, the lucid nature of the Sun express the
brightness of his glory, and the mysterious numbers of the Pythagoreans,
represent the Trinity to our phansies. And thus does Zoroastes in Patricius,
Philosophari de Deo, subdue, as it were, divinity to reason, and raise up
reason to join issue that paternal depth made of three threes, comprise all the
secrets of the Godhead. But besides these secrets of the upper Cabinet, these
supernatural depths, there are others secundae altitudinis, and as Halicar. l.
1. p. 11.
calls those which are above the reach of all but Philosophers, (...), and
Aristotle (...), natural miracles, which none but Scholars can attain to. And
these I hope shall never be discust upon a shopboard, or enter into lights of a
third magnitude, which yet every one has not eyes to gaze on, and of this
condition are almost all the speculations in divinity; nay the ordinariest
truth in a Catechism can scarce be forced into a vulgar understanding; his
brain is not set that way, Mary for an Angel, and the Apostles Creed, where
only they find mention of her, for a prayer: and then you cannot imagine what
stead a little learning would stand these men in, what even miracles 'twould
work upon them.

5. It Is but necessity and exigence of nature that those which are the weak
should apply themselves for help and directions to those that are stronger; the
child in a Cradle must be put to a Nurse, which There be in nature, faith
Aristotle in his Mechan. many wants; she performs not all our needs, and
therefore Engines were invented to supply defects. Thus is Art a Machina or
invention, (...), to furnish us with those abilities which nature was a niggard
in: and therefore to deprive our selves of this guidance when it is offered,
Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 7.
to put out an eye of his that has but one in all, which was of old a great
aggravation to the injury in the Rhetor. indeed to leave our selves desperately
blind. (...), in lambl. In matters of Religion we must not so much as speak,
nay, not think without a Candle, we shall want the guidance of some Teacher to
direct every such word out of our mouths or thought into our hearts. An
ignorant man must not have leave so much as to meditate on God without a Cl^m.
p. 56.
for he is mad, say the Philosophers, and then every thought of his will be a
kind of delirium or phrenzy. It Is the law of nature, says the Historian, Dion.
Hal. l. 1. p. 6.
(...), that superiors should have a kind of sovereignty over all that are
inferior to them, a magisterium and command over them, to rule and order them;
and this superiority and sovereignty has the learned Pastor, or generally the
Scholar over all ignorant men, be they never so rich or potent; and whosoever
denies or scorns thus to obey, I say not, is Ibid. p. 533.
without an assizes; but to be condemned of much peevishness and more
stupidity, and his punishment is, Let him fall into his own hands, i. e. be
ruled by a fool or mad man.

6. Much of the speculative part of Religion may be had from a Pharisee as well
as a Disciple. Christ himself bears witness of him, that he was orthodox in
matters concerning the Law: They sit in Moses chair, and therefore whatsoever
they bid you, that observe and do, Mat, do not after their works, for they say
and do not, verse 4. If I am resolved of such a man's abilities in learning, but
see him a scandalous liver, I will borrow of his gifts, and pray God to
increase his graces. In matters of spiritual joy and sorrow, I will, if I can,
be counseled by an heart which once was broken, that I Physician may cure a
disease, though himself was never sick of it. But for the ordinary Theories of
Religion, I will have patience to receive instructions from any one, and not
examine his practices, but in modesty, and in submission, and humility receive
the Law at his mouth. But all this with caution, (...), as to a guide not a
monarch rule he shall my belief, but not tyrannize over it. I will assent to my
teacher 'till I can disprove him, but adhere, and anchor, and fix my self on
the Scripture.

7. In matters of superstruction, where Scripture lays the foundation, but
interpreters, i. e. private spirits build upon it, some etc. and I cannot judge
or discern which is firmliest rooted on the foundation; I will take the
Philosophers counsel in the first of his Rhetor. and observe either (...) or
(...), be guided either by the ancientest, if they have showed themselves in
the cause, or else men alive, which be best reputed of for integrity and
judgment: I shall scarce trust the honestest man you can commend to me, unless
I have some knowledge of his parts; nor the learned you can cry up, unless I
can believe

8. All the contradictions and new ways of my own brain, opposite or wide from
the current of the learned, I must suspect for a work of my own fancy, not
entitle them to Gods spirit in me. Verebar omnia opera mea, says Job, whatever
a man can call his own, he must be very cautious and jealous over it. For it is
no less then atheism which the scorners of the last age are to fall upon by
walking after their own lusts, 2 Pet. iii. 3. And thus was the Pharisees
practice Have any of the Pharisees believed on him? There is not a more
dangerous mother of heresies in the midst of piety, then this one, that our
fancy first assures us that we have the spirit, and then that every fancy
of ours is Theopneust, the work of the spirit. There are a multitude of deceits
got altogether here; 1. We make every idle persuasion of our own the evidence
of Gods spirit, then we join infallibility to the person,

Lastly, If the word of God speak distinctly and clearly, enforce, as here by
miracles done before, all men to their astonishment and redargution, then will
I not stay my belief to wait on or follow the learned man in the world: when
Christ himself speaks to my eyes, the proudest, eminentest Pharisee in earth or
hell, nay if any of their sect have crowded into Heaven, shall not be able to
charm my ear, Pharisees argument in that case was sophistical, (the matter
being so plain to them that they needed no advice, His works bore witness of
him, John v. 36.) yet in the general it holds probable and learning remains a
good guide still, though an ill Master in matters of Religion, (...), the first
thing we undertook to demonstrate. And this we should draw down yet lower to
our practice, and Scholars to learn to set a value on their precious blessing
which God has vouchsafed them above all the world beside; to bless God
infinitely that they understand and conceive what they are commanded to
believe: this I am sure of, there is not a greater and more blessed privilege
besides Gods spirit, which our humane condition is capable of, then this of
Aristotle himself witnesses, (...), none is better then it. As long as we have
no evidence or demonstration from that (which yet it most nearly concerns us to
rely upon) we cannot enjoy without an immediate supernatural irradiation, a
tranquillity and consistency of spirit, we cannot peremptorily have resolved
our selves that we have built upon the rock: every temptation proves a
discouragement to us, many horrors take hold of us, and sometimes Apostles
were in, Luke xxiv. 22. We had trusted, but now we know not what to think of
it, that this was he that should have redeemed Israel. But to see all the
Articles of my faith ratified and confirmed to my understanding, to see the
greatest treasure and inheritance in the world sealed and delivered to me in my
hand, written in a character and language that I am perfectly skilled in; O
what a comfort is this to a Christian soul! O what a fullness of Father nor
Bible in the world, able out of my own stock to give an account, nay, a reason
of my faith before the perversest Papist, Heathen or Devil. This serves me
instead of having lived, and conversed, and been acquainted with Christ.

By this I have my fingers pit into the print of the nails, and my hands thrust
into his side, and am as sure as ever Thomas was; I see him as palpably as he
that handled him, that he is my Lord and my God. 'Twas observed by the
Philosopher as an act generally practiced among Tyrants to prohibit all Schools
and means of learning and education in the Commonwealth, (...), to suffer
neither learning, nor Schools, nor common meetings, that men being kept blind
might be sure to obey, Julian interdict the Christians all manner of
literature, and chiefly Philosophy, for fear, says Nazianzen, Steliteut.
they should be able to grapple with the Heathen, and cut off Goliah's head
with his own weapon. Italy. All which must call for a superlative measure of
thanks to be expressed, not in our tongues and hearts only, but in our lives and
actions; from us I say, who have obtained not only a knowledge of his laws, but
almost a vision of his secrets, and for as much as concerns our eternal bliss,
do even see things as they were acted, having already comprehended in our
reason, the breadth and length and depth and height of the conceived, incarnate,
and crucified God: and if all that will not serve our turn, but we must press
into his cabinet-secrets, invade the book of life, and oversee, and divulge to
all men abscondita Domini Dei nostri, then are Gods mercies unworthily repaid
by us, and those indulgences which were to bestow civility upon the world, have
only taught us to be more rude. In sum the reallest thanks we can perform is
modestly and softly to make use of it, 1. To the confirming of others faith,
and 2. to the expressing of our own. For 1. he is the deepest scholar, says
the Philosopher, (...).
who is (...), best able to teach other men what himself conceives; and then 2.
he has the habit most radicated who has pressed it down into his heart, and
there sowed a seed which shall increase and fructify, and spread, and flourish,
laden with the fruits of a lively faith. He is the truest scholar that has
Pharisees were great scholars, well seen in the Prophets, and it is much to be
suspected could not choose but find Christ there, and acknowledge him by his
Miracles, they saw him plain enough, and yet not a man would believe on him; My
second part, The greatest scholars are not always the best Christians.

cowardly are most inquisitive, their fears and jealousies make them very
careful to foresee any danger, and yet for the most part they have not spirit
enough to encounter, and they are so stupid and sluggish that they will not get
out of its way when they have foreseen it: the same baseness and timerousness
makes them a sort of men most diligent to at a distance avoid, and near hand
most negligent to prevent. Thus in iiii. Dan. 5. Nebuchadnezzar dreams and is
affrighted, Daniel, that his fears were not in vain, that the greatest
judgment that ever was heard of was within a twelve month to fall on him,
then as though he had been a beast before his time, without all understanding
he goes and crowns himself Prophecy, he was to suffer, then was he walking in
his pride; whilst he was ignorant, he was sensible of his danger, and now he
sees it before his eyes, he is most prodigiously blind. At the end of twelve
months, when his ruin was at hand, ver. 29. he walked in the Palace of the
Kingdom of Babylon, and the King spoke and said, Is not this great Babylon that
I have built, etc. In brief he that was most earnest to understand the dream,
is most negligent of the event of it, and knowledge and our wills, and when a
truth has fully conquered and got possession of our understanding, then to
begin to fortify most strongly, that the other castle of the soul, the
affections may yet remain impregnable. Thus will the Devil be content to have
the outworks and the watchtower taken, so he may be sure to Aristotle, is
terminated in it self, (...), it neither looks after, nor produces any
practical good, says Andronicus, (...),, nay there is no dependence betwixt
knowing and doing: as he that has read and studied the (...), may perhaps be
never the better wrastler, nor the skilfullest Physician healthy: experience
and trial must perfect the one, and a good temperature constitute the other. A
young man may be a good Naturalist, a good Geometer, nay a wise man, because he
may understand (...), wonders, depths, nay Divine matters, but he will never be
(...), prudent or actually virtuous, Eth. 6. 8.
i. e. a good Moralist: (...), moral precepts they cannot be said to believe,
they have not entered so far, they float only in their memories, they have them
Plato's scholars (says Plutarch) his depths of Philosophy: they now recite
them only, and shall then understand them, when they come of age, when they are
stayed enough to look into the meaning of them, and make use of them in their
practice. The Mathematics, 2 Met. 2.
says Aristotle, have nothing to do with the end or chief good that men look
after: never any man brought good or diagrams, necessary convictions of the
understanding. And therefore for these mere speculations, which hover only in
the brain, (...).
the youngest wit is nimblest; for (...), sharpness of apprehension is a
sprightfulness of the mind, Ethic. 6. 13.
and is there liveliest, where there be most spirits: prudence and active
virtue requires an habituate temper of passions, a stayedness of the mind, and
long trial and experience of its own strength, a constancy to continue in
virtue in spite of all foreign allurements or inward distempers. And the
ground of all this is, that those things that most incumber the Will and keep
us from practice, do nothing clog or stop the understanding, sensuality or
pleasure hinders us not from knowing (...), Ethic. 6 5.
etc. that a Triangle has three angles equal to two right ones, and the
Aristotle may teach us, why the greatest scholars, are not always the best
Christians: the Pharisees well read in the Prophets yet backwardest to believe,
because faith which constitutes a Christian is a spiritual prudence, as it is
best defined, and therefore is not appropriate to sub ratione boni, as being
the most unvaluable blessings which ever we desired of the Lord, (...), etc.
Ethic. 6. 7.
or can require. The speculative part of divine wisdom may make us (...),
intelligent spirits, nay possibly do it in the worst notion, render us devils.
Real practical knowledge, only prudence will make Angels, ministering spirits
unto God, teach us to live learning does neither make nor suppose men
Christians: Nay 2ly. it does per accidens many times hinder, put a rub in our
way, and keep us from being Christians. Philoponus and Synesius (Miracles of
learning) were therefore hardest to be converted, they were so possessed and
engaged in Peripatetical Philosophy: that however they might be persuaded to
the Trinity, they will not believe the resurrection. 'Twas too plain a
contradiction to philosophical reason Cor. i. 21. 1 Cor. I. 21.
the World by wisdom knew not God: they so relied on their reason, and trusted
in it for all truths, that they concluded every thing impossible that would not
concur with their old Principles. But this resistance which reason makes is not
so strong, but that it may easily be suppressed, and therefore Synesius was made
a Bishop before he explicitly believed the resurrection, because they were
confident that he which could not choose but be illuminated in time, in so
necessary a point of faith: and indeed so it happened in them both. But there
are other more dangerous engines, more insidious courses which learning uses to
supplant or undermine belief: other stratagems to keep us out of the way, to
anticipate all our desires or inclinations, or thoughts that way-ward: and
these are spiritual pride self-content. Men are so elevated in height of
contemplation, so well pleased, so fully satisfied in the pleasures and
delights of it, that the first sort scorn to submit or humble themselves to the
poverty and disparagement of believing in Christ; the second are never at
leisure to think of it. For the first, spiritual pride, it is set down as a
reason that the natural man receives not the things of the spirit, 1 Cor. ii.
14. receives them not, i. e. will not take them, will not accept of them,
though they are freely given him; for they so his proud brain reputes them. The
pride of Worldly wisdom extremely scorns the foolishness of Christ, and
consequently is infinitely opposite to faith which is wrought by special
humility.

Secondly, for self-content: (...), says Heraclitus in Hesych: Wise men need
no friends, they are able to subsist by themselves without any help: they will
have an happiness of their own making, and scorn to be beholding to Christ for
a new Jerusalem, of the Intercessor that has saved, of the way thither and
made it passable, of all the privileges and promises of our adoption, they
will hear them (...), as old wives fables; they have the fortunate Islands too,
their exactest tranquillity and serenity of mind in a perpetual contemplation,
and all the golden Apples in Paradise shall not tempt or allarm them out of it.
It Is strange study to the Church, how sleepy, and drowsy, and lethargical he is
in matters of Religion: how soon a little devotion has tired him out, that
could have pored over a book incessantly all his life long, and never thought
thus to have been interdicted the delights of humane learning, thus to have
been plucked and torn from the embraces of his Athenian Idol. His conversion is
much unlike another man's: that which calls Anchoret, and forces him to walk and
run the way of Gods Commandments, that had once decreed him himself to a chair
brain in spite of the Philosopher is an intemperance, as well as that of the
throat and palate, and more dangerous, because less suspected, and seldomer
declaimed against; and from this Epicurism, soul, good Lord deliver us.

Not to heap up reasons of this too manifest a truth, (would God it were not so
undeniable) take but this one more, of the unsufficiency of learning never so
well used to make a man a Christian. Let all the knowledge in the world,
profane and sacred, all the force and reason that all ages ever bragged of,
let it concur in one brain, and swell the head as big as his was in the Poem
that traveled of Minerva: let all Scriptures and Fathers join their power
faith in any one; all the miracles they can work are only on the understanding,
the will distinctly taken is above their sphere or compass: or if their
faculties are not distinguished, and to will is present with me, Romans vii. 18.
as well as to understand, yet they can produce only an absolute simple general
will, that is, an assent and approbation of the absolute goodness of the thing
proposed, not a resolute will to abandon all other worldly purposes to perform
Knowledge and right apprehension of things may convince me first of the
history, that all that is spoken of, or by Christ is true, and then of the
expedience to apply all his merits to my soul, but when I see all this cannot
be done without paying a price, without undoing my self, without pawning all
that I have, my learning, my wealth, my delights, my whole worldly being,
without self-denial, then the general assent, that absolute will is grown chill
and dead; we are still (whatever we Creed thus assented to are not enough to
make us Christians. So that the issue of all is, all knowledge in the world
cannot make us deny our selves, and therefore all knowledge in the world is not
able to produce belief; only the spirit must breath this power into us of
breathing out our selves, he must press our breasts, and stifle, and strangle
us; we must give up the natural ghost, he must force out our earthly breath out
of our earthly bodies, or else we shall not be spiritual. Thus have you reasons
of the common divorce betwixt knowledge and faith, i. e. the no manner of
dependence betwixt them in nature. Secondly, the open resistance in some points
betwixt reason and Scripture. Thirdly, the more secret reluctancies betwixt the
pride and contents of learning and the spirit. And lastly, the insufficiency of
all natural knowledge, and transcendency of spiritual, so that he cannot know
them, because Application.

That laying to our hearts the important documents of the Text, our
righteousness and faith may exceed that of the Pharisees, Mat. v. 20. our
preaching and walking may be like that of Christ's, in power, and as having
authority, and not as the Scribes, Mat. vii. 29. and we not content with a
floating knowledge in the brain, do press and Zenophanes his fancy, (...),
and that God was all eyes and all ears, but breathed not, there was no use of
that in him; and so is it with us, who are always exercising our knowledge,
powers to see and hear what e're is possible; but for any breath of life in us,
any motion of the spirit, we have no use of it: it is not worth valuing or
taking notice of, nothing so vulgar and contemptible Israelites, soon satiated
with their bread from Heaven, nothing comparable to their old food that Nilus
yielded them, Numb. xi. 5. We remember the fish that we did eat in Egypt, but
now our soul is as if that were not worth the gathering.

Pythagoras could say, that if any one were to be chosen to pray for the
people, to be made a Priest, he must be a virtuous man, (...), in Iamblicus,
Vit. Fyth. p. 61.
because the Gods would take more heed to his words: p. 107.
and again, that many things might be permitted the people, which should be
interdicted Preachers. It was the confirmation of his precepts by his life, p.
164.
and practice, (...), that Italy, p. 157.
(...), all the Country his School, and all that ever heard him his Disciples.
Nothing will give such authority to our doctrine, or set such a value on our
calling as a religious conversation. He that takes such a journey, as that into
Holy Orders, must go on, (...), according to his 15. Symbolum, must not return
to his former sins as well as trade, says lamblicus: the falling into one of
our youthful vices, is truly a disordering of our selves, and a kind of
plucking our hands from the plow. A Hippocrates, must have color and be in
flesh, (...), of a good promising healthy complexion, and then men will guess
him a man of skill, otherwise the patient will bid the Physician heal himself,
and having by his ill look a prejudice against his Physic, his fancy will
much hinder its working. Seneca talk of providence, nor be affected with bare
words, unless he see them armed and backed with power of him that utters them.
Consider but this one thing, and withal proverb, and he is a proud man that can
first draw it upon a Scholar, his learning and his clergy make him never the
more religious. O let our whole care and carriage, and the dearest of our
endeavors strive and prevail to cross the proverb, and stop the mouth of the
rashest declamer. That Comedy of Aristophanes took best, (...).
which was all spent in laughing at Socrates, and in him involved and abused
the whole condition of learning; though through Alcibiades his faction it
miscarried and Learning has still some honorable favorers which keep others
in awe with their countenance, but otherwise nothing more agreeable to the
people then Comedies or Satyrs, or Sarcasms dealt out against the Universities:
let us be sure that we act no parts in them our selves, nor perform them before
they are acted. Let us endeavor that theirs may be only pronunciations, a
story of our faults as presented Luke VI. 26.
Woe be to you when all men shall speak well of you] we have many good friends
that will not ^et this curse light on us. O let us deliver our selves from that
catalogue of woes which were all denounced against the Pharisees for many
vices, all contained in this accomplished piece, Ye say but do not, Mat. xxiii.
4. And seeing all our intellectual excellencies cannot allure, or bribe, or
woo Gods spirit to overshadow us, and conceive method and our Tutor, and
having hitherto learnt God from our selves, let us be better advised, and learn
our selves from God. Let us all study all learning from the spring or fountain,
and make him our instructor, who is the only Author worth our understanding,
and admit of no interpreter on him but himself. The knowledge of God shall be
our vision in heaven, O let it be the last work in which all the promises, all
our possible designs are accomplished: O let us in part anticipate that final
revelation of him, lest so sudden and so full a brightness of glory be too
excellent for the eyes of a Saint: and labor to comprehend here, where the
whole comfort of our life is what we shall then possess. spirit, that he will
fully enlighten and inflame us here with zeal as well as knowledge; that he
will fill us with his grace here, and accomplish us glory hereafter.

Now to him that has elected us, has created us and redeemed us, etc.

The XI. Sermon.
Matthew. X. 15. It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in
the day of judgment, then
THE whole new Covenant consists of these two words, Christ and Faith; Christ
bestowed on Gods part, Faith required on ours; Christ the matter, Faith the
condition of the Covenant. Now to bring or present this Faith before Anatomy
instruct) in every limb, or joint, or excellency of it, were but to recall you
to your Catechism, and to take pains to inform you in that which you are
presumed to know. The greater danger of us is, that we are behind in our
practice, that we know what faith is, but do not labor for it; and therefore
the seasonablest work will be on our affections to produce, a work of faith,
which was formerly but a fancy, dream and apparition. To this purpose to work
on your wills, no Rhetoric so likely, as that which is most sharp and
terrible, no such Physic for dead affections as Corrosives, the consideration
estate of infidels here in my Text; and that both in respect of the guilt of
the sin, and degree of the punishment, proportioned to it, and that above all
other sinners in the World, It shall be more, etc. Where you may briefly
observe, 1. the sin of infidelity, set down by its subject, that City which
would not receive Christ being preached unto it, v. 14. 2 the greatness of this
sin, expressed by the punishment attending it; and that either positively, it
shall go very sore with it, and therefore comparatively being weighed with
Sodom and Gomorrah in judgment, it shall be more tolerable for them then it:
and therefore it is not only a great sin, but the greatest, the most damning sin
in the world. And of these in order plainly, and to your hearts rather then
your brains, presuming that you are now come with solemn serious thoughts to be
edified not instructed, much less pleased or humor'd. And first of the first:
The sin of infidelity, noted in that City.

To pass by those, which we cannot choose but meet with, 1. a multitude of
ignorant Infidels, Pagans and Heathens. 2. of knowing but not acknowledging
Infidels, as Turks and Jews; We shall meet with another order of as great a
latitude, which will more nearly concern us; a world of believing Infidels,
which know and acknowledge Christ, the Gospel and the promises, are as fairly
mounted in the understanding part as you would wish, refuse and deny him in
their hearts, apply not a Command to themselves, submit not to him, nor desire
to make themselves capable of those mercies which they see offered by Christ in
the World; and these are distinctly set down in the verse next before my Text,
Whosoever shall not receive you, i. e. entertain the acceptable truth of Christ
and the Gospel preached by you, as it is interpreted by the 40. verse, He that
receives you receives me, i. e. believes on me, as the word is most plainly
used, Mat. xi. 14. Mat. XI. 14.
If you will receive if you will believe it, this is Elias which was for to
come. And Joh. i. 12. To as many as received him, even to them that believe in
his name. For you are to know that Faith truly justifying is nothing in the
World, but the receiving of Christ. Christ and his sufferings and full
satisfaction was once on the Cross rendered, and is ever since by the Gospel
and its Ministers offered to the world: and nothing required of us but an hand
and an heart to apprehend and receive: and to as many as received him, he gives
power to become Joh. i. 12. So that Faith and infidelity are not acts properly
determined to the understanding, but indeed to the whole soul, and most
distinctly to the Will, whose part it is to receive or repel, to entertain or
resist Christ and his promises, the Author and finisher of our salvation. Now
this receiving Romans i. 17. being rightly weighed will enforce. Read and mark,
(...), thus (...), in it, or by it, the Gospel, mentioned in the former verse
(...), the righteousness of God by Faith, as Romans iii. 22. Romans III. 22.
i. e. the not legal but Evangelical righteousness, which only God accepts,
directly set down Phil. iii. 9. Phil. III. 9.
That righteousness which is through Faith of Christ, is revealed to Faith, is
declared that we might believe; that finding no life or righteousness in our
selves, we may go out of our selves, and lay hold on that which is offered us
by Christ: and this you will find to be the clearest meaning of these words,
though somewhat obscured in our English reading of them. Now the accepting of
this righteousness is an act of ours following a proposal or offer of Christ's,
and consummating the match or bargain Husband in the Gospel, we enquire of him,
observe our own needs, and his Excellencies and riches to supply them, our sins
and his righteousness; and if upon advice we will take him, the match is
struck, we are our beloved's, and our beloved is ours; we are man and wife, we
have taken him for our husband, and with him are entitled to all his riches:
we have right to all his righteousness, and enjoy by his Patent all the
privileges, all the promises, all the mercies Gospel. But if the offer being
thus made by God to give us his Son freely, we stand upon terms, we are too
rich, too learned, too worldly minded, too much in love with the praise of men,
Joh. xii. 43. Joh. XII. 43.
i. e. fixed upon any worldly vanity, and resolve never to forego all these, to
disclaim our worldly liberty, our own righteousness, and to accept of so poor
an offer as a Christ; then are we the Infidels here spoken of, We will not come
to him that we might have life, Joh. v. 40. When he is held out to receive the
praise of men,how can you believe? Joh. v. 44. Joh. V. 44.
So that in brief, Infidelity consists in the not receiving of Christ, with a
reciprocal giving up of our selves to him, in the not answering affirmatively
denying to take him at all, or by taking him under a false person, or by not
performing the conditions required or presumed in the making of the match. They
that deny to take him at all, are the profane, negligent, presumptuous
Christians, who either never hearken after him, or else are so familiar with
the news, as to underprize him: Ananias and Sapphira, perhaps offer pretty
fair, bring two parts of their estate and lay them at the Apostles feet, but
will give no more; fall off at last for a trifle, and peremptorily deny Christ,
if they may not have him on their own Conditions. Some superfluities, some
vanities, some chargeable or troublesome sins perhaps they can spare, and those
they will be inclinable to part withal; but if this will not serve, Christ must
seek for a better Chapman, Judge, and therefore they now scorn him as a
Savior: they have lived at such ease of heart, that no legal terror, no
affrightments, or ghastly representations of sin can work upon them: and if the
reading of the law that killing letter, have been sent by God to libertine
souls to the spirit of bondage, and so school them to Christ, they have eyes,
but see not, ears, but hear it not, they are come to this (...), Romans i. 28. a
reprobate sense, or as it may be rendered, an undiscerning mind, not able to
judge of that which is thus read and proposed to it: or again a sense without
sense, not apprehensive of that which no man that has eyes can be ignorant of:
nay in Theod. phrase (...), an heart that will reverberate charm it with
pleasures, or overwhelm it with business, as Gain, when his Conscience was too
rough, and rigid for him, Genesis IV. 16.
Genesis iv. went out from the presence of the Lord, ver. 16. and as it is
observed, built Cities, v 17. got some of his progeny to invent Music, v. 21.
perhaps to still his tumultuous raving Conscience, that the noise of the
hammers and melody of the Instruments might outsound the din within him, as in
the sacrifices of Molock, where their children, which they offered in an hollow
brazen vessel, could not choose but howl hideously, they had 2 Kin. XXIII. 10.
(whereupon Tophet, where these sacrifices were kept, is by Grammarians deduced
from (...), tympanum) to drown the noise of the childrens cry; Seld. de diis
these I say which will not be instructed in their misery, Sir. l. 1. c. 6.
or bettered by the preaching of the law, which labor only to make their
school to the law, he that was never sensible of his own damned estate, he that
never hated himself, (...), will never receive, never accept of Christ.

Secondly, some are come thus far to a sense of their estate, and are twing'd
extremely, and therefore fly presently to the Gospel, hearing of Christ, they
fasten, are not patient of so much deliberation as to observe whether their
hands be empty, they are in distress, and Christ must needs save them suddenly:
they lay Christ indeed, but under a false person: either they take the promises
only, and let Christ alone, or take Christ the Savior, but not Christ the
Lord. Are willing to be saved by him, but never think of serving him: are
praying for ever for Heaven and glory, but never care how little they hear of
grace: the end they fasten on, the Covenant they hug and gripe with estate
before they have married the husband, which they have yet no more right to,
then a mere stranger: for the communicating the riches of a husband being but a
consequence of marriage, is therefore not yet made over till the marriage

In the third place, they which have accepted and received the husband, they do
begin to break Covenant, and either wholly substract, divide their love; they
married him for his wealth, and now they have that, they are soon weary of his
person: they came with the soul of an harlot, looking only what they should get
by him, and now they have many other old acquaintances they must needs keep
league with; their self-denial, their humility, their vows of obedience were
but arts and stratagems that want and necessity put them upon, and now they
have got their ends, all those are soon out-dated; they have faith and so are
justified, there is no condemnation to them, they are in Christ, and all the
sins, nay, all the devils in the world shall never separate them. And this is a
sanctified religious piece of infidelity in men, which think they have made
sure of the main, and so never think of the Consectaries; they have faith, and
so It Is no matter for good works; the lease is sealed, the wedding solemnized,
and then never dream or care for Covenants. And these men's fate is like to be
the same Samson's bodily strength: he vowed the vow of a Nazarite, and as long
as he kept unshaven no opposition could prevail against him; but as soon as he
broke his vow, when he had let his Mistress cut his locks, his strength
departed from him. All the promises and privileges of our being in Christ, are
upon condition of our obedience, and our vow being broken, the Devil and the
Philistines within us will soon deprive us of our eyes and life. Whatsoever
livelihood we presume we have in Christ, dead in trespasses and sins. Thus do
you see the three degrees of infidelity frequent amongst Christians, 1. a not
taking him at all; 2. a mistaking of his person; 3. a breaking off the
Covenants: now that you may abhor and fly from, and get out of each of them by
a lively faith, my next particular shall warn you, the greatness of this sin,
and that first positively in its self, it shall be very tolerable for that City.

Faith may be conceived in a threefold relation, either to men subjects of it,
and those sinners, or 2. to Christ and his suffering the objects of it, with
all the effects, remission of sins, and salvation attending it: or 3. to God
the Father, the Author and Commander of it, as the only condition annexed to all
his promises. And consequently infidelity, (...), shall be aggravated by these
three depths or degrees, each adding to its exceeding sinfulness.

As Faith respects its subject, and that a sinful miserable one, engaged second
Covenant now being sealed, and God for ever having established Heb. XI. 1.
Heb. xi. 1. being rightly weighed, Now faith is the substance of things hoped
for, where the Greek phrase, (...), signifies the ground or foundation of every
of those things which can be the object of a Christians hope. So Devil could
have but stolen this jewel out of the world, he had shut up Heaven gates
eternally, and had left it as empty of Saints, as it is full of glory, not
capable of any flesh but what Christ's hypostatical union brought thither. And
this is no more then I conceive the learned mean by necessitas medii, that
faith is necessary as a means, i. e. there is no means besides of power, either
absolutely or ex hypothesi, of it self, or on promises are sometimes made to
repentance, sometimes to obedience, as whosoever repents shall be saved; and
the like you are to know, that it is on this ground of the necessary union of
these graces, that where one of them is truly and sincerely, there the rest are
always in some degree, there being no example penitence or obedience in any
subject which had not faith also. For he that comes to God must believe that he
is, Heb. XI. 6.
etc. Heb. xi. 6. And he that heartily believes he is, and is a rewarder of
them that seek him, will not fail to search, pursue, and follow after him. So
that though the promises are made promiscuously to any one which has either of
these graces, yet it is upon supposal of the rest; if it be made of faith, it is
in confidence that faith works by love, Gal. V. 6.
Gal. v. 6. and as St. James enforces it, is made perfect by works, James II.
22.
So that in the first place infidelity is sufficiently aggravated in respect of
the subject; it being a Catholic destroyer, an intervenient that despoils him
of all means, all hope, all possibility of salvation: finding him in the state
of damnation, it sets him going, suffers him not to lay hold on any thing that
may stay him in his precipice; and in the midst of his shipwreck, when there be
planks and refuges enough about him, has numm'd his hands, deprived him of any
power of taking hold of them.

second place, in respect of Christ and his sufferings, the objects of our
Faith, so Faith is in a manner the Soul of them, giving them life and efficacy,
making things which are excellent in themselves prove so in effect to others.
Thus the whole splendour and beauty of the world, the most accurate proportions
and images of nature are beholding to the Eye, though not for their absolute
excellency, yet for both the account and use that is made of them; Christ, if
they be not believed in, are but, as Aristotle says of divine knowledge, a
most honorable thing, but of no manner of use, if they be not apprehended,
they are lost. Christ' s blood if not caught up in our hearts by Abel's, Genesis
IV. 10.
Genesis iv. 10. crying for judgment from the ground; that which is spilt is
clamorous, and its voice is toward Heaven for vengeance; only that which is
gathered up, as it falls from his side, by faith, will prove a medicine to heal
the Nations. So that infidelity makes the death of Christ no more then the
death of an ordinary man, in which there is no remedy, Wisd. ii. 1. (...),
there is no cure, no physic in it; or as the same Eccles. xxviii. 3. no
pardon, no remission wrought by it, a bare going down into the grave, that no
man is better for. It does even frustrate the sufferings of Christ, and make
him have paid a ransom to no purpose, and purchased an inheritance at an
infinite rate, and no man the better for it. Again, Christ is not only
contemned, but injured, not only slighted, but robbed, he loses not only his
price and his thanks, but his servant, which he has bought and purchased with
his blood. For redemption is ransomed from the Galleys is not presently a King,
but only recovered to a free and tolerable service: nay generally, if he be
redeemed he is eo nomine, a servant, by right and equity his Creature that
redeemed him, Luke I. 74.
according to the express words, Luke i. 74. That we being delivered might
serve him. Now a servant is a possession, unbeliever is a thief, robs Christ
not only of the honor of saving him, but of one of the Members of his family,
of part of his goods, his servant; nay, it is not a bare theft, but of the
highest size, a sacrilege, stealing an holy instrument, a vessel out of Gods
Temple, which he bought and delivered out of the common calamity to serve him
in holiness, Luke I. 74.
Luke i. 74. to be put to holy, special services.

In the third place, Faith may be considered in reference to God the Father,
and that 1. as the Author or fountain of this Theological grace: 2. as the
commander of this duty of believing; and either of these will aggravate the
unbelievers guilt, and add more articles to his indictment. As God is the
Author of faith, so the Scriptures, all the blessings of a Christian education,
all the benefits of sacred knowledge; in sum, the prayers, the sweat, the
lungs, the bowels of his Ministers, in Christ's stead beseeching you to be
reconciled, 1 Cor. V. 20.
1 Cor. v. 20. spending their dearest spirits, and even praying and preaching
out their souls for you, that you would be friends with God through Christ. All
these, spirit, it it should come in power to convert him, he would hold out and
bid defiance, and repel the omnipotent God with his omnipotent charms of mercy:
he that contemns Gods ordinary means, would be likely to resist his
extraordinary, were there not more force in the means, then forwardness in the
man: and thanks be to that controuling, convincing, constraining spirit, if
Disciple, 'twas not his innocence, but his good fortune, that he did not then
betray him. 'Twas well he was born amongst Christians, or else he might have
been as sour a prosest enemy of Christ as Pilate or Pharisees: an unbelieving
Christian is, for all his livery and profession, but a Jew or Heathen, and the
Lord make him sensible (...) his condition.

Lastly, consider this duty of faith in respect of God the Father commanding
it, and then you shall find it the main precept of the Bible. 'Twere long to
show you the ground of it in the law of (...), the obscure, yet discernable
mention of it in the moral law, (...) transcendently, in the main end of all,
and distinctly, though Pet. Baro. de praest. and dignit. div. legis. 'Twere as
^^^som to muster up all the commands of the Old Testament, which exactly and
determinately drive at belief in Christ, as generally in those places where the
Chaldee Paraphrase reads instead of God, Gods Word, as Fear not Abraham, for I
am thy shield, say they, thy word is thy shield, which speaks a plain command
of faith; for not to fear, is to trust; not to fear on that ground, because
Gods John I. 1.
(...), the Word, Joh. i. 1. i. e. Christ is ones shield, is nothing in the
world but to believe, and rely, and fasten, and depend on Christ. Many the like
commands of Faith in Christ will the Old Testament afford, and the new is
nothing else but a perpetual inculcating of it upon us, a driving and calling,
entreating and enforcing, wooing and hastening us to believe. In which respect
the Schools calls it also necessary necessitate praecepti, a thing natural, a
moral, nay, an Evangelical Commandment. And so much for the danger of
infidelity considered positively in relation to the Subject, whom it deprives
of Heaven, the Object Christ and his offers in the Gospel, which it frustrates,
and lastly the Author and commander of it God the Father, whom it resists,
disobeys, and dangerous condition of it, above all other sins and breaches in
the world, which is my third part, its comparative sinfulness, It shall be more
tolerable, etc.

And this will appear, if we consider it, 1. in it self; 2. in its
consequences. In it self it is fuller of guilt, in its consequences fuller of
danger, then any ordinary breach of the moral Law. In it self, so it is 1. the
greatest aversion from God, (in which aversion formalis ratio, the very essence
of sin) it is the perversest remotion and turning away of the soul from God,
and getting as far as we can out of his sight, or ken, the forbidding of all
manner of commerce or spiritual traffic, or correspondence with God, Heb. X.
38.
as may appear by that admirable place, Heb. X. 38. The just shall live by
faith, but if any man draw back, my soul has no pleasure in him: and verse 39.
We are not of them which draw back unto perdition, but of them that do believe
to the saving of the Where the phrase of drawing back opposed here to faith and
believing, is in the original (...), a cowardly, pusillanimous subducing of
ones self, a getting out of the way, a not daring to meet, or approach, or
accept of Christ when he is offered them; the same with (...) among the
Physicians, a contraction of the soul, a shriveling of it up, a sudden
correption and depression of the mind, such as the sight of some hideous danger
is wont to produce, 2 Mac. VI. 12.
so 2 Mac. vi. 12. (...), etc. to be discouraged, and Peter, Gal. II. 12.
Gal. ii. 12. (...), etc. He withdrew and separated himself, fearing those that
were of the Circumcision. The Infidel, I say, draws back, withdraws and sneaks
out of the way, as if he were afraid of the mercies of his Savior, as if it
were death to him to be so near salvation; as if Christ coming to him with the
mercies of the Gospel, were the mortal'st enemy under Heaven, and there were no
such mischief to be done him as his conversion. This indeed is an aversion in
the highest degree, when we fly and draw back from God when he comes to save
us, when the sight of a Savior makes us take our heels. Adam might well hide
himself when God came to challenge him about his disobedience; the guilty
conscience Cain, Genesis IIII. 16.
Genesis iiii. 16. But to tremble and quake at a proclamation of mercy, Hos. XI. 4.
when God draws with cords of a man, Hos. xi. 4. a powerful phrase expressed in
the next words with the bands of love: when he loves us, and calls his Son out
for us, v. 1. then to be bent to backsliding, in the 7. v. to draw back when he
comes to embrace, this is a stubbornness and contraction of the soul, a
crouching of it in, a (...) or (...), that neither nature nor reason

2. Infidelity, gives God the lie, and denies whatever God proclaims in the
Gospel. The reason or ground of any ones belief, the object am for male quo,
that by assenting to which I come to believe is Gods Veracity, the Confidence
that God speaks true, the relying on his word, is that which brings me to lay
hold on Christ: and God and his Evangelists: and this is an aggravation not to
be mentioned without reverence or horror, the most odious affront in the World:
the

Next, this sin is a sin of the most dangerous consequences of any. 1. It
produces all other sins, and that positively, by doubting of his justice, and
so falling into adulteries, blasphemies, and the like, in security and hope of
impunity, by distrusting of his providence and mercy, and so flying to
Covetousness, murmuring, tempting, subtlety, all arts and stratagems of getting
for our temporal estate, and ordinary despair in our spiritual: then
privatively, depriving faith, so that every thing for want of it is turned into
sin, and thereby depopulating the whole man, making him nothing in the World
but ruins and noysomness, a confluence of all manner of sins, without any
concomitant degree of duty or obedience.

2. It frustrates all good Exhortations, and forbids all manner of
superstructions which the Ministers are wont to labor for in Galba's Wit was a
good one, but 'twas unluckily placed, ill-seated, there was no good to be
wrought by it. The proudest of our works or merits, the perfectest morality
corner stone is Christ Jesus.

3. It leaves no place in the world for remedy: he that is an Idolater, a
Sabbath-breaker, or the like: he that is arraigned at the law, and found guilty
at that Tribunal, has yet an Aavocate in the Gospel, a higher power to whom he
may appeal to mitigate his sentence: but he that has sinned against the
Gospel, has no farther to go, he has sinned against that which should have
remitted all He that believes not is condemned already, Joh. III. 18.
Joh. iii. 18. his damnation is sealed to him; and the entail past cutting off,
it is his purchase, and now wants nothing but livery and seizin; nay it is his
patrimony (...), Eccl. XX. 25.
Ecclus. XX. 28. he is as sure inheritance. And the reason is employed, 1 Cor.
XV. 17. If Christ be not risen you are yet in your sins: there is no way to get
out of our sins but Christ's resurrection, and he that believes not, Christ is
not risen to him: 'twere all one to him if there had never been a Savior; and
therefore he remains in his old thraldom; he was taken captive in Adam, and
has never since had any other means to restore him: the ransom that was
offered all, he would none of, and so he sticks unredeemed, application.

The sin being thus displayed to you with its consequencies, O what a spirit
should it raise in us! O what a resolution and expression of us this evil heart
of unbelief! Heb. iii. 12. Heb. III. 12.
what an hatred should it work in our bowels, what a reluctance, what an
indignation, what a revenge against the fruit of our bosom, which has so long
grown and thrived within us, only to our destruction! which is provided as it
were to eat our souls, as an harbinger to prepare a place within us for the
worm in Hell, where it may lie and bite and gnaw at ease eternally! It Is an
Examination that will deserve the Heb. IV. 13.
Heb. iv. 13. naked and discernible as the entrals of a Creature cut down the
back, where the very method of nature in its secrecies is betrayed to the eye.
I say, to cut our selves up, and to search into every crany of our souls, every
winding of either our understanding or affections; and observe whether any
infidel thought, any infidel lust, be lodged there: and when we have found this
execrable thing which has brought City for its sake: and with more Ceremony
then ever the heathen used, even with a superstition of daily, hourly prayers,
and sacrificing our selves to God, strive and struggle, and offer violence to
remove this unclean thing out of our Coasts; use these unbelieving hearts of
ours, as Josiah did the Altars of Ahaz, 2 King. XXIII. 12.
2 King. xxiii. 12. break them down, beat them to powder, and cast the dust of
them into the brook Kidron; that Cedron which Christ passed Joh. XVIII. 1.
Joh. xviii. 1. even that brook which Christ drank of by the way, Psalm. CX. 7.
Psalm. cx. 7. And there indeed is there a remedy for infidelity, if the Infidel
will throw it in. If he will put it off, be it never so dyed in the contempt of
Christ's blood, that very blood shall cleanse it: and therefore

In the next place let us labor for Faith; let not his hands be stretched out
any longer upon the cross to a faithless and stubborn generation. 'Twere a
piece of ignorance that a Scholar would abhor Pilate in either of three
languages, Jesus of Nazareth King, Joh. xix. 19. Joh. XIX. 19.
Nay for all the Gospels and Comments written on it, both by his Disciples and
his works, still to be non-proficients, this would prove an accusation written
in Marble, nay an Exprobration above a (...). In a word, Christ is still
offered, and the proclamation not yet outdated, his sufferings in the Scripture
proposed to every one of you to lay hold on, and his Ministers sent Ambassadors
beseeching you to be reconciled, 2 Cor. V. 20.
2 Cor. v. 20. and more then that in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, his body
and blood set before our eyes to be felt and gazed on, and then even a Didymus
would believe, nay to be divided amongst us, and put in our mouths, and then
who would be so sluggish as to refuse to feed on him in his heart?

For your Election from the beginning to this gift of Faith, let that never
raise any doubt or scruple in you, and forslow that Christ that bids thee
repent, believe, and come unto him, is not so frivolous to command
impossibilities, nor so cruel to mock our impotence. Thou may believe,
because he bids: Believe, and then thou may be sure thou were predestined
to believe; and then all the decrees in the World cannot deny thee Gods
Councels, and never thinks fit to go about any Evangelical duty, till he can
see his name writ in the book of life, must not begin to believe, till he be in
Heaven; for there only is that to be read radio recto. The surer course is to
follow the Scripture; to hope comfortably every one radio reflexo, by knowing
that we believe to resolve that we are elected; thereby we know that we are
past from death to life, if we love the brethren, 1 John III. 14.
1 John iii. 14. And so is it also of faith, for these are inseparable graces.
So Psalm xxv. 14. Prove. iii. 32. Gods secret and his Covenant being taken for
his decree is said to be with them that and to be showed to them, i. e. their
very fearing of God is an evidence to them that they are his elect, with whom
he has entered Covenant. Our faith is the best argument, or (...), by which to
make a judgment of Gods decree concerning us. I say, if we will believe, God
has elected us; it is impossible any true faith should be refused upon pretense
the person was predestined to destruction; and if it were possible, yet would I
hope that Gods decrees (were they as absolute as some would Persian laws are
nothing to it, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
everlasting life, Joh. III. 15.
Joh. iii. 15. Wherefore in brief, let us attend the means, and let what will
or can come of the End; Christ is offered to every soul here present to be a
Jesus, only do thou accept of him, and thou art past from death to life; there
Person; thou must receive him, as well as his promises; thou must take him as a
Lord and King, as well as a Savior, and be content to be a subject, as well as
a Saint. He is now proclaimed in your ears, and you must not foreslow the
audience To day if you will hear his Voice harden not your hearts. He holds
himself out on purpose to you, and by the Minister wooes you to embrace him:
and then it nearly concerns you not to provoke so true, so hearty, nay even so
passionate a friend: Psalm. II. 12.
if he be not kissed he will be very angry. Lastly, if in spirit of power, to
subdue, and

Now to him which has elected us, etc.

The XII. Sermon.
Acts XVII. 30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to repent.
THE words in our English Translation carry somewhat in the sound, which does
not fully reach the importance of the Original, and therefore it must be the
task of our Preface not to connect the Text, but clear it; not to show its
dependence on the precedent words, but to restore it to the integrity of it
self, that so we Aristotle phrases it, Eth. 1. 7.
first represent them to you in the bulk, then describe them particularly in
their several lineaments. Our English setting of the words, seems to make two
Propositions, and in them a direct opposition betwixt the condition of the
ancient and present Gentiles that God had winked at, i.e. either approved, or
pitied, or pardoned the ignorance of the former Heathens, but now was resolved
on every one every where that did not repent. Now the Original runs thus,
(...), etc. that is, in a literal construction, God therefore passing over the
times of ignorance, as if he Which you may conceive thus, by this kind of
vulgar (...), or sensible proceeding in God. God always is essentially and
perfectly every one of his Attributes, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, etc. but yet is
said at one time to be peculiarly one Attribute, at another time another, i. e.
to be at one time actually just, at another time actually merciful, according
to his determination to the object. As when God fixes his eyes upon a
rebellious people, whose sins are Sodom: when he fixes his eyes upon a penitent
believing people, he then does exercise his mercy, as on Nineveh. Now when God
looks upon any part of the lapsed world on which he intends to have mercy, he
suffers not his eye to be fixed or terminated on the medium betwixt his eye and
them, on the sins of all their ancestors from the beginning of the world till
that day; but having another account to call them to, does for the present
(...), look over all them, as if they were not in his way, and imputing not the
sins of the fathers to the children, fixes on the children, makes his covenant
of mercy with them, and commands them the condition of this covenant, whereby
they shall obtain mercy, that is, every one every where to repent. So that in
the first place, (...), must not be rendered by way of opposition, he winked
then, but now commands, as if their former ignorance were justifiable, and an
account of knowledge should only second place, (...), a word read but this once
in all the New Testament, must be rendered, not winking at, but looking over, or
not insisting upon; as when we fix our eyes upon a hill we suffer them not to
dwell on the valley, on this side of it, because we look earnestly on the hill.
Now if this be not the common Attical acception of it, yet it will seem
agreeable to the penning of the New Testament, in which whosoever will observe
may find words and phrases which perhaps the Stephanus, Ad ulteriora oculos
convertere, and then the phrase shall be as proper as the sense, the Greek as
authentical as the doctrine, that God looking over and not insisting upon the
ignorance of the former Heathen, at Christ's coming entered a covenant that every
man every where should repent.

And this is made good by the Gr. Schol. Oecumen, Arc^as.
of the N. T. (...), etc. that is spoken, not that the former heathen should be
unpunished, but that their successors to whom St. Paul preached, if they would
repent should not be called to an account of their ignorance, should not fare
the worse for the ignorance of their fathers; and at this drives also
Chrysostom, Tom. 4.
out of whom the Scholiasts may seem to have borrowed it, their whole (...),
being but (...), gleanings out of the Fathers before them. I might farther
prove the necessity of this interpretation if it were required of me: and thus
far I have stayed you to prove it, because our English is somewhat imperfect in
the expression of it. (...), says Aristotle, Two cubes are not a cube, but
another figure very different from it: and indeed our English Translations by
making two Proposition God therefore not insisting on, but looking over those
times of ignorance, P. 47.
does now command all men every where to repent; of which those three lines in
Leo his fourth Sermon de Passione Domini are a just Paraphrase, Nos sub veteris
ignorantiae profunda nocte pereuntes, in Patriarcharum societatem, and sortem
electi gregis adoptavit. So then Heathens upon condition of repentance, in
which you may observe two grand parallel lines, 1. the ignorance of the
Heathen, such as in the justice of God might have provoked him to have
pretermitted the whole world of succeeding Gentiles: 2. the mercy of God, not
imputing their ignorance to our charge, whosoever every where to the end of the
world shall repent. And first of the the times, etc.

If for the clearing of this bill we should begin our inquest at Japhet the
father of the Gentiles, examine them all by their gradations, we should in the
general find the evidence to run thus; 1. that they were absolutely ignorant,
as ignorance is opposed to learning: 2. ignorant in the affairs of God, as
ignorance is opposed piety or spiritual wisdom: 3. Ignorant supinely,
perversely, and maliciously, as it is opposed to a simple or more excusable
ignorance.

Their absolute ignorance or (...), their want of learning is at large proved
by St. Austin 18. de Civ. Dei, Eusebius Prepar. 10. Clemens in his Protrep. and
others, some of whose writings to this purpose (because it is easier for my
Auditors to believe me in gross, then to be troubled with the retail) is this,
that the beginnings of learning in all kinds was among the Jews, whilst the
Moses appointed Masters among the tribes, (...), which initiated the youth of
Israel in all kind of secular learning, or if you will believe Patricius and
his proofs, In Zoroastr: P. 4.
that Sem erected, and afterward Heber enlarged Scholas Doctrinarum, Schools
l. 9. p. 244.
that Abraham, as Eusebius cites Nic. Damascenus for it, was excellent in the
Mathematics, and dispersed and communicated his knowledge in Chaldea, from
whence the Egyptians, and from them the Grecians came to them; Ib. p. 245.
that Enoch was probably judged by Polyhistor to be that Atlas to whom the
Heathen imputed the beginning of Astronomy; that in the sum, all learning was
primitive among the Hebrews, and from them by stealth and filching Phaenicia,
Egypt, and at last in Greece. For they make it plain by computation, that
Moses (who yet was long after Enoch, and Sem, and Heber, and Abraham, all in
confesso great Scholars) that Moses, I say, was 1500 years ancienter then the
Greek Philosophers, that all the learning that is found or bragged of amongst
the Grecians (whose ignorance my Text chiefly deals with, St. Paul's discourse
here being addressed to the Athenians) was but a babe of a day old in respect of
the true antiquity of learning: but scraps, (...), which fell from the Jews
tables; that in their stealth they were very imprudent, gleaned only that which
was not worth carrying away, (...), etc. stuffed their sacks, which they carried
into Egypt to buy food, only with some unprofitable chaff, with empty
speculations that would puff up, not fill or nourish the soul, but brought no
valuable real commodity away with them, whereby they might improve their
knowledge, or reform vanity and unprofitableness of their learning; 2. the
novelty of it in respect of the Hebrews from whom they stole it afar off; they
are not thought worthy of the title of Scholars; and for all the noise of their
Philosophy, are yet judged absolutely ignorant, as ignorance is opposed to
learning.

In the second place, for their ignorance in the affairs of God, their own
Authors examination will bring in a sufficient evidence. Deipnosophists, the
only wits of the time, are yet described by Athenaeus to employ their study
only how to get good cheer a free-cost, (...), they fed deliciously, and yet
were at no charge for the provision, and amongst them you shall scarcely find
any knowledge or worship of even their Heathen Gods, but only in drinking, where
their luxury had this excuse or pretense of religion, an experiment of the
power of that good God which had provided such a creature as Wine for them to
abuse; which perhaps a drunken Romish Casuist stole from them, where he allows
of drinking supra modum, ad glorificandum Deum, etc. to the glorifying of God
Creator of so excellent a creature, which has the effect in it of turning men
into beasts. So that it seems by the story of them in brief, that the
Deipnosophists, Ulpianus Tyrius, Calliphanes, and the like in Athenaeus, in the
multitude of the Grecian Gods had but one Deity, and that was their belly,
which they worshipped religioso luxu, not singing, but eating and drinking
praises to his name; to this add the Sophistae, Protagoras, Hippias, and the
like great boasters of learning in Socrates his time, and much followed by the
youth, till he persuaded them from admiring such unprofitable professors, and
these are observed by Plutarch, silver and popularity, but had no manner of
profitable learning to bestow upon them, as Plutarch dooms them in his
Platonic questions, and Socrates in his Dialogues in confutation of them; and
certainly by their very profession it is plain that these men had no God to know
or worship, except their gain. But not to insist on these or other their
Professors of more curious, trim, polite learning, as their Paul's auditors
here, the great speculators among them: (1.) the deepest Philosophers, and
there where you expect the greatest knowledge you shall find the most barbarous
ignorance; in the midst of the (...), of the Grecians, the Philosophers (says
Clem. and it is plain by their writings) finding out and acknowledging in
private this multitude of Gods to be a prodigious vanity, and infinitely below
the gravity Thales would not acknowledge Neptune, as the Poets and people did,
In (...). vid. chapter 15.
but yet he deifies the water, as Clem. observes: another scorned wood or
stone, and yet he deifies the earth, the parent of them both, and as senseless
as them both; and does at once calcare terram, and colere, tread on the earth
with his feet, and adore it with his heart. So Socrates (who by bringing in
morality was a great refiner and pruner of barren Philosophy) absolutely
denying the Grecian Gods, and thence called (...), In (...).
is yet brought in by Aristophanes, worshipping the clouds, (...), etc. and by
a more friendly Historian described addressing Aesculapius, Plato.
being at the point of death. So that in brief, the Philosophers disliking the
vulgar superstition went to School, faith Clem. to the Persian Magi, and of
them learnt a more Scholastic Atheism. The worship of those venerable
Elements, which because they were the beginnings, out of which supremum
cognitum the knowledge and worship of God; but there were many hindrances which
kept them grovelling on the earth, not able to ascend this ladder. 1. They
wanted that (...), which Aphrod. on the Topics speaks of, that kindly, P. 11,
familiar good temper, of the soul (...), by which the mind is able to find out
and judge of truth; they wanted that either natural harmony, or spiritual
concord of the powers of the soul, by which it is able to reach those things
which now in corrupt nature, In (...). A. 16.
are only spiritually discerned. For it is Clem. his Christian judgment of
them, that the Gentiles being but bastards, not true born sons of God, but
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, were therefore not able to look up
toward the Light, Eagles) or consequently to discern that inaccessible light,
till they were received into the Covenant, and made (...), true proper Children
of light. A 2d. hindrance was the grossness and earthyness of their fancy,
which was not able to conceive God to be any thing but a corporeous substance,
as Philoponus observes in Schol. on the books de anima, (...), etc. When we
have a mind to betake our selves to divine speculation, our fancy comes in,
(...), raises such a tempest in us, so many earthly meteors to clog, and
over-cloud the soul, that it cannot but conceive the Deity under some bodily
shape, and this disorder of the fancy does perpetually attend the soul, even in
the fairest weather, in its greatest calm and serenity of affections, (...),
etc. says Plato, even when the soul is free from its ordinary distractions,
and has provided it self most accurately for contemplation. Philoponus in this
place finding this inconvenience, fetches a remedy out of Plotinus for this
rarifying and purifying of the fancy, and it is the study of the Mathematics,
(...)etc. Let young men be brought up in the study of the Mathematics, to some
acquaintance with an incorporeous nature: but how unprofitable a remedy this
study of the Mathematics was, to the purpose of preparing the soul to a right
conceit of God, I doubt not but he himself afterward found, when he turned
Christian, and saw how far (...), P. 52.
and as Clem* says of them, were like birds crammed in a Coop; fed in darkness
and nourished for death: their gross conceits groping on in obscurity, and
furnishing them Aristotle one of the latest of the ancient Philosophers, not
above 340 years before Christ, who therefore seeing the vanities, and making
use of the helps of all the Grecian learning, may probably be judged to have as
much knowledge of God as any Heathen, and indeed the Colen Divines had such an
opinion of his skill and expressions that way, that in their Aristotle's
Salvation, they define him to be Christ's Praecursor in Naturalibus, as John
Baptist was in gratuitis. But in brief, if we examine him, we shall find him
much otherwise, as stupid in the affairs of 1. God, 2. The soul, 3. Happiness,
as any of his fellow Gentiles* If the book (...), were his own legitimate work,
a man might guess that he saw something, though he denied the particular
providence of the Deity, and that he acknowledged his omnipotence, though he
would not be so bold with Aristot. (...). cap. 9.
as judging it (...), etc. neither comely nor befitting the Majesty of a God,
to interest himself in every action upon earth. It might seem a reverence and
awe which made him provide the same course for God, which he saw used in the
Courts of Susa and Ecbatana, where the King (says he) lived invisible
Aristotle and translated by Apuleius, but not owned by its brethren, the rest
of his books of Philosophy; for even in the Metaphysics (where he is at his
wisest) he censures Zenophanes for a Clown for looking up to Heaven, Parmenides
for a subtle fellow, who said nothing at all, or I am sure to no purpose.

Concerning his knowledge of the soul, Schol. in lib. de anima.
it is Philoponus his observation But dehorts men of meaner vulgar parts, less
intent to their study, from meddling at all with this science about the soul, c.
2.
for he plainly tells them in his first de anima, it is too hard for any
ordinary capacity, and yet in the first of the Metaph. he defines the wise man
to be one who besides his own accurate knowledge of hard things, as the Causes
of the soul, etc. is also able to teach any body So then out of his own words
he is convinced to have had no skill, no wisdom in the business of the soul,
because he could not explain nor communicate this knowledge to any but choice
Auditors. The truth is, these were but shifts of pride, and ambitious pretenses
to cloak a palpable ignorance, under the habit of mysterious, deep speculation:
when alas poor man! all that which he

In the third place, concerning happiness, he plainly bewrays himself to be a
coward not daring to meddle with Divinity. For 1 Eth. c. 9. being probably
given to understand, 1 Eth. 9.
or rather indeed plainly convinced, that if any thing in the world were, then
happiness the gift of God bestowed on men, yet he there staggers at it, speaks
sceptically, and not so magisterially as he is wont, dares not be so bold as to
define it: and at last does not profess his ignorance, but takes a more
honorable course, and puts it off to some other place to be discust. Where
Andronicus Rhodius his Greek Paraphrase tells us he meant his Tract (...),
about Providence: but in all Laertius his Catalogue of the multitude of his
writings we find no such title, Ethics, but in the 10. c. it appears that it
was no pretermission, Eth. 1. 10.
but ignorance; not a care of deferring it to a fitter place, but a necessary
silence, where he was not able to speak. For there mentioning to be the good or
ill proof of their friends and children left behind them, which are to them
being dead, happiness or miseries, (...), of which they are not any way
sensible. But of what has been spoken it is plain that the heathen never
looked after God of their Aristotle says the Geometer does, Eth. l. 1. c. 7.
after a right line only, (...), as a contemplator of truth, but not as the
knowledge of it is any way useful or actions to his glory. For generally
whenever any action drove them on any subject which entrenched on Divinity,
you shall find them more flat then ordinary, not handling it according to any
manner of accuracy or sharpness, but only (...), only as much use or as little
as their study in the search of things constrained them to, and then for
Aristotle observes, that the whole Tract de causis was obscurely and
inartificially handled by the ancients, 1 M^t. 4.
and if sometimes they spoke to the purpose, 'twas as unskilful, unexercised
fencers (...), they lay on, and sometimes strike a lucky blow or two, but more
by chance then skill, sometimes letting fall from their pens those truths which
never entered their understandings, l. 2. p. 17.
as Theophilus ad Aulo. observes of Homer and Hesiod, that being inspired by
their Muses, i. e. the devil, spoke according to that spirit, lies and fables,
and exact Atheism, and yet sometimes would stumble upon a truth of Divinity, as
men possessed with Devils, did sometimes confess Christ, and the evil spirits
being adjured by his name, came out and confessed themselves to be devils. Thus
it is plain out of the Philosophers and Heathen discourses, 1. Of God, 2. The
soul, 3. Happiness, that they were also ignorant, as ignorance is opposed to
piety

Now in the third place, for the guilt of their ignorance, that it was a
perverse, gross, malicious and unexcusable ignorance, you shall briefly judge.
l Met. 2;
Aristotle 1 Met. 2. being elevated above ordinary in his discourse about
wisdom, confesses the Knowledge of God to be the best Knowledge and most
honorable of all, but of no manner of use or necessity; (...), etc. No
knowledge is Aristotle above others, and take as much pains to damn him as Colen
Divines did to save him, we will deal more at large, as Aristotle prescribes
his wise men, c. 2.
1 Met. and rip up to you the unexcusableness of the heathen ignorance in
general: 1. by the authority of Clemens, who is guest to be one of their
kindest patrons in his (...). where having cited many testimonies out of them,
(...), p. 36.
concerning the unity, he concludes thus, (...), etc. Seeing that the Heathen
had some sparks of the divine truth, some gleanings out of the written word,
and yet make so little use of it as they do, they do, show the power of Gods
word to have been revealed to them, and accuse their own weakness, that they
did not improve it to the end for which it was sent: that they increased it not
into a saving knowledge, where (by the way) the word weakness is used by Clement
by way of softning, or mercy, as here the Apostle uses ignorance, when he
might have said impiety. For sure if the accusation run thus, that the word of
God was revealed to them, and yet they made no use of it, as it does here in
Clem. the sentence then upon this V. Clem. (...). p. 56.
etc. whatsoever an ignorant man or fool does, is unholy and wicked
necessarily; ignorance being (...), a species of madness, and no madman being
capable of any sober action; so that if their ignorance were in the midst of
means of knowledge, then must it be perverse; if it had Clem. (...). p. 42.
to be a resolution not to change the religion of their fathers. It Is an
unreasonable thing, (...)
say the Heathens, which they will never be brought to, to change the customs
bequeathed to them by their ancestors. From whence the Father solidly
concludes, Wisd. XIV. 16
that there Tert. Apol.
which could make the Christian Religion contemned and hated, but only this
pestilent custom, of never altering any customs or laws, though never so
unreasonable: (...), etc. it is not possible that ever any nation should hate
and fly from this greatest blessing that ever was bestowed upon mankind, to
wit, the knowledge and worship of God, unless being carried on by custom they
resolved to go the old way to Hell, rather then to venture on a new path to
Heaven. (...). p. 1. B.
Hence it is that Athenagor as in Commodus for the Christians, ^o^ders much
that among so many Laws made yearly in Rome, there was not one enacted (...),
that men should forsake the customs of their fathers, which were any way
absurd. P. 2. A.
From whence he falls straight to their absurd Deities, as if it being made
lawful to relinquish ridiculous customs there would be no plea left for their
ridiculous gods. P. 47.
So Eusebius Praep. l. 2. makes the cause of P. 78.
where to bring in Christianity was accounted (...), to change things that were
fixed, (...), etc. and to be pragmatical, friends of innovation; and so it is
plain they esteemed St. Paul, and hated him in that name, as an Innovator,
because he preached unto them Jesus and the resurrection, Acts 17. 18. Acts
XVII. 18.
So Acts the 16. 21. St. Paul is said to teach customs which were not lawful
for them to receive nor observe, being Romans, because, (...)
says Casaubon out of Dio, 'twas not lawful for the Romans to innovate any
thing in religion, for says Dio, this bringing in of new Gods will bring in
new Laws with it. So that if (as has been proved) their not acknowledging of
the true God was grounded upon a perverse resolution, not to change any custom
of their fathers, either in opinion or practice, though never so absurd, then
was the ignorance (or as St. Paul might have called it, the idolatry) learning
or (...), which might be proved an excellent preparative to religion, their
Philosophy, which was to them as the Law to the Jews, by their using of it to a
perverse end grew ordinarily very pernicious to them. 4. How that those which
knew most, and were Atheism; as Hippocrates observes, Aph. 3.
that (...), and St. Basil, P. 230.
that (...), the most perfect constitution of body, so of the soul, is most
dangerous if not sustained with good care and wisdom. 5. How they always forged
lies to scandal the people of God, as Manetho the famous Egyptian Historian
says, that Moses and the Jews were banished out of Egypt, (...), because of
an infectious leprosy that overspread the Jews, Theophilus cites it, Ad Autol.
l. 3.
and Justine out of Trogus, P. 130.
and also Tacitus; and the Primitive Christians were branded and abomined by
them for three special faults, L. 36.
which they were little likely to be guilty of: 1. Atheism, 2. Eating their
Children, 3. Incestuous, common using of women, P. 4.
as we find them set down and confuted by Athen. in his Treaty or Apology, L.
3. p. 119.
and Theophilus ad Autol, etc. 6. By their own confession, as of Plato to his
friend, when he wrote in earnest, and secretly acknowledging the unity which he
openly denied against Orpheus the inventer of the (...), professing and
worshipping 365 Gods all his life time, at his death left in his will (...),
that, however he had persuaded them all the while, there was indeed but one
God. And lastly, Theop. ad Autol. l. 3. p. 117.
how these two affections in them, admiration and gratitude; admiration 2
Chrysostom. Hom. 1. p. 15.
it would be most evident, what I hope now at last is proved enough, that the
ignorance of those times was not simple, blind ignorance, but malign, perverse,
that ignorance in these Heathen, in Gods justice, might have provoked him to
have pretermitted the whole world of succeeding Gentiles, which I must dispatch
only in a word, because I would fain descend to Application, which I intended
to be the main, but the improvident expense of my time has now lest only to be
the close ignorance of those times being of this composition, both in respect
of the superstition of their worship, which was perverse, as has been proved,
and the profaneness of their lives, being abominable even to nature (as might
farther be showed) is now no longer to be called ignorance, but profaneness,
and a profaneness so Epidemical over all the Gentiles, so inbred and
naturalized among them, that it was even become their property, radicated in
their mythical times, and by continual succession derived damnable
superstitious, or rather idolatrous in their worship: all of them damnable
profane in their lives, and which was worse, all of them peremptorily
resolved, and by a law of homage to the customs of their fathers necessarily
engaged to continue in the road of damnation, desperate people, infinitely
beyond hopes or probability of salvation. And this may appear by St. Peter in
the 10. Acts X.
of the Acts, where this very thing, that the Gentiles should be called, was so
incredible a mystery, that he was fain to be cast into a trance, and to receive
a vision to interpret it to his belief: and a first or a second command could
not persuade him to arise, Verse 16.
kill, and eat, verse 16. that is, to preach to Gentiles; he was still
objecting the (...), the profaneness and uncleanness of them. And at last,
when by the assurance of the spirit, Verse 15.
verse 15. and the Heathen Cornelius his discourse with him, he was plainly
convinced what otherwise he never dreamt possible, that God had a design of
mercy on the Gentiles, he breaks out into a phrase both of acknowledgment and
admiration, Verse 34.
Of a truth I perceive, etc, verse 34. and that you may not judge it was one
single Doctors opinion, it is Verse 45.
verse 45. And they of the Circumcision which believed were astonished, because
that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. Nay, in
the 3. to the Ephesians verse 10. it is plain, that the calling of the Gentiles
was so strange a thing, that the Angels themselves knew not of it till it was
effected. For this was the mystery which from the beginning of the world had
been hid in God, verse 9. which was now made known by the Church to
principalities and powers, v. 10. The brief plain meaning of which hard place
is, that by S. Paul's it the manifold wisdom of God. And this Proposition I
might prove to you by many Topics: 1. by symtoms, that their estate was
desperate, and their disease (...), very, very mortal; as that God when he
would mend a people he punishes them with afflictions, when he intends to stop
a current of impetuous sinners, he lays the ax to the root, in a (...) or total
subversion of them: but when his punishments are spiritual, as they were here,
when he strikes neither with the rod nor with the sword, but makes one sin the
punishment of another, as unnatural lust of idolatry, and the like; when he
leaves a nation to it self, and the very judgment laid upon them makes them
only less capable of mercy; then is it much to be feared that God has little
mercy intended for that people, their desertion ab exemplo, and that exactly
with a nec datur dissimile in Scripture, that the nine Monarchies which the
learned observe in Scripture, were each of them destroyed for idolatry, in
which sin the Heathen now received to mercy, surpass all the precedent world,
and for all their many destructions, still uniformly continued in their
provocation. These and the like arguments I purposely omit, as concerning St.
Peter's vision mentioned before out of the Acts sufficiently to clear the
point, and therefore judging any farther enlargment of proofs superfluous, I
hasten with full speed to Application.

And first from the consideration of our estate, who being the offspring of
those Gentiles, might in the justice of God have been left to Heathenism, and
in all probability till St. Peter's vision discovered the contrary, were likely
to have been pretermitted eternally; to make this both the motive and business
of our humiliation: for general guilts, for all those more Catholic
engagements that either our stock, our nation, the sins of our progenitors back
to the beginning of the world, nay, the nature has plunged us in. To pass by
that ranker guilt of actual sins (for which I trust every man here has daily
some solemn Assizes to arraign himself) my Text will afford us yet some farther
indictments; if 1700 years ago our father were then an Amorite, and mother an
Hittite, if we being then in their loins, were enclosed in the compass of their
Idolatry; and as all in Adam, so besides that we again in the Gentilism of our
Fathers were all deeply plunged in a double common damnation; humble our selves
infinitely above measure; to stretch, and wrack, and torture every power of our
souls to its extent, thereby to enlarge and aggravate the measure of this guilt
against our selves, which hitherto perhaps we have not taken notice of? There
is not a better (...) in the world, no more powerful medicine for the softning
of the soul, and keeping it in a Christian tenderness, then this lading it with
all the burdens that its common or private condition can make it capable of;
this tiring dust in the sense of its spiritual engagements. For it is impossible
for him, who has fully valued the weight of his general guilts, each of which
has lead enough to sink the most corky, vain, fluctuating, proud, stubborn
heart in the world; It Is impossible, I say, for him either wilfully to run into
any actual sins, or insolently to hold up his head in the pride of his
integrity. This very one meditation that we all here might justly have been
left in Heathenism, and that the sins of the repent is enough to loosen the
toughest, strongest spirit, to melt the flintiest heart, to humble the most
elevated soul, to habituate it with such a sense of its common miseries, that
it shall never have courage or confidence to venture on the danger of particular
Rebellions.

2. From the view of their ignorance or impiety, which was of so heinous
importance, to examine our selves by their indictment, learning; 2. for our
lives; 3. for the life of grace in us. 1. For our learning, Whether that be not
mixed with a great deal of Atheistical ignorance, with a delight, and
acquiescence, and contentation in those lower Elements, which have nothing of
God in them; whether we have not sacrificed the liveliest and spritefullest
part of our age, and souls in these Philological and Physical disquisitions,
Storm. 1, vid. A. 17.
which if they have not a perpetual aspect and aim at Divinity, if they be not
set upon in that respect, and made use Clement, their best friend, they are
very hurtful, and of dangerous issue; Whether out of our circle of humane
heathen learning, whence the Fathers produced precious antidotes, we have not
sucked the poison of unhallowed vanity, and been fed either to a pride and
ostentation of our secular, or a satiety or loathing of our Theological
learning, as being too course and homely for our quainter palates; Whether our
studies Athenagoras, Apol. pro Christian. p. 8. A.
(...), etc. not vouchsafing to be taught by God even in matters of religion,
but every man consulting, and believing, and relying on his own reason; Again,
in making our study an instrument only to satisfy our curiosity, (...), only
as speculators of some unknown truths, not intending or desiring thereby either
to promote virtue, good works, Kingdom of God in our selves, or which is the
ultimate end (which only commends and blesses our study or knowledge) the glory
of God in others.

2. In our lives, to examine whether there are not also many relics of
heathenism, altars erected to Baalim, to Ceres, to Venus, and the like; Whether
there be not many amongst us whose God is their belly, their back, their lust,
their treasure, or that (...), that earthly unknown God (whom we have no one
God of the world; Whether we do not with as much zeal, and earnestness, and
cost, serve and worship many earthy vanities which our own phansies deisie for
us, as ever the Heathen did their multitude and shole of gods; And in brief,
whether we have not found in our selves the sins, as well as the blood of the
Gentiles, and acted over some or all the abominations, set down to judge our
selves by, Romans i. from the 21. verse to the end?

Lastly, for the life of grace in us, Whether many of us are not as arrant
heathens, as mere strangers from spiritual illumination, and so from the
mystical Commonwealth of Israel as any of them; Clem. Strom. 2. p. 281.
calls the life of your unregenerate man a Heathen life, and the first life we
have by which we live, and move, and grow, and see, but understand nothing; and
it is our regeneration by which we raise our selves (...), from being still mere
Gentiles: and Tatianus farther; (...)(...).
that without the spirit we differ from beasts, by the articulation of our
voice. So that in fine, neither cur reason, nor Christian profession,
distinguishes us either from beast or Gentiles, only the spirit is the
formalis ratio by which we excel and differ from the Heathen sons of darkness.
Wherefore, I say, to conclude, we must in the clearest calm and serenity of our
souls make a most earnest search and inquest on our selves, whether we are yet
raised out of this heathenism, this ignorance, this unregeneracy of nature, and
elevated any degree in Gentiles, and (which is worse then that) still senseless
of that our condition, we must strive, and work, and pray our selves our of it,
and not suffer the temptations of the flesh, the temptations of our nature, the
temptations of the world, nay, the temptations of our secular, learning lull us
one minute longer in that carnal security, lest after a careless unregenerate
natural life, we die the death of those bold, not vigilant, but stupid
Philosophers. And for those of us who are yet any way Heathenish, either in our
learning or lives; which have nothing but the name of Christians to exempt us
from the judgment of their ignorance; O Lord, make us in time sensible of this
our condition, and whenever we shall humble our selves before thee, and
confess unto thee the sinfulness of their rebellions.

Now to God, who has elected us, has, etc.

The XIII Sermon.
Acts XVII. 30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to
THEY which come from either mean or dishonored Progenitors, will desire to
make up their fathers defect by their own industry, (...), says Leo in his
Tacticks, Will be more forward to undertake any valiant bankrupt, to set upon
all the courses of Thrift, and stratagems of fiugality, to get out of that
hereditary poverty in which his fathers improvidence had engaged him. Thus is
it also in the poverty and bankrupt estate of the Soul: they who come from
prodigal Ancestors, which have embezled all the riches of Gods mercy, spent
profusely Gentiles were perversely blind, and resolutely, peremptorily ignorant,
then must their Progeny strive to wipe off the guilt and avoid the punishment
of their ignorance. Now this ignorance of theirs being not only by Clemens and
the fathers, but by Trismegistus in his Paemander defined to be (...), a
profaneness, Lib. 2. p. 7. 1.
an irrational sleep, and drunkenness of the soul; in sum an ignorance of
themselves, and of God, and a stupid neglect of any duty belonging to either;
this ignorance being either in its self or in its fruits (...), the wickedness
of the soul, and all manner of transgression: The only way for us, the
successors of these ignorant Gentiles to repair those ruins, p. 10. m.
to renew the Image of God in our selves, which their Idolatrous i. e.) in
respect of their simple ignorance, to labor for knowledge, in respect of the
effects of their ignorance, idolatry, profaneness, and all manner of
wickedness, to labor for Piety and Repentance. Briefly, if their ignorance of
God was an heirous sin, and vertually all kind of sin, then to esteem
repentance the greatest knowledge, to approve and second the force and method
of St. Paul's Item from God, Who now commands every man every where to repent.

We have heretofore divided these words, and in them handled already the
ignorance of the ancient Heathen, which in the justice of God might have
provoked him to have pretermitted the the mercy of God, not imputing their
ignorance to our charge, whosoever every where to the end of the world shall
repent. And in this you must consider, first Gods Covenant made with the
Gentiles, or the receiving them into the Church, deduced out of these words,
But now commands, for all to whom God makes known his commands, are by that
very cognizance known to be parts of his Church; and with all these he enters
covenant, he promises salvation condition it self, in the last words, to
repent. And then lastly the extent of both; the latitude of the persons with
whom this covenant is made, and from whom this condition is exacted, all men
everywhere. And first of the first, the covenant made with the Gentiles, or the
receiving them into the Church, noted in these words, But now commands,

It Is observable in our common affairs, that we do not use to lay our commands
on any, but those who have some relation to us: a King will not vouchsafe to
employ any in any peculiar service, but those whom he has entertained, and by
oath admitted into his Court. And it is the livery by which one is known to
belong to such a family, if he be employed in either common or special service
by the master of it. To express it more generally, they are laws or customs
national, who are engaged in the common burdens, as well as privileges, the
services, as well as benefits of a subject. The Ecclesiastical Canons are meant
and exhibited only to those, who are either in truth, or profession parts of
the Church: the Turk or Infidel professed is not honored so much as to be
bound to them. The orders and peculiar laws of a City or Country are directed
to those who are either cives, or civitate and our oaths and obligations to
these, or these local Collegiate statutes, argue us (...), to be members of
this or that foundation. Now to whomsoever these Laws and commands do belong,
whosoever is thus entertained, and admitted into services, is partaker also of
all advantages which belong to a member of a family; and is by covenant to
receive all emoluments in as ample a manner as any other of his quality. And
this briefly is the state of the Gentiles here in the Text, who, in that Jury
was Gods people, because they only received his Commands, and the Heathen had
not knowledge of his Laws; so now was it as evident a proof that the heathen
were received into his Church ( i. e.) into the number of those whom Appian
observes in his Proeme to his History, that the Romans were very coy in taking
some nations into their dominions; they could not be persuaded by every one to
be their Lords: he saw himself many Ambassadors from the Barbarians, who came
solemnly to give themselves up to the Roman greatness, ambitious to be received
into the number of and the King would not receive such low unprofitable
servants. 'Twas esteemed a preferment, which it seems every nation could not
attain to, to be under the Roman government, and commanded by the Roman laws:
and there were many reasons, if we may judge by the outside, why Gentiles
should not be likely to obtain this privilege from God, to be vouchsafed his
commands. For 1. they had been neazled up in so many centuries of ignorance,
they had been so starved with thin hard fare, under the tyranny of a continued
superstition, which gave them no solid nourishment, nothing but husks, and
acorns to feed on, that they were now grown horrid, and almost ghastly, being
past all amiableness or beauty, (...), good for nothing in the World. We see in
Histories that Egypt according to Pharaoh's dream, all heathen learning could
not mend their looks, they were still for all their Philosophy, like the lean
kine that had devoured the fat, yet thrived not on it; they were still poor and
ill favored, such as were not to be seen in all the land of Jury for badness,
Genesis xli. 19.

2. They had engaged themselves in such a course, that they could scarce seem
ever capable of being received into any favor with God. Lib. 1. p. 29.
Polybius observes it as a policy of those which were delighted Ambassadors, or
the like feat, which was unlawful even amongst enemies, that after such an
action the enemy should be incensed beyond hope of reconciliation. So did
Asdrubal in Appian, Ap. (...), p. 54.
use the captive Romans with all possible cruelty, with all arts of inhumanity,
fley'd them, cut off their fingers, and then hanged them alive; to the end,
says he, that thereby he might make the dissensions of Carthage and Rome to be
composed, but to be prosecuted with a perpetual hostility. This was the effect
of Achitophel's counsel to Absalom, that he should lie with his fathers
concubines; and this also was the Devils plot upon the Gentiles, who as if they
were not enough enemies unto God for the space of 2000 years Idolatry, at last
resolved to fill up the measure of their rebellions, to make themselves, if it
were possible, sinful beyond capability of mercy; and to provoke God to an
eternal revenge, they must crucifying Christ, and partake of the shedding of
that blood, which has ever since so dyed the souls, and cursed the successions
of the Jews. For it is plain, 1. by the kind of his death which was Roman, 2.
by his Judge, who was Caesaris rationalis, by whom Judaea was then governed: or
as Tacitus says in the 15. of his Annals, Caesar's Procurator; all capital
judgments being taken from the Jews Sanhedrim, as they confess, Joh. xviii. 21.
it is not lawful for us to put any one to death, 3. by the Prophecy, Mat. xx.
19. They shall deliver him to the Gentiles: by these I say, and many other
arguments, it is plain that the Gentiles had their part and guilt in the
crucifying of Christ, and so by slaying of the Son, as it is in the parable,
provoked and deserved the implacable revenge of the Father. And yet for all
this, God enters league, and truce, and peace with them, thinks them worthy to
hear and obey his laws; nay above the estate of servants, takes them into
civitate donates caelesti, within the pale of the Church, and covenant of
salvation. They which are overcome and taken captives in war, may by law be
possessed by the victor for all manner of servitude and slavery, and therefore
ought to esteem any the hardest conditions of peace and liberty as favors and
mercies, (...), says Marcus in Polybius: they which are conquered must or
truce. Thus was it above all other sinners with the Gentiles of that time,
after 2000 years war with the one God, they were now fallen into his hands,
ready to receive the forest strokes, to bear the shrewdest burdens he could lay
on them; had it not been then a favor above hope, to be received even as hired
servants, which was the highest of the Prodigals ambition? Luke xv. 19. Luke
XV. 19.
Had it not been a very hospitable carriage Mat. XV. 26.
Mat. xv. 26. to suffer them to lick up those crumbs which fell from the
childrens table? Yet so much are Gods mercies above the pitch of our
expectation, or deserts; above what we are able or confident enough to ask, or
hope, that he has assumed and adopted these captives into sons. And as once by
the council of God Jacob supplanted Esau, and thrust him out of his
birthright; so now by the mercy of God, Esau has supplanted Jacob, and taken
his room in Gods Church and Favor, Jews, of which the Church so long
consisted, now is come in the confusion of the Gentiles, Parthians, Medes,
Elamites, and the Babel of tongues, Act. ii. 9. And as once at the dispersion
of the Gentiles by the miracle of a punishment, they which were all of one
tongue, could not understand one another, Genesis xi. 9. Genesis XI. 9.
so now at the gathering of the Gentiles by a miracle of mercy, V. Leo. p. 67.
they which were of several tongues understood one another, and every Nation
heard the Apostles speak Acts XI. 6.
Acts xi. 6. noting thereby, says Austin, that the Catholic Church should be
dispersed over all Nations, and speak in as many languages as the world has
tongues. Concerning the business of receiving the Gentiles into covenant, De
Civit. l. 18. p. 49. c.

St. Austin is plentiful in his 18. Book de Civit. Dei. where he interprets the
symbolical the children of Israel, Hos. I. 11.
Hos. i. 11. as if Esau had robbed Jacob of his name, as well as inheritance;
that they are declared by the title of barren and desolate, Esa. LIVE. 1.
Esa. live. 1. whose fruitfulness should break forth, surpass the number of the
children of the married wife. To this purpose does he enlarge himself to
expound many other places of the Prophets, and among them the Prophecy of
Obadiah, from which ( Edom by a pars pro signifying the Gentiles) he expressly
concludes their calling, and salvation: but how that can hold in that place,
seeing the whole Prophecy is a denunciation of judgments against Edom, and ver.
10. it is expressly read, For thy violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall
cover thee, and thou shall be cut out for ever. How I say, from that place,
amongst others, this truth may be deduced, I leave to the revealers of
Revelations, and that undertaking sort of people, the peremptory expounders of
depths, and Prophecies. Peter had not marked or remembered them so exactly, as
to understand that by them, the Gentiles were to be preached to, and no longer
to be accounted profane and unclean, Acts x. yet it is more then probable, that
the devil, a great contemplator, and well seen in Prophecies, observed so much;
and therefore knowing Christ's coming to be Plutarch, and some other of the
devils champions, referred plausibly to the change of the soil, and failing of
Enthusiastical vapors and exhalations; yet was it an evident Lucifer was to
vanish like lightning, when the light to lighten the Gentiles did but begin to
appear; and his God would once be pleased to command. Now that (in a word) we
may more clearly see, what calling, what entering into covenant with the
Gentiles, is here meant by Gods commanding them; we are to rank the commands of
God into two sorts, 1. common Catholic commands, and these extend as far as
the visible Church, 2. peculiar commands, inward operations of the spirit,
these are both privileges and invisible Church (i. e) the Elect, and in both
these respects does he vouchsafe his commands to the Gentiles. In the first
respect God has his louder trumpets, (...), Matthew. xxiv. 31. Mat. XXIV. 31
which all acknowledge, who are in the noise of it, and that is the sound of
the Gospel, the hearing of which constitutes a visible Church. And thus at the
preaching of the Gospel, (...), all the Heathens had knowledge of his Laws,
Acts l. 25.
and so were offered the Covenant, if they would Acts i. 25. be by one of our
writers of the Church wrested, by changing (that I say not, by falsifying) the
punctuation, to witness this truth, I think we need not such shifts to prove,
that God took some course by the means of the Ministry and Apostleship, to
make known to all nations under Heaven ( i. e.) to some of all nations, both
his Gospel and commands; Romans X. 18.
the sound of it went through all the earth, Romans x. 18. Psalm. XIX. 4.
cited out the xix. Psalm. verse 4. though with some change of sound in the
Romans for their line in the Psalmist, caused by the Greek Translators, who
either read and rendered (...), for (...), (...),
or else laid hold of the Arabic notion of the word, the loud noise and clamor
which hunters make in their pursuit and chase. Mar. XIV. 9.
So Mark xiv. 9. This Gospel shall be preached througthout the world: Mar. XVI
15.
So Mark xvi. 15. To every creature; Matthew. xxiv. 14. in all the world, Mat.
XXIV. 14
and many the like, as belongs to our last particular to demonstrate. Besides
this, God had in the second respect, vocem pedissequam, which the Prophet
mentions, a voice attending us to tell us of our duty, to show us the way, and
accompany us therein. And this, I say, sounds in the heart not in the Ear, and
they only hear and understand the voice, who are partakers as well of the
effect, as of the news of the covenant. Thus in these two respects does he
command, by his word in the Ears of the Gentiles, by giving every man every
where knowledge of his laws: Just. l. 24.
and so in some Latin Authors mandare signifies to give notice, Gentiles, by
giving them the benefit of adoption, and in both these respects he enters a
covenant with the Gentiles (which was the thing to be demonstrated) with the
whole name of them at large, with some choice vessels of them more nearly and
peculiarly; and this was the thing which by way of doctrine we collected out of
these words, but now commands.] Now that we may not let such a Application
press it down to the heart, and fill our spirits with the comfort of that
doctrine, which has matter for our practice as well as our contemplation. For
if we do but lay to our thoughts, 1. the miracle of the Gentiles calling (as
has been heretofore and now insisted on) and 2. mark how nearly the receiving
of them into covenant concerns us their successors, we shall find real motives
to provoke us to a strain and key above ordinary thanksgiving. For as Peter
spoke of Gods promise, so it is in the like nature of Gods command (which is
also virtually a promise) it belonged not to them only, but it is to you and
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call, Acts II. 39.
Acts ii. 39. From the first, Page 158.
It Is storied of Brasidas in the fourth of Thucidides, that imputing the
victory which was somewhat miraculous to some more then ordinary humane cause,
he went presently to the Temple loaded with offerings, and would not suffer the
gods to bestow such an unexpected favor on him unrewarded: and can we pass by
such a mercy of our God without a spiritual sacrifice, without a daily Anthem
of Magnificats and Hallelujah's? Herodotus observes it is as a Proverb of
Greece, (...),Page.59.
that if God would not send them rain, they were to famish; for they had, said
he, no natural fountains, or any other help of waters, (...), but what God from
above sent. Page 130.
So faith Thucidides, in the fourth of his History, there was but one fountain
within a great compass, and that none of the biggest. So also was Egypt
another part of the Heathen world, to be watered only by Nilus, Herod. p.62.
and that being drawn by the Sua, did often succor them, Nilus flowed, Page.61.
the neighboring Rivers were left dry, says Herodotus. You need not the
mythology; the Philosophers, as well as soil of Greece, had not moisture enough
to sustain them from nature; if God had not sent them water from Heaven, they
and all we Gentiles had for ever suffered a spiritual thirst. Egypt and all
the Nations had for ever gasped for drought, if the sunshine of the Gospel had
not by its beams called out of the Well which had bucket, (...), living or
enlivening water, John 4. 6. But by this attraction of the Sun, these living
waters did so break out upon the Gentiles, that all the waters of Jury were
left dry, as once the dew was on Gideons fleece, and drought on all the earth
besides, Judge. vi. 37. Judge. VI: 37.
And is it reasonable for us to observe this miracle of mercy, and not return
even a miracle of thanksgiving? Can we think upon it without some rapture of
our souls? Can we insist on it, and not feel a holy tempest within us, a fsorm
and disquiet, Chrysostom, Tom. 4. P. 824.
in our audit of thanksgiving, to reckon up all the (...), all those common
benefactions of which others partake with for it is, says he, an ordinary
negligence in us, to recount Gods mercies as we confess our sins, only in
gross, with an (...), we are great sinners, and God has abounded in mercies to
us; never calling our selves to a strict retail either of our sins or his
mercies; and this neglect, says he, does deprive us of a great deal of
spiritual strength. For 1. the recounting of the multitude of Gods mercies to
us formerly, might give us confidence of the continuance of them, according
Cyprian, donando debet, Gods past blessings are engagements, and pawns of
future. 2. It Is, faith he, of excellent use, (...), to bring us acquainted and
familiar with God, and infinitely increases our love to him, and desire of
performing some manner of recompense. Which one thing made the Heathen of old
so love and respect their benefactors, that they worshiped them, and would not
suffer any common real benefaction to be done them without an (...), to the
author of it, as might be proved Paul and Barnabas, Acts XIV. 13.
Acts xiv. 13. In the second place, if we consider how nearly it concerns us,
that if they had been pretermitted, we to the end of the world might probably
have lived in the same darkness, that we now hold our right to Heaven by the
Covenant made to them, that those commands belong also to us and our children,
then we must in some reason of proportion thank God liberally, for that calling
of the confidence, and keep us in a Christian temper of humility and cheerful
obedience. And therefore I thought good to present it to you in the first place
as a duty of no ordinary moment.

2. If God has commanded, and consequently expects our obedience; if these
commands concern us, and contain in them all that belongs to our salvation; if
they are, as has been proved, Gods covenant with the Gentiles, then not to be
wanting to our selves, but earnestly to labor and provide that no one
circumstance of them may be without its peculiar profit, and advantage to our
souls. Lib. 1. p. 30.
Polybius from the war betwixt the Numidians and Uticenses, observes, that if a
victory gotten by the Captain, be not Soldiers prosecuted to the utmost, it
likely proves more dangerous, then if they had never had it: if the King, faith
he, take the City, (...), and the multitude overjoyed with the news, begin to
grow less earnest in the battle, a hundred to one, but the conquered will take
notice and heart from Uticenses did, make their flight a stratagem to get the
victory. Thus is it in those spiritual combats, where God is our leader, our
commander, our conqueror against the Devils host, if we of his command, the
(...), the many, who expect our part in the profit of the victory, do not
prosecute this conquest to the utmost, to the utter discomfiting and disarming
of our fugitive enemy; if we should grow secure upon the news, and neither fear
nor prevent any farther difficulties, we may Trophie's, our selves be overcome.
I might prescribe you many courses, which it would concern you to undertake,
for the right managing of this victory, which this our Commander, has not by
his fighting, but by his very commanding purchased us. But because my Text
requires have, and I go on but slowly, I must omit them, and only insist on
that which is specified in my Text, repentance, which drives

The word Repent] may in this place be taken in a double sense; 1. generally
for a sorrow for our sins, and on that, a disburdening of our selves of that
load which did formerly press down the soul; for a sense of our former ill
courses, and a desire to fit our selves for Gods service; for an humbling our
selves before God, and flying to him as our only succor, and so it well may be
called John Baptist, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand, Mat. III. 2.
Matthew. iii. 2. which, says the Text, was in effect, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight, verse 3. So that briefly, this repent is a
straightning and rectifying all crookedness, every distortion of the soul, and
thereby a preparing of it for the receiving of Christ and embracing his Gospel.
2. In nearer relation to the first words of the verse, repentance is taken more
specially by way of opposition, for a mending and forsaking of that which of
old was the fault, and guilt of the Gentiles, a reforming of every thing which
was either formally or virtually contained in their ignorance, and what that is
you shall briefly judge.

It Is observed by Interpreters, that doing or suffering, action or passion are
expressed in Scripture by the word knowing; so to know sin is to commit sin, to
know a woman, and the like. So Peter to the maid, Matthew. xxvi. 70. I know not
what thou say (i. e.) I am not guilty of the doing what thou imputest to me.
According to which Hebraism to know God and his laws, is to worship him, and
perform them: and consequently to be ignorant of both, is neither to worship
God, nor practice any thing which his laws command: and so knowledge shall
contain all piety and godly Hermes in his 10. Book called (...), the ignorance
of God is all manner of sin, the other of Pastor in Clemens, (...), repentance
is a great piece of knowledge or wisdom. So that briefly the recovering of the
soul to the obedience sake, because he commands it, to obey him for love's
sake, because we desire he should be glorified in our obedience. And this is
the excellency and perfection of a Christian, infinitely repentance of a
Christian, whereby he makes up those defects, which were most eminently
notorious in the Heathen: this is the impression of that humbling spirit, which
proud heathen nature was never stamp't with, for 'twas not so much their
ignorance in which they offended God, (though that was also full of guilt, as
has been proved) as their misusing of their knowledge to ungainly ends, as
either ambition, superstition, or for satisfying their curiosity, as partly P.
5.
says Athenagoras, the greatness, complexion, figure, and harmony of it, are
(...), engagements to us and pawns to oblige us to a pious worship of God. For
what Philoponus observes of the doctrine of the soul, is in like they extend
and have an influence over all our conversation; and if they be well studied,
and to purpose, leave their characters and impressions in our lives, as well as
our understandings: and from thence arose the Gentiles guilt, who did only
enrich their intellectual part with the knowledge and contemplation of them, no
whit better their lives, or glorify God which made them. But for us whose
knowledge is much elevated above their pitch, who Gentiles, then the not
directing that measure of knowledge they had, to Gods glory, and a virtuous
Christians to amend and repent of. For the most exquisite knowledge of nature,
and more specially the most accurate skill in Theological mysteries, if it
float only in the brain, and sink not down into the heart, if it end not in
reformation of erroneous life, as well as doctrine, and glorifying God in our
knowledge of him, it is to be reputed but a glorious, specious curse, not an
enriching, but a burthening of the soul, Aurum Tholosanum, an unlucky
merchandise, that can never Aust. de civ. Dei, lib: 8. cap. 3. etc. Proclus. v.
Patricii Plat. exoter. p. 42.
Socrates was the first that brought morality into the Schools, ideoque ad
hominum salutem natus est, said an old Philosopher: and that made the oracle so
much admire him for the wisest man in the world. At any piece of speculation,
the devil durst challenge the proudest Philosopher amongst them, but for a
virtuous life, he despaired of ever reaching to it: this set him at a gaze,
this posed and made Hesychius, (...), the making use of knowledge to ambition,
or puffing up, is a dangerous desperate disease, and pray God it be not (...),
also in its other sense, a disease that attends our holiest speculations, even
our study of Divinity. Arrian. in Epict. l. 1. c. 26.
For as Arrian says of those who read many Books and digest none, so is it
most true of those who do not concoct their (...), and turn it into spiritual
nourishment vomit it up again, and are never the better for it, they are
oppressed with this very learning, as a stomach with crudities, and thereby fall
many times (...), into vertigoes and catarrhes, the first of which disorders
the brain, and disables it for all manner of action: or if the more classical
notion of the word take place, it disaffects the bowels, entangles and distorts
the entrals, and (as St. Paul complains on this occasion) leaves without
natural affection, and then breast, clogs, and stifles the vital parts, and in
fine brings the whole man to a (...), or corruption of all its spiritual
graces. Thus have you at once the doctrine and the use of my 2. part, the
nature of that repentance which is here meant in opposition to the Gentiles
fault, which we have showed to be, the directing of our knowledge to a sober
pious end; Gods glory and our own edification, together with the Heathen were
raised up by the study of the creatures, to an admiration of Gods excellency,
which was a kind of glorifying his power, and those Philoponus calls (...),
perfect exact Naturalists; who from physical causes ascend to divine. Galen. de
Vsu part. l. 3. c. 6.
Witness Galen. de Usu partium, foot, he falls off into a meditation and Hymn
of Gods providence, (...), a Psalm or holy Elogy of him that has so
wonderfully made us. Page 4.
So Hermes in his first Book of piety and Philosophy, makes the only use of
Philosophy to return thanks to the Creator, as to a good Father, and profitable
Nurse, which duty he professes himself resolved never to be wanting in: and
after in the latter end of his 5. Book he makes good his word, breaking out
into a rythme, (...), etc. The like might be showed in some measure out of
others more classick heathen writers, which may briefly serve to upbraid our
defects, and aggravate our offense, if we with all our natural, and spiritual
light, go on yet in learning, as travelers in peregrination, only either as
curious inquisitors of some novelties, which they may brag of at their return,
or else having no other end of their travel but the journey it self: without
any care to every man every where. So I come to my last particular, the extent
and latitude of the persons with whom this covenant is made, and from whom this
condition is exacted, All men every where.

Now the universality of the persons, reflects either to the preceding words,
Commands: or to the subsequent, the matter of these commands, Repentance. From
the first, the point is, that Gods Commands were made known by the preaching of
the Gospel to all men every where. From the 2. that the Repentance here meant
is necessary to every man that will be saved. For the first, it has been
already proved out of Scripture, that the vocal articulation of Gods commands,
the sound and preaching of the Gospel, has gone out into all the World, and
that not Universis, but singulis, directed and promulged at least to every
creature, Mar. XVI. 15.
Mar. xvi. 15. the whole Gentile world has title to it. Now for the spiritual
efficacy of this voice, 1 Cor. 11. 4.
the demonstration of the spirit and of power, has not this also waited on the
voice, and in some kind or other evidenced effects of the preaching of the
Word, either converting or hardening, either dissolving the wax, or stiffening
the clay, you shall in every man be sure to meet with one of them. For the
conversion; what a multitude came in at the first noise of it, primo mane, as
soon as ever the Sun of righteousness began to dawn. In the ancient Sea Fights
they had their (...), little light ships, (...), says Zenophon, (...), say
Thucydides and Polybius, which they sent out as spies in the night, or at day
break, to bring word how the Seas were cleared; that so they might dare to make
use of the first opportunity to go out with their whole Navy. Thus was Job and
some few other Gentiles before the Gospel, and Cornelius at the dawning of it,
sent before in a manner, ut lembi ante classem, to spy and bring word whether
the Gentiles might enter and be received; and these returning to them like
Noah's Dove in Genesis viii. 11. Genesis VIII. 11.
with an olive leaf in her mouth, the many, the root, the common people of the
world, out of all Nations, and conditions some, hasten and run and crowd for a
part in this salvation, and the Glory of the Lord was revealed, and all flesh
saw it together, as it is in the phrase of the Prophecy, Isa. xl. 5. or in the
words of the Story, Isa. XL. 5.
There were daily added to the Church such as should be saved. Look but on the
Doctor of the Gentiles, Tyrannus his School, Acts XIX. 10.
Acts xix. 10. and you shall find that at that one Lecture (which indeed was
two years long) all the lesser Asia heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews
and Greeks. The 3000 souls which were added to the Church at St. Peter's Sermon,
Acts ii. 4. was a sufficient hours work, Acts 11. 4.
and a thing so admired by the wise men of the Gentiles, that they imputed it
magicis Petriartibus and veneficis carminibus, De* Civ. l. 18. c. 53.
says Austin, to some incantations and magical tricks which Peter used. And
oracle to confirm it with some suppos^^itious verses, to the purpose forged by
them: that the Christian Religion was raised by Peter's witchcraft, and by it
should last 365 years, and then be betrayed and vanish. But had these same
Gentiles in this humor of malice and prejudice, seen a third part of the Roman
world, all the Proconsular Asia converted by one Paul's disputations, they would
certainly have resolved that all the sorcery of Hell or Chaldaea could never
have yielded such miraculous enchantments. Sceva had experience of, Acts xix.
14. Acts XIX. 14.
who with all their exorcisms and the name of Jesus added to them, could not
yet imitate the Apostles in any one miracle; but the devil was too hard for
them, wounded, overcame, prevailed against them. Briefly 'twas more then the
magic either of men or devils, which so convinced the artificers of hell, that
they brought out their Books and burnt them openly; Act. XIX. 19.
which beside the price were rated at 50000 pieces of silver, which is computed
to be about 6250 l. So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed, and the
first effect of it, conversion, was miraculously manifest, though not on all,
yet on many of all people every where. Now for the other effect of it, the
hardening of obdurate Atheists, Act. XIX. 9.
look on xix. Acts. 9. where it is plain, that for all Paul's Logic and
Rhetoric, disputing and persuading for the space of three months, many were
hardened and believed not. They had Theodoret calls it, a heart that would
reverberate either precept or instruction, and make it rebound against the hand
that sent it; Philip. l. 1. de Anima.
(...), as Philoponus phrases it in his 1. l. de anima, their spirits fatned
and incrassated within them, stal'd up and fed to such a brawniness, that
neither the understanding nor the affections were capable of any impression,
and so their condition proved like that of the Anvil, which by many strokes is
somewhat smoothed, but no whit softened; all Sermon of a Paul or Peter was but
an alarm to set them on their guard of defense, to warn them to cast up some
more trenches and bulwarks, to fortify themselves stronger against any
possible invasion of Gods spirit; according to that of the Egyptian Hermes, P.
5.
speaking, (...), which is in a Christian phrase the power of the Scripture;
they have, says he, this property in them, that when they meet with evil they
do more sharpen and egg them on to evil. Thus was the preaching of the word to
all men every where attended with some effects or other, according to the
materials it met with, never returned unprofitably, but either was the power of
God to salvation unto all that believed, or the witness of God to condemnation
to those which were hardened. Now if this precious receipt administered to all,
find not in all the like effect of recovering, yet from hence is neither the
Physic to be under-prized that he cannot or will not perform the
prescriptions, sometimes (...), the fault is to be laid on the stubbornness and
stoutness of the disease, which turns every medicine into its nourishment, and
so is not abated but elevated by that which was intended to assuage it, as
Hippocrates defines it medicinally in his Book (...).

So then by way of Use, Page 2.
If we desire that these commands, this covenant offered to all men every
where, may evidence it self to our particular souls in its spiritual efficacy,
we must with all the industry of our spirits endeavor to remove those
hindrances, which may any way perturb, or disorder, or weaken it in its working
Hippoc. (...).
etc. says Hippocrates, you must furnish your self beforehand with a shop of
several softning plasters, and take some one of them as a preparative before
every Sermon you come to, that coming to Church with a tender, mollified, waxy
heart, you may be sure to receive every holy character, and impression, which
that days exercise has provided for thee, lest otherwise if thou should
come to Church with an heart of ice, that ice be congealed into Crystal, and by
mercy under Heaven should by our unpreparedness be turned into the most
exquisite curse, that Hell or malice has in store for us? That the most
precious Balm of Gilead, should by the malignity of some tempers be turned into
poison, that the leaves which are appointed for the healing of the Nations
should lenitive in the world should only work to our obduration, and the
preaching of the word of mercy add to the measure of our condemnation! this is
enough to persuade you by an horror into some kind of solicitude to prepare
your souls to a capability of this cure, to keep your selves in a Christian
temper, that it may be possible for a Sermon to work upon you, that that breath
which never returns in vain, may be Hippocrat. ibidem.
which the Physician speaks of, (...), instruments of spiritual surgery, to cut
and prune off all luxuriant cumbersom excrescences, all rankness and dead
flesh, which so oppress the soul, that the virtue of medicine cannot search to
it. And for this purpose there is no one more necessary, of more continual use
for every Repentance.

And so I come to the second respect, the universality of the persons, as it
refers to the matter of the command, repentance, every man every where to
repent.

And here I should show you that repentance, both generally taken for a sorrow
for sin, containing in it virtually says also, so the Baptism of repentance is
interpreted, Acts XIX 4.
Acts xix. 4. John baptized with the Baptism of repentance, saying unto the
people, that they etc. and more specially in this place taken for the directing
of our knowledge to practice, and both to Gods glory, as has been shown, is
and always was necessary to every man that will be saved. 1 ^^st. c. 4.
For according to Aristotle's rule, (...), noting both an universality of
subject and circumstance, is a degree of necessity; and therefore repentance
being here commanded, (...), is to be judged a condition necessary to every
man, i. e.) who expects his part in the covenant of salvation; this, I say, I
might prove at large, and to that purpose vindicate the writings of some of the
Fathers, especially of Clemens, who I am almost confident is groundlesly cited,
for bestowing salvation on the Heathen, without exacting the condition of faith
and repentance, which now 'twere superfluous to insist on. 2. Urge it both to
your brains and hearts, and by the necessity of the duty, rouse, and enforce,
and pursue you to the Holy Ghost, then the acquisition of our labors, seeing
this fundamental Cardinal gift comes from the supreme donor, seeing nature is
no more able spiritually to reinliven a soul then to animate a carcass, our
best endeavor will be our humiliation, our most profitable directions will
prove our prayers, and what our frailty cannot reach to, our devotions shall
obtain.

And let us labor and pray, and be confident, that God which commands will
enable us to a performance of them, and having made his covenant with us, will
fulfill in us the condition of it; that the thundering of his word being
accompanied with the still voice of his spirit, may suffer neither repulse nor
resistance; that our hearts being first softened, then stamped with the spirit,
may be the images of that God that made them: that all of us every where
endeavoring to glorify God in our knowledge, in our lives, in our faith, in
our repentance, may for ever be glorified

Now to him that has elected us, has created, redeemed, etc.

The XIV Sermon.
Romans I. 26. For this cause God gave them up unto vile
-IN this most accurate Epistle that ever the Pen of man could lay title to, in
which all the counsels, and proceedings, and methods of God in the work of our
salvation are described, our Apostle in his discourse goes on the same way that
God is said to do in his Decree; lays the Massa, and though they were already
Romans and Christians, yet before he opens Heaven gates to them, and either
teaches or suffers them to be Saints, he stays them a while in the
contemplation of their impurity, and damned neglected estate of the stock they
come from; looks upon them as polluted or trodden down in their own blood, Ezekiel.
XVI. 6.
as the phrase is, Ezekiel. xvi. 6. He plows and harrows, and digs as deep as
possible, that the seed Heaven might be founded in the Center of the earth; and
their faith being secured by the depth of its foundation, might increase
miraculously both in height and fruitfulness. Thus in the latter part of this
first Chapter does he show them the estate and rebellions, and punishment of
their heathen Ancestors, that the unregenerate man may in that glass see his
picture at the length, the regenerate humble And for this cause God gave them
up to vile affections. So that in the Text you may observe the whole state and
history of a heathen, natural, unregenerate life, which is a progress or travel
from one stage of sinning to another, beginning in a contempt of the light of
nature, and ending in the brink of Hell, all vile affections. For the discovery
of which we shall survey, 1. The Law or light of nature, what it can do; 2. The
sin of contemning for this cause) that is, because they did reject that which
would have stood them in good stead; 3. The effect or punishment of this
contempt, sottishness leading them stupidly into all vile affections; And
lastly, the inflicter of this punishment, and manner of inflicting of it, God
gave them up: and first of the first, the law and light of nature what it can
do.

To suppose a man born at large, left to the infinite liberty of a Hippocrates
says of the Scythians, for want of girdles, run all soul should be his
Lawgiver, and so the first minute of its essence should suppose it regular.
Whence is it that some Atheists in Theophilus ad Auto. L. 2. p. 82: B.
which said that all things were made by chance, and of their own accord, yet
affirmed that when they were made they had a God within them to guide them,
their own conscience, and in sum affirmed, (...), that there was no other God
in the world. observes that in the creatures which have no reason, fantasy
supplies its place, and does the Be as much service to perform the business of
its kind, as reason does in the man. Thus farther in them whose birth in an
uncivilized Country has deprived of any laws to govern them, reason supplies
their room, (...), says Arius Didymus, Eusebius. Prep.
Reason is naturally a law, and has as sovereign dictates with it, Ev. l. 15.
p. 477
pronounces sentence every minute from the tribunal within, as
authoritatively, Solon did in the theater. There is not a thing in the world
purely and absolutely good, but God and nature within commends and prescribes
to our practice, and would we but obey their counsels, and commands, 'twere a
way to innocence, and perfection, that even the Pelagians never dreamt of. To
speak no farther then will be both profitable and beyond exception, the
perfectest law in the world, is not so perfect a rule for our lives as this
(...), Methodius calls it, Photius. p. 915
this law of nature born with us, is for these things which are subject to its
reach. Shall I say Scripture it self is in some respect inferior to it? I think
I shall not prejudice that blessed Volume; for though it be as far from the
least spot, or suspicion of imperfection, as falsehood, though it be true,
perfect and righteous altogether, yet does it not so evidence it self to my
dull soul; it speaks not so clearly and irrefragably, so beyond all
contradiction, and demur to my Atheistical understanding, as Adherence, another
of Evidence, one of faith, the other of sense; the former is that grounded on
Gods Word, more infallible because it rests on divine authority; the latter
more clear, because I find it within me by experience. The first is given to
strengthen the weakness of the second, and is therefore called (...), 2 Pet. I.
19.
2 Pet. ^. 19. A more firm sure word, the second given within us to explain the
difficulties and obscurities Verse 16.
verse 16. we saw it with our eyes: so that Scriptures being conceived into
words, and sentences, are subject either not to be understood, or amiss; and
may either be doubted of by the ignorant, or perverted by the malicious. You
have learnt so many words without book, and say them minutely by heart, and yet
not either understand, or observe what you are about: but this unwritten law,
which no Scripture or Emperor may be either unknown or out of our heads, when
any casual opportunity shall bid us make use of them: but this law of the mind
is at home for ever, and either by intimation or loud define in brief what this
law of nature is, and what offices it performs in us, you are to know, that at
that grand forfeiture of all our inheritance, (goods truly real and personal)
all those primitive endowments of soul and body upon Adams rebellion, God
afterward, though he shined not on us in his full Image and beauty, yet cast
some rays and beams secret, unwritten, yet indeleble Law, by which the creature
may be warned what is good or bad, what agreeable, what hurtful to the
obtaining of the end of its creation. Now these commands or prescriptions of
nature, are either in order to speculation or practice; to increase our
knowledge or direct our lives. The former sort I omit, as being fitter for the
Schools then Pulpit to discourse practice, and those are either common, which
they call first principles, and such are in every man in the world equally, and
secundum rectitudinem, and notitiam, says Aquinas: Frima secundae, qu. 94.
every one does both conceive them in his understanding what they mean, and
assent to them in his will; that they are right and just, and necessary to be
performed; and of this nature are the Worship of God and justice amongst men:
for that lumen super nos signatum, in Bonaventures phrase, L. 2. d. 39. ar. 1.
q 2.
that light which nature has sealed, and conclusions drawn out of these common
principles; as when the common principle commands just dealing, the conclusion
from thence commands to restore what I have borrowed, and the like. And these
also if they be naturally and directly deduced, would every man in the world
both understand, and assent to; hindrance come in and forbid, or suspend,
either his understanding or assent. Hindrances which keep him from the
knowledge or conceiving of them, are that confusion and Chaos, and black
darkness, I had almost said that Tophet and hell of sensual affections, which
suffers not the light to show it self, and indeed Verse 21.
And this hindrance the Apostle calls, ver. 21. the vanity of imaginations by
which a foolish heart is darkened. Hindrances which keep us from assenting to a
conclusion in particular, which we do understand, are sometimes good, as first
a sight of some greater breach certain to follow the performance Divine laws,
as the command of robbing the Egyptians, and the like, for although that in
our hearts forbid robbing, yet God is greater then our hearts, and must be
obeyed when he prescribes it. Hindrances in this kind are also sometimes bad:
such are either habitude of nature, custom of Country, which made the
Lacedaemonians esteem theft a passions: for every one of these has its several
project upon the reasonable soul, its several design of malice either by
treachery, or force to keep it hood-winkt or cast it into a lethargy, when any
particular virtuous action requires to be assented to by our practice. If I
should go so far as some do, to define this law of nature to be the full will
of God written by his hand immediately in every man's heart after the fall, by
which we feel our selves bound to do every thing that is Adams integrity; and
yet Zanchy, who was never guest near a Pelagian, in his 4. Tome 1. l. 10. c. 8.
Thesis would authorize every part of it, and yet not seem to make an Idol of
nature, but only extol Gods mercy, who has bestowed a soul on every one of us
with this character and impression, Holiness to the Lord; which though it be
written unequally, in some Bonaventure out of Austin against Pelagius, Which
Damascen. calls, lucem naturalem intellectus, as the Schools have it from him.
Wiggers^p. 160.
Non est parum accepisse natural indicatorium, it is no small mercy that we
have received a natural glass, in which we may see and judge of objects before
we venture on them, a power of distinguishing good from evil, which even the
malice of sin and passions in the highest degree cannot wholly extinguish in
us, Cain, the voice of whose conscience spoke as loud within him as that of his
brothers blood: as also in the very damned, whose worm of sense, not penitence
for what they have done in their flesh shall for ever bite, and gripe them
hideously. This Light indeed may either by, first blindness, or 2. delight in
sinning, or 3. peremptory resolvedness not to see, be for the present hindered
secundum actum, from doing any good upon us. per modum deliberationis, yet not
as per modum naturae, their reason which moves them

Now that the most ignorant, clouded, unnurtured brain amongst you may reap
some profit from this Discourse, let him but one soul shall yield him a Comment
to my Sermon; and if he dare but once to open his eyes, shall show him the law
and light of nature in himself, which before he never dreamt of. Of those of
you that ever spared one minute from your worldly affairs to think of your
spiritual, there is one thought that suddenly comes upon you, and makes short
work of all that spiritual Art. in Ep.
(...), without any proportion betwixt their receipts and expenses. Shall we be
so senseless as to hope that the contempt of one blessing will natural reason
there will not furnish you with some kind of profitable, though not sufficient
directions, to order your whole lives by; bring your selves up to that
stay'dness of temper, as never to venture on any thing, till you have asked your
own souls advice whether it be to be done or no; and if you can but observe its
dictates, and keep your hands to obey your head; if you can be content to
Heathens themselves set upon this light within them, which yet certainly
Pythagoreans and Stoics have done, who represent conscience not only as a
guide and moderator of our actions, but as (...), a tutelary spirit, or Angel,
or genius, which never sleeps or dotes, but is still present and employed in
our behalf? And this Arrian specifies to be the reasonable piece or shread, L.
1. c. 14.
or as others more according to modest truth call it, (...), a ray or beam of
that invisible Sun, by which our dull, unactive, frozen bodies, after the fall
were warmed and re-inlivened. Now if any one shall make a diligent inquisition
in himself, shall, as the Philosopher in his Cynical humor light a candle to
no purpose, Jeremy, seek and make hue and cry after a man through all
Jerusalem, and yet not meet with him: if, I say, any body shall search for this
light in himself, and find all darkness within, then will you say I have all
this while possessed you with some phansies and Ideas, without any real profit to
be received from them; you will make that complaint as the women for our
Savior, We went to seek for him, and when we went down all was dark, and
emptiness, Joh. XX. 13.
They have taken him away, and I know not where they Nay, but the error is in
the seeker, not in my directions: he that would behold the Sun must stay till
the cloud be over; he that would receive from the fire, either light or warmth,
must take the pains to remove the ashes. There be some encumbrances, which may
hinder the most active qualities in the world from working, and abate the edge
of the keenest metal. In sum, there is a cloud, and gloom, and vail within
thee, like that darkness on the face of the deep, when the earth was (...),
without Genesis i. 2. or like that at Lots door among the Sodomites, or that of
Egypt, thick and palpable: and this have we created to our selves, a sky full
of tempestuous, untamed affections; this cloud of vapors have we exhaled out of
the lower part of our soul, our sensitive faculty; and therewith have we so
filled the air within us with sad, black meteors, that the Sun in its Zenith,
the height or pride of its splendour would scarce be able to pierce through it.
So that for to make a search for this light within thee, tears in our eyes will
spiritually mend our sight; as whatever you see through water, though it be
represented somewhat dimly, yet seems bigger and larger then if there Optics,
Whatever is seen through a thicker medium seems bigger then it is. And then by
way of Use, shall we suffer so incomparable a mercy to be cast away upon us?
Shall we only see and admire, and not make use of it? Shall we fence, as it
were, and fortify our outward Arrian calls those, in whom this light of the
soul is, L. 1. c. 19.
clouded and obscured, (...) and (...), dead trunks and carcasses of flesh, c.
2. 9.
and to keep such men in order were humane laws provided, which he therefore
calls, (...), miserable hard laws to keep dead men in compass, C. 13.
and again, (...), Earth and Hell, the places to which dead bodies are
committed. And certainly, if so, then by way of contrary, all the life that we
possess is but by obedience to this law within us; and it is no longer to be
called life, but either sleep, death, or lethargy, every minute that we move
out of the circle of its directions. There is not a step, or moment in our
lives, but we have a special use, and need of this law to manage us: every
enterprise of our thoughts or actions will yield some difficulty which we must
hold up, and read, and judge of by this candle, nay, sometimes we have need of
a glass, or instrument to contract the beams and light of it, or else 'twould
scarce be able to get through to our actions, passion, and folly, and the
Atheism of medium. Wherefore in brief, remember that counsel, Mal. II. 15.
Mal. ii. 15. Take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously with
the wife of his youth: the wife of his youth, i. e. says Jeroms gloss, legem
naturalem scriptam in cord, the law of nature written in his heart, which was
given him in the womb as a wife and help to succor him. Let us set a value on
this polar Star within us, which has, or should have an influence, at least
directions on all our actions; let us increase, and nourish, and make Scholars,
and Antiquaries prize nothing so high as a fair Manuscript or ancient
Inscription, let us not contemn that which Gods own finger has written within
us, lest the sin of the contempt make us more miserable, and the mercy profit
us only to make us unexcusable. And so I come to my second part, the sin of
contemning or rejecting this law. For this cause he gave them up, 1. because
the contempt of his law thus provoked him.

Heathens, 2. the Jews, 3. present Christians, and then let every man that
desires a more distinct light descend and commune with his own heart, and so he
shall make up the observation.

The Heathens sin will be much aggravated, if we consider how law, as the
square, and rule, and canon of their actions, and therefore they will be
inexcusable who scarce be ever at leisure to call to it to direct them, when
they had use of it. A^r. Ep. l. 2. c. 9.
The Stoic calls it (...), the promise that every man makes; the obligation
that he is bound in to nature at his shaping in the womb, and upon which
condition his reasonable soul is at his conception demised to him; so that
whosoever puts off this obedience does (as he goes on) renounce and even
proclaim destroys the natural man within him, and by a prodigious regeneration
is in a manner transubstantiate into a beast of the field. Which conceit many
of them were so possessed with, that they thought in earnest, that 'twas ordinary
for souls to walk from men into Cocks and Asses, and the like, and return again
at natures appointment, as if this one contempt of the law of nature were
enough to unman comparable, nay coessential to the beasts that perish. 'Twere
too long to show you what a sense the wisest of them had of the helps that
light could afford them: so that one of them cries out confidently, Hesych.
(...). in vit. Aesch.
(...), etc. If all other laws were taken out of the world, we Philosophers
would still live as we do, those directions within us would keep us in as much
awe, as the most imperious or severest Lawgiver. And again how they took
notice of the perverseness of men in refusing to make use of it: for Arr. l. 2.
c. 11.
this knowledge and discretion of good and evil, as old in him as his soul? And
yet who makes any use of it in his actions: nothing so ordinary as to betray,
and declare that we have it, by finding fault, and accusing vices in other men;
by calling this justice, this tyranny, this virtue, this vice in another:
whilst yet we never are patient to observe or discern ought of it in our
selves. (...), etc. Who ever spares to call injustice which he sees for his own
reason tells him it is so, and he must needs give it its title? But when the
case concerns his own person, when his passions counsel him against the law
within him, then is he content not to see, though it shine never so bright
about him; and this was one degree of their guilt, that they observed the power
of it in their speculations, and made use of it also to censure and find fault
with others; but seldom or never strived to better themselves, or straighten
their own actions by it. Again, Apostles argument, and look more distinctly
upon them in their particular chief sins which this contempt produced in them,
you shall find them in the front to be Idolatry and superstition, in the verses
next before my Text: When they knew God they glorified him not as God, Verse 21.
verse 21. But changed his glory into an Verse 24.
etc. verse 24. And then we may cry out with Theodoret in his, (...), the
errors and vanities of their worship has rased out all the characters that God
anciently had written in them. And can any man show a greater contempt to a
book, or writing, then to tear, and scrape, and scratch out every letter in it?
The first voice of nature in the creature which it uttered even in the cradle,
when it was an infant in the world, and therefore perhaps, as children worship
of one eternal God, Creator of that soul we breath by, and world we live in; as
one simple, incorporeal, everlasting essence; and thus far (no doubt) could
nature proclaim in the heart of every Gentile, though it was by many of them,
either silenced, or not hearkened to, which if it were doubted of, might be
deduced out of the 19. verse of this chap. God has showed unto them, Verse 19.
etc. Now this so that they are without excuse, Verse 20.
ver. 20. All that would ever think of it, and were not blind with an habit of
sottishness, acknowledged a God, Vid. Origin. contr. Celsum, l. 1. p. 7. (...),
etc. Clem. Strom. l. 1.
yet none would think aright of him. Some would acknowledge him a simple
essence, and impossible to be described, or worshiped aright by any Image, as
Varr^ an Heathen Rome continued 170 years without any Images of the Gods in it.
Yet even they which acknowledged him simple from all corporeity and
composition, would not allow him single from plurality. Jupiter and Saturn, and
the rest of their shole of Gods, had already got in, and possessed both their
Temples, and their hearts. In sum their understandings were so gross within
them, being fatned and incrassate with magical phantasms, that let the truth
within them say what 1. 6, 7, c.
Aristotle observes in his Rhet. that a man that has but one eye loves that
very dearly, (...), and sets a far higher price on it, is much more tender over
it then he that has two; so he that has but one son, cannot choose but be very
fond of him, and the greatest lamentation that can be expressed, is but a shadow
of that which is for ones only Son, as may appear, Amos viii. 10. Amos VIII. 10.
Zach. xii. 10. when it is observed that, (...) Zach. XII. 10.
the only begotten and the beloved are taken in Scripture promiscuously, as
signifying all one. And then what a price should the Heathen have set upon this
eye of nature, being (...), having no other eye to see by? having neither
Scripture nor Spirit, those two other glorious eyes of the world to enlighten
them: and therefore being sure by the contemning and depriving themselves of
this light to turn all into horrible darkness. 'Twould strike a man into agony
of pity and amazement, to see a world inevitable hell, as it is in the Book of
Wisdom, and all this directly by contemning this first, and only begotten light
in them, which God set in the Firmaments of their hearts, to have lead and
directed them a more comfortable way. And this or as bad is every unregenerate
man's case exactly, if they be not forewarned by their elder brethren the
Heathens example: as we

Secondly, among the Jews, under which name I contain all the people of God,
from Adam to Christ, it is a lamentable contemplation to observe, and trace the
law and the contempt of it; like a Jacob at the heels supplanting it in every
soul which it came to inhabit. Those Characters of verum and bonum which in
Adam were written in a statelier Copy and fairer Manuscript then our slow
undervaluing conceits can guess at: nay afterward explained Of the tree of
knowledge, Genesis II. 17.
etc. thou shall not eat, Genesis ii. 17. Yet how were they by one slender
temptation of the Serpent presently sullied and blurred? so that all the aqua
fortis, and instruments in the world will never be able to wash out or erase
that blot; or ever restore that handwriting in our hearts to the integrity and
beauty of that Copy in its primitive estate. And since when by that sin
darkness was in a manner gone over their hearts, and there remained Temple,
nothing comparable to the beauty of the first: instead of weeping with a loud
voice, Ezra III. 12.
as many of the Priests and Levites did, Ezra iii. 12. or building, or
repairing of it with all alacrity, as all Israel did through that whole Book,
their whole endeavor and project was even to destroy the ruins, and utterly
finish the work of destruction which Adam had begun, as being impatient of that
shelter Commandments at Mount Sinai. They despised the law in their hearts
where God and nature whispered it in calmly, insensibly, and softly, and
therefore now it shall be thundered in their ears in words, and those
boisterous ones, Exodus xix. 18.
at which the whole mount quaked greatly, Exodus xix. 18. And in the 16. Verse
16.
verse, it must be ushered with variety of dismal meteors upon the Mount, and
the voice of a trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the
Camp trembled. Thus upon their contempt and peevishness was this manuscript put
in print, this Privy Seal turned into a Proclamation, and that a dreadful one,
bound and subscribed, with a Cursed is he that continues not in every title of
it to perform it. Mean while the matter is not altered, but only the
dispensation of it. That which till then had taught men in their hearts, and
had been explained from tradition, from Father to Son. Adam instructing Seth,
and Seth Enoch in all righteousness, is now put into Tables, that they may have
eyes to see, that would not have hearts to understand, that the perverse may
archivis, though, perhaps, as it always was, neglected, soiled, and
moth-eaten, and he shall be censured either for ambition or curiosity, that
shall ever be seen to enquire, or look after it. Still I say, throughout all
their ways, and arts, judgments attended them without, and as often as sword,
or plague wounded them, made them acknowledge the justice of God, that thus
rewarded their perverseness. Nay you shall see it sometimes break out against
them, when perhaps the written law spoke too softly for them to be understood.
Thus did David's heart smite him when he had numbered the people; though there
Ex. XXX. 12.
and that he had sinned against God in trusting and glorying in that arm of
flesh, or paid not the tribute appointed by God on that occasion. To conclude
this discourse of the Jews, every rebellion and idolatry of theirs was a double
breach, of a double law, the one in tables, the other in their heart; and could
they have been freed from the killing letter of the one, the Christ, where no
humane lawgiver or magistrate went about to deter them from shedding his
blood, or denying his miracles, yet many of their own hearts apprehended, and
violently buffetted, and scourged, and tormented them. At one time when they
are most resolved against him, the whole Senate is suddenly pricked, and
convinced within, and express it with a Surely this man does many miracles,
John XI. 48.
John xi. 48. Pilate is deterred from condemning, and though the fear of the
people made him valiant, yet, as if he contemned this voice of his conscience
against his will, with some reluctance, he washes his hands when he would have
been gladder to quench the fire in his heart, which still burnt and vexed him.
Lastly, when Judas had betrayed and sold him, and no man made huy and cry after
him, his conscience was his pursuer, judge, and executioner, persecuted him

Lastly, even we Christians are not likely to clear our selves of this bill;
it is much to be feared, that if our own hearts are called to witness, Arr. l.
2. c. 11.
our Judge will need no farther Indictments. 'Twas an Heathen speech concerning
this rule of our lives and actions, that to study it hard, to reform and repair
all obliquities and defects to set it up strong and firm as a pillar in our
hearts, was the part and office of a Philosopher; and then afterward to make
use of it in our whole conversation, this was the part of a virtuous man
complete and absolute. And how then will our contempt be aggravated, if
Christianity, which Clemens calls spiritual Philosophy, and is to be reckoned
above all moral perfections, has yet wrought neither of these effects in us?
if we have continued so far from straightning, or setting up, or making
Theodoret in his second (...). Theod. Therap. 1, 2.
is very passionate in the expression of this contempt of the (...), the light
of truth shining in our understandings. There be a sort of birds, says he, as
a creature sent on purpose to preserve them: and these, says he, deserve not
to be child but pitied, for nature at first appointed them this condition of
life, (...), it is their birthright and inheritance, and therefore no body will
be angry with wilful hearts, to hate and abjure, and defy this light, to run
out of the world almost Aristoph. in Nub.
as Socrates was said to adore the clouds, this is such a sottishness, that the
stupidst element under Heaven would naturally scorn to be guilty of: for never
was the Earth so peevish, as to forbid the Sun when it should shine on it, or
to slink away, or subduce it self from its rays. And yet this is our case,
beloved, who do more amorously, and flatteringly court, and woo, and solicit
darkness, then ever the Heathens adored the Sun. Not to Gospel and Christianity
is neglected by us, our guilt will lie heavy enough on us, if we keep us to the
light only of natural reason within us. How many sins do we daily commit, which
both nature and reason abhor and loath? How many times do we not only unman,
but even uncreature our selves? Aristotle observes, that that by which any
thing is known first, that which does distinguish one thing from another a
priore, Mat. 4.
(...), is to be called the beginning or cause of that thing, and that the light
of reason distinguishing one action from another, being the first thing that
teaches me that this is good, that otherwise may from thence be termed the
beginning of every reasonable action in us, and then where ever this cause or
beginning is left out, and wanting, there the thing produced is not so called a
positive act, or proper effect, but a defect, an abortion, or still-born
frustrate issue; and of this condition indeed is every sin in us. Every action
die daily; our whole life is but a multiplied swoon or lethargy, in which we
remain stupid, breathless, senseless, till the day of death or judgment with a
hideous voice Tully says a Swine has, which serves it only instead of salt,
to Aristotle's observation, that every one of the elements, De anima l. 1. c. 2.
besides the earth, was by some Philosopher or other defined to be the soul.
Some said the soul was fire, some that 'twas air, some water, but never any man
was so mad, as to maintain the earth to be it, because 'twas so heavy and
unweildy. So then this heavy, motionless, unactive Christian, this clod of
earth, has, as I said, uncreatured himself, and by contemning this active
reason within him, even deprived himself of his soul. vegetative growing
faculty; (...), etc. Porphyr. (...) 1. 3. p. 44.
and then what difference is there betwixt him and a tree, whose whole nature
it is to feed and grow? Certainly unless he has some better employment, he is
at best but (...), a plant-animal, whose shape would perhaps persuade you that
it plant, little better then an Artichoak or Cabbage: another goes a little
higher, yet not far, does all that his sense presents to him, suffers all that
his sensitive faculties lust, and rage to exercise at freedom; is as fierce as
the Tiger, as lustful as the Goat, as ravenous Wolf, and the like: and all the
beasts of the field, and fowls of the air, be but several Emblemes, and
Hieroglyphics concurring to make up his character, carries a wilderness about
him, as many sins as the nature of a sensitive creature is capable of: and then
who will stick to compare this man to the beasts that perish? For it is
Theophilus his note, Ad Anto. l. 2. p. 95.
that the cattle and beasts of the field were created the same day with man,
Genesis 1. 25.
Genesis i. 25. to note, (...), the brutish condition of some men, and that
therefore the have the dominion over them, Verse 26, 28.
verse 26, 28. In sum, every action which Reason, or Scripture, or Gods spirit
guides not in us, is to be called the work of some other creature of one of
these three sorts; either earthly, the work of a plant, or sensual, the work of
a brute, or thirdly, (...) Iambl. Protrept. p. 145.
above the condition of both these, devilish. Thus do you see the sin of the
contempt of the light of nature, which although it be dimmed in us by our
corruption, yet Heathen, that they were left without excuse; in the Jews, that
even their own hearts accused them for their rebellions; and in us Christians,
that unless we move according to its directions, we are fallen below the
condition of men, almost of creatures. 'Twere now superfluous farther to
demonstrate it, our time will be better spent if we close with some use of it;
and that will prove manifold, 1. by way of caution, not to deifie or exalt too
high, or trust in this light of nature. It was light in the Lord, almost an
Angel of light, it shone as the Sun in the Firmament, in majesty and full
brightness, but is now only as the Moon, pale and dim, scarce able to do us any
service, unless it borrows some rays from the Sun of Righteousness. The fall
has done somewhat with it, I know not what to call it, either much impaired
it, and diminisht its light in its essence, or else much encumbered, or oppressed
it in its operations, as a corruptible body presses down the soul, etc. Wisd.
IX. 15.
Wisd. ix. 15. And humble our selves before God for the first sin of Adam,
which brought this darkness on our souls, and account it not the meanest, or
slightest of our miseries, that our whole nature is defiled, and bruised, and
weakened: to aggravate every circumstance and effect of that sin against thy
self, which has so libera^ly afforded f^el acknowledge the necessity of some
brighter light, then this of nature can afford us, and with all the care and
vigilance of our hearts, all the means that Scripture will lend us, and at last
with all the importunities and groans, and violence of our souls, to petition
and Grammarians, a man of deep and various knowledge, because there may be some
passage or other in that book, which will refer to every sort of learning in
the world, whence it is observed that the old Scholiasts and (...), were most
exquisit Scholars. Thus certainly will not any ordinary skill serve turn to
interpret and explain many dark sayings, which were at first written Spirit,
that has no shadow of ignorance, the finger that first writ, must be beseeched
to read and point out the riddle. We must make use of that rotten staff of
nature, as far as its strength will bear, and that very gingerly too, never
daring to lean, or lay our whole weight upon it, lest it either wound with its
splinter, or else break under us: our help and stay, and subsistence, and trust
must be in the Lord, our eyes must wait on and reinliven this light within us.
And that first,

By stirring up and blowing, and so nourishing every spark we find within us.
The least particle of fire left in a coal, may by pains be improved into a
flame; it is held possible to restore, or at least preserve for a time any thing
that is not quite departed. If thou find but a spark of Religion in thee,
which says, A God is to atome of that fire, which thou once feel within
thee, ever go out: quench not the weakest motion, or inclination even of reason
toward God, or goodness: how unpolish't soever this Diamond be, yet if it do
but glissen, it is too precious to be cast away. And then 2.

By removing all hindrances, or encumbrances that may any way weaken or oppress
it, and these you have learnt to be corrupt affections. That democracy, and
crowd, and press, and common people of the soul, raises a tumult in every
street within us, that no voice of law or reason can be heard. If you will but
disgorge, In T^p. l. 1.
says Aphrodiseus, that kindly familiar good temper of the soul, by which it
is able to find out and judge of truth. In brief, if thou can mild voice
within thee, in the cave, take heart and show it self. In the mean time this
hurry of thy senses drowns that reason, and thou can not hope to see, as long
as like old Tobit, the dung, and white film does remain upon thine eyes. If
thou can use any means to dissolve this dung of affections which an habit of
sin has baked Tobit shall be restored to his sight. In brief, do but fortify
thy reasonable soul against all the undermining, and faction, and violence of
these sensual passions, do but either depose, or put to the sword that
Atheistical Tyrant, and Usurper, as Iamblichus calls the affections, do but set
reason in the chair, and hear, and observe his dictates, and thou have
disburthened thy self of a great company of weights, and pressures: thou will
be able to look more soul prompts thee to, Gods spirit is nigh at hand to
perfect, and crown, and seal thee up to the day of redemption.

In the next place, thou may see thine own guilts the clearer, call thy self
to an account even of those things which thou think Apostle in this chapter
and part of my discourse has charged the Heathens with: and if thou look
narrowly, I am afraid thou will spy thine own picture in that glass, and find
thy self in many things as arrant a Gentile, as any of them. For any sincere
care of God, or Religion, how few of us are there, that ever entertained so
unpleasant a guest in their hearts: we go to Church, and so did they to their
Temples: we pray, and they sacrificed; they washed and bathed themselves of
their highest crime Idolatry? Some of them took the brain Athenaeus; and
therefore hearing some cry God help when one sneezed, the ignorant sort
worshipped that noise as an expression of a Deity in the brain; and so as
senslesly many of us deify our own brains, and adore every thing that ever
comes out of them. Every conceit of ours must be like the birth of Jupiters
brain, a Minerva at least; be we never so ignorant or mechanical, every device,
every fancy of our own (especially in matters of Religion) is straight of
Divine Authority; Theopneust, and inspired, and others accused for irreligious,
or singular, that will not as soon give homage to it. In sum, every imagination
becomes an Image, and the Artificer deifies his own handiwork, forgetting that
he made it as it is described in the 13. of Wisd. Wisd. XIII.
toward the end, and this is one kind of Idolatry. Again who is there that has
not some pleasure in his heart, which takes place of God there? They had Sun
and Moon most glorious creatures, their Heroes, whose virtues had even deified
their memory, and silly men they admired, and could not choose but worship. The
Devil, and a humor of superstition customary in them, fee'd and bribed the law
in their hearts to hold its peace, and not recall them. But how basely have we
out-gone their vilest worships? How have we outstript them? Let but one
appearance of gain like that golden calf of the Israelites, a beautiful woman,
like that Venus of the Image, or representation of delight thy own lust can
propose thee, let it but glance, or glide by thee, and Quis non incurvavit?
Show me a man that has not at some time or other fallen down and worshipped. In
sum, all the lower part of the soul, or carnal affections are but a picture of
the City of Athens, Acts xvii. 16. Acts XVII. 16.
Wholly given to Idolatry. The basest, unworthiest pleasure or content in the
world, that which is good for nothing else, Wisd. XIII. 13.
the very refuse of the refuse, Wisd. xiii. 13. is become Idol, and has its
shrines in some heart or other: and we crouch and bow, and sacrifice to it, and
all this against the voice of our soul, and nature within us, if we would
suffer it to speak aloud, or but hearken to its whisperings: (...), says
Philoponus, 4 Ar. de. au.
Nature only bids us feed our selves with sufficient, lust brought in
superfluity and pleasure. But this only by the way, lest you might think that
part of my Sermon concerning the Heathens contempt of this law, did belong
little to you, and so

Lastly, not to lade every part of my former discourse with its several use, or
application, take but this one more. If this Light shines but dimly within us,
then let us so much the more not dare contemn it. That Master that speaks but
seldom, then surely deserves Craesus his dumb son in Herodotus, Herod. l. 1.
seeing one come to kill his father, shall by violence break the string of his
tongue that formerly hindered his speech, and he that never spoke before roar
out an (...), Sir kill not Craesus, I wonder not that the Persian held his
hand: a very Barbarian would be amazed, and stopped by such a prodigy; it must
needs be an odious thing when the child bestial soul, that of our sense, shall
seduce us to any thing that our manly soul, that of our reason, which is now
somewhat decrepit, and dim-sighted, shall yet espy and find fault with: if in
any enterprise this natural law within us shall give the check, let us suddenly
remove our project, and not dare to reject such fatherly, sage admonishments;
if all the means in the world can help to avoid it, let us never fall into the
snare. And if at thy audit with Rhetoric, if I had it to spare, would do any
good upon you. Only I will try one suasory more, which being somewhat rough may
chance to frighten you, and that is the punishment that here expects this
contempt, and that a dismal hideous one, all the wild savage devourers in the
wilderness, Vile affections, which punishment together with the inflicter, and
manner of inflicting it, are the last parts of my discourse, of which together
in a word. God gave them up to vile affections.

Fiends of Hell could not invent, or wish a man a greater: there is not a more
certain presage of a (...), or total subversion of body and soul, nor a more
desperate prognostic in the world. P. 36. 9.
It Is observed in Photius, as a sure token that Jerusalem should be destroyed,
because punishment came upon it in a chain, every link drew on another, no
intermission, or discontinuance of judgments, (...), etc. A single judgment
that brings no train after it is cheaply calamity, but a visitation: but when
one plague shall invade, shall supplant another, when the pestilence shall
fright out the famine, and the sword pursue the pestilence, that neither may
slay all, but each join in the glory of the spoil: then must the beholder
acknowledge (...), that God is resolved to make them the scene of his rage, not
only of his wrath. Thus also in the spiritual (...) of the estate Amorites, to
goad our sides, not destroy, but humble us. But when sins shall come like gaol
birds linked, and chained together, when our corruptions, and insolent
tyrannical passions shall make us contemn the light and law of reason, and
nature; when that contempt shall bring forth Idolatry, and the like, either
worship of Idolgods, or vain conceits, or imaginary delights, every lust of our
baser soul, then can it not be expected that God will have so little to Es. 1.
5.
The next voice that we can expect, is that horrible mercy of his, Why should
you be smitten any more? Any restraint either of chastisement, or instruction
would be scarce seen upon us, and therefore it is but lost labor to beat the
air, or to lay stripes upon the sea with Xerxes. The height of Gods wrath in
this world, is but our just reward, and that is disertion, or dereliction, and
giving us over, and giving us up, which vile affections.

The issue of all is this; that those that contemn Gods ordinary restraints,
God ordinarily leaves to themselves, and suffers them to run into most horrible
sins. It Is justice that they which delight in error, should be let alone in
their course, that they may see and acknowledge the error of their delight,
that they which have contemned Gods voice, and natures within them, should be
forsaken De aqu. aer. and locis.
It Is Hippoer. his observation that the Africans are very libidinous: they are
neither hardy nor valiant, nor laborious, (...), Lust has but for softness:
and therefore says he, (...), there be among them beasts of all sorts of
strange shapes, the heat and violence of the same lust makes the very beasts
unnatural, the confusion of species is ordinary among them; and so almost every
birth a Monster: nature is almost lost amongst them, and many beasts may be
found in Africa, which never had any of their kind in the Ark; Africa semper
aliquod apportat novi, whosoever has Monsters, monstrous oaths, monstrous
delights, monstrous vanities. Some new art or trick of sinning that was never
heard of before, is invented against every solemn season of our jollity, and
this we carry about, and show, and brag of as a new creature, Symptom, and
prognostic of them in our selves, and never leave poring till we have pierced
through that carnal security that blinded us, and fully humble Physician of our
souls, that Restorer of reasonable creatures, that he will by some spiritual
eye water, recover us to that sense. It Is impossible says Tobias, for any one
to restore us to the Image of the Father which was once on Photius p. 601.
but him only who was the eternal Image of the Father, he only could (...),
turn out that unreasonable blind soul within us, made up of our sins which move
us, and reduce us to the dignity of reasonable creatures. He has already by
his incarnation, delivered us from one long night, the dark gloom of our
heathen Ancestors, O that he would be born again spiritually in our souls, to
deliver us from other more Cimerian darkness, the night, and hell of habituate
sin, wherein we men, O that he would again but breath on us the (...), His holy
breath, his hallowing breath, his breath of holiness to make us Saints. It is
he that must prevent us with his Spirit, or else we run headlong into all vile
affections.

O that he would but Sanctify us, and then the most plausible flattering sin
in the world, nay, the most boystrous, impetuous lust, should not be able to
tyrannize over us. In Grace is never placed but in a reasonable creature; and
is therefore said to be sent to make reason see, what by nature only it cannot,
never to blemish it in what it can comprehend, as the Learned Bishop has
observed against the Jesuit. Let us make much of all the light that nature and
reason will afford us, let us not suffer one precious

Now to him which has elected us, has created, redeemed, etc.

The XV. Sermon.
Gal. VI. 15. But a new Creature.
Heaven, there is no one that does so clog and trash, so disadvantage and
backward us, and in fine, so cast us behind in our race, as a contentedness in
a formal worship of God, an acquiescence and resting satisfied in outward
performances, when men upon a confidence that they perform all that can be
Apostle begins to character and censure in the 12. Verse 12.
verse of the Chapter, As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, etc.
They that stand only on a fair specious outside, and think all the sap and
life of Religion lies in the bark, they do this and this, these will have you
circumcised, and constrain you to a many Ave Mary's and Pater nosters by tale)
and thus you may be sure to be saved. In brief, the Apostle here shows the
unprofitableness of all these, and sets up the inward sanctity and renewedness
of heart against them all, as the only thing that will stand us in stead, and
appear to be of any weight in the For neither circumcision avails any thing,
neither uncircumcision, but a new creature.

The particle but in the front of my Text is exclusive and restrictive, it
excludes every thing in the world from pretending to avail any thing, from
being believed to do us any good. For by circumcision the Church of the Jews,
and by uncircumcision the whole profession of Christian Religion being
understood, when he says neither of these avails any thing, he forcibly
implies that all other new creature; there it is to be had, and no where else:
thus does he slight and undervalue, and even reprobate all other ways to
Heaven, that he may set the richer price, and raise a greater estimation in us
of this. The substance of all the Apostles discourse, and the groundwork of
mine shall be this one Aphorism, Nothing is efficaciously available to
salvation, but a renewed, For the opening of which we will examine by way of
doctrine, wherein this new creature consists, and then by way of use, the
necessity of that, and unprofitableness of all other plausible pretending
means; and first of the first, wherein this new creature consists.

It Is observable, that our state of nature and sin is in Scripture expressed
ordinarily by old age, Romans VI. 6.
the natural sinful man, that is, all our natural affections that are born and
grow up with us, Col. III. 9.
are called old man, as if since Adams fall we were decrepit, Ephesians. IV. 22.
and feeble, and aged as soon as born, as a child begotten by a man in a
consumption never comes to the strength of a man, is always weak, and crazy,
and puling, has all the imperfections and corporal infirmities of age before
he is out of his Infancy. And according to this ground the whole Analogy of
Scripture runs; all that is opposite to the old decrepit state, to the dotage
of nature is phrased new; Mar. I. 27.
The new Covenant, Mark i. 27. The language of believers new tongues, Mar. XVI.
17.
Mark xvi. 17. A new commandment, John xiii. 34. Joh. XIII. 34.
A new man, Ephesians. ii. 15. In sum, the state of grace is expressed by (...), Ephesians.
II. 15.
all is become new, 2 Cor. v. 17. So that old and new, 2 Cor. V. 17.
as it divides the Bible, the whole state of things, the world; so it does that
to which all these serve, man; every natural man Adam was a perfect man when he
was but a minute old, and all his children are old even in the cradle, Ephesians. 11.
5.
nay, even dead with old age, Ephesians. ii. 5. And then consequently, every
spiritual man which has somewhat else in him then he received from Adam, he
that is born from above, John III. 3.
John iii. 3. (...), (for it may be so rendered from the original, as well as
born again, as our English read it) Ephesians. II. 5.
Ephesians. ii. 5. he is contrary to the former, a new man, a new creature; the old
Eagle has cast his beak and is grown young; the man, when old has entered the
second time into his mothers womb, and is born again, all the gray hairs and
wrinkles fall off from him, as the scales from blind Tobits eyes, and he comes
forth a refined, glorious, beauteous new creature, you would wonder to see the
change. So that you find in general, that the Scripture presumes it, that there
moves this soul, and enables it to do that which naturally it could Gal. II. 20.
He lives, yet not he, but Christ lives in him, Gal. ii. 20. This being
premised, that now you know what this new creature is, he that lives and moves
by a new principle, all that is behind whence it comes, the answer is clear and
punctual, John III. 3.
John iii. 3. (...), from above, from whence comes every good, and especially
every perfect gift, James i. 17. James I. 17.
but this most peculiarly by a several and more excellent way then any thing
else. Since Christ's ascension the Holy Ghost of all the persons in the Trinity
is most frequently employed in the John xv. 26. John XV. 26.
The comforter whom I will send from the Father. Now this spirit being present
every where in its essence, is said to come to us by communication of his
gifts, and so to be peculiarly resident 1 Cor. VI. 19.
1 Cor. vi. 19. God sends then his Spirit into our hearts; and this, I said, by
a peculiar manner, not by way of emission, as an arrow sent out of a bow, which
loses its union which it had with the bow, and is now fastened in the But or
white; nor properly by way of infusion, as the soul is in the body, infused
from God, yet so also, that it is in a manner put into our hands, and is so in
the man's possession irradiation, as a beam sent from the Sun, that is in the
air indeed, and that substantially, yet so as it is not separated from the Sun,
nay, consists only in this, that it is united to the Sun; so that if it were
possible for it to be cut off from the Sun, it would desist to be, it would
illuminate no longer. So that you must conceive these beams of Gods Spirit at
the same time in the Christians heart He has bent his bow, he has sent forth
his arrows, Psalm. XVIII. 14.
he cast forth lightnings, Psalm. xviii. 14. But if I like any thing that I meet
with, if I would have it to me, I reach out my spear and fasten in it, but
still hold the spear in my hand, and Eusebius. his phrase, which no man can cut
asunder. It Is impossible to divide or cut a spirit, and this bond is (...), a
spiritual one, and that made St. Paul so confident, That no creature Romans VIII.
39
Romans viii. 39. And this God does by way of emanation, as a loadstone sending
out its effluvia or magnetic atoms draws the iron to it self, which never
stays till it be united. Thus do you see from whence this principle comes to
me, and in what manner, from Gods Spirit by this means uniting me to himself.

To the second question, where it lodges, my answer is, in the heart of man, in
the whole soul; not in the understanding, not in it begins to express and show
it self in the world, by them the habit Blessed is the womb that bears this
incarnate Spirit, Luke XI. 27.
and the paps that give him suck! Now this inward principle, this grace of
regeneration, understanding it is first, spiritual wisdom, and discretion in
holy things, Romans I. 28.
opposite to which is (...), Romans i. 28. an unapproving, as well as unapproved
or reprobate mind, and frequently in Scripture spiritual blindness. Then as a
branch of this, belief or assent to the truth of the promises, and the like; in
the practical judgment it is spiritual prudence in ordering all our holy
knowledge to holy practice; in the will it is a regular choice of whatsoever may
prove available to salvation, a holy love of the end, and embracing of the
means with courage and zeal. Lastly, in the outward man it is an ordering of all
our actions to a blessed conformity with a sanctified soul. In brief, it is one
principle within us does every thing that is holy, believes, repents, hopes,
loves,

For the third question, when this new principle enters; first, you are to
know, that comes into the heart in a threefold condition; 1. as an harbinger;
2. as a private secret guest; 3. as an inhabitant, or housekeeper. As it is an
harbinger, so it comes to fit and prepare gladiators had their arma
praelusoria) by skirmishing with our corruptions before he comes to give them a
pitch-battel; he brandishes a flaming sword about our ears, Spirit of bondage.
In sum, every check of conscience, every sigh for sin, every fear of judgment,
every desire of grace, every motion or inclination toward spiritual good, he it
never so short-winded, is praeludium spiritus, a kind of John Baptist to
Christ, something that God sent before to prepare the ways of affliction,
every disease, (which is part of Gods discipline to keep us in some order,) in
brief, at every Sermon that works upon us at the hearing: then I say, the
lightning flashes in our eyes, we have a glimpse of his Spirit, but cannot come
to a full sight of it* and thus he appears to many, whom he will never dwell
with. Unhappy men that they cannot lay hold on him when he comes so near them!
and yet somewhat more happy, then they that never came within ken of
Inhabitance of the Spirit cannot make such use as he should, yet to make the
best he can: and thus I say the Spirit appears to the unregenerate, almost
every day of our lives. 2. When this Spirit comes a guest to lodge with us,
then is he said to enter; but till by actions and frequent obliging works he
makes himself known to his neighbors, as long as he keeps his chamber, till he
declare himself to be there, so long he remains a private secret guest: and
that is called the introduction of the form, that makes a man to be truly
regenerate, when the seed is sown in his heart, when the habit is infused, and
that is done sometimes discernibly, sometimes not discernibly, but seldom, as
when Saul was called in the Acts IX.
Acts ix. he was certainly able to tell a man the very minute of his change, of
his being made a new creature. Thus they which have long lived in an enormous
Antichristian course, do many times find themselves stricken on a sudden, and
are able to date their regeneration, and tell you punctually how old they are
in the Spirit. Yet because there be many preparations to this Spirit, which are
not this Spirit; many presumptions in our hearts false-grounded, many
tremblings and jealousies in those that have it, natural and spiritual: seeing
it is a Spirit that thus enters, and not as it did light on the Disciples in a
bodily shape, it is not an easy matter for any one to define the time of his
conversion. Some may guess somewhat nearer then others, as remembering a
sensible change in themselves; but in a word, the surest discerning of it, is
in its working, not at its entering. I may know that now I have the Spirit
better then at what time I came to it. Undiscernibly Gods supernatural agency
interposes sometimes in the mothers womb, as in John Baptist springing in
Elizabeth at Maryes salutation, Luke I. 41.
Luke i. 41. and perhaps in Jeremy, Jer. i. 5. Before thou came out of the
womb I Sanctified thee, Jer. l. 5.
and in Isaiah, Isa. xlix. 5. Isa. XLIX 5.
The Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant. But this divine
address attends most ordinarily till the time of our Baptism, when the Spirit
accompanying the outward sign infuses it self into their hearts, and there
seats and plants it self, and habit of grace into holy spiritual acts of Faith
and Obedience: from which it is ordinarily said, that Infants baptized have
habitual Faith, as they may be also said to have habitual repentance, and the
habits of all other graces, because they have the root and seed of those
beauteous healthful flowers which will actually flourish then, when they
Baptism, that ordinarily it is not wrought without that means, and in those
means we may expect it, as our Church does in our Liturgies, where she presumes
at every Baptism that it has pleased God to regenerate the Infant by his holy
Spirit. And this may prove a solemn piece of comfort to some, who suspect their
state more then they need: and think it is impossible that they should be in a
regenerate condition, because they have not as yet found any occasional
emergencies, the sense of Gods judgments on our selves or others, the reflection
on his mercies, the reading good Books, falling into virtuous acquaintance, but
most eminently at, and with the preaching of the Word: and this by degrees as
it seems to us; but indeed Romans I. 16.
for even it is the power of God unto salvation, Romans i. 16. inhabitant, or
housekeeper. The Spirit, Epist. 105. ad Xystum.
says Austin, first is in us, then dwells in us: before it dwells, it helps us
to believe: when it dwells, it helps, and perfects, and improves our faith, and
accomplishes it with all other concomitant graces. So I say here, the Spirit is
then said to inhabit, and keep house in us, not as soon as it is entertained
and received: but when it breaks forth into acts, and declares it self before
all men, When men see our good works, and glorify our Mat. V. 16.
Matthew. v. 16. Before we were said to live in the Spirit, now to walk, Gal. V.
25.
as you shall see the phrases used distinctly, Gal v. 25* (...) walk, that is
to go about conspicuously in the sight of all men, breaking forth into works,
(as the Sun after the dispersions of a mist or cloud) whereby all men see and
acknowledge his faith and obedience, and find their own evil ways reprehended,
and made manifest by his good, Ephesians. V. 13.
as is noted in the 13. verse, All things that are reproved, are made manifest
by the light. Semblable Atheists repining at the godly man, Wisd. II. 14.
2 Wisd. ii. 14. He is made to reprove our thoughts. Thus is the third Quere
resolved also, when this inward principle enters. 1. It comes as an harbenger,
in every outward restraint by which God keeps us from sinning. 2. It enters as
a guest in some season or other, once for all. In the womb, at Baptism, at some
Sermon, sometimes at a notable tempest, shaking and stirring us violently,
ordinarily and for the most part not to be discerned by us: and lastly, dwells
with us, and shows it self in its works, yet that not at any set time after his
entrance, not constantly without ever covering his face, but when and as often
as it pleases, and the flesh resists not. To the last Quere, What works it
performs, the answer shall be brief; every thing that may be called spiritual,
Faith, Repentance, Charity, Hope, Self-denial, and the rest: but these not
promiscuously, or in an heap altogether, but by a wise dispensation, in time
and by degrees. The soul being enabled Without Faith it is it is true; but argues
no necessary precedence of it before other graces, for the habits of them all
are of the same age in us, and then also will it be as true, that without
Repentance, or without Love, Faith it self cannot please God: for if it be
truly acceptable Faith, there is both Repentance and Love in the same womb to
keep it company. Thus are we wont to say that only Faith justifies, but not
Faith alone: and the Faith saves every man that has it, and yet the
believing'st man under Heaven shall not be saved without Charity. Charity hides
a multitude of sins, and yet the charitablest man in the world shall never have
his score cross't without Repentance. A catalogue of these fruits of the Spirit
you may at your leisure Gal. V. 22.
out of the fifth to the Gal. from the 22. verse, 1 Pet. I. V.
and 1 Peter i 5. All these graces together, though some belonging to one, some
to another faculty of the soul, are yet all at once conceived in it, at once
begin their life in the heart, though one be perhaps sooner ready to walk
abroad, and show it self in the world then another. As in the 2 of Kings iv.
34. 2 Kings IV. 34.
Elisha went up on the bed and lay on the child and put his mouth on his mouth,
and eyes upon his eyes, and hands upon his hands, and and verse 35. Verse 35.
the child sneezed seven times, and opened his eyes. Thus I say, does the
Spirit apply it self unto the soul, and measure it self out to every part of
it; and then the spiritual life comes at once into the soul (as motion
beginning in the center, diffuses it self equally through the whole sphere, and
affects every part of the circumference) and the flesh of the child waxed
warm; where the flesh indefinitely signifies every part of it together, and in
sneezed seven times, a violent disburthening it self of some troublesome humors
that tickle in the head; to which may be answerable our spiritual clearing and
purging our selves by Self-denial, the laying aside every weight, Heb. XII. 1.
Heb. xii. 1. then opened his eyes, which in our spiritual creature, is
spiritual illumination, or the eye of Faith; these I say, Esaias and Jacob) the
rougher come out first. We begin our spiritual life in Repentance and
contrition, and with many harsh twinges of the Spirit; and then comes Faith
like Jacob at the heels, smooth and soft, applying all the cordial promises to
our penitent souls. In brief, if any judgment be to be made, which of these
Self denial and Faith to be there first, and most eminent, according to that
notable place, Matthew, XVI. 24.
Matthew, xvi. 24. where Christ seems to set down the order of graces in true
Disciples. Let him deny himself, and take up his cross, that is, forgo all his
carnal delights, then follow me; that is, by a lively faith believe in Christ,
and prize him before all the world besides: and indeed in effect these two are
but one, though they appear to us in several shapes: for Faith is nothing
without Self-denial, it cannot work till our carnal affections be subjected to
it. Believe a man may, and have flesh and fleshly lust in him, but unless Faith
have the pre-eminence, Faith is no Faith. the law of his members, and the law
of his mind; so many degrees of flesh, so many of spirit: but if there be
constantly but an even balance, or more of flesh then spirit, if 3 degrees of
spirit, and 5 of flesh, then can there not be said to be any true Self-denial,
and consequently any Faith, no more then that can be said to be hot, which has
more degrees of cold, then heat in it. In brief, it is a good measure of
Self-denial that sets his faith in his Throne, and when by it faith has
conquered, life of Faith. Gal. II. 20.
Faith is become a principle of the greatest power and activity in the soul.
And so much for these 4 Queries; from which I conceive every thing that is
material, and directly pertinent to instruct you, and open the estate of a new
creature, may be resolved. And for other niceties, how far we may prepare our
selves, how cooperate hearts raised, then your brains puffed up; to have your
spirits and souls inwardly affected to an earnest desire and longing after it,
which will perhaps be somewhat Use and Application.

And for the necessity of renewedness of heart, to demonstrate that, I will
only crave of you to grant me, that the performance of any one duty toward God
is necessary, and then it will prove it self; for it is certain no duty to God
can be performed without it. For it is not a fair outside, a slight performance,
a Cain would deserve as much thanks for his sacrifice as his brother Abel; for
in the outside of them there was no difference, unless perhaps on Cain's side,
that he was forwardest in the duty, and offered first, Genesis iv. 3. But it is
the inside of the action, Genesis IV. 3.
the marrow and bowels of it that God judges by. If a sum in gross, or a bag
sealed up, would pass for payment in Gods audit; every man God of thoughts, and
a searcher of the heart and reins, and 'twill then be a harder business to be
found just when he examines, or clear when he will judge. The least spot and
blemish in the face of it, the least maim or imperfection in the offering, the
least negligence or coldness in the Isa.
Who has required it at your hands? This is not it that God is taken with, or
such as he commanded, it may pass for a complement, or a work of course, but
never be valued as a duty or real service. Resolve thy self to dwell no Simeon
(...), in Eusebius.) plant thy self continually in a Pillar, with thy eyes, and
words, fixed, and shot up perpetually toward Heaven. If there be not a spirit
within thee to give light to the eyes; to add sighs and groans to the voice,
all this that thou have done is nothing but as a blind man's pretensions to
sight, and a dumb man's claim to speech; and so in like manner in all our duties
which the world and carnal men set a price on. And the reason is, because every
spiritual seeming work done by a natural man, is not truly so: it is nothing
less then that which it is said to be; his prayers are not prayers, lip-labor
perhaps, but not devotion; his serving of God is formality, not obedience; his
hope of Heaven, not a hope but a fancy. If God, or Satan, a judge, or a
tempter, should come to reason with him about it, he would soon be worsted,
never be able to maintain his title to it. In brief, the fairest part of a
natural man, that which is least counterfeit, his desire and natural desires of
spiritual obedience,) these I say, are but false desires, false affections. 1.
They have no solidity or permanency in the will, only fluid and transitory,
some flight sudden wishes, tempests and storms of a troubled mind, soon blown
over: the least temptation will be sure to do it. They are like those wavering
prayers without any stay of faith, Jam. I. 6.
Jam. 1. 6. like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and tossed. 2. That being
which they have is acts are distinguished by their objects, he sees truly which
judges the thing to be that that it is: it is true indeed that another man sees,
he that takes blew for green, but he does not see truly: so also he only
wills a good thing, that wills that natural man, when he is said to choose
spiritual things, as Heaven, Happiness and the like, he desires not a spiritual
but a carnal thing: in desiring Heaven, he desires somewhat that would free him
from misery in happiness, a natural or moral good, that would be acceptable to
any creature under Heaven: and so a Turk will desire paradise, and that very
impatiently, in hope that he shall have his fill of lust there. Generally you
may mark that in such desires of spiritual things, it is love of Christ grows by
sending out and fastening our affections on him as an object fittest for our
turns, that will advantage us most; but not by receiving in his Image and shape
into our souls: this indeed would make us not only love, but

By what has been said it is plain enough (though it might be much more
amplified) that grace is of absolute necessity to performance of any holy work
acceptable to God: that without it whatsoever is done in spiritual matters is
carnal, not indeed spiritual, but equivocally and absurdly so called. The
natural man's desires Coloquintida within him? There Is mors in olla, 2 Kings.
as the Prophet once spoke, that is death in the pot, that so infects and kills
every thing that comes out of it. How should we abhor, and loath, and detest
this old leaven that so besowres all our actions? this Heathenism of ungenerate
carnal nature, which makes our best works so unchristian? To insist longer upon
this, were but to increase your thirst, not to satisfy it: to make marasmus
and desperate drought that has gone over your souls, but not to help you to
any waters for the cure: that shall come next, as the last work of this
exercise to be performed, in a word.

Having learnt what this new creature is, and how absolutely necessary to a
Christian; O let us not defer one minute longer to examine our estates, whether
we are yet renewed or no, and by the acts which we daily perform, observe
whether the sanctifying habit Turkey, might not have made thee worship Mahumet.
I would be sorry to be rigid; I fear thou will find they might: well then, a
new course must be taken, all thy former heathen, carnal, or at best good moral
life, all thy formal performances, the best of thy natural desires must be
content to be rank't here with circumcision and uncircumcision availing
nothing, there is no trust, or confidence to be placed on these Egyptian
staves of reed, Es. xxxvi. 6. And then if thou will Creator of Spirits and
Lover of Souls, and never leave soliciting, till he has breathed another
breath into your nostrils, another Soul into your Soul: you must lay your self
at his feet, and with all the violence and Rhetoric, and humility, that these
wants will prompt thee to, and woo, and importune the Holy Spirit to overshadow
thee, to conceive all holy graces spiritually in thee: and if thou can not
suddenly receive swept and garnish't. All the outward means which God has
afforded thee, before thou art regenerate, though thou sin in all thy
unregenerate performances, for want of inward sanctity, yet it is better to
have obeyed imperfectly, then not at all: the first is weakness, the other
desperate presumption; the first material circumspect, watch and observe the
Spirit, and be perpetually ready to receive its blasts, let it never have
breathed on thee in vain; let thine ear be for ever open to its thunder. Christ
seldom speaks so loud now adays as he did to Saul, Acts ix. it is in a soft
still voice, and I will not promise you that men that dwell in a mill, that are
perpetually engaged in worldly loud employments, or that men asleep, shall ever
come to hear of it. The sum of all my exhortation is, after examination, to
cleanse, and And do thou, O Holy Lord, work this whole work in us, prepare us
by thy outward, perfect us by thy inward graces: awaken us out of the darkness
of death, and plant a new seed of holy light and life in us: infuse into our
heathen hearts a Christian habit of sanctity, that we may perform all spiritual
duties of holiness, that we may glorify thee here Spirit, and be glorified
with thee by thy Christ hereafter.

Now to him that has elected us, has, etc.

The XVI. Sermon.
2 Pet. III. 3. Scoffers walking after their own lusts.
THat we may take our rise luckily, and set out Preface to clear our passage to
our future discourse, and so spend no part of our precious time unprofitably,
we will by way of introduction examine what is here meant 1. by scoffers, 2. by
walking after their own lusts. And first, scoffers here do not signify those
whom confidence joined to a good natural wit, has taught to give and play
facetiousness, in an immoderate scurrility. But scoffers here are of a more
special stamp, those who deal out their scoffs only on God and Religion. (...).
The word in the original signifies to mock, to abuse, and that either in
words, and then it is rendered scoffing, or in our actions, when we promise any
man to perform a business, and then deceive his expectation, and then it is
rendered deluding. So Matthew. ii. 16. Matthew. II. 16.
when Herod saw he was mocked, (...), that he deluded by the magicians. So that
in the first primitive sense, scoffers must signify those who either laugh at
God, or else delude him in not performing what he expects, and they by their
profession promised. In the secondary notion, to scoff, is by way of argument
to oppose any truth contumeliously or bitterly, as Solomon begins Atheists
scoffs, Wisd. II. 1.
Wisd. ii. 1. The ungodly said reasoning with themselves, and these are said to
set their mouth against Heaven, managing disputes, which have both sting and
poison in them; the first to wound and overthrow the truth spoken of, the other
to infect the auditors with a contrary opinion. And these rational scoffs, for
which Socrates anciently was very famous, are ordinarily in form of question,
as in the Psalmist often, Where is now their God? i. e. Certainly if they had a
God he would be seen at Israelites for being such fools as to worship him that
will not relieve them, but implicitly argue, that indeed there is no such God
as they pretend to worship. And just in this manner were the scoffers in my
Text, who did not only laugh, but argue, saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? verse 4. Verse 4.
persuading themselves, and laboring to prove to others, that what is spoken
of Christ's second coming to judgment was Athenians did at the resurrection,
Acts xvii. 32. and when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked, etc. i. e. disputed sarcastically and contumeliously against it, that
certainly there was no such matter. And thus also is the same word used of
those which joined their reason and malice to disprove Christ's omnipotence,
Matthew. xxvii. 42. where they reviled and mocked him, saying, He saved others,
In which speech the bitterest part of the scoff was the reason there used,
plausible enough amongst ignorant Jews, that surely if he had any power, he
would make use of it for himself.

Thirdly, to scoff is sometimes without words or actions to show a contempt or
neglect of any body. So Herod's mocking of Christ, is set as an expression that
he did not think him worthy talking with, Luke xxiii. 11. He set him at naught,
and mocked him, he would not vouchsafe to take notice of him, nor to be troubled
with the examination of so poor contemptible a fellow. Rhet. ^. 2*
And so in Aristotle, not to know a man's name, not to have taken so much notice
of him, as to remember what to call him, is reckoned the greatest neglect, the
unkindest scoff in the world, and is ordinarily taken very tenderly by any one
who has deserved any thing at our hands. So that in brief (to gather up what
we have hitherto scattered) the scoffers here meant, are i. e. remain errand
Atheists under a Christian profession, who by letting loose either their wits
to profane jests, or their reason to heathenish conceits and disputings, or
their actions to all manner of disobedience, demonstrate that indeed they care
not for God, they scarce remember his name, Psalm X. 4.
Neither is he in all their thoughts, Psalm. x. 4.

In the next place, walking after their own lusts, is giving themselves liberty
to follow all the directions of corrupt polluted nature, in entertaining all
conceits and practices which the pride of their understadings and rankness of
their affections shall propose to them in opposition to God. And this without
any reluctance or twinge of conscience, walking on as securely and confidently,
as if it were indeed the right highway.

So that now you have seen the outside of the Text, and looked it Atheism, and
the subjects in which it shows it self, There shall come in the last days
scoffers. 2. The motive and impellent to this sin, a liberty which men give
themselves, to walk after their own lusts. And first of Atheism, and the
subjects in whom it shows its self, In the, etc. Where you may note that the
words being in a form of a prophecy, do note a sort of people which were to
come in respect of St. Peter, who writes it. period of the Jewish Nation, and
destruction of Jerusalem; takes in the parallel state of things under the last
age, and dotage, and declination of the world. Accordingly we see at the 24. of
St. Matthew, the prophecy of both, as it were interwoven and twisted into each
other; so that what St. Peter says shall be, we may justly suspect is
fulfilled amongst us, his future being now turned into a present, his prophecy
into a story. In the Apostles times, when Christianity was in the Philosophers,
who peremptorily resolved themselves against this profession, joined issue with
the Apostles in assiduous disputation, as we may find in the 17. of the Acts.
Amongst those the Epicureans did plainly deny that there was any God that
governed the world, and laughed at any proof that Moses and the Prophets could
afford for their conviction. And here a man might Philosophers. The Epicurean
unbelief seemed nothing to him, being compared to this Christian Atheism, where
men under the vizard of religion and profession of piety, are in heart arrant
Heathens, and in their fairest note is, that the profession of Christianity is
mixed with an infinite deal of Atheism, and that in some degree above the
Heathenism of the perversest Philosophers. There were in St. Peter's time
Epicureans, and all sects of scoffers at Christianity,

It Is worth observing what variety of stratagems the Devil has always had, to
keep us in defiance with God, and to nourish in us that hostility and enmity
against Heaven, which is so deep and predominant in himself. He first set them
a work to rebel and fortify themselves against God, and make themselves by
building Tower so impregnable, that God himself could not be able to disperse
them. Genesis xi. 4. Afterward, when by the punishment and defeating of that
design, the world was sufficiently instructed, that no arm of flesh, no bodily
strength could make resistance against Heaven; when the body could hold out in
rebellion no longer, he then instructs the inward man, the soul to make its
approaches, and challenge Heaven. Now the soul of man consisting of two
faculties, the Understanding and the Will, he first deals Idolatrous worship,
in making it adore the Sun, the Moon, and the whole Host of Heaven, which was a
more generous kind of Idolatry. Afterward, in making them worship Dogs and
Cats, Onions and Garlic, for so did the Egyptians; and this was a more sottish
stupid affection, a man would wonder how the Devil could make them such fools.
Afterward he wrought still upon admiration and gratitude, admiration of any
kind of virtue, and gratitude for any good turn) to deifie and worship as gods
any men which had ever done, either their Nation, or private persons any
important good or favor. So that every Heroes or noble, famous man, as soon as
he was dead was worshipped. 'Twere long to show you the variety of shifts in this
kind, which the Devil used to bring in the (...) of the Gentiles, i. e. their
Christianity came into the world, and turned it out of doors, and at Christ's
Resurrection all the gods of the Heathen expired. However the Devil still stuck
close to that faculty of the soul, which he had been so long acquainted with, I
mean the understanding, and seeing through the whole world almost the Doctrine
of Christ had so possessed men, that he could not hope to bring in his Heathen
gods again, he therefore has one design more on the understanding: Heresies
concerning the union of his natures, equality of his person with the Father,
and the like: and rung as many changes in men's opinions as the matter of faith
was capable of. There was no truth almost in Christianity, but had its Heretic
reason and truth, and the power of Scripture having outlived in a good degree
fundamental error in opinion, has almost expuls'd the Devil out of the head,
or upper part of the soul, the Understanding, his last plot is on the heel, i.
e. the Will and Affections; and that he has bruised terribly, Genesis III. 15.
according to that prophecy, Genesis iii. 15. He deals mainly on our manners, and
strives to make them, if it be possible, sinful beyond capability of mercy. And
this design has heresy against Christ in our lives, then ever he was able to
do in our doctrine. In a Kingdom, where the custom of the Country and education
has planted purity of faith in the understanding, he there labors to supplant
and eradicate charity and devotion in the will; and crucifies Christ more
confidently in our corrupt heathenish practices, then ever the Jews did in
their incredulity. And on this plot he has stuck close, and insisted a
corrupt, and curse, and make abominable a sincere belief by an Atheistical
conversation. And this does prove in general, that it is the Devils aim, and
from thence probably the Christians curse, to have more hostility against God
in our Wills, and so to be more horrible Atheists, then ever the Heathen had in
their Understandings. Now that we may the more distinctly discover the
Christian Atheist, who is very orthodox

He is in his knowledge sufficiently Catechized in the knowledge of Scripture,
and is confident that all its dictates are to be believed, disposition,
religious education, common custom of the place or times where we live, human
laws, and the like; and each or all of these may curb our forwardness, and keep
us in some order. But who is there amongst us, that being tempted with a fair,
lovely, amiable vice, which sin in one scale, and the bare authority of the
Scriptures in the other quite out-weighing all them with its heaviness, I
should then hope that our Jury would bring in an evidence of guilt, that in any
our most entire obediences some other respect casts the scales: and this is one
piece of direct Atheism, that though our Understandings affirm, yet our Will
and affections deny that Scripture is for its own sake to be obeyed.

Gods Essence and Attributes, our Understandings have a distinct conceit of awe
and reverence, to answer every notion we have of God; and yet here also our
conversation has its postures of defiance, its scoffs and arts of reviling, as
it were to deface and scrape out every of these notions out of our Wills, and
to persuade both our selves and others, that that knowledge does only (...).
float in our brains, but has no manner of weight to sink it believe, or at
least pretend to, we do so, the immensity, i. e. the ubiquity and omnipresence
of God, that he indeed is every where, to fill, to see, to survey, to punish,
and yet our lives do plainly proclaim, that in earnest we mean no such matter;
we shut up our hearts against God, and either as the Gadarens did Christ, being
weary of his presence, fairly entreat, or else directly banish him out of our
coasts, because he has been or is like to be the destruction of some Swine,
beastial affections in us. And in sum, those bodies of ours, which he has
marked out for his Temples, we will scarce allow him for his Inn to lodge with
us one night. Again, can we expect to be credited, when we say we believe the
ubiquity and omnipresence of God, and yet live and sin as confidently, as if we
were out of his sight, or reach? Do we behave our selves in our outrages, in
our luxury, nay, even in our gravest devotions, as if God were within ken?
Without all doubt in every minute almost of omnipresence to see, or else his
justice to punish us: for those very things which we dare not to venture on in
the sight of an earthly Magistrate that may punish us, nay, of a spy that may
complain of us, nay, of an enemy that will upbraid us, nay, of a friend that
will check and admonish us; we never doubt, or demur, or delay to practice in
private, or the dark, where still God is present to oversee and Atheism. In
like manner, we acknowledge God to be (...), all-sufficient; and if we should
be examined in earnest, we would confess that there is no ability in any
creature to bestow or provide any good thing for us: and yet our will here also
has its ways and arguments of contradiction. tremblings, our jealousies, our
distrusts, our carefulness, our worldly providence, and importunate carking,
our methods and stratagems of thrift and covetousness, and the whole business
of our lives in wooing, and soliciting, and importuning every power of nature,
every trade and art of the world, to succor, to assist and provide for us, are
most egregious evidences that we put no trust or confidence in Gods
all sufficiency, but wholly depend and rely second causes, without any raising
or elevating our eyes or thoughts toward God, from whom comes our help,
plainly shows that God still dwells abroad in tents: we have seen or heard of
him, but have not yet brought him home into our hearts, there to possess, and
rectify, and instruct our wills, as well as our understandings.

Thirdly, The whole mystery of Christ articulately set down in our Creed we as
punctually believe, and to make good our names, that we are Christians in
earnest, we will challenge and defy the fire and faggot to persuade us out of
it: and these are good resolutions, if our practices did not give our faith the
lie, and utterly renounce at the Church door whatsoever we professed in our pews.
This very one thing, that he which is our Savior, shall be our Judge, that he
which was crucified, dead, and buried, sits now at the this main part, yea, sum
of our belief, we deny and bandy against all our lives long. If the story of
Christ coming to judgment, set down in the xxv. Mat. XXV. 30.
of Matthew after the 30. verse, had ever entered through the doors of our ears
to the inward closets of our hearts, it is impossible but we should observe and
practice that one single duty there required of us. Christ there as a Judge
exacts and calls us to account for nothing in the world, but only works of
mercy, and Alms-deeds, which concern only the outside of our neighbor, and are
but a kind of worldly mercy, there are many more important, but cheaper works
of mercy, as good counsel, spiritual instructions, holy education of them that
are come out of our loins, or are committed to our care, seasonable reproof,
according to that excellent place, Lev xix. 17. Lev. XIX. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but in any wise reprove him: a
care of carrying Beloved, till by some severe hand held over our lives, and
particularly by the daily study and exercise of some work of mercy or other, we
demonstrate the sincerity of our belief, the Saints on Earth, and Angels in
Heaven will shrewdly suspect, that we do only say over that part of our Creed,
that we believe only that which is for our turn, the sufferings and
satisfactions of Christ, which cost us nothing, but do not proceed to his
office of a Judge, do not either fear his works of mercy, whatsoever he brags
of in his theory or speculation, in his heart either denies or contemns Christ
as Judge, and so destroys the sum of his Faith, and this is another kind of
secret Atheism.

Fourthly, Our Creed leads us on to a belief and acknowledgement of the Holy
Ghost; and it is well we have all conn'd his name Ephesian Disciples, Acts xix.
2. Acts XIX 2.
They have not so much as heard whether there be an Holy Ghost or no. But not
to suspect so much ignorance in any Christian, we will suppose indeed men to
know whatsoever they profess, and enquire only whether our lives second our
professions, or whether indeed they are mere Infidels, and Atheistical in this
business concerning the Holy Ghost. How many of the ignorant sort which have
learnt this name in their Catechism or Creed, have not yet any further use to
put it to, but only to make up the number of the Trinity, have no special
office to appoint for him, no special mercy, or gift, or ability to beg of him
in the business of their salvation, but mention him only for fashion sake, not
that they ever think of preparing their bodies or souls to be Temples worthy to
entertain him, not that they ever look after earnest of the Spirit in their
hearts, 2 Cor. l. 22.
2 Cor. i. 22. Further yet, how many better learned amongst us do not yet in
our lives acknowledge him in that Epithet annexed to his title, the Holy Ghost,
i. e. not only eminently in himself holy, but causally, producing the same
quality in us, from thence called the sanctifying and renewing Spirit? How do
we for the most part fly from, and abandon, and resist, and so violently deny
him, when he once appears to us in this Attribute? When he comes to sanctify
us, we are world, as he begins to exact of us, we shake off many blessed
motions of the Spirit, and keep our selves within garrison, as far as we can
out of his reach, lest at any turn he should meet with, and we should be
converted. Lastly, the most ordinary morally qualified tame Christians amongst
us, who are not so violent as to profess open arms against this Spirit, how do
they yet reject him out of all their thoughts? How seldom Fathers, which will
cast many fair outsides at the bar for Atheists, That the life of an
unregenerate man is but the life of an Heathen, Clem. Al.
and that it is our regeneration only that raises us up (...), Strom. p. 281.
from being still mere Gentiles. He that believes in his Creed the person, nay,
understands in the Schools the Attributes and gifts of the Holy Ghost, and yet
sees them only in the fountain, neither finds nor seeks for any effects of them
in his own soul; he that is still unregenerate, and continues still gaping and
yawning, stupid and senseless in this his condition, is still for all his Creed
and learning in effect an Atheist. And the Lord of Heaven give him to see, and
endeavors to work, and an heart to pray, and his Spirit to draw and force him
out of this condition.

Fifthly, Not to cramp in every Article of our Creed into this Discourse, we
will only insist on two more. We say therefore believe the forgiveness of sins,
and it is a blessed confidence, that all the treasures in the world cannot
equal. But do our selves keep equipage, and hand in hand accompany this
profession? Let me catechize you a while. You believe the forgiveness of sins,
but I hope not absolutely, that the sufferings of Christ shall effectually
clear every man's score at the day of judgment: well then, it must be meant only
of those that by repentance and faith are grafted into Christ, and shall appear
at that great marriage in a wedding garment, which shall be acknowledged the
livery and colors of the Lamb. But do our lives ever stand to this
explication, and restriction of the Article? Do they ever expect this beloved
remission by performing the condition of repentance? Do we ever go about to
make our selves capable of receiving this mercy conditionally i. e. both our
original actual transgressions: but we never take any course to rest satisfied,
that we in particular shall participate of this happiness. This requires the
humiliation of the whole man, the spirit of bondage for a while, afterward a
second purity and virginity of the soul recovered by repentance, and then a
soberly grounded faith and confidence, and an expressing of it by our own
forgiving of others. And till this piece of our Creed be thus explained and
interpreted in our conversation, we remain but confident

Sixthly and lastly, The resurrection of the body, and its consequent,
everlasting life, is the close of our Faith, and end, and prop, and
encouragement, and consummation of our hope; and yet we take most pains of all
to prove our selves Infidels in this: our whole carriage, both in the choice
and observance of our Religion show that we do not depend on it, that we put no
confidence in the resurrection. profit or convenience is in a matter of so high
importance, knowing and expecting that our reward shall be great in Heaven.
This one thought of a resurrection, and an infinite reward of any faithful
undertaking of ours, would make us disdain, and almost be afraid of any
temporal recompense for our everlasting one. We should catch and be ambitious
of that expression of devotion, which were most painful and least profitable as
to worldly advantage: and yet we in the stupidity of Atheistical hearts are so
improvidently covetous, so hasty and impatient in our Religion, that unless
some present gain allure and draw us, we have no manner of life, or spirit, or
alacrity to this, as we count it, unprofitable service of God. The least
encumbrance promotion, or other like encouragement, will produce and raise in
us these affections and expressions of zeal, which the expectation of the
resurrection could never work in us. Our Religion is somewhat like that of the
Samaritans before Christ's time, either Jews or Heathens, Jos. Ant. Jud. l. 12.
c. 7. l. 11. 8.
according as their King Antiochus would have them, after Christ's time were
perpetually either Jews or Christians, according as the Romans, their new Lords
and Masters either threatened, or granted privilege to the Jews. If there were
any thing to be gotten by the profession, they would be as solemn Christians as
any. So when the Goths and Vandals overrun Italy, and (whether upon good
affection or compulsion from God, I know not) spared them that fled to the
Basilica in Rome, the place where the Christians exercised: then, I say, they
which formerly persecuted Churches, and to save their lives fled to the Temple
for a refuge, which before they abomin'd; and made use of Christianity for
their safeguard, which they would not own for their Religion, and hurried to
that Sanctuary for their lives, which they would not visit for their Souls. The
condition of our Religion is like that which is upbraided to Ephraim, Hos. X.
11.
Hos. X. 11. Ephraim is like an Heifer that loves to tread out the Corn. 'Twas
prohibited by the law to muzzle Ephraim love the toil so well, because that at
the very time he performed the labor, he enjoyed the fruit of it; had, as we
say, his wages in his hand; had some present emolument that would ingratiate
his work to him; was not left to such a tedious expectation, to so long a date
as to wait for his reward till the resurrection: those were too hard terms for
him, he could not endure to be tied so to serve God for naught, to spend the
quickest of our spirits in a sour crabbed profession, and expect our thanks at
doomsday. This plainly demonstrates, that however our theory be possessed, our
practice places no trust, no confidence, no assurance in that part of our
Creed, the resurrection. Church, of the certainty of the resurrection, that
religious men, and those whom undoubtedly God loved, were full of sufferings in
this world, and lived and died many of them without any expression of Gods
favor to them, which made them certainly to conclude, that no doubt God has
some other course to exhibit himself in the riches of his mercy to them; and
seeing there was no hope but in another Verily there should be a reward for the
righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth: and by this
argument we may try our selves for the sincerity of our faith in this business.
If we can be patient to endure afflictions here, and not complain or grumble
for a respite and deliverance, but keep all our hopes to be accomplished, That
our Redeemer lives, and that with these eyes we shall behold him, then may we
cheer up, and persuade our selves on good grounds, that our hearts and lives do
assent to the resurrection, Ecclus. XXXVIII. 20.
which our tongues brag of: Take no heaviness to heart, but drive it away and
remember the end. But if this consideration cannot digest the least oppression
of this life, cannot faith to behold that which easily we might, all our wants
relieved, all our injuries revenged, all our wounds bound up in the day of the
resurrection: but all our life long we repine and grumble, and as men without
hope; and whilst we do thus, what do we but act the part of these Atheists here
in my Text, scoffing and saying, Where is the promise of his coming, in the
next verse to my Text. This very impatience and want of skill in bearing the
brunts of this our warfare, is but a piece of cowardly Atheism, either a
denying or mocking at the resurrection. Every sigh is a scoff, every groan a
gibe, every fear a sly art of laughing at the stupidity of those who depend
upon the fulfilling of the promise live as if there were no resurrection, as
Sadduces, if not as Atheists; all our designs look no further then this life,
all our contrivances are defeated and frustrate in the grave; we manage our
selves with so little understanding, that any spectator would judge by our
actions, that it is no injury to compare us to the beasts that perish and never
return again. Certainly if we had any design upon Heaven or another life, we
would here make some provision for it, Make use those good things that God has
given us with some kind of providence, that they may stand us in stead when we
have need of them, i. e. not only as instruments to sin (for that is to get us
more enemies) but as harbingers to be sent before us to Heaven. 'Twas a bitter
Sarcasm of the fool to the Abbot on his deathbed, that the Abbot deserved his
staff, as being the verier fool of the two, that being straight Tent to another
world, he had sent none of his household stuff before him. The truth is, we live
generally as men that would be very angry, much displeased if any should
persuade us there were a resurrection, the very mentioning of it to us might
seem to upbraid our ordinary practices, which have nothing but the darkness of
death, and silence of the grave to countenance them. I may justly say, that
many ignorant Heathens, annihilated, and turn again into a perpetual nothing,
yet either for the awe they bore to virtue, or fear of disgrace after death,
kept themselves more regularly, lived more carefully then many of us
Christians. And this is an horrid accusation, that will lie very heavy upon us,
that against so many illuminated understandings the ignorance of the Gentiles
should rise up in judgment, and the learned Christian be found Lev. xix. 17.
that 'twas no small work of mercy, 'twas the most friendly office that could be
performed any man, to reprehend, and as the Text says, Not to suffer sin upon
thy neighbor, especially so sly a covert lurking sin as this of Atheism, which
few can discern in themselves. I shall now come Application, which because the
whole Doctrine spoke morally to your affections, and so in a manner prevented
Uses, shall be only a recapitulation and brief knitting up of what hitherto
has been scattered at large.

Seeing that the Devils policy of deluding, and bewitching, and distorting our
Understandings, either with variety of false gods, or heresies raised upon the
true, is now almost clearly out-dated, and his skill is all bent to the
deforming of the Will, and defacing the opinion as in practice, not so much
Atheism to be dreaded from the infidelity of our brains, as the Heathenism and
Gentilism of our lusts, which even in the midst of a Christian Frontiers and
Fortifications must be set up before that part of the soul, our most careful
Watch and Sentinel placed upon our affections, lest the Devil enter there and
depopulate the whole Christian, and plant the Atheist in his room. To this
purpose we must examine what seeds are already sown, what treachery is a
working within, and no doubt most of us at the first cast of the eye shall find
great store, unless we be partial to our selves, and bring weakness, which
indeed signifies Atheism.

When upon examination we find our lives undermining our belief, our practices
denying the authority of Scripture, and no whit forwarder to any Christian duty
upon its commands. When we Gods essence and Attributes reviled and scoffed at
in our conversation, his omnipresence contemned by our confidence in sinning,
and argued against by our banishing God out of all our thoughts, his all
sufficiency doubted of by our distrusts, and our scorn to depend upon it. When
we perceive that our carriages do fall off at this part of our belief in
Christ, that he shall come again to be our Judge, and by our neglect of those
works especially of mercy, which he shall then require of us, show that indeed
we expect him Wills resisting the gifts, and falsifying the Attribute, whilst
our Creed confesses the Person of the Holy Ghost, and see how little, how
nothing of the sanctifying spirit, of the earnest of our regeneration is in our
hearts, and we still stupidly senseless of the want. When we believe forgiveness
of sins, and that only upon condition of repentance, and yet abhor so much as
to hear or think of the performing of it, or to make good that mercy to others
which our reward for all our goodness, and ruling our Religion to our earthly
profit, by our impatience of any affliction, by our heathenish neglect and
stupidity, and riot, that we do not in earnest look for the resurrection to
life. When, I say, by a just, but exact survey and inquest we find these so
many degrees of secret Atheism in us, then must we shrift, and purge, and
cleanse, and rinse our souls from these Gentile in the face, 'till we have
removed this plague from us. And do thou, O Lord, assist our endeavors, and by
the violence of thy Spirit force and ravish us in our lives, as well as belief,
to a sincere acknowledgment and expression of every minute part of that
Religion which is purely Christian, that we may adore thee in our hearts as
well as our brains, and being sanctified throughout, from any tincture, or
color, or suspicion of irreligion

Now to him which has elected us, has, etc.

The XVII. Sermon.
2 Pet. III. 3. Scoffers walking after their own lusts.
IT is an excellent observation of Aristotle's, that rich men are naturally most
contumelious, most given to abuse and deride others, C. 15.
which he expresses thus, in the seventh of his Pol. (...). The contentment
which they enjoy in the continuance of their worldly happiness, Aristotle,
((...),) that their happiness is elevated infinitely above the ordinary pitch;
that whatever contentments any other sort of people can glory or delight in, is
but some imaginary, slight, poor happiness that men are fain to solace
themselves withal, to keep them from melancholy, all far enough contemn or pity
the poverty, and improvidence, and perhaps the sottishness of such wisdom,
knowledge, nay even of Gods graces; no object is more ridiculous in his eye,
then either a Scholar or a Christian, that knows not the value of riches: for
says Aristotle, 2 Rhet. c. 16.
(...). Money is reckoned the price of all things else, that which can easily
purchase whatever else we can stand in need of; and therefore the rich man if
he could think Learning and Religion worth any thing, having his Stoic, to
divest himself of his robes, and put on the sowerness, the rigid, sad behavior
which the profession of Wisdom or Christianity requires. He is better pleased
in his present pomp, then to go and woo that misery and ruggedness, which the
severity of discipline looks for. Let silly beggars boast of the contents of
Wisdom or hopes of Heaven, his coffers at home are better companions then all
the melancholy of books, or sullen solaces of the spirit. He has learnt by
experience, that he ought to pity and contemn these fictions of delight which
the Poets fetch from the fortunate islands to delude, and cozen, and comfort
beggars: his glory, and pride, and riches, are happiness indeed, and whatever
else the poverty of the world can boast of, are objects not of his envy but his
scorn.

Epicure or voluptuous man, who has set up his Idol lust, to whom he owes all
his sacrifice, and from whom he expects all his good fortune, that has fixed
his Pillars, and cast his Anchor, and is peremptorily constant in his course,
that he is resolved for ever to rejoices to run his course, and scorns any
contrary motion that he meets or hears of, and only observes the ways of
virtue, and religion, to hate and laugh at them: and the farther he walks, the
deeper he is engaged in this humor of self-content, and contempt of others, of
security, and scoffing. For this is the force and implicit argument, covertly
contained in the close of these words, There shall come in the last etc. i. e.
this resolution to walk on in their own lusts, has brought them to this pitch
of Atheism, to scoff and deride both God and Goodness. There shall, etc.

We have heretofore divided these words, and in them observed and handled
already the sin of Atheism, together with the subjects in which it works,
Christians of the last times, noted from this prophetic speech, There shall
come in the last days scoffers. We impellent to this sin, a liberty which men
give themselves, and a content which they take to walk after their own lusts.

The second chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, is an excellent description of
the Atheist: and though it be of Apocryphal authority, yet it is of most divine
Canonical truth. I could find in my heart, nay, I can scarce hold from reading,
and paraphrasing the whole chapter to you: it is so solid, so strong, so perfect
a discourse For their own wickedness has blinded them: their stupid
perseverance in those dark ways, in that black Tophet on earth, habituate
custom of sinning, had so thickened their sight, had drawn such a film over
their eyes, that in the judgment of divine affairs, they were stark blind: they
could see nothing in all the mystery of godliness which was worth embracing:
and therefore had no employment, but to walk on after their own lusts, and to
scoff at those that were so foolishly friendly to them, as to call them out of
their voluptuous course of life is a great promoter and advancer of Atheism:
there had never been so many scoffers in the Christian world, had there not
been also those that were resolute to walk after their own lusts.

In the first verse of the Psalms, there be steps, and rounds, and Walking in
the counsel of the ungodly, 2. Standing in the way of sinners, 3. Sitting in
the seat of the scorner. The two first being degrees in his motion, several
stages of his journey to this (...), or top pitch of sinning in the last.
Walking in the counsel of the ungodly is the first entrance to his course: and
he that has such a rise as this, has a great advantage of all other sinners;
he will perform his race with speed, and come suddenly to his goal. This
deliberate walking in the ways, Mercury's post in the midst of a rode, never
removed or stirred an inch, though never so justled by the passengers. Let all
the contrary virtues never so thwart and cross him, he has fixed his station,
and neither force, nor allurements shall make him move. Yet because standing
also is a painful posture, with which the valiantest legs will at last be
nummed, if not cathedra, as a feat of greatness, lording it, and sinning
imperiously, commanding every spectator to follow his example of scoffing at
God and goodness. 2. In cathedra, as a seat of authority, sinning doctorally,
and magisterially, by his practice defining the lawfulness of these scoffs,
even setting up a school of Atheism. And 3. in cathedra, as a seat of rest, and
ease, and pleasure, merry Atheist, seldom, if ever proves a sad sober
Christian. He is seated in his chair of scorning, and contemns the mercy of
that spirit that should take him out of it. Thus you see, that walking in the
steps, and standing in the way, i. e. following the commands of their own
lusts, they are soon arrived to the Lucifer for preeminence in hell, or else
challenge Rabshakeh to rail, or Julian to blaspheme. But this is the highest
degree of scoffers, and I hope the devil has but few such valiant, bold,
forward Champions in the world, since Julian or Lucian's time. And therefore I
hope I have pricked no man's conscience here, whilst I have spoke of them: but I
have formerly proved, (...)
Hippocrates observes of the Scythians that they do not swathe themselves, nor
bind in their loins Scythians, they will run into a strange bulk and
corpulence, into moist things are apt to be contained in other terms, but
hardly in their own: the water is easily cooped up in a glass or bucket, where
there are Ocean, or hollow place which may enclose, and bestow the consistency
on it which it has not of it self. Thus may you see a river whilst it is kept
within the channel, go on in its stream and course very soberly and orderly,
but when it has over-swelled the banks which before kept it in, then does it
run about the pastures, scorns to be kept within any compass. Thus is it with
the soul of man, bounds, if it have a strict hand held over it, if it be curbed
and brought to its postures, if it have reason and grace, and a careful tutor
to order it, you shall find it as tame a creature as you need deal with: it
will never straggle or stray beyond the confines which the spirit has set it;
the reason is, because though it be in it self fluid, and moist, and ready to
run about like water, yet Deus firmavit Aquas, God has made a firmament
betwixt the waters, Genesis l. 7.
as he did, Genesis i. 7. i. e. he has Ocean, never stays, or considers, or
consults, but rushes headlong into all inordinacy, having neither the
licentiousness is the actual renouncing of Religion, this very walking after
their own lusts, is not only a motive to this sin of scoffing, but the very sin
it self.

A false Conception in the womb is only a rude, confused, ugly Chaos, a mere
lump of flesh, of no kind of figure or resemblance, gives only disappointment,
danger, and torment to the Mother. soul at its entrance which defines, and
trims, and polishes into a body, that gives it eyes, and ears, and legs, and
hands, which before it had not distinctly and severally, but only rudely
altogether with that mass or lump. Thus is it with the Man, till Religion has
entered into him as a soul to inform, and fashion him, as long as he lives thus
at large, having no terms, or bounds, or limits to his actions, having no form,
or figure, or certain motion defined him, he is a Mola, a mere lump of man, an
arrant Atheist: you Religion must take him up, must smooth and dress him over,
and according to its Etymon, must religare, swathe and bind up this loose piece
of flesh, must animate and inform him, must reduce him to some set form of
Christianity, or else he is likely after a long and fruitless travel to appear
a deformed monstrous Atheist. But not to deal any voluptuous life was it self
perfect Heathenism. For can you imagine a man to be any but a Gentile, who has
abandoned all love, all awe, all fear, all care of God (any one of which would
much contract and draw him into compass) who has utterly put off every garb of
a Christian, who has enjoyed the reins so long, that now he is not sensible,
or at least contemns the curb or snaff^le if he be but Heathen are noted not so
much that they worshipped no God at all, but that they worshipped so many, and
none of them the true. Every great friend they had, every delight and pleasure,
every thing that was worth praying for, straight proved their God, and had its
special Temple erected for its Worship. So that do but imagine one of them
every day worshipping every God whom he Oratory, spending his whole life, and
that too little too, in running from one Temple to another, and you have
described our licentious man posting on perpetually to his sensual devotions,
worshipping, adoring, and sacrificing every minute of his life, to some
Idol-vanity, and bestowing as much pains and charges in his profane heathenish
pleasures, as ever the Gentiles did on their false gods, or the most
supererogating Papist on their true.

We are wont to say in Divinity, Wigg: in Jam. secundae quest. 1. Art. 5. p.
27, 28.
and that without an Hyperbole, that every commission of sin is a kind of
Idolatry, an incurvation, and bending down of the soul to some creature, which
should always be erect, looking up to Heaven, from whence it was infused, like
water naturally inclined to climb and ascend as high as the fountain, or head
from whence it sprang. And then certainly a licentious life is a perpetual
Idolatry, a supineness, and proneness, and incurvation of the soul to somewhat
that deserves to be called i. e. either in St. Paul's acceptance of it, nothing
(an Idol is nothing, 2 Cor. VIII. 4.
1 Cor. viii. 4.) or else in the most honorable signification, only an Image,
or some rude likeness or representation of God. We are the Image of God our
selves, and whatsoever is below us, is but an imperfect draught of him,
containing some lineaments, some confused resemblances of his power which
created them, have no being of their own, but only as shadows which the light
does cast. And therefore every love, every bow, every Papists talk of, which
by bowing to our Ladies house, when in walks by the wood toward Loretto, have
ever since stood stooping. Thus do you see how the latter part of my Text has
overtook the former: the walking after his own lusts, becomes a scoffer, the
licentious man proceeded Atheist, and that with ease, his very voluptuous life
is a kind of Atheism, and the reasons of this are obvious, you need not seek or
search far for them.

For first, this walking in their own lusts, notes an habit gathered out of
many acts: he has walked there a long while, and therefore now has the skill
of it, walks on confidently, and carelessly without any rub or thought of
stopping. And contrary to this the worship of God, of which Atheism is a
privation, is an habit and its opposite privation are incompetible, light, and
darkness at the same time, though they may seem to meet sometimes, as in
twilight: but for two opposite positive habits, never any man's conceit was so
bold or fantastical as to join them: you cannot imagine one, but you must
remove the other. You may suppose a man distempered or weak, which is a
privation of health, healthy, as long as his natural strength is able to
overcome it; but can you suppose a man in a violent fever actually upon him,
and yet still imagine him in perfect health? Thus is it with a sinner, who has
given himself over to the tyranny, and impotency of his lusts, he has utterly
put off all degrees, all sparks of any habit of Religion, according to that of
our Savior, You cannot serve God and Mammon, where Mammon signifying in a vast
extent the god of this World, imports all

Secondly, Every habit notes a delight, an acquiescence, and joy in enjoying of
that which through many actions, perhaps some brunts and rubs he has at last
arrived to. Now this delight and contentation, that is may be complete, is
impatient of any other encumbrance, which at any time may come in to interrupt
or disorder it. If any thing so happen, it is never quiet, till it have removed
it. The Scholar that has all his life labored, and at last contemplation, is
impatient if any piece of ignorance cross or thwart him in his walk, he will to
his books again, and never rest till he has overcome and turned it out. Thus
does the sensual man being come to the (...), and pitch, and entered into the
Paradise of his worldly joys, if he do but meet with any jar, if he feel any
pluck or twinge from his conscience, any grudge or compunction God out of all
his thoughts. Thus shall you see the Atheist on his humor, for want of some
compunction at hone, grumble at every godly man or action which they saw in
Wisd. II. 14.
In the 2. of Wisdom at the 14. He is grievous unto us to b^^old, he was made
to reprove our thoughts; and they do not return to their content, they are not
pleased again till they have gotten him into their inquisition, to examine him
with despitefulness and torture, ver. 19. Thus do they abhor and stifle, and
strangle every godly action in others, or motion in themselves, because the
holiness of the one is an exprobration to their profaneness,

Thirdly, This walking in the Text, though it be with some motion, yet it is a
slow one, a kind of walking in ones sleep, or that of a melancholy man, that
can walk till he be wet through, and not mark that it rained. I say, it notes
here an heavy, drowsy, unactive habit expressed by the Psalmist by sitting in a
chair, as we showed you: it notes a kind of churlish resoluteness, to walk act
as suffer them, he walks on snorting in his road, do what you can, you shall
neither turn nor wake him. Now this slow, drowsy, unactive habit begets a kind
of numbness in him, a sluggish, sullen stupidity over all his faculties, that
even a spur or goad cannot rouse him; all the pores as it were and passages,
and entries to the soul are so stopped, and bung'd up, all his affections are
grown so gross and brawny, so hardened Religion, or God, or Virtue, is as he
that waketh one from a sound sleep: he that tells such a fool a tale of
Wisdom, speaks to one in a slumber, and when he has told his tale, he will
say, What is the matter? Ecclus. xxii. 8. Thus do you see, 1. The repugnance
and inconsistence of a voluptuous life and Religion, 2. The delight, 3. The
stupidity of this habit. Each of which have made a place for the Libertine, and
set him in the ears: Now that your hearts and affections may partake of the
sound, that the softer waxy part of you, may receive some impression from this
discourse, let us close all with an Application.

And first from the guilt and dangerous condition of a licentious life, to
labor by all means possible to keep out of it. He that is once engaged in it,
goes on with a great deal of content, and in the midst of his pleasures on the
one side, and carnal security on Understanding, and Will, and Senses are lulled
into a lethargy, nay the very fancy in him is asleep, which in other sleeps is
most active: he never imagines, never dreams of any fear, or danger, either
God, or Devil. O what a lamentable woeful estate is it to be thus sick beyond a
sense of our disease, to be so near a spiritual death, and not so much as feel
our weakness! Oh what an horrid thing it were to pass away in such a sleep, and
never observe our selves near death, till Satan has arrested beyond

custom is another nature, and those things which we have brought our selves up
to, we can as ill put off, as our constitution, or disposition. Now those
things which spring from the nature of any thing, are inseparable from the
subject; banish them as often as you will, usque recurrent, they will return
again as to their home, they cannot subsist any where else, they dwell there.
So wallowing in the mire being a condition natural to the Swine, can never be
extorted from them: wash Hyssop, as soon as ever they meet with mire again,
they will into it. Their swinish nature has such an influence on them, that
all care or art cannot forbid, or hinder this effect of it. So that a customary
sinner, who has as it were made lust a part of his nature, has incorporated
profaneness, and grafted it into his affections, can as hardly be rid of it,
as a subject of his property; it is possible for fear, or want of opportunity
sometime to keep him in, and make him abstain: lodestone may lie quiet, whilst
no iron is within ken, or it may be held by force in its presence; but give it
materials and leave to work, and it draws incontinently. So for all his
temporary forbearance, upon some either policy or necessity, the habituate
sinner has not yet given over his habit. Leave him to himself, give him room
and opportunity, and he will hold no longer. If he be once advanced to this
pitch of sin to be walking after his own lusts, he may possibly be driven back
with a storm, or thunder: tempest is over. Nay farther, even when he wants
objects and opportunities, he will yet show his condition, he will betray the
desire and good affection he bears to his old lusts; his discourse or fashions
argue him incontinently bent, even when he is at the stanchest. As Aristotle
observes of the fearful man, that even when no formidable object is near, he
falls into many frights: so the voluptuous man's fancy is perpetually possessed
with second nature be quite taken out of him, and another holy spiritual nature
created in its room, unless a stronger come and bind this Devil and dispossess
him of it, he has small hopes of getting himself out of his dominion, and
tyranny: there is a great deal more stir in the converting of one customary
sinner, then of a thousand others, it is not to be accomplished without a kind
of death, and resurrection, without desperateness of the cure to move you to
study some art, some physic of prevention, lest when it is grown upon you, it
be too late to enquire for remedies. How should we dare to Devils works, as to
transubstantiate our selves into his nature; let us not put off our manhood
with our integrity, and though we cannot be Saints, let us keep our selves men?
It Is a degree of innocence not to be extremely wicked, and a piece
Philosopher,((...), Iambl.) and he that walks after it has an endless journey:
there is no hope that he that has so far to go, will ever have leisure to sit
still. And therefore I say if we must needs sin, yet let us not engage our
selves to sin for ever: if our being men lays a necessity of sinning on us, let
our care to stay whilst it is possible for us, prove that we do not sin like
Devils, whose sin is their glory, and their resolution peremptory, walk after
our own lusts.

Secondly, If our lusts be such dangerous paths to walk in, and this in that
very respect as they are our own in opposition to Gods commands, if they are
the straight direct way to Atheism, nay Atheism it self: then what care and
circumspection is required at every setting down of our feet, at every entrance
on any action, Serpent in the way, some piece of profaneness in every
enterprise we enter on of our selves? How ought we to fear, to suspect, and
balk any way that is our own? For where it is Atheism to walk, there surely
it is a sin to tread: and where we have once ventured to tread, we shall be
shrewdly tempted to walk; every step we have safely taken being an
encouragement to a second. Verebar omnia opera mea, says Job, I feared all my
works: whatever action I could entitle my self to, methought trial of all our
serious deliberate actions, to mark whether they are our own or no, whether we
went about them on our own heads, without our warrant or directions from God:
if we did, it is much to be doubted there is some poison, some guilt in them,
something that deserves to be feared, and fled from. This very suspecting of
our own ways, will alien us from our own

Thirdly, If walking in our own lusts be direct Atheism, what shall we think of
them who make it a piece of Religion, and holy policy to do so? Beloved, there
be some learned Catechized Atheists, who upon confidence of an absolute eternal
predestination of every man in the world that shall ever possibly be saved, set
up their rest there, and expect what God will do with them. It Is to no purpose
God will alter the decree, they are resolved to leave all to God, and if they
perish, they perish. Mark with me, is not this a religious Atheism to attribute
so much to God as to become careless of him, so to depend as never to think on
him, and by granting his decree in our understanding, to deny his Godhead in
our conversation? He that lives negligently on confidence that his care may be
spared, that if there be any salvation for him, God will work it out without
his fear or trembling: he election so absolute, that himself has nothing to do
in the business, whilst he expects mercy, makes himself incapable of it, and
though he acknowledge a resurrection, lives as though he looked to be
annihilated. Certainly he that expects God should send him a fruitful harvest,
will himself manure the ground; he that hopes, will labor, according to that,
1 John iii. 3. He that has this hope in him purifies himself, etc. So that
whosoever relyes on God for salvation, and in the midst of his hopes stands
idle,

Lastly, If it be this confident walking after our own lusts, which is here the
expression of Atheism, then here is a comfort for some fearful sinners, who
finding themselves not yet taken up quite from a licentious life, suspect, and
would be in danger to despair of themselves as Atheists. It Is a blessed
tenderness to feel Cain ly'd when he said his sin was greater then could be
either born or forgiven. When the Physicians have given one over, (...),
Philop. 1. de an.
nature has its spring and plunge, and sometimes quits and overcomes the
disease. If thou art in this dangerous walk, and strivest and heavest, and
can not get out of it, yet sin be a walking, then every stop is a cessation,
every check a degree to integrity, every godly thought or desire a pawn from
God that he will give thee strength to victory: and if thou do but nourish
labor, and endeavor, and pray that we may be loosed from these toyls and
gins, and engagements of our own lusts, and being entered into a more religious
severe Course here, then the Atheism of our ways would counsel us to, we may
obtain the end, and rest, and consummation, and reward of our Course hereafter.

Now to him which has elected us, etc.

The XVIII. Sermon.
1 Timothy I. 15. Of whom I am the chief.
business of our Apostle St. Paul in all his Epistles is, what the main of
every Preacher ought to be, Exhortation. There is not one doctrinal point but
contains a precept to our Understanding to believe it, nor moral discourse, but
effectually implies an admonishment to our Wills to practice it. Now these
Exhortations are proposed either vulgarly in 1 Timothy IV. 11.
as, These things command and teach, etc. or in a more artificial, obscure,
enforcing way of Rhetoric, as, God forbid that I should glory, Gal. VI. 14.
save in the cross of Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto
the world; which though in words it seems a protestation of St. Paul's own
resolution, yet in effect is a most powerful exhortatory to every succeeding
Christian to glory only in the cross of Christ, and on it to crucify both the
world and himself. This method of reducing St. Paul to Exhortation I observe
Thesis or point of belief, that Christ came into the world to save sinners,
illustrated and applied by the speaker as one, and the chief of the number of
those sinners to be saved. But it contains a most Rhetorical powerful
Exhortation to both Understanding and Will; to believe this faithful saying,
That Christ came, etc. and to accept, lay hold of, and with all our might to
embrace Understanding, that he believe that Christ, etc. to every man's
affections, that he humble himself, and teach his heart, and that his tongue to
confess, Of all sinners, etc. This Text shall not be divided into parts (which
were to disorder profession of St. Paul of himself, and there we will enquire
whether and how Paul was the chief of all sinners. Secondly, respectively to
us, for whom this form of confessing the state and applying the salvation of
sinners to our selves is set down. And first, whether and how Paul was the
chief of all sinners, where we are to read him in a double estate, converted
and unconverted, expressed Paul and Saul, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, Saul a
Persecutor, mad against the Christians; and that both these estates may be
contained in the Text, although penned by Paul regenerated, may appear, in that
the Pronoun (...) I, signifying the whole complete person of Paul, restrains
not the speech to his present being only, but considers also what he had been;
more especially set down at the 13. verse, Who was before a blasphemer, etc. So
then Paul in his Saul-ship being ablasphemer, Saul, as may appear by those many
that were guilty of Christ's death (as Saul in person was not) and those that so
madly stoned St. Stephen whilst Saul only kept the witnesses clothes, Acts VII.
58.
and as the Text was consenting unto his death; seeing, I say, that others of
that age equalled, if not exceeded Saul's guilt, how can he be said above all
other sinners to be the chief. I think we shall not wrest or enlarge the Text
beside or beyond the meaning of the Holy Ghost or Apostle, if in answer unto
this we say that here is intended not so much the greatness of his sins above
all sinners in the world, but the greatness of the miracle in converting so
great a sinner into so great a Saint and Apostle. So that the words shall i. e.
Paul was the chief of all converts, and Paul was the first, that from so great
a persecuter of Christ was changed into so great, so glorious an For this cause
I obtained mercy, that in me first Christ Jesus might show forth all long
suffering, etc. The issue of all is this, that Saul unconverted was a very
great sinner, yet not the greatest of sinners absolutely, but for ought we read
in the New Testament, the greatest and first that was called from such a degree
of infidelity; a blasphemer, a persecuter, to so high a pitch of salvation, a
Saint, an Apostle, yea, and greater then an Apostle; whence the observation
Saul were, yet every blasphemous sinner cannot expect to be called from the
depth of sin to regeneracy and salvation. Although Saul being (...), the chief
of sinners, was called and saved; yet Saul was also in another sense, for ought
we read (...), and perhaps the last that from so great a riot of sin obtained
so great salvation. Wherefore, O sinner, be not presumptuous from Paul's
example, but from Paul's single example begin to suspect thy state, and fear
that such a miracle of salvation Romans, that the greatest sinner is the more
likely object of Gods mercy, or subject of his grace then the mere moral man,
whom either natural fear, or the like, not spiritual respects has restrained
from those outrages of sin. The being of this opinion in the primitive Romans,
and the falseness of it is sufficiently proved by that expostulation of St.
Paul, Shall we continue in sin, Romans VI. 1.
that grace may abound? God forbid. In answer sin was the best qualification,
and only motive to provoke and deserve a more abundant grace and certain
salvation. As if that spirit which once to manifest its power called Saul in
the midst of his madness breathing out threatenings and slaughters against the
Church, would not call any but those who had prepared themselves by the same
degree of madness, but required that men should make themselves almost Devils
that they might be called into Christians, as if that God which could out of
stones, John XI. 39.
could not also out of men raise up children unto Abraham; as if that Christ
which raised up Lazarus, being dead four days, and as they thought stinking in
his grave, could not as easily have healed him whilst he was yet alive: whereas
we read that Christ dealt more on the cures of the impotent, then resurrections
of the dead; that is in a spiritual application healed more from the bed of
languishment, of their weaknesses and diseases, debauched man, that he shall be
called or saved, then of the mere moral, honest man, who yet is in the state of
unregeneracy. Have not some men defining this moral man by the formal hypocrite
set him in the greatest opposition to Heaven? As if that degree of innocence,
or rather not being extremely sinful, which a moral care of our ways may
bestow on us, were a greater hindrance then promotion toward the state of
grace, and the natural man were so much the further from God, the nearer he
were to goodness, and no man could hope to come to Heaven but he that had
knocked at Hell gates. I confess indeed that the Holy Ghost where he means to
inhabit has no need of pains to prepare him a Spirit can at the same instant
strike the most obdurate heart, and soften it, and where it once enters cannot
be repulsed by the most sturdy habituate sin, or Deval. I confess likewise,
that some have been thus rather snatched then called, like the firebrarnds out
of the fire, and by an ecstasy of the Spirit inwardly in a minute changed from
incarnate Devils into incarnate Mary dispossessed of seven Devils, who was after
so highly promoted in Christ's favor, that she had the honor to be the first
witness of the resurrection. Mark XVI. 9.
So that Gadarene who had intrencht and fortified himself among the Tombs, and
was garrisoned with an army of Devils, so that he brake fetters and chains, and
could not be tamed or kept in any compass, yet in a minute at Christ's word sent
forth a legion of Fiends sufficient to people and destroy a Colony of Swine.
And so was Paul in my Text, in a spirits, and straight became the joy of
Angels, the Apostle of the Gentiles. Yet mean time, these miraculous, but rarer
examples must not prescribe and set up, must not become a rule and encourage
any one to Saul's madness on confidence of Paul's conversion, to a more impetuous
course of sinning, that he may become a more glorious Saints. It Is a wrong way
to Heaven to dig into the deep, and a brutish arrogance to hope that God will
the more Apostle, raised from the depth of sin, as Lazarus from the stench of
the grave, yet these in respect of others more softly and ordinarily called,
are found few in number; and such Apostle (to go no farther) was to be cast
into a trance, and his regeneration not to be accomplished without a Paul was
most notably converted; that he had the alleviation of ignorance, for which
cause (as he says himself) he found mercy, and that others are not probably to
expect the like miracle, who have not those insuperable prepossessions custom
and religion, but that this is not the business of the Text, but a
praecognoscendum or passage to the clearing of it. Briefly therefore to
conclude this note, Paul is the chief example mentioned in Scripture, and there
be not many, though some more, that were called from the height of impiety,
from the gall of bitterness, to this mystical third Heaven, or so high degree
of Saint and Apostle. The more ordinary course of Gods proceeding (if we may
possibly judge of the Decree by events and examples) is to call such humility,
the best (if there be any preparative) for the receiving of grace. Mean while
we are not to be mistaken, as if we thought Gods purposes tied to man's or man's
moral goodness to woo and allure Gods Spirit, as that the Almighty is not
equally able to sanctify the foulest soul by his converting grace, and the
less polluted, or that he requires man's preparation: but our position is, that
in ordinary charitable reason we ought to judge more comfortably, and hope more
confidently of a mere moral man naturally more careful of his ways, that he
shall be both called and saved, that God will with his Spirit perfect and crown
his morally good, though imperfect position I have in brief proved, though
nothing so largely as I might, in confutation of them who do utterly condemn
unregenerate morality, and deject it below the lowest degree of profaneness,
as if they would teach a man his way to Heaven by boasting arrogantly, what
Paul converted confesses humbly, I am the nearer to Christ's Salvation, because
of all sinners I am the chief. The Use in brief Thesis shall be for those who
not as yet find the power of the regenerating spirit in them (for I am to fear
many of my auditors may be in this case, and I pray God they feel, and work,
and pray themselves out of it) the Use, I say, is for those who are not yet
full possessors of the spirit, to labor to keep their unregeneracy spotless
from the greater offense, that if they are not yet called to the preferment of
Converts and Saints, the second part of City of God, that yet they will live
orderly in that lower regiment, wherein they yet remain, and be subject to the
law of nature, till it shall please God to take them into a new Commonwealth
under the law of grace, to improve their natural abilities to the height, and
bind their hands and hearts from the practice and study of outrageous sins, by
those ordinary restraints which nature will afford us; such as are a good
disposition, education, and the like; not to leave and refer all to the
miraculous God requires not this glory at our hands that we should peremptorily
over-damn our selves, that he may be the more honored in saving us. His mercy
is more known to the world then to need this woeful foil to illustrate it. God
is not wont to rake Hell for converts, to gather Devils to make Saints of; the
Kingdom of Heaven would suffer great violence, if only such should take it. If
Saul were infinitely sinful before he proved an Acts XXIII. 1.
he had lived in all good conscience) yet expect not thou the same miracle, nor
think that the excess of sins is the cue that God ordinarily takes to convert
us. The Fathers in an obedience to the discipline and pedagogy of the old Law
possessed their soul in patience, expecting the prophesied approach of the new,
did not by a contempt of Moses precipitate and hasten the coming of the
Messiah. Cornelius lived a long while devoutly, Acts X. i.
and gave much alms, till at last God Saul and Cornelius; Saul, that he, not
many, were called from a professed blasphemer; Cornelius, that before he was
called, he prayed to God always: and do thou endeavor to grace, as grace, that
is not as our merit, but as his free will favor, not as the desert of our
morality, but a stream from the bounty of his mercy, who (we may hope) will
crown his common graces with the fullness of his Spirit. And now, O powerful
God, on those of us which are yet unregenerate, bestow thy restraining grace,
which may curb and stop our natural inordinacy, and by a sober, careful,
continent life, prepare us Saul unconverted, how of all sinners he was the
chief, not absolutely, that he surpassed the whole world in rankness of sin,
but respectively to his later state, that few or Paul, i. e. converted, and
then the question is, Whether, and how Paul converted may be said the chief of
all sinners.

'Twere too speculative a depth for a popular Sermon to discuss the inherence
and condition of sin in the regenerate; the business will be brought home more
profitably to our practice, if we drive Paul in this place intending by his own
example to direct others how to believe the truth, and embrace, and fasten on
the efficacy of Christ's Incarnation, has no better motive to incite himself
and others toward it, then a recognition of his sins, that is, a survey of the
power of sin in him before, and a sense of the relics of sin in him since his
conversion. Whence the note is, That the greatness of ones sins makes the
regenerate man apply himself more fiercely to Christ. This faithful saying was
therefore Paul worthy of all acceptance, because of all sinners he was the
chief. St. Paul, as every regenerate man, is to be observed in a treble
posture, either casting his eyes backward, or calling them in upon himself, or
else looking forward and aloof; and accordingly is to be conceived in a treble
meditation, either of his life past, or present state, or future hopes. In the
first posture and meditation you may see first Paul alone, who was before a
blasphemer, a persecuter and injurious; secondly, all the regenerate together:
etc. and many the like. In the second posture and meditation you may observe
him retracting an error, Acts XXIII.
Acts xxiii. deprecating a temptation with earnest and repeated intercessions,
2 Cor. xii. 7. 2 Cor. XII. 7.
fighting with and harrasing himself, beating down his body, and keeping it in
subjection, lest while he preached to others he himself might be a castaway, 1
Cor. IX. 27.
1 Cor. ix. 27. etc. In the third posture we find him, Romans vii. 25. where
after a long disguise he cries Phil. III. 13.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And again, Phil. iii. 13. most
evidently, Forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching out to those
things which are before, I press toward the mark, etc. like a racer in the heat
of his course whose eyes desires to anticipate his feet, and enjoy the goal
before he reach it. These three carriages of the regenerate man fully prove our
observation: for if either of the two former sights could afford him any
content; if either his former or present state did not sufficiently terrify
him, pride and self-love to contemn any foreign aid as long as it finds either
appearance or hope of domestic. If in the view of his former life he should
find any thing either good or not extremely bad and sinful, he would
under-prize the mercy of that Savior that redeemed him from so poor a guilt;
if he could observe in his present state any natural firmness or stability, any
inherent purity, sacrifice to his own nets, and reckoning himself in perfect
peace with God, neither invoke and seek, nor acknowledge a Mediator. But when
in his former life he shall find nothing but the matter and cause of horror
and amazement, nothing but hideous ghastly affrightments, yea, and a body of
damnation: when in hope to mend himself, and ease his fears, he shall fly to
the comfort of his present converted state, and yet there also espy many thorns
of temptations, 2 Cor. XII. 7.
how can he but be Apostle in my Text, where he does more peremptorily
apprehend Christ, and more bodily believe, That he came into the world to save
sinners, because of all sinners he was chief, making his own sinfulness (being
the object and external motive of Gods mercy) an argument and internal motive
of his own faith I.
The plain meaning of this Thesis is, that among men things are not always
valued according to the merit of their nature, for then each commodity should
be equally prized by all men, and the man in health should bestow as much
charges on physic as the diseased: but each thing bears its several estimation
by its usefulness, and the riches of every merchandise is increased accordingly
as men to whom it is proferred do either use or want it. Moreover, this
usefulness is not to be reckoned of according to truth, but opinion, not
according to men's real wants, but according to the sense which they have of
their wants; so a man distracted, because he has not so much reason about him
as to observe his disease, will contemn Hellebore, or any other the most
precions Recipe for this cure: and generally no man will hasten to the
Physician, or justly value his art and drugs, but he whom misery has taught
the use of them. So then unless a man have been in some spiritual danger, and
by the converting Spirit be instructed into Amorite, he will not take notice of
the want and necessity which he has of Christ's mediation. But when he shall
with a tenderness of memory survey the guilt of his former state, from the
imputation, not importunity whereof he is now justified, when he shall still
feel within him the buffetings of Satan, and sensibly observe himself not fully
sanctified, then, and not before, will he with a zealous earnestness apprehend
the profit, yea, necessity of a Savior, whose assistance so nearly concerns
him. II.
The second ground of this position is, That an extraordinary undeserved
deliverance is by an afflicted man received with some suspicion: the
consideration of the greatness of the benefit makes him doubt of the truth of
it, and he will scarce believe so important an happiness befaln him, because
his misery could neither expect nor hope it. Hence upon the first notice of it
he desires to ascertain it unto his sense, by a sudden possession of it, and
not at all to defer the enjoying of that mercy which his former misery made
infinitely worthy of all acceptance. Thus may you see a ship-wrackt man
recovered to some refuge, cling about, and almost incorporate himself unto it,
because the fortune regenerate man finding in the Scripture the promise of a
Redeemer, which shall free him from those engagements which his former bankrupt
estate had plunged him in, cannot delay so great an happiness, but with a kind
of tender fear and filial trembling, runs (and strives as the Disciples to the
Sepulcher) to assure his necessitous soul of this acceptable salvation: Matthew.
XX. 4.
even sets upon his Savior with a kind of violence, and will seem to distrust
his promise, till his seal shall authorize resurrection beget in Thomas a
suspicion and incredulity, I will not believe, etc. John XX. 25.
where our charity may conjecture, that he above all the rest was not
absolutely resolved not to believe the resurrection, but that he being absent
at the first apparition, would not take so important a miracle upon trust, but
desired to have that demonstrated to his sense, which did so nearly concern his
faith; that so by putting his finger into the print of the nails, and he might
almost consubstantiate and unite himself unto his Savior, and at once be
assured of the truth and partake of the profit of the resurrection. Hear but
the voice of the Spouse, and any further proofs shall be superfluous, where in
violence and jealousy of love she importunes the Eternal presence of the
Beloved, Cant. VIII. 6.
Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm, for love is strong
as death, jealousy as cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are coals of fire
which has a vehement flame. She Cant III. 4.
for having roused him, ruit in amplexus, she rusht into his embraces, she held
him and would not let him go. Thus you see the jealousy and eagerness of love
produced by either a former loss, or present more then ordinary want of the
object, both which how pertinent they are to the regenerate man, either
observing his past sins, or instant temptations, this discourse has already
made manifest. The Use of this Thesis (to wit, that the greatness of ones
caution, I.
that we mistake not a motive for an efficient, an impulsive for a principal
cause. For where we say, It makes him apply himself, etc.] we mean not that the
increase of sin produces faith formally, but only inciteth to believe by way of
instruction, by showing us what distress we are in, and consequently in what a
necessity of a deliverer. The meditation of our disclose our misery, not
redress it; may explore, not mend a sinner, like a touchstone to try, not any
way to alter him. It is the controuling Spirit which must effectually renew our
spirits, and lead us to the Christ which our sins told us we had need of. The
sense of sin may rouse the soul, but it is the Spirit of God that lays the
toils; the feeling of our guilt may beat the waters, but it is the great fisher
of our souls which spreads the nets, which entraps us as we are in our way to
Hell, and leads us captive to salvation. The mere gripings of our Conscience
being not produced by any Pharmacon of the spirit, but by some distemper
arising from sin, what anxiety does it cause within us? What pangs and twinges
to the soul? O Lord, do thou regenerate us, and then thy Holy Spirit shall
sanctify even our sins unto our good; and if thy grace may lead us, our sins
shall pursue and drive us unto Christ. Secondly, by way of character, how to
distinguish a true convert from a false. A man which from an inveterate
desperate malady expression above an ordinary joy; you shall see him in an
ecstasy of thanksgiving and exultancy, whilst another, which was never in that
distress, quietly enjoys the same health, and gives thanks softly by himself to
his preserver. So is it in the distresses of the soul, which if they have been
excessive, and almost beyond hope of recovery, as the miracle must, so will the
expression of this deliverance be somewhat extraordinary. The magis immutata
quam genita, rather changed then regenerate into a spiritual, goes through this
business without any great noise, the Spirit entering into it in a still small
voice, Jo. XX. 22.
or at a breathing: but when a robustous obdurate sinner shall be rather
apprehended then called, when the Sea shall be commanded to give up his
ship-wrack't, and the Sepulcher to restore her dead, the soul surely which thus
escapes shall not be content with a mean expression, but will practice
Hallelujahs and Magnificats which the triumphant Liturgies of the Saints can
afford it. Wherefore, I say, if any one out of a full violent course of sinning
conceive himself converted and regenerated, let him examine what a degree of
spiritual exultancy he has attained to, and if he find it but mean, and
slight, and perfunctory, let him somewhat suspect that he may the more confirm
the evidence of his calling. Now this spiritual exultancy of the regenerate
consists both in a solemn humiliation of himself, Mary's Magnificat, where she
specifies in the midst of her joy the lowliness of his handmaid, and in St.
Paul's victory-song over death. So that if the conversion of an inordinate
sinner be not accompanied with unwonted joy and sorrow, with a godly sense of
his past distress, and a godly triumph for his delivery; if it be not followed
with a violent eagerness to fasten on Christ; finally, if there be not somewhat
above ordinary in the expression, then I counsel not to distrust, but fear,
that is, with a sollicitous, not suspicious trembling to labor to make thy
calling and election sure: to pray to that Holy Spirit to strike our hearts
with a measure of holy joy and holy sorrow, some way proportionable to the size
of those sins, which in our unregeneracy reigned in us; and for those of us
whom press toward the mark, and fasten our selves on that Savior, which has
redeemed us from the body and guilt of this so great death. III.
The third Use is of comfort and confirmation to some tender souls who are
incorporated into Christ, yet finding not in themselves that excessive measure
of humiliation which they observe in others, suspect their own state, tears
from their eyes. For if the greatness of sin past, or the plentiful relics of
sin remaining, do require so great a measure of sorrow, to expiate the one, and
subdue the other; if it be a deliverance from an habituate servitude to all
manner of sin, which provokes this extraordinary pains of expression; then
certainly they who have been brought up with the spirit, which were baptism
never wholly deprived of it, need not to be bound over to this trade of sorrow,
need not to be set apart to that perpetual humiliation which a more stubborn
sin or Devil is wont to be cast out by. I doubt not but a soul educated in
familiarity with the spirit, may at once enjoy her self and it; and, so that if
it have an humble conceit of it self, and a filial of God, may in earth possess
God with some clearness of look, some serenity of affections, some alacrity of
heart, and tranquillity of spirit. God delights not in the torment of his
children, (though some are so to be humbled) yea, he delights not in such burnt
offerings as they bestow upon him, who destroy, and consume, and sacrifice
themselves; but the Lords delight is in them that fear him filially, and put
their trust, i. e. assurance, confidence in his mercy; in them that rejoice,
that make their service a pleasure, not an affliction, and thereby possess
Heaven before they come to it. It Is observed in husbandry, that soil, laid on
hard, barren, starved application. Again, the husbandman can mend a dry,
stubborn, wayward, fruitless earth, by overflowing of it, and on such indeed is
his ordinary requisite discipline, to punish it for its amendment. But there is
a ground otherwise well tempered, which they call a weeping ground, whence
continually water soaks out, and this proves seldom fruitful (if our learned
husbandmen observe aright) whereof there is sometime need of draining, as well
as watering. The application is, that your soul which either has been
naturally dry and barren, or else over-wrought in the business of the world,
needs a flood of tears to soften and purge it. But the well tempered soul which
has never been out of heart, but has always had some inward life, some
fatness of, and nourishment mellow, which being crushed will break but not
crumble, dissolve, but not excessively. Hence, I say, the habituate believer
need not suspect his estate, if he find not in himself such an extremity of
violent grief, and humiliation habitually humbled, but actually lively and
alacrious in the ways of godliness; not to be too rigid and severe a tyrant
over his soul, but to keep it in a temper of Christian softness, tender under
the hand of God, and yet man-like and able both in the performance of Gods
worship and his own calling. And whenever we shall find our selves which he
has prescribed us. O Holy Lord, we are the greatest of sinners, and therefore
we humble our selves before thee, but thou have sent thy Christ And thus much
of this point, and in brief, of the first consideration of these words, to wit,
as they are absolutely a profession of Paul himself, to which end we beheld him
in his double estate, converted and unconverted. In his unconverted state we
found, though a very great sinner, yet not absolutely greater then those times
brought forth, and therefore we were to think of him relatively to his rarity
of such conversions, that though Saul were, yet every blasphemous sinner could
not expect to be called from the depth of sin to regeneracy and salvation: and
Romans and modern Censors of morality, and applied it to the care which we
ought to have of keeping our unregeneracy spotless from any reigning sin.
Afterward we came to Paul converted, where we balk't the discourse of the
condition of sin in the regenerate, and rather observed the effect of it; and
in it, that the greatness of his sin made (as Paul, so) every regenerate man
more eagerly to fasten on Christ. Which being proved by a double ground, we
applied first by way of caution, character, how a great sinner may judge of his
sincere certain conversion; 3. by way of comfort to others, who find not the
effects of humiliation and the like in themselves, in such measure as they see
in others; and so we have past through the first consideration of these words,
being conceived absolutely as St. Paul's profession of himself, we should come
to the other consideration, as they are set down to us as a pattern or form of
confessing the estate, and applying the

Now the God which has created us, has elected, redeemed, called, justified
us, will sanctify us in his time, will prosper this his ordinance, will direct
us by his grace to his glory. To him be ascribed due the honor, the praise,
the glory, the dominion, which through all ages of the world have been given to
him that sits on the Throne, to the Holy Spirit, and Lamb for evermore.

The XIX. Sermon
1 Timothy I. 15. Of whom I am the chief.
IN all Humane writings and Learning, there is a emptiness, which makes them
when they are beheld by a judicious reader look starved and crest-faln: their
speeches are rather puffed up then filled, they have a kind of boasting and
ostentation in them, and promise more substance and matter to the ear, then
they are able to perform really to the understanding: whence it falls out, that
we are more affected with them Orator be clear in his expression, we understand
as much at the first recital, as we are able to do at the hundredth repetition.
But there is a kind of Excellency in the Scripture, a kind of (...), or
sublimity above all other writings in the world. The reading of every section
of it leaves a sting in the mind, and a perpetual conceit of a still imperfect
understanding of it. An intelligent man at every view finds in it a fresh
mystery, and still perceives that there is somewhat beyond, not yet attained

We have already handled the Words at large in one consideration, as they are a
profession of Paul himself; I will not repeat you the particular occurrents. We
now without any more delay of preface come to the second consideration of them,
as they are spoken by Paul respectively to us, i. e. as they are prescribed us
for a form Of all, etc.

Where first the cadence or manner how Paul falls into these words, is worthy
to be both observed and imitated: the chief and whole business of this verse
being the truth, the acceptable truth of Christ's Incarnation, with the end of
it, the saving of sinners. He can no sooner name this word sinners, but his
exceeding melting Of all sinners, etc. If there be any thing that concerns
sinners, I am sure I have my part in that, for of that number I am the chief.
The note by the way briefly is, That a tender conscience never hears of the
name of sinner, but straight applies it to it self. It is noted by Aristotle,
the master of Human Learning, that that Rhetoric was very thin and
unprofitable, very poor and like to do little good upon men's affections, which
insisted on general matters, (...).
and descended not to particulars, intemperate person could hear a declamation
against vice, and never be affected with it, unles it stooped to take notice of
his particular enormities, and so is it with other criminals. This reason of
his was grounded upon the obdurateness of men's hearts, which would think that
nothing concerned them, senslesness may also seem to have been amongst St.
Paul's Corinthians, which made him use Aristotle's counsel, in driving his
speech home to their private pensons, 1 Cor. vi. Verse. 10, 11.
Where telling them that neither fornicators nor Idolaters, and the like, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God; for fear they should not be so tender-conscienced
as of their own accords to apply these sins to themselves, and read themselves
guilty in that glass; he is fain to supply that office, and plainly tell them
what otherwise perhaps they would not have conceived, and such were some of
you, ver. 11. This senseless hard-heartedness or backwardness in applying the
either commands or threatenings of the Apostle called, (...), which we
ordinarily translate a reprobate mind, but may be brought to signify a mind
without judgment, that has no faculty of discerning, that cannot in a general
threatening observe something that may concern the danger of his particular
state: or as it may be rendered, a mind without sense, not apprehensive of those
things which are manifestly proposed to them, like those walking Idols
described by the Psalmist, Psalm CXV.
Eyes have they and see not, ears and hear not, noses only beautiful carcasses
of Christians, which have nothing but their shape and motion to persuade you
that they live: unless we add this most unhappy symptom, which indicates a
state more wretched far then death it self, that there is strength and vigor
to oppose recovery, that amidst death there yet survives a hatred, and
antipathy to life. In such a soul as this there is a perpetual reaction, an
impatience of the presence of any thing which may trash, incumber, or oppress
it: a judgment or denunciation is hard, stupid heart toward either Scripture or
Preacher, to the plain opening of this point; for you shall more clearly
understand the tender heart by observing the obdurate, and learn to be affected
aright with Gods law or punishments, by knowing and hating the opposite
stubborn senslesness. Now in brief, this tender heart in the discovery of Thou
art the man] to bring it home to his person. The more wide, and general the
proposal is, the more directly and effectually is this stricken with it. In a
common satyr or declamation against sin in general, it has a sudden art of
Logic to anatomize and branch this sin in general into all its parts; and then
to lay each of them to its own charge; it has a skill of making every passage
in the Scripture, a glass to espy some of her deformities in, and cannot so Of
all sinners, etc. The plain reason of this effect in the tender heart is, first
because it is tender. The soft and accurate part of a man's body do suffer
without reaction, i. e. do yield at the appearance of an enemy, and not any way
put forward to repel him. These being fixed on by a Be, or the like, are easily
penetrated by the sting, and are so far from resisting of it, that they do in a
manner Be may fix and not forfeit her sting. So does a tender heart never
resist or defend it self against a stroke, but attenuates its self, lays

Again, a tender heart ordinarily meets with more blows, more oppressions then
any other: its very passiveness provokes every ones malice; the fly and dust,
as if it were by a kind of natural instinct, drive directly at the eye, and no
member about you shall be mote which the hand observes not, will torment the
eye. So is it with the Conscience, whose tenderness does tempt every piece of
Scripture to afflict it, and is more encumbered with the lest atome of sin or
threat, then the more hardened sinner is with a beam or Mountain.

Thirdly, one that has any solemn business to do will not pass opportunity of
means which may advantage him in it. One that has a search to make, will not
slip any evidence which may concur to the helping of his discovery, one that
has any Treatise to write, will be ready to apply any thing that ever he reads
to h^s Theme or purpose. Now the search, the discourse, the whole employment of
a tender heart, is the enquiry after the multitude of its sins, and in sum the
aggravation of each particular guilt, in and against it self, that so having
sufficiently loaded it self, and being Christ requires of them which come to
him and be prepared to receive that ease which Christ has promised to the
weary and heavy laden. Matthew. XI. 26.
So then if the tender Conscience does never repel, or reverberate any mention
of sin, but does draw out the sting of it to its length, if it be much affected
with the lest atome of sin, and therefore meets with frequent disorders, if
lastly it make its employment to gather out of all the Scripture, name of
sinner, but straight she applies it to her self, which was the point we
undertook to show. The direct use of this Proposition is for a (...), or
judgment of our estate. It Is observed in the body, that the rest of the senses
may be distempered, and lost without impairing of it, but only the touch
cannot, which therefore they call the sense of life, because that part or body
which is deprived of feeling, spiritual matters: of all other symptoms this of
senslesness is most dangerous, and as the Greek Physicians are wont to say of a
desperate disease, (...), very very mortal. This feeling tenderness is
necessary to the life of grace, and is an inseparable both effect and argument
of it. Wherefore I say for the judgment of your selves, observe Scripture works
upon you. If you can pass over a Catalogue of sins and judgments without any
regret, or reluctance, if you can read Sodom and Gomorrah, Babylon and the
Harlot Jerusalem, and not be affected with their stories, if thou can be the
Auditor of other men's faults without any sense or griping of thine own, if the
name of sin or sinner be unto thee but as a jest or fable, not worthy thy
serious notice, then fear thy affections want of that temper, which the
softning spirit is wont to bestow O Holy Spirit, from hardness of heart, Good
Lord deliver us.

And thus much of this point, of this effect of a tender heart, noted to you
out of the cadence of the words. I now come to observe somewhat more real out
of the main of the words themselves, Of whom, etc. We find not our Apostle here
complementing with himself, either excusing or attenuating his guilt, but as it
were Peter his successor for a Primacy (as he professes) of all Bishops, yea
the whole Church; so our Apostle here, Of all sinners I am the chief. The note
briefly is this, That every one is to aggravate the measure and number of his
sins against himself, and as near as he can observe how his guilt exceeds
other men's. This was St. Paul's practice and our pattern David's example in his
penitential Psalms, especially 51. out of Nehemiahs confession, and the like,
but taking this as supposed, I shall rather mix doctrine, and reason, and use,
altogether in prescribeing some forms of aggravating our selves to our selves,
yet not descending to a particular dissection of sin into all its parts, but
dealing Original sin, or the sin of our nature, of which we are all equally
guilty, 2. Personal sin, grounded in and terminated to each man's person. For
Original sin, it is the Fathers complaint, and ought more justly to be ours of
these times, there is no reckoning made of it, it is seldom thought worthy to
supply a serious place in our humiliation, it is mentioned only for fashions
sake, and as it were to stop Gods mouth, and to give him satisfaction, or
palliate the guilt of our wilful rebellions, not on any real apprehension that
its cure and remedy in Baptism is a considerable benefit, or the remanant
weakness (after the killing venom is abated) were more then a trivial
disadvantage. So that we have a kind of need of original clearness of
understanding, Adam who committed this first sin, in a doub'e respect, either
as one particular man, or as containing in his loins the whole nature of man,
all mankind, which should ever come from him. Adams i. e. his personal
disobedience is wonderfully aggravated by the Fathers, Aug. de Civ. 21. 12.
1. from his original justice, which God had bestowed on him, 2. from the near
familiarity with God, which he enjoyed and then lost, 3. from the perpetual
blessed estate, which had it not been for this disobedience he might for ever
have lived in, 4. from the purity and integrity of his Will, which was then
void of all sinful desire, Ib. l. 14. c. 12.
which otherwise might have tempted to this disobedience, 5. from the easiness
of both remembering and observing the Commandment, it being a short prohibition,
and only to abstain from one tree, where there was such plenty besides, 6. from
the nature and circumstances of the offense by which the Fathers do refer it to
all manner of most heinous sins, vid. Le^n. p. 143.
making it to contain a breach of almost each moral law, all which were then
written in the tables of his heart, and therefore concluding it to be an
aggregate or mixture of all those sins which we have since so reiterated, and
so many times sinned over. So then this Adam was of no mean size, not to be
reckoned of as an every days offense, as an ordinary breach, or the mere eating
of an apple. In the next place, as Adam was no private person, but the whole
humane nature, so this sin is to be considered either in the root, or in the
fruit, in its self, or in its effects. In its self, so all mankind, and every
particular man, is, and in that name must humble himself as concerned in the
eating of that fruit, which only Adams teeth did fasten on; is to deem himself
bound to be off by the work of a several repentance. Now in the last place, sin
of all mankind in Adam is considered in its effects, so it becomes to us a body
of sin and death, a natural disorder of the whole man, an hostility and enmity
of the flesh against the spirit, and the parent of all sin in us, as may appear
Romans vii. and Jam. i. 14. Which that you may have a more complete understanding
of, consider it as it is ordinarily set down, consisting of three parts, 1. A
natural defect, 2. A moral affection, 3. A legal guilt. 1. A guiltiness of the
breach of the law, for these three (whatsoever you Adam, of which this is an
effect. And first that natural defect is a total loss, and privation of that
primitive justice, holiness and obedience, which God had furnished the creature
withal; a disorder of all the powers of the soul, a darkness of the
understanding, a perverseness of the will, a debility, weakness, and decay of
all the senses, and lament this loss with all the veins of our heart? to labor
for some new strain of expressing our sorrow, and in fine to petition that rich
grace, which may build up all these ruins? to pray to God that his Christ may
purchase and bestow on us new abilities? that the second Adam may furnish us
with more durable powers and lasting graces then we had, but forfeited in the
first? The following part viz. A moral evil affection, is word for word
mentioned Romans vii. 5. For there the Greek words, Romans VII. 5.
(...), ordinarily translated motions of sins, and in the margin the passions
of sins, are more significantly to be rendered affections of sins, (...).
i. e. by an usual figure, sinful affections. That you may the better observe
the encumbrances of this branch of this sin, Sub. pro A^jun.
which does so overshadow the whole man, and so sense him from the beams and
light of the spiritual invisible Sun, I am to tell you that Heathen that lived
without the knowledge of God, had no conversation with, and so no instruction
from the Bible in this matter, that these very Heathens I say, had a sense of
this part of original sin, to wit, of these evil moral lusts and affections,
which they felt in themselves, though they knew not whence they sprang. lambl.
Pro^^ept. p. 102. c. 17.
Hence is it that a Greek Philosopher out of the ancients makes a large
discourse of the unsatiable desire and lust which is in every man, and renders
his life grievous unto him, where he James does c. i. ver. 15. (...), infinite
lust, Jam. c. 1.
with which, as St. James says, a man is drawn away and enticed, (...), so
says he, that part of the mind in which these lusts dwell, is persuaded and
drawn, or an unsattable intemperance of the appetite, never filled with a
desire, never ceasing in the prosecution of evil; and again he calls it, P. 136.
(...), our birth and nativity derived to us by our parents, i. e. an evil
affection hereditary to us, and delivered to us as a legacy at our birth or
nativity: all which seems custom among all of them, I mean the common Heathen,
to use many ways of purgations, especially on their children, who at the
imposition of their names were to be lustrated and purified with a great deal
of superstition and ceremony, such like as they used to drive away a plague, or
a cure for an house or City. As if nature by instinct had taught them so much
Religion, as to acknowledge and desire disease of the soul, this plague of man's
heart, as it is called 1 Kings viii. 38. 1 Kings VIII. 38.
And in sum the whole learning of the Wisest of them (such were the Moralists)
was directed to the governing and keeping in order of these evil affections,
Socrates, etc.
which they called the unruly Citizens and common people of the soul, Max.
Tyrius.
whose intemperance and disorders they plainly observed within themselves, and
labored hard to purge out, or subdue to the government of reason, and virtue,
which two we life but a living death, Eurip.
(...); body but the Sepulcher of the soul, (...), both which together are but
a Periphrasis of that which St. Paul calls in brief the body of death. And
shall we who have obtained plenty of light and instruction, besides that which
nature bestowed on us with them, shall we, I say, let our eyes be confounded
with abundance of day? shall we see it more clearly to take less notice of it?
Shall we feel the stings of sin within us (which though they do but prick the
regenerate, Vipers, by denying it all nourishment from without, all advantages
of temptations and the like, which it is wont to make use of to beget in us all
manner of sin: let us aggravate every circumstance and inconvenience Holy
Spirit, to curb and subdue it, that in the necessity of residing, it yet may
not reign in our mortal bodies; to tame and abate the power of this necessary
Amorite, and free us from the activity and mischief, and temptations of it
here, and from the punishment and imputation of it hereafter. And so I come to
the third part, or branch of this original sin, to wit, its legal guilt, and
this we prepossession, that it outruns all other computations of our life. We
carry a body of sin about us, before we have one of flesh, have a decrepit,
weak old man, with all his crazy train of affections and lusts, before even
infancy begins. Behold says the Psalmist, Psalm. LI. 5.
Psalm. li. 5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me:
as if guilt were the plastic power that formed us, and wickedness the Minera
and Element of our being, as if it were that little moving point which the
curious enquirers animation, and pants not then for life, but lust, and endless
death. So that the saying of St. James, Jam. l. 15.
chap. i. 15. seems a description of our natural birth, When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth
death. Nor does this hasty inmate leave us when grown up: no, it improves its
rancour against God and goodness, mixes with custom, passion, and example, and
whatever thing is apt to lead us unto mischief, somenting all the wild desires
of our inferior banners for tokens, under that proud name of another law, Romans
vii. 23. I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind,
and as if it had got the better of the day, bringing me into captivity to the
law of sin, unto its self. And shall we feel such an enemy within us, laying
siege at God and grace in us, and fiercely resolving, whether by deceit or
battery to captivate us unto himself, and shall we not take notice of him?
Shall we not think it worthy our pains and expense to defeat him, or secure our
selves? Beloved, that will be the best stratagem for the taking of this enemy,
which is now adays most ordinary in sieges, to block up all passages, and
hinder all access of fresh provision, mortification and repentance prescribed
you in Scripture, you shall better learn by your own practice then aggravation
of this guilt is, that is, that its minera and fuel lurks even in a regenerate
man, 1 Cor. IX. 27.
wretched, etc. and enforces Paul into a conflict, a war against himself. And
is it possible for one otherwise happy (as the regenerate man inwardly surely
is) to sleep securely, and never to try a field with the Author of its so much
misery, or finding it to be within its self part of it self, not to think it a
sin worthy repentance, and sorrow, by which Gods Holy Spirit is so resisted, so
affronted, guilt of it appears by the effects of it, 1. inclination, 2. consent
to evil: for even every inclination to sin without consent is an irregularity
and kind of sin, i. e. an aversion of some of our faculties from God; all which
should directly drive amain to him and goodness. That servant which is
commanded with all speed and earnestness, to go about any thing, offends
against his Masters precept, if he any way incline to disobedience, if he
perform his commands with any consent is so natural a consequent of this evil
inclination, that in a man you can scarce discern, much less sever them. No man
has any inordinate lust, but does give some kind of consent to it, the whole
will being so infected with this lust, that that can no sooner bring forth evil
motions, but this will be ready at hand with evil desires: and then how evident
a guilt, how plain a breach of the law it is you need not mine eyes to teach
you. Thus have I insisted somewhat largely on the Adam, as you reckon, only
sinned, has any effect on you. I am yet afraid And suffer us not, O Lord, to
nourish in our selves such a torpor, a sluggishness and security, lest it drive
us headlong to all manner of hard-heartedness to commit actual sins, and that
even with greediness.

And so I come briefly to a view of each man's personal sins, I am where I might
rank all manner of sins into some forms or seats, and then urge the deformity
of each of them single and naked to your view, but I will for the present
presume your understandings sufficiently instructed in the hainousness of each
sin forbidden by the Commandments. For others who will make more or less sins
then the Scripture does, I come not to swatisfie them, or decide their Cases of
Conscience. In brief I will propose confessing your sins, and humbling your
selves for them, which I desire you to aggravate to your selves, because I have
not now the leisure to beat them low, or deep to your consciences. Besides
original sin already spoken of, you are to lay hard to your own charges, 1.
your particular chief sins, 2. all your ordinary sins in gross. For the first,
observe but that one admirable place in Solomon's Prayer at the dedication of
the Temple. 1 Kings VIII. 37.
If there be in the land famine, etc. Whatsoever etc. Where the condition of
obtaining their requests from God is excellently set down, if they shall know,
i. e. be sensible of, be sorry for, and confess to God every man the plague of
his own heart, that is, in the bulk and heap of their sins, shall pick the
fairest loveliest sin in the pack, the plague, i. e. reigning, sweeping
offense, on which all the lower train of petty faults do wait and depend, do
minister and suppeditate matter to work. If, I say, they shall take this
captain sin, and anatomize, and cut up, and discover every branch of him
without any fraud or concealment before the Lord, and then sacrifice that dear
darling, and with it their whole fleshy lust as an Holocaust, or whole
burnt-offering before the Lord: then will he hear from Heaven his dwelling
place, and when he hears, forgive even master sin that rules the rabble, one
fatling which is fed with the choicest of our provision, one captain of the
Devils troop, one the plague in every man's heart. This being sincerely confessed
and displaid, and washed in a full stream of tears; for the lower more ordinary
sort, for the heap or bulk, we must use David's penitential compendious art,
Psalm. XIX. 12.
Psalm. xix. 12. who overcome with the Who can tell how often he offends? etc.
And do thou, O Lord, work in us the sincere acknowledgment of, and contrition
for both them, and the whole bundle of our unknown every days transgressions,
and having purged out of us those more forward, known, notorious enormities,
cleanse us also from our secret faults. And thus much be spoken of this
Proposition, that, and how every man is to aggravate the measure and number of
his sins Doctrine is, and in our whole discourse has been handled for a store
of Uses; for in setting down how you are to aggravate your sins, especially
your original sin against your selves, I have spoken all the while to your
affections, and will therefore presume that you have already laid them up in
your Use for a close, which has not been touched in the former discourse. If
every one be to aggravate his own sins, and to reckon himself of all sinners
the chief; then must no man usurp the privilege to see or censure other men's
sins through a multiplying glass, i. e. double to what indeed they are, as most
men do now adays. What so frequent among those who are most negligent of their
own ways, as to be most severe inquisitors of other men's? and to spy, and
censure, and Lay men the sins of Clergy are weighed according to the measure of
the Sanctuary, which was provided for the paying of their Tithes, Lev. xxvii.
25 H^^ker p. 428.
i. e. double the ordinary balance; and their own, if not under, at most
according to the common weight of the Congregation. In a Minister every error
shall become an heresy, every slip a crime, and every crime a sacrilege,
whereas beloved, he that means to Paul's lesson, must extenuate every man's sins
but his own, or else his heart will give his tongue the lie, when it hears him
say, Of all, etc.

And so much of this Doctrine of aggravating our sins to our selves, which we
are to perform in our daily audit betwixt us and our own consciences. There is
another seasonable Observation behind in a word to be handled; this particle
(...), of whom, has a double relation, either to sinners simply, and so it
has been Paul here is changed from the chief of sinners to the chief of
Saints, and then the Doctrine is become a Doctrine of comfort fit for a
Conclusion, that he who can follow Paul's example and precept, can sufficiently
humble himself for his sins, accept that faithful saying, and rightly lay hold
on Christ, may assure himself that he is become a chief Saint, for so could
Paul say, Of all sinners I am and therefore of all those sinners that Christ
came into the world to save, (...), I am the chief too. I shall not discus this
Point at large, as being too wide to be comprehended in so poor a pittance of
time, but show the condition of it briefly. He that by Gods inward effectual
working is come to a clear sight and accurate feeling of his sins; that has
not spared any one minute of circumstance for the discovery of them, not one
point of aggravation for the humbling of himself, he that being thus prepared
journey to Christ with his burden on his back, shall then take his flight and
keep upon the wing, till he fix firmly on him, may be as sure that he shall die
the death, and reign the life of a Saint, as he is resolved that God is
faithful in his promises: then may he live with this Syllogism of confidence,
not presumption in his mouth, It Is a faithful saying, that Christ came into the
world to justify, sanctify, and save believing humbled sinners; but I find my
Paul's, I am the chief] interpreted by that assured persuasion, Romans viii. 38.
that neither death nor life, nor any creature shall be able to separate him,
etc. I will not discuss the nature of this assurance, whether it be an act of
faith or hope, only thus much, it seems to be derived or bestowed upon hope by
faith, an expectation of the performances of the premises grounded upon Use of
this Point is, not to be content with this bare assurance, but to labor to
confirm it to us by those effects which do ordinarily and naturally spring from
it. Such are 1. Heb. III. 6.
joy, or glorying mentioned Heb. iii. 6. the confidence and rejoicing of your
hope firm unto the end, 2. a delight in God mentioned 1 Pet. I Pet. I. 3, 6.
i. 3, 6. a lively hope, etc. wherein (...), you exult, you greatly rejoice and
are delighted, 3. a patient adhering Isa. VIII. 17.
mentioned Isa. viii. 17. I will wait upon the Lord which hides his face, and
I will look for him, i. e. I will wait his leisure patiently, for I am sure he
will uncover his face. And Job more plainly and vehemently, Though he kill me,
Romans VIII. 25.
yet will I trust in him. So verbatim, Romans viii. 25. then do we in patience
wait for it, 2 These. III. 5.
and 2 These. iii. 5. The patient waiting for Christ. Fourthly, as an effect of
this patience, a silence and acquiescence in the Will of God, without any
desire of hastening or altering any effect of it. Ps. XXXVII. 7.
So Psalm, xxxvii. 7. Rest in the Lord, where the Hebrew has it, (...)
be silent to the Lord and wait patiently for him, i. e. as the consequents
interpret it, quarrel not with God for any thing that happens according to his
will, but against thine, as the prosperity of the wicked, and the like.
Fifthly, a confirmation of the mind, as making our hope the anchor of our soul,
sure and steadfast, Heb. vi. 17. Heb. VI. 17.
that we may thereby in patience possess our souls, Luke Luke XXI. 19.
And lastly, a desire of sanctifying our selves, according to that 1 John iii.
3. 1 John III. 3.
Every man that has this hope in him purifies himself, even as Christ is pure.
These six effects briefly set down, may be certain marks to you, by which you
may judge how just grounds your assurance stands on, and whereby it is to be
distinguished from presumption. O Lord let the fullness of thy Holy Spirit
overshadow us, and increase our weaker faith into a richer measure of
assurance, and our more fearful hopes into a degree of confidence may either be
or seem but a presumption, work in us those effects of patience, of silence, of
joy, of delight, of confirmation of mind, and above all a desire and ability of
sanctifying our lives unto thee.

cadence of them observed to you the tenderness of St. Paul and every
regenerate man, at the least mention of a sin or sinner, illustr^ted by the
opposite hardness of heart, proved of soft, tender parts of our body, and made
use of for a crisis or judgment of our estate and livelihood in grace.
Secondly, out of the words themselves we observed the necessity, and method of
aggravating our sins, especially original sin against our selves, which we made
assurance, discussed to you in brief with six effects of it proposed for an
example to your care and imitation.

Now the God which has created us, redeemed, called, justified us, will
sanctify in his time, will prosper this his ordinance to that end, will direct
us by his grace to his glory. To him be ascribed due the honor, the

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for, and
THE Whole Duty of Man, laid down in a plain and familiar way for the use of
all, but especially the meanest reader; Necessary for all families; with
private Devotions for several occasions.

The Gentleman's Calling, Written by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety, Or an Impartial Survey of the
Ruins of Christian Religion, undermined by Unchristian Practice; By the Author
of the Whole Duty of Man.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture; Or the certain and
indubitate books thereof as they are received in the Church of England: by Dr.
Cousin, Lord Bishop of Durham.

Divine Breathings, or a Pious Soul thirsting after Christ in One hundred
excellent Meditations.

Hugo Grotius de Rebus Belgicis, Or the Annals and History of the Low Country
Wars in English, wherein is manifested that the United Netherlands are indebted
for the glory of their Conquests to the Valor of the English.

A Treatise of the English Particles; showing much of the variety of their
significations and uses in English: and how to render them into Latin,
according to the propriety and elegancy of that language; with a praxis upon
the same; by William Walker, B. D. Schoolmaster Grantham.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillyes Grammar explained, opening the
meaning of the Rules with great plainness to the under standing of Children of
the meanest capacity, with choice observations on the same from the best
Authors: by W. Walker B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

A Treatise proving Spirits, Witches, and supernatural operations by Meric
Casaubon D. D.

A Catalogue of the names of all the Parliaments or reputed Parliaments from
the year 1640.

A Narrative of some Passages in or relating to the Long Parliament, by a
Person of Honor.

Nemesius' s Nature of Man, in English; by G. Withers Gent.



Tolleration Intolerable.

A Letter about Comprehension.

A Rationale on the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England: by Anthony
Sparrow Lord Bishop of Exon.

A Collection of Canons, Articles and Injunctions of the Church of England: by
Anthony Sparrow Lord Bishop of Exon.

Golden Remains of the ever memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaton-Colledge, etc.
The second Impression with Additions from the Authors own Copy; also more
Letters and Expresses concerning the Synod of Dort, from an Authentic hand,
not before published.

Mr. Chillingworth 's Reasons against Popery.

Book of Homilies appointed to be read in Churches.

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical.

Episcopacy as established by Law in England, written by the special Command of
the late King, by R. Sanderson late Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

s History of the World.

Military and Maritime Discipline.

The Bishop of Exons Caution to his Diocese against false doctrines: delivered
in a Sermon at his Primary Visitation.

A Thanksgiving Sermon preached before the King: by J. Dolben D. D. Dean of
Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet.

Bishop Brownrigs Sermon on the Gunpowder Treason.

A Letter to a Person of Quality concerning the Fines received by

A Narrative or Journal of the Proceedings of the Lord Holles and the Lord
Coventry, Ambassadors Plenipotentiary for the Treaty at Breda: written by a
Person of Quality concerned in that Ambassy.

A Narrative of the Burning of London, 1666. with an account of the Losses, and
a most remarkable Parallel between it and MOSCO, both

Lluellyns three Sermons on the Kings Murder.

A Collection of the Rules and Orders now used in Chancery.

Iter Lusitanicum, Or the Portugal Voyage, with what memorable passages
intervened at the shipping, and in the Transportation of her Sacred Majesty
Katherine Queen of Great Britain from Lisbon to England; by Dr. Samuel Hynde.

A Charge given by the most Eminent and Learned Sir Francis Bacon; at a
Sessions for the Verge, declaring the Jurisdiction thereof, and the offenses
therein inquirable as well by the Common Law as by several Statutes.

Mr. White' s learned Tract of the Laws of England.

Graphice, Or the use of the Pen and Pensil in Designing, Drawing and Painting:
by Sir William Sanderson Knight.

Hypocrates Aphorisms in English.

The Communicant instructed for worthy receiving the Lords Supper: by Tho.
Tro^t, of Barkston near Grantham.

All sorts of Law Books.


