A Guide to Heaven FROM THE WORD: OR, GOOD COUNSEL How to close savingly with
CHRIST.

WITH Some short, but serious Questions to ask our hearts every Morning and
Evening, whether we walk closely with Him.

And especially, Rules for the strict and due observation of the Lords Day.

Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures. London, Printed by E. C. for H. Brom at the
Gun in Ivy lane, 1664.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
HAd the Author of these Rules and Enquiries intended them for the Press, thou
might have found them set off with greater advantage to please a curious
Pallat; but being drawn out only for a plain people, they come close to the
Conscience, in a familiar vulgar style. Read them with care and consideration,
and you will find every line almost heartsearching. Keep this Book always at
your Bedshead, and let not a day pass over your head, without taking it into
your hand, and pondering the things in your heart. The first Rules are of
singular use to bring you unto Christ: The Questions to keep you close in your
walk with him everyday: And the last Rules are to help you especially on Gods
Day. Never more need of Counsel about our souls: The Lord help us to improve
all to Gods glory, and our own good and comfort.

Farewell.

A Guide to Heaven FROM THE WORD: OR, Good Counsel how to close savingly with
Christ, etc.
Twelve Rules to prepare you for closing with Christ.
1. WOrk your hearts into a through and unseigned belief of the Articles of your
Faith: Believe certainly and firmly, without the least doubt, that there is a
great and glorious God, that Jesus Christ is his only Son, and the alone
Savior: That the Bible is the true Word of God: That undoubtedly there is such
a place as Heaven and Hell, Heb. 11. 6.

2. Really believe, that you carry within your breasts, precious and immortal
souls: which must be adjudged by this God to one of those two places, there to
be for ever and ever, Mat. 16.26, etc.

3. Assure your selves. that the last Sentence will be past according to your
well or ill behaving your selves in this life. Every man shall be rewarded
according to his works, 2 Cor. 5.10. Isa. 3.10, 11. Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13.

4. Account upon it, that it is very difficult to come to that Heaven, and that
the way to destruction is broad and easy. Remember still, you have deceitful
hearts within you, a wicked Devil nigh you, and snares and hindrances about
and before you, Mat. 7.13, 14. Luke 13.24.

Say, my time is short my work is great, and my strength is small.

5. Certainly believe it, that Heaven is so glorious, that it is worth all your
care and pains, be it never so much: and that Hell is so dreadful, that you may
reasonably fly from it with all diligence, earnestness and speed; that it is
better you never had been born, if you should die in your sins, and perish
everlastingly: what a direful screetch will your soul give, if it goes out of
your body into unquenchable burnings? Heb. 11.14, 16, 26.1 ^e^. 1.4.2 Cor.
4.17, 18.2 Cor. 5.11.

6. Reckon, that all the troubles of this world, cannot make a man going to that
Heaven in ways of Righteousness, miserable and wretched: How sweet will it be
to pass, though out of a poor tottering Cottage, into a glorious Palace? Out of
a Sea of troubles and dangers, into an Haven of Peace, Rest, and Plenty? Nor
can all the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures here, make a man going to that Hell,
happy: What a terrible Hell will Hell be to great ones, that have spent all
their days in pleasure! It Is much to change a Palace for the dark silent Grave;
Jewels and Deckings, for worms and rottenness. But what is it to have sweet
singings turned into bitter howlings? Decked and glittering rooms, pleasant
walks, rich attire, delicious fare into dark Dungeons, unquenchable lakes of
fire and brimstone? Mal. 3.15. to 18. Luke 12.16. to 21.

7. Seriously think, I may yet get to this Heaven, and avoid the fearful
plagues and terrors of Hell. If I shall come to glory, what a God shall I
enjoy for ever and ever? into what blessed arms and bosom shall I cast my
soul? and if I should go to Hell at last, can I bear up under the weight of
Gods vengeance? Well, yet there is hope; Gods heart, the door of Grace, and the
Gate of Heaven, yet stand open. How would the damned in Hell give thousands of
worlds (if they had them) for my may be! Heaven, Grace, and Christ are offered,
and dare I refuse all? Can I venture the loss of soul and body for ever and
ever? Heb. 10.30, 31.

8. If I miss of glory, 'twill be mine own fault, my damnation will lie at my
own door: God can clear himself of my blood; his profers of grace are free and
frequent, earnest and real; and shall I murder mine own soul? Ezekiel. 18.32. Joh.
5.40. It may be written over my Grave, Here is one that destroyed himself, that
would go to Hell through mercies, judgments and warnings.

9. Debate the case with your soul solemnly, What is there in sin, that I so
much dote on? What are my greatest designs and projects in the World? Can I dig
the pearl of happiness out of this dunghill World? Can I get the Houses, Lands,
Honors, Friends that I aim at? and if I should, what are they? Certainly
conclude, the greatest wisdom is to be wise to salvation, and my best work is
to work it out with fear and trembling, lest I lose it, Prove. 3.13, 14. etc.

10. Then search and try your hearts, whether you are in the Faith, and your
hearts sound in Gods Statutes. Ask seriously, Have I the love that is sincere,
the Faith that is sound, soulsaving; and sin-killing, and life-reforming? Am I
sure my face and heart are really set Sion-ward, and Heavenward? 2 Cor. 13.5.

To this end Query:

1. Did I ever see sin odious, black and hellish? Defiling and damning? Have I
seen it in the glass of the Law, bloody and killing? but in Christ's blood,
exceeding, and above me asure sinful? Romans 7.13.

2. Do I see in Jesus Christ a beauty and excellency, a fullness and
all sufficiency? Is he the chiefest of ten thousands, altogether lovely in mine
eye? Can I say, Oh! thousand of gold (if I had it) for an interest in Christ's
blood, that cleansing, healing; Pea e-speaking blood! None but Christ. All is
but dung, that I may win him, Phil. 3.7, 8.

11. Take it for granted, that there is no name under heaven, whereby you can
be saved, but Jesus Christ's. All grace and mercy for this life, and that to
come, must come to you through the channel of Christ's blood, Acts 16.30, 31.
Acts 4.10, 11 12. Say, By sin I have shut Heaven gate, and hardened Gods heart
against me: I have laid my self open to all the wrath of God, all the curses
inn the Bible, and all the torments of Hell: and if I could bring all the cries
of my self, and all my friends, the strength of the Angels, the riches of all
the world, it would be as nothing to make up this woeful breach: Christ alone
can do it.

12. Believe it, that Christ came to seek and to save such as we that were
lost. That he is not only able, but willing and ready to give forth his rich
grace. What made him leave his Fathers bosom, put off the Majestic Robes of
his glory, but love to poor souls? What made him drink the dreadful cup of his
Fathers wrath, make such loud calls, such rich proffers; wait, and send; be
rejected, and wait; cry earnestly, and wait long, but love to sinners? Joh.
6.35, 37. 'Twas love to souls made him give up his body to be broken, that
precious box of ointment, which fills both heaven and earth with its sweet
savor, and pleasant perfumes.

Having thoroughly weighed and believed these foregoing propositions: then come
to Christ these 13 ways.

Directions how to close savingly with Christ.
1. COme to Christ, a poor, lost, and undone wretch, hopeless and helpless; as
to an only able, and merciful Savior. Cry out, as one sinking under the Waves
and boisterous tempests of sin, Master save, or else I perish. If thou will,
thou can, Heb. 7.25. Say with Thomas, My Lord, and my God, my Christ, and my
Savior; put the hand of thy Faith into Christ's pierced and bleeding sides,
Joh. 20.27, 28. Say as they, Joh. 6.68. Whither should I go, but unto such a
Savior! thou have eternal life. Thou can help me out of the deep and miery
ditch of my sins, and over the fiery and fearful gulf of Gods wrath, and can
bring me into the blessed presence, yea, into the gracious arms, bosom, and
embraces of the God of glory. I stretch out the weak arms of my Faith to thee,
O stretch out the strong arm of thy power and mercy, and come and save me!

2. Come as an humble, broken, and relenting sinner, to an offended Majesty.
Come trembling, with tears in your eyes, and deep sorrow in your heart. Come as
one vile in the sight of God, your self, men, and Angels. As the poor Publican,
not worthy to look up to heaven, smite on thy wicked heart. As the Centurion,
say, I am not worthy thou should come under the roof of my heart. As the
Prodigal, I have sinned against Heaven, and am not worthy to be an hired
servant. Yet there is mercy enough in my Fathers heart and thy merits, Isa.
61.1. I have let fly many poisonous bullets, and bitter arrows of sin against
thee; I have by sin, fetched (as it were) blood from thy precious heart afresh,
though it ran so freely and abundantly for my sake; but now a sight of thy
pierced side breaks my heart with sobs and sighs. My sins are now as so many
pricks in my side, thorns at my heart, and ropes about my neck.

3. Come as a filthy polluted, loathsome creature, to a cleansing Fountain of
Grace, Lazarus in all his sores, or Job on the dunghill with his scabs and
botches, were not so filthy and abominable in the eye of man, as I am through
the running sores and plagues of my heart and life, in the sight of an holy and
pure God. I am more vile then the Toad, then the stinking carrion in the ditch.
How does this filth stream through every duty and mercy? I drop the filthiness
of sin, wherever I go. Oh wash, cleanse and purify in thy blood, Job 15. 16,
42. Unclean, unclean! Thy, body was broken to let out thy blood for my sake,
and shall not my heart be broken to let out the filth and gore of my sin?

4. Come as a bond-slave, drudge, and vassal, to Christ as to a Redeemer.
Complain of the Devils cruel usage, and Sins tyrannizing. Say, Lord, thou have
paid a price sufficient. Thou have redeemed me by thy precious blood, that is
more worth then ten thousand worlds. Knock off these iron fetters, rescue me
out of this hellish Dungeon of sin. I have now no command of my head or heart,
of my tongue or passions. How do lusts domineere! Luke 4.18. Heb. 2.14, 15.
Romans 12, 13, 14. Here I lie staked down to the earth by a carnal heart.

5. Come as a sin-sick-soul to Christ, as to the only able Physician. As sick
persons, crying out of an aching head, or griping bowels. So complain, Oh the
plague of an hard heart! The galls and gripes of a wounded conscience! the
wounds and stabs I have given my soul by sin! Here I am sick to the very heart,
fainting and perishing. Oh a drop of thy blood: that is a cordial indeed, the
sovereign Balm of Gilead. These many years, yea all my life have I been
diseased with the bloody issue of sin; and all others are Physicians of no
value; but if I may but touch the hem of thy righteous Garment, I shall be
whole, Matthew. 9.20, 21, 22. I come to thee with mine Ulcers and Imposthumes, to
be lanced; that the rotten members of my body of sin may be cut off.

6. Come weary and heavy laden with your sins, to Christ for rest and ease,
Mat. 11, 28, 29. Good Paul groaning under the weight of sin, makes many heavy
heart-burning complaints, Romans 7.18, 19, and 24 but yet in the 25. v. he
triumphs in Christ. Holy David, restless and disquiet, roars under sin, Psalm.
38.1. to 9. Those sins that were as jewels in your eye, yea, as your right hand
or eye, are they now as milstones and loads to your soul?

7. Come as a poor, needy, and naked creature to Christ, as the poor to the
rich man's door for alms. Come quite stripped naked of your own righteousness,
Rev. 3.17, 18. Cry out of your spiritual poverty: Lord, not one penny of grace
to help my self. Never a poorer wretch came to thee for mercy. Grace I want; if
I perish it shall be at thy feet, begging and praying. I will not be thrust
away from thy door. Behold want of Faith, Patience, Love, etc. Not able to
think or speak, to do, or suffer. Oh let the sweet gales of thy spirit bring
thy rich promises fraught with incomparable grace and comfort, to unlade their
heavenly treasure into my bosom. Give me the key of Faith, that I may unlock
thy rich Storehouse, and fetch what I want.

8. Come as an hunger-starved soul for bread of life, thirsting and panting for
soul-refreshing grace, Isa. 55. Beg, cry out; Bread, Bread. In some Countries
through great want, they cry, Give, and cut me, (holding out their arm) give
and kill me. Cry, Give, Lord, and strike me, Give me heavenly food, and do what
thou will with me. Say, Lord, if but as a Dog, I may receive crumbs that fall
from thy full Table of Grace. Thirst and behold in every bleeding deep wound of
Christ a fountain of rich flowing mercy. Each heavenly promise steept in that
sweet blood of Christ by faith, can afford a full satisfying meal of joy and
comfort to thy pining hunger-bitten Soul. Apply the lips of thy faith to those
full breasts, to those over, ever-flowing Wells of salvation. Say, Lord, open
those precious boxes of ointment, and sprinkle them on my dead, barren, parched
thirsty heart. May I have but bread, but a drop, 'twill be as a refreshing
cordial; how sweet then will a feast of fat things be, Wine on the Lees!

9. Come as a foolish ignorant and backward Scholar to Christ as to a great
Prophet or Schoolmaster. Say, Lord, its thou must teach me, or I shall never
learn: I am dull to understand, but thou can and do teach thy people to
profit: Lord, that I may receive my spiritual eyesight! Thou have many an
heavenly lesson to teach, as Faith, Patience, Self-denial, etc. I am come to be
thy Disciple, I have a long time been under the teachings of man, let me have
the teachings of thy Spirit. Thou art meek, and not harsh, Mat. 11. 29.

10. Come as an unskilful, trembling Soldier, as a weak David, struggling with
Bears, Lions, and Goliahs, with Principalities and Powers. Come to Christ as to
the Captain of your Salvation; say, Lord, it is thou must teach my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight. It Is thou must fight my battles for me, or I shall
fall by the hands of these strong and to wring lusts. What batteries, assaults,
and storms does Satan raise against my soul! Heb. 2.10. Ephesians. 6.12.

11. Come as a condemned Malefactor and lost prisoner to Christ, as to your
Advocate and Intercessor. Lay open your bad cause and sad estate.

1. Your crimes are great and fearful, horrid treason, and that against the
highest Majesty.

2 Your accusers and adversaries many, subtle, diligent and cruel. The Devil,
your own heart, and acquaintance can bring in black bills against you.

3. The Law of God condemns you, and your doom is dreadful.

4 The great God your Judge, is highly incensed, affronted and dishonored.

Now apply your self to Jesus Christ, who has undertook as bad causes; say,
Lord, stand between the flaming fire and revenging sword of Gods wrath and my
poor soul, 1 Timothy 2.5.1. Ioh. 2, 1.

12. Come as a willing servant to a good Master, as a loyal Subject to your
only Lord and Sovereign, to obey, honor and love him above all others, and
that to the death. Say, Here I am, what will thou have me to do? Here is my
head to know thee, my heart to love thee, my tongue to praise thee, mine ears
to hear thy voice, and mine hands and feet to do thy will. Other Lords besides
thee have ruled over me. But thou art mine only Savior and Prince, Acts 5, 30,
31. Heb. 5.9. I dislike none of thy commands, they are righteous, good and
reasonable; but I find fault with mine own wretched heart, that I can no more
heartily love, and readily obey them. Say, Thy work is as Adam's was in
Paradise, a pleasure and not a toil; as the Be laboring, sucks honey and
sweetness, 1 John 5.3. What sweet, soul-ravishing work will my heart make of
praying, hearing, and meditating, etc. when thou streamest forth thy graces,
those blessed silver drops of heaven into every vein of my soul.

13. Come as a poor worthless Spouse to Christ, as to an honorable and
glorious husband. Come both for thy wedding Garment and matchless portion. Come
as Abigal to David, 1 Samuel 25.40, 4142. say, Lord, here I am meanly, yea vilely
descended, by sin a child of Satan, and thou art the Lord from Heaven. Enoble
me with thy grace, which is divine and heavenly blood, far above the heroical
blood of Ancestors. Here I am ragged, decrepit and deformed through sin. Cover
my filth and nakedness. with thy white, spotless garment, that my shame appear
not. What is platting the hair, decking a filthy, slimy carkase, to the
adorning the soul with invaluable grace! Every grace of thine is a rich
Diamond, a Pearl, yea far above. The soul filled with God, is a little Heaven
on Earth; and these graces are the bespangling stars and glittering lamps
thereof. Read that notable Description, Ezekiel. 16.3. to 14.

These rich ornaments, this crown, not of gold but of grace and glory, none but
Christ's Bride wears. Every morning set your self solemnly, as in the presence
of God Omniscient, and charge your heart to give in a true answer to these
enquiries, as it will account for these and many others things at the day of
Judgment before all the World.

Serious Questions to put to our souls every Morning.
Qu 1. How did I lie down and rise up? Was God in my thoughts? And if so, were
the thoughts of him sweet and precious to my soul? Psalm. 139. 2, 3, 4. Psalm.
92.1, 2.

2. In what frame is my heart at present? Do I admire Gods goodness for the
last nights sleep, for adding more time to my life: and am I heartily thankful?
Prove. 3.24.

3. Can I really commit all mine affairs to God this day, to be guided by his
connsel, Protected and Provided for by his care, and to be willing to be at his
dispose? Mat. 6.25. etc. 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 37.4.

4. Am I resolved to speak for God and his glory, what ever it cost me? In the
strength of Christ will I not be terrified from, be ashamed of, or grow weary
in well-doing? Mar. 8.38.

5. Am I a child of God, an heir of Glory? or a slave to sin, and a child of
Satan? If I am Gods child, must I not wear the glorious garment of
Righteousness, that royal sparkling livery of Heaven? If an heir of heaven,
should I not cast off the rags of corruption, and take heed of defiling my self
with the mire of sin? Deuteronomy. 5.32. Jude 23. What should I do more then others?
Mat. 5.47.

6. Who is the greatest deceiver? if my heart, let me not trust, but watch over
it all this day! Wherein are the greatest dangers, the most horrid and woeful
mistakes? if about men's sou's, let me venture the loss of all rather then of my
precious never dying soul, Jer. 17.9, 10.

7. What are mine implacable, potent, and soul-ruining enemies, but the flesh,
the Devil, and the World? Let me not pamper the one, hearken to the second, nor
idolize the third; Let me beware of them, watch and be sober, Romans 8.8. etc.
Gal. 5.17, 19.1 Pet. 5.8. Jam. 4.4.1 Joh. 2.15.

8. Who is and can be my best friend, but God? Let me take care in all things
to please him, fear provoking him. Let me love him with all my heart, obey him
with all my might, and honor him throughout all the day. Psalm. 144.15.

9. Wherein is the greatest vanity and vexation, but in the world? Let me then
slight and not admire and adore it. What is the sure gain and most lasting
good? Certainly Godliness; let me then prize, press after, and live in it,
Eccles. 1.2.1 Tim. 4.8. Chapter 6.6, 7.

10. What is my heavenly work, but to run a race, fight a good fight, strive
and wrestle? Can this be without care, diligence and watchfulness? 1 Cor. 9.24.
Oh that a vein of Religion might run through all I do this day!

11. Whose eyes will be upon me all this day, to observe head and heart, lip
and life? Will not God's, the Judge of all the earth? and dare I sin in his
presence? dare I so highly affront him to his face? Heb. 4.13. Genesis 39.9.

12. If I should spend this day in vanity, sin and idleness, will it not be
bitterness and sorrow at night? If I spend it holily and profitably, shall I
not pray with more confidence, and lie down with the more peace? Will not the
testimony of a good conscience be ground of great rejoicing? Psalm. 4.7, 8.2
Cor. 1.12.

13 How would I have this day represented at the great day of Judgment? What
words, thoughts, and actions, would I have then brought forth? Let mine be
such; for certainly all must then be laid open, 2 Timothy, 6.11, 12, 17, 18, 19,
Eccles. 11.8.

14 How may I this day order my secular business with most wisdom and honesty,
and for my greater advantage? Psalm. 112.5.

15 Am I sit now to pour out my soul to God in Prayer? Can I first and chiefest
seek the Kingdom of God? Mat. 6.33. Psalm. 5.2, 3.

Separate your self every Evening from all company, and ask your heart these
Questions; And wherein you have been guilty, be heartily sorrowful, and beg
pardon: and wherein God has enabled you to be in any measure faithful, bless
God and be thankful.

Every Evening ask these Questions.
1 WHat have I done this day for God and his Glory? what can I now look back
upon with comfort? Micah. 6.8.

2 In what frame has mine heart been all this day? what have I desired most,
Heavenly or Earthly things? Has my joy been more in God and in hope of glory,
then in riches, honors, etc? Was my grief most for sin, or for troubles? What
have I most sucked comfort from and lived upon, Creatures the Cistern, or God
the Fountain? Jer. 2.12, 13. Hab. 3.17, 18.

3 What were mine aims and ends, in what I went about? Have I been sincere, and
exercised a good conscience toward God and Men? Did I eat and drink, pray and
discourse with an eye to Gods glory? or ratner did self sit uppermost in all? 1
Cor. 10.31.1 Pet. 4.11.

4 What spiritual duties have I performed this day? Did I regard the manner as
well as the matter; out of conscience did I do them, and not out of custom? Did
I pray fervently, read with care and observation, meditate so seriously as
thoroughly to affect the heart? Romans 12.11. Iam. 5.16.

5 How faithful, diligent and careful have I been in my Place and Calling? Have
there been no idle hours in the day? Romans 12.11.1 Tim. 5.13. Prove. 10.4.1
These. 4.11.

6 What have been my company this day? What good have I done to them, or
received from them? Did I reprove, exhort, strengthen, encourage, comfort, or
warn, as occasion was given, and need required? Col. 4.6. Heb. 10.24, 25.

7 How have I born the troubles and crosses of the day? Did I not murmur, vex,
nor sink? Did I not entertain hard thoughts of, nor utter rash words against
God? Phil. 4.11, 12.

8 What were my temprations this day, and what my sins? Was I not easily drawn
into sin? Little over-awed or restrained by Gods All-seeing eye, merciful
heart, or revenging hand? Was I not soon proud, angry? etc. Did I not long
continue in it, and have I yet thoroughly repented of it? What conviction or
mercy, or warning did I sin against? Isa. 59.12, 13. Jer. 8.6.

9 What were my mercies this day, and how was my heart under them? Was I
affected with Gods goodness, and unfeignedly thankful, and therefore cheerfully
fruitful in good works? Have I prized my health, friends, and estate? etc. Ephesians.
5.20.

10 What have I learnt this day? What tsmore heart-affecting knowledge have I
got of God and his glory, of my self and my sins: of this world and that to
come? Phil. 1.9.2 Pet. 3.18. Col. 1.9, 10.

11 What of Gods word have I remembered or read, repeated or heard this day? Was
any Scripture sweet and good to my soul? What promise did I by Faith make mine
own? What particular command did in any thing sway and rule me? 2 Timothy 3.15,
16, 17.

12 What graces have I especially exercised? Have I lived by Faith, loved God
with all my heart and soul? Denied my self in any thing dear to me for God? 2
Pet. 1.6.

13 Have I this day lived upon, loved, honored, and reverenced God the Father,
as my Sun, Shield, and Portion? Have I this day prized, owned, and made use of
Christ as my Savior, Intercessour, and Friend; As my Root, Head, and Husband?
Has the Holy Ghost been to me a Director, or Comforter, a Quickner, or
Confirmer? Have I cherisht and not quenched its motions? Psalm. 84.11.

14 Have I been affected with the evils of sin or misery of others, of Nation,
Parish and Family, of Friends or Foes? Have I had a pitiful heart, or bountiful
hand to any in want? Psalm. 119.136. Jam. 2.15, 16.

15 Have I shown more especial love and pity to those that are of the household
of Faith? how have I honored those that fear the Lord? Psalm. 15.4. Psalm. 16.3.
Has a godly Job or Lazarus, though in rags and sores, been unto me as an
Orient Pearl on a Dunghill? Have I not valued men more according to greatness,
then goodness? Gal. 6.10.

16 Did the Church of God and interest of Christ lie near my heart this day?
have I heartily prayed for the welfare of Sion? and mourned when its songs are
turned into lamentations, and its glory into desolation? Do I prefer Jerusalem
above my chief joy? Jer. 19.1.

17 Can my Family witness that I have done any good for or to them? Can those
that best know me, speak best for me? Have I been good as Husband or Wife?
Psalm. 101.2. etc. as Parent or Child, as Master or Servant? Ephesians. 6.1. etc.

18 Have I wronged no man in his estate, by overreaching him; in his name, by
slandering, or backbiting? 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. in his soul or body, by letting him
fall into, or live in any sin or trouble? have I done to others, as I would
they should do to me? Mat. 7.12.

19 Have I forgiven mine enemies, rejoiced at others mercies, and not envied
any ones honor, riches, or friends, and coveted them? Luke 6.27. to 35. Matthew.
6.12, 14, 15.

20 Am I of a quiet, peaceable spirit? Have I not quarreled and contended with
my neighbors? Or do I make up breaches and follow peace with all men? Do I
honor the King, and obey Governors for Conscience sake? Romans 12.18. Romans 13.1,
etc.

21 Has my clothing Been suitable to my place and station? Has my carriage
been sober, discreet, and serious? Have I not been vain, wanton, nor frothy in
my discourse or spirit. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.2. Tit. 1, etc.

22 Have I scorned and contemned the glory of the world, accounting it but dirt
for Grace, and dross for Christ? 1 John 5.4, 5.

23 Have I really set death before me? My life as a vapor, a shadow? if I
should die daily, what preparation have I made for it? Am I sure, but this is
my last night? If God should shut mine eyes by death, how is it like to be with
my soul? Dare I lie down with the guilt or filth of any one sin? Is there any
returning from the Grave to amend? No certainly, 2 Cor. 4.14, 16. I Cor. 15.54,
etc. Prove. 27. 1.

24 Can I tell how great the day of Judgment will be? how glorious and
terrible? And dare I meet Christ coming in flaming fire, with ten thousand of
my sins to take vengeance? Can I hold up my head? Are my graces sound, and of
the right kind? All is not gold that glisters. Have I this day searched, judged,
and condemned my self? 1 Cor. 11.31. 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.2 These. 1.8.9, 10.

25 Do I believe Hell torments dreadful and eternal? Its flames unspeakably
scorching? Its misery endless and easeless? And do I not fly from this wrath to
come? Rev. 14.10, 11.

26. Have I ascended in the triumphant Chariot of Faith this day, and beheld
the new Jerusalem, Gods glorious Palace? Did I live, love, think and talk as an
Heir of this kingdom? Ephesians. 1.18, 19.

27 Have I not in all I have done, minded man more then God? Have I not minded
only the clean-sing. the outside? Ephesians. 6.5, 6.

28 Dare I lie down this night without praying earnestly to God for the pardon
of my sins, the blessings of the night, and the salvation of my soul?

Directions for the strict observation of the Lords Day.
For Preparation.
1 ORder all your week business so wisely before hand, that you may have no
unnecessary work on Gods day; that your hands may be as free as possible from
worldly work, and your heads from worldly cares and thoughts. Exodus 20.8, 9,
10, 11.

2 Think seriously, What a weighty work am I going about! My week-affairs are
but Toys and Trifles to this. What are Sheep, Oxen, or Shops, to Grace, Christ,
or Heaven? Can I be too careful and serious in Gods Work, in Soul-salvation
work? Surely no. How holy should my thoughts be, how heavenly my discourse, how
earnest mine endeavors all the day long? Isa. 58.13, 14.

3 Therefore prepare with all your might, search your hearts and lives, 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 2.1 Find out what your sins are, to confess, mourn over, and pray
against, Lam. 3.20.2 What the Mercies are you want for soul or body, for your
Friends, Families, and Nation; account this a Market day for your souls, Rev.
3.17, 18.3. What blessings received, and what thanks to be returned. Psalm.
116.12.

4 Think with your self, What good did I get by former, yea, by the last
Sabbath? Was my heart then broken, or warmed with love to God, and the like?
What did I then learn, and how have I practiced it in the Week? Have I fully
digested by meditation, firmly believed, and faithfully obeyed the truths were
last taught me? Isa. 1.11. etc.

5 Beg earnestly of God, that he would help you to sanctify a Sabbath, that
this may be the best Sabbath you ever kept. That your heart may be more tender,
humble, and heavenly; that the outgoings of your soul may be more free,
strong, and fixed, and the incomes of Heavenly grace and comfort more abundant:
that God may reap more glory, and you receive more good then ever heretofore.
That the holy keeping of this Sabbath, may be an earnest to you of keeping a
never never-ending Sabbath with God in glory.

To this end pray especially for these four things.

1 That God may prepare a suitable word for your soul, that the Ministers mouth
may be opened, and his heart enlarged, and his message full of goodness. That
it may be the pure, plain, and powerful Word of God, Ephesians. 6.18, 19. 2 That
God would fill his own Ordinances with his own presence and blessing: that he
would touch your heart, when man speaks to the ear. Drop, yea, stream down
h;eavenly grace through these Conduit Pipes, Isa. 48.17. Luke 16.14. 3 That you
may have the hearing Ear, the seeing Eye, and the understanding Heart; that you
may be teachable, willing to learn, and apt to receive what God delivers, Jam.
1.21, 22. Psalm. 110.3. 4 That your souls enemies may be kept off, at least
resisted and kept down. That your hearts may not deceive you, the Devil divert
you, nor the World distract or disturb you.
Having thus in some measure prepared your hearts for the Solemn work of this
great Day; observe and practice these following directions, as ever you hope to
have the blessing of the Sabbath.

1 As soon as you awake fix your hearts and eyes heavenward; bless God that
you see the light of one day more, especially Gods day; wherein you may labor
to have your sins pardoned and purged, and your souls furnished with grace, and
so fitted for glory. Call the Sabbath your delight, Psalm. 118.23, 24, Psalm.
59.16.

2 Beg heartily of God, that he would strengthen you by his grace, to do what
he requires, as he would have it done; that he would pardon your unpreparation,
bear with your infirmities, accept of your poor services, and Crown all with
his blessing, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.

3 That you be fitted for the holy and heavenly work of the day; affect your
heart with some or all of these Ten following things:

1 With the Majesty of that God whom you are to wait upon, Psalm. 95.2, 3, etc.
2 With the vileness of sin, and of your selves because of sin. 3 With the
sweetness of Christ, and the greatness of his Love and Mercy. 4 With the
excellency of that heavenly work you are going about, and the gain of
godliness. 5 With the vanity of the world, and all things therein. 6 With the
worth, and high value of your immortal souls. 7 With the rage, subtilty, and
diligence of your souls enemies. 8 Especially with the deceitfulness of your
own hearts. 9 With the Terror and Torment of Hell. 10 With the unspeakable and
everlasting glory of Heaven.
4 Carefully, and conscienciously perform Family Duties, Josh. 24. 15.

1 See that your Servants and Children of age, waste not away the Morning in
sleep or idleness.

2 Cause them to join together in Prayer, Reading, or any other Godly Exercise,
Genesis 18.19.

3 If you have time, you may Catechize them, or discourse to them of any of
those former Ten things, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.

1 Inform your selves and them, what a great and glorious Majesty and Master
you are to serve, Mal. 1.14.

2 What a blessed and heavenly work you go about; that it is heart work, Joh.
4.24. and therefore hard and difficult work, and yet that its pleasant and
excellent, Prove. 3.17. Chap. 8.34, 35. Oh the fatness of Gods house, and the
beauties of holiness!

3 What an abundant and unspeakable reward attends the well-doing, even life
everlasting, Rom 6.22. and how fearful a thing it is to trifle and be careless
in it, Lev. 10.3. Mal. 1.8, 13, 14. Heb. 12.28, 29. Acts 20.9.

4 Exhort and command them to be at all good exercises; yea, watch over, and
look after them. Remember the fourth Commandment binds you to look to all
within your care and power, Manservant, Maidservant, etc. If God had no more
pity and mercy to the souls of children and servants, then many bloody Parents
and Masters, they must needs swim in the direful Gulf of their sins, into
utter destruction.

5 Repair to the public places of Worship: If you have no Minister in your own
Parish, go where is the most soul-seaching, heart-melting, and sinner-rowsing
Preaching, etc. Isa. 2.3.

Take these Rules with you.

1 Thoroughly weigh these four things:

1 Consider I am this day to wait on God, the King of Glory, and not on man;
and therefore am I to come with all fear and care; what an infinite greatness
am I to admire and reverence? What rich goodness am I to love and delight in?
what depths of wisdom to look into? what infallible truth to rest upon and
believe? what a wrath and fiery indignation to tremble at? God is glorious in
holiness, and of pure eyes, Isa 6.1, 2, 3. 2 What a poor worthless worm and
wretch am 1? How should I come crawling, crouching, and trembling to the Throne
of Grace? What am I but dust and ashes, but putrefaction, yea, a sink of sin?
Isa. 6.5. Job 42.5, 6. 3 I have not only an empty heart, void of all good, but
an envious heart, full of all mischief and perverseness, Romans 8.7, 8. 4 Yet what
preparation have I made? Have I not spent more time and care to dress my body
for the eye of man, then to deck my soul for the eye of God? Job 11.13, 14, 15.
Psalm. 10.17.
2 As you are going to Gods house,

1 If you are alone, fill your heart with heavenly Meditations, hunger and
thirst after the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2. Mat. 5.6. Think, if God should meet my soul
and bless it: Oh that he would!

2 If you are in company, talk of God and his Word, but without pride or
affectation. Or hear others heavenly discourse: but if they are such as savor
only of Earth, and scorn Godliness, either reprove or leave them, 2 Cor. 6.17.

3 As you enter Gods presence, really expect his goodness to pass before you.
See Exodus 33.18. to the end, Chap. 34.67. Earnestly look for the light of his
Countenance, Psalm. 4.6. Say, Lord, thou have promised to be in the midst of thy
people, Psalm. 133.3. Matthew. 18.20. Bow the Heavens and come down: Let thy
greatness aw us, and thy goodness refresh us. By Faith, behold God in the
highest Heavens, surrounded with glorious Saints and Angels, and take heed to
thy self, Eccles. 5.1, 2. and yet through Christ, come with boldness, and cry
Abba Father, Heb. 4.15, 16. Chapter 10.19, 20, 21, 22.

4 Make a Covenant with your eyes, that they gaze not about to see, who is in
the Congregation, and what Clothes they wear and the like; Take heed of a
wandering departing heart, Matthew. 15.8, 9. Fix your Eyes on the Minister, your
Ears on the Word, and your heart on God, Psalm. 123.1, 2.

5 Be reverend in the gesture of your bodies, bow your knees as well as your
hearts before the Lord; if the place be not convenient for kneeling, stand
upright, 1 Cor. 14.40.

6 Whatever Spiritual work you set about, do it with all your might and soul,
Eccles. 9.10. Romans 12.11. As,

1 In Prayer, while the Minister is confessing and bewailing sin, let your
hearts even melt, bleed and break, Joel 2.13. When he begs Mercy, let your
souls breath and pant after it, Psalm. 42.1, 2. When he returns thanks and
praise, let all that is within you bless Gods holy Name, Psalm. 103.1, 2.

2 If Singing, let your hearts make melody to the Lord; Take heed when your
voice is high, your heart be not dead, flat and low, Col. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19.

3 When the Word is read or preached, mind, This is the Word of God, 1 These.
2.13.

1 It is his Command, and dare I disobey it? Oh that my ways were directed!
Psalm. 119.4, 5.

2 Does God threaten these Judgments, and denounce these curses on sinners? And
must I not tremble?

3 Are these his calls and invitations? his rich promises and great love? and
shall I refuse all? Does God knock at the door of my heart? Let the everlasting
doors thereof fly open, that the King of Glory may come in.

4 While the Minister is pronouncing the Blessing, post not away, (a fault too
common every where) but hope, desire, and believe it shall come down upon you,
Psalm. 133.3. Prove. 8.33, 34, 35.

5 Take heed afterward that Satan may not steal away the good seed sown; that
the thorny cares of the world may not choke it, Mark 4.14. to 20. Let not the
World get into your mouths, as soon as the Word is out of the Ministers. Some
have been sin-sick when they hear a row-sing Sermon, when the Word flashes
Heil-fire in their faces, a little startled; but it is as men are Sea sick,
vomit up the Word, and come ashore to the World, and all is well again.

6 As soon as you come home, beg of God to bless the Word you have heard, that
it may not be as water spilt on the ground, but that your memories may retain
it, your hearts love, and your wills obey it, 1 Cor. 3.6. That it may tear,
rent and fetch blood from your lusts, that it may fire your hearts with love
to, and zeal for God; and that love may fill your mouths with good words, and
your hands with good works, Romans 2.13.

7 When you sit down to dinner, having begged Gods blessing on the food of Soul
and Body, Matthew. 14.19.

1 Eat no more then will fit and enable you comfortably and lively to serve
God, Luke 21.34. Many fill their bellies so at this time, that they are fit
only to lay their drowsy heads on the Devils pillow of sloth.

2 Talk of Gods Word sitting down and rising up. Let your hearts be heavenly,
and your discourse savoury, seasoned with Grace. A Table without some good
discourse, differs little from a manger, Isa. 5.12.

8 After Dinner, either repeat the Word heard, or read in the Bible, or in some
other good book; and call your own heart, and your family to an account for
what you have heard, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9.

9 In the time appointed, go with your Family to the public, as in the
Morning. Think not half a day enough for God and your souls.

1 If you come to the Congregation before the Minister, spend not away the time
in idle imaginations or worldly discourse, or any vain stories; but either
meditate on God or his Word, or talk heavenly and holily. It Is sad to see a
Churchyard filled with idle persons, to hear nothing but of this or that
person and family. The great Questions are, how Corn was sold the last Market
day, and what Corn in such a field? and the like. Poor barren empty souls! have
you no better things to employ your heads and tongues about? Rather ask, What a
good Word we heard this day? How are we now to provide for Heaven? The Devil is
so busy in the Churchyard sowing his seed, that Gods seed takes little place
and rooting in the Church. Can you do the Devils work now, and the next hour
Gods? I am persuaded, the seasoning of persons hearts with vanity and frothy
discourse before Sermon, has been a very great hindrance to the efficacy of
the Word, and the good of many poor souls.

2 Warm your hearts with love to God, and delight in the work; think not that
falling down on your knees at your entrance, and tumbling over a few words, is
a sufficient preparation. It Is an harder work then most imagine, to fit the
soul for God.

3 When you are waiting on God, take heed of drowsiness, deadness, or
distraction. Remember, a careless heart, a drowsy body, dull affections and
dead services are not fit for a living God. Think, Do I pray now as for Heaven?
hear as one hearing God speaking from Heaven? Is my heart such as God may love
and delight in?

It Is to be feared, many can tell, where the windows and seats are broken, what
spots on the walls, and the like, better then what the Text, Doctrines, or
Heads of the Sermon were.

4 Take heed how you spend the Evening. The heart is very apt to be vain after
serious Duties. If God has set home any sin, shown you any duty, run that over
and over in your retired thoughts, Psalm. 1.2.

10 When you are about your necessary worldly work, as serving your cattle, and
the like; Take heed of carrying a worldly heart into the field. Turn all things
you see or hear heavenly. If your cattle stray, think, How apt am I to go out
of Gods way! If you behold the Heavens, see therein Gods power and wisdom, etc.
Psalm. 19.1. Think or talk of the Word, Psalm. 19.7. to 11.

11 Look on all you have done, as far short of what God deserves and requires.
What heavenly, fervent, zealous prayers does such a God deserve, and such rich
mercy call for? God is worthy of a better tongue then mine to praise him, and a
better heart to love him. Could I have done all commanded, and never so well, I
were but an unprofitable servant, Luke 17.10. What am I then, when I come so
infinitely far short; when every duty is filled up with abundance of sin and
fearful failings!

12 Rest on nothing you have done for acceptance or salvation, but on Christ
alone. Disown all confidence in your own righteousness, and expect all the
blessings and promises streaming to you alone in the blood of Christ, Phil.
3.8, 9.

13 Before you lie down at night, look over the days work. Search back into
every hour and duty of the day. Humble your self, and be heartily sorrowful
for any miscarriages; bless God, and be unfeignedly thankful; if you have
received any good; and still look out for more. Take the shame of failings to
your self, and give God the glory of any enlargements, 1 Chronicles. 29, 10, 11, etc.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
DIodates Notes on the Bible, Fol.

The New Common Prayer with choice Cuts in Copper newly engraven, suited to all
the Feasts and Fasts of the Church of England, throughout the year; in a Pocket
Volume.

Doctor Sparks's Devotions on all the Festivals of the year, in 8, with Cuts.

The Alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of England since
the Reformation; by Hamon L'Estrange Esquire in fol.

Justice revived, or the whole Office of a Country Justice, in 8.

The Exact Constable, with his Original and Power, in the Offices of
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors, Treasurers, and other
Officers, as they are now established by the Laws and Statutes of the Land:
both E. Wingate Esquire

Dr. Browns Sepulchral Urns, and Garden of Cyrus, in 8.

Floddan Field in nine Fits, etc.

Mr. Richard Brom his Royal Exchange.

The Jovial Crew.

English More.

Lovesick Conceit.

New Exchange.

Covent Garden Weeded

Queen and Concubine.

All the Songs on the Long Parliament and Rump, from 1640. to 1660. the second
edition enlarged.

Songs and other Poems, by A. Brom Gent.

Mr. Boys Translation on the sixth Book of Virgil.

AEneas his Voyage from Troy to Italy, an Assay upon the third Book of Virgil,
in 8

The Pourtraicture of His sacred Majesty King Charles the second, from his
birth 1630. till this present year 1661. being the whole story of his escape at
Worcester, his Travels and Troubles.

Chisul's danger of being almost a Christian, in 12. Choice occasional Sermons

Mr. Grenfields Sermon in behalf of the Loyal Party.

Mr. Glovers Assize Sermon.

-- His Sermon on Jan. 30. Mr. Stones Sermon at S. Paul's October. 20. 1661.
against Rebellion.

Mr. Walwins Sermon on the happy Return^ of King Charles the second.

Eighteen choice Sermons preached by Bishop Usher in Oxford in the time of War,
in 4.

A Treatise of Moderation by Mr. Gaul in 8.

S. Boneventures Soliloquies, in 4.

Speeds Husbandry, in 8.

The glories and Magnificent Triumphs of the Restitution of King Charles the
second, showing his entertainments in Holland, and his passage through London,
and the Country, comprising all the Honors done to, and conferred by him: by
James Heath; formerly Student of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

The covenant discharged, by J. Russel in 4.

The complete Art of Water-drawing, in 4.

The Harmony of the World in 8. in 3 parts.

The Temple of Wisdom, useful for all persons, being a Magical Discourse, in 8.
both by John Heydon Esquire

Jews in America, by Mr. Thorogood, in 4.

Blood for Blood, in 35 Tragical stories; the five last being the sad product
of our late Rebellion, in 8.

A Discourse of all the Imperfections of Women in 8.

Mr. Mortons Rule of Life in 8.

A Geographical Dictionary of all the Towns and Cities in the world.

Arithmetical Tables fitted to the capacity of such as are unskilled in the Art
of Numbers: by H. Walrond Esquire in 8.

Holy Anthems, sung in all Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches in England.

Schiverius Lexicon, Greek and Latin, the fourth Edition much enlarged.

A learned Exposition on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, and the Major
Prophets, by John Trapp, M. A.

The Crams of Comfort. The History of the Bib'e. The List of the Loyal Party.
And Case.
A brief Chronicle of the Turkish War: From July to January, 1663. Turned out
of High Dutch. Together with his Imperial Majesty's Reasons for the undertaking
of the War, and a Map for the better understanding of the Story.


