Reason in Season: OR, A WORD on the Behalf of the NON-COLLEGIATE PHYSICIANS
And of the Right of the People IN THE Choice of their Physicians.
By A. Hargrave, PHILO MEDICVS.

Magna est Veritas, et praevalebit.

Printed in the Year 1676.

Reason in Season, etc.
FOrasmuch as there was never any Prohibition of the Practice of Physic or
Chyrurgery to those that had Skill therein, until the time of King Henry the
8th, it is to be presumed, that the Exercise of these Arts is Common Right. For
our Kings and Governors had no such Thoughts, as some now have, that the
Educations of the Universities only capacitated Persons for that Practice;
because, had they so judged, it cannot be imagined they would, for so many
Hundreds of Years, in a Nation of such pregnant Faculties, have forborne to
specify their Resentment thereof; especially considering, that the Clergy (the
Original and Support of Academick Learning, were the great Ministers of State,
for the most part under every King since the Conquest; and how easy it had
been for them, had they (seeing they ruled All) apprehended it Essential to
Healing, may be judged by every Rational Man.

Nor does it appear by that Act of the third of Henry the 8th, where the
Bishops are the Licensers of Physic, that there was ought of other Learning
required, then Judgment in the Faculty; because it was appointed by that Act,
They should call to their Assistance any Four Teachers thereof; and as if this
also were thought too great an Infringment of Liberty, it was by another Act of
Parliament in the 34th Year of the said King's Reign (taking no notice, if
there were any such, of that in the 14th and 15th Year of the same King)
ordered, That Any that had Skill in Herbs, Roots, Waters, or to cure any
Outward Sores, the Stone, Stranguries, Agues and Impesthumes; not withstanding
any thing specified in the former Act, should have Liberty so to do: and good
Reason. For they found that Limitation of Practice to a set Number increased
Pride and Covetousness (grand Hindrances to the Improvement of Physic) and the
Di^ressed wanted Help, and they that did them Good were Troubled for so doing,
as the Preamble to that Act sufficiently manifests.

Now, although some may Object, This later Act was only made against that
Branch of the former which concerned Chyrurgeons; yet you may without
Difficulty discern that Agues. the Stone and Stranguries (Distempers not cured
by Outward Medicines) are referred to Any Persons skilful therein. Yea, the
very Letter of the Act, specifying Knowledge in Herbs, Roots and Waters
(Chemical Spirits and other Preparations of theirs being at that time unknown)
does undeniably demonstrate some part of Physicians Practice, if not the better
part. For though Colledgiate Physicians (through Ignorance and Idleness) refer
the Stone to the Knife, and so make it a part of Chyrurgery; yet the Stone in
the Kidneys (all men know) the Knife never reached; and where one is troubled
with the former, there are six, if not ten with the latter^ and can any one
think, that that Act should only or simply respect Chyrurgery. For in A^u^s,
though they are sometimes cured by Topics, most men now know, that internal
Remedies are more efficacious. The Strangury outward Medicines could never
cure; to testisie which I call to witness the Calamities of the Sick, and the
Error of Physicians (marked with a Bloody Character) who, by doting on the
Stone and outward Remedies, have neglected the One thing necessary, viz. the
Assistance of the Physical Man, and by that means miserably prostrated their
Patients to Death

Wherefore we may reasonably conclude, that Parliament never intended to make
the Power given to Physicians as a Bar to Natural Endowments, or the
Improvements of others in any wise relating to the cure of the sick. And
although by Misinformation they had enthroned Colledgiates as Judges, yet
(upon sense of their Inabilities) they were willing to curtayl their Power. A
sufficient Demonstration, that the Limitation of Physic never arose Naturally
as needful; but, by surprise of persons in authority, with pretenses of what
was not. It is also to be considered that in none of the Acts, made during that
King's Reign, was any thing specified to limit the Practice of Physic to those
only that were Academical; and although men now dote upon that kind of learning
(which as we would not contemn, so we are unwilling too much to adore) yet it is
to be presumed, our Ancestors left Nature free to bring forth her own Virtues,
as all the foregoing Generations before that time had done; especially when
they saw the limitation to a particular, so far to endanger the who^^. For if
we contemplate the original of Physic, it owes not its Birth to any Academy,
it having had its being long before they were known in the world. Nor had it
its Rise in Societies, but in and from particular persons, as (in the former
Ages of the world from Hermes, Machaon, Esculapius, Hippocrates, etc. and (in
the latter) from Basil Valentine, Paracels^^, Alexander Suchte^ Helmont, etc.
Hippocrates indeed, though a Man descended from the Race of Physicians, was
reckoned the Founder thereof; and because he cured the Plague. ^^dged to be
endowed with a Divine Nature (as Petus, Physician to Arta^^r^^^, testified to
his Master) and to have done more in his single Person, then all his Ancestors
had (...) and this same Man also, by his Volumns written, has so far proved
his Gifts, as to be esteemed the Patron of Physic, though we do not find him
acquainted with ought but his Mother Tongue. And that it was so, is probable
enough, seeing Collegiates and Academists confess, and the World knows, that
Natural Gifts arise not from nor are tied to learning of Languages; for if they
were, then every Man, who has learned French, Dutch, Spanish; or any other
Language besides his own should necessarily he endowed with more Excellent
Gifts then others, the contrary of which is daily obvious. Nor can there be at
this day such Pretenses for Academick Learning, as heretofore might have been,
in order to the understanding of Physic; because the Sum of all that has been
written by the Ancients, is now in the English Tongue, although at the time of
that Act making it was locked up in other Languages.

Moreover, Chemistry (the great Ornament of Physicians and Benefit to the Sick)
was not so much as thought of to be essential to the Practice of Physic; but
of later times, experience testifies, little can be effected therein without
it. And it is apparently evident, that Colledgiates have made very small
Progress therein; but those that are not of them (and whom they at this day
persecute) have solely aimed at, and brought to Light, such Remedies as do more
easily, safely and speedily effect the Cure of the Sick, then the Medicines of
their Dispensatory can at this day, What! shall we then defend a shadow, that
cannot benefit us, and destroy a substance, that helps to preserve us?

The College allege their Education, as great Help to their Capacities; yet
when we consider of it, we shall not find it amounts to more then a Memorative
Knowledge of what they have read; and what this can advantage us, is easy to
judge. For, since we live in a Climate and Time, where and when no Disease is
so apparently single, as to answer the Description of the Ancients, how shall
what they have said advantage the sick, when the present Distempers were not in
former times known? That this is true, the Observation of many years has
proved: for Collegiates themselves are frequently crying out, This is a New
Distemper. Therefore if we rightly consider, the learning of Languages cannot
better the Reason of any man, much less beget Understanding, except historical,
which in Physic can be of no service at all in this our Age: because Diseases
are now changed and complicated, and few or none apparently single (as we said)
and the Constitutions of Bodies so altered, as whatsoever might formerly be of
use, and very beneficial, at this Day is so far from doing Good, as it is often
found to prove inimical and injurious, for the Reasons aforesaid.

Indeed, it is clear to all Practitioners in Physisk, that are not Lip-learned
only, that very few Sick Persons have been so happy as to suffer the Affliction
singly of any Nominal Disease, ever since the Pox and Scurvey have proved so
Epidemical; and the last Plague augmented the latter, as becoming material
therein, that that Disease seems as the Mother or Genetress of all Calamities
now reigning; insomuch that the Stone, Go^ts Pa^sies, and all the Troop of
Diseases (congealing, coagulating and obstracting receive Life and Existance
therefrom; against which no known Ancient: Remedies prevail, or effect ought to
purpose, Nor did any Methodist ever care by them in these latter Days,
notwithstanding the Advantage they have of Association, and standing so fair in
the Opinions of the People, that they have Patients at their B^ck so as at the
very first beginning of Distempers 'ere those Diseases have materiated
themselves, they are the Subjects of their Skill: An Advantage that those that
are not of them seldom have: yet it is evident, that in Chronical Diseases more
are cured by Particular Persons of no Society (when the Patients are by the
other lest off as Uncurable, and the Disease for the most part changed in
respect of its Seat; and the Spirit more darkened, through great De^ility of the
Faculties) then they themselves, with all the Helps of Nature's Clearness,
Strength of Faculties and Unfixedness of the Disease it self could alleviate or
tolerably help.

Now, since few of the Practitioners in Physic (that are not Collegiates or
Dependers on them) follow any other Method, then what they have raised from
Experience, or a well grounded Judgment in Nature, both as to the Progress of
Distempers and the Cures thereof; is it not reasonable to judge, they are as
fit (if not more to practice Physic, then Those that sit down contented with
Rules prescribed by the Ancients, who knew nothing of the Distempers which now
afflict, as is well and pithily noted by the Chemists of London in the first
Part of their Principles stated etc. For it is evident by the Histories of
former Times, Distempers were rarely complicated, and now we are sensible; that
they are seldom Simple; and how the Remedies appointed by the Ancients in their
Days should serve ours, We leave to the Judgment of every Man.

Therefore it is worthy the Consideration of Magistrates and Others, that not
withstanding there has been, for many Years, this great Digression in Nature
from her wonted Path, and Epidemical Diseases falling one upon the Neck of
another have greatly augmented the same, yet has it not been in the Hearts of
these Men that are called a College, either to take sufficient Notice of the
same, or to (...) after Remedies for Prevention of the Increase thereof;
whereas it is the Part of a good Physician, not only to change and alter his
Medicines, but his Method of (...) also (if Need be) as Diseases vary and are
changed; and whenever any (...) his formerly succesful Remedies are
unserviceable, to substitute others more effectual in their Stead, and this,
not by Hearsay, or Reports of Others, but with found Judgment and proper
Experience: But They, on the contrary, in all Times and Seasons have been so
far from thinking this any Part of their Concern, that they have labored to
suppress those that have endeavored it, as their Persecutions in all Times
have testified.

They are not ignorant of the Improvement that has been made in Physic by
those that are not of them (although Mr. G^odale slanderously avers the
contrary) in so much that there is no single Laboring Physician, but has
something he can call his own, as a Blessing upon his Endeavor, whilst They,
with all their Accumulations (if they set aside what is bought, begged, or
borrowed) are destitute (...) the Like, as they are a College: For indeed
Industry is always followed with hopeful Fruits, but ^^eness reapeth Nothing;
yet we know they have their private Nostrums (as they call their peculiar
Remedies) but if compared with who Laboring Physicians profess they are but as
Chass to Wheat and more for State the Service, and each of theirs for the most
Part is such a Child as cannot call them Father: Now can it be thought These
Men, if left free to their pretended Power should ever advance Physic to the
Benefit of their Country, when they so apparently hinder Others: For although
for above an hundred Years they have had all the Advantages any Sort of People
could desire, yet do they walk, like a Carrier's Horse* (...) the old Track
still; and this C^urse they will hold (because splendid and profitable though
almost every One of them, taken apart, will confess there is a Better Way but
because those they have assumed for Patrons have not prescribed it. They rather
choose to stumble and fall, and make Others do so too, then to leave the same;
Piece of Confidence, which (in any other Sort of Men) could not but be
accounted Sordid; yet so strangely are these Men bewitched with the Pretense of
Power, that They think, if they Kill by a prescribed Rule (like the Wild-Irish
ploughing by the Horse-Tail) to be more pardonable then Others that are none of
them, who really Cure without that Rule; but this is a Part of Boldness, so
inconsistant with Ingenuity, that any unbyassed Man would be apt to judge them
clear of the same; therefore since they are notoriously guilty thereof, it is a
Thing very fit to be considered.

For if they were by Act of Parliament made a Society, that was for the
Advancement (not the Hindrance of Improvement) of Physic; and if they have not
advanced, but hindered it, are they not, ipso facto, as other men that never had
any such Authority? For where the Reason for which a Law was made cease, the
Law it self cease to be: And can any man judge they were established a
College, for any other End, then the Cure of the Sick, after an easier and
safer Manner then Others could do? and if they have not done it, shall Those
that have done what They have not (or cannot do) be counted Aggressor? The Laws
of the Kingdom, that admit, every Man's House as his Castle, for a Just Defense
of his Propriety; and judge every Man or Men a Felon or Felons that break it
open; yet in the Case of Fire do not in the least accuse Those, that for
Preservation of the same House, and Defense of others, force open the Doors to
quench it: Nor is the restraining of Mad or Passionate Men from injuring Others
or themselves, either by locking a Door upon them, or holding their Hands,
adjudged a Restraint of Personal Liberty (though in other Cases punishable by
Law) because it is a Maxim in our Law, that all Laws are made for the Benefit,
not the Hurt of the People in general: Therefore it has been established by
the Grand Charter, and since confirmed by many Parliaments, that if any Act be
made contrary thereunto, it shall be holden for Null: Nor want there Examples
for Proof of the same, as is well known to All that are acquainted with our own
Histories; for the End of all Laws is no other, but the Preservation either of
our Persons or our Estates; and so far as this Law does so, it is to be
acknowledged and adjudged Good.

But can Any be so ignorant as to think, that if these Men could obtain their
desirable Power (which they earnestly attempted to acquire from the Parliament
in the Year 1664. and seem now again to thirst after) it should be for the
Preservation of Persons, or Security of Estates, when by Suppression of the
Laborious and Ingenuous Party, they should arrogate and assume to themselves
the sole Power of Administering; shall not the Remedies so many Thousands have
experienced the Use of, and the Advantages they have found by them be utterly
extinct, and their Persons endangered for Want of them, and their Purses be
exposed to the Pleasure of those they must be compelled to make Use of, who
being but a small Number (and in a joint Confederacy) may set what Price they
please on their Visits? For without Doubt, where there is One Colledgiate
Practitioner, there are three or four Others; and if the Number of People be
considered in London and seven Miles about, it will be found that they of the
College are not capable (if the Non-Colledgiates, practizing Apothecaries and
Chyrurgions were suppressed) to supply the Necessities of half the Sick; suppose
there were five hundred of them, which it is well known they are not, what is
that to take Care of ten hundred Thousand Persons? But if it were so, that they
were numerous enough, and as well furnised with Remedies, we see no Reason why
any Man should be debarred of his Liberty so, as not to choose whom he pleases
for his Physician, seeing it is one of the greatest Helps a Sick Person has to
be satisfied with those about him: And should we well weigh what it is to be
debarred of using what Physician we please in Time of Sickness, it would amount
to no less then the Greatest of Cruelty; for the Husband must be forced to
abandon the Relief of his Wife, when Sick, if under such a Distemper as their
Remedies (which we too ^^^en find incapable) cannot reach, and the Wife also
must do the same to her Husband, the Father or Mother to their Children, and
the Children to their Parents which if so, are not the Duties of Relations
dissolved, and the Law of GOD (implanted in our Hearts, blotted out? And is not
this an Impiety beyond Parallel. For of how great an Advance the Affection of a
Patient to his Physician is toward his Recovery, none will doubt; but if the
Sick Man shall be compelled to use that Physician he affects not, what great
Consternations, Doubtings and Trouble of Mind (to the u^ter undoing of the
Patient) will unavoidably thence arise in him every Man of a mean Capacity may
easily judge.

Besides, in Times of greatest Danger, as when the Plague raged, We have seen
how inhumanely they fled the City, leaving its Inhabitants at that Time, when
their Skill (if they had any) was of most Use; hence you may clearly see
whether it be for the Benefit of the People to be compelled to use no other
Physicians, then those who in Time of greatest Danger will be sure to forsake
them: But I suppose every Rational Man will judge this enough to prove they
have forfeited their Power, having broken their Trust, which was for better
securing the People from the Hands of the Ignorant.

Now to conclude this Apology let us consider the Preamble of their Patent, the
main Hinge or Soul of their Constitution, which (if perused) you will find
clearly to demonstrate, that to prevent the Ignorant, Malicious and wicked from
hurting the People, their Authority took Beginning, and was imposed on them for
the same End wherefore, if They cannot prove Ignorance, Malice and Wickedness
in the Persons they trouble, can any Conscientious Jury-man find them guilty of
a Law (if it be one) that have not deviated from the Scope and End thereof; let
this be laid to Heart; also let it be well weighed, that They use not against
us the Verity of their Arts, but Arms, viz. their pretended Law, as if they
wanted other Arguments to confute Us; a sufficient Testimony They rather seek
to suppress the Industrious by Power, then Reason; which if so, let all Men
consider how safe they are under their Hands, and also, that Men of Innocence
and Prudence seek not coercive Power over Others, but leave all Men to be
Judges of their Acts, and are willing to stand or fall by the Common Law of the
Kingdom, which never wants Power to chastize Those that by Male-Practice injure
their Neighbors.

FINIS.

