THE PAPISTS New fashioned Allegiance:
A LETTER Lately seized in the House of an Eminent Roman Catholic in
Hereford-shire, and produced at the late ASSIZES there held:
Written by Father HARCOVRT the Jesuit, lately Executed; Concerning taking the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.
UPon a late search in Herefordshire, the ensuing Letter was found by a Justice
of the Peace in a Papist's House, very choicely laid up amongst a parcel of
Crucifixes, Relics, and Popish Trinkets: It was written as from a Woman, as
some Expressions would make one believe; But both the Matter, Style and
Character, evidently showed it to be in Truth from some Jesuit or Popish
Priest, who now commonly maintain their Correspondencies in the Names, and by
the Mediation of their Female-Disciples. For as that Sex is by Nature ignorant,
Superstitious, and pertinacious in their Opinions; so these crafty Seducers
imitating their Father, the Original Deceiver, make special use of these weaker
Vessels, to imbibe and propagate their false Doctrines.

The Author of this Epistle therefore, is generally reported, and on good
grounds believed to be no other than that late Executed Traitor, Father W.
Harcourt, the Jesuit, as well because the Letters of the Name subscribed, agree
with his, and that it is certain he was intimately Familiar in that Family, and
at that time sculking up and down the Country; as also, because some
acquainted with his Handwriting conclude it to be of the same Character. And
though the matter thereof seem to be good and commendable, as persuading, or if
you please, giving leave to Papists, to do that which in it self is most
lawful, and no more than their Duty, yet the manner and grounds on which this
is here advised, evidently demonstrate, that it is done merely to serve a
present Turn, and elude the Law by Swearing in such an abstruse Equivocating
sense, as renders the Government never the more secure: The necessary
preservation whereof, was the grand end for which these Oaths were originally
enjoined, and still imposed. -- The Letter follows.

Dear Cousin,
I Am glad to hear you continue so well after your hard Bargain, for I was
afraid all our Friends had been quite lost, they have been so disturbed and
Letters are so uncertain, that one dares not trust any but by a special
Messenger, and scarce so. I might have been as happy as you, but the sudden
Frights of Searchers, which I feared might have plundered in All, and hurried
my good Gentleman to London, caused a Miscarriage, which went harder with me
than Childbearing. The Times are sad at present, but we ought not to despond,
a little Patience may mend all. My privacy affords but little News, and how the
Great Wheel turns, I am not certain, but hope and pray for the best. We are all
well as yet, at our little Pathmos, and after serious Examination and Advice,
which we think fit to communicate to you, and the rest of our Friends, Approve
of it as requisite for a Catholic man to express his true Loyalty in such
Circumstances to his King by taking the Oaths, when necessitated thereunto. For
though there be much harshness in the words, as to exclude our Acknowledgment
and Adherence by Faith and Obedience unto our purely Spiritual Head; yet since
we be admitted to make our own Sense, as indeed, whoever Swears cannot be
hindered by any words imposed from Swearing, in such Sense as is agreeable to
his own understanding; so that here we only swear within such bounds as the
Catholic Church and our Duty allows, that is, only acknowledging a Temporal
Power over Spirituals, as in Contentious Courts due to the Temporal Sword, and
not in Foro Conscientiae, as by the Proviso in the Statute Quinto Elizabethae
may be seen.

Therefore to take off this Ignominious Censure of denying our Allegiance, and
let the World know, that we may give to Caesar what is his due, we may not
refuse the Oaths when legally tendered, especially at such a time when
Catholics lie under so many Suspicions and Scandals, in point of Loyalty,
which it is an indispensable Duty, incumbent upon us all, to prevent to the
utmost of our power, and this especially when we are not compelled to the
Rigor of the words, as formerly; but only to allow His Majesty a Supreme,
Temporal Power in Spiritual things, and not a purely Spiritual Power, which is
due only to the Supreme Spiritual Pastor of our Souls. Without denying God his
Right, we may attribute in a sound Sense to the King, that Spiritual Coercive
Power, which he or his Ancestors gave to the Church. Now he claims it to
himself, and with more Justice than the first Framer of one of these Oaths that
began it by Pillaging the Church, and usurping its Power: For he now quietly
possesses the Church Livings, and had not he the Authority in the Spiritual
Courts, upon every disagreeing, the obstinately Contentious or best monied
Litigants would Appeal to Rome, which would be as inconvenient to our Peace, as
those harsh words, which some devout Catholics now scruple at, though without
reason, when their ghostly Instructors have signified their Concurrence, etc.
For when the SWEET LENITIVE is admitted, by owning the King has such a
Temporal Coercive Power over Spirituals, we do not deny the purely Spiritual
Power of our Supreme Pastor. As for Example, The Pope creates a Bishop, and
gives him Power to administer Sacraments; This was the Power of the Keys given
to St. Peter by our Savior: But 'twas Constantine gave St. Sylvester his
Temporal Command, and had Constantius his Son, reassumed it again, he had but
destroyed his Father's gift. Now then when all the Lands be in the Crown, we
may acknowledge the King the Supreme Head, and as they be called Spiritual
Livings, because they belonged to the Church; so he may not improperly be
styled a Spiritual Head, that has Command of them; which at his Pleasure he may
again bestow upon Spiritual Persons. This is what I thought fit to signify to
you at present on this matter, wherein you desired Directions, and might have
been more plain, would the Times have born it. I should be heartily glad to
hear from you as often as you can, but you know the necessary Cautions. Pray
present my Duty to my Aunt; And so with my Prayers to Almighty God for you all,
and most Cordial Love remembered, I ever am

April the 12th. 1679. Your most Affectionate Cousin W. H.


Though this Letter be written in so strange and affected cloudy Style, and
those words, Miscarriage, Childbearing, Husband, etc. cast in to make it the
better pass for a Woman's Penning, which yet possibly may have some other
determinate meaning, well known by Confederacy amongst the Correspondents; yet
the main drift of it seems plain enough to be the signification of some
Dispensation lately granted to English Papists, to take the Oaths; and this
merely suited to the present Juncture of Affairs, to avoid the Penalties of the
Laws, prevent Scandal, and possess Protestants with a good opinion of their
Loyalty: The better to dispose zealous and scrupulous Roman Catholics
thereunto, here is the use of Equivocation recommended, and such an
unaccountable distinction framed about Temporal Power in Spirituals, and that
so warily laid down, that the Jesuits may at any time give a different or clean
contrary Interpretation, whenever Opportunity and their Interest shall require
it. By these, and the like dealings of these Men, we may evidently perceive
that they make use of Religion only as a Politic Engine, which they manage
variously at their pleasure, as it may be most serviceable to their Designs:
And that there is no Oath, Test, or Obligation, which by the help of an
Equivocation and a Distinction they cannot accept, and presently evade or break
through.

FINIS.

