A SERMON Preached at St. MARYS Church IN CAMBRIDGE, JANUARY the 6th. Being the
FEAST OF THE EPIPHANY.

By FRANCIS HARE, A.M. and Fellow of KING'S College.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed at the University Press, for Edmund Jeffery, Bookseller in
Cambridge, 1700.

Mr Hare's SERMON On the EPIPHANY.

Imprimatur.

THO. GREEN, Procan. HUMF. GOWER, Prof. Marg. S. BLITHE, Aul. Clar. Custos. C.
RODERICK, Coll. Regal. Praep.


LUKE II. xxxii. A Light to lighten the Gentiles --
THE Hymn from whence these Words are taken, is so well known by being made a
part of the constant Service of the Church, that I need not mention either the
Author or Occasion of them; Every body knows When they were spoken and by Whom,
sees Who it is they point to, and is beforehand with me in the application of
them to the Day; Which the Church has set apart to commemorate that great
Mystery, the Manifestation of the Messiah to the Gentiles, a Mystery hid from
Ages and Generations, but now made known in the Persons of the Wise Men; who by
the Leading of a Star came from the East to Jerusalem to pay their homage to
the Newborn King: For they were the First Fruits of the Gentiles; in Them was
this Manifestation, not only signified and shadowed forth, but actually begun;
so soon did the Messiah the Glory of Israel begin to be a Light to the Gentiles
also.

This is a Day much to be remembered in it self; and as it is the last of the
Solemnity of this Season, so is it the great Reason we remembered those that
went before it: For what if Christ were in the fullness of Time Born of a pure
Virgin, what if he were Circumcised the Eight day, and made obedient to the
Law; what had these things been to us, or what Interest had we had in them, if
He that was Born and Circumcised, had not been Manifested to us?

If we have any Sense of the Misery the Gentile World had hitherto, and would
have still continued to lie under, if the Messiah had not been revealed at all;
and the yet greater Evils they must have undergone, if he had been revealed in
the manner the Jews expected; we shall see abundant Reason to celebrate this
Day, and joyfully acknowledge the Goodness of God to us, in that Manifestation
of His Son, which we now commemorate. And if a Sense of being delivered from
our Misery, if a Sense of having the greatest Evils removed far from us, be
sufficient to excite Joy and Praise, and Thanksgiving in us; much more will our
Rejoicing be increased, much greater will our Obligations be, when we consider
the Favors and Blessings we do or may enjoy, if it be not our own Fault, in
the room of those Evils, which we must have been otherwise exposed to.

If the Messiah had not been revealed at all, the World would still have lain
in Sin, in Blindness and great Darkness, and had neither known God, nor been
known by Him; they would have been still wandering after their own Imaginations,
and either not searched, or searched in vain for any real Happiness; their
Wisdom must still have ended in extreme Folly, and they at last forced to sit
down, after having tired themselves in endless Mazes and Uncertainties, in
profound Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death. Such would have been the
wretched State of Man, had the Messiah never come, or which is all one, had
never been revealed to us; for such it was before He came, as I shall show more
at large by and by, and such it still is in those parts of the Gentile World,
where the Light of the Gospel has never Shone.

But Worse, much Worse had our Condition been, if the Messiah had been revealed
in the manner the Jews expected; then indeed He had been a Light to the
Gentiles, but not to Lighten and Comfort, and give Life to; far from that, He
would have been a Light Dreadful and Terrible, to Burn up and to Destroy the
Nations of the Earth, as many as would not bow their Neck to the Jewish Yoke;
which was now, in the fullness of Time to be laid on all People, and be, as they
thought, Universally Submitted to: for they expected the Messiah should be a
Mighty Deliverer, a Glorious Conqueror, One that should lift up his Voice on
High, that should be Dreadful to the Kings of the Earth, and subdue all People
to Himself. They expected a Star should arise out of Jacob, and a Scepter out
of Judah, that should smite the Corners of Moab, and destroy all the Children
of Seth.

These were the Expectations of the Jews; which had they been fulfilled, had
the Messiah appeared, as they flattered themselves He would; they indeed would
have had great Reason to Rejoice: for to see the Slavery they were under, for
in truth their Subjection to the Roman Yoke was little better, to see that not
only changed into a Glorious Liberty, but to have themselves the Power of the
World in their own Hands; to see all Nations and Kingdoms fall down before
them; but above all, to have it now their turn to Rule over those, who at
present Ruled it over them; this would have been matter of great Joy to any
People, though they had been more Considerable, had Suffered less, and had had a
better Temper than the Jews. But how great soever their Joy would have been on
this Occasion, the rest of the World would have had little Reason to join with
them; their Portion would have been to Lament themselves and their hard
Fortune, their Sorrow would have rise with the Calamities this State of Things
would have reduced them to, and both would have increased in proportion to the
Prosperity and Joy of this little People; who confined to a narrow Corner of
the World, now made no Figure, were no Terror to their Neighbors, but lived
to themselves, Despising and Despised.

But, Thanks be to God, this is not the Case; their Expectations are so far
from being fulfilled, that the exact Reverse of them is come to pass. They are
so far from being the only People whom the Lord has Redeemed, so far from
engrossing the Blessings of the Messiah to themselves, that they are almost the
only Nation that has had no part in them: For God has given them the Spirit of
Slumber, Eyes that they should not see, and Ears that they should not hear:
They stumbled, they fell, and through their fall Salvation is come unto the
Gentiles. So great is the Goodness and Severity of God; on them which fell,
Severity; but Goodness toward us. His Severity indeed is by no means matter of
Joy to a Good Man; far be those Thoughts from us, we ought rather to pity their
great Unhappiness, and pray for the Time when God will have Mercy on his
Ancient People; but we ought to make this Use of it, it should teach us to set
a greater value on his Goodness, who have received such undeserved and
unexpected Favors from Him, When we were no People, when we sought Him not,
nor asked after Him; and that not in common and together with them who were His
People, and whose God He had declared Himself to be; but what is much more
surprising, they had no Share in them; The casting them away was the
Reconciling of the World.

That we may the better understand the Greatness of this Mercy, and have a due
Sense of the Obligations it brings with it, I shall consider,

First, the State of the Gentile World before our Savior came;

Next wherein the Enlightening it consisted; and

In the Last place make some Application of the Whole.

First, To consider the State of the Gentile World before our Savior came, we
find it frequently represented to us in the Scriptures under one Word, and that
is Darkness; To give Light to them that sit in Darkness; Ye were sometime
Darkness; but now are ye Light in the Lord; who has called you out of
Darkness, into mavelous Light; We are not of the Night, nor of Darkness; Who
has delivered us from the power of Darkness; with many more places of the like
nature, in all which the Word Darkness i^ ^^^d to represent the Sad Condition
the ^^rld was in, before the Messiah was Manifested to them: Sad indeed it was,
if this be a just Name for it; For Darkness we ha^^ all a great and natural
Aversion to, it is a State of Inactivity, deprives us of all the Use and
Pleasure of the Day, and is utterly unfit for Motion; we either cannot move, or
cannot be sure we move aright; it is a time fit only for the Beasts and Men of
Prey to move in; for we want the Benefit of the Noblest and most Useful Sense
we have, our Sight; without which the Rest are of very little Use, either to
keep us from the Dangers which we should otherwise bring upon our selves, or to
defend us from the Insults and Injuries of others. In a word, there is nothing
creates a greater, or more universal Fear, than long or unusual Darkness; and
nothing but Custom, and the help of Artificial Light, reconciles us to what is
usual. What then can a State of Darkness mean less than a Wretched, Ignorant,
Uncomfortable State; a State full of Confusion and Error, of Corrupt Opinions,
and Abominable Practices; a State Hideous and Ugly as the first Chaos, when the
Earth was without Form and Void; and Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep?

Now that the State of the Gentile World before our Savior came, was a State
of Darkness, and deservedly 'called by so Black a Name, must be owned by all
who have ever looked into these Times, and considered the Particulars wherein
this Darkness consisted; which, were they all put together, should give us a
just Conception of that Universal Night, which was then spread over the
Intellectual World. The great Ignorance they were under, and the Consequences
of it, would give us such a frightful Scene of things, as one can hardly tell
how to Believe; or Believing, how to Reconcile it with the Wisdom and Goodness
of that Being, whose Eyes are always upon the Works of his hands, and who from
the Beginning Rules over All. The first and great Fundamental Error they were
in, was concerning the True GOD; their Notions were so contrary and
inconsistent upon this Head, that one cannot read them without deeply and
frequently Reflecting, how Poor and Low a Thing the Mind of Man is, when he
Attempts to comprehend Divine Truths. The World was divided into two Extremes;
they were either for many Gods, or none at all; Opinions almost as remote from
Truth, as from one another. The Oldest indeed, and always most Universal
Opinion, and which perhaps arose from the Scattered and Corrupt Remains of some
Ancient and Genuine Traditions, was that of many Gods: But this was so absurd
in it self, and all it is Consequences; their Number, Names, Actions, Offices,
Worship and Sacrifices, were so very unaccountable, so impossible to be made
Sense of; that when the World grew more refined, the Men of Penetration and
Thought, to mend the matter, betook themselves to the opposite Extreme; and
because they could no where meet with a Rational Religion, vainly concluded
that Reason and Religion were in their Natures inconsistent; they concluded no
Religion could be True, because all they had seen were certainly False. For
they were in almost every Country different at the same time, and in the same
Country at different times: they worshipped they knew not what nor why, they
worshipped Stocks and Stones, and under them Imaginary Beings infinitely above
Humane Nature, together with others as much below it.

We have an Epitome of the grossest and foulest Superstition the World ever
knew, in that one People the Egyptians: Nothing can be more ridiculous, than
what the best Writers tell us of their Gods, and their Religious Rites; and in
their Story we see in effect the Religions of other Nations. For Egypt was the
great Nursery of Superstition; from thence arose that thick Darkness, which
afterward overspread the Earth; not that this Darkness was every where
uniformly spread; as soon as it began to be diffused, 'twas divided and broke
into unequal parts, insensibly altered as it went along, and received different
Additions, according to the several Climates to which it came. By which means
their Religions by degrees differed more from one another, but not less from
Reason than before. Sacred and Profane were every where arbitrary things, and
sometimes names directly opposite were given to the same thing by different
Orders of Men in the same Country. There was nothing so absurd which
Superstition could not lead them into a Belief of; and if one may judge of what
they thought by what they did, one would think, the more absurd a thing was,
the more they liked it: otherwise one cannot imagine how the World could have
fallen into so great a variety of Errors, so very gross, with so small a
mixture of Truth in them; which, as it was very little, so very probably 'twas
owing not to any right Reasoning; for had they reasoned about these things
rightly, they must needs have found out more Truth, they could not have stopped
so very short, and have taken up with so few right Notions, so extremely
disguised with false ones. These therefore it is likely were borrowed from some
Traditions, which once were more perfect, but now were grown very old, and by
length of time, and frequent Transplanting so altered and defaced, that the
first Authors of them would scarce have known them; so little of the Genuine
parts remained, and the old Strokes were in a manner all gone. Else how could
things so incoherent be embraced, as there was in most of their Religions? how
was it possible so many and so different Persuasions could be deductions from
the same common Principles?

It Is hard to conceive how the Opinions of any one People, taken together,
could proceed from any Principles at all: nor indeed did they; these Religions
were then formed when the World were children in Understanding; when they
admired every thing, and understood nothing; nothing of Arts and Sciences,
nothing of the Causes and Natures of things, in a word, nothing beyond their
Senses, and what was just before their Eyes; and by that means became an easy
Prey to a few, who thought farther than the rest, and used them as we use
Children now; amused them with Fables and strange Stories, and lead them which
way they would, by complying with their Superstition; to which purpose they
took care the Doctrines they taught the People, should be absurd enough, and
well adjusted to the Lowness of their Understandings. This was really the case,
and no better; for the Fabulous Age of the World was the time when these
several Religions were first invented, and their Poets were the Authors of
them; of which the Eldest either never wrote, or at least nothing of their
genuine Writings is now left: but of the Poets which do remain, we find always
the oldest, as had in greatest Veneration, so be sure most absurd in matters of
Religion.

The World in the mean time was like to thrive and grow in Understanding, under
the Influence of such Teachers, and in embracing Schemes of Religion formed in
such Times, Times of which we know nothing certainly besides their Ignorance.
Yet Considerations of State, Management of designing Men, and the Interest that
a great many had in them, kept these Superstitions up in aftertimes; the bulk
of the People being as ignorant as ever, and still believing whatever they were
taught. There were, no doubt, some wise and honest Men, who saw the Absurdity
of these things, and would have declaimed sooner and more loudly against them,
but were deterred, it is likely, from the Attempt, partly by the Danger they
might bring upon themselves, and partly through a very right Opinion they had,
that Religion was necessary for Society; and that though the established one were
very faulty, there might be more inconvenience in laboring a Change;
especially since they could not be sure what Religion was true, to bring in the
room of it, or indeed whether any were so: besides it may be they thought, that
in that State of things Prejudices were necessary to make the People have any
notion of Religion; and therefore if they were once removed, the People, who
are always ready to run into extremes, and if once unhinged, are very hard to
be settled again, if they had shaken off the Religion they were bred in, would
then perhaps take up with none at all. Some such Thoughts probably kept in the
Wiser Heathens from exposing the Folly and Inconsistency of the Religions then
in use, who could easily have framed more rational Schemes, but were not sure
they could find out the True one; and therefore were content to sit down by
those they had, and make the best Sense of them they could.

In time indeed they ventured, many of them, to refine a little, and by degrees
endeavored to explain away what was most apparently Absurd; but this did not
satisfy some, who being Men of more Heat and less Discretion, were for going
faster, and thinking they knew more than all before them, could not keep in the
mighty Secret any longer. The Credulity, implicit Belief and Bigotry the World
had been so long under, about things they had scarce any notion at all of, made
them run now into the other Extreme; and so first Skepticism and then downright
Atheism became the Learning and Wisdom of the World. These Men having found the
World was mistaken in many things, began now to doubt of every thing, they
began to question the Being of any God at all; and having shown with Reason
enough on their side the folly and weakness of the common Opinions, as they
were then corrupted, 'twas so hard to see the little Truth that lay under them,
that without Distinction they threw them all away; and setting up for
themselves, entertained about almost all things new Opinions of their own, very
different from what had been hitherto received, but not less Extravagant. And
thus by different ways they came to all intents and purposes to the same end,
and left the World in as ill a Condition as they found it, or rather made
things worse; for perhaps it is better to act upon wrong Principles, than none
at all; for then Men may be governed by those that are wiser than themselves,
whereas the Men of no Principles can be governed neither by themselves nor
others.

Some of the main Points about which the World, when they began to think
freely, were employed, were these; First, They were much in the dark, whether
there were such a thing as an Eternal Intelligent Being or not; if there were,
wherein his Nature consisted, and what were his chief Attributes; and if there
were one such Being, who was infinitely Wise and Good, whether there were not
an Evil one Equal in Power to him; without which they could not account for the
Origin of Evil, which was always one great Difficulty. Next, if there were One
Eternal Mind, and but One, which we call GOD, whether he made the World or not;
if he did, whether he only put things into that Frame and Order they are now
in, or whether he made the things themselves out of Nothing; If the former, for
the latter was an Opinion that all their Philosophy was not able to comprehend,
whether this GOD were any other than the Soul of the World, animating the vast
Mass of Matter, after the same manner as the Soul of Man actuates his little
World. Again, if GOD were a Being entirely distinct from the Universe, with
which many of them confounded him, whether he did at all interest himself in
the Government of the World, after he had made it; that is, whether there were
any Providence or not, whether his Happiness did not consist in perpetual Ease
and Rest, and consequently whether any Care or Thought of Business were not
inconsistent with it; or if he did meddle and concern himself with the
Government of Things, whether this Care were not confined within certain
Bounds, in looking after the great Springs and Wheels of the Machine, while the
Sublunary things and this lower World were quite neglected; or if he took care
of them too, whether this extended to the Insensible and Vegetable part only,
or to the Sensible and Rational; if to them, whether he governed the Minds and
Actions of Men, or only their involuntary Motions; if their Minds and Thoughts
and Actions, whether by a chain of Causes linked together in a perpetual and
necessary Order, or only by a Concurrence with their own free voluntary
Motions; if the latter, whether Men were by that rendered capable of Moral Good
and Moral Evil; if capable, whether they were actually accountable to GOD for
what they do; which supposes that there are fixed and unalterable Rules or Good
and Evil, that these Rules are the Will of GOD, that he has declared this Will
of his to Man; if so, what and how many are these Rules; when and where
Revealed; are they all of Perpetual and Universal Obligation or not; if some
only, which are they; what Punishments are annexed to the Violation of them;
when to be inflicted, in this Life or another; if in another, the Soul must be
immortal and immaterial, and the Man must live again; besides many other
Difficulties, which must be determined, before we can know whether Man be
actually accountable to GOD for what he does.

These, all these are Questions of great Importance, and such as the wisest
Heathens could come to no certain Conclusions about: Some of them indeed by an
extraordinary Goodness of Mind have hit upon Noble Thoughts, and very much
resembling Truth; but when well examined, they appear to be, what themselves
could rather wish to be true, than be at all sure they were so. I shall give
but one Instance of this, and that is in that excellent Discourse of Socrates
before his Death; in which there are strange and surprising Strokes of Truth,
about the Immortality of the Soul, and the Rewards and Punishments of another
Life. Who can without pity see the weak Efforts of the best Reason? who can
forbear wishing him Success, or not be sorry, extremely sorry at his
Disappointment, who has such noble Conclusions in view; but is utterly at a
loss, by what certain Steps to get at them? One sees him through all along that
piece, very earnest in the search after and pursuit of Truth; he sometimes
takes such true Steps, and pursues so closely, that one cannot help thinking
every minute, the next will be the last, he seems so very near it; and then
loses his Scent a while, and then comes on again; which gives the Reader a very
melancholy pleasure, who cannot but be in some sort disappointed himself, every
time he sees He is. The Discourse throughout must be owned to be at first Sight
very Beautiful; but if one view the Picture nicely, examine the several Parts
of it, the Proportions and Reasons on which they are built, the whole will
appear such a strange mixture of Truth and Error, full of such inconclusive
Arguments, so like Dreaming of some Fairy Land, that one cannot but wonder how
it could come from the Hand of so great a Master, or be thought a finished Piece
by those that heard it. In truth, under all the Good Will he discovers for so
good a Cause, one cannot but observe with how much Diffidence himself speaks of
it; much less can any body else be convinced by what he says, unless such as
come prepared to believe before they hear, and can take up with Conclusions
first, and then look out for Premises, by which they may seem to others to have
come to them.

So great was the Blindness and Ignorance the World was under about things of
the greatest moment; I might proceed to show that their Works also were Works
of Darkness; that their Manners, generally speaking, were as corrupt as their
Opinions; but the close Connection there is between Religion and Morality makes
this less necessary, nor have I time for it, if I would. How far this
Corruption was inevitable and invincible, I will not now dispute: Thus much is
certain, the World either had no means to remove it, or at least did not know
how to use them, and consequently would never have removed it, had not the
Messiah in the fullness of Time been revealed to them. In Him the People that
walked in Darkness, have seen a great Light: they that dwell in the Land of the
Shadow of Death, upon them has the Light shined. 'Twas He dispelled these
clouds which had so long hung over the Earth; He enlightened the World after
this long and universal Dark, this black eternal Night.

Wherein this Enlightening the World consisted, was the Second thing I proposed
to speak to; which I shall do very briefly.

It consisted then in introducing a new State of things, a State in all its
parts opposite to that I have been describing; in teaching the World all That
is necessary for them to know of Divine things, of the Nature of GOD, and of
Themselves; in giving us just and true Notions of the Divine Providence, of his
Wisdom and Goodness in governing the World; in laying down excellent Rules of
Living well, and teaching us the true nature of Moral Good and Evil; and
lastly, in giving us a reasonable Worship, worthy of Man, and in some sort
worthy his Creator.

Now the World is no longer at a loss to know what GOD is, what he Requires of
us, and how he will be Served; now we have a certain Measure of our Duty, we
have fixed unalterable Rules to go by; we depend now no longer on our own
Reason, or the Authority of others; we are directed by the highest Reason of
the best Being, by the divine and infallible Guidance of the Son of GOD.
Before, the World must either have followed the Dictates of some great
Lawgiver, or found out the Rules of their Duty for themselves. As to the
former, no Man ever had or could have an Authority to prescribe to the rest of
the World, nor was it safe he should, as appears from the great Imperfections,
that are to be met with in the best Systemes of Human Laws: nor could they find
out the Measure of their Duty themselves; for that requires vast Abilities,
capable of drawing a very long Chain of Consequences from a very few
Principles; and therefore, if possible, yet is it what much the greatest part
of Mankind have neither Capacity nor Opportunity for.

But this is but a part only of what our Savior has done for us; to all this
he has added great and precious Promises, to invite us to our Duty, and
proportionable Threats to deter us from the contrary: and that nothing might be
wanting to complete this great Redemption he has wrought for us, that no one
might complain he had not all due Assistance to enable him to do what is
required of him, he has graciously promised his holy Spirit to all them that
call upon him.

O! how thankful ought we all to be for this great Goodness of GOD to us, how
careful not to undervalue it, as some do, who by a strange Ingratitude, because
GOD has suffered them to enjoy the Light, conclude there was no Darkness, and
that the World would have been sufficiently enlightened, though GOD had done
nothing of all this for them. They deny the Necessity of Revelation, and bring
down the Sublime Perfection of the Christian Religion to that which they call
Natural: They can now prove to you from that all the Truths delivered in the
Gospel, and argue against Revealed Religion, from that very Light it furnishes
them with: And so in truth beg the Question, while to prove they don't stand in
need of Revelation, they produce as the Effect of their own unassisted Reason
what was really borrowed from it. They distinguish not between Reason with, and
without the helps the Scriptures give it; which yet are very different things,
as different as it is to find out a thing, and assent to it when it is found
out: a Man may as well say, he can move as regularly in the Dark as in the
Light, because he has in both the Faculty of Moving; as pretend he could
reason as well without the Gospel, as he can under it, because he would have
the Faculty of Reasoning then as well as now. Could these Men possibly efface
the early Notices they received from Revelation, they would soon think more
meanly of themselves, and see how small Advances we should make, if GOD in his
Displeasure had still left us to our selves: or, if either their great Opinion
of themselves, or the real Difficulty of the thing hinder them from judging of
the Strength, or rather Weakness of their own Reason, in case it were divested
of the helps they have from Revelation, a little Learning will serve the turn:
let them look back into the first Histories of the earliest Times, let them
read the best Discourses of the ablest Men, Men no way inferior to them in
Natural Abilities, Men of greater Industry, closer Thought and more Virtue; and
then they will be easily convinced, unless they are resolved not to see, how
few Conclusions we are able to come to of our selves about Divine Matters,
about GOD, Religion, Liberty, Morality, a future Judgment and Immortality.

There is great reason to think these Men contend for Natural Religion, not for
its own sake, but to pull down that which is revealed; and were that once done,
they would deal easily enough with this, and so get to their beloved
Conclusion, That there is no Religion at all: They would then be very ingenious
in showing the Faults and Imperfections of what they now so much cry up, and
would with Triumph prove, That they who have thrown off Revealed Religion,
cannot reasonably adhere to it; since the Difficulties against one, many of
them at least, lie equally against the other, if one be absurd and too hard to
be believed, so is the other, and no one, who can take up with the Principles
of Natural Religion, can find it difficult to embrace the Christian.

But we have not so learned Christ, we see and know the great Things he has
done for us, that he is the true Light, and that the World was in Darkness
before he came: He is the great Restorer and Deliverer of Mankind from that
Blindness and Ignorance the Degeneracy of their Nature had brought them under;
'twas He that formed anew, as it were, this Part of the Creation, and gave
again to Man an understanding Heart; He stamped again upon him the Image of his
Maker, that Image, on which the Dominion of Man over the rest of the Creation
was at first founded: which Pre-eminence before 'twas hard to see a reason for,
he differed so very little from the Beasts that perish, but now has GOD
exalted him for ever, he has once more made him a little lower than the
Angels, he has crowned him with Honor and Immortality, which is again brought
to light by the Gospel of his Son. This is the Lord's doing, and is mavelous
in our Eyes; for this should every Mouth be full of Thanksgiving, and every
Tongue tell forth his Praise. It Is as impossible to have a Sense of these
Favors, and not be thankful for them, as it is for those to be thankful, who
have no Sense of them.

But this is not all, it is not enough to thank GOD on this wise: The Natural
Consequence of what he has done for us, is to deny Ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, to have no Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness, but to walk
as Children of the Light and of the Day. The times of Darkness were times of
Ignorance, and therefore GOD winked at them; but now since the Light of the
Gospel is shed abroad, he commands all Men every where to repent. Our Duty
rises in proportion to the Means GOD has furnished us with for the Performance
of it; this every body is sensible of, this makes wicked Men so naturally plead
Ignorance, this makes Men shut their Eyes so hard against the Light of the
Gospel, as being conscious they are without excuse, if the Light really shines
upon them, and they see it does so, and yet still work the Works of Darkness.
Now if this be so, if our Duty increases as the Light does that is given us to
work by, then are they under the greatest Obligations, who enjoy most of this
Light: And therefore as the Jewish Dispensation obliged them to a greater
Perfection and Holiness than what the Heathen World knew, so does Christianity
obliges us to a greater than either. We are taught that except our
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

By the same Argument a greater Degree of Piety, Charity, and other Virtues
will be required of some parts of the Christian World above others, in as much
as they enjoy greater Light, purer and less corrupted by Superstition,
Ignorance, and the remains of ancient Heathenism. This is the case of the
Reformed Churches, in comparison not only of the Roman, but of any other
Christian Church now in being: And if all the Reformed Churches enjoy not an
equal Light, we have no reason to think any of them on this account more happy
than our own. And indeed we are apt enough to own this, and please our selves
with the thoughts of being of so pure a Church, where we have the Word of GOD
constantly read and preached to us, frequent Sacraments, and daily Prayers: We
are bred up to a rational and intelligible Devotion, we want neither the
Substance nor Form of Godliness, we are taught to serve GOD with the purest
Worship, and in the most decent Manner. But it is strange to see Men cry up this
Church, and value themselves for being Members of it, and yet not see at the
same time, how much more they have on this account to answer for; how by this
means the great Plea of not knowing or not being taught their Duty is wholly
taken from them.

But I must not stop here; the Gradation from Heathenism to Judaism, and from
thence to Christianity in general, then to the Reformed parts of it, and last
of all to our own Church, this Gradation must still be carried one step higher,
from our Church to the Eyes of it the Universities. Here we meet with greater,
much greater means of knowing and doing our Duty, than any other Place any
where affords. And who does not see the Consequence of this? were a Man who had
never seen or heard of such a Place as this before, for the first time made
acquainted with the Institution and Design of it, the Laws we are governed by,
the Care and Discipline and Method of instruction, and lastly the great and
good Examples we live under; how would he long after the Original of so fair a
Picture, how desirous would he be to see this Beauty of our Earth? He would
expect Learning to run down among us like a Stream, and Righteousness like a
Flood; he would expect to meet every where with bright and shining Instances of
Piety and Holiness, of Industry and Temperance, of Charity, Patience and
Humility; in short; something far beyond the Improvements the rest of the World
are capable of.

But I need not suppose what Thoughts a Man would have, who never saw any thing
of a University beyond the Scheme and Model of it; we are pretty well
convinced, that this is what the World expects of us: for if they did not look
for something very perfect, they would think our Imperfections a great deal
less, than we find they are apt to do. Which should be an additional Argument
to us to walk worthy of the Light we have; for our Light is not like the Pillar
that led the Israelites of old, a Light to them it was to guide, and Dark to
all besides; as we have this Light, so every body sees we have it, and from
thence are ready to take all advantages against us. I think we may without
great Partiality to our selves say, We are not fairly dealt with in this
matter; Envy and Ill Nature and a Spirit of Phanaticism, both as to the Civil
and Religious State, have certainly a great share in the loud Complaints
against us; and they that rail at us for being no better, are many of them
really sorry, we are no worse. Men who design to destroy all Principles of
Religion and Government, cannot with patience see those Places flourish, which
are so directy opposite to such Designs, whose very End is to instill true
Notions of these things, and root out all destructive Opinions whatsoever.
Which makes Atheists and Deists necessarily Enemies to our very Constitution,
for These are the Banks that keep out their pernicious Doctrines from breaking
in upon the Nation. Not that these are all the Enemies we have; a little Truth
mixed with a great deal of Calumny, has made our Faults appear much greater
than they are; by which means other and better Men have been unhappily
influenced to the Prejudice of these Places.

But how unjust soever these Complaints are, we may make a right use of them,
by mending what ever is amiss, by walking more circumspectly, and giving no
Occasion to the Adversary. It Is the Fate of Persons and Places that are
Eminent; the more they are so, the more they are exposed to public View, and
consequently Censure; for many, a great many take a View of them, not to admire
their Beauty or Excellency, but to find some Fault with them, and then are most
disappointed when they find fewest. And as this is generally one of the
Disadvantages of a high Station, so it is in a peculiar manner, and for
particular reasons, the Fortune or rather Fate of those Illustrious Bodies the
Universities.

But to return from this Digression, which a just Sense of the Light we live
under, the Obligations it lays on us, and the Restlesness of our Enemies has
led me to; where much is given, much is required, and in return of great
Favors, great Duties become due from us; and if we would be the better for the
Light that is come into the World, we must endeavor to deserve it; we can have
no benefit in the bright Shining of the Gospel, unless we renounce the hidden
Pleasures of the Night. GOD did not give us this Light to glory in our Shame,
and show that we can be wicked still, that we can abuse his Grace, and dare
produce those Monsters into open Day, which before were shrouded under the
cover of the Dark. No, what was then excusable, is now no longer so; to prefer
the absurd Pleasures of Sin before the Beauty and Comeliness of Virtue, when
our Eyes are open, and in the day, this is very unnatural and unpardonable,
this proves we want common Sense as well as common Gratitude, this cannot but be
highly provoking to Almighty GOD, who bestowed these Favors on us to quite
other Purposes. Let us not therefore any longer distinguish our time as
Christians into Light and Darkness, and think we have the night still left to
revel in: the Darkness now will not cover us, the Darkness is no Darkness to
us, the Light is as clear as the Day, the Darkness and Light to us are both
alike. For since the Sun of Righteousness is risen, since He that was in the
beginning Light, Eternal Light, is come down among us and become the Light of
Men; to this new State agrees the Description St. John gives us of the New
Jerusalem, with which I shall conclude. The City had no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God did lighten it, and
the Lamb is the Light thereof.

THE END.

