THE Family-Dictionary; OR, Household Companion: Wherein are Alphabetically laid
down Exact Rules and Choice Physical RECEIPTS FOR The Preservation of Health,
Prevention of Sickness, and Curing the several Diseases, Distempers, and
Grievances, incident to Men, Women, and Children.

Also, Directions for Making Oils, Ointments, Salves, Cordial-Waters, Powders,
Pills, Bolus's, Lozenges, Chemical Preparations, Physical-Wines, Ales, and
other Liquors, etc. and Descriptions of the Virtues of Herbs, Fruits, Flowers,
Seeds, Roots, Barks, Minerals, and Parts of Living Creatures, used in Medicinal
Potions, etc.

Likewise, Directions for Cookery, in Dressing Flesh, Fish, Fowl, Seasoning,
Garnishing, Sauces, and Serving-up in the Best and most acceptable Manner. The
Whole ART of Pastry, Conserving, Preserving, Candying, Confectioning, etc.

Also, The Way of Making all sorts of Perfumes, Beautifying-Waters, Pomatums,
Washes, Sweet-Balls, Sweet-Bags, and Essences: Taking Spots, and Stains out of
Garments, Linen, etc. and Preserving them from Moths, etc. Washing Point,
Sarsnets, and Restoring Faded Linen; and Scowring, or Brightning Tarnished
Gold, or Silver Lace, Plate, etc.

Together, With the Art of Making all sorts of English VVines, as Currants,
Cherries, Gooseberries, and Cider, Mead, Metheglin, etc. And the ART of Fining,
and Recovering Foul or Faded Wines. The MYSTERY of Pickling, and keeping all
Sorts of Pickles throughout the Year.

To which is Added, as an APPENDIX, The Explanation of Physical Terms, Bills of
Fare in all Seasons of the Year. With the ART of CARVING. And many other Useful
Matters.

By J. H.

London, Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star, the Corner of Bride-lane, in
Fleetstreet, 1695.

LICENSED,

February the 28th. 1694/5.
THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
IN this elaborate Work, thou will find such Satisfaction, as perhaps the
present, or past Ages, have not before afforded thee. If Health is held
valueable in your Eyes, and you would avoid the Pains and tediousness of
Sickness, or Grievances incident to Human Bodies; here you may repair to an
Asylum, and find the Arcana opened for your Good, which have been hitherto
locked up from the greater part of Mankind. All Difficulties, and Hard Terms,
or Words, are removed, which have puzzled Ingenious Persons, and the Path is
made so smooth that any reasonable Capacity or Understanding may travel in it
without the least fear of Stumbling or falling into Error, if some particular
Cautions, that will herein occur, are used as a Guide and Conductor. For, I
confess, in weighty Matters, such as tend to the Preservation of Health; the
preciousest Jewel of Life, things ought to be well weighed and considered, that
every thing may concur with the Ends for which it was designed and made
public, which is the Benefit of Mankind.

That it is called a FAMILY-DICTIONARY, shows it is intended for the Public
Good, containing such Things as cannot in one way or other miss of their
designed Ends, in being Useful and Advantageous to those that stand in need of
Good Advice or Directions, and will be so wise or kind to themselves, as to
consult their own Benefit in what is contained in this Book, it being a Mixture
of many Rarities that have (when practiced in Private) given Contentment even
to Admiration, and answered the End beyond Expectation.

Here you will not only find Physical Receipts for the most reigning
Distempers, Diseases, and Grievances, incident to English Bodies; but how to
Prepare and Administer them in the best and properest Ways and Methods: So that
every one may be provided with Remedies when Necessity calls for them, and a
Physician or Surgeon are not to be had: which may be done with little Cost and
Labor. The Rich, being Charitably disposed, may find an easy Means to
exercise their Charity, in helping the afflicted Poor; and even Gardens and
Fields may afford Relief, without any Cost, to ease the Pains and Miseries of
those that labor under tedious and troublesome Distempers, or Grievances, when
Friends may fail.

Here you are also taught how to make all sorts of Wines, Cyders, Metheglins,
etc. and several sorts of Cordial-Waters, Perfumes, Washes, Beautifying-Waters,
and other Rarities of the like Nature.

All sorts of Cookery are herein nicely displayed; and the whole Mystery of
Confection: with many other Things too tedious to be recited in a Preface: So
that the Roses are twined with the Gessamine, and many other Fragrant Branches,
bearing curious Flowers of Profit and Advantage, to render it a Garland lovely
and acceptable.

What shall I further say, but that it is recommended to the World by Ingenious
Persons who have perused it, as a Curious Piece done in an easy Method to
direct the Reader in what he is desirous to know, or practice. And will not
only do Good to the present, but future Ages: Be a Helper at Need, and
treasured up as a Jewel by those who will undoubtedly find their Expectations
answered in the Particulars they require to be satisfied about.

To conclude, what is not done from the exactest Experience, is taken with Care
and Caution from the most approved Authors as well Ancient as Modern.

Take it then as you find it, and let neither Fear, small Charges, or Neglect,
deter you from practicing what is convenient or advantageous for your Health,
as occasion offers, or requires it: And may every thing succeed according to
your Wishes and Desires.

VALE.
ACH, or Swelling: Take Sheeps-suet, Oatmeal and Black Soap of each Four
Ounces, boil them in Two Quarts of Water till they come to the thickness of a
Salve; then spread a Plaster, and laying it to the Place grieved, it will
remove the Pain.

Aches: For Aches in any part of the Body, take this following Ointment thus
made;

Take the tender Tops of Wormwood, Rosemary and Bay Leaves, of each a Handful,
Sage and Rue each a Pound, the Kidney-suet of a Wether, clean picked from the
Skin, half a Pound, Oil of Olives Two Quarts; bruise the Herbs and Suet, being
first shred small, then put in the Oil and temper them well, and so suffer them
to stand in an Earthen Vessel, close stopped, for the space of Seven Days: Then
set it on a gentle Fire, and let it heat by degrees, and keep it stirring till
the Herbs are shrivel'd with the Oils and Suet; and then strain it and use it
with Success, not only for Aches, but for Lameness in the Limbs, Stitches,
Gout, or Bruises.

Adders Tongue: This Herb is used successfully in Wounds new or old, either
outwardly applied, or taken inwardly: And in case of Ruptures, dry the Leaves;
and having made them into a Powder, take about a Dram and a half, according to
the Age of the Party, in Two Ounces of Oak-buds, which you may, for the more
convenience of taking sweeten with the Syrup of Quinces; and so take it in a
Morning fasting, for Fifteen Days, or thereabouts, having the Rupture put up
and trussed well before you begin to take it. There is also an Oil made of it
in this manner, viz. Bruise a Handful of the Leaves in a stone Mortar, boil
them in a Pint of Olive-Oil, till they have sucked up the Oil; then press them
hard, and keep the Oil that comes from them for your use. It is used with
Success in Wounds and Ulcers.

Aegyptiacum: To make the Ointment so called, observe to take of Verdigrease
Five Ounces, Honey Fourteen Drams, Vinegar Seven Ounces, put them together, and
let them thicken and incorporate over a gentle Fire, and it will be of a purple
Color; so make it up into an Ointment, and use it in cleaning Ulcers that are
it inveterate, and Fistula's. It consumes proud, spongy and dead Flesh.

Aethiops Mineralis: Take of Crude Mercury one part, and of the Flowers of
Sulphur twice as much, mingle them well together in a Glass Mortar, and fire
the Composition till it becomes a Black Powder.

This is exceeding successful in the French Disease, commonly called the Pox;
also for old Sores, and in the Dropsy: The Dose is properly half a Dram, and
no more; and is best taken Night and Morning, mixed with the Syrup of
Clove-Gillyflowers; or you may make it into a Bolus with Conserve of Red Roses,
and continue taking it for the space of Three or Four Weeks; yet it may be
convenient, though there is no danger of its Fluxing, to take a gentle Purge
once a Week, during the Course.

Agrimony, its Virtues: It cleanses the Blood, removes Obstructions of the
Liver, and is consequently good in the Dropsy, and Jaundice, the Leaves of it
being boiled in their ordinary Drink; it may be used outwardly in Baths to
strengthen weak Limbs: Half a Dram the Powder of the Leaves in Conserve or
Wine, restrains involuntary Pissing.

Agrimony-common: This strengthens and cleanses the Blood, and opens the
Obstructions of the Liver; for which reason it is very available in Dropsies,
the Jaundice, and ill Habits of the Body, if you infuse it in Ale or Beer, or
your ordinary Drink. Eight Handfuls in Four Gallons, are sufficient: It is used
also outwardly in Baths and Lotion.

There is a Powder likewise made of it, which is done by drying the Leaves, to
prevent involuntary Urin; half a Dram of it in the Conserve of Roses being to
be taken going to Bed, for Three Weeks successively.

Agues to Cure. To make an excellent Water for the Cure of Agues: Take the
Roots and Leaves of Fennel, the Leaves of Rue, Sage, Wormwood, Mugwort,
Rosemary or Rosemary-Flowers, the Tops of the lesser Centaury, of each a
Handful, bruise them, and let them stand Three Days in a Gallon of White Wind,
and so distill them.

This Water is highly commended and approved in the Fits of the Ague,
especially the Quartan, given at the beginning of the Fit, from One to Four
Ounces.

Ague-Tertian, to remove. Take of Rhubarb one Dram, infuse it in Six Spoonfuls
of Succory-Water over a gentle Fire for Three Hours; then strain it, and add
half a Dram of the Syrup of Rhubarb, three Spoonfuls of the Syrup of Roses, and
a Spoonful of Cinamon-Water; take this fasting after the Fourth Fit: But if the
Distemper has not so much weakened the Body, but that it will bear somewhat a
stronger Purge, add a Dram of the Leaves of Senna, and Two Drams of
Fennel-Seeds; and it will in once or twice taking, effect the Cure.

Ague falling into any part of the Body: If the Ague take its station in any
particular Place, and affect not the whole Body at once, to remove and expel
it, Take Parsley, Smallage and Hemlock, of each a small Handful, bruise them,
and add Four Ounces of Barrows Grease; then mix them by braying well together,
and boil them half an Hour, stirring them continually until they become very
green; then putting them in a Canvas-Bag, strain out the Oily and Liquid part,
and with it bathe the afflicted Place, as hot as may be endured, before a Fire:
And in so doing Two or Three times, it will remove the cold Humor that
occasions the Ague.

Ague, in a Woman's Breast: To remedy this, Take the Leaves of Hemlock, bruise
them, and then fry 'em with the best sweet Butter; and being made into a
Poultis, apply it to the Breast as hot as it can be well endured, clapping over
it a Handful of white Cotton, and it will in a short time, cure the Ague.

Ague in the Breast: To remedy this, Take Grounsil, the Leaves of single
Daisies, also the Roots, and coarse Wheat Flour, and as much of the Parties
own Water, as, when they are well beaten together, will bring them to be spread
Plaster or Poultis-wise, on a Leather or thick Cloth, and apply it to the
Stomach or Parts where the Coldness or Trembling is most observed, as hot as
may be well endured; and in so often doing it will prove a Remedy.

Ague to cure, a Powder: Take Antimony and Cinnabar an Ounce, common Salt
roasted Two Drams, powder them together, and put them into a glass Cucurbit,
and pour, on them Four Ounces of the Oil of Sulphur; let them digest for Two
Days over a moderate Heat in a Bath of Ashes; then by increasing the Heat,
evaporate the superfluous Moisture, and having well washed the Mass that
remains, dry it and reduce it to a Powder, and mix it with Four Ounces of the
Flower of Sulphur, and set it over live Coals in an earthen Platter, stir it
continually with an iron Spatula, and when the Flowers are consumed, pour in
Spirit of Wine Three Fingers high; and when it is consumed, take the remaining
Mass, powder it, and keep it for use.

This is a Powder extremely commended for the Cure of all intermitting Agues,
being taken half an Hour before the Fit, from 15 to 20 Grains in some Syrup or
Cordial-Water, and supping a little Broth about Two Hours after it; and if the
first and second Dose prevails not, a Third may be taken; for it works easily,
and mostly by Sweat.

Alder, The Leaves of it bruised and applied Poultis-wise to Tumors, easily
discuss them; and being put into the Shoes of Travelers, (some say) prevent,
in a great measure, Weariness.

Aleberry: Boil Ale or Beer a Quart, scum it well, put in slices of fine
Manchet, and blades of large Mace, boil it well, and put in some Sugar, with a
sprig or two of Rosemary; strain it and drink it hot. It is not only
Strengthening, but very good against Colds and Rheums.

Ale-Purging: To make this (according to the true Receipt left by the famous
Dr. Butler) Take Two Ounces of Sarsaparilla, Senna, and Polypody of the Oak, of
each Four Ounces, Anniseeds, and Carraway-seeds, of each half an Ounce,
Licorish Two Ounces, Agrimony and Maidenhair, of each a small Handful,
Scurvygrass Ten Handfuls; beat and bruise these together grossly, put them into
a Bag made of Canvas, and hang it in Five or Six Gallons of Ale; and when it is
Three Days old drink it. This Liquor chiefly purges by gentle breathing Sweats
and Urin, being excellent to expel Scorbutic Humors and Dropsies, etc.

Ale, a Syrup of it: Take of new Ale a Gallon, it being the Wort of the first
running; put it into an iron Pot over a clear gentle Fire, keeping the Pot
open, and scumming it continually; and when it is boiled away to a Pint, take it
off, and put it in an earthen Pot with a Cover, and take a little thereof
Morning and Evening on a Knife point. This is excellent good for Pains in the
Back, occasioned by the foulness or Heat of Urin in the Ureters, Kidneys, or
the Stoppage of the Passage in the Reins, and also for the Whites in Women.

Alabastrum Vnguentum, an Ointment so called; to make which, Take Red-Bryer
tops, when at the tenderest, Six Handfuls, stamp them small, and add Two Quarts
of White-Whine, Rue One Handful, the Flowers and Leaves of Camomil One Ounce,
Powder of Alabaster Two Ounces, Fennel-Seeds One Ounce, Oil of Roses half a
Pound, Wax half a Dram, put them altogether, except the Camomil and the Wax,
let them infuse over a gentle Fire, and when they sees, put in the Wax and
Camomil; let it boil up till the Wine be consumed; and when it is cold, take
the Whites of Five Eggs, mingle them well with all the Materials, and strain
them through a fair Linen Cloth, and put it into a glazed earthen Pot.

This Ointment is singularly good for Pins and Webs, and other Spots in the
Eyes, by dropping a little of it into them, and keeping them close for a time.
It is also good for the Megrim and Headache: Likewise Pains in the Matrix are
eased by anointing the Belly, Flanks, and Reins of the Back with it. The
Stomach being anointed with it is eased of its Pains, and any other part; even
the Pains of the Gout are removed by it.

Alexander, its Virtues: This Herb is under the Dominion of Jupiter, and
therefore friendly to Nature; it is by some called Horse-Parsly, or
Wild-Parsly. It warmeth the Stomach, and opens Stoppages of the Liver and
Spleen; it moves the Courses, and expels the Afterbirth; it breaks Wind, and
provokes Urin, helps the Strangury, if the Leaves be boiled in Wine, and
drank Two Ounces at a time pretty hot; the Seeds have the same virtue, and are
effectual against the biting of Serpents.

Alexanders: This is mostly used in Broth in the Spring-Season, because it
cleanses and cools the Blood, and strengthens the Stomach. The Seeds to the
quantity of half a Dram dried, so that they may be reduced to Powder, and drunk
in a Glass of White Wind, provoke Urine.

Almond-Bisket: To make this, Take the Whites of Four new-lay'd Eggs, and Two
Yelks, beat these well for the space of an Hour, having in readiness a quarter
of a Pound of the best Almonds blanched in cold Water, beat them very fine with
Rose Water, lest they come to an Oil; then beat a Pound of fine Loaf-Sugar in
the Eggs a while, and so put in the Almonds, with Five or Six Spoonfuls of the
finest Flower, make them into proper Shapes, and bake them in a moderately
heated Oven, on Paper Plates, dusting over them a little fine sifted Sugar.

Almond-Cakes: To make these, Take a Pound of Almonds blanched in cold Water,
beat them with Rose Water till they lose their glistring, put in half a Pound
of fine Sugar well sifted; beat these and the Almonds together till they be
well mixed, then take the Whites of Two Eggs, and Two Spoonfuls of fine Flower
well dried, and beat them together, and pour in your Almonds; then butter the
Plates you frame your Cakes in, dust them with fine Sugar and Flower; and when
they are a little brown in the Oven, draw them, suffering the Oven a little to
cool; then set them in again upon brown Paper, and they will become much whiter
than before.

Almond-Caudle: To do this well, Take of new Ale Three Pints, boil in it a
quarter of an Ounce of Mace and Cloves, as also some sliced White-bread, then
put in a Pound of blanched Almonds well beaten, and half a Pint of White Wind,
skim it well in boiling, and when it is sufficiently thickened, sweeten it
according to your Palate. This is not only pleasant and nourishing, but very
good in a Consumption.

Almond-Caudle: Strain half a pound of blanched Almonds, well beaten in a
Mortar, into a Pint of new Ale, then boil in it slices of fine Manchet, large
Mace and Sugar: Being almost boiled put in a Jill of Sack, and so serve it up
sweetened with a little Sugar.

Almond-Cheese: Take Almonds beaten fine, make a Sack-Posset made only with
Sack and Cream, take off the Curd and mingle it with the beaten Almonds, set it
on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and put some double refined Sugar to it with a
sufficient quantity of Rose Water, then in a Pye-Plate fashion it into the form
of a Cheese; put it into a Dish, and scrape a little Sugar over it, and when it
is cold serve it up.

Almond-Cream: Take half a Pound of Almond-Past beaten with Rose Water, strain
it with a Quart of Cream, and put it in a Skellet with a Stick of Cinnamon
broken into small pieces, stir it continually in the boiling; and when it is
boiled put Sugar to it, and serve it up when cold.

Almond-Cream another way: Take thick Almond-Milk, made with fair Spring Water,
boil it a little, and then removing it from the Fire, put into it a little Salt
and Vinegar; put it then into a clean strainer, and hang it on a Pin over the
Dish, till it is all drained out; then take down the remainder, put it into a
Dish, and add to it some fine Sugar, and a quarter of a Pint of Muscadel or
Canary, strew it then over with Red Biscuit, and serve it up.

Almond-Custard: Take Two Pound of Almonds, blanch and beat them in a Stone
Mortar very fine, adding as much Rose Water as will make them very moist; then
put them in a Press, and squeeze out the liquid part, and put it to Two Quarts
of Cream, Twenty Whites of Eggs well beaten, and a Pound of double refined
Sugar, put it into a Pan, cover it with a Lid of Puff-past; let it be baked
gently, and then scrape over it fine Sugar.

Almond-Ielly: Take a Pound of Almonds, and steep them in cold Water Six Hours,
when they swell, the Husks may be taken off; then make a Decoction of half a
Pound of Ising-glass, with the Juice of Two Lemons, and Two Quarts of
White Wind, boil it till half be consumed, then let it cool, and strain it,
mingle it with the Almonds and strain it: With a Pound of double refined Sugar,
and with suitable Colors you may make it of what Color you will; put into it
Egg-shels or Orange-peels that is, place them on the top of it, and serve it up.

Almond-Leach: To do this, according to the French Fashion, Take a Quart of
fresh Cream, a quarter of a Pint of Rose Water, Four Grains of Musk dissolved
in Rose Water, and Four or Five Blades of large Mace, boil them with half a
Pound of Ising-glass, steeped before in Water, and washed cle^n; put to these
half a Pound of Sugar, and being boiled to a jelly, strain it through a
Jelly-Bag into a Dish; and when it is cold, slice it into a Diamond-fashion,
and chequer it over, and serve it on glass or other Plates, strewing, if you
please, Sugar mixed with the Powder of Cinnamon on them.

Almond-Milk: To make it, according to the best Method, you must boil about Two
Quarts of Water, scumming it well, and when it is taken off suffer it to
settle; pour out the clear part, and setting it over the Fire again, boil in it
Violet-Leaves, and Straw-berry-Leaves, of the Roots of each a large Handful,
Sorrel-Roots half a Handful; these being well washed, put in with them a Crust
of Bread, and stoned Raisins of the Sun Two Ounces, and so suffer them to boil
over a gentle Fire till the liquid part be consumed to a Quart; and then with
Fifty Almonds blanched, and Thirty Pompion-Kernels all well beaten, draw an
Almond-Milk, sweeten it with fine Sugar, and drink Morning and Evening about
Three Quarters of a Pint. This excellently sweetens the Blood, and causes a
ruddy and fair Complexion, being very good in Consumptions.

Almonds, an Oil: To make this, Take sweet Almonds, blanch them and bruise
them, then pour on them a little Rose Water, and put them into a Vessel that
they may be kept warm, as it were in hot Water; then put them into a Bag that
is very porous, pressing them at first gently, and so continue it by degrees,
till you perceive a clear Oil come out. This by bathing mitigates Pains and
Swellings, comfort the exasperated Parts, especially the Lungs and Kidneys,
it mollifyeth dry and hard Swellings and is profifitable in Hectic Feavours to
be given in any cooling Liquors, and for the anointing the Forehead and
Stomach; it also supples the Face and Hands, and keeps them plump and soft.

Almond-Pudding: To make this, Take Two French Rolls, or other White-bread,
slice them and put them into a Quart of Cream; put it then on a gentle Fire
till both be hot, beat it well together, add Twelve Eggs, and the Whites but of
Four, Beef Suet, or Marrow Four Ounces, as much of Currants and Raisins, and
season it with grated Nutmegs, Mace, Salt, and Sugar, scattering into it a
little Flower, then make a piece of Puff-past, as much as will cover your Dish;
set it in a quick Oven, but not too hot bake it sufficiently, and server it up.

Almond-Snow-Cream: Take a Quart of Sweet Cream, a quarter of a Pound of
Almond-Past, beat it well up with Rose Water, mix it with half a Pint of
White Wind, and strain it, put into it the scrapings of Orange-Peel, and
Nutmegs sliced. Two or Three Sprigs of Rosemary, and suffer it to steep Two or
Three Hours; then put some double refined Sugar to it, strain it into a Basin,
and beat it till it froth and bubble; and as the Froth rises, take it off with
a Spoon, and put it into the Dish you serve it up in.

Almond-Tart: Strain beaten Almonds with the Yelks of Eggs well beaten, and new
Cream, Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger, boil it thick, and fill your Tart; and when
it is baked, ice it over with gleer of Eggs, Sugar and Rose Water, beat up well
together.

Aloes-Rosatum: Take of the finest Aloes-Succotrine Four Ounces, make them into
a Powder; take the Juice of Damask-Roles clarified two pound, put them
together, and let them stand in the Sun in a glass Vessel, or in Balneo, till
all the moisture be exhaled: do this four times, and then make it into Pills,
which are excellent to purge the Stomach, for Pains in the Bowels, and a gentle
Purge upon any Occasion.

Alom to burn: Burn this in a new earthen Vessel, keeping as much as may be the
more subtle part from evaporating; and when it ceases to bubble, and no more
froth or scum, upon the sudden taking off the Cover, arises, it is sufficient.

Ambergrease-Cake: To make this, Take fine white Sugar, beat it and sift it
well, then beat Six new-lay'd Eggs till the Froth rises, and by degrees drop
them on the Sugar, mixing that and them together by stirring round very quick
in a marble Mortar; and being wrought till it may be dropped thin on Plates,
then put in a grain of Civet, and Two Grains of Ambergrease; then butter your
Pye-Plate, and taking the stuff up by Spoonfuls, drop it on the Plates in the
nature of Cakes, and put them into a gentle Oven; when they begin to rise take
them out, and keep them for use in a dry Place. These are good for the Stomach
and Head.

Ambergrease-Cakes: Take fine Flower a quarter of a Peck, mix with it slices of
Marmalade of Quinces, a quarter of a Pound of Sugar and Rose Water beaten up
together, of each 10 Spoonfuls, Yest half a Pint, Currants a Pound, clean
picked and washed, Cinnamon and Mace, finely powdered, each half an Ounce,
candy'd Orange-Peel cut very small; then with Ten new-lay'd Eggs, and a Quart
of new Milk, thicken it, and mix it well, then dissolve a Dram of Ambergrease
in a quarter of a Pint of White Wind, and mix with the rest, So make it up into
a Cake, and bake it in a gentle Oven, and it will prove excellent, if iced over
with Sugar melted in Rose Water, and the White of an Egg.

Ambergrease, the Tincture: To make this, Put in half a Pint of Spirit of Wine
into a strong Glass, Ambergrease one Ounce, Musk Two Drams, let the Glass be
stopped close with a Cork, and tied over with a Bladder, and place it in warm
Horse-Dung for the space of 12 Days; then pour off the Spirit gently, and put
on as much new Spirit, and place it as before, pouring off the second rhyme
clean; and after all this, the Ambergrease will serve for ordinary Uses: And
the Tincture drawn off as before: one drop of it is an excellent Perfume, and
being drunk in Tea or Coffee, is an excellent Cordial against Fevers and
Pestilential Distempers.

Amber-Pills: Take Venice-Turpentine washed, one Ounce, Powder of white Amber
Six Grains, mix them well and put them in a clean glazed Earthen Pot upon
Embers moderately hot, and to try whether it be enough, take a drop and let it
cool, and when it is so stiff that it will not cleave to the Fingers, it is
enough; then take of the Powder of Pearl, white Amber and Coral, of each a
Dram, of the inner Bark of an Oak, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, of each a quarter of an
Ounce; add to these Three Ounces of Loaf-Sugar bruised and sifted, then make
them into a Powder and sees them, and put the Pills into them; (but before you
take them, it will be proper to take a gentle Purge) after which wrap up Three
of the Pills in as much of the Powder as will lie on a Shilling; and take them,
swallowing after them the Yelk of an Egg a little warm: And by so doing Two or
Three times, it will eradicate noxious Humors, and fortify the Body against
violent Distempers.

Amber-Pudding: Take, to make this the Guts of a young Hog, turn them and wash
'em very clean, then take Two Pound of the best Hogs-Lard, a Pound and a half
of the best Jordan-Almonds Almonds blanched, beat one half of them very small,
and the other half reserve unbeaten; take further, a Pound and a half of Sugar,
Four Penny White-Loaves, grate them over the former Composition, and mingle
them well, put in half an Ounce of Ambergrease scraped very small, half a
quarter of an Ounce of Levant-Musk, a quarter of a Pint of Orange-flower-Water,
mingle all these very well, fill the Guts, but not too tight; boil them over a
gentle Fire for fear of breaking, and they will prove excellent fare.

Amber, a volatile Salt: Take of Amber Two Pound, let it be finely bruised and
reduced to Powder, and put it into an earthen Cucurbit, or Glass, so that Three
quarters of the Cucurbit may be empty, then set it in Sand, fitting the Head to
it, and a small Recipient; and when the Junctures are well luted, put a
moderate Fire under it for the space of an Hour; then the Cucurbit being hot,
increase the Fire by degrees to a third degree hotter than at first, and so you
will find a Phlegm and Spirit, and after them a volatile Salt, which in little
Crystals will fasten to the Head, and afterward an Oil will distill, but from
White changing to Red, it will continue clear however; and when you perceive no
Vapors to rise, extinguish the Fire; and so suffering the Vessels to cool,
unlute them, and with a Feather gather the volatile Salt into a convenient
Vessel; and although as yet it will remain unpure, by reason of the small
quantity of Oil that is found to be mixed with it, you must have a Viol
sufficiently large that a Fourth only may be filled with the volatile Salt, and
stopping it only with Paper, place it in Sand, and sublime it with a gentle
Fire, so that the pure Salt will appear in Crystal very fair at the top of the
Viol; and when you perceive the Oil begins to rise, then raise the Glass from
off the Fire, and having suffered it to cool, break it to separate the Salt;
and here finding at least half an Ounce, keep it in a Viol well stopped for
use, and it will prove very excellent.

Its Virtues are rare in the Jaundice, Scurvy, Ulcers of the Bladder, to force
Urine, and for Fits of the Mother. It may be taken from Six to Eight Grains, in
some proper Liquid.

Anacardiums to prepare: Having first powdered, and then infused them in a
convenient quantity of Vinegar, when you have sufficiently imbibed it, cause
the Vinegar gently to evaporate, and dry them.

Andolians: Soak the Guts of a Poarker in Water and Salt, turn them and scour
them that they may be made very clean; let them steep after that a Day and a
Night in fair Water, dry them well with a Linnen-Gloath, turn the fat side
outwardmost; then shred Sage very small, mix it with beaten and then sifted
Pepper; do the like by Cloves Mace, and Coriander-seed, mingle with them a
little Salt, and season the fat side of the Guts, then turn that side inward
again, and draw one Gut over another to what thickness you please, boil them in
fair Water with a piece of interlarded Bacon, some of the Spices
beforementioned, and a seasoning of Salt, tie them fast at both ends at what
length you please, and as it is more liking and savoury to your Palate, you
may put into them Pennyroyal, Savory, Leeks, Onions, or Sweet-Marjoram, chopped
or bruised very small; or if you please further to gratify your Appetite,
Rosemary, Thyme, Nutmegs, Ginger or Pepper grossly bruised.

Angelica is hot and dry, even the Herb, but more especially the Root: The Root
preserves against the Infection of the Plague, if infused in Vinegar, you
frequently chew it and hold it to your Nose. Take a Dram of the Powder only of
the Root, and half a Dram mixed with as much Venice-Treacle; and this being
taken once in Six Hours, will cause a curious breathing Sweat. The candied
Roots and Stalks sweeten the Breath, and help against the Diseases of the
Lungs; you may make Lozenges of them, which are excellent Preservatives, being
held in the Mouth in pestilential Times; Thus,

Take the Extract of the Roots of Angelica, and Contrayerva, of each of them an
Ounce, Three Drams of the Extract of Liquorice, of the Flower of Sulphur
sublimed with Myrrh Five Drams, of Oil of Cinnamon about Eight Drops, fine
Sugar twice the weight of all of them, with a mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth made
in Scordium-Water, and so make them up into Lozenges.

Angelica, to Candy: Take the Stalks, boil them in fair Water till they become
very tender, then shift them in Three Boilings Six or Seven times, that the
bitterness may be so taken away; then cover them with Sugar, and let them boil
a Minute, then take them out and dry them in an Oven; and being dried boil the
Sugar to a Candy height, and so cast them into the hot Sugar, and take them
out again suddenly, and use them as the former.

Angelica, its Virtues: The Powder of the Root of it resists the Plague and
Pestilential Fevers, being drank in Wine a Dram at a time, or infused in
Vinegar, and held to your Nose: It eases violent Pains in the Head. The Powder
taken with Venice-Treacle or Diascordium, causes gentle breathing Sweats,
carrying off the sharp Humors that many times, by settling, occasion racking
Pains in the Joints.

Angelot to make: To do this, Take a Gallon of Stroakings, and a Pint of Cream,
put to them, when mixed, a little Rennet; when you fill, turn up the middle side
of the Cheese-fat, fill them a little at once, and suffer it to stand all that
Day and the next; then turn them, and so leave them till they will slip out of
the Fat: Salt them on both sides, and when the Coats begin to come, lay them a
drying, and it will have a very pleasant relish.

Angling: To have the best Sport and Success in this part of Recreation, Take
Assa-Foetida, Camphire, Aqua-vitae, and Olive-Oil, bruise them in a Mortar till
they become a pliable Ointment; and by anointing your Bates therewith, the Fish
will presently take them.

Anodyne-Clyster: Boil a Pint of Milk once up, and mix with it the Yolk of an
Egg well beaten, so that in the putting in, it curdle not, then Four Spoonfuls
of brown Sugar, and a little of the Decoction of Camomil Flowers; and being
administered pretty hot, it gives speedy and effectual Ease to the gripings and
Pains in the Bowels.

Antiepileptick Water of Langius: Take the Shavings of Man's Scull, Misletoe of
the Oak, Peony and White Dittany, of each two ounces, fresh Flowers of Lillies
of the Valleys two handfuls, Cinnamon six Drams, Nutmeg half an Ounce, Cloves,
Mace, and Cubebs, of each two Drams: these being all bruised together, put them
into a Matras, and stop them up as secure from Air as may be, in eight pints of
Malmsey, and when they have macerated for a Week over a gentle Fire, distill
them in a moderate Sand Bath.

This is properly called a Corrected Antiepileptick Water of Langius, and has
been long in request, and by the preparing it as here directed, it is
excellent, given in Epileptick-Fits. The Dose is two Drams. It may be also used
for the prevention, as well as the Cure of this Distemper, and is very proper
for all cold Diseases in the Brain.

Antimonial Claret-Water: Take Glass of Antimony finely powdered, two Drams,
Claret Wine a pint and a half, macerate them over a gentle Fire for a
considerable time in a Mattress carefully stopped, and often shaking it, mix then
with the whole, four Ounces of fine Loaf-Sugar, two drops of the, Chemical Oil
of Cinnamon, and keep it for use.

This Liquor must be kept in a double Glass-Bottle, well corked, and tied down:
It is very pleasing and agreeable to the Taste, purging gently upward and
downward, Two Drams being taken for a Dose.

Antimony, its Cinabar: Put into your Retort of Sublimate Corrosive and
Antimony, as much as half fills it, powdered and well mingled together; let the
Retort be placed in Sand, in a small Furnace, fit to it a Receiver, lute the
Junctures, and so make a Distillation, and perceiving a red Vapor appear, take
away the Receiver, and put another into its place, not luted, increasing the
Fire by degrees, till the Retort is red hot, and so let it continue three or
four hours; then suffering it to cool, break it, and you will perceive a
sublimated Cinabar sticking to the Neck of it, separate it, and keep it. It is
a very much prized Remedy for the French Disease; it likewise forces Sweat, and
remedies the Falling Sickness: it may be taken, if the Party be careful of him
or her self, from six to fourteen grains.

Antimony Diaphoretick, To do this, mix three parts of purified Saltpeter with
one part of Antimony, and your Crucible being very hot, cast in a Spoonful of
this mixture, which will make a kind of a thundering, and after that is past, do
the like by another Spoonful, and so do by all the rest; and when it has been
on the Fire about two hours, throw the Matter, which then will be white, into
an Earthen Vessel, almost full of fair Water; let it soke ten or twelve hours,
that the Saltpeter which is fixed may dissolve in it: then let the Liquor be
separated by Inclination, wash the White Powder you find remaining in the
bottom, Five or Six times with hot Water, so dry it, and you will have
Diaphoretick Antimony.

It is Sudorifick causing Sweats, and notably resists Poison, and is approved
in Malignant Diseases and the Plague: The Dose is from six Grains to thirty, in
some proper Liquid.

Antimony, an Oil or Liquor: Take six Ounces of fine white Sugar Candy, beat it
to powder, then do the like by eight Ounces of Hungarian Antimony, and mix them
well together, and put them into a Glass Retort, and distill them on a
Sand-Bath with a gradual Fire: This Liquor cures intermitting Agues, given in
White Wind, three, four, five or six drops at the beginning of the Fit, and so
repeating it two or three times.

Antinephritick-Water: Take of Narbone Honey half a pound, Venice-Turpentine
two Ounces, Nephritick Wood and Roots of Rest-Harrow, of each an Ounce and a
half, Lignum Aloes an Ounce, Galingal, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, Cubebs, and
Mastick, of each half an Ounce, bruise and macerate them for three days
together, in two Quarts of Rectified Spirits of Wine, or for want of that, in
Aqua vitae, and distill them over a moderate Fire.

This Water is highly recommended for removing of Gravel or Sand out of the
Bladder or Kidneys, as also for easing the Pains of the Colic, given from one
Dram to half an Ounce, either alone, or mixed with proper Liquors.

Antiscorbutick Elixir Propritetatis: Take Myrrh of Alexandria, Aloes
Succotrina and Saffron, beaten into Powder, of each four Ounces, digest them in
a close stopped Vessel for eight days in a moderate Sand Bath, with four pints
of Antiscorbutick Spirit; then for one hour increase the heat of the Bath, and
filtre and keep it apart; then pour on the remaining Mass, a pint of fresh
Spirit, and reiterate digestion and filtration; then draw off the Spirit in a
Sand-Bath, with a moderate Fire, till there only remains a third part; and when
the Vessels are cool, preserve the Elixir; and when it is to be used, mix it
with a third or fourth part of the volatile Spirit of Hartshorn.

This Elixir is now wonderfully in use, and highly esteemed in all Diseases
that proceed from Corruption of Humors, but chiefly used in the Cure of the
Scurvy; for it purifies the Blood, and quickens the Motion of its Circulation.
It may be taken in Wine or some other Liquors, from Seven or Eight to Fifteen
or Twenty Drops.

Appetite to restore: Take Wood or Garden-sorrel a Handful, boil it in a Pint
of White-wine-Vinegar till it becomes very tender; then strain it out, sweeten
it with Two Ounces of Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup, and take a quarter of an
Ounce at any time when you find your Appetite fail you.

Apple-Cream: Take Ten or Twelve Pippens, when pretty ripe, pare them, take out
the Cores and slice them thin, cut them in quarters and put them into a Pipkin
with Claret Wine, a few slices of Ginger, Lemon Peel scraped, as also some
white Sugar, let them boil up together till they are very soft; then take then
off the Fire and put them into a Dish, and when they are pretty cool, take a
Quart of new Cream boiled with a little Nutmeg, and put in of the Apple stuff,
to make it of what thickness you please; and so with a little sprinkling of
Sugar, and Rose Water, serve it up as a most acceptable Banqueting.

Apple-Tansey: To make this, Pare your Apples thin, cut them in round slices,
fry them in sweet Butter, beat Ten Eggs in a Pint of Cream, add Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, and Ginger, of each a Dram, well beaten or grated Sugar Three Ounces,
Rose Water Two Ounces; these being well beaten together, pour on the Batter,
fry them moderately, and dust them over with Sugar and a sprinkling of
Rose Water, and serve them up.

Apples, a Purging Syrup: Take of the Water and Juice of the best scented
Pippins, of each a Pint and a half, Borrage and Bugloss-water and Juice, of
each Nine Ounces, Eastern Senna half a Pound, Fennel and Anniseeds, of each
Three Drams, Cretan-Dodder Two Ounces, White Agarick, and the best Rhubarb half
an Ounce, Mace and Ginger, of each Four Scruples, Saffron half a Dram; let the
Rhubarb be infused with the Senna a part in White Wind, and the Juice of Apples
of each Two Ounces; infuse, except the Saffron, all the rest in the
afore-mentioned Water: The following Day pour on the Juices and set them on the
Fire, let them simper gently, take off the Scum, then strain the liquid Parts
and add Four Pounds of white Sugar, boil it to a Syrup, the infusion of Rhubarb
being put into it, and the Saffron often dipped in it tied up in a Rag, and so
squeezed out. This Syrup is held to be a very gentle Purge for melancholy
People, and very safe and easy: but proves more effectual in its Operation and
Strength, if Two Ounces of it be taken in Three Ounces of the Decoction of
Dodder.

Apoplectick-Water: Take of the Lilies of the Valley, Rosemary, Lavender, Sage,
Primroses, of each three handfuls: let them macerate eight Days in the Sun, or
in a Stove, in rectified Spirits of Wine and Orange-Flower Water, of each three
pints: then distill them in a Sand-Bath, and preserve this excellent Water for
your use.

It fortifies the Brain and noble Parts, being taken from half to a whole
spoonful: It is successful, as well to prevent, as to cure the Apoplexy, and
all other violent Diseases of the Brain.

Apoplectick-Water, another: Bruise four pound of Black-Cherries, Roots of
Valerian, and Shavings of Hartshorn, of each three ounces; grated White-Bread
one pound, Cloves and Mace beaten fine and sifted, of each half an ounce;
Saffron two drams, Flowers of Lilies of the Valley, and Lavender, of each three
handfuls: mix them well together by bruising and shredding, and macerate them
twenty four Hours in a warm Water-Bath; then increase the heat, and put them in
Balneo Mariae.

This Water eases Apoplectick Pains, Palsy, and other Distempers in the Head
and Brain, arising from Cold, being taken at seasonable times from half an
ounce an ounce.

Apoplexy: To cure this violent and dangerous Distemper, Take two quarts of the
Spirit of Wine; infuse in it a pound of Imperatory, Castor, and Sarsaparilla,
of each half an ounce; being bruised a little, add to them two handfuls of
ordinary Lavender and Sage-Flowers; steep them in an earthen Pot well glazed:
stop it very close, and set it in a Chimney-corner, or other warm place, four
or five Days, often setting it on warm Embers, and as often shaking it: then
take nine Drams of Camphire dissolved in half a pint of Sack, and put it in,
setting it in a cool place, and then philter it two or three times; and when
the Distemper approaches, which is known by a shooting Pain in the Head, a
swimming dizziness of the Eyes, etc. rub the Forehead and Temples with it till
it drys in, and it gives speedy ease.

Apricocks: Apricocks are a delicious Fruit to the Taste, and much more wholesome
than the Peach; but above all, from the Kernels of them an excellent Oil is
extracted for Hemorrhoids, Pains in the Ears, Swellings, and Inflammations. The
Kernels much avail in the Heart-burn.

Apricock-Cakes: To make this, Take the largest and smoothest Fruit, parboil
them in Spring Water till they become very tender; then pressing out the Pulp,
put to it an equal weight of Sugar; set them over a gentle sire, and keep them
continually stirring; and when you can see the bottom of the Skillet or Pan,
they are enough: then put the Pulp and Sugar into Cards sewed round, and dust
them over with sifted Sugar, and letting them stand two or three Days, turn
them; and then if they be candied, take them out of the Cards and dust them
with Sugar again: and so often turning them, let 'em dry for your use in a
gentle heat.

Apricocks to Candy: Take the Apricocks, pare them very thin, and strew fine
Sugar lightly on them; then lay them on a broad pewter Dish, and so put them
into an Oven as hot as usually heated for Manchet, and as the Liquor comes from
them, pour it forth and turn them; strew more Sugar, and sprinkle them with
Rose Water, turn and sugar them till near dry, then lay them on a Lettice-Wyre
till they are dried, which you may do in an Oven after the drawing, and by this
means they will keep all the Year.

Apricocks to dry: In the first place, Take out the Stones, then weigh the
remainder, and take the weight of them in double refined Sugar, and make a
Syrup with so much Water as will wet them, and boil it up so high that if a
drop be dropped on a clean Plate, it slip off, being cold: put in your Apricocks
pared when the Syrup is heated, stir them about and turn them out, and tie them
one by one in Tiffanies; then put them in again, and set the Syrup over a quick
fire, making it to boil as fast as it can, and scum it well: and when they look
clear, take them from the fire, then lay them on a Sieve to drain, and being
well drained, take them out of the Tiffanies, and dry them in a Stove, or the
Sun, in Glasses, to keep off the dust.

Apricock-Iambals: Take Apricocks, scald them to a tenderness, and dry the pulp
in a pewter or earthen Dish over a Chafing Dish of Coals, then for a Day or two
set it on a Stone, and beat it afterward in a Stone Mortar, adding as much fine
Sugar as will make it a stiff Past; then color it with Saunders, Cochineel, or
Indico, roll them long, tie them into Knots, and so dry them for use.

Apricock-Past: To make this, Pare your Fruit, and stone them; set them between
two Dishes on a Chafing Dish of Coals, till they are boiled very tender; let
them cool, and lay them out on white Paper, take their weight of Sugar, and
boil it to a Candy height, with as much fair Water and Rose Water, as will
dissolve the Sugar; then put the Pulp into it, and let it boil till it be as
thick as Marmalade, still keeping it stirring; then on a Pye-Plate fashion it
into the shape of whole Apricocks; and so being dried, it will be very
transparent, and eat more luscious and pleasant than Apricocks newly gathered
from the Trees.

Apricocks to preserve: Take them when they are pretty well buttoned, yet so
tender that you may run a Needle through the Stones and all, without any
difficulty; then put them into lukewarm Water to break them, and let them stand
close covered in that Water till a thin Skin will come off with scraping, and
all this while they will look yellow; then put them into another
Preserving-Pan, or Skillet of hot Water, and let them stand covered till they
recover a curious green color; then having equally weighed them with a like
weight of Sugar, clarify the Sugar with the White of an Egg, or some Water,
and so preserve them for use.

If you would preserve them when ripe, you must take out the Stones; you need
not at all boil them in Water, but with the Juice of some of them dissolve the
Sugar, and stew them in it; then having a Syrup of Sugar boiled to a height,
put them in it till they look clear, and so set them up close covered for your
use.

Aqua Coelestis: To make this, Take of Cinnamon one dram, Ginger half a dram,
the three sorts of Saunders, of each of them a quarter of an Ounce, Cubebs and
Mace, of each of them a Dram; Cardamum the bigger and lesser, of each three
drams; Setwell-Roots half an ounce, Fennel-seeds, Anni-seeds, and Basil-seeds,
of each two drams; Angelica-roots, Gilliflowers, Thyme, Calamint, Liquorish,
Calamus, Masterwort, Peniroyal, Mint, Mother of Thyme, and Marjoram, of each
two drams; Red-Rose-seeds and Flower, Bettony and Sage, of each a dram and
half; Cloves, Nutmegs, and Gallingall, of each two Drams; the Flower of
Stechadoes, Rosemary, Borrage, and Bugloss, of each a Dram and half; Rind of
Citron three Drams: Bruise these well together, and put to them
Cordial-Powders, the Spices made with Pearl, of each three drams: Infuse them
in twelve pints of Aquavitae, in a close stopped Glass fifteen Days with often
shaking; then distill them in an Alembick, and hang in the Spirit a Cloth, two
drams of Musk, half a dram of Ambergrease, and ten or twelve grains of Gold.

This excellent Cordial fortifies the Heart against the Plague, and all
pestilential Diseases, expels Poison, and heals Aches and Pains.

Aqua Epidemica: This is the London Plague-Water. To make it, Take the Roots of
Tormentile, Angelica the greater, Piony, Liquorice, Elecampane, of each half an
ounce; the Leaves of Sage, the greater Celandine, Rue, the tops of Rosemary and
Mugwort, Burnet, Dragons, Scabeous, Bawm, Carduus Benedictus, Bettony, the
lesser Centaury, the Leaves and Flowers of Marigolds, of each a handful; shred,
bruise and steep them four Days in a glass Alembick, and take from a quarter of
an ounce to half an ounce at a time, and it mainly resists the Plague,
pestilential Fevers, and all infectious Diseases, reviving and cheering the
Heart and Brain, and rarefying and sweetening the whole Mass of Blood.

Aqua Lactis alexiteria: Take Carduus Benedictus, the Leaves of Meadow-sweet,
and Goats-Rue, of each six handfuls; Mint and common Wormwood, of each five
handfuls; Angelica two handfuls, Rue three handfuls: bruise them very well, and
put to them three Gallons of the best new Milk; and suffering them to infuse
for twelve Hours, distill them in a cold Still.

This Water, though it be frequently used as a simple Water in making up
Medicines, is nevertheless of singular use it self, being a very gentle
Alexipharmick, and may be given (to expel Malignity, and prevent the Infection)
with other things. It comforts the Heart and Stomach, and sweetens the Blood
taken singly; and so inoffensive it is, that you may take four, five, or six
ounces at a time.

Aqua Mirabilis: To make this, (according to Dr. Willoughby's Receipt) Take
Galingales, Mace, Cloves, Cubebs, Ginger, Cardamoms, Nutmeg, Mellilot and
Saffron, of each an equal quantity, in all four ounces; beat and bruise them
well, and add Agrimony-Water a dram or two: Take of the Juice of Celandine half
a pint, mingle them together with a quart of Aqua-vitae and three pints of
White Wind, put them in a glass Still, and let them infuse twelve Hours: then
distill off the Water with a gentle fire under a Sand-Bath.

This Water dissolves the Swellings, and removes the Oppressions incident to
the Lungs, helps and comforts them, being Wounded, not suffering the Blood to
putrefie; and those that use it often, will have little cause to be blooded at
any time, unless in cases of sudden or violent Bruises, or internal Bleedings,
etc.

Aqua Mirabilis: To make this, Take Cubebs, Cardamoms, Galingal, Mace, Cloves,
Ginger, Mellilot-Flowers, of each one dram; bruise them: then take a pint of
the Juice of Celandine, the Juices of Bawm and Spearmint, of each half a pint,
Sugar a pound, Flowers of Cowslips, Borrage, Rosemary, Marigolds, and Bugloss,
of each two drams; Canary three pints, strong Angelica-water one pint: bruise
the Spices and Flowers well, and steep them in the Sack and Juices the space of
twelve Hours, and distill them the next Morning in a glass Still, laying
Hearts-Tongue Leaves in the bottom of it.

This Water is an excellent Preserver of the Lungs, purifying the Blood, and
removing the Defects of the Spleen; it helps Digestion, preserves a youthful
Complexion, and contiues a good color in the Face.

Aqua Mirabilis: Take Cinnamon the best sort an ounce; Nutmegs and Citron-Peel,
of each six drams; Cloves, Galangal, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Ginger, of each
two drams: bruise them all together, and let them infuse in White Wind, and
Spirit of Wine, of each a pint, distill them in a moderate Sand-Bath.

This is an excellent Cordial taken from half an ounce to an ounce at a time:
It fortifies the noble Parts, and resists Poison, etc.

Aquavitae Regia: Take Lignum Aloes, Roots of Zedoary, Carline-Thistle, and
Valerian, of each an ounce, choice Citron-Rind, Mace and Cinnamon, of each six
drams; Cloves, the lesser Cardamoms, and Fennel-seeds, of each half an ounce;
Flowers of Oranges, Rosemary, Sage, and Marjoram in the flower, of each two
handfuls: bruise what requires it, and put them into a Matras with the Spirit
of Wine and Malmsey, of each two quarts; stop the Vessel close, and let them
infuse over a gentle fire for the space of three days: then distill them, and
dissolve into the distilled Bath Musk and Ambergrease, of each a dram and a
half, and keep it for use in a close Vessel, or rather in glass Bottles.

This Water fortifies the Brain, Head and Stomach, and all the noble Parts,
when enfeebled by the dissipation of the Spirits, or over-pressed by the ill
Qualities or abundance of bad Humors. It is to be taken fasting in a Morning
from one dram to half an Ounce, mixed with proper Liquors, as Bawm-water and
Mint-water.

Aquine's Diuretick-Water: Take the Roots of Parsley, Eringoes, Rest-Harrow,
Juniper Berries, and Alkekengi, of each two ounces, Pimpernel, Watercresses,
and Elder-flowers, of each two handfuls: bruise and macerate them twentyfour
Hours in White Wind, add a quart of the Juice of Radishes, with one ounce of
Narbone-Honey, Venice-Turpentine half a pound; distill them in a moderate
Sand-Bath, adding to every part of the distilled Water dulcified Spirit of Salt.

This is an exceeding prevalent Water to strengthen the Heart, but is chiefly
designed for opening Obstructions in the Ureters and Bladder, and causing a
free Passage for the Urine: You may safely take it from one to three or four
ounces.

Arcanum Carolinum: Put red Precipitate into an earthen Vessel well glazed,
pour on it Spirit of Wine well rectified, so set fire to it, and when the
Spirit is consumed add more: do this six times.

This is excellent for Purging, and sometimes procures Vomiting, opening
Obstructions, and dissolving scirrhous tumors, and mainly contributes to the
Cure of the French Disease. The Dose is from three to five or six grains.

Arsmart: The common sort of this is hot and dry, chiefly used in outward
Wounds or Swellings. A Decoction of it is good to wash old Sores. The Water
helps the Gravel in the Kidneys or Bladder; the Root or Seed put into an hollow
Tooth cures the Toothache.

Artery-Hurt: Take Olibanum two ounces, Aloes Hepatica one ounce, the Wool of a
Hairs Scut a little, the Juice of Ash-Leaves half an ounce; mix with these the
Whites of Eggs beaten to Water, and dipping a Rag into the liquid Compound, lay
it to the Artery either cut, bruised, or otherways afflicted, renewing it as it
dries, and then bath or anoint the Place with Oil of Roses.

Artichoaks to bake: Boil them first in fair Water, and so soon as you can
separate the bottoms from the Leaves without breaking, lay them in a Dish, and
season them with Nutmeg, Pepper and Cinnamon, very lightly, having laid a Sheet
of Past under them with some bits of Butter; then lay on Potatoes sliced round
the Dish, also some Eringo-Roots and Dates, Beef-Marrow, large Mace, sliced
Lemon and more Butter; close it up with another Sheet of Past, and being baked,
liquor it with Grape-juice or Verjuice, Butter and Sugar beat up together, ice
it with Sugar and Rose Water, and so serve it up.

Artichoaks to dress: The best way is to boil them in a Beef-pot, and when they
are tender sodden, take off the tops only, leaving the bottoms with some round
about them; then put them into a Dish, putting some fair Water to them and two
or three spoonfuls of Sack, and a spoonful of Sugar, stew them on a
Chafing Dish of Coals, take the Liquor then from them, and make ready some
Cream with the Yelks of two Eggs, two ounces of Marrow, and as much sweet
Butter as will serve 'em up.

Artichoaks stewed: Having first boiled the Artichoaks, take off the Leaves and
the Choke, cut the bottoms into quarters, split them in the middle, put them
into a flat Stewing-pan, put under them Toasts of Bread, and the Marrow of two
Bones, five or six Blades of large Mace, half a pound of preserved Plumbs, with
two ounces of Sugar, and suffer them to stew together the space of two Hours:
then put them into a Dish with Sippits, garnished with Barberrie, and so serve
them up, and they will make a delicate and much approved Dish.

Ash, or Ash-Tree: The Seed of the Ash-Keys dried, powdered, and drank in
White Wind, provokes Urine. The Juice of the Leaves drank constantly in drink
prevents Fatness, and reduces those that are so. The Bark and Wood dry and
attenuate, and are supposed to soften the hardness of the Spleen by a specific
Quality. The Juice of Ash-Leaves drank and the beaten Leaves outwardly applied,
avail much against the biting of any venomous Creature, and stench blood. The
Juice, with Honey, is good for internal Bruises. The Leaves and tender Twigs
boiled in your usual drink, is good against the Dropsy: though the Seeds
powdered and taken in Wine, in the Opinion of others, are more powerful. The
Salt of Ash provokes Urine.

Asparagus, or Sperage: The prickly sort of this, which in many Places grows
wild, being boiled in White Wind provokes Urine, is good against the Strangury
or difficulty in making Water, expels Gravel in the Kidneys or Bladder, eases
Pains in the Reins; and boiled in Wine-Vinegar, closes the Arteries, and eases
the Pains of the Hip-Gout, or Sciatica: The Decoction of the Root boiled to
clear the sight, and being held in the Mouth, eases he Pains in the Teeth.

Asthma: Take the distilled Water of Nettles, and Coltsfoot-water, of each one
pint, Anniseeds and Licorice-Powder, of each two spoonfuls; Raisins of the Sun,
and Figs sliced, of each a handful, boil them till half a pint of the Liquor be
consumed, strain the remainder, and with a pound of white Sugar Candy finely
pondered, make it into a Syrup: take a quarter of an ounce at a time, and the
Stomach will be helped to a good Digestion. It removes also Obstructions of the
Lungs.

Astringent-Powder: Take Bole-Armoniack, and Terrasigillata, of each two
ounces; Pomgranat-Flowers, Red-Roses and Dragons-seeds, of Sumach and
Whortle-Berries, Frankincense and Mastick, of each two ounces: make all these
into a fine Powder.

This Powder taken in Wine, or some Decoction, from a scruple to a dram, in
losses of Blood, weakness of the Stomach and Intestines, is singular good: It
may likewise be applied outwardly, incorporated with Whites of Eggs, Vinegar,
or some Astringent-Water or Decoction, like a Cataplasm, to stop defluxions and
loss of Blood, and to strengthen or close the Parts.

Astringent Saffron of Mars: Take of the filings of Steel and Sulphur powdered
an equal quantity, mix them well, and make them into a Past with Water; put the
Past into an earthen Vessel, and suffer it to ferment there four or five Hours;
after which set the Vessel over a quick fire, and with an iron Instrument fit
for that purpose, stir the Matter about, and it will flame: suffer the Sulphur
to burn out, and it will appear very black, yet continue it over a brisk fire,
and stir it about for two Hours after, and then you will perceive it of a red
Color; then wash it five or six times in strong Vinegar, leaving it to steep
an Hour at a time, and then calcine it in a Pot or on a Tile in a great fire
five or six Hours: after suffer it to cool, and stop it up close.

Avens: This Herb is Astringent in some degrees, it strengthens and discusses,
being cephalic and cordial, and resists Poisons; though it is mostly
appropriated to the Cure of Catarrhs, and for quickening the Blood when thick
or coagulated. Wine, wherein the Roots have been steeped, have a fine pleasant
taste and smell: It cheers the Heart and opens Obstructions. The Root infused in
Beer, is excellent in strengthening the Joints, and Bowels. Two ounces of the
Root, or a handful of the Herb boiled in Water or Posset Drink, to the quantity
of a Quart, and consumed to a fourth part, has been used successfully in the
Cure of Agues, more particularly the Tertians, by taking it two Hours, or
thereabout, before the Fit comes.

BAck, the Crick in it: To remove this Pain, Take the Marrow of the Bone of a
Horse, and a little of the Juice of Elder-Leaves, mix them together over a
gentle Fire, and, when become an Ointment, chafe it into the Place grieved.

Back heated: To remedy this, Take Rose Water, infuse therein, for twelve
Hours, Red and Yellow-Saunders, the Leaves of Red-Roses; then bath your Back
with the liquid part, blood-warm, and it will assuage the Pain, and in a little
time utterly remove it.

Back wasting: Take Plantain and Ribwort, distill them in a common Rose-Still;
and when you are to use the Water, take Pippins, roast them, and take away the
Skin, and Core; then put them into Water, making thereof a Lambs-wool as thick
as you please; and this being sweetened with Loaf-Sugar, take thereof half a
pint when you go to Bed, and so do nine Nights together. It is also good for
the Strangury, and many Pains incident to those Parts.

Back, weak: To strengthen the Back, if it be over-strained or troubled with
Pains or Aches, take the Yolk of a new-lay'd Egg, put to it a quarter of a pint
of Muscadel, or Alicant, and being well warmed, grate in some Nutmeg, and drink
it hot twice a Day.

Back, weak: Take of the Pith or Marrow of a Black Ox's Backbone three ounces,
Dates stoned and sliced two ounces, boil them well together in a pint or more
of Muscadin, and take two or three spoonfuls Morning and Evening, and you will
find it exceedingly strengthen the Back, especially of old People.

Balls of Eggs; tried: Put your Butter or tried Suet into the Pan, and when it
is melted and hot, stir it about till it runs round in Circles; then break an
Egg in the midst of the whirling, and whirle it round till it becomes as an Egg
poached, and it will, with the motion, become as round as a Ball; then take it
up with a slice, and put it into a warm Pipkin or Dish, and set it a leaning
against the Fire: You may do thus by diverse, and serve them up with fried and
toasted Collops as a dainty Dish.

Balsom: The following Balsom is very excellent for any Wounds, Burns, Scalds,
old Sores, Botches, Scabs, etc.

Take Conduit or Spring Water and Olive-oil, of each a quart, Turpentine four
ounces, Liquid-Storax six ounces; put them in an earthen glazed Pot, and suffer
them to stand together all Night: in the Morning having melted half a pound of
Beeswax, shred Marjoram, Rosemary, and Bays, of each a handful, beat and
bruise them very small; then add Dragons-Blood, and Mummy made small, of each
an ounce: Let them boil in the Wax a while, then add Oil of St. John's-wort,
and Rose Water, of each two ounces; boil it together a little more, and then
put in some red Balsom, and red Saunders pulverized, and being cooled, make a
hole to let out the Water; dissolve it again on a Fire, and put it up in a
close Pot for your use. This Balsom likewise cures the Headache, only by
anointing the Nostrils therewith; also it is exceeding good in the Wind-Colick,
or Stitches in the Side, being warmly applied to the Side or Belly, an ounce at
a time, for four Mornings.

Balsom: That called Lucatello's, so highly in esteem for its Virtues, is made
after this manner: Olive-Oil three pints, Venice-Turpentine one pound, Sack six
spoonfuls, yellow Wax one pound, natural Balsom half an Ounce, Red-Saunders in
Powder and Oil of St. John's-wort, of each an ounce; wash the Turpentine three
times in Rose-wawater, water, then slice the Wax thin, and place it on the
Fire, and being thinly melted, put in the Turpentine, incorporate them well by
stirring: then let it stand till the next Day; cut it in thick slices, and let
all the Water drain out, and melt it again; put in the aforesaid Oils, Balsam,
and Saunders, with about six spoonfuls of Sack; stir them well together again
over a gentle Fire for the space of an Hour, that it may become thick; and
being cool, use it for Wounds with Gunshot, Scalds with Lead, Sulphur,
Blasting, etc.

Balsom of Fallopius: Take of clear Turpentine two pound, Linseed-Oil one
pound, Rosin six ounces, Myrrh, Aloes, Mastick, Sarcocoll, Mace, Wood of Aloes,
of each two Ounces, Saffron half an ounce; put them in a glass Retort, and set
them in Ashes; and when they are distilled, there will come out a clear Water,
and after that a redish Oil, which is excellent in curing Wounds, healing old
Sores, cleansing Ulcers, etc.

Balsom of Sulphur: It has an excellent Virtue to cure Ulcers of the Lungs and
Breast, and wonderfully cleanses all other Ulcers. The Dose is from ten to
twenty Drops, and may at any time be taken, though not too often, with any
convenient Liquor mixed with Sugar to abate a little the sharpness of it.

Barberries: These are cooling and astringent, they provoke Appetite, are great
strengtheners of the Stomach, which is the reason the Conserve is used so much
in Fevers, Looseness and Bloody Flux, for which it is very good: The inward Bark
of the Branches and Root steeped in White Wind, are prevalent in the Cure of
the Yellow-Jaundice: A Concoction of the Bark, the Juice of the Berries, or the
Juice of the Leaves mixed with Vinegar, cure the Toothache, occasioned by
fluxion of Rheums. The Conserve is usually taken with success in Inflammations
of the Mouth and Throat; or more expeditiously, if the Mouth be gargled with
some of the Conserve dissolved in Vinegar and Water.

Barberries to pickle: Take the largest Bunches, steep them an Hour or two in
warm Water and Salt, then boil up the Water with more Salt, having first taken
the Barberries out: when the Liquor is cool, put in a few slices of Ginger, and
a little lump of Alom, and then press the Barberries down with a Stone or
Slate, cover them close, and keep them for your use. Thus Medlars, Services,
Grapes, and suchlike Things, are pickled to keep all the Year.

Barberry-Tree, the Virtue: The inward Rind of this Tree boiled in White Wind,
and every Morning a quarter of a pint of it drank, is very much approved for
cleansing the Body from choleric Humors, and freeing it from such Diseases as
Choler causes, viz. Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ring-worms, Yellow-Jaundice, Boils,
and the like. It is also excellent for Agues and Burnings, scalding Heat of the
Liver, and the Bloody Flux. The Berries have the same Virtue.

Barley: This is a common Grain amongst us, and of great use in many Cases; many
of its Virtues are known but to a few. It is too well known to need a
Description.

Its Virtues: The Meal of Barley boiled in Honey and Spring Water, resolves all
Inflammations or Imposthumes; with Rosin, and Pigeons-Dung, it ripeneth all
hard Swellings; with Mellilot and Poppy-seeds, it eases Pains in the Sides;
applied Poultiswise pretty hot, and mixed with bruised Quinces or Vinegar, it
eases the Inflammation of the Gout in the Legs or Feet: The Ashes of burnt
Barley mixed with Olive-Oil, is very good for Burns or Scalds.

Barly-Posset: Boil half a pound of French Barley in three pints of Milk, boil
it till it is enough, then put in a pint of Cream, some Mace and Cinnamon;
sweeten it with fine Sugar, and when it is just warm, pour in a pint of
White Wind, froth it up, and eat it with a Spoon; or press out the liquid part,
and drink it.

Barly-Pottage: Take a pound of French Barley, cleanse it well from Husks, put
it into two quarts of Milk to steep, and boil it a little; when it is pretty
well boiled, put in a quart of Cream, an ounce of Salt, some Mace, a little
Stick of Cinnamon broken in small pieces; and when it is thick enough, scrape
some fine Sugar into it, and serve it up.

Basil (Garden): This comforts the Heart, and expels Melancholy, moves the
Courses, and cleanses the Lungs.

There is another sort called Wild Basil, which forces the Courses and the
Birth, and removes Melancholy, being bruised and infused in Wine.

Bastings of Meats or Fowls: (1.) Clarified Suet. (2.) Fresh Butter. (3.)
Minced Sweet-herbs, Butter and Claret Wine; and this last is excellent for
Mutton or Lamb. (4.) Water and Salt. (5.) and especially for a Flayed Pig,
Cream and melted Butter well beaten up together. (6.) Yolks of Eggs, Juice of
Oranges, and grated Biscuit: And if this be intended for large Fowl, as
Bustards, Peacocks, or Turkeys, you may use the same.

Bath for the Legs: For Diseases in the Legs make this Bath, Take Sorrel and
Fumitory, of each two handfuls, Nep one handful, Barley, Bran and Lupins, of
each half a handful, and a like quantity of Violet and Mallow-Leaves; white and
black Ellebor, of each an Ounce, Honey two ounces: let them boil in a
sufficient quantity of Water till the third part be consumed, and then bath the
Legs with it very warm. It is good for Sores, Scabs, Botches, Boils, and Aches,
and the Gout.

Bath for a Rupture: Take of the Bark and Flowers of Pomgranets, Cups of Acorns
and Sumac, of each an ounce; Lark-Spurs and Comfrey, of each a handful;
Hypocistis, Galls, and Alom, of each two drams; Roses, Camomile, and
Anni-seeds, of each two pugils: boil them in an equal proportion of Red-Wine,
and Smiths-Water, and with the Decoction bath the Part affected.

Bay Tree: The Decoction of the Leaves, Bark and Berries of this Tree, makes an
excellent Bath for the Diseases of the Womb and Bladder: The Oil of Barberries
is very useful in cold Diseases of the Nerves and Joints. The Electuary is
frequently used in Clisters to expel Wind; it also eases the Pains of the
Colic; and in like manner does the Concoction of the Berries in Ale or any
dulcified Liquor.

Bdellium: To make the Tincture of it, Take Bdellium in Powder one ounce,
Spirit of Wine sixteen ounces, mix, digest, and extract a Tincture which keep
for use. This, as the Gum, eases the Colic, provokes Urine and the Terms,
expels the Afterbirth, and is Traumatick and Vulnerary: The Dose is from one
dram to a dram and a half.

Beef to Collar: Take the Flank, and when you have taken out the Sinews, the
more skinny part, and some of the Fat, put it into as much Water and Salt as
will cover it; let it steep three Days, then hang it to drain in the Air, and
dry it with a Linnen-Cloath; Mince Tops of Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Savory,
and Thime shred small, get a quarter of an ounce of Mace, half a quarter of an
ounce of Cloves, a slice or two of Ginger, half an ounce of Pepper, and some
Salt, roll them up in it, bind it up well, and put it into an Oven and bake it.

Beef to Souce: Take the Buttocks, Cheeks, and Briskets of Beef, season any of
them four Days with Pepper and Salt, roll up them as even as you can; boil them
in a Cloth tied fast about, in Water and Salt; and when it is pretty tender,
put it into a Hoop-frame to fashion it round and upright; dry it in some smoaky
Place, or in the Air, and cutting it out in Slices, serve it up with Sugar and
Mustard; observing before you dry it, to souce it in Water, Vinegar, and a
little White Wind and Salt.

Beet is hot and dry: It loosens the Belly, and the Juice snuffed up the
Nostrils, occasions sneezing, and purges the Head: The Leaves boiled and eaten
with Vinegar, create an Appetite: They extinguish Thirst, and suppress Choler
in the Stomach. The Juice of this Herb snuffed up into the Nostrils, gives ease
to an inveterate Headache.

Benjamin: This is an odoriferous, fragrant, and well scented yellow Rosin, or
Gum, very much used among the Perfumers; it attenuates, and is pectoral, used
chiefly inwardly against Catarrhs, Coughs, Colds, Asthma's, Obstructions of the
Lungs: It purges the Brain by sneezing, and likewise fortifies the Heart, and
resists malignant Humors, being taken in Wine, etc.

Benjamin Spirit: Put one Pound of Benjamin in a Cucurbit of glass, and distill
it in Balneo Mariae, or a Sand-Furnace, and there will first come over a clear
Liquor which will have the odoriferous Scent of Benjamin.

Benjamin, a Tincture: Take of Benjamin three ounces, Storax half an ounce, let
them be powdered grossly, put them into a Mattress or Bottle, so that either of
them may be but half filled, then pour on them Spirit of Wine, stopping them
close and covering the Vessel with warm Horse-Dung; so let the Materials digest
for fourteen Days, then filter the liquid part, and keep it close stopped in a
glass Viol, and you may, if you please, add five or six drops of Balsom of
Peru, to give it the better Scent.

This wonderfully whitens the Face and Hands, and is an excellent Wash to take
away Spots or any Deformities; but you must not put above a dram of it into
four ounces of Water, which is sufficient to turn it to the whiteness of Milk,
and then it is called by the Beautifiers, Lac Virginis, Virgins Milk.

Bezoar is a very highly esteemed Powder and excellent against all sorts of
Poisons and Venoms; for it fortifies and defends the noble Parts, and expels
the Malignity by Sweat, or by insensible Transpiration. The Dose taken in Sack,
or some other Cordial-Wine or Water, is from a scruple to a dram.

Bezoardick-Balsom: Take distilled Oil of Rue, the Rind of Citron, the Peels of
Oranges, Lavender, and Angelica, of each half a scruple; Oil of Amber rectified
five drops, Camphire four grains, Oil of Nutmeg half an ounce: make these into
a Balsom by bruising and well incorporating over a gentle Fire.

It is good in pestilential Airs, and apoplectick Fits, or any disorder of the
Brain

Bezoar-Stone: The use of this is excellent in all pestilential Distempers,
being a rare Cordial to fortify and strengthen the Heart in any Plague or
pestilential Fever; Take the weight of three Barly-corns in a spoonful of
Carduus, Bugloss or Borrage-Waters, and keep your self moderately warm Morning
and Evening.

Bezoardick-Water: Take the Roots of Carline-Thistle and Swallow-wort, of each
four Ounces, Leaves of Water-Germander, Rue, Carduus-Benedictus, Thyme, Tops of
St. John's-wort, of each two handfuls: bruise and shred these, and suffer them
to macerate or infuse in four pints of distilled Water of Nuts, and one pint of
Spirit of Wine, distill them in a Sand-Bath with a moderate Fire; burn the
Sediment, and extract a Salt out of it, to be dissolved in Water when you use
it.

Bifoyl, or Twa-blade: This small Herb growing up from a Root that has
something of a sweet Savor in it like Garden-Musk, is good, being bruised or
applied to green or old Wounds; and also for Ruptures, the Herb being applied
Poultiswise when the Parts are well trussed up.

Bilberries: These made into a Syrup, are cooling and astringent, allay the
Heat of the Stomach, and quench Thirst.

Bile: To cure this Grievance, take a white Lily-root, roast it in the Embers in
a brown Paper; then bruise Figs small and Fenugreek-seeds with Linseeds, of
each a quarter of an ounce; beat these well together, boil them in new Milk
until it be thick, stir it well and put to it a quarter of a pound of
Barrows-grease, and lay it on Poultiswise.

Birch-Bark: It is bituminous, and therefore mixed with Perfumes, it renders a
wholesome Air in such Places as it is burned. The Fungus of it has an astringent
quality, so that it very strangely stops bleeding. The Tree being pierced in
the Spring before the Leaves come forth, yields a very wholesome and nourishing
Liquor against the Dropsy.

Birch-Tree-Leaves: These are hot and dry, cleansing and resolving, opening and
bitter, for which Cause they are much available in Dropsies, in the Cure of the
Itch, and taking away Scurf and Deformities from the Skin; and the decoction of
them in Water or White Wind is very good to wash old Sores or Breakings-out in
any Part of the Body.

Birds-foot: This is of a drying quality, and therefore used successfully in
Drinks or Potions to be given for Wounds, as also to be applied outwardly. It
also helps the Rupture, being taken inwardly.

Biscuit: To make Biscuit the best way, Take half a peck of Flower, four Eggs,
half a pint of Yest, an ounce and a half of Anniseeds; make these into a Loaf
with sweet Cream and cold Water; fashion it somewhat long, and when it is baked
and a Day or two old, cut it into thin slices like Toasts, and strew them over
with powdered Sugar, dry it in a warm Stove or Oven, and sugar it again when
dry; and so do three or four times, and so put them up for use.

Bistort the greater: This is cooling and drying, the Root is harsh and
astringent, being mostly used to stay Vomitings, and to prevent Abortion, etc.
The Powder of the Root mixed with Conserve of Roses, prevents spitting of
Blood, as also the Bloody Flux: It stops the immoderate Courses, and the Powder
sprinkled on fresh Wounds, stays Bleeding.

Take of the Roots of Bistort and Tormentil, of each an ounce; of the Leaves of
Burnet, Wood Sorrel, and Meadowsweet, of each a handful; burnt Hartshorn two
drams, Ivory the like quantity: boil them in three pints of Spring Water to the
Consumption of a third part; then add three ounces of red Roses, strain the
liquid part, and take six Spoonfuls a Day if you see convenient.

Bistort-Water: It is excellent in making the white Potion for a Gonorrhea, and
the Whites in Women: The fresh Root made into a Cataplasm, eases the Pain in
the Gout. The Herb is cold, dry and astringent, stays Fluxes in the Bowels,
also Vomiting, and brings a disordered Body into a good Temper and Habit.

Biting by a Snake, Adder, or Mad Dog: Take a handful, or more, of Hazle-Nuts,
Rue about a quarter of a handful, a Clove of Garlic; stamp these with a
quarter of a handful of Ash-leaves or Ash-keys, squeeze out the Juice, and put
a little Venice-Treacle to it, and drink it very warm in Beer, Ale, or Wine.

Black-Pudding: To make this the best, and far exceeding the common way, Boil
the Umbles of a Hog tender, take some of the Lights with the Heart, and all the
Flesh about them, taking out the Sinews, and mincing the rest very small; do
the like by the Liver: add grated Nutmeg, four or five Yolks of Eggs, a pint of
sweet Cream, a quarter of a pint of Canary, Sugar, Cloves, Mace and Cinnamon
finely powdered, a few Carraway-seeds, and a little Rose Water, a pretty
quantity of Hogs-fat, and some Salt: roll it up about two Hours before you put
it into the Guts, and then put it into them after you have rinsed them in
Rose Water

Blamanger to make: Take a Capon, either boiled or roasted, and mince it small;
then blanch a pound of Almonds, and beat them finely till they become a Past;
beat the minced Capon among it with some Rose Water, mingle it with Cream, and
ten Whites of Eggs, and grated Manchet: then strain all the foresaid things
with Salt, Sugar, and a little Musk, boil them in a clean Pan or broad Skillet
to the thickness of Pap; stir it continually in the boiling, and being boiled,
strain it again, and serve it according to what form or fashion you please.

To make your Past into quaint devices, Take a quart of fine Flower, a quarter
of a pound of Butter, and the Yolks of four Eggs; boil your Butter in fair
Water, and put the Yolks of eight Eggs on one side of your Dish, and make up
your Past quick and stiff, but not too dry.

Blamanger another way: Take half a pound of fine searsed Rice-flower, put to
it a quart of Morning-Milk, set a broad Skillet, and strain them into it, set
it on a gentle Fire, and stir it with a slice; and when it is a little thick,
take it from the Fire, and put in a quarter of a pint of Rose Water; set it to
the Fire again and stir it well, and in stirring beat it to the sides of the
Skillet, and when it becomes as thick as Pap, take it off, and put it into a
fair Dish, and when it is cold, lay three slices in a Dish, and scrape on Sugar.

Blisters to draw: To do this without the help of Cantharides, Take Crows-foot
a handful, put to it about a spoonful of Mustard; beat them very well together
to the consistence of a Poultis; put this to the thickness of a Man's little
Finger in a Box-cover cut shallow, and about the breadth of the Palm of ones
Hand, and cut a hole of the wideness of the Box in a Plaster of Diapalma, or
the like, to make it stick; and this apply to the Part, and let it lie on
twelve or fourteen Hours, because it works as well more slowly than
Cantharides, as more safely and innocently.

Blisters, Another: Take Cantharides reduced to Powder, and upon half an ounce
of this put two or three ounces of Spirit of Wine: let them continue together
four or five Days, that the Spirit may gain a good Tincture; then filter it,
and dip into it a Linen Rag six or seven times double, and of the figure and
largeness that you desire: This Cloth being thoroughly wet, and covered with a
Melilot-Plaister, or a Plaster of Diachylum, to keep it sticking on, apply it
to the Part, and at the end of five or six Hours you may take it off.

Blites: This Herb eaten as a boiled Sallad, loosens the Belly, cools Heats of
the Stomach and Bowels: The Juice, which may be taken to four ounces, provokes
gentle Vomits. A Syrup made of the Juice is very cooling, and allays the Heat
of the Blood, also of the Liver and Spleen, abates the Heat of violent burning
Fevers, and a Saline or salt Tincture of it opens Obstructions, cools the Reins
and Bladder, provoking Urine.

Blood extravasated: Grate or rasp the Roots of well grown Burdocks into a fine
Powder, spread it on a Linnen-Cloath, bind it quite round the affected Part,
and renew it twice a Day.

Blood-spitting: Take Comfry-Roots six ounces, Leaves of Plantain two handfuls,
beat them well together in a stone Mortar, then press out the Juice, which
strain through a Linen Cloth; let it settle, then boil it up to a Syrup, and
clarify it with the White of an Egg. Take a spoonful of this Syrup several
times a Day, and at any time in the Night.

Blood-spitting, Another: Take Leaves of Coltsfoot half a Handful, shred it
very small, then fry it with a little Bacon; then put to it the Yolk of an Egg,
and stir it in the Morning fasting. Continue this for some time.

Blood to stanch: Take Hungarian Vitriol and Alom, of each half a pound,
Phlegm of Vitriol ten pounds, boil them till the Vitriol and Alom are
dissolved; and being cold, filter them through a brown Paper; and if any
Crystals shoot, separate the Liquor from them, adding to each pound an ounce of
Oil of Vitriol: Dip a Cloth into this Liquor, and apply it to the Part
affected.

Blood to sweeten: Take of the best and clearest red Coral an ounce, reduce it
(by grinding it very well on a Stone or Porphyry) to an impalpable Powder: Take
a dram at a time of this Magistery made without Acids, as long as you find
you have occasion.

Blue-Bottles: The distilled Water of the Flowers give help in the
Inflammations of the Eyes, and in drying up and healing putrid Ulcers: The
Powders of the Flowers taken inwardly are very effectual in the Jaundice.

Body-bound: To remedy Costiveness, boil in a large Porringer about a handful
of the Leaves of common Mallows, and let the Party sup them up before Meals.

Bole Armoniack: To prepare this, you need no more than moisten it with
May-dew, or any other Dew not too gross, and dry it in the shade.

Borrage: This is one of the four Cordial-Flowers, it comforts the Heart,
cheers Melancholy, revives the fainting Spirits, and purifies the Blood: The
Water of it is good for Inflammations of the Eyes, and for Fevers; and the like
virtue has the Conserve made of the Flowers: The Conserve of the Flowers mixed
with Wine, opens Obstructions in the Female Sex.

Bore baked: This is usually meant of the Parts of a wild Bore, though it will
indifferently serve for any: Take the Leg, season it very and then lard it with
Lard seasoned with Nutmeg, Pepper, and beaten Ginger; lay it, the Bones being
taken out, in a Pie with fine, but strong thick Crust; then sprinkle it over
with the forementioned Spices and Salt, putting a few whole Cloves and
Bay Leaves on it, with large slices of Lard, and store of Butter: and being
baked, liquor it with sweet Butter, and stop up the vent; and if you would have
it keep long, bake it in an earthen Pan, and filling it up with Butter, it
will, if it be not set in a very moist place, keep a whole Year; or before you
put the Flesh into the Pie, you may lay it in soak two Days, then parboil it,
and bake it in all Points seasoned as before.

Box-Leaves: Dry them and powder them; then take from one dram to one and a
half: They purge gently; so does the Decoction of an ounce and a half of them
in Whey, or some such like Liquid.

Bramble-Berries, or, Black-Berries: The Berries not quite ripe, are very
astringent: A Decoction of them heals sore Mouths, and allays the Heat of
Fevers.

Brawn broiled: Cut a Collar of Brawn into slices, and lay it on a Plate in an
Oven; and when it is broiled enough, serve it up with the Juice of Oranges,
Pepper, Gravy, and beaten Butter.

Brawn of a Pig: Let not your Pig be any way spotted, yet pretty large and fat,
and being scalded, draw and bone it whole, only the Head being cut off; then
cut it into two Collars overthwart both the sides, and being washed, soak them
in Water and Salt two Hours; then dry them with a clean Cloth, and season the
inside with minced Lemon Peel and Salt; roll them up even at both ends, and put
them into a clean Cloth, bind them about very tite, and when the Water is
boiling, put them in, adding a little Salt, keeping the Pot clear scummed, and
when they are sufficiently boiled, hoop them, and keep them in an even Frame,
and being cold, put them into a souced Drink made of Whey and Salt, or Oatmeal
boiled and strained, and then put them into such a Vessel as you can
conveniently stop up from the Air.

Brawn to souce: Take a fat Brawn about three Years old, and bone the Sides,
cut the Head close to the Roots of the Ears, and cut fine Collars of a side
Bone, and hinder Legs, an inch deeper in the Belly than on the Back, bind them
up equally at both ends, soak them in fair Water and Salt a Night and a Day,
put them into boiling Water, keeping the Pot continually scum'd; and after the
first quick boiling, let them boil leisurely, putting in Water as it boils
away, and so lessening the Fire by degrees, let them stand over it a whole
Night, then being between hot and cold, take them off into Moulds of deep
Hoops, bind them about with Packthread, and when they are cold put them into
Souce-drink made of Oatmeal ground or beaten, and Bran boiled in fair Water;
being cold, strain it through a Sieve, and putting Salt and Vinegar to it,
close up the Vessel tite, and so keep it for your use.

Bread, the French way: Take four pound of Wheat Flour very fine, a pint of
new Ale Yest, beat the Whites of six new-lay'd Eggs, mingle them together,
adding three spoonful of Salt finely beaten, a then so much Milk and fair
Water, an equal quantity, as will make it into a Dough, so that it may be
pretty stiff; and having worked it well that it becomes of an even mixture in
all Parts, cover it with a wooden Tray pretty warm, and when the Oven is
prepared for receiving it, make it into Rouls, or as you please, and when it
rises and begins to look brownish, take it out, chip off the Crust whilst it is
pretty hot.

Breading Meats or Fowls: These being diverse ways to be done, it is necessary
they should be here set down in order to prevent their being frequently mixed,
and not readily found upon occasion. (1.) Flower mixed with grated Bread. (2.)
Sweet-Herbs dried and powdered, mixed with grated Bread. (3.) Lemon Peel dried,
so that it may be beaten into Powder, or Orange-Peel scraped very small, and
mixed with grated Bread and Flower. (4.) Sugar finely beaten and mixed with
Cinnamon, grated Bread, and fine Flower. (5.) Coriander-seeds, Fennel-seeds,
Cinnamon and Sugar finely beaten and mixed with Flower. (6.) For young Pigs,
beaten Yolks of Eggs, beaten Pepper, Nutmeg, and Ginger mixed with grated
Bread, and a little fine Sugar. (7.) Sugar, Bread and Salt only mixed. This is
generally known by the Name of Dredging or scattering over the Fowl, or Meat,
whilst roasting, to keep it up to a good color, and secure the Gravy from too
much evaporating by the Heat of the Fire, or running out into the Dripping-Pan.

Breast-aching: This is either occasioned by the emptyness of the Veins, or a
pricking caused by virulent Humors: To remove this grief, take a piece of
Flannel of a deep blue Color, so often dipped in the Dye, till it looks as if it
were black; anoint the Breast with Oil of Camomil and Smallage, and then cover
it warm with the Flannel,

Breast cankered: To remedy this grievance, Take a mellow Pippin of about a
Year old, cut off the top, and take out the Core, fill it with Hogs-Lard, and
cover it with the Cap: roast the Apple then to Pap, so take off the Skin, and
mingle the Pulp and Grease together; then spread it thick on a Linnen-Cloath,
and apply it to the Place grieved very warm, and cover it over with a piece of
a Bladder or the Skin of Suet; and by often renewing it, the Party will find it
a Remedy.

Breast cold: for a Cold in the Breast, Take half a Sheet of brown Paper of as
even a mixture as can be had, anoint it over as even as may be with the Tallow
of Candles that have been made a long time: do this before a Fire, so that the
Paper may be thoroughly penetrated; then grate over it as much Nutmeg as will
cover it, clap it warm to the Pit of the Stomach, that it may reach a good way
above and below it.

Breast sore: This comes many times though want of Milk, and frequently after
Childbirth: To remedy this, Take of Barrows-grease half a pound, yellow Bees
wax an ounce, Burgundy-Pitch five ounces, Venice-Turpentine one ounce; put
these into a Skillet with a quarter of a pint of fair Water, and let them
simper over a gentle Fire, scuming off the bubling Froth, and pour it into an
earthen Pan to cool: when it is cold, take it out of the Pan, and scrape off
the Dregs or Dross at the bottom; melt it again, and refine it over the Fire,
and so making it into Plasters or Cerecloaths, apply it to the Place grieved.

Breasts of Women: Women's Breasts, especially after their Lying-in, contract a
hardness, and are sore, occasioned by gross Humors fixing there: To remedy
this, Take two Turnips, boil them in Spring Water till they are very tender,
then press out the Water, and mash them in a wooden Dish or Mortar; scrape on
them an ounce of Bole-Armoniack, and make them into a Poultis with fresh
Butter; and being laid to the Breasts very warm on a hot Linnen-Cloath, they
will take away the Pain.

Breath, shortness thereof to help: Take a quarter of a pound of blue Figs, an
ounce of Licorice, Caraways and Anniseeds, of each half an ounce; boil them in
two quarts of Ale till a pint be consumed, and then sweeten it with
Sugar Candy: Drink half a pint Morning and Evening.

Breath to sweeten: Take the dried Flowers and tops of Rosemary, Sugar Candy,
Cloves, and Mace, of each two drams, Cinnamon one dram; dry these and beat them
into fine Powder. About a dram of this at a time in a new-lay'd Egg, sucked up
fasting Morning and Night, clears the Lungs from offensive Matter, and sweetens
the Breath.

Brook-lime is excellent in the Scurvy; it powerfully expels the Stone in the
Bladder and Kidneys; it provokes the Courses. For the Scurvy, Take the Juice of
Brooklime, Watercresses, and Scurvy Grass, of each half a pint; the Juice of
Oranges four ounces, fine Sugar two pound; make a Syrup of it, and take a
spoonful of it in your ordinary Drink.

Broken-Belly, or Burstenness: Take Cranes-Bill, usually called Columbinum,
reduce the Roots and Leaves to a fine Powder; take about half a spoonful of
this Night and Morning forabout three Weeks together, washing it down with a
spoonful or two of Red Wine or Claret.

Broom: The Root of this is an excellent Opener, being one of the five opening
Roots, and is principally made use of for Obstructions of the Liver, the Urine
and the Courses. The Syrup of the five opening Roots, is thus:

Take the Roots of Fenel, Butchers-Broom, Asparagus, Parsley, and Smallage, of
each two ounces, Spring Water three quarts, digest 'em hot, and boil them in
Balneo.

Broom-Rape: The Herb or Roots of this are to be had Candied, and are very good
in the Diseases of the Spleen and Melancholy.

Broth, very excellent: Parboil two young Cocks, the Legs and Wings being cut
off; scum the Water you boil them in very clean: then take them out, and wash
them in cold Water, and with a pint of Rhenish-Wine, and two quarts of strong
Broth, put them into a Pipkin or convenient Vessel, add two ounces of
China-Root, and an ounce and a half of Hartshorn, with an ounce of Cloves,
Mace, Pepper and Ginger mixed together; season it with a little Salt, and cover
the Pipkin close, and set it in a Pot of boiling Water, so that the Water get
not into it: let it boil for six Hours, then pour out the Broth squeeze into it
the Juice of Lemons, and serve it. This is excellent to strengthen or restore
decayed Bodies after Sickness, and for such as are Consumptive.

Bruise: To remedy the Pain of a Bruise or Swelling, Take a pint of fair Water,
boil in it a handful of Salt, and half a handful of Ash-leaves, or Ash-bark;
bruise then the Bark, or Leaves; and straining out the Liquid part, dip
Linnen-Rags in it, and apply them to the Place grieved.

Bruise in the Head: Take Rosin, and a little Red-Deer's Suet, Camphire, and
White Wind, set them over a moderate Fire till it boil; then strain it and beat
it till it comes to an Ointment, over a somewhat gentler Fire, and anoint the
Place grieved with it as hot as you can, and chafe it in.

Bruise, with great Swelling: Take Hemp, Tow, or Flax, moisten it with Brandy,
and spread it over with Honey; then sprinkle Brandy again upon the Honey, and
bathing the swelled Part withsome Brandy very warm, lay on the other, and it
will not only sink the Swelling, but give ease to the bruised Part by
dispersing the gathering Humors.

Bucks-Horn: This is a small Plant or Herb growing in barren and sandy Grounds,
and comes up with some of its Leaves jagged or sprouting out at the sides, like
the Horns of a Buck, from which Allusion, I suppose, it takes its Name. This is
a kind of Plantane different from some others, and has a quality of binding and
drying. The Decoction in Wine drank, and the bruised Leaves outwardly applied,
ease the Pains, and remedy the Bitings of most venomous Creatures; and the
Juice helps those that are troubled with the Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys,
Bladder, or Reins, and stops Bleeding.

Bugle, its Virtues: Either inward or outward it is a good vulnerary Herb; it
is used in the Yellow-Jaundice, and Obstructions in the Liver, Reins and
Bladder.

Bugloss: Take the Juice of Bugloss clarified three pound, white Sugar two
pound; boil them up to a Syrup. This Syrup chears the Heart, prevents swooning
Fits, and expels Melancholy.

Bullock's-Cheek, the Italian way: Break the Bones so that the flesh be as
little mangled with them as may be, wash it very clean in shifted Waters, and
let it steep three or four hours; then boil it in fair Water with some
Bolonia-Sausage, and a piece of interlarded Bacon; and when they are tender
boiled, dish them up, and garnish them with Flowers and Greens, and serve them
up with Mustard and Sugar in Saucers.

Bullock's-Cheek, to Stew: Having cleaned, well soaked and ordered them, by
taking out the Bones, after you have half-roasted the Meat by an indifferent
quick fire, save the Gravy, and put them into a Pipkin with some more Gravy and
Claret Wine, also some strong Broth; sliced Nutmeg and Ginger, Salt and Pepper,
with an Onion and a Shalot or two; let it stew about two hours, and so with the
Materials it is stewed in serve it up on carved Sippets, and it will be an
excellent Dish, worth all your cost and trouble.

Bur of the Meadow: This Herb, or Plant, grows in wet places, most commonly by
Rivers and Ditch-sides in Meadows and Marshy-grounds, flowering very early, so
that they decay in February or March, before the Leaves appear, which put not
out till April. The Sun claims an extraordinary Influence over this; and
therefore, as all other Herbs under the Solar Government, it is a great
strengthener of the Heart, cheating the Vital Spirits. The Roots are good
against the Plague, and Pestilential Fevers, by provoking Sweat, if they be
powdered, and taken in a glass of Whitewine. They likewise greatly resist
Poison: being taken with the Powders of Angelica and Zedoary, they prevent the
Rising of the Mother. The Roots boiled in Wine, are good for those that are
troubled with Shortness of Breath.

Burnet: This Herb, infused in Wine, chears the Heart, and renders it very
pleasant, by imparting a curious Smell and Taste to it: it preserves against
the Plague, and the Bitings of Mad Dogs, and also resists Poisons.

Burnet-Water: Take the Tops of Wormwood, Rosemary and Burner, Mugwort, Sun-dew
and Dragons, Scabious, Agrimony, Carduus, Bettony, Baum, and the Lesser
Centaury, of each a handful; Roots of Angelica, Peony, Zedoary, Tormentile,
Liquorice and Elecampane, of each half an ounce: bruise, shred and infuse them
with Sage, Rue, Celandine, Marrigold-leaves and flowers, of each a handful,
three or four days, in four quarts of the finest White Wind: Then distill it
carefully, and let the Dose be three or four spoonfuls at a time.

Burns: For any Burns or Scalds, mingle Limewater with Linseed-oil, by beating
them together with a Spoon; and with a Feather dipped in it, dress the place
grieved till you find the fire is gone: Do this as often as you have Occasion.

Burns: Take a couple of hard Onions; mash them in a Mortar with half a handful
of Bay Salt, so apply them. If for Scalding, Take the inner Rind of an
Elder-tree, and fresh Sheep's-dung, of each half an handful, and with
Fresh-butter or Oil make thereof an Ointment, and with it anoint often the
scalded place, and the heat will be extracted.

Burn in the Eye: Take a new-lay'd Egg, boil it hard, and apply one of the
Whites at a time pretty warm, but not too hot, and keep it on some hours; then
take two or three rotten Apples, beat them to mash, and lay them over the Eye
as a Poultis.

Burn, an Ointment: Take Saccharum Saturni half a dram, and of the sharpest
Vinegar four ounces, make a Solution of the former in the latter; then put Oil
of Elder so much as will serve to make it into an Unguent or Ointment, and so
apply it to the Part affected.

Burn or Scald: Take Oil of Olives three ounces, White Wax two ounces,
Sheeps-suet one ounce and an half Minium and Castle-soap of each half an ounce,
Dragons Blood drams; mingle and make 'em into an Ointment according to Art:
This is a most approved Remedy for Burn or Scald.

Dr. Butler's Ale. See Ale-Purging.

Butter, called May-Butter: To preserve this, Take the freshest and newest
Butter made about the middle or end of May, put it into a large glazed
Earth-pot, and place it so hot in the Sun, that it may run and melt; then press
it through a fine Cloth, and expose it to the Sun again, till it is well
clarified: Take the purer fart from the Setlings, and it will keep all the
Year. It supples and asswages hard Swellings, allaying the Heat and
Inflammation of them; cures breakings-out and Heat, being mixed and made into
an Ointment with the Juice of Wormwood and Vinegar, and is thus prepared to mix
with diverse toppling and mollifying Ointments.

CAchexies: To make a Pill for the Cure of them, Take half an ounce of
Trochiscs of Alhandale; Myrrh, choice Aloes, and Galpanum, of each three drams:
Scammony, Jallop, and white Agarick, of each one dram and a half; Oil of
Nutmeg, one dram; Amber, Cinnamon, and Cloves, of each six drops; Extract of
Juniper, as much as is sufficient to make them up into Pills, when they are
very well mixed.

These are very much recommended for the Curing of the Quartan Ague, Jaundice,
Dropsy, and the Retention of the Menstruums. The weight of these Pills must be
but two grains a piece, and two or three may be taken at a time; but be careful
to keep your Body warm, in good order, three or four hours after.

Calves-Foot-Pye: Take Calves-feet boil them very tender; then take out the
Bones, and mince them small: do the like by two pound of Beef Suet; then add a
quarter of an ounce of beaten Cloves and Mace, Lemon Peel small shred; a
quarter of an ounce of beaten Cinnamon and Nutmeg,; and strew over all a little
Pepper and Salt finely beaten together. And to any of these Pyes you may, if
you think it convenient, put in this following Caudle when they are baked: viz.

A quarter of a pint of White Wind, half as much Verjuyce, a blade of whole
Mace, the Yolks of three Eggs, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and as much
Butter; beat them up well, and strain out the thinnest part, and so put it into
the Pie as it is just going to be served up at the Table, and it gives a
curious flavor and relish: you may likewise scrape fine sifted Sugar over the
Lid, and so serve it up.

Calves-Head-Pye: Boil your Calf's-Head till the Meat will come from the Bones;
then cut it into thin slices; then take half an ounce of Nutmeg, as much Cloves
and Mace, half an ounce of Cinnamon, half a pound of Dates sliced thin, a pound
of Raisins, a quarter of an ounce of whole Mace, the Marrow of four bones, the
Yolks of six Eggs hard boiled, cut them in halves, and then take half a pound
of candied Lemon Peel and Citron, a handful of pickled Barberries and Lemons
sliced thin, a pound of Butter, and so bake it pretty well.

Calves-Head-Pye with Dysters: Order the Head as the former, season it with a
quarter of an ounce of Pepper, two large Nutmegs, and a quarter of an ounce of
whole Mace; put in six Cloves of Shalots small minced, two quarts of Oysters,
and on the top and bottom lay two pound of Butter; lay on four Anchovies mixed,
or in small streaks, and over these pour half a pint of Whitewine.

Cammock: The Root of this Powder drank in White Wind, with the Juice of
Lemons, is excellent in the Stone or Gravel in the Reins or Bladder, especially
when the Conduits, thorough which the Urine should pass, are obstructed: And
(according to the Testimony of Matthiolus) a certain Man having used the Powder
of this Root for many Months, cured himself of a Rupture. The Decoction also of
this Root, and Water which has been distilled from it, provoke Urine, and
remove Obstructions in the Reins and Bladder.

Cammock, to make the Distilled Water, You must take four pounds of the Rinds
of the green Roots, cut them very small, and infuse them in a gallon of Malmsey
or Mallaga, and then set them over a gentle heat: Distill them in a glass
Alembick in Balneo Mariae, and you will have a pleasant Water fit for the
abovesaid Uses.

Capon, Boiled the Italian way: Take a young Capon, draw it and truss it to
boil, then lay it in fair Water, and parboil it a little, then boil it in
strong Broth until it be enough: Then take a good quantity of Beet-leaves, boil
them in fair Water very tender, press out the Water, and take six Sweetbreads
of Veal, boil and mince them and the Herbs very small, then add the Marrow of
four or five Bones; steep the Sweetbread and Herbs that are minced small, and
boil the bigger pieces in Water by themselves, and lay on the Capon on the top
of the Dish: Then take Raisins of the Sun stoned, shred them small with half a
pound of Dates, a quarter of a pound of Pomcitron minced, and a pound of Naples
Biscuit grated; put them together in a large Dish or Charger with half a pound
of Sweet-butter, and work it with your hands into a piece of Paste; season it
with a little Nutmeg, Ginger, Cinnamon and Salt well beaten, and some Parmisan
grated and mingled with fine Sugar; then make a Paste of fine Flower, six Yolks
raw of Eggs, a little Saffron beaten small, and half a pound of Butter, and a
little Salt; then drive out a long sheet with a Rowling-pin very thin, and lay
the Ingredients in small heaps round or long; then cover them with the Paste,
and cut it asunder, and lay about the Capon till you have filled the Dish; then
pour on Butter with little strong Broth; garnish it with Lemons, and serve it
up.

Carbuncle: Take Salt well beaten to Powder, sift it, and incorporate it with
the Yolk of an Egg; and applying it, it will draw away the Venom, and offensive
Humors, break any Boil, or Plague Sore, and contribute much toward the
healing of it.

Carp, to Roast: Make a Pudding of Almond-paste and Cream, grated Bread,
Nutmeg, Currants, and Salt; and when the Carp is drawn without cutting open,
viz. through the Gills, put in the Pudding that way till the Belly be full; tie
it to a Spit, and when it is roasted, make the Sauce with what drops from it,
and the Juice of Oranges, Cinnamon and Sugar, beaten up with Sweet-butter.

Carp Stewed: Having bled him, save the Blood, scrape off the Scales, and take
out the Intrails; then put him into your Stew Pan, with Made, Ginger, Cloves,
Nutmeg, Sweet-herbs, and a large Onion quartered, with half a pound of Butter;
mix some of the Blood with Claret; put it in, and being enough, garnish it with
sliced Lemons, and green Spinach, and serve it up to the Table.

Cassia, its Virtues. It Is Loosening, and a Purifier of the Blood; it allays
Heat, and moderately loosens the Belly; provokes Urine, purges Choler and
Phlegm, and mollifies the Breast and Throat; it resolves Inflammations, and
cleanses the Reins from Sand and Gravel.

Caustic Liquor of Verdigrease: Take Verdigrease four ounces, Salt of Niter
eight ounces; mix them together, fire them, and let them burn in an Iron or
Marble Mortar well heated; then make them into a Powder, and put them into a
convenient Vessel. Let them, by dropping, dissolve in a moist place; and
preserve the Liquor that falls in a thick Glass or glazed earthen Pot.

This Liquor is highly approved for consuming proud and corrupted Flesh; and
likewise all sorts of Excrescencies, more particularly such as accompany
Venereal Distempers.

Caustic Powder, or Specific Corrosive of Paracelsus: To make it, Take
Corrosive Mercury Sublimate three ounces, Sal Armoniack two ounces, powder them
together; put them into a Matras, pour on them a pint of Aqua fortis; which
evaporate in a moderate heat till the Ingredients come to the consistence of a
Paste: dry the whole Mass in such a moderate heat as will reduce it to a fine
Powder.

This Powder Cauterizes very speedily and violently any superfluous Flesh, and
such Excrescencies as are to be removed. It is quick in Operation; and the
regard that is to be had to the Nature of the Corrosive Sublimate, requires
much Caution and Prudence in the Use of it; insomuch, that you must put on but
a very little at a time, and use it only upon strong Bodies; and it is to be
applied upon no other Parts than what are remote from the Emunctories of the
Noble Parts.

Celandine the greater: The Juice of this is very good to take out Spots, Pins
and Webs in the Eye; but by reason of its sharpness, you may allay it with a
little Breast-milk: Being put into hollow Teeth often, it will loosen them, and
greatly facilitate their Drawing: Warts frequently rubbed with the Juice of
Celandine, will dry up, and peel off. The Decoction of the Root being drank
with Aniseeds and Whitewine, is good for the Jaundice, or to wash eating Ulcers
withal. The Root being chewed asswageth the Toothache.

Celandine the less: It breaks the Skin where it is applied as a Poultis: it
cause bad Nails and Hair to fall off: the Juice of it snuffed up the Nose,
greatly purges the Brain: A Gargarism made of the Decoction of it with Honey,
has the same effect.

Centaury major: The chief Virtues of this consists in the Root which is used
for Ruptures, Difficulty in Breathing, old Coughs, Pleurisies, and Spitting of
Blood: It is successfully given in the Dropsy and Jaundice, being either
infused in Wine, or beat to Powder, and drank immediately.

Centaury minor: Of this Lesser sort Galen has written a large Treatise. It
purges Choler and Phlegm; for which cause the Decoction thereof is given in
Tertian Agues: It kills Worms in the Belly. The Leaves of this Herb being
applied fresh to Wounds, search them, and heal up Ulcers.

Cephalic Elixir: Take Misleto that grows on the Oak, Piony-roots, the Bigger
Valerian, of each an ounce and an half; Piony-seed, Laurel and Juniper Berries,
of each one ounce; Cinnamon, Mace, and Cubebs, of each three drams; Flowers of
Tillet, Rosemary and Lavender, of each a handful: bruise what is to be bruised,
and macerate them together for twenty four hours in the Water of Lilies of the
Valley, Black-Cherry-water, the rectified Spirit of Wine, of each a pint and an
half: then distill them according to Art. To the Liquor distilled add refined
Sugar one pound, Tincture of Ambergrease a dram; put this Elixir in an
Earthen-Pot, well stopped and glazed.

This Elixir is of wonderful Use in Epilepsies, Apoplexies, and other cold
Diseases of the Brain, being taken fasting, from half a spoonful to two
spoonfuls.

Cerate for Masks for Women: Take white Beeswax four pound, Sperma Ceti two
ounces, Oil of the four greater cold Seeds cleansed, extracted without fire,
and Bismuth precipitated, of each three drams; Borax and Burnt-Alom finely
powdered, of each half a dram; melt and mix them in Balneo Mariae, and at the
same time dip and spread the Cloth. This Preparation for the Lining Women's
Masks, or laying on their Faces, going to bed, wonderfully preserves the
Beauty, and increases its Charms and Loveliness to Admiration.

Cerate for Women's Breasts: Take Oil of Roses six ounces, bruised Periwinkles
three ounces; the Juice of Mint, and the lesser Sage, of each an ounce and an
half; boil them over a soft fire to the consumption of the Juices: then press
out what remains thorough a close-threaded Cloth; then melt into it Beeswax
three ounces; and when it is almost cold, put in three ounces of the Powder of
Mastick; and having well stirred these about, dip in the Cloths you intend to
use.

This prevents the Breasts of Women from swelling or growing big after
Childbearing; it likewise changes the course of the Milk, and turns it
downwards: it must be laid pretty hot on the Breast, and wrapped up with warm
Cloths, and renewed every twenty-four hours, till the desired Effect be
performed.

Cerecloth for Broken Bones: Take Frankincense and Galbanum, of each three
quarters of an ounce; Mastick an ounce, Wax three ounces, Rosin an ounce and an
half, Olive-oil an ounce; dissolve the Galbanum in a little Vinegar, and then
melt all together in the Oil, and so bruise and strain it thorough a Cloth;
then dip your Cerecloth, and apply it to the Fracture, and it will mainly
strengthen the Sinews, and knit the fractur'd Bone sooner than can be
reasonably expected.

Cerecloth of Galbanum: Take prepared Galbanum an ounce and an half, Turpentine
an ounce, Assa foetida half an ounce, Bdellium a dram, two drams of Red Myrrh,
and two ounces of Beeswax; the Leaves of Fetherfew and Mugwort, of each half a
dram; the Seed of Daucus one scruple: Dissolve all, except the Assa foetida, in
Whitewine-Vinegar, and that is to be dissolved with the Turpentine; and so
mixing them well together, make a Cerecloth.

This being applied to the Belly, expells Wind, kills Worms, and provokes the
Courses; prevents Fits of the Mother, etc.

Cerecloth of Saunders: Take ten drams of Red Saunders, and six of White and
Yellow; an ounce and an half of Red Roses, and seven drams of Bole-Armoniack;
half an ounce of Spodium of Ivory, and two drams of Camphire; Yellow Beeswax
one pound, Oil of Roses six ounces. Let the Saunders be powdered together, and
the Roses, Ivory, Bole and Camphire apart: then melt the Wax over a moderate
fire; and when it is somewhat cool, mix the Powders, putting in the (amphire
last dissolved in Oil, so mix them well together for your Use.

It is extraordinary good, applied to the Stomach, for Inflammations of the
Liver, and other Parts; likewise against Pains and Weakness of the Back and
Reins, and may be used for Pains in any other Parts.

Chalybeate Salt against an ill Habit of Body: Take Vitriol of Mars an ounce,
Sal Prunellae two ounces, Salt extracted out of the dead Head of Aqua fortis
three ounces; pulverize them together, and put them into a glass Cucurbit, set
them in a Sand-Bath with a Fire made under them by decrees; augment the Heat
till the Matter look red hot and flows like Water, and in the end turn to a
hard red Stone or Salt.

This is much applauded for the Cure of Cachexies and scorbutic Distempers,
also to purge the Mass of Blood, create an Appetite, and open the Passages of
the Urine, provoke Sleep, and divert the Fluxes of Rheum; it also carries off
bad Humors by Sweat and Stool, or insensible Transpiration: You may take it
when it is finely reduced to Powder, from seven or eight, to twelve or fifteen
grains, in a Glass of Wine, or some convenient Cordial Waters.

Cheese to Make: It is not here meant the ordinary sort of Cheese, but a
Rarity. To make it therefore, Put whole Cinnamon in new Milk, or Cream, let it
boil; then take it off and sweeten it with Sugar, add two quarts of Milk or
Cream, a spoonful of Runnet, cover it till it curdle; then strew on it Sugar
and the Powder of Cinnamon, and dip Sippits in Canary, and serve it up.

Cheesecakes: Put to a Gallon of new Milk half a pint of Runnet, let it stand
till it is curdled; then put the Curd into a Linnen-Cloath, tie it up, and by
laying a Weight on it, press out the Whey; which being done, beat up the Curds
with Yolks of Eggs, White Wind, and Rose Water, with a little Sugar dissolved
in the latter; then add half a pound of Currants washed clean from Gravel and
Stones; make up all these Materials into a Puff-past of fine Flower, Eggs,
Butter, Ale, Yest, and as much Milk as will fashion it; beat it with a
Rolling-pin till it is of an equal temper, then take and roll it up into little
Balls, spread them out into round flat pieces as thin as is convenient: make
them into what fashion you please. When they come to be turned up, put the
Curds and other Materials in the middle of them, then wet them round with
Water, turn up and pinch the Corners, and put them into due proportion, and
when baked, strew them over with Sugar mixed with Powder of Cinnamon, or
without, and sprinkle over them Rose Water, and so serve them up.

Cheesecakes, the Italian way: Take two pound of Pistaches, stamp them, when
taken out of the Shells, with two pound of Morning-Milk Cheese-Curd newly made
three ounces of Elder Flowers, and ten Eggs, Sugar and sweet Butter, of each a
pound, with two quarts of Flower; drain these in course Strainers, and put them
into a Puff-past, Cheesecake fashion.

Cheesecakes without Milk: Take twelve Eggs, and lay away six of the Whites,
beat them up finely, and having a quart of new Cream boiled up with Mace, take
it off, and putting in the beaten Eggs, stir it about till it curdles, then let
it cool a little, and put in a good quantity of Sugar, beaten Mace and grated
Nutmeg, dissolve a little Musk and Ambergrease in Rose Water, and sprinkle it
over lightly; then put in three or four spoonfuls of grated Bread with half a
pound of beaten Almonds, and a little cold Cream, with some Currants, and it
will make an excellent Curd; Then make up a Puff-past Cheesecake fashion, in
which this is placed, and bake them in a moderate Oven, and drawing them,
sprinkle them over with Rose Water and Sugar, and so serve them up.

Chicken in White-Broth: Take a quart of White Wind, and three pints of strong
Broth, and put one or more Chickens to it in a Pipkin, or a convenient earthen
Vessel, add a quarter of a pound of Dates sliced, half a pound of fine Sugar,
and four or five Blades of Mace the Marrow of three Bones, and a handful of
white Endive shred small, and let them stew over a gentle Fire; and when the
Broth is well tasted, strain the Yolks of ten Eggs into it, keeping it
continually stirring, that the Eggs may mix with the Broth, and not curdle:
then take out the Chickens, put the Broth into the Dish, and lay them in it,
and garnish it with Marrow, sliced Dates, large Mace, Endive, preserved
Barberries, and boiled Skirrets, and make Leer of Almond-Past and the Juice of
green Grapes.

Chilblains: Take a Turnip, put it under hot Embers, and roast it well; then
take off the Coat, and beat it to Mash: apply it very hot Poultiswise, shift it
often for fresh ones, and continue it three or four Days.

China-Broth: Take an ounce of China-Root chipped thin, steep it in three pints
of Water all Night, on Embers covered; the next Day take a Cock-Chicken, put in
its Belly Agrimony and Maidenhair, of each half a handful, Raisins of the Sun
stoned a good handful, and as much French Barley; boil these in a Pipkin close
covered on a gentle Fire six or seven Hours: strain it, and take it for a
Consumption, or any Defect in the Lungs.

Chops of the Breast: Take two drams of the white sort of Gum-Tragacanth,
beaten and sifted into fine Powder; macerate them over a gentle Fire in a
sufficient quantity of Rose Water, and extract a Mucilage.

This is a very good Remedy to cure Clifts and Chops of the Breast and Nipples:
It may serve for the Hands, Lips, or any other Parts, being bathed or anointed
with it warm.

Cinnamon takes away and dissolves all superfluous Humors of the Body, and
fortifieth the Members. There is a distilled Water made of Cinnamon, strong in
Smell and Taste, and of great Virtue, and is thus made.

Cinamon-Water to Make: Take a pound of Cinnamon that has not lost its Scent,
bruise it and put it into a Vessel with four pound of Rose Water, and half a
pint of White Wind; then set your Vessel, being very close stopped, in warm
Water, and then make your Distillation in the same Water, being placed on a
Furnace where the Fire is maintained, in such manner that the Water may
continue boiling.

This distilled Water is sovereign against all Diseases proceeding from cold
Causes; for it dissolveth and consumes Phlegm, removes Windiness and clammy
Humors, and comforts the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Brain, and Sinews: It is an
admirable Cordial against faintness or fainting Fits, comforting and cheering
the Heart; it resists Poison, or the biting of venomous Beasts, provokes Urin
and the Terms, and proves helpful to those that are short-winded, or are sick
of the Palsy.

Citron: The Juice of it represses Choler, and (if made into a Syrup with fine
Sugar) is very good against the Plague, and pestilential Fevers. The Meat or
Pulp is of a gross and phlegmatic Substance, the Kernels bitter and loosening.

Citrons, a Syrup: Take Citrons, as many as you think convenient, pare and
slice them very thin, then put them into a silver or glass Basin with layings
of fine Sugar till it be near full; the Day following pour off the Liquor into
a Glass with a paper Funnel, strain it with a tiffany Strainer, clarify it on
a soft Fire, and it will keep a Twelvemonth. This is excellent in hot
Distempers, especially mixed with Juleps and Cordials.

Claret-Water for the Stomach: Take four ounces of Cinnamon, bruised Cloves
Ginger, Mace, Galangal, and Cardamoms in Powder, of each half a dram; macerate
them in the Cold in two quarts of Aquavitae, and a pint and a half of
Rose Water six Hours: being put into a Mattress very close stopped; filter it,
and in the filtering dissolve two pound of Loaf-Sugar, and so the Water is
perfect.

This is very pleasing in Taste, and exceedingly fortifies the Stomach and
Vitals, dissipates Windyness, and creates a good Appetite; you may take it from
three drams to half an ounce.

Cloves: They help Digestions, stay the Flux of the Belly, and are binding;
they clear the sight, and the powder of them consumes and takes away the Web or
Film in the Eye, as also Clouds and Spots: being beaten to Powder, and drunk
with Wine or the Juice of Quinces, they stay Vomiting, restore lost Appetite,
fortify the Stomach and Head, gently warm an over-cold Liver; and for this
Reason they are given with success to such as have the Dropsy: The smell of
the Oil of them is good against fainting Fits and Swoonings; and being chewed,
they sweeten the Breath, and fasten the Teeth; the Powder of them in White Wind
is given for the Falling Sickness, or Palsy; the distilled Water of Cloves is
good against Surfeits and pestilential Diseases; receiving the Smoke of the
Gloves into the Nostrils whilst they are burning on a Chafing Dish of Coals,
opens the Pores of the Head.

Clouted-Cream: Set new Milk to simper on the Embers twelve Hours, add sliced
Marmalade of Damascens, Sugar and Cinnamon finely powdered, with as much Cream
as amounts to a third part of all these Materials, serve it up strewed over
with Sugar, and sprinkled with Rose Water.

Cock-Ale: Stone four pound of Raisins of the Sun washed and well dried; take a
young Cock, truss him, and put him into twelve Gallons of Ale, with the
Raisins; of Nutmegs, and Mace, of each an ounce, Dates half a pound: infuse
these in a quart of Canary twenty four Hours, and put them to the Ale: When the
Cock is boiled almost to a Jelly, strain and press out the Liquor, put it up
into a Cask, and put about half a pint of new Ale-Yest to it, let it work a
Day, and the next you may broach it; but three or four Days is better, If this
prove too strong, as no doubt it will to some Pallats, mingle it as you please
with plain Ale in the drawing, or by putting two Gallons of it into three
Firkins of plain Ale in the Barrel. It is excellent to strengthen and restore
decayed Nature, and is drank with success in a Consumption.

Cock-Water: Take a Cock, pull him alive, then kill him and split him, take out
his Intrails, quarter him, and bruise his Bones; then put him into a Rose Water
Still with a Pottle of Sack, Currants and Raisins of the Sun stoned, and Figs
sliced, of each a pound; Dates stoned and cut in halfs half a pound, Rosemary
Flowers, wild Thyme, and Spear-mint, of each a handful; wild Marjoram, Bugloss,
Pimpernel, of each two handfuls, new red Cow's Milk two quarts: distill these
over a gentle Fire, putting into the receiver a quarter of a pound of brown
Sugar Candy beaten small, four grains of Ambergrease, and forty grains of
prepared Pearl, and half a Book of Leaf-Gold. Two spoonfuls of this taken
Morning and Night are good for a Consumption.

Codlin-Cream: Scald the Codlins till they are pretty soft, peel them, and
scrape off the Pulp from the Core, strain the Pulp through a thin
Linnen-Cloath, add to it Sugar well dissolved in Rose Water, and then mingle
these with Cream: adding, if you find occasion, more Sugar, Rose Water, and a
little Cinnamon powdered very fine, and serve it up.

Codlin-Tart: Take Codlins before they are quite ripe, pare them, cut them in
quarters, and take out the Cores: lay them in quarters in the Tart, with a thin
slice of Quince under each quarter, and the scrapings of Orange or Lemon Peel,
strew them over with Sugar and Rose Water after you have poured in the Syrup of
Quinces, or the Syrup of Pippins; scatter over them a little Cinnamon beaten
into fine Powder, close up the Lid, and bake them in a gentle Oven.

Cods-Head to Dress: Cut it fair and large, boil it in Water and Salt, add a
pint of Vinegar, so that all the Head and Appurtenances may be just covered,
put into the Mouth of it a quart of stewing Oisters, a bundle of sweet-Herbs,
and an Onion quartered; and when it is sufficiently boiled, set it a drying
over a Chafing Dish of Coals; then take Oister liquor, sliced Onion, and two or
three Anchoves, a quarter of a pint of White Wind, and a pound of sweet Butter,
shred the Herbs, mix them with the Oisters, and garnish it with them, adding
withal some slices of Lemon, grated Bread, and a little Parsley.

Colic and Stone: Drink of the distilled Water of Parsley, in White Wind, or
good Ale.

Colic and Stone: Take four long Pepper-Corns, two races of Ginger, both
bruised, two sprigs of Rosemary, the shells of two new-lay'd Eggs in fine
Powder, the inner Skin being taken away; boil them together for a quarter of an
Hour in a pint of White Wind; let it boil well, and brew them together with two
ounces of Loaf-Sugar, and drink it warm going to Bed.

Complexion to preserve; Take Water-Lily Flowers, Mint, Vine-Leaves, Violets,
Myrtle-Berries, or Seeds, Roses, white and yellow Saunders, Citron-peels, dried
Quinces, dried Prunes, of each a dram; Camphor and Saffron, of each a scruple;
make them up into Balls with Vinegar, wherein the best Bolus has been
dissolved: and it is not only of an excellent Scent; but dissolved in fumitory
Water, it causes a very charming Complexion, as well as preserves Beauty.

Confection to cause Sweat: Take Treacle and Mithridate, of each an ounce;
Pimpernel and Angelica, of each ten grains; Cardamoms and Camphire, of each
five grains; bruise and mix them well together, and make them up into a
Confection with ten grains of beaten Cinnamon, and of this take to the quantity
of a Hazle-Nut in Carduus, or Sorrel-water, first dissolving it well; and keep
close and warm in Bed, and you may continue sweating three or four Hours, if
the Distemper be violent; or a less while, as occasion requires: For want of
this Confection, if any sudden Cause requires sweating, you may take a dram of
Mithridate in Carduus, Treacle, or Sorrel-water, and keep your self warm for
some Hours afterward, lest the Pores by this means opening suddenly, suck in
the cold Air, and do more harm than good.

Confection against Pestilential Airs: Take white Diapalma, fine Bolus, sealed
Earth, Myrrh, Wormwood, Scabious, Pimpernel, Sorrel, Zedoary, and Rue, of each
a dram and a half; Tormentile, Aristolochy, and Bay Leaves, of each a dram;
five or six Walnut-Kernels peeled, twelve new Figs; Mithridate and Treacle, of
each an ounce, Camphor and Saffron of each a Scruple; Unicorns-Horn, Bone of a
Stag's Heart prepared, Pearl burnt, and Hartshorn, of each a dram and a half;
of either the Seeds of Citron peeled and bruised, half an ounce, Mace a dram:
make them into a Powder, and with Citron-Syrup mingle them to the thickness of
a Confection. Take half a dram Morning and Evening in a glass of Canary or
Muscadine, and it mainly strengthens and preserves Nature against corrupt and
pestilential Airs: For want of Wine, in Summer especially, yon may take it in
Rose or Mint-Water.

Confection to help the Sight: Take Eyebright and Fenel of each a Dram,
Cardamoms and Mace, of each a dram and a half; Seeds of Rue and Celandine, of
each a quarter of an ounce; Rosemary an ounce, Anniseed, Lignum-Aloes, and
Carraways, of each half an ounce: make of these finely beaten a Confection with
Honey or Sugar. This is called the Oculists Confection, and is very
strengthening to the Eyes and Brain; it restores decayed Sight. Take three or
four Drams in five or six spoonful of Wine.

Confection, Another, for the Sight: Take Celandine, dried Bettony, Eyebright,
Hyssop, Peneroyal, of each a dram; Fennel, Coriander prepared, Marjoram and
Basil-seeds, Cardamoms, Cinnamon, Ginger, Galingale, Nutmegs, Cloves, long
Pepper, Lignum-Aloes, Mastick, Spicknard, of each half a dram; preserved
Citron-peels three drams, Conserve of Borrage and Rosemary-Flowers, of each six
drams: make them up with Sugar and Fennel-water; or for want of Fennel-water,
Rose Water. Three drams at a time of this may be taken in White Wind, Rhenish,
or any other convenient Liquor.

Conserve of Citron-Flowers: Take their weight or more in white Sugar, dissolve
them in Rose Water, hang it over a gentle Fire, then take it off and boil it
almost to the consistence of a Syrup; then put in the Flowers, and boil it up
to a height, and mash them to a Conserve.

Consolidative-Plaister: Take the dried Leaves of Aristolochia, and the round
ones an ounce; Mastick, Frankincense and Myrrh, of each two drams; Aloes
Succotrina one dram, Litharge four scruples, red Led two scruples, Meal of
Lupins a dram: make them into fine Powder, and dissolve an ounce of Deers-suet,
Hog's Grease half an ounce, Oil of St. John's-wort six drams, Turpentine washed
half an ounce, yellow Wax three ounces; incorporate them over a gentle Fire to
the consistence of a Plaster. This is excellent for the Plague sore, or any
such poisonous or infectious Swelling.

Consumption: Take Coltsfoot, Succory, Endive, Borrage, Liverwort, of each six
handfuls, shred them all very small, put them in a gallon of New-Milk; let them
steep all night, and in the morning distill them; take of this Water, and Red
Rose Water, of each three spoonfuls: put this to half a pint of Red Cow's Milk,
sweeten it with Sugar of Roses, and so drink it warm at least three times every
day.

Consumption, a Broth: Take China-roots thin sliced two ounces, White and Red
Saunders of each three drams; put them into a large Pipkin, and pour upon it
four quarts of fair Water; cover it close, and let it stand to infuse in a warm
place, or in hot Water, for twenty-four hours; then put to it a good Pullet, or
two Chickens; let it boil, and scum it well; then put into it two handfuls of
Five-leav'd-grass, Maidenhair and Hart's-tongue of each half a handful; 20
Dates cut small, a little Mace, with the under-Crust of a Manchet: Let all
these boil together till two quarts be consumed; then take out the Pullets or
Chickens, and stamp them in a clean Stone-Mortar; then put it in the Broth
again, and let it boil half an hour longer; then strain it, and press out all
the Broth from the Pullet: If you please, you may sweeten it with Sugar Candy.
Drink of this Broth early in the Morning, and sleep after it, if you can; and
another Draught at Four in the Afternoon, and another at night when you go to
Rest.

Consumption, a Broth: Take two spoonfuls of French Barley, scald it in two
Waters, throw away the Waters; put the Barley into a Pipkin. with a Crag-end of
a Neck of Mutton, and a Knuckle of Veal; pour thereon a sufficient quantity of
fair Water, and let it boil, scumming it well; when it has boiled an hour, put
into it a Pullet, and let it boil an hour longer; then put in a large quantity
of Sorrel, Lettice, Purslain, Borrage and Bugloss, and let it boil an hour
more, viz. three hours in all. Before you put in the Herbs, season the Broth
with Salt, and a little Pepper and Cloves; then strain out the Broth, and drink
it pretty warm, three or four times every day.

Consumption, a Water: Take the Liver of a Calf, and the Lungs of a Fox; the
Herbs Lungwort, Liverwort, Sage, Rue, Hyssop, of each one handful; Elecampane,
the Root of Flag, of each half an ounce; Anniseeds, Carraway-seeds, Sweet
Fennel-seeds, of each half an ounce; Flowers of Borrage, of Bugloss, of each
two drams: cut them all very small, then infuse them for twenty-four hours in
two quarts of Old Mallaga; and Scabious, and Carduus Water, of each four
ounces; Hyssop-water two ounces; then distill it, and sweeten it with
Sugar Candy: Drink a little glass-full thereof two or three times a day. This
Water comforts and strengthens the Lungs and Liver, attenuates thick Phlegm,
and expels Wind out of the Stomach and Bowels.

Contagion of the Plague, to Expel: Take Rue, Wormwood, and Black-berry-tops,
of each half a handful; Celandine an handful and a half; put them into a glazed
earthen Pot, when bruised together, with a pint of strong Whitewine-vinegar:
stop the Pot close, then let them sees in Balneo Mariae till the third part be
consumed, and then strain it out, and keep it close stopped: Let the Party
infected drink two or three ounces of it, and sweat after it, without sleeping,
a considerable time, if it may possibly be prevented: it fortifies the Heart,
assisting Nature against Poisons, and infectious Airs.

Contrayerva-Stone: Take Oriental Pearls, the Root of Contrayerva, Coral and
White Amber prepared, of each a dram; prepared Crab's-eyes double the weight of
the rest. Take the Jelly of Vipers, and with it make the rest up into Balls,
and dry them, and keep them for your use.

This reduced by scraping into a Powder, is highly commended against the Plague
or Pestilence, or suchlike raging Diseases occasioned by Infection: It may be
taken in Wine, or Cordial-waters, from ten to twenty or thirty grains.

Coral, to Prepare: Take such a quantity as you think convenient, make it into
a fine Powder in a Porphyry or Steel Mortar; drop on it, by degrees, a little
Rose Water, and form it into Balls for use. After this manner, Crab's-eyes,
Pearl and Precious-stones are prepared, to make up Cordials compounded of them,
and other suitable Materials for the strengthening the Heart in Fevers, or
suchlike violent Diseases, and to restore the Decays of Nature.

Cordial, Excellent: Take two ounces of dried Red Gilliflowers, and put them
into a Pottle of Canary; add three ounces of fine Sugar in Powder, and half a
scruple of Ambergrease in the same manner; put them into a Stone-bottle, and
stop it close, often shaking it; and when it has stood ten Days, then pass it
through a Jelly-bag or Strainer; and putting it up for use, take two or three
spoonfuls of it at a time, and it will greatly strengthen the Heart, and
restore Health again, etc.

Cordial-Water: Take a gallon of Strawberries clean picked, put to them a pint
of Aquavitae, and let them stand four Days, and then pour off what is liquid,
and strain the rest into it; sweeten it with a little Sugar, and infuse a grain
of Musk or Ambergrease into it. This strengthens the Heart and Stomach: Half a
quartern in a Morning is a good Preservative against ill Airs and Infections.

Cosmetick-Water: Take fine White Sugar a pound, Roach-allom three ounces;
White Poppy-seed, Flower of Beans, Water Lillies, Violets, and great Housleek,
of each one handful; the Juice of four Lemons, and the grated Crumbs of two
White Penny Loaves; Goats Milk and White Wind, of each a quart: Bruise what is
to be bruised, and mix them together, putting them into a Glass Alembick.
Distill them in Balneo Mariae, and it will be an excellent Beautifyng Water to
preserve the Hands, Face, and other parts of the Body, clear, smooth, and of a
good Complexion.

Cough: Boil in two quarts of Posset Drink, a good handful of Moss that grows
upon Oaken Pales, and drink a good draught in the Morning, and take three
spoonfuls of good Sallad-oil after it: drink it afternoon and at night without
Oil, taking sometimes at Night one of Matthews's Pills with it.

Cough: Take Raisins of the Sun stoned, and Figs warned and sliced, of each two
ounces; unset-Hyssop a handful, Enula-campana dried and bruised two ounces,
Aniseeds bruised one ounce; boil all these in a gallon of small-Ale till half
is consumed; then strain it, and put to it Honey and Sweet-butter of each four
ounces, Saffron dried and powdered half a dram: boil them again gently till
they be well incorporated: Drink half a pint of this Liquor warned, both
Morning and Night. This Proportion made twice, has cured Coughs of long
continuance.

Coughs: Take three spoonfuls of the best Sallad-oil, three spoonfuls of
Vinegar, and Sugar Candy enough to sweeten it: Take it in the Morning fasting,
and at Night when going to rest.

Cough or Cold: Take a quart of Milk, and make a Posset thereof with a pint of
Ale; then strain it, and put two spoonfuls of beaten Aniseeds, two Pippins
sliced with the Pareings, and a stick of Licorice bruised, and a quarter of a
pound of Raisins stoned: let it boil gently for half an hour; then strain it
again, and drink a draught thereof warm, with a little piece of Fresh-butter in
it: Take it two or three times a day.

Cough or Cold: Take Fennel and Parsley-roots, four of each; wash and scrape
them, and take the Pith out of them: Maidenhair, Rosa-Solis-flower, of each
one handful; Licorice, Coriander and Aniseeds, one ounce; five Leaves of
Hart's-tongue; Lungwort and Liverwort, of each a handful; Raisins stoned half a
pound; shred the Herbs, and bruise the Seeds, and put them all into a Pottle of
Spring Water, in a Pipkin close covered: which set on hot Embers for a whole
Day together, till the Liquor be half consumed; then strain it without pressing
it, and sweeten it with Brown Sugar Candy, and drink thereof Morning and
Evening.

Cough or Cold: Take three ounces of Enula-campana, scrape off the Rind, and
cut it into thin slices; then boil it in three pints of Water till it comes to
a pint and an half; then put therein a pound of fine Sugar, and let it simper a
little on the fire; then take it off, and let it cool, and it will be a perfect
Syrup; of which take three spoonfuls both Morning and Evening.

Cough or Cold: Take one pound of fine Sugar; Licorice and Enula-campana,
finely powdered, of each four ounces; put them into a little earthen Pan, and
moisten them with two or three spoonfuls of unset Hyssop-water, distilled when
it is in its flower: then sprinkle into it a little powdered Pepper, and cast
them into a Pye-plate, with Flower strewed on it; and when it is cold, make
Lozenges of it.

Cough or Cold: Take Germander, Hyssop, Horehound, Maidenhair, Agrimony,
Bettony, Liverwort, Hart's-tongue, of each an handful; boil them in nine pints
of Water to the Consumption of six; then let it cool, and strain it: To the
Decoction put clarified Honey half a pound, fine Powder of Licorice five
ounces, Elecampane-roots in Powder three ounces; boil them up to the thickness
of an Electuary, and take of it about the quantity of a Nutmeg, at any time,
especially in the Morning fasting, and at Night when you go to rest.

Court-Ielly: Take three or four Calves-feet, and lay them in Water all night;
then scald off the Hair, slit them, and take out the long Bones: then take a
young Cockerel and dress him, after he has lain all night in Water; boil him
and the Feet together in four pints of White Wind, and as much fair Water,
until they be enough: then let it run thorough a Strainer into a Basin, or
other Vessel, letting it stand till it is cold: then with the point of a Knife
or Spoon take of the clearest from the settlings, and put it into a Pot with
three quarters of a pound of fine Sugar, and two ounces of Cinnamon scraped, an
ounce of Ginger, two sliced Nutmegs, and ten Cloves; boil them together; and
while they are boiling, put in the Whites of six Eggs, and a Branch of
Rosemary; strain it thorough a Jelly-bag, and so serve it up. This greatly
fortifies Nature, creates good and wholesome Blood, and restores decayed and
Consumptive Bodies.

Cramp: To make an Amulet for the Stomach, Take the Roots of Mechoacan, reduce
them to a Powder, and fill with this Powder a little square Bag of Sarsnet, or
some such slight stuff: Let it be about three inches square, and hang it by a
string about your Neck, so low that it may reach the Pit of the Stomach. Wear
it next the Skin.

Cream-Cheese: Take two quarts of Milk warm from the Cow, Almonds blanched half
a pound, beat the Almonds small; add a pint of Cream, and of Rose Water four
ounces; half a pound of fine Sugar, and a quarter of an ounce of beaten
Cinnamon, and as much Ginger; then put the Runnet to the Milk and Cream; and
when it is curdled, press out the Whey; and what remains beside, serve up in
Cream.

Cream of Eggs: Take a quart of Cream, heat it, and beat up the Whites of five
Eggs: keep them stirring; and when it boils, add two or three spoon-fulls of
Rose Water; and when it begins to thicken, take it off, let it cool, and put in
a little Salt and fine Sugar, and so serve it up.

Cream-Fool: Take two quarts of Cream, set them over a gentle fire in an
earthen Vessel; and when it simpers up, add the Yolks of twelve Eggs well
beaten up with three or four spoon-fuls of cold Cream; put them to the hot
Cream, and keep it continually stirring, to prevent burning-to. When it is
boiled well, take it off, and let it cool; then put to it half a gill of
Canary, stir it about, and pour it on Sippets cut very thin, and strewn over
with the Powder of Cinnamon and Sugar; then pour over it some Syrup of
Rasberries, and serve it up.

Cream-Tart: Take Manchet-bread, pare off the Crust, and grate the Crumb very
fine, mix it with sweet Cream and Butter, beat up the Yolks of a dozen Eggs
with Cream, adding four ounces of Sugar, boil them till they come to a
thickness; then make two leaves of fine Paste as thin as conveniently can be
raised; make them but shallow, and put the Materials into them, put on the Lid,
bake the Tart in a gently heated Oven; and when it is baked, strew fine Sugar
over it, and then serve it up.

Curd-Cakes: Take a pound of Curds, four Yolks of Eggs, and two of the Whites,
a little Flower to bind them together, Sugar, grated Nutmeg; mingle 'em well,
and bake them in Cakes, Icing them over with Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, or
drop them into a Drying Pan in hot Suet, as you like them best.

Currant-Cream: Take Red Currants, plump them up in warm Water; then mash them,
and strain them thorough a Cloth with hard pressing, put to them the Powder of
Cinnamon and Sugar, and a quart of new Cream, and serve them up.

Currants or Gooseberries, a Ielly: Take the Fruit indifferently ripe, press
out the Juice through a coarse Linen Cloth, clarify it, and add to each quart
a pound of Sugar clarified and boiled up to a Candy height; then boil them
together till a third part be consumed: put to them a pint of White Wind,
wherein an ounce of Cherry-tree or Plum-tree Gum has been dissolved, and it
will bring it into a curious Jelly.

Custards, to Make: The Paste being raised into what Form you please, dry it a
little in an Oven after it has been drawn, that the Moisture that is to be put
into them, by reason of their thinness, may not make them fall when put into a
hot Oven: then break eighteen Eggs into two quarts of Milk, yet half the Whites
must be omitted; and if made of Cream, no Whites at all, only the Yolks: then a
pound of Sugar, and a little Rose Water, beat them together till they are very
well mixed; and when you fill your Pans or Pastes, strain out the liquid part,
and leave the Curds and Crudities, if there be any behind, and bake them in an
Oven about three-quarters heated.

Custards, another way: Boil a quart of Cream, with Nutmegs, Mace and Cloves
bruised, of each two drams; the Yolks of ten Eggs, and the Whites of five,
beaten up with a little cold Cream; mix these together with a grain of Saffron
wet in White Wind or Canary, and strained thorough a Linen Cloth with a hard
pressure, upon often wetting, put these Ingredients into the Paste you have
provided for them, in what fashion or form you please: and if you find it
proves too thick, make it thinner with a little Milk and Rose Water, adding a
little refined. Sugar and powdered Cinnamon infused in White Wind: then bake
them in a gentle Oven, and serve them up on Plates, with Sweetmeats or Flowers
made in Paste.

Cyprus, the Bark of the Boots Prepared: Infuse the Bark, after you have
cleansed it in sharp Vinegar for the space of three Days; then dry it, and keep
it for use. And in this manner you may Prepare the Leaves of Spurge, Laurel,
Mezereon, or such like.

DAistes: This Herb is excellent for Wounds in the Breasts; the Oil of it,
Plaster, or Syrup, are extraordinary good, and requisite to be kept in all
Families. The great wild Daisie is a Wound-Herb, to be had in great regard,
often to be used in Drinks or Salves, either externally or internally. The
Juice of these, or the distilled Water, as also of single Daisies, greatly
tempers choleric Heats, refreshes the Liver, and other inward parts. A
Decoction of them much avails in the cure of Wounds in the hollowness of the
Breast or Stomach; as also for Ulcers and Pustles in the Mouth, Tongue, or
Privy-Parts. The Leaves bruised and applied to the Testicles, or any other hot
and swelled part, dissolves the Swelling, and temperates the Heat: being boiled
with Wall-wort and Agrimony, they greatly help in the Palsy, Gout or Sciatica,
dispelling Knobs or Kernels in any fleshy part. They help Bruises and Ails
occasioned by Falls, or Contusions by Blows. They are successfully used in case
of Ruptures; the Ointment of them cools and expedites the cure of inflamed
Wounds, especially when they happen in or near the Joints: the Juice may be
dropped into rheumatick sore Eyes.

Damascens, to Preserve: Gather your Damascens in dry Weather, suffering them
to be very ripe, or they will be but of an indifferent color; to every pound
of them put a spoonful of Rose Water, and a pound of Sugar finely beaten; then
put the Fruit in a large bottomed Pan, one by one, and set them on a
Chafing Dish of five Coals, but not at first too hot; then put in as much Sugar
and Rose Water as will melt it; and when the Pan is warm, cast on half your
Sugar, and let it be no hotter than you can endure your hand upon it,
forbearing to turn them till there be as much Syrup as will bear them up: then
turn them, and cast on the rest of the Sugar, not suffering them to sees when
you turn them, lest they break on both sides: when they are enough, take off
the Skins gently; and when they are cold, put them up in a Glass, and put into
them four or five Cloves, and as many little bits of Cinnamon, and so you may
Preserve any Plums. Rut to any sort of White Plums put neither Cloves nor
Cinnamon.

Dandelyon, or Denti de Leon, or Lions Tooth: Its Quality is Cleansing and
Opening; by which means it is effectual in removing the Obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen and Gall, and such Diseases as arise from them, as
Hypochondriacal Passions, and the Jaundice, etc. opening the Passage of Urine
in Men and Women of all Ages, cleansing Aposthumes, and the inward urinary
Passages, and then by a temperate and drying quality heals them: In this case,
you may boil the Leaves in White Wind; or shred small, put them into Broth. It
is good likewise in a Consumption, boiled in Broth, or the Juice of the Root
drank in Canary, or in the bad Disposition of the body called Cachexia: it
procures Rest and Sleep, when the Body is disordered by Agues. The distilled
Water is good in Pestilential Fevers, and to wash old Sores.

Dates: Of these there are diverse kinds; and as to their Physical Virtues, some
of them are dry and binding, as those of Egypt; others are soft, moist and
sweet, as those growing in Syria, Palestine and Jericho; the rest are a mean
between those two kinds, and all of them are hard in Digestion, and not very
good for the Head; because they many times cause the Headache: but the Powder
of them is successfully taken by such as spit Blood, or are troubled with the
Bloody Flux.

Deafness: Take Betony and Horehound, and stamp them in a Mortar; strain out
the Juice, and when the Party is in bed, and lying on one side, drop in three
or four drops into the Ear, and it will in a few days time restore the Hearing,
if the Party was not born Deaf, or some Violence has hot been offered to the
Organs of Hearing.

Decoction to Open the Body: Take twelve Prunes, Licorice, Aniseeds, Currants,
and Fenel-seeds, of each half an ounce; Flowers of Borrage and Bugloss, of each
a dram and an half: boil them bruised and shred in a quart of fair Water till
the third part be wasted; then strain it, and drink it at three several times
very hot, and walk about upon it. It loosens the Belly.

Decoction for Clysters: Take the Leaves of Violets, Mallows, Pellitory,
Mercury (the Herb so called) of each a handful; the Flowers of Camomil two
pugils, Sweet Fenel-seeds half an ounce, Linseed two drams; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water or Milk to a pint. These are the Herbs commonly
used in Clysters to cool and empty the Bowels in Stoppages, or hot Diseases;
but to make them work well, you must add brown Sugar.

Decoction Pectoral: Take Raisins of the Sun stoned an ounce; Jubebs and
Sebestenes, of each fifteen; six Dates, and eight fat Figs; Barley cleansed an
ounce, Licorice half an ounce; the Leaves of Maidenhair, Hyssop, Scabious, and
Coltsfoot, of each one handful; boil them in three pints of Spring Water to the
consumption of a third part. A quarter of a pint taken of it every Morning, is
excellent good for Heats, Pains, Swelling, or any Distemper or Diseases of the
Breast, and to help Expectorations.

Decoction of Senna: Take two ounces of the Leaves of Senna; of the Roots of
Polypody of the Oak, of each half an ounce; Raisins of the Sun stoned two
ounces, Ginger one dram, Sebestens and Damask-prunes, of each a dozen; of the
Flowers of Borrage, Red Roses, Violets, and Rosemary, of each two drams: boil
them in two quarts of Spring Water till half be consumed. This is an excellent
Purging Potion. The Dose is four ounces: If it be given to a strong Body, that
it may work the better, put to three ounces of it, an ounce of the Syrup of
Buckthorn or Roses solutive. This may be safely taken as often as any occasion
of Ilness or Indisposition requires it, or for prevention.

Decoction of Woods: Take Sarsaparilla-roots, split and cut small, four Ounces,
Guaiacum three ounces, the Bark of the Wood two ounces, Sassafras one ounce and
an half; the Roots of Burdocks and Butterbur, of each two ounces and an half;
Rhodium-wood and Yellow Saunders, of each an ounce; Carduus-seeds and
Juniper Berries, of each six drams; of the outer Bark of dried Citrons two
drams: infuse them all night in six quarts of fair Water, and then boil them to
the consumption of half the Liquid. This drank as a Diet-drink, is exceeding
good for those that are troubled with the French Disease, King's Evil, Rheums
or Coughs. It may be taken four times a day, for twenty or thirty days together.

Decoctum Amarum: This bitter Decoction, or Draught, is made in the following
manner: Take the Flowers of Camomil, the Tops of the Lesser Centaury, of each a
pugil, or very small handful; Gentian-root half a scruple; the Leaves of Senna
cleansed, and Carduus-Benedictus-seeds, of each one dram: boil them in a
sufficient quantity of clear Spring Water to four ounces. This strengthens the
Stomach, restores lost Appetite, and causes a good Digestion, You may take four
ounces of it for a Dose fasting, five or six Mornings together.

Defluxion on the Eyes: Take red Sage, and Rue, of each a handful: fine
Wheat Flour, a spoonful, the White of a new-lay'd Egg beaten to Water; mix
them very well, and spread them upon a very thin Leather, or black Silk, and
apply it to the Temples, it draws off the Rheum that afflicts the light.

Defluction, another: Take the Tops of Rosemary one dram, beat them up with one
or two ounces of rotten Pear-mains, or Pippins, spread them like a Cataplasm,
and lay them on the Eyes when you go to Bed. It asswages the Heat, and removes
the Pain, redness and Inflammation in the Eyes.

Devils-Bit: This Herb and Root being boiled in White Wind, makes a Decoction,
good against the Plague, and pestilential Airs, and Diseases occasioned
thereby, as Fevers, etc. It is an Antidote, and much fortifies against Poisons,
and helps the Pain caused by the stinging or biting of venomous Beasts; and
also for inward Bruises, Contusions by blows, and dissolves congealed or
clotted Blood. The Root and Herb bruised and applied Poultiswise, takes away
the black and blue Marks in the Skin. The Decoction of the Herb only mixed with
Honey of Roses, is with success applied to Tumors and Swellings in the Throat,
by often gargling the Mouth, and down the Throat, as convenience will permit:
It helps to procure Women's Courses, and eases all Pains of the Mother,
expels Wind in the Bowels: The Powder of the Root drunk in Wormwood-Water,
kills and drives out Worms: The Juice of the distilled Water is good to wash
green Wounds with, or old Sores: It cleanses the Body, being taken inwardly;
and the Seed decocted, takes away the Itch, cures old Sores, removes Freckles,
Pimples and Morphew, the Parts being bathed with it especially, and the sooner,
when a little Vitriol is dissolved in it.

Diacodium: To make it, Take the heads of white Poppys, neither the greatest
nor ripest, about twelve in number, Aqua-Coelestis a quart; boil them to the
consumption of a third part, and when it is strained, put thereto of the best
Sapa, that is, new Wine boiled to a third part, five ounces, of the best Honey
two ounces; boil them together, and in the end of the Decoction, put red Roses,
Leaves of Pomgranate, Acacia, Sumach, of each two drams, Seeds of Purslain,
white and red Coral, of each a dram.

This Syrup stays the Flux in the Belly, procures Sleep in over-watchful
Persons, helps Catarrhs, and violent Colds.

Diarrhoea: Mix fifteen Grains, or if the Distemper be but light, ten grains of
the Powder of Rhubarb, with half a dram of Diascordium, and take it either
going to Bed, or early in the Morning after the first Sleep. It stays
Loosnesses, and remedies Fluxes in the Belly.

Difficult Breathing: Take Castoreum dried to Powder two or three grains, at
the most but four; mix this with ten or twelve grains of Gascoin Powder, add a
little Syrup or Conserve of Roses, and being taken, wash it down with a mixture
of five drams of Penny royal-Water, and two drams at most of compound Water of
Briony.

Difficulty in Hearing: Take a chive out of a Root of Garlic, put a fine piece
of Thread or Silk thorough it at the end, that it may easily be plucked out
again; crush it a little between your Fingers, and anoint it over with the Oil
of Bitter Almonds, and so put it into the Cavity of the Ear, at going to bed;
and draw it out the next morning, stopping the Ear with Black Wool: But if the
first time succeed not, you must use it oftener.

Digestives: Take two ounces of Venice-Turpentine, incorporate it well with the
Yolk of an Egg, add to it at discretion, a little Spirit of Wine: With this
dress the Part Morning and Evening, laying on thicker if the Part be near some
Nerve, and the less where it is most fleshy, and it will soon bring it to a
head, or dispel the Tumor, Humors, or Pain contracted. It is used instead of
Basilicum.

Digestion to help: Take fine Sugar, powdered and sifted two ounces, sprinkle
on it the Spirit of Wormwood; then take a quarter of an ounce of
Gum-Tragacanth, and steep it all Night in Rose Water; then take some of this,
wet the Sugar with it, and beat them together till it come to a Past like
Dough: you may add a little Musk, and then make it up into Cakes the breadth of
a Groat. Lay them upon Plates, and dry them gently in an Oven, keeping them in
a dry place. Eat one or two of them in a Morning, and they will help Digestion.

Dill: This is a great strengthner of the Brain: The Decoction of it is good in
Pains and Swelling, eases Pains in the Belly, and is excellent for Women
troubled with Pains and Windiness: It stays the Hiccough, if you hold your Nose
over the steam, if boiled in Wine. The Seed is of greater virtue than the
Leaves, as being more powerful to digest vicious and raw Humors, and very
useful in Medicines appropriated to expel Wind: It dries up moist Ulcers, more
particularly in the Secret Part, Dill-oil resolves Humors and Imposthumes,
eases Pains, and procures Rest. The Herb or Seed in White Wind expels Winds,
and provokes the Terms.

Dill-Seed, etc. Its Virtues: Four drops of the Oil extracted from it, and half
an ounce of the Oil of sweet Almonds mingled together, and taken in warm Ale,
are excellent good for Hiccoughs when they proceed from cold Causes. The Seed
bruised and applied, discusses and ripens Tumors, disposes to Sleep, being
steeped in Wine. They take off the excessive Heat and Desire in Venery, stay
Vomiting. The tender Tops and Roots boiled with the Seeds in White Wind,
greatly provoke Urine, and are helpful in dissolving or bringing away the Stone
or Gravel.

Diseases from Obstructions: Drink every Morning, the first thing, a moderate
draught of your own Urin, newly made, whilst it is warm; and forbear eating any
thing after it, the space of an Hour or two.

Distilled-Vinegar: Put six quarts of strong White Wind Vinegar into an earthen
Pan, evaporate about a quart in a Bath, till the phlegmatic Part is removed:
pour what remains into a glass or earthen Cucurbit; distill it in a strong
Sand-heat, till nothing but substance like Honey remains at the bottom. It is
mixed likewise with Cordial Potions to resist putrefaction, an outwardly
applied, it asswageth Inflammations; half a ounce of it may be taken at a time
in any proper Liquor.

Diuretics: To make them, Peel off the inner Rind or Skin of an Egg-shel, beat
the Shell to a very fine powder, and take about a scruple of it at a time in a
spoonful of convenient Liquor.

It eases Pains and Obstructions; adding to it Powder of Crab's-eyes, it brings
away the Stone or Gravel.

Diuretick-Tablets: Take Stone-Parsly, Roots of Rest-harrow, Butchersbroom,
Fenel, Eringoes, of each half an ounce; the Seeds of Burdock and Grounsil, of
each two drams: boil these in two pints of the distilled Water of Radishes.
Boil the straining, according to Art, with half a pound of double refined
Sugar, into Tablets of two drams weight a-piece, and take one or two of them in
a Morning fasting for the Stone or Gravel, or Ulcerations in the Kidneys, or
Bladder.

Dock: It is a great cleanser of the Blood, and strengthener of the Liver when
they are afflicted with Choler. Some hold, that the yellow Dock-roots work most
effectually when they are so afflicted: All Docks have in them a kind of a
cooling, drying quality, but not all alike: The Sorrel being most cold, and the
Blood-wort most drying, the Seed of them stays the Lasks and Fluxes of diverse
kinds: The Roots boiled in Vingear, cure and take off the Itch or Scabs, (the
place being washed with the Concoction,) and the Breakings out of the Skin. The
distilled Water of the Herb and Roots have the same virtue, and more-especially
cleanse the Skin from Morphew, Spots, Freckles, or other discolorings: Any of
the several Docks being boiled with Meat, make it boil sooner; Bloodwort
especially is a very wholesome Pot-herb, though some, ignorant of its virtues,
refuse it, because it makes the Pottage blackish: but those are more nice than
wise.

Doctor Stephen's- Water: Take a gallon of Claret Wine, or Canary, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Grains of Paradise, Gallingal, Nutmegs, Aniseed, and Fenelseed, of each
three drams; Sage, Mint, red Roses, (Pellitory of the Wall, wild Marjoram,
Rosemary, wild Thyme, Camomil and Lavenden, of each a handful; bruise the
Spices small, cut and bruise the Herbs, and put all into the Wine in an
Alembick; and after it has stood twenty four Hours distill it.

Dodder, a Decoction: Take of Mirobolans half an ounce, Arabian Stoechas,
Raisins of the Sun stoned, Dodder of Thyme and Senna, of each an ounce,
Fumitory half an ounce, Hemp and Agrimony five drams; of the Roots of Polypody
of the Oak six drams, Turbith half an ounce, Whey two quarts; boil them all but
the Dodder, till the Liquid be consumed to a quart, then put in the Dodder, and
make it afterward just ready to boil, and so take it from the Fire, adding a
dram and a half of the Roots of black Hellebore, of Agarick half a dram, Sal
Gemma a dram and a half: When these have been infused about ten hours, press
out the Liquor, and take four ounces of it at a time, as an excellent Purge for
Madness or Melancholy.

Dodder of Thyme: It is effectual in Melancholy, and purges black or burnt
Choler; it takes away the Trembling of the Heart, swoonings or Faintings, all
Diseases and Griefs of the Spleen and Melancholy arising from the windiness of
the Hypochondria: It purges the Reins and Kidneys, it opens the Obstructions of
the Gall, and is hereby helpful in case of the Jaundice: It purges the Reins of
phlegmatic, and choleric Humors, and mixed with a little Wormseed is good in
Agues in Children.

Dog-Biting: If you are bitten by a mad Dog, or any other, Take the Roots of
Gentian one dram, Myrrh two drams, the Eyes or black Claws of Crabs burnt and
powdered, two drams; put them into White Wind, boil them, and straining out the
Decoction, drink a quarter of a pint at a time fasting, if you can, and very
warm, then wash the Wound with your own Urin, wherein Rue and Carduus have been
boiled, and so continue to do three or four Days successively, having first
laid some of the Powder dry on it, to draw out the putrefied Blood, and cleanse
it.

Dogs-Grass: It is gentle in its operation; being boiled in Whitewine or Ale,
it opens Obstructions of the Liver and Gall; it removes the Stoppage of Urin,
eases Gripings, and Pains of the Belly, and Inflammations. The Seeds work
powerfully in expelling Urin, and the Decoction of them stays Lasks and
Vomiting: The Roots boiled in Whitewine, are a general Remedy against all
Diseases occasioned by Stoppages.

Dogs-tooth: This is a kind of Grass so called, and has in it many excellent
Virtues in Physic: viz. The Decoction of it heals the Pains of the Belly,
helps difficulty in making Water, breaks the Stone, and brings away Gravel.
The Root bruised and applied, searches Wounds, and keeps them from
Inflammation. If the Decoction be put into a little Wine or Honey, and the
third part of so much Myrrh, Pepper and Frankincense, and be made to boil in
some Copper Vessel, it is a singular Remedy for the Toothache, and Rheums
falling into the Eyes. It is good for the Headache, being stamped and applied
to the Forehead. It likewise stenches Bleeding at the Nose. And the Seed
thereof greatly provokes Urine, and binds the Belly, and stays Vomiting,
etc.

Darnel: The Meal of it is good to be applied to Gangreens, or any the like
fretting and consuming Cancers, or corrupted Sores. It is excellent to cleanse
a Leprous Skin, or that which is affected with Ringworms or Morphew. It
dissolves Knots and Kernels, being used in quick Brimstone and Vinegar,
breaking those that will not easily dissolve. Being boiled with Pigeons-Dung
and Linseed in White Wind, it gives ease to the Sciatica. The Meal of it,
applied Poultis-wise, draws Splinters or Thorns out of the Flesh, as also
Splinters of broken Bones, so that they may be easily taken out. The Red Darnel
concocted in Red Wine, is excellent to stay Lasks, Fluxes, and bloody Issues;
and retains Urine that would otherwise pass away too suddenly.

Doves-foot Is a present Ease for the Wind-colick: it expels the Stone and
Gravel in the Kidneys; and boiled in White Wind, is good for Bruises, Hurts or
Wounds, stays Bleeding, dissolves and expels congealed Blood, cleanses old
Sores and Ulcers, being washed therewith, and also Fistula's. The green Herb
bruised and applied to green Wounds, asswageth the Pain, and allays the
Inflammation. The Decoction of it in Red Wine eases the Pains of the Gout, and
Aches in the Joints or Sinews: the Powder or Decoction of it taken for some
time together, is experienced to be very helpful in the Rupture or Burstenness
of Old or Young. This Herb, by some, is called Cranes-Bill.

Down, by some called Cotton-Thistle: The Leaves and Roots help (if the Juice
or Decoction of them be drank) Cricks and Pains in the Neck. Galen affirms,
That the Roots and Leaves are of a Healing Quality, and help against
Convulsions of the Nerves, whereby any Part of the Body is drawn up by some
Spasm, as the Rickets in Children, and the Shrinking of the Sinews in Old
People.

Dragons: The Water of this distilled, scoureth and cleanses the Body: being
applied outwardly, it takes away Freckles, Morphew and Sunburn, especially if
mixed with strong Vinegar: an Ointment of it is good in Wounds: it consumes the
offensive Flesh growing in the Nostrils, called Polypus, and Cancers. If dropped
into the Eye, it takes off Films. It is likewise good against the Pestilence.

Drink in Fevers: This is most excellent in hot and continued Fevers, viz. boil
a handful of the Leaves of Rue in fair Water till it taste very strong of it;
strain it, and add an ounce of beaten Licorice, and two ounces of Sugar; to
half a pint of this add ten drops of Spirit (not Oil) of Vitriol, and use it
for an ordinary Drink, and it will allay and drive out the Heat that occasions
the Fever.

Drink, another: Take half a pint of Small-beer, half an ounce of burnt
Hartshorn; powder it, and boil it a little in the Liquor, and it will fortify
the Heart, and expel the Heat.

Drink for Malignant Fevers: Take Spring Water a quart, give it a walm or two,
put into it an ounce of burnt Hartshorn; the Mixture being cold, put in three
ounces of Syrup made of the Juice of Lemons; make them well together, and take
a quarter of a pint both Morning and Evening.

Drink for Head-Pains: Take of the Leaves of Senna one ounce; Cinnamon,
Aniseeds, Fenel-seeds and Currants, of each a dram; Licorice two drams, Rosemary
and Sweet Marjoram a handful; shred and bruise these, and slice in three or
four new Figs, boil them in three pints of Water, with an ounce of Sugar, till
a third part be consumed; then strain it. The Dose to the weak is about two
ounces; but for stronger Bodies, from two to four ounces. It removes Pains, if
the Body be open or soluble, that the Vapors arise not too hastily to afflict
the Brain.

Note, If the He^d be pained, and the Body bound, endeavor, the first thing
you do, to open and render it soluble; otherwise the ascending of Vapors to
the Brain will so disturb the Head, and distemper it with Heat and Pain, that
Lightness of the Head, Phrensies, or raging Madness may happen to ensue, if not
timely prevented.

Drink correcting sharp Humors: Take an ounce of choice Barley, wash it very
clean, then boil it in a quart or more of Spring Water till the Grains begin to
burst; then strain the Decoction through a Cloth, and drink it for your
ordinary Drink at Meals.

Drink for the Scurvy: Take two handfuls of Water-trefoyl, and suffer it to
work in about eight gallons of Wort; use it for all or the greatest part of
your ordinary Drink, and it will purge out by gentle breathing Sweats the
noxious Humors that occasion the Distemper.

Drink for Wheezing: Take five pints of fair Water, half a pint of Honey, six
Figs, an ounce of Blue Currants, two drams of Licorice; boil them to the
consumption of a pint and drink a quarter of a pint of it both Morning and
Evening pretty hot. This brings away tough Phlegm, cures the phlegmatic and
slimy Cough, and remedies Shortness of Breath.

Dropsy: Take Smallage, Thyme, Hyssop, Watercresses, Pennyroyal, Nettle-tops,
of each a handful; Caraway-seeds, Calamint, Elecampane-roots, of each one
ounce; boil them in six Quarts of running Water until one half be consumed,
then strain it: put to this Liquor two quarts of Canary, add Licorice scraped
and bruised two ounces, Sweet-Fenel-seeds one ounce, Cumin-seeds, and
Alexander-seeds, of each two drams: boil all these together again for half an
hour, then strain it for use. Take nine spoonfuls of this Liquor in the Morning
fasting, and as much about three or four in the Afternoon, and continue it for
some time.

Dropsy: Take the Root of Gors (it grows upon Hills and Heaths, and is full
of Prickles and yellow Flowers) pare off the outward Bark, which throw away;
then scrape off the inner Rind, and fill a pint Bottle with it lightly; then
fill it up with Rhenish or White Wind; let it stand to infuse all night, the
next morning drink a glass-ful of it, and continue it till you are cured.

Dropsy: Take Rue, Camomil, Melilot, Calamint, of each two ounces; beat them
small, and boil them in Wine, and Oil of Dill; then add of Gummi Carana, as
much as suffices to make a Plaster.

Dropwort-Root, its Virtue: A Decoction of it provokes Urin and expels Gravel,
cures the Heat of Urin, and removes the difficulty in making it. The Juice of
the Root, and the Powder, are held to be successful in the Falling Sickness.
The Dose is a dram of the Powder or Juice of the Root in Wine. It Is excellent
in stopping Fluxes. It heals the Ruptures of the Belly, and cures the
Bloody Flux.

Ducks-Meat: It swims on the Tops of Ponds, mostly in Summertime; it helps
Inflammations and St. Anthony's-Fire, as also the Gout, when applied
Poultis-wise with Barley-meal. The distilled Water of it is good against
Inflammations inwardly, and Pestilential Fevers. It removes the Redness of
Sore-eyes, and the Swellings of the Breasts of Women, if applied before they be
grown too large. The Herb fresh, eases the Pains of the Head, if caused by
Hear, or hot Inflammations.

Dullness of Hearing: Take the Juice of Red Onions, and drop it into the Ears,
stopping them with Cotton-wool; or the Juice of Briony-root, but not too often,
nor too much at a time; and the Obstructions, by this means, being opened and
removed, the Hearing will be recovered and removed, the Hearing will be
recovered and restored

Dysentery: for this Disease, which many times proves very dangerous, Take the
Dung of a Pig, dry it very well, and burn it till it becomes gray, in Ashes;
put about half a dram of it into a spoonful of Vinegar, and drink it both
Morning and Evening, and it will remove this Distemper.

Dysentery: To remove this, and other sharp Fluxes, Take the Herbs and Leaves
of Fleabane, dry it by degrees, till it be reduceable to a Powder; take about a
dram of it twice or thrice a day in White Wind, or you may take it rolled up in
Conserve of Roses.

EArs Imposthumated: If you perceive any Imposthume breeding in the Ears; To
ripen it, Take fine Wheat Flour an ounce and an half, Fenegreek-seed,
Eels-grease, Litharge of Gold, Ceruse and Frankincense, of each one dram; mix
them together, and make a Plaster of them; lay it all over the Ear, having
first dropped in some Oil of Myrrh: when it is ready to break, take Sarcocolla,
Aloes, Dragons-blood, Myrrh and Frankincense, the Dross of Iron and
Verdegrease, of each half a dram; mix them with Vinegar to a thinness, dip a
Taint therein, and put it into the Ear.

Earthworms Prepared: To do this, that they may be kept for any use, you must
only slit them down the middle, wash them well in White Wind or
Whitewine-Vinegar; then dry them in the Sun, and put them up into dry Boxes to
make Powders, or for other Uses upon occasion.

Ebony: The Decoction of it, when rasp'd or made thin in Shavings, is approved
in Convulsions, if it be drank sweetened with Honey.

Eels to Collar: Take a large silver Eel, take out the Backbone, dry and
season it after its having been washed, with beaten Nutmeg and Salt, then cut
off the Head, and roll in the Tail, being seasoned in the sides; bind it up
close and straight in a fine white Cloth, then put it into a fit Pipkin, with
as much fair Water and Whitewine, as will cover it upward of two inches, of
each a like quantity: then season it with some Salt, and the Eel being put into
the boiling Liquor when it is boiled pretty tender, take it up; and when the
Liquor is almost cool, put to it a little Vinegar, and make a souce of it,
adding some Blades of Mace, and a few Bay Leaves and Tops of Rosemary; and when
you intend to use it, take it out of the Cloth, pare it, and dish it up: place
a Sprig of Rosemary in the middle of it, and boil up the Liquor it was boiled
in to a Jelly, by adding a little Isinglass, and so serve it to the Table.

Eels, Court-fashion, to Bake: Cut your Eels, being warned, stripped, and well
cleaned, into convenient lengths, have a convenient earthen Pot, or Vessel,
that being put in, they may stand end-ways; and put to them a spoonful or two
of Water, with some chopped Sage, Marjoram, Thyme and Rose-mary-Tops, with a
little Pepper, Garlic, or Shalors, small bruised; and when they are enough,
beat up some Butter with Claret, Whitewine, and the Liquor that comes from
them, and laying them in order in a fair Dish, serve them up.

Eels another way to Dress: Having drawn them and washed them in clean Water,
rub them in Pepper and Salt finely beaten; cut them athwart on both sides a
good depth, then crossways, and so cut them thorough in such pieces as you
think convenient: then having a pint of Whitewine-Vinegar pretty well heated in
a Dish, put them to it, and sprinkle a little Salt; and then having a Pot over
the Fire full of fair Water, put more to your Eels, some sliced Onion, a few
Cloves and Mace; and so place your Dish, or other Vessel wherein they are, that
the boiling Water in the Pot may surround it, but not come into it; and when by
that heat, with often turning them, they are sufficiently enough, take them out
and drain them from the liquor; and when they are cold, take a pint of
White Wind, boil it up with Saffron to color it; then take out some of the
liquor, or put it into an earthen Pan, take out the Onions, and all the Herbs,
suffering the Cloves and Mace to remain, and so serve them up in the Liquor,
adding some beaten Butter and Powder of Cinnamon or Ginger; and this way they
are accounted the best of any boiled.

Eels Hash'd: Take two or three large Eels, bone them: when they are drawn and
washed, mince them; then season then with some Cloves and Mace, and put to them
Stewing-Oysters, an Onion cut in four quarters, and a little White Wind: stew
them with these and an Anchove or two on a gentle fire: then serve them up on
fine carved Sippets, the Dish being garnished with some slices of Oranges; run
them over with beaten butter, the Yolk of an Egg or two, grated Nutmeg, and the
Juice of an Orange.

Eel-Pye, to Season: Take about eight silver Eels of a middle size, cut them
into convenient lengths; beat half an ounce of Cloves and Mace, scrape two
Nutmegs, and put in a quarter of an ounce of Pepper: then take a quarter of
whole Mace, break it into little sprigs, strew it on with Salt; and add two
pound of Butter, placing it under and above the Eels in thin slices.

Eel, to Roast: Take a large silver Eel, draw off the Skin, and cleanse it
well: then take a handful of Thyme, Winter-savory, Marjoram, Rosemary and Sage;
shred them, and bruise them small; incorporate them with about half a pound of
Sweet-Butter, and a little grated Nutmeg and Mace; stuff it into the Eels
Belly, sow it up lightly, and then draw the Skin over him: prick it full of
holes, to prevent breaking, so tie it to a Spit and roast it; saving what comes
from it, to be beaten up with some Butter and Claret for the Sauce.

Eels Spitchcockt or Broiled: Take a pretty large Eel, split it down the Back,
and joint the Bone, but leave on the Skin, and cut it into four pieces of equal
bigness; salt and baste them with Butter and Vinegar, broil them on a gentle
fire; and being well broiled, serve them up with beaten Butter and Juice of
Lemons, and garnished with Sprigs of Rosemary.

Eels Stewed: Having drawn and washed them, place them round or in pieces; then
with a quart of Whitewine, a pint and a half of Wine-Vinegar, and a quart of
Water; some Salt, and a handful of Rosemary and Thyme bound hard up, letting
them boil before you put in the Eels; let them take a walm or two, and so put
to them some whole Pepper, and a few blades of large Mace; and being boiled,
dish them with some of the Broth, beat up thick with Butter: place Sip-pets,
sliced Lemon, Barberries and Grapes about the Dish, and so serve them up.

Eels Stewed: To do this, You must cut the Eels in pieces at moderate lengths,
and put them into your Stew-pans, with White Wind, Butter, Parsley shred, and
some Capers; a few Chippings of Bread, to allay the Sauce; and when all is
enough, serve it up: and if you please, you may make a white Sauce to it with
Whites of Eggs and Verjuice, or Whits-wine and Vinegar.

Eels, another way: Cut two or three Eels into pieces of a convenient length,
set them endwise in an Earthen-Pot, and put in a spoonful or two of Water; and
to them put some Sage, Thyme and Winter-savory chopped small, season them with
Salt and Pepper, and so set them in the Oven, and serve them up with a Sauce of
Butter, Mace, Nutmeg, Verjuice, and the Herbs baked with them.

Eglantine: The Virtues of the Flowers are Astringent, for which reason they
are used with Success in Fluxes of the Womb: the Fruit is in high esteem for
its Lithontriptick Virtue; the Heads being ripe, afford a Pulp of a very
pleasant sharp Taste, which some reckon good in Fevers, or to sharpen and
restore lost Appetites. The Conserve of it is good against Spitting of Blood,
and the Scurvy. The Root boiled in White Wind, and inwardly and outwardly
applied, heals the Bitings of Mad Dogs. The Ashes of it cure the Heat of Urine,
and kill Worms.

Take the Conserve of Hips and Wood Sorrel, of each one ounce; Cream of Tartar
a dram, Conserve of Barberries half an ounce; and with the Juice of Lemons and
fine Sugar make these into an Electuary, and thrice a Day take the quantity of
a small Nut. It is excellent in allaying the Heat of Fevers, and Cooling the
Blood.

Eggs Fricased: Take twelve Eggs, Cream, Sugar, Nutmeg, Mace and Rose Water;
then pare and take out the Cores of some good Apples, slice them very thin into
the Pan, and fry them in Sweet-Butter; and when they are enough, take them up,
and fry half the Eggs and Cream with more Sweet-Butter; then put in the rest of
the Eggs and Cream, and lay the Apples round the Pan and the Eggs that were
first fried uppermost. Dish them on Plates, and put to them the Juice of
Oranges and Sugar.

Eggs to Poach: To do these the best and surest way, Take a dozen of new-lay'd
Eggs, and the Flesh of four Partridges, or other Fowls; mince the Flesh small,
and season it with a few beaten Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace; adding a Ladle-ful of
the Gravy of Mutton, wherein two or three Anchovies are dissolved: then set it
a stewing over a gentle fire, and when it is half stewed, and boiling up, break
in your Eggs one by one, putting away the better half of the Whites; make a
place in your Dish of Meat, and therein put the Yolks of the Eggs round in
order among it; so set them to stew till your Eggs be enough, taking care they
harden not; then grate in a little Nutmeg, and the Juice of a couple of
Oranges, but none of the Seeds; wipe the sides of the Dish, and garnish it with
slices of Oranges, and Lemons, and a little Pepper, Sugar and Salt.

Eggs Quelquechose: Break about forty Eggs, and beat them together with some
Salt; fry them at four times on one side; and before you take them out of the
Pan, make a Compound or Composition of hard Eggs; boil some Sweet-Herbs finely
shred with some Currants: Then put them to the Eggs, and strew them over with
beaten Cinnamon, Almond-paste, Juice of Oranges and Sugar; and dividing them,
roll them up like Wafers, and put them in a Dish with Juice of Lemons, and
white Sugar: then warm and Ice them over in an Oven with beaten Butter and fine
Sugar, and serve them up as a Dish very admirable and rare.

Eggs the Spanish way: Take about twenty new-lay'd Eggs, break, and mix them
with a quarter of a pint of Canary, and a quarter of a pound of fine Sugar,
some grated Nutmeg, and Salt; beat them together with the Juice of an Orange,
set them over a gentle fire, keep them stirring till they begin to thicken;
serve them up in a Dish with toasted Manchet and scraped Sugar; sprinkle them
over with Orange-juice, Comfits or sweet Wine, having dipped the Toasts before
you lay them in Juice of Oranges, Claret, or White Wind.

Electuarium Diacarthamum: Take of the Spices of Diatragacanth frigid half an
ounce, of the Pulp of Preserved Quinces one ounce, of the Marrow of the Seeds
of Bastard-saffron half an ounce, white Ginger two drams, Diagrydium powdered
apart three drams, of white Turbith six drams, Manna two ounces; Solutive
Honey of Roses strained, and Sugar Candy, of each an ounce; of Hermodactyls
half an ounce, white Sugar boiled to the Consistence of solid Electuary ten
ounces and an half: and when it is hot, mix with it the Honey of Manna and Pulp
of Quinces; then add the Powders, and make it up into solid Electuary, to be
formed into Tablers. It is excellent good for Pains in the Stomach, and
comfort the Heart and Brain.

Electuarium Diaprunum: It Is so called from the Plums of which it is partly
made, and is made of Damascens after the following manner: Take of those that
are large, ripe and fresh, about a quart; let them boil in a sufficient
quantity of Water till you can easily pulp them thorough a Sieve; then boil an
ounce of Violet-flowers fresh or dried, in the same Liquor, and strain it, and
add to it two pound of Sugar, boiled up to a Syrup; then add the Pulp
above-named, and of the Pulp of Cassia and Tamarinds strained and dissolved in
a small quantity of the Liquor, of each an ounce: boil it up again, stir it
continually, and add the following Powders, viz. Saunders, White and Red, and
Rhubarb, of each three drams; Red Roses, Violets, the Seeds of Purslain,
Endive, Barberries, Gum Tragacanth, and the Juice of Licorice, of each two
drams; of the great Cold Seeds one dram. These being made into an Electuary,
are exceeding good in Fevers, as being Cold and Moist.

Electuary of Citron Solutide: Take Citron-peel candied, of the Conserve of the
Flowers of Bugloss, of Species of Diatragacanth frigid, and Diagrydium, of each
half an ounce; of Turbith five drams; Ginger half a dram; of the Leaves of
Senna six drams; and of the Seeds of sweet Fenel a dram; of white Sugar
dissolved in Rose Water, and boiled up to a sufficiency, ten ounces: beat in a
Brass Mortar the Turbith and Ginger, being first cut small: the Senna, Fenel
and Diagrydium must be powdered apart, and mixed with a little of the
Diatragacanth: the Bark of the Citron must be pounded in a Marble Mortar; then
add the Conserves pulped thorough a fine Sieve, and boiled a little in the
Sugar dissolved: take it off the fire, and when it is just warm, put in the
Powders, and lastly the Diagrydium and Diatragacanth: of this Paste make
Tablets, which are good against Pestilential Distempers, or for such as have
been bit by any venomous Creatures.

Electuary of Lawrel-Berries: Take ten drams of the Powder of dried Rue; the
Seeds of Bishops-weed, Cumin and Lovage, Caraways, Nigellum, wild Marjoram,
wild Carrots, Parsley, Bitter Almonds, Round and Long Pepper, Horse Mint,
Lawrel-Berries and Castor, of each two drams; Sagapenum half an ounce,
Clarified Honey a pound and an half, Opopanax three drams: these things being
well beaten, bruised and mixed together, add the Gums, toward the end,
dissolved in White Wind, and make them up into an Electuary.

A dram of it may be taken at any time. It is good for the Colic, expels Wind,
and strengthens the Stomach; and when, upon extraordinary Occasions, it is
given in Clysters, near half an ounce of it may be mingled with the other
Ingredients.

Electuary Lenitide: Take of Raisins stoned; Polypody of the Oak, Oriental
Senna, of each two ounces; Mercury a handful and an half; Jubebs and
Sebestenes, of each twenty five; Maidenhair, Violets and Barley cleansed, of
each a handful; Damask Prunes and Tamarinds, of each six drams; Licorice half
an ounce: boil them in five quarts of Water to the consumption of a third part:
then strain them out hard in part of the Liquor dissolved, of the Pulp of
Cassia and Tamarinds, fresh Prunes, Violets and Sugar, of each six ounces: and
in the other part of the Liquor dissolve two pound of fine Sugar; then add an
ounce and an half of the Powder of Senna, and two drams of the Powder of
Aniseeds, for every pound of the Electuary, and so make it up according to Art.
This is an excellent Electuary for Cooling and Purging gently. The Dose is from
an ounce to an ounce and an half.

Electuary for Obstructions: Take Cinnamon, Mace, the Roots of Asarabacca,
Spikenard, Mastick and Saffron, of each six drams; unwash'd Aloes twelve ounces
and an half, clarified Honey a pound and three ounces; make these up into an
Electuary. It powerfully opens Obstructions, yet purges but gently, and
greatly cleanses the Stomach. The Dose is from two to three drams.

Electuary Purging: Take Rhubarb an ounce, bring it into Powder; then in a
Marble or Glass Mortar put about half a pound of Currants clean picked and
washed, and bruised as small as may be, strewing and incorporating the Powder
of Rhubarb with them; and of it take in the Morning fasting as much as an
ordinary Walnut. This is good for Pains and Gripes, and especially Worms in
Children.

Electuary of Sassafras: Take of this fragrant Wood two ounces, three pints of
Spring Water; boil them to the consumption of a third part, adding toward the
end, half an ounce of Cinnamon bruised; then place two pound of Sugar in an
earthen Pan, and strain out the Liquor to it; and being well mixed, boil it up
into a Syrup, adding two drams more of beaten Cinnamon, half a scruple of Powder
of Nutmeg, Ambergrise thirty two grains, Musk three grains, ten beaten Leaves
of Gold, and so make it up into an Electuary with four drops of the Spirit of
Vitriol.

This is a singular good Drying Medicine, and therefore to be taken in
Rheumatisms, or Moist Diseases, and consequently in Defluxions of Rheums and
the Dropsy. A dram is sufficient for a Dose in some Cordial-water that is
healing or chearing the Noble Parts.

Elixir for the Head: Take Misleto that grows on the Oak, Piony-roots, and the
bigger Valerian, of each an ounce and an half; Laurel, Juniper-berry, and
Piony-seeds, of each an ounce: Cinnamon, Mace and Cubebs, of each three drams;
Flowers of Rosemary, and Lavender, of each a handful: bruise what is to be so
bruised, and macerate them together twenty four hours in the Water of Black
Cherries and Lily of the Valleys, and Spirit of Wine rectified, of each twenty
four ounces: then having distilled them, dissolve in the Water a pound of the
best white Sugar, and a dram of the Tincture of Ambergrise: keep it close
stopped.

Elixir Proprietatis: The new way to do this, is to take Saffron, Myrrh and
Aloes, of each half an ounce; the rectified Spirit of Wine very near three
quarters of a pint; Spirit of Sulphur per campanam, half an ounce: draw, in the
first place, a Tincture from the Saffron into the Spirit of Wine, by infusing
or digesting it six or seven Days: then add grossly bruised Aloes and Myrrh,
and the Spirit of Sulphur; digest them in a long Viol well stopped for the
space of thirty Days, but keep it frequently shaking; then you will find a
black Tincture on the faeces, pour that off, and let it stand still for twelve
hours, and so decant it till you find no faeces at the bottom. The Dose is
fifteen or twenty drops in a Morning, in a glass of Wine, or some other
convenient Liquor.

This Elixir is Stomachick, Anodyne, Alexipharmick, and Uterine. It has great
success in Tertian Agues, and may be safely given to all Ages and
Constitutions. It Alters, Evacuates and Strengthens.

Elixir Proprietatis. Vid. Antiscorbutick Elixir Proprietatis.

Elixir Salutis: Take of the Leaves of Senna, four ounces; Guajacum and the
Roots of Elecampane dried, of the Seeds of Anise, Caraways and Coriander, of
each two ounces; of Licorice two ounces; Raisins of the Sun stoned half a
pound: infuse them cold in three quarts of Aqua-vitae, or some other good
Spirit of the like Nature, not too strong, for the space of four Days: draw it
off, and bottle it up. If it proves an excellent Cordial, you may, if you would
have it somewhat more Purging, put a few slices of Rhubarb into it. It is good
in the Colic, or any Pains of the Belly; also it cleanses the Stomach, and
dissolves the Stone in the Bladder or Kidneys. It brings away the Gravel and
Stone. Two or three spoonfuls are a sufficient Dose for an ordinary
Constitution; and so more or less, as it can be borne.

Elm: The Leaves, Branches and Bark of this Tree are Astringent. The Leaves
bruised with Vinegar, stop Bleeding; and applied to fresh Wounds, facilitate
their Cure; as also boiled in Vinegar very strong, they much avail in the
Leprosy. The Bark of the younger Sprigs boiled in Spring Water almost to the
Consistence of a Syrup, and a third part of Aqua-vitae mixed with it, is an
excellent Remedy for the Gout in the Hip, if the Part affected with it be
fomented before the Fire. The Water in the Bladders on the Leaves, clears the
Skin, and mends the Complexion. Clothes being wet in this Water, and applied,
helps Burstenness in Children, the Bowels being at the same time kept up with a
Truss.

Take of the Bark of Elm six drams, Red Roses half a handful, Raisins of the
Sun stoned twenty: boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to a pint and an
half; dissolve in it Honey of Roses, and simple Oxymel, of each two ounces. It
is an excellent Gargarisme for Inflammations, and in hot Diseases that dry and
parch the Mouth or Throat, or in such as afflict them with too much Phlegm and
slimy Matter.

Emplaster of Bettony: Take green Bettony, Burnet, Sage, Milfoil, Agrimony,
Peneroyal, and the lesser Centaury, great Comfrey and Clary, of each six
ounces; Mastick and Frankincense, of each three drams; Orris and round
Bithwort, of each six drams; white Beeswax, and clarified Turpentine, of each
eight ounces; Rosin of the Pine six ounces; Gum-Elemy, and Oil of Firr, of each
two ounces; Whitewine three pints: beat the Herbs very well, and set them seven
or eight Days to infuse in Whitewine; stir them well, then boil them, and
strain out the Wine: boil it with a gentle Fire to the consumption of a third
part; add the Oil of Firr, next the Wax melted, and so the Rosin and Gum, and
the Turpentine; and having boiled them a little, and removed them from the
Fire, cool them by degrees; then put to all these, well mixed, the Powders of
Orris, and Bithwort, and make 'em into an Emplaster.

This is exceeding strengthening and restoring. It is applied with great
success to fractured or broken Bones, al so to strengthen weak Joints. and heal
Sprains or Bruises of the Sinews; small Emplasters of it laid to the Temples
and Nape of the Neck, draw Rheums away from the Eyes, and also ease Pains in
the Head.

Emplastrum Caesaris: This is called Caesar's Plaster, for the strength it
gives to those that are weakened with Sickness or Hurts. To make it, Take red
Roses an ounce and a half, the Roots of Bithwort, Cyprus Nuts, the several
sorts of Saunders, Mint, Corianderseed, Dragrons-Blood, Hypocistis, Acacia,
seal'd-Earth, bole and red Coral powdered, of each two drams; Turpentine that
has been infused in Plantain-water four ounces, Oil of Roses three ounces,
white Wax twelve ounces, Rosin of the Pine ten ounces, Stone-pitch six ounces,
Plantane, Orpin, and Housleek-Juices, of each an ounce. To the Rosin, Wax, and
Pitch melted together, add the Turpentine and Oil, then the Hypocistis and
Acacia dissolved in the Juices, and then the Powders; and so over a gentle Fire
make them into an Emplaster, or Cerecloath.

It is very astringent, and therefore strengthens the Back and all other Parts
of the Body, removes Pains, and is a most excellent Remedy for the
over-straining of the Sinews.

Endive-Water: This is an excellent cooling Water to mix with cooling Syrups,
and to give in Fevers and hot Diseases: It allays Inflammations and the Heat of
the Blood. The Herb eaten in Sallads raw or boiled, resists Choler. It prevents
Heat breaking out, that deforms the Body with Pimples and Redness, and frequent
flushings of the Face.

Epilepsie: Children, it is observed, are many times troubled with the
Falling Sickness, either during the first Month after a Looseness, (in which
case, Diacodium, to the quantity of a Pepper-Corn dissolved in Saxifrage-water,
or the Woman's Milk, is given with success,) or about the time of their
breeding Teeth from the 7th. to the 10th. Month; it is accompanied with a
Cough, or, what is worse, Vomiting and Looseness, voiding green Excrements: In
this case apply a blistering Plaster, as soon as may be to the hinder Part of
the Neck.

Take of Langius's Epileptick Water three drams, Liquid Laudanum two drops, or
more, if the Child be strong; Syrup of Peony one dram; mix them for a Draught,
which must be presently given: or, Take of the Water of Rue three ounces,
Langius's Epileptick Water, the Compound of Briony-Water, of each an ounce;
Syrup of Gilliflowers half an ounce. Of these well mixed together make a
Cordial or Julep, and give a spoonful every Hour, if the forementioned Draught
has not discussed the Paroxysm.

Eringoes, otherways called Sea-Holly: It forces Urin and the Courses, expels
VVind, helps the Jaundice, and eases the Gripes in the Belly and Stomach. The
Roots candied are reckoned amongst Sweetmeats as very wholesome and pleasant,
and are good Preservatives against the Plague, contagious Fevers, and
infectious Airs: those that have the Consumption would do well to eat them
often. The Roots candied, cure the Gonorrhea, and prove advantageous in
contributing to the Cure of the French Pox. Some hold that being stamped and
applied to the Bellies of Women, they prevent Abortion.

Erysipelas: This is a very strange Distemper, for all Parts of the Body, with
the Face especially, are swollen red, and full of Pains, overspread with little
thick Pimples, which sometimes rise into Blisters, and the Eyes seem to be
closed with the Swellings, Coldness, Shivering, and the like. In this case,
open a Vein in the Arm, let not the quantity taken away exceed nine or ten
ounces. Then take of Lily-roots and Marshmallow-roots, of each an ounce;
Camomil-flowers, Elder an Base Mullein, Mellilot, the Tops of St. John's-wort,
an the lesser Centaury, of each a handful; Fenugreekseed and Linseed of each
half an ounce; boil them to three pound in a quantity of Water sufficient to do
it; strain out the Liquor, and when you design it for use, add two ounces of
the Spirit of Wine, and in this Water so strained out, dip pieces of new
Flannel, and having squeezed them, apply them hot, often anointing the Parts so
grieved after fomentation, with the fllowing Direction.

Take half a pint of the Spirit of Wine, Treacle two ounces, Long-pepper and
Cloves in Powder, of each two drams; make these, by mixture and infusion, as
strong as may be; and being strained, dip Cap-paper into the Liquid so
strained, and apply it wet and warm to the afflicted Part; and for the more
speedy Remedy after letting Blood, the Party may take a Clyster of Milk with
Syrup of Violets, and cooling Emulsions and Juleps.

Erysipelas: An experienced Remedy for this, is, the Blood of a Hare, best in
March, but at other times may serve: Take it hot if you can, and anoint the
Place infected with it; otherwise apply a Linnen-Rag, that has, though a good
while since, thoroughly imbibed the fresh Blood, and dried in the Air; but if it
be too hard or stiff, soften it with a little fair Water, the cold taken off.

Evil: for this, commonly called the King's Evil, Take Cuttlebone uncalcined,
scrape off the outside, or that which is colored, dry the white part, and beat
it to Powder very fine, and take half a dram in a spoonful of Aqua Malvae.

Excoriation: This is when the true Cutis is affected; then Take Prunella,
called in English Self-heal, bruise it well in a Mortar of glass or stone, and
apply it to the Part afflicted, renewing it but seldom, and sometimes not at
all.

Excoriations: Melt Mutton-Suet of the Kidneys, freed from Fibers or Strings,
two ounces; add by little and little sixteen or eighteen drops, though in small
Matters eight or ten may serve, of Oil of Turpentine; spread the Mixture on a
Linnen-Cloath, and apply it to the Part afflicted by binding, or otherwise.

Expectoration: This is designed to ripen Coughs; and dissolve Phlegm. To do
it, Take hard Onions, fry them with sweet Butter, or first with a little fair
Water, to take away their Taste; then take them out of the Pan and boil them
with new Milk till it be well impregnated with them, and they become tender:
Mash them together, and for your better Accommodation, you may scrape Among
them some Sugar Candy, it matters not whether white or brown, and put it up in
a Gally pot, taking Night and Morning two or three spoonfuls.

Eyes Blistered: Take Saffron half a dram, the Juice of Sloes a scruple; mix
them with Rose Water, and beat them into as fine a thinness as you can with the
White of an Egg, and drop a little of it into the Eyes, and anoint the Eyelids
with it when you go to Bed.

Eye bright: It chiefly helps and strengthens the Sight, and cures such
Diseases as are incident to the Eyes. The distilled Water wonderfully
strengthens the Sight, and the Juice is very good on the like account. Diverse
knowing Oculists order the Parties, whose Sights are defective, to use this
Herb in Sallads, and in their Broths; and Drink.

Eye Bruised: Take Bettony and Eyebright Water, of each a spoonful; drop
three or four drops of clarified Honey into it, then shake them together, dip a
fine Rag or Cotton into it, and lay it to the Part grieved.

Eyes Burnt or Scalded: Take Mucilages of Quince-seed, Fleawort, Linseed and
Fenugreekseed, of each a scruple; boil them a little in four ounces of
Bettony-water, filter it, and apply it to the Part.

Eyes to Cure: If the Eyes be dull, cloudy, or specks, spots, or films begin to
appear on them, Take Paracelsus, (Zibethum Occidentale) viz. Human-Dung of a
good color and consistence, dry it by degrees moderately, till it be capable
of being reduced to Powder, then powder it and searce it very fine, a little of
which must be blown once or twice a day into the Eyes, as the nature of the
defect requires; then keep it in for a time by closing the Lids, and so wash it
off with Eye-bright-water.

Eyes foul, a Water: Take prepared Pearl and Coral, of each a scruple; Aloes
finely powdered three grains, red Rose Water and Succory, of each an ounce, mix
them well: and if you would have the Mixture stronger, put in a few grains of
Trochisci Albi Rhasis in very fine Powder, and wash the Eyes with it as you see
occasion.

Eyes Inflamed, or Bloodshot: Boil a new-lay'd Egg hard, cut it in halves
without taking out the Yolk, and apply one of these considerably warm, but not
too hot, to the Eye grieved; and keep it on, if need requires, six or eight
hours, and it will draw away the Heat: Or you may make a Poultis with it and
rotten Apples, and apply it in the same manner.

Eyes Inflamed: Take the Juice of a rotten Pippin; some Hen-dung, that of it
which is the whitest; beat the White of an Egg very fine, burn the Hen-dung to
Powder, put the Apple-juice to the White of the Egg; add Loaf-sugar finely
scraped: and having well mixed them together, dip a Feather in them, and drop a
few drops into the Eyes, winking hard to keep it in; and by often so doing, you
will find the Pain, Redness and Heat abated.

Or This, (especially if the Sight be weakened with the long continuance of the
Inflammation, or any other matter,) Powder very small a whole Nutmeg, so that
being dried well, it may be sifted thorough a fine Lawn: do the like by the
Leaves and Flowers of Eyebright, the tender Tops and the Seeds of Fenel; add a
small quantity of burnt Alom and fine Sugar as finely powdered: mix these
together, and take the Composition from a dram to two ounces or more at a time,
doing it often, and washing your Eyes both Morning and Evening with fair Water.

Eyes, an Ointment in general: Take new Hogs-lard two ounces, Tutia prepared
six drams, Lapis Haematitis washed one scruple, Aloes washed and powdered
twelve grains, Seed-pear finely powdered three grains; steep the Lard in
Rose Water six hours, and then wash it very well in Whitewine: powder the Tutia
very finely, and so over a gentle fire make it into an Ointment with a little
Fenel-water. And in case of any grief in the Eyes, you may use it with success
by anointing the Eyelids, and Corners of the Eyes, for present ease, till you
meet with a more particu^ Remedy.

Eyes Pained: For the extraordinary Pain or Heaviness in the Eyes, Take Flower
of Melilot, of Elder and of Marrigolds, of each a small handful; Linseeds,
Fenegreek, Fleawort, Cummin and Quinces, of each half a scruple; French Barley
half an ounce, Damask roses half an ounce, Spring Water a pint and an half:
mix, boil and strain these well, and with the Decoction foment the Forehead and
Temples considerably warm.

Eyes, their Pains to assuage: Take young Endive, and stamp it with the Oil of
Roses and Violets, and anoint the Corners of the Eyes and the Eyelids with it;
and so doing often, the Pain will quickly be abated.

Eye Salve: Take Oil of Myrtle, and Juice of Rue, of each two ounces; boil
them, and strain out the liquid part, and set it again upon the fire, and put
to it Sapphire prepared half a dram, Jacinth one scruple, and Antimony half a
scruple; burnt Copper one scruple, Tutia prepared three drams: let them sees
on a gentle fire, and add two or three drams of Beeswax, and so anoint the
Eyelids, or spread it on a thin piece of Silk, and lay it on the Eyes. This
helps Watery Eyes, the Pains in them, and stays Defluxions of Rheums.

Eye Salve, another: Take Starch three quarters of an ounce, Tutia prepared in
Rose Water half an ounce, fresh Hog's Grease an ounce; bruise and temper them
well together: anoint the Eyelids, Forehead and Temples with it. It remedies
Inflammations, Pains, Wounds and Bloodshot Eyes.

Eyelid Sore: Take Tutia and white Sugar Candy, of each half a dram; Powder of
red Roses a dram and an half, the Crumbs of white-Bread half an ounce; Coral
prepared, and Pearl, of each half a dram; Flowers of Saint John's-wort one
dram: make these into a Poultis, and lay it to the Eye on a fine Cloth.

Eyes Spotted: If any Spots appear growing on the Eye, Take fine White-Paper,
let it flame away upon a clean Pewter Plate, till so much Oil of the Paper
sticks to the Plate as you have occasion for; so blow off the Ashes of the
Paper, and with a little of your Spittle mingled with the Oil, mix it with your
Finger, or some other convenient thing, into an Ointment; which with a Feather
apply gently to your Eyes once or twice a day, as need shall require, or as you
can bear it; for it will make the Eyes smart, but in a little time you will
find the benefit of it.

Eyes Red: Take three grains of Camphire, and a large blanched Almond;
incorporate them well by grinding them, and add by little and little two or
three ounces of Red Rose Water, still grinding them till the whole be brought
to a kind of Emulsion, drop a little of this in the place affected, and it
will, by often so doing, ease the Pain, and take away the Redness.

Eyes Red and Fiery: Take Ground Ivy, single Daisie-roots, and Housleek:
distill them, or for want of that Convenience, press out the Juice; dissolve in
two ounces of the Water or Juice about a quarter of a spoonful of clarified
Honey, and suffer them to depurate by residence; then drop it into the Eyes,
two or three drops at a time, and continue so doing four or five times a day:
But if there be no great Inflammation, there must be more of the Daisie-root
and Ground Ivy, than of the Housleek.

Eye-Water: Take Gumarabick, Rose-leaves, Saffron, Spica, of each a quarter of
an ounce; beat them small, and make Cakes of them with Spring Water; and when
you are to use it, take a dram thereof and steep it in the White of an Egg well
beaten, and wash the Eye with it; and by often so doing, it will not only
repel the Matter, and consume the Pain, but produce a clearer Sight than usual.

Or, Take Juice of Fennel well clarified an ounce, Aloes two drams and a half,
Leaf of beaten Gold, mix them well together; then add seven grains of
Frankincense, and dissolve them in Whitewine: mix them all together with Fenel
and Rose Water, and drop three or four drops of it into the Eye twice a Day.

Eye-Water, another: Take two or three ounces of the simple Water of Pimpernel,
distill it in Balneo, and put it into a little Pot or Porringer of Rose-copper,
and then put into it the quantity of a hazle Nut of strong Quicklime; cover
it, and let the Ingredients lie till the Liquor has acquired a bluish Color;
very warily pour off the clear, and add to it as much live-Honey as will give
it a little Taste. If you find it too strong, weaken it with Water of
Pimpernel, or clear Spring Water, and apply it to the Eyes, by bathing them
with a linen Rag dipped in it. This takes away Heat, Pains, sharp Rheums,
Prickles and Inflammations of the Eyes.

Eye-Water, another: Take Red Rose Water, and Water of Plantain, of each an
ounce; Tutia prepared half a scruple, Lapis Lazuli prepared six grains, Red
Coral prepared five grains: mix and make them into a Collyrium, or Eye-Water.
This dropped into the Eye, being first very well mixed by shaking, wonderfully
revives and clears the Sight, provided there be no great foulness nor
scrophulous disposition of the Body, or temperament of the Party, It takes away
the Redness from the Eyelids, if a Sponge be dipped in it, and often wetted with
it: it also takes off thin Skins very easily.

Eye-Water, another: Take the Flowers of Corn-flower, Blue-bottles gathered
with their Cups; bruise and infuse them in Snow-water twenty-four hours at the
least, then distill them in a moderate Sand-bath.

This Water being very Cooling, most effectually cures the Infirmities of the
Eyes, especially those that are troubled with Inflammations. It Chears,
Strengthens and Preserves the Sight.

Falling Sickness: Take half a dram of choice Amber, powder it very fine, and
take it fasting once a day in a quarter or a pint of Whitewine, for seven or
eight days successively

Falling Sickness: Take Misleto of the Oak, the Leaves and Berries, and all the
tender Branches; dry them in a gentle Oven or Stove, so that they may be beat
to Powder: sift it very fine, and give as much as will lie on a Shilling, for
one of riper years: for middle age a lesser quantity; and so to a Child, by
lessening the Dose. Let it be taken both Morning and Evening in Couslip-water,
three Days before and three Days after the Full of the Moon: repeat the Dose
for a considerable time, at least two Months, if necessity requires it.

Falling Sickness, another: Take Senna two ounces; Turbith, Mechoacan, of each
half an ounce; Raspings of Elks-hoof, Powder of a dead Man's Skull, and Nutmeg,
of each two drams; Roots and Seeds of Peony, Misleto of the Oak, of each half a
dram; Cardamom, Cassia Lignea, and Cloves, of each a dram; Flowers of Male
Peony, of Lilly of the Valleys, of Lavender, of the Tyle-tree, of each half a
dram; Rhenish-wine one quart and half a pint: digest these in a warm place for
two Days, then strain out the liquid part, and sweeten in with three ounces of
double-refined Sugar. This is also good against Vapors.

Falling Sickness, another: Take white Incense, called Olibanum; Mastick and
Spicknard, of each three ounces; Galbanum and Opopanax, of each half an ounce;
Viscus Quercinus an ounce, Amber half a scruple, Peony-seeds half a dram,
Labdanum two drams, the Seeds of wild Rue one dram, Nutmeg and Cubebs, of each
half an ounce; Castor and Copperas, of each half a dram: having beaten those
that are to be beaten very well, and dissolved the Gums in Oil of Rue,
incorporate them with your Hands, or some convenient Instrument, with the
Viscus; which being done, and the Amber put in last in Powder, the Head of the
Party being shaven, spread a Plaster of the Composition, and lay upon it, and
renew it once in three or four Days: And in so doing, the afflicted Party will
find great ease, and in a little time the Cause of this troublesome and
dangerous Distemper removed.

Fats to Prepare: To do this, that they may be in readiness on sundry emergent
Occasions, Take the freshest of any of them, take out the little Veins and
Fibers, and separate the Fat from the Skin, then wash it in clear Water till it
is freed from Blood; then mince it very small, or bruise it, and put it into a
double Vessel to melt; then strain it into clean Water, and having remained
there till it becomes cold, drain the Water from it, and keep it in an earthen
glazed Pot in a cool place, though not too moist, and it will keep good for use
a Twelvemonth.

Fevers continual: Make a Decoction of the Leaves of Rue in Spring Water, or
other clear Water till the Liquor be pretty strong of the Plant; which being
strained, make it somewhat a pallatable Liquor, with a sufficient quantity of
Licorice, Sugar, or an aromatic Body, and to half a pint of it add ten drops
of the Spirit, not Oil, of Vitriol, and take it Morning, Afternoon, and at
Night.

Fevers, another Remedy: Take in half a pint of some convenient cooling Liquor,
half an ounce of Hartshorn burnt to a great whiteness, and powdered, being
first bruised a little in the Liquid, and this may be taken as occasion
requires.

Fevers, another Remedy: Apply to the Soles of the Feet a mixture, or thin
Cataplasm, made of the Leaves of Tobacco, cut and beaten into a moisture with
new Currants.

Feverfew: This is excellent in the Diseases of the Womb; the Decoction of it
forces the Courses, and expels the Afterbirth, and does all a bitter Herb is
capable of doing. It is successful in Fevers, by being applied to the Soles of
the Feet. Take of it a handful, warm it between two Tiles, and apply it twice
or thrice, and it cures a Hemicrania; and the crude Herb applied to the Crown
of the Head, cures the Headache. A Decoction of it, with the Flowers of
Camomel, cures the hysterical Symptoms, and forces Childbed purgations, etc.

Fig Tree: The Fruit of the Fig Tree applied outwardly Ripens, Mollifies and
Attracts; being beaten with Salt and Leaven, they break pestilential Buboes, or
other Tumors, in few Days. The Juice of the Fig Tree is very biting, and may
be numbered among Causticks, and may be used for the Cure of Warts, and
suchlike excrescencies of the Skin.

Take Raisins of the Sun stoned one ounce, Jubebs and Sebestens of each
fifteen; eight fat Figgs, and six Dates, half an ounce of Licorice, and an
ounce of French Barley; of the Leaves of Maidenhair, Hysop, Scabious and
Coltsfoot, of each a handful: boil them in three pints of Fountain Water, till
a third part be consumed: press out the Decoction, and take eight spoonfuls
three times a Day. This is a very good Pectoral.

Figwort, its Virtues: The Powder of the dried Root applied to Piles, drys them
up; it is also useful in Cancers, and eating Ulcers; a dram of the Powder taken
inwardly, expels Worms; the Water distilled from the Roots steeped in Water and
Vinegar, cures the redness of the Face: and of this Herb an excellent Ointment
is made for killing the Itch, and bringing away the Scurf of it: The Decoction
of it taken inwardly, and the Herb bruised and Poultiswise applied, dissolves
and brings away congealed and clotted Blood: The distilled Water takes away
Freckles, Morphew, etc. There is a Plaster of it made for the King's Evil, as
follows:

Take the Leaves of Figwort, Houndstongue and the Flowers of white Archangel
and Foxglove, cut them very small, then melt a pound of Lard; and it being very
hot, put them into it, boil them till they are crisp, then strain them out, and
put in others, till the Ointment look very thick of the green; then having
strained them out, put into the Hogs-Lard two ounces of Turpentine, and an
ounce of Verdigrease, and as much Rosin refined, and Beeswax, as will make it
into a Salve; spread a Plaster, and apply it to the grieved Part, renewing it
often. It asswages the Swellings, disperses the Humors, not only of the
King's Evil, but of any other Knots, Kernels, Bunches, or Wens.

Filbert: This Garden-Nut is very pleasant, and used mostly for serving up at
Tables among other Fruits; an Oil is extracted from them that supples hard
Swellings, and is successfully used in old Sores; but the much eating of these
breeds the Headache, and much Windiness in the Stomach.

Films: This is when a thin Skin grows over the Eye, and clouds the Sight. To
take it off, Make some Limewater, by pouring a gallon of boiling Water on a
pound of Lime unslack'd, stirring the Lime in it, and after some Hours decant
warily that which is clear, and to a pound of this Water, put an ounce of
choice Verdigrease in powder, and in a very moderate Heat extract a Tincture of
a fine, but somewhat dilute saphirine color, but not too deep; decant this
very warily, and let a drop of this, as often as necessity requires, fall into
the Eye, the Party winking hard, and it will shrivel off the Film.

Fir Tree Has its Virtues, mostly consisting in its Rosins and Turpentines,
which in their proper Alphabets you may see: The Branches and Tops of this Tree
are infused in Diet-Drinks, and given for the Scurvy with good Success.

Fits-Apoplectick: Fix a Cupping-glass without scarification to the Nape of the
Neck, and one to each Shoulder, and let them take fast hold, till they begin to
loosen, and they will draw down the afflicting Humor or Vapor from the Brain.

Fits of the Mother: To remedy this, Dip Sea Salt in Vinegar, and into it dip a
soft Linnen-Rag, fold it three or four times double, lay it warm to the Soles
of the Feet, and keep it on till the Fit be over.

Flag, the sweet one: This grows in diverse Parts of England, and is
distinguished from others by its curious Scent. It is chiefly used in
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Courses; also in the Colic it provokes
Urin: And the Roots of it candied are of a pleasant Taste, nourishing and
grateful to the Stomach, and keeps out evil Airs and Infections; and for this
cause the Turks frequently chew it, and the Tartars boil it in their Water, or
infuse the Roots of it in cold Water before they drink it.

Flax: There is an Oil made of the Seed of this Plant that is very excellent in
sundry Medians, as also alone. It is taken inwardly in the Colic, Quinsie,
Pleurisy, and Consumption; outwardly it mollifies hard Swellings, eases Pains,
and is used much in Paintings, etc.

Flax, or, Wild Dwarf-Flax: This Herb infused in Whitewine, after it has been
bruised, for a whole Night over hot Embers, purges watery Humors very strongly:
Take of this purging Flax an handful, of sweet Fenelseeds two drams; boil them
in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water, adding to every six ounces two ounces
of White Wind, and it makes a gentle purging potion, being taken two or three
spoonfuls at a time.

Flix of the Liver: Take Agrimony one handful, Squinant two handfuls, Spiknard
and Liquorice, of each half a handful; Mace and Mastick, of each half an ounce;
Lignum Aloes three drams, Bole-Armoniack, Lapis Hematitis, and Terra sigillata,
of each six drams, Corianderseeds prepared one ounce and half, Spodium two
drams, dried Roses one ounce, Barry-Meal two ounces, the Filings of Iron
prepared one dram, the Compound of the three kinds of Saunders, made with
Camphire, half an ounce, Oil of Myrtle and Mastick, of each two drams: powder
the Herbs, then mix with them the other things made into Powders, then add the
Oils, and being set over a gentle Fire in a close Vessel till dissolved, stir
them well to the thickness of a Plaster, and apply it very large on the right
side of the Body, so that it may reach from the Breast unto the Stomach.

Flixweed: A dram of the Seed of this taken in red Wine, or Syrup of Sloes,
stays Loosnesses, and both the Seed and the Herb help in the Flux of the Belly,
and the Bloody Flux: It is used in Plasters for Wounds and sordid Ulcers; and
some hold, that the Seed boiled in Vinegar, and drank warm, expels Gravel.

Florentine of Carps: Take a quarter of a peck of fine Flower, sweet Butter
three quarters of a pound, and six Yolks of Eggs; work these up in the Butter
and Flower, and dry them; then put to it as much fair Water as will make it up
into a Past: then take the Carp, scale it alive, and scrape off the slime, draw
it, and take away the Guts and Gall, and scotch it, season it lightly with
Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and lay it into the Past made up into a Pie in the
fashion, a^ near as may be, of the Fish; put the Milt into the Belly, lay on
sliced Dates in halves, Orange or Lemon sliced, Barberries, Raisins, and
Butter; close it up, and bake it; and being almost baked, close it up and
liquor it with Butter, Sugar, Verjuice, Claret, and White Wind, and ice it
over, and so serve it up when it is hot, and it will prove a very acceptable
Banquet.

Florentine of Eggs: To do this, Boil about eighteen Eggs hard, then mince them
with two pound of Beef Suet clean taken from the Skins and Fibers, till it be
very small; then take a quarter of an ounce of Cloves and Mace, one large
Nutmeg; let these be finely beaten or grated with a quarter of an ounce of
Cinnamon; then add half a pound of fine Sugar, and a pound and half of Currants,
a quarter of a pound of Dates minced very small; then mince or bruise very
small some choice Lemon Peel, and lastly having mixed all the foregoing things
well together, put about a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, and a little Salt
in it.

When you have so ordered the Materials, put them into the Oven; let it
moderately bake, and then have in readiness this Leer to put to it when it
comes out, viz. Heat a little fair Water, and beat up half a pound of Butter
with it to a thickness; add a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and the Juice of a
Lemon, and so serve them up upon it.

Florentine with Partridge: Your Partridge being roasted and minced small with
the weight of the Meat in Beef-Marrow, put to it two ounces of Orange-peel,
with as much green Citron small minced; season the Meat with beaten Cloves,
Nutmeg, Mace and Salt, and Sugar, mixing all together, put the Materials into a
Puff-past, and open it, being baked, and put in half a grain of Musk or
Ambergrease dissolved in the Juice of an Orange and Rose Water; stir them among
the Meat, then cover it, and serve it up.

Florentine of Tongues: Boil and Blanch a fresh Neats-Tongue, and being cold,
cut it into little square bits as big as great Hazle-Nuts, lard it with small
Lard, then having another Tongue raw, take off the Skin, mince it with
Beef Suet, then lay one half of it in a Dish on a Sheet of white Paper, and lay
on the Tongue, being finely larded and seasoned with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt,
and with the other minced Tongue put grated Bread to it, some sweet Herbs small
minced, and Yolks of raw Eggs, and being made up into Balls as big as small
Wash-balls, lay them on the Tongue with, some Barberries, Marrow, and
interlarded Bacon and Butter, close it up with a convenient Lid, and bake it;
and being baked, liquor it with Butter beaten up with Verjuice, and the Yolks
of three or four Eggs strained.

Flower of Rice and Cream: To make a dainty Dish of this, Take half a pound of
Rice, see it be well dusted and cleansed, then wash it and dry it in a moderate
Heat, and when it is dry, rub it and beat it in a Mortar till the Flower be
very fine; then take a pint of thick Cream, and the Whites of three or four
new-lay'd Eggs, beat them well together with a little Rose Water, and set them
on a soft Fire, boil it very thick, and so put it into a Dish, and let it stand
till it is cold; then slice it out, cast some Biscuit on it, and serve it up.

Flummery to Make: This in the Western Parts of England is made of
Wheat Flour, which is held to be the most heartning and strengthening: To make
this, Take half a peck of Wheat-Bran, let it soak in cold Water three or four
Days, then strain out the milky Water of it, and boil it to a Jelly; then
season it with Sugar, Rose and Orange-flower-water, and let it stand till it is
cold and thickened again, then eat it with white, or Rhenish Wine, or Cream, or
Milk, or Ale.

Flux of the Belly: Take half an ounce of Mithridate, two ounces of fine Sugar,
dissolve these over a gentle Fire in a pint of new Milk, and take it as a
Clyster.

Flux-Bloody: Take Syrup of Sloes two ounces, the Powder of Acorns a quarter of
an ounce, the Ashes of Ash-keys, or the Bark of the Root of an Ash-Tree two
drams, Conserve of Roses a quarter of an ounce, dissolve them in a quarter of a
pint of Claret or red Wine, and drink it fasting somewhat warm. Do this two or
three times, and you shall find the Flux abate, and the Body restored to a
liveliness.

Flux-Bloody, another: Take the Powder of Crepitus Lupi, or Fuss-Balls, make it
up with Conserve of Provence-roses, and take it often from a scruple at a time
to about half a dram of the Powder, and it will stop the efflux of Blood, and
heal the Bowels.

Flux, or Looseness: Take the Filings of Needle-makers Steel four ounces, put
them into a glazed Pipkin and pour thereon a quart of the deepest red Wine; let
it boil till about three parts of the Liquid be consumed; stir it often, and
strain it whilst it is hot; then take two spoonfuls of it in warm Broth or Ale
in the Morning fasting, for three or four days sucessively. This likewise is
good to stay the Bloody Flux, and remove the Cause.

Flux of the Whites: To remedy this, Take half an ounce of Ising-glass,
dissolve it over a gentle fire in a pint of New-Milk.

Frankincense: This grows chiefly in the Forest of Arabia, where they lance
the Bark of the Trees, the better to let the Frankincense flow out, or else the
Liquor whereof it is made. This being drank about a dram in a glass of
Whitewine well digested, is very good against the Dysentery and Fluxes of the
Belly, increases the Memory, chases away Sadness, and cheareth the Heart. It
stays the Bleeding at the Nose, being powdered and incorporated with the White
of an Egg and Aloes, and held to it, or put up the Nostrils tentwise. It eases
the Pains and Megrims, being mixed with the Whites of Eggs and the Powder of
Myrrh, and spread on a linen Cloth, and applied to the Forehead and Temples.

Freckles, to take away: Take four spoonfuls of Fumitory-water, a spoonful of
the Oil of Tartar, and the Gall of a Cock; mingle these together over a gentle
fire, till they become a kind of Ointment, and with it anoint the places where
the Freckles are, and let it dry on them: Then take a little Rye-meal, put it
into Milk, and wash off the Ointment.

French way for Carps: To stew these Fish the French way, Put it in boiling
Liquor, and take a good large Dish or Stew Pan that will contain the Carp, put
it into as much Claret as will cover it; wash off the Blood, and take the Fish
out, and put into the Wine in the Dish three or four slices of Onions, some
large Blades of Mace and Pepper grossly beaten, with a little Salt; and when
the Pan boils, put in the Carp, and cover it close; and being well stewed down,
dish it with fine carved Sippets round about it: pour the Liquor it was boiled
in on it, with the Spices, Onion, sliced Lemon, and Lemon Peel; run it over
with beaten Butter, and garnish it with dry Bread.

French Pox: Take good Mercury sublimate, Mithridate or Venice-Treacle, of each
an ounce; mix them well, and infuse them into a quart of Spring Water; set them
in Balneo to dissolve in a close Vessel; and of this Liquor well settled take
about half a spoonful, or, if need require it, a spoonful, but not above a
spoonful and an half by any means; take it in a quarter of a pint of small Ale
fasting in the Morning, and an ounce in the Afternon or Evening, the Stomach
being as near as may be empty, intermitting every second Day, and taking, a
gentle Purge.

Frenzy or Madness: Take the Juice of Burnet, Sage and Ground Ivy, of each half
an ounce, sweeten it with half an ounce of Virgin-Honey, and give it to the
Party so distempered or afflicted.

Fricasie of Chickens: The Chickens for this purpose must be cut in small
pieces, and fried in Butter: then pour on them some hot Broth, or boiling
Water; put into it an Onion quartered, and a little shred Thyme and Parsley,
with Pepper and Salt enough to season them; the Lean of Bacon cut small, and a
few Cloves; the Yolks of Eggs beaten fine, with the Broth or
Whitewhine-Vinegar; keep it in motion till the Sauce be thickened, and then
serve it up. Note, If in this manner they be stewed too long, they will be
Tough.

Fricasie of Pigeons: Take young Pigeons, cut off the Wings and Legs, and
quarter the Bodies; put them into a Stew Pan, add to them some fat Bacon cut
square in small pieces; as much whole Pepper and Salt as will season them, a
few Cloves, a bundle of Parsley and Thyme, and an Onion quartered: then pour on
so much fair Water as will nearly touch the top of the Pigeons: when they are
tender, put in a sufficient quantity of Butter; change the Parsley and Thyme
for some more that is fresh; then take the Yolks of Eggs finely beaten in a
little of the Broth, White Wind and Verjuice; lay them out in a Dish upon
Sippets with the Broth; squeeze an Orange over them, and serve them up.

Fritters, the English way: Take a Pint of Canary, the like quantity of Ale,
and a litte Ale-Yest; the Yolks and Whites of nine Eggs beaten first very well
by themselves, and then with the rest: add a pound of fine Flower, and little
Ginger. Let the Butter stand a while, and then put in Apples thin sliced, and
fry them with Beef Suet clarified, or a little Butter: take them out, and strew
them over with fine Sugar; then sprinkle them with Rose or Cinnamon Water.

Or, Take a quart of Flower, three pints of Mutton-broth when cold; Nutmeg and
Cinnamon of each a quarter of an ounce; beat them fine, as also a Race of
Ginger, five Eggs, and a little Salt, and strain the Materials; put to them
some thin slices of Pippins, and fry them in as much Suet as will suffice,
ordering them as the former in serving up. Some make the Batter of Eggs, Cream,
Cloves, Mace, Saffron, Nutmeg, Barm, Ale and Salt. Others, of Flower, grated
Bread, Mace, Ginger, Pepper, Salt, Barm, Saffron, Milk, Sack, or White Wind.
Some again use Marrow perfumed with Musk and Rose Water, by being steeped in
the latter with the slices of pleasant Pears of Quinces. Others again, with
Raisins, Currants, Apples cut Dice-fashion, and as small, in quarters or in
halves. I leave the Reader to his Choice.

Fritters, the Italian way: Take a pound of Holland-Cheese or Parmisan, grate
it into a pound of fine Flower, with as much fine Bisket-bread muskified and
beaten to Powder; the Yolks of five Eggs, some Rose Water, Saffron, Sugar,
Cloves, Mace, Cream; make of these well tempered a stiff Paste, and rolling it
into Balls as big as Wall-nuts, fry them with clarified Butter.

Or, Take a pound of Rice, boil it in a pint of Cream something thick; lay it
abroad in a Dish, and when it is cold, bruise it in a Mortar with a pound of
grated fat Old Cheese, some Musk, and the Yolks of four or five Eggs boiled
hard, a little Sugar and grated Manchet; then mix these well together, make
them into a stiff Paste, and that Paste into small Balls. You may, for the
greater variety, color them with the Juice of Flowers or Sweet-herbs, as
Marrigolds, Violets, Carnations, etc. And if the Paste be too tender, work more
Bread and Flower, and fry them pretty well; and when you serve them up, scrape
on Sugar, and sprinkle them with the Juice of Oranges, or Orange-water.

Fritters of Spinnage: Boil the Leaves of Spinach in fair Water, yet but
tenderly; then drain the Liquor from it as much as may be, stamp it or mince it
very small; add to it beaten Cinnamon, Ginger and Nutmeg, grated Manchet, and
the Whites and Yolks of Eggs, and as much Cream as will moisten it, yet the
Batter must remain of an indifferent thickness; then put in some Currants that
have been swelled in warm Water, mix them well together, and having a Kettle
boiled with tried Suet or Lard, drop them into it by spoonfuls; and when they
rise, take them out, for then they are enough.

Fritters of diverse Forms: To make these, Take a quart of fine Flower, strain
it with some Almond-milk, Saffron, Sugar, White Wind; have then Moulds made of
Tin, of various Forms, as Arms, Dolphins, Birds, Flowers, and the like; put the
Batter into them, and place them in the Pan, covered with Suet or clarified
Butter, and they will come out in such Forms as the Mould impresses on them,
and look very pleasant, if orderly placed in a Dish.

Fumitory: It purifies the Blood, and purges Choler, and is available in the
Leprosy, Itch, and other Diseases of the Skin: The distilled Water is used for
Beautifying, It opens Obstructions of the Liver, and helps the Jaundice and
Scurvy. The Juice or Water of it dropped into the Eye, helps Dimness of Sight:
Being mixed with Venice-Treacle, it resists the Plague and Pestilential Fevers.
An Ointment made of the Juice of it, sharp-pointed Dock, and Honey, is a speedy
Cure for the Itch, Botches, Scurff, or any other Deformity in the Skin.

Fundament-falling: Take a quarter of an ounce of the best Ginger, slice it
very thin, put it into a little Pan, and heat it by clear and well-kindled
Coals, and receive the Fume of it call on by little and little in a kind of
Close-stool, or some convenient Seat for that purpose, where the lower part of
the Body may be well covered for about half a quarter of an hour at a time.

GAlimafre of Mutton: To do this, Take a Gigget of Mutton, or, if you please,
the whole Leg; when it is ready dressed, hash the one part as small as you can,
and put it into a Dish with Onions minced small; and the other parts of your
Mutton cut into bigger pieces, breaking likewise the Bones; set it a stewing,
and add Verjuice, Pepper, a handful of Capers, a quarter of a pint of
White Wind, some salt, and a little white Sugar; and when it is stewed, serve
it upon Sippets carved or plain.

Gall Obstructed: Take Gum Lac prepared, and of the Roots of Rhaponticum, of
each three drams; Schenanth of Spike, Indian Nard, Mastick, Juice of Wormwood,
Agrimony thickened, the Seeds of Smallage, Bishops-weed, Aniseeds, Fenil,
Savin, bitter Almonds, Zedoary, the Roots of Madder, cleansed Myrrh,
Asarabacca, Bithwort, the round and long Gentian, Saffron, Cinnamon, dried
Hyssop, the Roots of Cassia and Bdellium, of each a dram and an half; Ginger
and Black Pepper, of each a dram: dry, bruise, and make them into a Powder, and
take half a dram of it at a time in a Vehicle. It purifies the Blood, opens
Obstructions of the Gall, Liver, Spleen and Bladder. It Is good for the Dropsy
and Jaundice, and is a great Dispeller of Wind. It likewise cleanses the
Stomach, and drives ill Vapors from, the Brain.

Gammon of Bacon: To dress this the neatest way, having watered it, scrubb'd it
with a Brush, and scraped the Rind, and dried it again with a Cloth, put it
into a Kettle wherein it may have sufficient room: then take Sage, Marjoram,
Fenel, Sprigs of Bays and Rosemary, and boil it till it is enough; then slit
the Skin, and so curiously carve it, and stick the places so stripped with
Cloves; strew some Pepper on it, and serve it up with Mustard, Pepper, Vinegar,
and the Herbs small minced, cut up in fine slices of what length you please,
but of a very indifferent thickness.

Gangreen: When the part afflicted with this Malady has been lightly scarified,
apply, as hot as can be endured, a Cataplasm of strong Brandy and Crumbs of
White Bread, shifting it three or four times a day, or as often as you find
convenient; or, for want of this, take a boiled Turnip, mash it with Hogs-lard,
and lay it to the place.

Gargarism to Cleanse the Head: Take Marjoram, Galingale, Carraways, Ginger,
Broad Plantain-seed, and Mustard Seed; beat them grossly together, and put two
ounces of this Powder to a quart of Water, in a Vessel that may be close stopped:
boil it in Balneo, and when it is well sodden, put a quart of White Wind to it,
and an ounce of clear Honey; and let it sees again till about a pint of the
Liquor be wasted, and then strain out the rest, and with it gargle the Mouth
well every Morning, holding it hot also in your Mouth, that the Fumes may
ascend up into the Head.

Gargle: Take six ounces of Scabious-water, one spoon-full full of Mustard, as
much of Honey; put these into half a quartern of Wine-Vinegar, and mix them all
together in a marble or glass Mortar, till they become very liquid, and then
gargle your Mouth with it.

Gargle for a Sore Throat: To make this, Take fur ounces of Plantain-water,
three or four spoonfuls of Red Rose Water, mix them very well with the White of
an Egg beaten to Water; sweeten this mixture with a small spoon-full of white
Sugar Candy beaten into Powder, or, for want of that, Loaf-sugar; and letting
it go a little down your Throat, gugle it up again These will cool and allay
the Heat, and take away the hot Humors that occasion them.

Garlic: This being stamped and infused in Vinegar, and drank, resists the
Plague, and is good to dissolve the Stone, and bring away Gravel: and being
made into a Syrup by boiling and squeesing out the Juice, and adding as much
Sugar as will bring it into a Syrup, it wonderfully preserves the Lungs,
removes Coughs and Colds, and kills Worms in the Belly and Stomach.

Garlic: It provokes the Courses, and Urine; and helps the Bitings of Mad
Dogs, and other venomous Creatures: It kills Worms in Children, and avoideth
tough Phlegm, purging the Head, helping the Lethargy. It is a good Preservative
against, the Plague; also cures Sores and Ulcers, takes away Spots, and
Blemishes in the Skin, and eases Pains in the Teeth; breaks Imposthumes, and
eases Pains in the Ears. It has a special quality to discuss the
Inconveniences coming by corrupt Airs, and Mineral Vapors, or by drinking
unwholsom Waters or Liquors; as also by unadvisedly taking Wolf-bane, Henbane,
or Hemlock, or other dangerous Herbs. It is held good in the Jaundice, Cramp,
Convulsions, Falling Sickness, the Piles or Hemorrhoids, and such like Diseases
proceeding from Cold. But it has not its Virtues without its Vices; for it
heats very vehemently; and all such hot Simples send up ill Vapors to the
Brain. In Choleric Persons it will increase the Choler; and in those that are
troubled with Melancholy, it will attenuate the Humors, and cause strange
Fancies and Visions in the Head; therefore let it be taken inwardly with great
Moderation; but for outward Applications you need hot be so strict.

Giblets to Bake: Let them be well cleansed and scalded, and season them well
with Pepper, Sale and Nutmeg; put them into a Pie, then put some Butter, slice
an Onion or two, and close up the Coffin with a Lid; bake them well, and soak
them three Hours: then pour in more Butter into which a Nutmeg has been grated.

Giblets to Boil: Take the Giblets of a Goose, or any other Fowl; scald them
well, and boil them whole in Water and Salt, and two or three Blades of Mace,
and so serve them on Sippets, finely carved, with beaten Butter, Lemons,
scalded Gooseberries, scalded Grapes, Mace, Barberries, and Lemons sliced.

Gilliflowers to Candy: Take refined Sugar, or white Sugar Candy, to the weight
of your Flowers, sift it, and put to if some Rose Water, set them over a Fire
made of Charcoal, but not too hot; stir these till they be a candied Syrup
height, then keep them in a dry place, and use them as you find occasion: and
if you use them for Sallads, put a little Wine-Vinegar to them to make the
Syrup thinner.

Gilliflowers to Pick: Take Clove-Gilliflowers, when just blown, clip the white
Bottoms from them, when taken out of the Husks, lay them to steep a little in
fair Water, boil up some Whitewine-Vinegar till the scum will come no more on
it: squeeze the Water out of your Gilliflowers, and the Vinegar being cool, put
them into it; then melt as much Sugar as is convenient in Rose Water; put it to
them with a little broken Cinnamon, and a few Blades of Mace; stop them up
close, and when you use them, mince them small, and putting a little fresh
Vinegar to them, strew a little white Sugar finely beaten, and they are an
excellent Sauce for Mutton or Lamb.

Glove-Gilliflowers: These Flowers are of a fine temper, neither excessive in
heat nor cold, nor dryness, nor moisture, that can be perceived in them: They
are great strengthners of the Heart and Brain, and therefore serve
indifferently for Cephalicks or Cordials; good in Consumptions, and easy to
Nature, helping it in many Emergencies. The Syrup and Conserve of these
Flowers, are wonderfully fortifying against pestilential Fevers and Poisons,
and may be taken with great safety at any timely Young or Old, either by
themselves, or dissolved, or mixed in any convenient Liquors.

Ginger: It is a Root belonging rather to a Herb or Plant, than a Tree; for it
bears a Top like Reeds, and runs knotty in the Ground a great way yet is of
admirable use, viz. It helps Digestion, looseneth the Belly, moderately is
good for the Stomach, and profitable against all things that dim and hinder the
Sight. It heateth much, though not at the first tasting, like Pepper, for which
Cause some will not allow it to consist of subtle parts, though that may be
attributed to its earthiness, as being a Root, and known to be composed of
gross and undigested Substance, tending much to watery, yet is of excellent Use
in Physic and Diet.

Ginger-Bread to Make: Take a pound of Jordan-Almonds, a penny white Loaf
grated and sifted among the Almonds, when blanched, and finely beat them
together; then add an ounce of Ginger finely scraped, Licorice and Aniseeds in
Powder, each a quarter of an ounce, add two or three spoonfuls of Rose Water,
and make them all up in a Past with half a pound of Sugar, mould it and roll it
thin, then print it and dry it in a Stove: And thus you may make Ginger-bread
of Sugar-plate, putting Sugar sufficient to it, that will keep all the Year
round.

Gladwin: That here intended, is that they call the Stinking sort. The Juice of
it snuffed up the Nose, causes Sneezing, and purges the Head, Rheums, and
offensive Matter: the Powder of the Root drunk in Wine has the same Effect, and
gives ease to the Cramp and Convulsions of the Nerves: It mainly avails in the
Pain of the Gout, or Sciatica, and gives ease to those that are afflicted with
griping Pains in their Bowels, as also in the Strangury. The Roots boiled in
Wine and drank, effectually procure Women's Courses; but is dangerous to be
taken by a Woman with Child; lest it cause Abortion: half a dram of the Powder
removes Obstructions in the Ureters and Bladder, and immediately provokes Urin.

Gleetings: Take four ounces of Spring Water, or rather Plantane-water,
dissolve it in about one scruple of Sympathetick-Powder, or so much as will
give it a sensible, but yet a faint Vitriol, like Tincture, inject as much as
is usual, through a small Syrup every Morning and Evening, as long as need
requires.

Gloves to Perfume lightly: Rub over your Gloves with Gleer of Eggs and
Benjamin-water, very thin and fine, wherein a grain of Musk, Ambergrease, or
any other strong Perfume has been infused, and it will take and hold the Scent
a long time: You may, as you like for change and alteration of Scent, rub them
over with a fine Puff of Silk dipped in Gessimine, Orange-flower Butter, Essence
of Roses, etc.

Goards: This Plant is cooling and mollifying by Nature. The fresh Leaves
applied to the Breasts of Women in Childbed, lessen their Milk; the Seeds are
accounted among the four great cold Seeds, for a red fiery Face or often
Flushings of the Face. Take the Seeds of Goards two ounces, the Kernels of
Peach-stones four ounces, make an Oil of them by Expression, and anoint the
Face often, and the redness will decrease, and in the end vanish.

Goatsbeard: This Plant is reckoned delicious in Food, being often eaten raw in
Sallads; It Is a great Nourisher, and therefore good for Consumptive People: It
is used for the Cough, and in Diseases of the Breast, and difficulty of
Breathing. It is held good to expel the Stone, and provoke Urine: The Juice of
the Root of it, and the distilled Water have the same Effect, as the Juice or
Concoction of the Herb.

Goats-Blood Prepared: Take the Blood of a middle-aged Goat, receive it into an
earthen Vessel, and having covered it with a Cloth, set it in the Sun that it
may coagulate: then drain of the watery part, and dry the thicker part, so that
it may be reduced into a Powder; mix it with the Juice of Nettles and
Ash-leaves to stay Bleeding, or being taken a dram of it in a glass of the
Decoction of Licorice in White Wind, it much comfort the Heart and Lungs. It
is also prepared for diverse other Uses too tedious here to mention, but will
occur in the various Medicine scattered over this Work.

Golden Rob is excellent for Wounds inwardly or outwardly applied, two drams of
the Powder heated in White Wind, and taken every Morning, removed the
Obstructions of the Bowels, stops Fluxes of the Womb or Belly, and inward
Bleeding.

Gonorrhoea: To remedy this, Take two ounces of ripe Laurel-Berries, and infuse
them for a Day in a quart of Whitewine, and let the Patient drink about two or
three spoonfuls twice a Day for a good while, and then intermit a Day, and so a
third, that some gentle purging Medicine may be taken.

Gonorrhoea, another: Take choice Mastick a sufficient quantity, beat it and
searce it well, then put about half an ounce of it at a time in the Yolk of a
new-lay'd Egg, washing it down with Ale or Beer, but not too much; or else take
this, viz. Choice Amber and Mastick both reduced to very fine Powder, and very
well mixed in equal parts, and of this Mixture give half a dram at a time in
Chocolate, or Tea, etc. and if need require it, continue it for three Weeks, or
a Month, purging the Day before you begin to take it, and once every Week
afterward, especially when you leave off the use of the Powder.

Gonorrhoea, another: For this, Take Mastick and the finest red Coral, of each
an equal quantity, let them he separately reduced into a Powder very fine, and
being well mixed, take about thirty or forty grains for one Dose in a glass of
Whitewine.

Gonorrhoea, another: To make Tablets for the stopping it, Take Seeds of
Plantane, Agnus Castus, white Poppies Rue, red Roses dried, Mint and Coral
prepared, of each two drams: reduce them into a Powder as fine as may be, and
make it into Tablets with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, and fine beaten Sugar, of
each eight ounces; make your Tablets half an ounce in weight, and take one of
them in a Morning fasting: They are very proper to stop the Gonorrhea after the
general Remedies taken.

Goose Boiled: Put it into a Pipkin, or other Vessel fit for it, boil it with
strong Broth, or fair Spring Water, and scum it clean, then add three or four
sliced Onions, some Currants, Mace, Raisins, Pepper, and a bundle of
Sweet-Herbs, grated Bread, White Wind, and two or three Cloves; and when it is
boiled enough, slash it on the Breast, and dish it up on fine carved Sippets;
and lay on a few slices of Lemon and Lemon Peel, Barberries, or Grapes, and run
it over with beaten Butter, Sugar, or Ginger, and trim the Dish sides with
grated Bread, or beaten Ginger: And this way you may dress and serve up any
large Waterfowl, as Swans, Ducks, Teal, Whoopers, etc.

Goose Old, to Boil tender: Take the Goose being powdered, and fill her Belly
with Oatmeal, being first steeped in warm Milk or Water, then flash the Breast,
and put her into a Pipkin with her Breast downward, put in them two or three
slices of Onion, and Carrots cut like Lard, some Butter, Mace, Pepper, and
Salt, Savory, Thyme, strong Broth, and a little Whitewine; let the Broth be
half consumed, and stew it very softly, being well stewed, dish it up on
Sippits, and pour on the Broth, etc. or you may boil her this way, viz. Put her
into a Pipkin, as before; put to the Oatmeal you stuff her withal some
Beef Suet, minced Onions and Apples, seasoned with Cloves, Mace, Sweet-Herbs
finely shred, and also beaten Pepper, fasten the Neck and Vent by tying a
string hard; and serve it up on Brewis, with Colliflowers, Cabbage, Turnips and
Barberries, and run 'em over with beaten Butter, and it will be very delicate
and tender.

Gooseberries: These being boiled in Broth, before they are ripe, are very
agreeable to the Stomach, and are Cooling in Fevers. They stop the Flux of the
Belly, and cause a good Appetite. They cure the Whites and Gonorrhoea. They are
applied outwardly with good success for St. Anthony's-Fire, and Inflammations;
but if before they are ripe they be eaten raw, especially to any excess, they
cause griping Pains and Slime in the Bowels.

Gooseberry-Cream: Coddle your Berries green, and boil them up with Sugar as
for a Preserve; then put them into the Cream strained, while the Berries are
whole; then scrape Sugar over them, and so serve them up in boiled or raw
Cream. And in this manner you may use Strawberries, Raspberries, or Red Currants
whole, in raw Cream; or serve them up with Wine, Sugar and Rose Water, without
Cream.

Gooseberries, to Preserve: Take of the largest Berries, when they are green
and hard; of those, if you can get them, that are called Gascoign Berries: pick
them clean, and covering them very close, let them stand over a gentle fire
half an hour, to coddle a little; but suffer them not to boil, lest the Skins
break; and when you perceive a fixed greenness on them, put them into a Sieve,
that the Water may drain from them: then put them into as much clarified Sugar
as will cover them and simper leisurely, being close covered, by which means
they will look greener than they grew; and having suffered them to stand on the
fire in the Syrup, take them off; and being cool, put them up for your use. Now
as for Preserving the various sorts of Green Fruits, there are several proper
Seasons to be observed: Viz.

Green Gooseberries about Whitsontide; White Wheat-plumbs in the midst of July;
Pear-plumbs in the middle of August; the Peach and Pippin about
Bartholomew-tide; Grapes in the beginning of September. Note, That when your
Green-Fruit is to be Preserved, you have two Skillets of boiling Water, to
shift 'em into one as the other cools, and fettle them in the Water till they
fix to a greenness; then take and put them into a Sugar Syrup, and let them
boil gently about a quarter of an hour, and so put them up for use.

Gooseberries, to Pickle: Pick the Berries clean from the Stalks and Buds, lay
them in soak in Salt and Water all night; then put them into the Juice of
Crab-cherries, Grape-verjuice or other Verjuice, and so barrel them up. In this
manner you may Pickle green Grapes and Plumbs.

Gooseberry-Wine, the best way: Take the ripe Berries, and put them into a
Vessel, and pour upon them a sufficient quantity of Water very hot; and then
covering the Vessel very close, let them stand till the Liquor is impregnated
with the Juice, at least three or four Weeks; then draw it out, mix it well,
and ferment it with fine Sugar; putting it up in Bottles close cork'd, it will
become a generous Wine: A little of it is good in Fevers, and other hot
Diseases; or it may be drank for Pleasure, as ordinary Wine.

A Decoction of the Leaves of Gooseberries cools and allays hot Swellings and
Inflammations; and when they first begin to budd, being beaten and infused in
White Wind, they much help in expelling the Stone; and being eaten with cooling
Herbs as Sallads, they allay the excessive Heat of the Liver and Stomach.

Gout: Take the Roots of Red Dock and Burdock; bruise them, and put to 'em a
little Spirit of Wine; let 'em stand twenty four hours; then hard, and put to
it a little Oil of Turpentine and Olive-Oil, and stop these up close in a Glass
for your use; and when you are to use them, pour out a little into a Saucer,
warm it over a Chafing Dish of warm Coals, and dipping a thick linen Cloth in
it, wrap it hard and close about the part grieved; and in so doing twice or
thrice, the Pain will entirely cease.

Gout, to Check it: Take three ounces of Sarsaparilla sliced and cut thin; to
these add an equal weight of Raisins of the Sun rubbed very clean, but not
broken: put both these into three quarts of strong Water, and let them stand on
a moderate heat, that the liquid part may simper for several hours; and being
closely bottl'd up, take a quarter of a pint when the Pain comes upon you, and
it will ease it.

Gout, a Plaster: Take Paracelsus and Diapalma, of each a quarter of an ounce;
melt and incorporate them well together, and spread it Plaister-wise upon
Leather; then anoint the part grieved with the Ointment of Tobacco and Oil of
Turpentine; and so laying on the Plaster, the Pain in a little time will cease.

Gout, to Remove: Take highly rectified Spirits of Man's Urine, warm it a
little over a gentle fire, and rub it in on the part afflicted with a woollen
Cloth, and in a little time the Pain will remove, and at last vanish.

Gout, Running: Take Earthworms well cleansed in Moss, and fill an earthen
glazed Pot well luted and covered; set it with them in a gentle Oven, and let
it stand there till the Oven becomes cold; then take out the Pot, and remove
the Cover, and you will find a gross Liquor: strain this, and keep it stopped for
your use, rubbing the part grieved with it, very warm, once or twice a day: And
if the Smell be offensive, you may put in a few drops of the Oil of Rhodium, or
any other odoriferous Unguent to correct it.

Gout-Wort: This is so called from the excellent Advantage it brings to those
that are afflicted with the Pain of the Gout, or Sciatica in the Joints, if the
Juice or Herb be applied Poultis-wise Some hold, it will allay these Pains, by
being carried about the Party afflicted therewith.

Grapes: The sweet ones are of a more hot substance, and therefore cause
Thirst, and loosen the Belly; but the sour ones are binding, and of hard
digestion. The Juice of the ripe Grape applied to Burns or Scalds, eases the
Pain. The Mother of the Wine or Grapes being kept, is profitable against
Inflammations, of the Breasts, and Hardness of them through too much abundance
of Milk. The Decoction of it in Clysters is good for Dysenteries or Fluxes: The
Stones or Seeds slave a restringent virtue, and are profitable for the Stomach;
and being parched, and beat to Powder, and drank in Whitewine, are very good
against the Flux, as also the Weakness of the Stomach. Dried Grapes and Raisins
have yet a greater virtue and property in Physic, and more-especially those
that are sweetest, and of most substance, as they of Damascus, Cyprus, and
Candia. They are good for Coughs, Sore Throats, Pains in the Reins and Bladder,
if you eat the Stones with them. Being boiled with Sugar, and the Flower of
Barley, and an Egg, they purge the Brain: Being reduced into a Plaster with
Flower of Beans and Cummin-seed, they allay Inflammations. The fat Raisins
nourish more than the sharp and lean ones. Those that are stoned are Lenitive,
and therefore very helping in Pains of the Breast, Coughs, Sore Throats, Pains
of the Bladder or Reins, and the Obstruction in the Liver.

Grapes to Preserve: Take the Grapes when green, stone them, and break the
little bunches of the stalk of the great ones; then take their weight in
refined Sugar finely beaten, and strew a row of Sugar in your Preserving-pan,
and a lay of Grapes upon it; then strew some more Sugar on them; then put in
four or five spoonfuls of fair Water, and boil them up as fast as may be.

Grapes and Wine, their Virtues: Very admirable are the Virtues of the Vine,
and the Fruit thereof; I had almost said, above all other Plants: for the
Leaves and tender Branches being bruised and laid to the Head, by their Cooling
quality, ease the Pains of the Head, occasioned by Heat, also the Inflammations
or Heat of the Stomach, being applied to it: And the Juice drank in
Borrage-water, helps the Dysentery, Fluxes or Spitting of Blood, Weakness of
Stomach, and bad Appetite, especially of Women Great with Child. The Water
which flows from the Vine, when it is cut, or bleeds (as some term if) being
drank in White Wind, purges the Gravel. The Ashes of the Branches of the Vine,
and Stones of Grapes, mixed with Vinegar, help Costiveness. It Is good against
the Stingings and Bitings of venomous Creatures; and if mixed with Oil of
Roses, Rue, and Vinegar, and laid Plaister-wise, it helps the Inflammation of
the Spleen.

Gravel: If you be troubled with the Gravel in the Reins, Kidneys or Bladder,
Take Daucus-seeds and Burdock-seeds, of each an ounce; mix them together; and
put one ounce of the Mixture into a gallon of small Ale; and when that has
steeped a while, and is drank up, put the other ounce into another gallon, and
so continue it as a Drink.

Gravel, another: Take Crabs-claws one ounce, and beat them into Powder;
Fenel-seed powdered half an ounce, Powder of Nutmegs four drams, double-refined
Sugar two ounces; these being mixed and finely stuffed, take as much at a time
as will lie on a shilling, in a glass of White Wind in a Morning, fasting: or
it may be taken in Ale or Beer.

Gravel, another: Take a quart of Water that is ready to boil, put into it half
a handful of Scabious, and half as much Sage; let it boil pretty well, and
drink it in the nature of Tea with Sugar, and the Juice of a Lemon squeezed
into it.

Gravel, to Remove: Take a quart of White or Rhenish-Wine, boil it well to the
consumption of a third part; then put in an ounce of the Juice of White Lily
roots, Juice of Housleek, and Syrup of Citron; mix them well together over a
gentle fire, and let the Party drink a quarter of a pint at a time blood-warm;
and so doing four or five times, it will force the Gravel before it, and cause
it to void through the neck of the Bladder.

Gravel, to Expel: Kill a black Hen or Cock, if it be to be had; if not, one
of another Color may serve; take out the thick Membrane or Skin that lines the
Gizard, wipe it clean, and dry it cautiously so as it may be beat to Powder:
with this Powder mix an equal part or half so much red Coral calcined, and take
thirty or forty grains of it at a time in White Wind, or some other such kind
of acid Wine.

Gravel, another, to Expel: Take two large Red Onions, and a White Lily-root,
bruise them in a Mortar; squeeze the Juice of them into White Wind, and drink
it in the Morning fasting, sweetened with a little Honey: This gives Ease
presently; and continuing it, it removes the Cause.

Green Ointment: Take new Butter, toiled and purified, four Pound;
Burgundy-Pitch, and Rosin, of each a pound; Yellow Beeswax four ounces; melt
them, and make an Ointment of them over a gentle fire, adding an ounce of
Verdigriese in Powder, to make it of a deep green Color, and so keep it
stirring till the Ointment be cold.

This is a wonderful Cleanser and Healer of all sorts of Wounds and Ulcers; it
gives Ease to Pains, and allays Burnings and Heats in the Wounds, or any
Inflammations. It Is greatly in request for Burns and Scalds, especially if
mixed with Oil of Roses and Snow-water, and applied on a linen Cloth to the
place grieved.

Green-Sauce: Take the Blades of Green Wheat, Sorrel, Parsley and Spinach;
stamp them in a wooden Mortar or Bowl, with some Vinegar and fine White Sugar,
and serve it up in Saucers, somewhat thinnish, with a Leg of Veal boiled, or a
Calf's Head.

Green, or Winter-Green: This mainly conduces to the healing of green Wounds;
the green Leaves bruised, or the Juice applied. A Salve of the green Herb
stamped, or the Juice boiled with Beeswax, Hogs-lard, Sallad-oil, and
Turpentine, is highly preferred for the Cure of all manner of Wounds or Sores.
The Herb boiled in Wine or Water, and given to such as are troubled with any
inward Ulcers of the Kidneys or Neck of the Bladder, mainly relieves them. It
stays the Fluxes. It is good in Inflammations rising upon Pains of the Heart;
also in Cankers or Fistula's. And the distilled Water may be carried along with
you, or kept by you for the abovesaid uses.

Gripes in Children: Take the Oils of Nutmeg and of Wormwood, of each a dram;
mingle them well with two drams of Camomel, and anoint therewith the Party's
Navel, and Pit of the Stomach; and by often so doing, the Pain will cease.

Grounsil: This indeed is very common, which renders its Virtues less esteemed,
though they are very rare; for the Seeds cleanse the Reins, help much to break
and expel the Stone, and provoke Urine; two drams of it taken in a glass of
White Wind, in Powder, three three or four times a day, some say, facilitate
the Birth, if it be taken by the travailing Woman in a little Breast-Milk.

Ground Pine: This is excellent to strengthen the Nerves; and to open the
Parts: it also provokes the Courses, expells the dead Child in the Womb, and
the Afterbirth; but not safe to be taken by Women during their going with
Child; because it works so powerfully, that it endangers Miscarriage. If it be
boiled in White Wind, or powdered, and made into small Pills with Hermodactyls
and Venice-Turpentine, it is given in Dropsies: and outwardly applied, it cures
Ulcers, by cleansing and filling them with good Flesh.

Take of this and Wormwood, of each two handfuls; Scurvygrass five times as
much, Sage of the Mountain six handfuls, sliced Oranges six; make a Paste of,
Barley-meal and Rye an equal quantity; make it into the fashion of a Pie, and
equal these in it small shred; then take them out and shred them with the Crust
over again, and so put all into a Bag, hanging it in about five gallons of Ale,
not too strong nor too small, about six days, and then drink it twice or thrice
a day, about half a pint at a time. This has been proved for the Scurvy, and
afflicting Pains of the Gout.

Guajacum: This for its singular Virtues is called Holy-wood: The Decoction of
it well managed, and taken in time, is a certain Remedy for the French Disease.
It is good in Dropsies, for Asthma's, Falling Sickness, and Diseases of the
Bladder and Reins, Pains in the Joints proceeding from cold Tumors and Wind.
It grows in the West Indies, and there the Spaniards learned the Use of it from
the Natives.

The way to prepare the Decoction of this Wood is in this manner: Take twelve
ounces of the Wood cut small, of the Bark of it beaten two ounces, infuse it in
six pints of Water, in a large earthen Pot, the space of twenty four Hours,
keeping the Pot close stopped, and boil it with a gentle Fire to the
Consumption of two quarts; and when it is cold, strain it: then put to the same
Wood a gallon of fresh Water, boil it to a quart, and keep these two Waters
apart for use.

Gums Apostemated: Take a handful of red Sage, boil it in Whitewine, add an
ounce of the Powder of Burnt-Alom, and wash your Mouth frequently with this
Water: It is also good against the Scurvy. It likewise fastens the Teeth, and
keeps them from rotting; it gives them a Whiteness, and eases the Toothache.

Gum of Cedar, its Virtues: An Oil extracted from this Gum is hot in the fourth
degree; wherefore it does, without pain, rot soft and delicate Flesh; but in
hard Bodies it operateth with more time and difficulty. It dries dead Bodies,
and preserves them from Putrefaction, by consuming the superfluous Humor,
without touching the sound Parts: but in living Bodies the Heat in them augment
the force of the Oil, which causes it to burn the tender Flesh. It is excellent
to kill Nits, Lice, or any Insect crept into the Ear, and good in cold
Distempers to anoint the Joints and Limbs, withal being much available in the
Pains of the Gout, if mollified with Oil of Camomil, or suchlike supling Oils.

Gum Plaster of Diachylon: Take Bdellium, Sagapenum Amoniacum, of each two
ounces: dissolve 'em in Wine, and strain 'em; boil them to the consistence of
Honey and Great Diachylon.

This being applied, dissolves, digests, and ripens hard Swellings, and is for
those Purposes very excellent, if not the best of Plasters.

Gums Scorbutic: Take Bole Armoniack the best, two drams; choice Myrrh (not
Lucid) one dram, Roch-Alom crude half a dram, Claret one pint; boil them over a
gentle Fire, strain out the Liquid part, and put a spoonful in your Mouth twice
or thrice a Day.

Gums to Strengthen: Take Japonian Earth, and in a pint of Claret, or Red Wine,
dissolve as much as you can of it; then decant the Liquor warily from the
subsiding Faeces, and with it, when well settled, wash your Mouth Morning and
Evening, and it will not only fasten the Teeth, but renew the Gums where they
are decayed or wasted.

Gunpowder to Remove: If any spots of Gunpowder, or Shot stick in the Face,
or other Parts of the Body, you may remove either of them: by taking fresh
Cow Dung, warming it, and putting to it a little Hogs-Lard, and applying it
Poultiswise.

Guts-Griping: Take about a quarter of a pint of Brandy, and having made a
Toast of Bread, not too fine and white, throw it very hot into the Brandy, and
as soon as it is thoroughly drenched, take it out and eat it hot: this being
repeated two or three times, the Pain will cease. Or use this, viz.

Take a handful of wild Camomil, wash it, and sees it in a quart of new Ale;
add an ounce of Licorice, and half an ounce of Ani-seeds; sweeten it with brown
Sugar Candy, and drink it very hot.

Guts-Griping, or, Colic: Take half a pint of good old Hock, and boil it, and
put therein a lump of Loaf-Sugar; drink it hot going to Bed.

Guts-Griping, or, Colic, another: Take Sage and Mint, boil them in a fit
proportion of Claret Wine; then strain it, and sweeten it with a little Sugar,
and drink it warm.

HAberdine-Pye: The Fish being boiled, take it from the Skin and Bones, and
mince it with some Pippins cored, season it with Nutmegs, Ginger, Cinnamon,
Pepper, and Caraway-seeds, Rose Water, Raisins, and Currants, Sugar, sliced
Dates, scraped Lemon Peel, Butter beaten up with Verjuice and Whitewine; and
when these are so ordered, fill up a Pie with them, and being baked, ice it
with Sugar dissolved in Rose Water.

Hair to Fasten: If the Hair be subject to fall off, Take half a pint of
Ox-Urin newly made; boil in it Sage and Rosemary-flowers, of each a quarter of
an ounce; then strain out the Liquid part, and anoint the Roots of your Hair
with it, and a pretty while after, wash it over with Water wherein Bran and a
little Alom have been boiled.

Hair to make Grow: Take of the Leaves of Radishes, boil them in Water with as
much more of the Roots of Dog-Fennel, and being well boiled, strain and press
them out, and with the Decoction often wash the place where the Hair is fallen
off, and it will grow again.

Hair to make grow Thick: Take of the best Honey three spoonful; a handful of
Vine-sprigs that twist like Wyre, beat them well, and strain their Juice into
the Honey; temper them a little over a gentle Fire, and lay it on the Place
where the Hair is come off.

Hair to make grow Thick, another: Take three ounces of Honey, and a handful of
the Tendrils of a Vine; bruise the latter with the former, and having heated
them over a gentle Fire till the Honey is melted, anoint the Place where the
Hair is defective, or grows thin, and it will, in often so ordering, sprout up,
and become very thick and curling.

Hair to take away: To do this, Beat the Shells of a great many Eggs, very
small, and put them into a Still with a quick Fire, and there will come forth a
curious Water, with which anoint the Place where superfluity of Hair grows.
This being done, take the hard Dung of a He-Cat, dry it, and powder it; then
make a Plaster with strong Vinegar, and put it to the Place.

Hands to Beautify: Take of the Oil of Myrrh half an ounce, the Marrow of
Hogs, or Calves-Feet, two ounces; of the Water of Tartar, an ounce; the Oil of
Spiknard half an ounce: mix and dissolve them well over a gentle Fire, and
allay their Heat with two ounces of the Oil of sweet Almonds: then strain it,
put it into Boxes, anoint the Hands and Face with it, and it will not only take
away Spots or other Deformity, but create a lovely charming Complexion.

Hare Boiled the French way: Take a large Piece of Beef that has a Marrow-Bone
in it, as also a piece of Bacon, and your Hare; season it with a little Salt,
and when the Hare is almost boiled, take it up and bruise some Pease, and set
them a boiling in the Broth wherein the Hare was boiled; then take all the
Bones out of your Beef, and put the Hare again into the Pease, and the Pease
being boiled enough, take them up and strain them through a thin Cloth, and
put the Pulp a boiling in a Pot by themselves: then dish up the Hare, and
smother it by covering ^t over with the Pulp of the Pease, and it eats very
excellently. In this manner they order a Capon or Turkey.

Hare to Dress the French way: Take a Hare cased and washed from the Blood, as
also some fresh Pork, or Veal, cut in handsome pieces of about three Fingers
thickness; put it into an earthen Pot, or Pipkin, with Onions fried with
Hog's-Lard; then put to the Hare and Pork some Beef-Broth, as much as will half
cover it, so set it a stewing on a gentle Fire, renewing it by degrees: then
take Bread well toasted, and the Livers of six Fowl parboiled, put them to
steep in some of the Broth, then add Cinnamon, Ginger, Long-pepper, Nutmegs,
Cloves, and Salt, finely bruised, but not to Powder, of each two drams: then
with a little Vinegar and Claret Wine, strain it into the Pot where your Hare,
Pork, or Veal is, and let them stew together till they are enough; then
withdraw them, and so dish them up at your pleasure.

Hare Hashed: Case it, draw it, and cut it in moderate Pieces, wash the Pieces
in Claret and Water very clean, strain the Liquor, and parboil the Parts; then
take and slice them, and put them into a Dish with the Legs, Head, Wings, or
Shoulders whole; cut the Chine into many Parts, then put in two or three sliced
Onions, and some of the Liquor wherein it was parboiled, stew it between the
Dishes over a gentle Fire, covering it close till it be tender; and put to it
some beaten Pepper, Mace and Nutmeg, serve it on fine carved Sippets, running
it over with beaten Butter and Marrow, garnishing with Lemons and Barberries.

Hare, or Leveret-Pye: Most are of Opinion, that these are best baked with
their Bones, though some, more nice than wise, will bone them; however, being
baked with the Bones, let the Bones be broke, and the Hare well larded, season
it with Salt, Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Bay Leaves, put it into either white
or brown Past at your discretion, and with it a sufficient quantity of Lard
beaten, that it may as well conveniently lie under it as above; and being
baked, stop the Funnel of the Pie, after having poured in some melted Butter,
and set it in a dry Place to cool; and being cold, serve it up; but observe, if
you will bone your Hare, to leave the Flesh as whole as may be, and larding it
with great Lard, season it as directed.

Hare to Roast with her Skin: When it is imboweled, dry the inside with a clean
Cloth, make a farcing or stuffing of all manner of sweet Herbs, as sweet
Marjoram, Savory, Thyme, Parsley, etc. shred very small and rolled up in Butter;
and being almost roasted, fley off the Skin: bread it with fine grated Manchet,
Flower and Cinnamon very thick, and so froth it up, and dish it on Sauce made of
grated Bread, Claret, Wine-Vinegar, Barberries, Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger; and
garnish the Dish with Shalots, Lemon and Parsley.

Hare, another way: Put the Hare on the Spit or Gridiron, when it is hot
through, cut it into quarters, and put it into hot Hog's-Lard in a Drying Pan;
then steep toasted Bread in Beef-Broth and Whitewine, strain it through a
Strainer with beaten Ginger and Cloves, add then some Verjuice, so that your
Composition may appear blackish, but not too thick nor binding; and so with
Butter, Mustard, Sugar, and Juice of Lemon well beaten, serve up this Dish,
garnishing it with slices of Lemons and Greens: in the same manner you may
dress Rabbits, but especially old Coneys.

Haricote of Mutton: Take a Shoulder of Mutton, or the bloody end of it, with
the Head, Neck and Breast, and cut it into small Pieces, and fry it in a
Drying Pan with tried Suet. Hog's-Lard, and some small shred Onions: this done,
put it in a Stew Pan with Beef-Broth, and let it stew and boil with Parsley,
Hyssop, and Sage shred small, and serve it up with Sippits, garnished with
slices of Lemon, and green Parsley.

Hartshorn Burnt: Take of Hartshorn, as much as you think convenient, put it
into a Crucible, and so put it into the Fire, till it becomes black, and
continue it till it grows white, powder it, and make it into Troches with
Rose Water, and so keep it for use. In this manner you may reduce Ivory or Bone
into a fine Powder.

Hart's-tongue: The Decoction of it in Whitewine, is excellent for the Swelling
of the Spleen, Flux of the Belly, and Spitting of Blood. If outwardly applied,
it cleanses Wounds and Ulcers. The Powder of it is of excellent use in the
Palpitations of the Heart, for Fits of the Mother, and Convulsions, being taken
in Small-beer, and Posset Drink. A Conserve made of the green Leaves of it, is
to the same Effect.

Hash of Oysters: Parboil boil about three quarts of Oysters in their Liquor,
mince about two quarts of them small, and stew them with half a pint of
Whitewine, an Onion cut in Quarters, four large Blades of Mace and a grated
Nutmeg, sliced Chestnuts, some Pistaches, and a quarter of a pint of
White-wine-Vinegar, a pound of fresh Butter, Pepper, Salt, and a bundle of
sweet Herbs, stew them well on a soft Fire, and fry the remaining Oysters
seasoned with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, in a Batter made of fine Flower, Eggs,
and Cream; green it with the Juice of Spinnage, and serve them together with
Lemon-Juice, and a Garnish of sliced Orange and Olives.

Hash of Scotch Collops: Cur a Leg of Veal in thin slices, beat them with a
Rolling-pin, and fry them with fine slices of interlarded Bacon, add sweet
Butter, and being well fried, dish them up, put from them the Butter you fried
them with, and put beaten Butter, with Lemon, Gravy, and the Juice of Oranges.
Mutton may be hashed the same way, only leave out the slices of Bacon: or if
you would do them the French way, parboil your Meat, then take it up and pare
off some thin slices on the upper and under side, and round it; prick it
through, and let out the Gravy on the slices, then shred and bruise some Thyme,
Marjoram, Parsley, and Savory, and put to them sweet Butter and Verjuice, with
some beaten Pepper; and when the Meat is boiled or stewed, pour all the Herbs,
Slices and Broth into the Dish, and serve it up garnished with Parsley and
Barberries.

Hash'd Venison, the Dutch way: Cut a Haunch of Venison into Collops, fry it
with Sweet-Butter and Oysters, adding a little Gravy or strong Broth: then
having your Stew Pan simpering with some Broth or Gravy, put it in with the
Oysters, and suffer it to stew about half an hour; and then strip in some Thyme
and Winter-savoury, with a Blade or two of Mace, and some whole Cloves and
Pepper: then make Anchovy-Sauce, and with the Gravy serve it up, garnished with
Lemon Peel, and Shalots peeled and slit in halves, and some few heaps of grated
Manchet mixed with Cinnamon and Pepper. This is very savoury Meat.

Hastereaux of Veal: Cut them out of a Leg or Gigget of Veal as thin as
possible may be, and beat them with the backside of a Knife or Rouling-pin:
then take fat Bacon or Lard, and Beef Suet and sweet Herbs, mincing them very
small, and mincing them together, season them with small beaten Spice and fine
Salt; and having made them up round like an Orange, or Balls of Venison, stew
them, and serve them up whole in good Broth, garnished with Oranges, and put
some Verjuice into the Broth.

Headache: Take green Hemlock that it tender, put it in the Socks of your
Shoes, that it may lie thinly between them and the Soles of your Feet, and
shift it once a day for that which is fresh.

Headache, another way: Take Bettony-water two ounces, Red Rose-leaves as much,
VVheat-flower two ounces; Oil of Roses and Housleek, an ounce of each; boil
these in a pint of VVine-Vinegar till they come to a thickness, then spread
them on a linen cloth, applying it to the Forehead and Temples, and it will
avert the Pain.

Headache, another way to Cure: Take four ounces of Rosemary-flowers, stamp
'em, and infuse them in White Wind and Bettony-water: let them infuse in the
Sun, or some other gentle Heat, four or five days, the Glass into which you put
them being close stopped; then distill them over a gentle fire, and you will find
a Scum or oily Matter; separate these, and keep them close stopped in different
Glasses. Their Virtues are excellent; viz.

The Oil, by anointing the Forehead and Tempos, eases all inveterate
Head-achs, and strengthens the Memory and Sight: being dropped into the Ears, it
helps Deafness: some few drops of it in White Wind are prescribed for the
Dropsy and Yellow-Jaundice. It helps the Colic, and Rising of the Mother;
and is an Antidote against Poison, and infectious Air, the Plague and
Pestilence. It comfort the Heart, and cleanses the Blood; makes a merry and
cheerful Countenance, and creates a good Color. It purges out the Humors, by
Sweat, that occasion the Itch, or any Breaking-out. In short, It is a sovereign
Remedy in all Distempers proceeding from cold and moist Humors. The Water is
good for Beautifying, and sets a rare Complexion on the Face and Hands.

Headache Inveterate: Take strong Vinegar, dip a Rose-cake in it, and sprinkle
that over with scraped Nutmeg and Powder of Wormwood; lay it to the Forehead,
and burn Feather few under your Nose, on a Chafing Dish, that the Smock may
ascend up your Nostrils.

Headache or Megrim: Take Unguentum desiccativum rubrum one dram, the Power
them well together, and make them into a Plaster upon a piece of new Leather,
and lay to the Temples upon the pained side: or if that, by reason of an
universal Pain, cannot be distinguished, lay it on both sides, renewing it
every other day, and the desired Cure will be effected.

Head Bald: To cover it with a comely Hair, if Age has not proceeded too far,
and utterly denied it, Take a handful of Southernwood, dry it to Powder, or
reduce it to Ashes by Fire: mix it with the Oil of Radishes, and anoint the
place, and in a few times so doing you may perceive the Hair to sprout amain.

Head Breaking-out: This mostly happens to Children, caused by the
super-abundance or hot Humors, and is very afflicting and offensive to them:
To cure it, boil some Olive-oil and Vinegar, to the consumption of a third
part; of Hogs-lard an ounce; anoint it with these, when they come to the
thickness of an Ointment, both Morning and Evening; putting on, after the
anointing, a linen Cap; and give them to drink Whey, wherein Scabious,
Agrimony, and a few Tops of Wormwood have been boiled, to clear and purify the
Blood.

Head Breaking-out, another way to cure: Take Butter and Salt, and fry them
till a Blackness appear. Or, Take fine Olive-oil and Vinegar, beat them
together, and anoint the place afflicted both Morning and Evening. If these
have no effect, Take a quart of Whey, boil in it Agrimony, Scabious and
Wormwood, of each an ounce, and wash the Breaking out with the Liquid; you must
give two ounces of it to drink at the same time.

Head to Clear: Snuff up, in the Morning fasting, a spoonful, or somewhat less,
of the clarified Juice of Ground Ivy, or of Beets, spitting out, from time to
time, as much Liquor as comes into your Mouth.

Head disturbed with Noises: Take a green Ash-stick, and whilst one end is
burning, receive the Water or Moisture that hisses out of the other; dissolve
in it a little Civet; and being well dissolved, drop a drop or two of it into
the Ear, when you go to rest, and immediately stop it with Lint moistened in
the same Liquid, and lie still about half an hour with that Ear uppermost that
it is dropped into; in so often doing, the Noise will cease, and the Head be
restored to its former Ease and Quiet.

Head Lightness: If by reason of a violent Sickness, as Fevers, Smallpox, etc.
there is a Lightness in the Brain that disorders the Understanding, Take the
distilled Waters of White single Primroses, and Couslips, of each an ounce: put
into them a dram of the Powder of Pearl, and a grain of Bezoar-stones; and let
the Party take it, and compose himself, as much as the Disorder will permit, to
rest after it. This has brought many to their Speech again.

Head Lightness, another: For the Lightness or Swimming of the Head, especially
in or after Sickness, Take the Flowers of single White Primroses, distill them,
and drink of the Water: If this succeed not, mingle with it the like quantity
of Rosemary-flower-water, and Couslip-water, and this will soon restore your
Speech.

Head and Nerves: Take of the fresh Roots of both the Peonies, gathered about
the Full of the Moon, of each an ounce and a half; of Contrayerva half an
ounce; Elks-hoof an ounce; of Rosemary before it is flowered a handful, or with
the Flowers; Bettony, Hyssop, Wild Marjoram, Ground Pine, and Rue, of each
three drams; of the Wood of Aloes, Cloves, and the Seeds of the Letter
Cardamom, of each two drams; Ginger and Spikenard, of each one dram; Stechas
and Nutmegs, of each two drams and an half: After a warm Digestion for one day
in three quarts of the distilled Water of the Roots of Peony, bo^ them to two
in a Bath: then strain, and with four pound of Sugar make it into a Syrup an a
Bath. This is good for most Diseases of the Head and Nerves. The Dose is an
ounce, which may safely be taken at one time.

Head Noisie: If there be a beating or singing in the Head and Ears, Take a
pretty large silver Eel newly caught, tie it to a Spit, and let it roast
without any basting, unless with a little Water rubbed on with a cloth to keep
it moist, having, before you lay it down, put some Cummin-seeds into the Belly
of the Eel: then take what drops from it, and putting it into a glazed earthen
Vessel, let it stand close covered with some fresh Cumimn-seed on warm Embers,
and then going to Bed drop three or four drops into your Ears, or that only on
which side of the Head the Noise is most.

Head-Pains, a Cephalic Wine: Take two ounces and a half of Succory; the like
quantity of the Roots of Avens; Elecampane one once; Ceterach, Bettony,
Red-Sage, Liverwort, Carduus, Centaury, of each a handful; dried Orange-peel
half an ounce and two drams; bruise the Barks and Roots, and shred the Herbs
small: infuse them three or four days in a gallon of Rhenish-wine, often
shaking them; and then strain it, and drink about three ounces of it every
Morning fasting, and the like at Night when going to rest.

This helps the most violent Distempers of the Head, and also those of the
Spleen; and is an excellent Pectoral for the Breast and Lungs, as likewise for
curing Catarrhs.

Head-Pains tending to Madness: Take a quarter of a pint of the Juice of
Ground Ivy, of the Juices of Burnet and Red Sage, of each two ounces: drink
them fasting in the Morning, and at Night when going to rest; and do it for
twelve or thirteen days, but not successively, intermitting a day between, if
the Distemper continue so long; and after it you may take Red Rose-leaves
dried; mix them with Flower and Vinegar, Oil of Roses, and the Juice of
Housleek; boil them together until they be thick, and spreading them as a
Poultis or Plaster, apply them to the Forehead and Temples.

The Conserve of Rue is also excellent for the Brain, preserving it from the
Fits of the Apoplexy, Palsy, and such like painful and dangerous Distempers.
Make it in this manner; with one part of Rue, mix two parts of fine Sugar,
mixing them well together, so that they may be made into a Conserve; of which
eat both Morning and Evening to the bigness of a large Hazle Nut.

Head Powder: Take the Flowers and Leaves of Bettony, Damask-Roses, and the
Flowers of Rosemary and Sage; dry these well, and add the Powder of
Lignum-Aloes, and some Seeds of Nigella Romana: make them into a fine Powder,
to be used as an Hair-Powder, when the Party goes to rest, his Head covered
close with a Cap. This is excellent against the Headache, Pains in the Eyes,
and likewise Swimming of the Head.

Head to Purge: Take Agarick and Mastick, of each three drams; the Roots of
Flower-de-luce and Hare-hound, of each one dram; Turbith five drams in Powder,
Hiera Picra half an ounce; Pulp of Coloquintida and Sarcocoll, of each two
drams; Myrrh one dram, Sapa as much as shall suffice to make them into a mass.
These purge very strongly from all parts of the Body, both Choler and
Phlegmatic Humors, but especially from the Head and Breast, and are good
against old Colds and Catarrhs. The Dose is half a dram.

Head Scald: Take Olive-oil, put it into a Dish-full of fair Water, beat them
well together; then add some fine Powder of Brimstone and May-Butter; make an
Ointment thereof, and anoint the Head therewith.

Head Scald, another: Take Olive-oil two ounces, put it into half a pint of
Spring Water, stir and beat them well together; then add half an ounce of
Flower of Brimstone, and three ounces of May-Butter, and over a gentle fire
make it into an Ointment, and anoint the Head therewith as hot as may be
endured: bath it about seven or eight hours afterward with Oil of Roses and
Camomel melted or mixed together over a gentle fire; and by often so doing, you
have the Remedy.

Head Scald, another: Take half a peck of Oyster-shells out of which the
Oysters have newly been unshell'd; calcine them in a clear fire so that they
may be reduced to Powder; sift it as fine as Flower, and mix it with White
Ointment, so that it may be something stiff, and anoint the Head with it daily,
and you will soon find the Effects answer your desire.

Head to Strengthen: Take Ointment of Mastick, and anoint the Temples and
Forehead therewith. You may make it in this manner: Take of the Oils of
Mastick, Wormwood and Nard, of each one ounce; Mastick, Mint, Coral, Red Roses,
Cloves, Cinnamon and Wood of Aloes, of each a dram; and of Yellow Wax a
sufficient quantity to make it into an Ointment. This not only strengthens the
Head, but the Nerves and Stomach, and is Astringent.

Hearing: For Thickness of Hearing, Take Garden Daisie-roots, and beat then
till a Juice may be pressed from them; then laying your Head on a Bolster, your
Body lying at length, drop three or four drops into the Ear you hear best
withal; and so continue to do for three of four days together, stopping the Ear
with Cotton-wool, or Lint, to keep the Air out.

Hearing to Recover: Take the Juices of Celandine and Daisie roots, and drop
into the Ears, stopping them afterward with Black Wool or Cotton, lying on your
Back, with your Head very low, for the space of half an hour after it; and in
twice or thrice so doing, you will find great advantage by it.

Heart-Burning: Take Red Coral finely poudered about a dram, take it in
White Wind or Ale: for want of this, scrape some Chalk that has been well burnt
in the fire, and drink it in the abovesaid Liquors.

Heart to Cheer: Take Carduus, Bean, Borrage and Bugloss-waters, equal
quantities, and in all but one ounce; put into them three grains of
Bezoar-stone finely beaten to Powder; and having infused it for the space of an
hour, drink it off, and keep your self warm an hour afterward, and then drink a
glass of Muskadel; and in so doing often, it will remove Heart-sickness, Pains
and Tremblings, as also Melancholy, etc.

Heart to Cheer and Comfort: Take of the Leaves of Celandine the Greater with
the Roots, three handfuls; of Rue a handful; of Scordium two handfuls; Dittany
of Creet, and Carduus Benedictus, of each a handful and an half; the Roots of
Angelica and Zedoary, of each three drams; the outward Peels of Citron and
Lemon, of each five drams; of July-Flowers one ounce and an half; Red Roses,
and of the Flowers of the Lesser Centaury of each two drams; shred what is to
be shred, and infuse them three days in three pints of Malaga-Wine, or the
Spirit of Wine: The Vinegar of July-Flowers, and the Juice of Lemons, of each a
pint: distill them in a Bath in a Glass Vessel; and to the distilled Liquor add
of Cinnamon three drams, Cloves two drams and an half, Mithridate an ounce,
Venice-Treacle three ounces, Troches of Vipers half an ounce, Camphire two
scruples, Wood of Aloes a dram, Mace two drams, Yellow Saunders one dram and an
half; of the Seeds of Carduus Benedictus one ounce; of the Seeds of Citron
three drams: let these be infused two days, then with a gentle fire distill
them twice or thrice, and draw off half thereof. This Water is excellent to
Cheer and Enliven the Heart, and for expelling Melancholy.

Heart-Passion: Boil Pimpernel the Garden sort, Herb, Flower and Roots, in Ale,
till the Ale be very strong of them; drink it up hot, sweetened with a little
Syrup of Roses or Violets: this twice or thrice done, removes Heartsickness, or
the Infection of the Plague; and made into Posset Drink with Milk, is good in
Pestilential Fevers.

Heart-sickness to Remove: Take Ale, and make a Posset Drink thereof: then
clarify it, and sees Pimpernel in it, till it becomes strong of the Herb;
sweeten it a little, and drink it often.

Heat in the Eyes: Beat the White of an Egg, and dissolve in it a pretty
quantity of fine Loaf-Sugar; beat them till they become thin, then drop it into
the Eye.

Heat in the Face: Dip a Cloth in the Juice of Lemons, and Salt and Atom heated
in White Wind; and in often applying it, the Heat or Redness of the Face will
be removed, and the Skin become clear, smooth, and of its proper Color.

Heats or Inflammations of the Eyes: Take the Powder of Tutty-stone, Aloes and
Sugar, of each an ounce: infuse them in a quart of Red Rose Water and
White Wind: being put into a double Glass, and placed in Balneo Mariae five or
six days with often shaking; wash the Eyes, Forehead, Temples, and indeed the
whole Head with this often, so you will find a speedy Remedy.

Heat of the Liver: Take Liverwort, Garden and Wild, and Endive, of each a
handful; Maidenhair half an handful; boil them in Water with a little Sugar;
and being clarified, put into the Decoction a little of the Wine of
Pomgranates, and drink it alone, and in your usual Drink, for a Week together,
or as you see occasion. The Dose is a quarter of a pint at a time.

Hellebore, to Prepare: Infuse the Roots of Black Hellebore in the Juice of
Quinces three days in a moderate Heat, then dry them, and keep 'em for use.

Hemlock: This, by reason of its Coldness, is supposed to be poisonous; yet it
is frequently used, and not without success, for Tumors, and Inflammations of
the Spleen. A Cataplasm or Plaster of it with Ammoniacum, powerfully discuss
all Tumors or hard Swellings. Twenty grains of the Root in Powder, is an
admirable Diaphoretick in any Malignant Fevers.

Hemlock Plaster: Take of the Juice of the Leaves of Hemlock four ounces;
Vinegar of Squills, and Gum-Ammoniack, of each eight ounces: dissolve the Gum
in the Juice and Vinegar; and after a sufficient Infusion make them into a
Salve over a gentle fire. This is a very good Plaster to soften hard
Swellings, or take away Inflammations.

Hemorrhoids: If these be not too much inflamed, dip your Finger or a fine Rag
in the Balsom or Sulphur made with Oil of Turpentine, and besmear and anoint
the Tumors once or twice a day: But if inflamed much, take Myrrh, Olibanum,
common Frankincense, of each a like quantity: powder and mix them very well,
and receive the Fume of this Mixture cast on a Chafing Dish of Coals with
Embers, in a Close-stool, or some such convenient thing, about a quarter of an
hour, more or less, as the Party can endure it.

Hemorrhoids, another: To prepare these for a Cure, Take White Wind, boil it in
a handful of Incense, which is only to comfort it; then wash with it the part
grieved very often; then dip some Lint or Rags in Oleum Magistrale, (to make
which, you will find under O L,) and often apply it as a sovereign Ointment for
this Grievance. Then for a Plaster, Take the said Oil, Venice-Turpentine, and
new Beeswax, of each an ounce; set them over a gentle fire, and keep them
stirring a quarter of an hour; then let it cool, and being cold, apply it as a
Plaster. This is good for Fistula's, Ulcers, and all such Grievances
occasioned by hot Humors offensive to Nature. It is applied in Wounds made by
a Sword, etc. Gunshot, and Blasts by Gunpowder, Scalding with Lead, or any
Mineral.

Hemorrhoids, another way: Take the Sole of an old Shoe worn by a Man much used
to travel, cut it to pieces, and burn it, yet neither to gray nor white Ashes,
but to a fryable and tender Coal: reduce it into an impalpable Powder. Take
then unsalted Hogs-lard, and work it with it to an Ointment, and anoint the
afflicted part often therewith.

Hen-Pye: Take away the Hens Breast Bone, truss and set them in warm Water,
lard it with Lard not too big, season it with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg; raise
your Paste to an Oval form, and put in your Hens, and garnish or fill them with
Champignons Artichoak-bottoms, Livers of Fowls, Sweet-Herbs, and Lard melted or
beaten: cover the Pie with the Lid, and let it bake for the space of three
hours; and being baked, put in some Juice of Lemons, beaten up with Butter and
Gravy.

Hern-Pye: Take your Hern, and pull the Feathers and Stumps clean off: break
the Breast Bone, and lay it to soak in warm Water and Salt for the space of an
hour: then having Sweet-Herbs and Onions shred, make little Balls of them;
sticking them together with Butter, and put it into the Belly; season it with
Salt, Pepper, Nutmeg, Mace and Ginger finely beaten: then lard the Breast, and
stick pieces of Lard under the Wings: lay also other Balls about it of the
Composition of these that were put into the Belly, till the Coffin is full:
then sprinkle on some Juice of Lemon, and so bake it for two hours: when it is
enough, pour melted Butter into it, set it in a dry place till cold, and then
serve it up.

Hern to Roast: Take a Hern that is not too old, lard the Back and Breast after
you have parboiled it; then put it on a Spit, baste it with Butter and
White Wind beaten up together, and dridge it with grated Bread and Sweet-Herbs
cut very small: and when it is sufficiently roasted, make a Sauce of the beaten
Yolks of Eggs, Anchovy, Claret, and Vinegar: garnish your Dish with Oranges,
Lemons, Savory, and Tops of Rosemary.

Herring-Pye to Season: Take about eight middle-sized Herrings, the soft-Roes
are the best, slit them down the Backs, and taking out the Bones, rub them over
with Pepper and Salt: then mince Onions, Leeks and Apples, and scrape in
Lemon Peel; then strew over them some Nutmeg finely grated, half a pound of
Currants, and mix a pound of Butter with a little Flower, and place it above and
beneath in thin slices.

Hiccough: This is dangerous when it happens in Fevers; therefore to remedy it
in that extremity, Take only two or three preserved Damascens at a time,
keeping your mouth close shut, and holding your breath now and then.

Hippocras of White Wind: Take about three quarts of the best White Wind, a
pound and an half of Sugar, and an ounce of Cinnamon; two or three Tops of
Sweet-Marjoram, and a little whole Pepper; let these run thorough a filtering
Bag with a grain of Musk; then add the Juice of a large Lemon, and when it has
taken a gentle heat over the fire, and stood for the space of three or four
days close covered; put it in Bottles, and keep it close stopped, as an excellent
and generous Wine, as also a very curious Cordial to refresh and enliven the
Spirits: Or, if you think it best, as to the Color, you may make it of the
Color of Claret, though this at pleasure may be colored with Red Wine, Syrup,
of Elder-berries, Mulberries, Clovegilly-flowers, etc. It eases the
Palpitations and Tremblings of the Heart, and removes the Causes of
Panick-Fears, Frights, and sudden Startings: It gives Rest to weary Eyes, and
heats the cold Stomach.

Hispidula, Known otherwise by the name of Coltsfoot, is an Herb growing on
Hills, and bearing a Red Flower, and sometimes a White: it has a particular
Virtue against the Ulcers of the Lungs, Phthisick, and Spitting of Blood. A
distilled Water of the whole-Plant, and a Syrup made of the Juice, are either
of them admirable good against the Consumption of the Lungs. The Essence of the
Juice is singular good against the Bloody Flux, and either Fluxes of the Bowels.

Hoarseness: Take three ounces of Hyssop-water, and sweeten it with fine Sugar;
then beat well in it the Yolk of a new-lay'd Egg, and drink it fasting.

Holly: The Prickles of Leaves boiled in Posset Drink, wonderfully ease the
Colic, and Pains in the Bowels, (as has been often approved, when other
Remedies more costly have failed.)

Honey Clarified: Boil Honey that has been clarified with the Whites of Eggs,
until it come to a thickness: then take it off the fire; and when it is cool,
put it up for your use. This is good in Inflammations, either taken inwardly,
or outwardly applied to any Part where extraordinary Heat is predominant.

Honey of Raisins, the Best: Take three quarts of Water, heat it, and when it
bubbles up, scum it: stone two pound of Raisins, and put them into it till they
swell and are pulpy; then boil them to the consumption of half the Water; then
strain and press out the remainder of the liquid part; boil the Decoction to
the thickness of a moderate Honey; and then add two pound of clarified Honey,
and being well mingled, boil it to the thickness of a perfect Honey.

This is good for any Stoppages or Defects in the Lungs: if mixed with
White Wind, it helps Digestion; and mixed with cooling simple Water, is given
in Fevers.

Honey of Violets: Take of the Flowers of Violets, the Bottoms chipt off, viz.
Purple Violets, two pound; infuse them in two quarts of Water, boil them up,
and add two pound of Honey, and so boil them up to the thickness of an Honey,
and press the liquid part thorough a linen Cloth.

This eases the Inflammation of the Liver, cures sore Mouths; and mixed with
the Decoction of Wood Sorrel and Barberries, is Cooling, and much allays the
Heat of Fevers. Thus you may make Honey of Roses.

Hordeum: This is an Excrescence growing on the Eyelid: To remove it, Take
Housleek, dry it, and bring it to a Powder; then take of the Housleek-juice,
and make a Cataplasm of the Powder, and cover as much as is needful of it, viz.
to the thickness of Half a Crown, or a Crown-piece, in the fold of a Rag;
fasten that part then upon the Eye, and let the rest of the Cloth bind round
the Head, and so let it continue all night, and repeat the Application two or
three times, if need require.

Horminum, or Clary, (by some called Clear-eye:) There are two sorts of this,
Garden and Wild. The Herb and Flower is Cleansing, Attenuating and
Strengthening, and is good to be eaten by those that have weak Backs, or Pains
in them. The Seed of it concocted in Spring Water, is wonderful good for
clearing the Eyesight, the Eyes being washed therewith. The Powder of the
Leaves snuffed up the Nose, purge the Head and Brain of Phlegm. A dram taken
inwardly, provokes Venery. The Essence of the Juice strengthens Weakness in the
Reigns, and much avails in Barrenness, comforting and strengthening the Womb.
A mucilage of the Seed discusses Swellings. The Leaves of Wild Clary are
discussive, strengthening, and clear the Sight.

Hotch-pot of Beef: Take a Brisket Rand of Beef, any piece of Mutton, and a
piece of Veal; put this into a sufficient quantity of boiling Water, keeping it
clear from the Scum: then put in Sweet-Herbs; minced Cabbage, but not too
small; and Carrots sliced: let them boil almost to a Jelly, and so serve them
up on Sippets.

Hotch-pot of Pigeons: Put your Pigeons (drawn and a few Sweet-Herbs finely
shred, and mixed with Butter) into a Pot, as many as you think convenient: then
put to them some strong Broth, after you have laid between them some slices of
interlarded Bacon, beaten Nutmeg, Ginger, and a little Saffron, that they may
give them a color; then make 'em boil a-pace, and when they are boiled enough,
put in some Verjuice of Grapes, or Wine-Vinegar, and so season them with a
little Salt and Pepper, and serve them upon Sippits. And thus you may order a
Hotchpot of Chickens, only these you must cut into quarters, and lard them with
small square pieces of Bacon Lard, and boil or stew them not too hastily: you
may add some sweet Herbs shred small, and a piece of Butter; and being enough,
garnish and serve them up as the Pigeons. This way you may draw any sort of
small Fowl, either Wild or Tame.

Humor in the Eye: Take new Milk, let it stand till a little Cream comes over
it, then lying on your Back, dip your Finger into the Cream, and shutting the
Eyelids, besmear the Eyes with it, keeping it out of the Eyes as much as may
be. Let this be done when you go to Bed, and let it continue on till the
Morning, and to renew it often.

Humors fallen into the Eyes: To remedy this Grievance, Take of Whitewine six
ounces, red Rose Water the like quantity, Tutty-stone in powder three scruples,
Eye-bright-water six ounces, Aloes three Scruples, Loaf-Sugar finely powdered
four scruples; put them into a Glass with a narrow Mouth, stop it close, and
let them infuse in the Sun, or some warm place, about three Days, then draw off
the purest Water separated from the settling, and wash the Eyes with it
frequently; and it will restore them to their strength and firmness of sight
without any Trouble.

Humor in the Eyes, a Water: Take prepared Tutty half an ounce, Pearl half a
scruple, Trochisci Alb-Ros five or six grains; red Rose Water, and
Succory-water, of each an ounce and a half: mix them well, and if you will have
the Medicine stronger, put three or four grains of Aloes into it, dissolve
these well by shaking as well as may be, and with the liquid part wash the
Place grieved.

Humors to Draw out of the Head and Face: Take a couple of new-lay'd Eggs, and
by opening the Top, take out part of the White, and put in some Powder of
Cummin-seed, and also the Powder of Anniseed by degrees; then having closed the
Egg with Past, till it is very hard: cut it in the middle, and lay it to the
Nape of the Neck.

Humors Sharp to Correct: Take the Roots of Marshmallows two ounces,
Meadow-grass, Asparagus, Raisins of the Sun, Licorice, Red Chich-Pease, of each
half an ounce; Tops of Marshmallows, Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Plantane,
Burnet, Saxifrage, white and black Maidenhair, of each one handful; of the four
lesser and greater Cold-seeds, of each three drams: wash and cleanse the Roots
from their Dirt, Pitch, and Strings, and so cut them into slices, and having
boiled the grass Roots first a quarter of an hour in eight pints of Water, put
into the Decoction the Roots of Marshmallows and Asparagus, let them boil well
for half an hour with the rest: after that add Licorice sliced, and the
Maidenhair cut, and when they begin to boil, put in the cold Seeds, and keep
them down in the Decoction: then take the whole off the Fire, and strain them
about a quarter of an hour after, and so clarify the Liquor with the White of
an Egg, and four pound of Sugar, and boil it on a moderate Fire to the
Consistence of a Syrup.

This eases Pains, corrects sharp Humors, and has its principal Use for the
remedying the Disease of the Bladder, and Stone in the Kidneys. An ounce at a
time may be taken in any convenient Liquor.

Hurt in the Eye: If the Hurt makes a solution of continuity in the Eye, take
two ounces of Cellendine-water, put to it three or four drops of clarified
Honey, stir them well together, and add four or five drops of Oil of Roses, and
dress the Eye with it. The Mixture must be made fresh once in two or three
Days, or it will four.

Hydromel, a short way: To make this, Take two Gallons of Spring Water, boil it
over a gentle Fire, keeping it scumming till no more will arise, then put in a
pound of the best Honey, adding a little Fenel and Eyebright tied up in a
bundle, and so let it sees till the third part be consumed, scum it very well,
strain it through a fine Cloth or Sieve, and with a quarter of a pound of
Sugar Candy finely beaten, put it up into a Vessel, and keep it close stopped;
and it is an excellent cooling Liquor, greatly comforting and reviving the
Spirits in Fevers and other hot Diseases, and is good in extreme Costiveness to
loosen the Belly, and contributes much to the freeness of making Urin.

Hydropsie: Take half a dram of transparent yellow Amber twice or thrice a day
in any convenient Liquor. This has been proved with good success.

Hyoscyamus, or Henbane: A Cataplasm of the Roots applied in the Gout, Tumor
or Toothache, gives present ease. The Leaves which have all the Virtues, and
Preparation of the Root, wonderfuly mollify and ease Pains, being laid on as
a Poultis. A distilled Water of the Flowers and Seeds, not ripe, and an Oil
compressed out of them, cure the Pains in the Teeth and Gout, and are held to
help Deafness and Noise, and Worms in the Ears, if dropped into them, though hot
too much. A Gataplasm of the Leaves boiled in Vinegar and Whitewine, eases all
Inflammations of the Eyes, asswages Swelling of the Gods, or in Women's
Breasts: Gives ease to the Sciatica, and other Pains in the Joints, proceeding
from hot Causes.

Hyssop, its Virtue: The Qualities are piercing and attenuating, opening and
abstersive, and therefore it has power to heal and purify. Being concocted
with Figs, Honey, and Rue, of an equal quantity in fair Water, is good for
Inflammations of the Lungs, old Coughs, Difficulty of Breathing and Catarrhs.
It kills Worms in the Belly, and being beaten with Salt and Cummin, it remedies
the poisonous Biting of Serpents, if immediately applied to the Wound with a
mixture of Honey. It is profitable to those that are troubled with the
Falling Sickness, the Decoction of it being drunk in VVhitewine, as also to
cause the voiding of Phlegm, especially when it chiefly oppresses the Stomach
and Lungs, as also the phlegmatic Maladies of the Brain and Sinews; and not
only purges, but also fortifieth them. It drives away Ventosities, and moves
Appetite; provokes Urin, and lessens the shaking of the Ague Fit, sharpens the
Sight, and supporteth a good Color. It is good for the Spleen and Dropsy, and
is singularly good against the Quinsie in the Mouth and Throat, being
gargarized with the Decoction of it, and Figs in fair Water. The Oil made of
the Leaves and Flowers helps refrigerated or benumbed Sinews and Nerves, and
strengthens them: And in brief so admirable are the Virtues of this Plant, that
it has begot a Saying, viz. He that eats Hyssop, shall live long, etc.

Hysteric Affections: Take an ounce or sufficient quantity of Volatile Salt of
Hartshorn, drop on it as much Spirit of Tartar as will satiate it, when the
Conflict is over; digest and mix it for a while, that it may acquire a redness
in Color, and keep it carefully stopped. The Dose is four or five drops in any
convenient Syrup. This is excellent good for the Genus Nervosum and other
Distempers and Afflictions.

Hysterick-Balsom: Take Galbanum, Opopanax, the Tears of Assa Foetida,
Sagapenum and Armoniack, of each a dram: distilled Oils of Rue,
Juniper Berries, and Amber, of each a scruple: melt the Gums in a brass Melter,
and mix the Oils, and make a Balsom by remixing them over a gentle Fire.

This Balsam is very excellent to suppress the Vapors of the Matrix, put up
into the Nostrils, and by anointing the Navel with it, it provokes the Terms,
or by applying it to the lower part of the Belly.

Hysterick-Elixir: Take the distilled Oil of Wormwood, Pennyroyal, Amber,
Featherfew, and Rue, of each six drops; Tincture of Castor and Saffron, of each
three ounces; refined Sugar, Elderflower-water, and Mugwort, of each six
ounces: make these into an Elixir, and let it stand ten Days before you use it.

It is an excellent Elixir against all Diseases and Infirmities of the Matrix.
The Dose is from half a spoonful to a whole one.

Hysterick-Liquor: Take of Castoreum two drams, Saffron and Camphire, of each
an ounce: let them macerate fifteen days in a pint of Aqua-vitae, not being set
on any Fire, and then filter the Liquid part.

This is an excellent Specific to suppress Vapors, especially in Women, when
arising from the Matrix: it may be taken upon any occasion, the Party who takes
it being fasting, that it may operate the better, from half a spoonful to a
whole one. It also may be snuffed up the Nostrils, or the Temples bathed with
it, to ease Pains in the Head, and prevent the ascending of offensive Vapors
to the Brain.

Hysterical-Vapours: These are usually called Fits of the Mother: To cure or
avert them, Take the Liver of a hunted Hare, hang it up for a time in a dry
place where it may not putrefie, till it may be reduced to powder, then take
two or three scruples at a time in any convenient Liquor.

Hysterick-Water: Take the Roots of Briony, and Piony, and Orange-peels, of
each three ounces; Flowers of Mugwort, Baum, Featherfew, Pennyroyol, Savin, and
Elder-flowers, of each ^ handful; Myrrh and Castor, of each an ounce; Saffron
two drams. Let these macerate twenty four Hours in two quarts of Canary, a pint
of the Water of the Catkins of Filberds, and the like quantity of
Orange-flower-water, and distill them all on a Sand-Bath.

This Water is very highly commended by most learned Physicians for the Cure of
the Distempers and Grievances of the Matrix. The Dose is an ounce and an half.

Or take this, viz. Juice of Neppe, Wormwood, Mugwort, Pennyroyal,
Elderflowers, and Hyssop, of each half a handful; distill them, and preserve the
Water for Use. This is not so powerful as the other, though very good, and
contributing much to the Ease of the aforesaid Grievances and Distempers.

IAcinth Confection: Take Jacinth Stones, red Coral, Bole Armoniack, and sealed
Earth, of each two ounces and two drams; the Shavings of Hartshorn, the Seeds
of Sorrel and Purslain, of each five drams; Leaves of Cretan Ditany, Grains of
Kermes, Roots of Tormentile and Bithworth, Seeds of Citron cleansed, Ethiopian
Myrrh, Saffron, red Roses, the several sorts of Saunders, the Shavings of Ivory
and of the Bone in a Stag's Heart, of each five drams; Smaragds, Oriential
Pearl, Topazes, raw Silk, and Leaves of Gold and Silver, of each eight
scruples, Ambergrease, and eastern Milk twenty grains, Syrup of
Clove-Gilliflowers six pound and seven ounces.

This is an excellent Confection to strengthen the Heart, remove Infections,
and is proper for killing of Worms in the Belly or Stomach. It may be taken in
a Bolus alone, or mixed with other Powders, or Opiates, or else dissolved in
Wine or Broth, or in some Cordial Liquor. The Dose is from a scruple to a dram,
and sometimes two: It is likewise outwardly applied in Liquid and solid
Epithems.

Iacobine-Dottage: Take either a Capon, or two Brace of Partridges, roast them,
and take out the Bones, and mince the Brawn very small, then breaking the
Bones, boil them in strong Broth with a Faggot of sweet Herbs, in an earthen
Pot: then strain out the Broth upon Sippits of Bread, and lay on the Bread a
layer of Flesh or grated Cheese, then put over it some Broth, of Almonds, and
make it boil; then fill up your Dish by little and little, till it be quite
full, so garnish it with the ends and pinions of the Wings, and the Bones, by
sticking them end ways in your Pottage, beat then the Yolks of three Eggs very
thin, mix them with a little Almond, or other Broth, and pour them over the
Pottage, and so serve it up as a dainty Mess.

Iaundice-Black, to Cure: Take Smallage, Sage, Parsley, and Groundsil, cut them
small, and boil them as Pot Herbs with Pork, and drink the Liquor, and feed on
the Meat, as a constant Diet for a Week together.

Iaundice-Black, another: Take a spoonful of Honey, boil it gently, and scum it
till it come to a good consistence, add then Wheat Flour and Saffron reduced
to Powder, as much of each as will lie on a Knife's point; and having mixed
them well over a gentle Fire, till the scent be lost, put them into a little
stone or earthen Pot, and let the Party grieved take the quantity of a Pea at a
time of it made up into a Pill, and anoint the Navel with it, chafing it into
the Cavity, repeating the application for some Days together, when the Stomach
is empty, and fast afterward two or three Hours.

Iaundice in Children: Take half an ounce of the best Rhubarb, make it into a
Powder; then take two handfuls of fine Currants, and incorporate it with them,
when extraordinary well beaten, and so make it up into an Electuary: And of
this, let Children take the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time fasting, and fast an
Hour after it for several Mornings successively.

Iaundice Yellow: Take an ounce of Castile-soap, slice it thin, and put it into
a pint of cold Small-beer; set it on the fire, and let it boil half away: then
scum it once, and strain it thorough a Sieve, and drink one half of it in the
Morning, and the other in the Evening: take a lump of Sugar after it, and fast
two or three hours. Taking this, will not hinder any moderate Business If the
Distemper be far gone, you may take it once or twice more in two or three
days-time afterward.

Iaundice Yellow, another: Take two or three ounces of Hemp Seed, and boil them
in New-Milk till some of the Seeds begin to open and burst, or somewhat longer;
then strain out the liquid part, and drink it very warm, renewing it, if
occasion require, for two or three days together.

Ielly: Take a dozen Calves-feet, sealed them, and take away the Fat between the
Claws, as also the great long Shank-bones; lay them in Water four or five
hours, and boil them in two gallons of Spring Water: keep them scumming till
the Water comes to about three quarts; then strain it thorough a thick linen
Cloth, and let it cool; and when it is cold, cleanse it from the Setlings: pare
off the top, and melt it; then put into a large Pipkin three quarts of
White Wind, and three races of Ginger sliced, six or seven blades of Mace, and
a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon, a grain of Musk, with eighteen Whites of Eggs
beaten with four pound of fine Sugar: mix them with the Jelly in the Pipkin,
then put in the Juice of three Lemons, and let them boil leisurely: then strain
it again, and run it, and serve it up with any Meats, or other things that
require Jellies. It Is very good to strengthen the Back, and enable Generation.

Iellies, their proper Meats: 1. Three pair of Calves-feet. 2. A Knuckle of
Veal, and a fine well-flesh'd Capon not very fat. 3. One pair of Calves-feet, a
well-flesh'd Capon, half a pound of Hartshorn, and an ounce of Isingglass. 4.
An old Cock, and a Knuckle of Veal. 5. Hartshorn, and a Pullet. 6. Good bodied
Capons only. 7. A Cock or Capon with Isingglass. 8. Jelly of Hogs-feet. 9.
Sheeps-feet, Lambs-feet, and Calves-feet. And these may be all ordered as the
foregoing, for matter of Boiling and Straining.

Ielly of Apples, the French way: Make a Decoction of Apples pared, sliced, and
cored; then run it thorough a fine Cloth, and to a French pint (which is
almost one of our quarts) put about three quarters of a pound of Sugar, and so
boil it up to a Jelly. This is very cooling and wholesome for the Stomach, and
good to be given in Fevers, and hot Diseases; yet it must be taken, in such
cases, with moderation.

Ielly-Broth: For the true making this, observe what is material, besides the
matter to be jellied, viz. the Meats, add a, quart of White Wind, a pound and a
half of Sugar, six Eggs, two Nutmegs sliced, a quarter of an onnce of Mace, two
Races of Ginger sliced, a little stick of Cinnamon grossly bruised, two grains of
Musk, and Ambergrease.

Sometimes, for variety, instead of Wine, use Grape-Juice, a quart of the Juice
of Lemons, a pint of the Juice of Oranges, a quart of Woodsorrel, or a Quart of
the Juice of Quinces.

Ielly Crystalline: To do this, Take half a dozen Calves-feet, scald off the
Hair, take off the Claws, and take out the great Bones and Fat; then casting
the Flesh into fair Water, shift them three or four times a day and a night,
and in the morning boil them in a glazed Pipkin, in six quarts of Water,
keeping it very clean scumm'd, till it is reduced by boiling to three quarts;
then strain it into a clean earthen Vessel, and when it is cold, take away the
Dross from the bottom, and the Fat from the top, if any remain there; then put
it into a large Pipkin of six quarts, and put to it two quarts of old
White Wind and the Juice of four Lemons, three blades of Mace, and two races of
Ginger sliced; then melt or dissolve it again into Broth, and let it cool, and
then have four pound of Sugar ready beaten, and in a large Dish mix it with
twelve Whites of Eggs; then put them into the Pipkin where the Jelly is, and so
stir them together with a grain of Musk, and Ambergrease: put it in a fine
linen Cloth; bound up, and a quarter of a pint of Damask-Rose-water, and set
it a stewing on a gentle Charcoal-fire; before it boils, put in a little
Ising-glass; and being boiled, cool it, and then run it up.

Ielly of whole Currants: Boil to candy sour pound of fine White Sugar
clarified with the Whites of Eggs; put into it Red Currants about five pound:
let them boil together till they are almost become a Jelly, then put into it
some whole Currants fresh and cleanly picked; and when they are enough, put them
into the Sugar, but let it be very clear, and well ordered, and scum it well
while it boils with the Sugar, and so you will have an excellent Jelly, very
cooling and grateful to the Stomach, and useful for restoring a lost Appetite.

Ielly of Flesh: Take a Red Cock, and a Knuckle of Mutton, or the Sinews and
Knuckle of Veal with a little Mutton, Raisins of the Sun stoned; boil all these
to pieces: then take the Vessel wherein they boil, from off the fire, pour but
what is in it into a wooden Vessel, and break and mix it together very well:
then run it thorough a Strainer; and when it has stood all night, scum off the
top, and season the rest with Sugar, a stick of Cinnamon broken very small, a
blade or two of Mace; so boil it up again, and strain it thorough a Jelly-bag
for use. It is exceeding nourishing and good for those that are in, or
enclining to a Consumption; also to restore weak and decayed Bodies.

Ielly of Gooseberries, the French way: Take Gooseberries, and press or bruise
them, and strain out the Pulp thorough a Straining-cloth: measure the Juice,
and to every pint put three quarters of a pound of Sugar: make it boil up well
together; and when it is so well boiled, that some of it being laid on a Plate,
it will not stick, but come clean of, then strain it, and keep it to put into
Tarts with Pears, Apples, Quinces, or the like, to make them taste like
Gooseberries, when Gooseberries are out of season. And so you may Jelly
Raspberries, Cherries, Currants, or any such like soft Fruit.

Ielly of Hartshorn: This has been a long time greatly in request. To make it,
Take half a pound of Hartshorn, boil it leisurely in Spring Water close
covered, and in a well-glazed Pipkin that will hold a gallon: boil it well;
when it is cold, strain it thorough a fine Cloth, and put it into another lesser
Pipkin, and with the Juice of eight or nine large Lemons, a pound and a half of
double-refined Sugar, and so let it boil a little, and put it into a Gally-pot
or small Glass, or cast it into a Mould, or any fashion you fancy best. This is
by Physicians held to be a special Cordial, and a great Strengthener; a
Restorer of Consumptive Bodies, or those faln-away by long or violent
Sicknesses.

Ielly to Make: Take a large Leg of Veal, cut away the Fat as clean as you can;
wash it well, and let it lie a soaking a quarter of an hour or more, having
first broke the Bones: then take four Calf's-feet, and scald off the Hair in
boiling Water, slit them, and put them to your Veal; boil them over the fire in
a brass Pot, in two gallons or ten quarts of Water, according to the Proportion
of the Meat: scum it very often, and so continue it till it is boiled away to
three pints; then strain it thorough a clean Strainer, and let it stand till it
be quite cold, that it will easily be cut out; pare the top and the bottom, and
then put it into a Skillet: then take two ounces of Cinnamon bruised, and Nutmeg
sliced, a race of Ginger, and a large Mace or two, a little quantity of Salt,
and a spoonful or two of Wine-Vinegar, and the Whites of Eggs well beaten: put
all to the Jelly, and then set it on the fire, and let it sees two or three
walms, stirring it all the while; then strain it thorough a Jelly-bag, and eat
it when you find Nature weakened or decayed, and it greatly strengthens and
fortifies it.

Ielly of Quinces, the French way: Make a Decoction of Quinces pared, quartered
and cored, till they are very soft, so that they may be mash'd and mingled with
the Water they are boiled in; then strain them thorough a Straining-cloth, and
boil the liquid part up again with Sugar, a pound to a quart, till it comes to
a reddish color: then scumming it lightly, let it settle, and take off the
finest part, when it is warm, put it into glazed earthen Vessels, and let it
stand till it is cool, and it will become a curious red Jelly, and is a great
Comforter of the Stomach, exceeding good for the Lungs, and Shortness of Breath.

Ielly of Verjuice: Boil Verjuice in fair Water, then strain it, and in the
Decoction boil Apples, and a little Isingglass; and when the liquid part begins
to consume, it will be a perfect Jelly. This is good to use in Sauces, and for
garnishing Dishes; as likewise to prepare the Stomach for a good Appetite, by
being eaten with Sugar and Rosewater.

Ielly White: Take a pound of Almonds, and steep them in cold Water till the
Husks come off; being blanched, beat them with a quart of Rose Water; then a
Decoction of half a pound of Ising-glass boiled with a gallon of fair
Spring Water, or else half Wine, boil it till half be wasted; then cool it, and
strain it, and mingle it with your Almonds, and strain with them a pound of
double-refined Sugar, the Juice of two Lemons, and cast it into Egg-shells; put
Saffron to some of it, and make some of it blue, and some of what colors you
please, though naturally it will be as white as Snow.

Iemelloes to Make: Take a pound of fine Sugar beaten and sifted, four Yolks of
new-lay'd Eggs, a grain of Musk, and two drams of Carraway-seeds finely beaten
and sifted, a little Gum-dragon dissolved in Rose Water, and six spoonfuls of
fine Flower; beat all these together in as equal mixture as may be; so beat
them into a thin Paste a little softer than Butter; then run it thorough rough
a Butter-Squirt of two or three Else long, bigger than a Wheat-straw; and let
them dry upon Paper a quarter of an hour, then tie them up in such Knots as you
fancy most proper; and being dry, boil them in Rose water and Sugar, and it
proves very useful in setting out a rich Banquet.

Ill Hahit of Body, to Remedy: Take double-refined Sugar one pound, the
distilled Water of Citron-peels four ounces, boil them over a gentle fire to
the consistence of a solid Electuary: then add a Nutmeg, Sugar powdered and
passed thorough a Sieve, Pulp of Pistaches three drams; choice Cinnamon and Mace
finely powdered, of each two drams; put in first the Nutmeg and the Pistaches,
after that the Peel, and then the Powder; and being all incorporated, make them
up into Tablets, and dry them, so that they may be well kept for use.

These Tablets are of a very pleating Scent and Odor, grateful to the Stomach,
and removing the ill Habit of Body. They increase the Appetite, and facilitate
Concoction and Distribution of the Nourishment. They also are very effectual to
expel Wind, and hinder the Putrefaction of the Humors. You may take of them
for a Dose two drams in the Morning fasting, and immediately after Meals, and
may continue the use of them as you see occasion.

Incontinency of Urine: Take the Pizzle of a Wether, dry it in an Oven so that
it may be reduced to a Powder; mix it with a little Powder of Coral, and take
as much as will lie on a Threepence in a spoonful of Vinegar.

Inflammation Day: For this, Take Crumbs of Bread half an ounce, Coral and
Pearl prepared, Tuttia and white Sugar-Candia, of each half a dram; Powder of
red Roses a dram and a half, Flowers of St. John's-wort one dram, and with a
sufficient quantity of Milk make a Cataplasm or Poultis; and for a dry hot
Inflammation lay it on the Eyes.

Inflammation Moist: Take a Pippin, and having cut it in two halves, take out
the Core of each of them, and fill up the cavity with the tender Tops of common
Wormwood, and so close them together by tying the halves: and when it is well
roasted, take off the Skin bruise it into a kind of a Poultis, and apply it
warm to the Eye, spread on a Cloth.

Internal Piles: Take two parts of Flower of Sulphur, and one of Sugar very
finely poudered; mix them exactly together, and make them up with a sufficient
quantity of Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth, into Lozenges, of about a dram weight,
and take one at a time thrice a day; or, if need require, four or five times a
day.

St. Iohn's-wort: This is a sovereign Herb for Wounds, or internal Bruises;
boil it in White Wind, and drink it very warm, with a little Sugar. For Wounds,
make it into an Ointment or Bath. It opens Obstructions, and dissolves
Swellings: It closes up the Lips of Wounds, and strengthens the Parts that
are weak and feeble. The Seed, especially if brought into a Powder, and drank
with the Juice of Knot-grass, helps all manner of Spitting or Vomiting of
Blood, closes a Vein broken inwardly, and helps those that are stung by any
venomous Creature. It is good for those that are troubled with the Stone or
Gravel in the Kidneys, or have difficulty in making Urine. Two drams of the
Powder of the Seed taken, in a little Broth, gently expels Choler, or congealed
Blood in the Stomach. The Decoction of the Leaves and Seeds, being drank
somewhat warm before the Fit of an Ague, whether Tertian or Quartan, does alter
the Fits; and by often using, takes 'em away. The Seed is very much commended,
being drank for forty days together, in helping the Sciatica, Falling Sickness,
and Palsy.

Ioints Afflicted: Take Bay Leaves two large handfuls, and of the Berries half
a pound; Colewort-leaves a pugil, Neats-feet-oil five pints, Beef Suet two
pound; bruise what is to be bruised, and mingle the rest: boil them till the
Berries and Leaves are crisp, then strain out the Ointment, and use it by
suppling or bathing pretty hot in all cold Distempers that afflict the Nerves
and Joints.

Ioint-stiffness, etc. Take of the Flowers and Tops of Rosemary, Marjoram, Rue,
Wild Thyme, and the Roots of Wake-Robin, and Wild Cucumers, of each four ounces
and an half; and of the Leaves of Bays, Sage, Savin, Briony-roots, of each
three ounces; Fleabane, Spurge, Laurel, of each nine ounces; the Leaves of wild
Cucumers and Calamint, of each half a pound: they must be gathered very fresh,
cleansed and bruised, and infused seven days in five pints of the best
Olive-oil, and one of the Spirit of Wine: boil them gently till the watery
Humor be evaporated; strain out the Oil, and melt it in fifteen ounces of
yellow Beeswax, Bears-grease, and the Oil of Bays, of each three ounces; of
Mascheleum half an ounce, Petroleum an ounce, Butter four ounces: stir them,
and sprinkle in the following Powders, viz. of Mastick and Olibanum, of each
six drams; of Pellitory of Spain, Pepper, Ginger, and Euphorbium, of each an
ounce; make them into an Ointment over a gentle fire, with well mixing and
stirring; and, lastly, straining out the liquid part, keep it close stopped in an
earthen Vessel for your use.

This is an excellent Ointment for all cold Diseases, as Palsies, Stiffness of
the Joints, Cramps, Convulsions, and the Colic, and Pains of the Reins, etc.

Italian Biscuit: Take a pound of fine Sugar, beat it yet finer, and sift it;
and to it put a pound of fine Wheat Flour, and six Eggs beaten very thin; then
beat them all together in a stone Mortar for an hour's space, not suffering it
to stand still, lest it prove heavy; then put in half an ounce of Aniseeds: rub
Butter over your Plates, and drop the Ingredients with a Spoon as fast as
possible you can: set them into an Oven and bake them, but let them not be too
much by any means.

Italian Chips: Take Past of Flowers, beat them till they are reduced to a fine
Powder; then sift them, and take some Gum-dragon steeped in Rose Water; beat
them in a wooden or stone Mortar to a perfect Paste, then roll it very thin,
and lay one color upon another in a long roll, and being rouled very thin, cut
them overthwart, and they will appear of diverse curious and delicate Colors
like Marbling.

Itch to Cure: Take strong Limewater one pound, and put it into a gallon of
Spring Water; let them work together for some hours, and then carefully pour
off what is clear: filter the rest, and take two ounces of Quicksilver tied up
in a linen Bag: let this hang in the Liquor, and boil it half an hour or more:
then pour off the clear Liquor, and with it wash the part afflicted; and when
it is well dried in, anoint the same places with Ointment of Tobacco, which you
may have ready prepared.

Itch, another way to Cure: Take a handful of the Roots of Elecampane, and as
much of sharp-pointed Dock; shred them small, and boil them in two quarts of
Spring Water till a pint be consumed; then strain out the Liquor, and wash with
it the place affliccted once or twice a day.

Itch, a Durge: Take Tamarinds half an ounce, sharp-pointed Dock-roots two
drams; Fumitory and Succory, of each half a handful; white Tartar half a dram,
Ginger a scruple: let the Herbs be shred very small, then stamp the Roots, and
boil all in a sufficient quantity of fair Water, till it be consumed to about a
quarter of a pint; to which, being strained, add an ounce of the Syrup of
Roses, and two drams of Syrup of Buckthorn Berries: Take it in the Morning
fasting, and it will purge and cleanse the Blood, so that the Humors, that
occasion the offensive Disease, will be expelled, by gentle Swellings.

Juice of Crabs: This is commonly called Verjuice, it cools, drys, binds, and
quenches the Thirst, asswages the heat of burning Fevers, stops Fluxes, and
causes Appetite. In other Countries they imitate ours with the Juice of unripe
Grapes. It is used with Sauces in Food, to sharpen the Appetite; and made into
Lohoch with Virgin-Honey, it cools in hot Diseases, and cuts tough Phlegm.

Juice of Cucumbers: Here is meant the wild ones: It is Catharick; it prevails
against the Gout, Scurvy, and King's Evil, Obstructions of the Viscera and
Jaundice, also the Dropsy: It is to be taken from two drams, to three, four,
or five.

To make a Syrup of it, Take of the Juice two pound, of choice Senna two ounces
and a half: mix and infuse them over a gentle Heat close covered, sixteen or
twenty four Hours; then strain it out, and boil it up with as much white Sugar,
as will make it into a Syrup. The Dose is from two, three, four, or five
spoonfuls in any of the Distempers or Grievances beforementioned. It purges
out watery Humors very strongly.

Juices Depurated: Let your Juices settle for twelve Hours, then pour it off
gently from the gross Impurities settled at the bottom; boil it gently in a
Pipkin, and take off the Scum or Curds, letting it boil only a warm or two,
then strain it.

Juice of Garden, or Field-Sorrel: This made into a Syrup, or the Juice
sweetened with Sugar, is very cooling and astringent, it allays the Heat of the
Liver and Stomach, stays Fluxes, and inward Bleedings. It is good to expel the
afflicting hot Vapors infesting the Brain in Fevers, and to hinder the
Lightness in the Head: Eaten in Sallads, it cools the Blood and thins it.
Applied Poultis-wise, it asswages hot Swellings, or any external Inflammation,
takes off the Redness and Heat of the Face, or any Part of the Body, being
washed with the distilled Water of it, and that of Scabious.

Juice of Hypocistis: This Juice proceeds from a Plant growing like Mifleto. It
thickens and binds strongly, and is used chiefly to stop all Fluxes of the
Belly, Womb, and Stomach: It stays Vomiting and Spitting of Blood, by reason of
internal Bruises, An aqueous or vinous Tincture of it, is used to stop the
Gonorrhoea, and Whites in Women. A Lohoch made of it with red Wine, and adding
a third part of Honey, that it may be inspissated to a thickness, is given for
the Cure of Ulcers in the Lungs, Stomach, or Bowels.

Juice of Licorice: Of Licorice there are two kinds, viz. the Spanish and the
English, though much of the same Virtues. The Spanish Juice is made by boiling
the Juice to a thickness, or inspissating it by Evaporation, and then making it
up into Rolls or Cakes, which they wrap up in Bay Leaves, and that which is
best good breaks free, and is clear and shining like Jet. The English Juice is
made into round Balls, and is generally a Composition made of the Juice and the
Pulp of Prunes, and so inspissated to a Body.

It is one of the greatest Pectorals, good against Coughs, Colds, Hoarsness,
Wheesing' Difficulty of Breathing, Shortness of Breath, stuffing of the Lungs,
Breast, and Stomach; also for Ulcers in the Kidneys, sharpness of Urine, and
the Corrosion of the Bladder: It helps Expectoration, lenifies roughness,
loosens the Bellies of Children, and takes away the Gripings and other Pains.
It helps to overcome and remove the Effects, many times left behind, of strong
and sharp Purgers.

To make an aqueous Tincture of Licorice take this Rule: Take Spanish Juice
very thin sliced, or bruised to pieces in a Mortar, one ounce, fair Water three
quarts, Salt of Tartar three drams: mix and put all these into a glass Body
digested over a very gentle Heat twenty four Hours, and a pure Tincture will
arise into the Water, leaving all the Faeces, or earthy substance behind in the
same form or shape it was put in: Beware you shake it not, but decant the pure
clear Liquor for use, and cast away the Faeces. It wonderfully sweetens the
Blood, and is excellent in the Scurvy and French Pox.

Juice of Licorice white: Take clean Powder of Licorice-roots, and Orris, of
each six scruples; Wheat Flour two ounces, Sugar finely beaten one pound;
Eastern Musk, and Ambergrease, of each three grains: incorporate these together
with a mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth extracted in Rose Water, mixing and beating
them together in a solid Paste: make them up into Tablets or Rolls, and dry
them in the Sun, or before a gentle Fire, on fine Paper.

The Juice of white Licorice is more pleasing than the black, very acceptable
to the Taste and Smell; and dissolved in Mint, or Rose Water with a little Syrup
of Gilliflowers, is good against Coughs, Colds, Phthisicks, Asthmas and most
pectoral Diseases.

Juice of Nettles: It stays Bleeding, mixed with white Sugar and snuffed up the
Nose. A quarter of a pint of the Juice of the Tops of young Nettles drank at a
time, stops internal bleeding. It is also good, made into a Syrup with Sugar,
against the Diseases of the Lungs, as Colds, Coughs, Asthmas, Peripenumony,
Pleurisies Stitches in the Side, Heat, Pain, and Stoppage of Urin, whether
proceeding from Sand, Gravel or other mucilaginous Matter.

Juice of Pomgranet: This is cooling and Cordial, chearing the Heart, and
refreshing the Spirits: It resists Poison, and the Infection of the Plague, and
all other pestilential and contagious Distempers: It cools, and that which is
most acid, is grateful to the Stomach. It is given in choleric Fevers, the
Pica in Women with Child, Gonorrhoea's, and cures the sore Mouth. The Wine like
Juice, that is between sower and sweet, is Cordial and Cephalic, good against
the Megrims, Vapors, fainting and swooning Fits; the sweet Juice is good
against old Coughs. Of the acid or sharp Juice is made first, Syrup, with a
sufficient quantity of Sugar to make it into a convenient thickness; secondly,
Lohochs with Honey, and the distilled Spirit of the Wine of Pomgranets, is an
excellent Cordial mixed with cooling Waters in all hot Diseases.

Juice of Wood Sorrel: Take four pints of the Juice of Wood Sorrel, purify it,
and pour it into a glass Cucurbit, cover it with its Alembick slightly luted,
place it in Balneo Mariae, and distill about half the moisture with a moderate
Fire; then take away the Cucurbit, and let it cool: this being done, pour out
the acid Juice that remains by inclination, and pass it through a brown Paper,
to separate the Dregs gathered in distillation; then weigh out a quart of the
clarified, Juice, and in it dissolve four pound of fine Sugar, and give it a
little time to wamble over the fire: Take it off, and scum it when it is come
to the thickness of a Syrup: you may likewise clarify the fine powdered Sugar
with the White of an Egg, and fair Water, and boil it to the strong consistency
of a solid Electuary; and afterward incorporate the Juice of the Wood Sorrel
prepared as is directed.

This Syrup is very cooling, and is useful to quench Thirst in hot Diseases;
also the Heat of the Liver and Stomach. It is very much commended in Burning
Fevers, and in Malignant and Epidemick Distempers. It comfort and
strengthens the Heart, and allays the Inflammation of the Mouth and Tongue,
likewise that of the Palate and Throat: the distilled. Water of the Juice may
be very properly mixed with the Syrup, or you may drink the Water alone. The
quantity to be taken is from half an ounce to an ounce, and may be taken in the
Morning fasting, and at Night when you go to rest; or at any time of the day,
as necessity requires.

Iujubs, a Syrup: Take six Jujubs; Barley picked, Licorice and Maidenhair, of
each an ounce; fresh Violets a handful; Seeds of Mallows, Quinces, White
Poppey, Melons and Lettice, of each three drams: put the Barley into a glazed
earthen Pot, with six pints of Water, and let it boil over a gentle fire for
half an hour; then put in the Jujubs sliced, and let them boil a quarter of an
hour; then add the Licorice scraped and bruised, the Maidenhair cut, and the
Seeds bruised: let them boil a while, and then add the fresh Violets, thrusting
them down into the Decoction, at the same time taking off the Pot from the
fire; and when the Decoction is somewhat cool, strain it, and clarify the
Liquor with the White of an Egg, and three pound of sine Sugar; boil it over a
gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup.

This Syrup is chiefly given in dry Coughs, or hot and thin Defluxions on the
Lungs; for it thickens the Phlegm, and qualifies the Acrimony thereof, and
helps to expectorate. It may be taken from half an ounce to an ounce, either
alone, or else in Pectoral Juleps, Apozems, or mixed with Lohochs.

Iulep: To make an excellent Cooler for a Calenture, or Burning Fever, Pare ten
Lemons, press out the Juice, and let it settle twenty-four hours; then pour off
the clear part, and strain it or filter it, and digest it in a stone Bottle in
hot Water, or in Sand, for twelve days; then filter it again, and digest it as
before: repeat this until no more faeces settle; and during that time, calcine
the outward or yellow Peel of the Lemons, and with distilled Water draw the
Salt out of the Ashes, and put this Salt into the purified Juice; and having
digested them for some time together, put it into little Vials of an ounce a
piece, which is a Dose sufficient for any one. Some say, That two Doses of this
will allay the greatest Burning Fever, and by degrees so cool and temperate the
Blood, that the Distemper in a little time will cease. It may be given by it
self; but if it prove unpleasant to the Palate, you may mix a little Sugar with
it.

Iumbals: To make these, Take a pint of Wheat Flour, and a pound of white
Sugar, make a mixture of these with the Whites of two or three Eggs finely
beaten, and a pound of blanched Almonds well beaten, with half a pound of fresh
Butter, and a spoonful or two of Rose Water. To these add half a pint of
Cream, and mould it till it becomes a Paste, so roll it into what shapes you
please, and dry it a while; then bake it in an Oven not too hot, to the number
of twenty or more.

Iumbals, another: Take a pound of fine Wheat Flour, the Yolks of four
new-lay'd Eggs, about a quarter of a pint of sweet Cream, a quarter of an ounce
of Aniseeds, and half a pound of cold Butter; make all these into a Paste, and
roll it into long rouls as big as your Little-Finger, and make them into what
Knots, Forms or Fashions you please: then boil them in fair Water; after that,
bake them, and keep them in Boxes in dry places to set out the Table, as
occasion requires.

Iumbals Sugared: Take two pound of fine Flower, beat a pound of Loaf-Sugar
into Powder, sift it, and mingle it with the Flower: then take a pound and an
half of Sweet-Butter, break it in small pieces among the Flower and Sugar; then
take five spoonfuls of Canary, and three or four Yolks of new-lay'd Eggs, and a
quarter of a pint of Cream; beat them well together, and put them to the rest
of the Materials, and when they are worked up into a Paste, fashion them as
your Fancy leads: lay them on white Paper, or on Plates, and put them into an
Oven, and bake them with a gentle heat, taking an extraordinary care that they
be not scorched.

Iuniper-Berries, their Virtues: The Spiritous Water, as also the Oil, are
either of them proper to free the Reins and Ureters from Gravel, and vicious
Matter, that stops the Passages, and hinders the Urine from having its course.
They are also very useful in cold Maladies of the Brain, and in Scorbutic
Distempers. They fortify the Stomach, and create an Appetite, help Digestion,
and resist Putrefaction, and the Humors, and kill the Worms in the Body; also
expel Wind, Colic, and cold Maladies of the Bowels.

Ivy: This Simple, though by some not much regarded, is of great virtue: for
Dioscorides tells us, A pugil of the Flowers, which may be about a dram, boiled
in Red-Wine, or powdered and drank twice a day, helps the Lask and Bloody Flux.
It is an Enemy to the Nerves and Sinews, if taken much inwardly; but very
strengthening to them, if applied outwardly in Oil, Ointment, or Poultis. The
Berries powdered, and drank in Ale, are good against the Jaundice, Black or
Yellow; they help those that spit Blood, and kill Worms. They are a great Enemy
to Wine; for if any one has got a Surfeit by hard, drinking of Wine, boil a
handful of Ivy in the like Wine, and the Decoction will greatly contribute
toward the Party's Health. The Juice of the Berries snuffed up the Nose,
purges the Head of Rheum, and is good for sore Eyes.

Sir KEnelm Digby's Wound-Drink: Take an handful of the Leaves of Sage and Rue,
bruise them, and put them into a thin Bag or Boulter, and hang it in four
gallons of ordinary Small Ale well brewed; and as soon as it is Tunn'd, take
three hundred live Sows, commonly called Hog-Lice, (they live under old Wood
and Stones:) bruise these with a little of the Ale, that all the Moisture may
be extracted; then strain it, and pour it among the rest, and put the Skins of
the Sows to the Herbs in the Bag: when it has worked sufficiently, begin to
drink it at Meals, and at other times when you have occasion to drink: and to
render it more grateful to the Taste, you may add a fourth part of White Wind,
forbearing, during the taking of it, to eat salt Fish, or salt Meats.

It is not to be wondered at, that this Drink should be so efficacious, though
it be compounded but of few Ingredients, since all famous Authors ascribe such
wonderful Virtue to these Creatures; and Experience testifies, that they
cleanse, resolve and purify to a wonder. They dissolve the Stone in the Reins
and Bladder to a Slime, and bring it away; they open the Obstructions, help the
Jaundice, and all Obstructions, Stoppage and Strangury of Urine; the Colic,
Asthma's, Shortness of Breath; and also restore lost Appetite. They are very
much recommended for the curing all sorts of Cancers, scirrhous Tumors in what
part of the Body soever, the King's Evil, and all sordid and inveterate Ulcers
and Sores. With this Drink did Sir Kenelm do great Cures at Frankford, in
Germany, and at other places. It likewise stays the bleeding of Wounds, and
heals them very speedily.

Kermes: This is usually called the Scarlet Oak. The Grains of this Tree are
doubly useful, either for dyeing Scarlet Color; or for Medicine, which is most
to our purpose: Wherefore, to omit the former, it is astringent, and used
successfully for Wounds, especially where the Nerves are cut; and also prevents
Miscarriage in Women. They are used in sharp Diseases, as Apoplexies, Palsy,
etc. as also for the Palpitation of the Heart, Fainting, Swooning and
Melancholy.

Kermes, a Confection: Take the Juice of pleasant smelling Apples, and
Rose Water, of each a pint; boil them almost to the thickness of Honey, then
take it from the fire, and whilst it is hot, add two drams of Ambergriese, cut
small, and dissolved with some drops of the Oil of Cinnamon; which being well
mixed, add what follows in Powder, viz. Wood of Aloes and Cinnamon, of each six
drams, prepared Pearl two drams, Leaf-gold one dram; then drain and mix them
with the Syrup of Kermes, which is made in this manner: mix the Grains in a
marble Mortar, pulp them thorough a Sieve or Strainer, and mix them with an
equal quantity of Sugar. This is the proper Conserve; and to make it a Syrup,
it is but adding more Sugar, raw Silk, the Juice of Apples, and Rose Water. It
is a great Strengthener of the Heart, and Restorer of Nature; expels
Melancholy, and restores a cheerful and wholesome Complexion.

Kermes, a Confection: Take the Juice of pleasant Apples, and Rose Water, a
pound and an half; raw Silk cut very small one pound; put them into a Mattress
well stopped, and digest them for twenty four hours in Balneo Mariae; then
squeeze the warm Silk in a Press, and boil the Liquor to the consistence of a
solid Electuary with two pound of Sugar: then take it from the fire, and
dissolve in it a pound of the new thicker Juice of Kermes; and afterward mix
with it Oriental Pearl prepared, Yellow Saunders, and biting Cinnamon, of each
half an ounce; Ambergriese pulverised with three drops of the best distilled
Oil of Cinnamon, Lapis Lazuli burnt, washed, and made smooth, three drams;
Leaf-gold one dram, Oriental Musk half a dram.

This Confection, without dispute, is a very excellent lam den day one, and
held to be one of the best and purest Cordials that ever and Galenick Physician
invented; for it repairs and recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits, cures the
Palpitations of the Heart, and remedies Swooning-Fits: it very much fortifies
the Brain, and all the Noble Parts, and is an Enemy to Putrefaction: it
re-establishes the languishing and decaying Strength, and drives away
Melancholy and Sadness; and restores and preserves both Body and Mind in a good
Condition. It may be taken upon the Point of a Knife, or dissolved in Wine, or
in Broth, or in any Cordial or Cephalic Liquor. It is sometimes mixed with
Electuaries or Opiates either soft or solid; The usual Dose is from one scruple
to one dram. It is also mixed in Epithems prescribed for the Heart and Liver,
and rarely fails the Parent's Expectation.

Kermes, the Juice, its Virtues: Kermes, or Alkermes, is made of the
Kermes-Berries, and brought from Marseilles: it is of a bright Scarlet Color,
well-tasted, and of the thickness of an ordinary Syrup. It is a very great
Cordial; it discusses Wind and Vapors, cheers the Heart, revives the Spirit,
helps Women in Travail, helps Nature, cures Wounds and wounded Nerves, resists
the Poison of the Plague, and the malignity of Pestilential Fevers, and very
powerfully and kindly drives out the Smallpox and Measles. The Dose is from
half an ounce to an ounce and an half, and may be taken in this Mixture, viz.
the Juice of Kermes six drams, Aqua Lactis Alexiter. four ounces, mix them
together for a Draught. Or in this manner; Take the Juice of Kermes six drams,
the Tincture of Cochineel two drams, Aqua Lactis Alexiter. four ounces; mix for
a Dose a Syrup made of this Juice with double-refined Sugar: it is good to cut
tough Phlegm, if mingled with a little Juice of Lemons or Citron; also to open
Obstructions of the Breast and Lungs, and strengthen the Stomach; it causes a
good Appetite, and is good against pestilential Diseases. A Water distilled
from the Juice very much resists the Plague, and creates a good Habit and
Constitution of Body.

Kernels of Peaches: These bruised and applied to Inflammations allay the Heat,
and bring Swelling Humors to a Head; there is an Oil drawn from them that in
hot Inflammations is very good, and also to anoint the Stomach with, in
fainting or swooning Fits.

Kernels of Pine-Apples: The Decoction of them is taken with good success by
such as are of phlegmatic Constitution, or afflicted with Rheumatisms, as also
to wash old running Sores with, and to cleanse Ulcers, and suchlike Matters.

Kibes: Take Navel wort, the Leaves and Root, stamp it very small: to half a
handful of both these, put two ounces of Linseed-oil, and a quarter of an ounce
of Alom in powder; mix them well together over a gentle fire, wash your Kibes
first in Water and Salt, and being dried, bind this on as a Plaster or
Poultis. It is the same for Chilblains, and helps Corns, it being so applied,
when they are newly cut.

Kibes Broke, to Heal: Take the Lungs of a Ram dried and beat to Powder, mixed
with the Oil of Earthworms, and Linseed-oil, and by applying it three or four
times, and washing them with Urin, your Expectation will be answered: or if
they be not broken, make a Plaster of Alom, Vinegar. and Mustard, and lay it
on them.

Kidneys: If you find any Swelling in the Kidneys, by reason of Obstruction of
Urin, Cold, some Blow received, or otherwise, Take the Oil of Roses and
Quinces, of each two drams; warm and mix them well over a gentle Fire, chafe it
on the Reins of the Back, and swath the Body very warm with a Flannel Wrapper.

Kidney-Beans: To enlarge upon these will not be amiss, seeing so many and
various Uses are appropriated to them.

They open Obstructions, provoke Urin, expel Sand, Gravel, and slimy Matter,
strengthen wonderfully, and cause a good Color in the Face, restore in
Consumptions; they thicken, cleanse, and stop Fluxes, as Diarrhoea's,
Lienteries. The Decoction of them is good against the Stone; a strong Broth of
them boiled till they are broken, dissolved and strained, is good against a
Consumption. The Flower is used in Poultisses, and to ripen Fevers. It eases
Pains outwardly, it takes away Freckles, Morphew, and Sun-burn, and other
Deformities of the Skin. A Cataplasm made of it, discusses Bruises in the Eyes.
A volatile Salt made of them, is good against the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Palsy,
Lethargy, and Convulsion, Gout, Stone, Rheumatism, Colic, and other Diseases
of the Head, Nerves, Womb, and Joints. The Dose is from six grains to ten. They
are likewise pleasant for Food, and very nourishing.

Kidneys, their Pains Cured: Take five ounces of Maidenhair, Licorice five
ounces; infuse them twelve Hours in three quarts of Spring-VVater; then boil
them gently in a Bath, and press out the Liquid part, when a third part of it
is consumed, and add, by well mixing, three pound of clarified Sugar.

This not only helps the Diseases and Pains in the Kidneys and Sides, but also
opens the Obstructions of the Lungs, provokes Urin gently, and expels the
Gravel and Stone out of the Bladder: An ounce of it may be taken at a time in
any proper Liquor.

Kidney-Pye, or Pasty: Take the Kidneys of Veal, Fat and all, with some of the
Meat, when the Loins of Veal are just roasted, mince them very small with the
Marrow of six Bones cold, to which add sweet Marjoram, Winter-savory and Thyme,
very well bruised, or small shred, Rosewater a quarter of a pint, half a pound
of Currants, a sliced Nutmeg, half a pound of Sugar, and the Yolks of six Eggs;
and mixing them well together, let the Crust of your Pyes or Pasties be of
Puff-past, and of but an indifferent size. These, by some, are called
Marrow-Pasties; but then there is usually more of the one than of the other
among the Ingredients: These, being made very small, may be fried in sweet
Butter, or tried Suet.

Kidney, the Stone in it: We may beforehand perceive the Signs of this
dangerous Distemper by a fixed Pain in the Loins, bloody Urin, or voiding Sand
or Stones, the numbness of the Leg on the side of the affected Kidney, the
retraction of the Testicles on the same side the Pain afflicts, a queasiness of
the Sromach, and straining to Vomit. In this case, if the Person be of a
sanguin Constitution, about ten ounces of Blood may be taken from the Arm on
the side the Pain most afflicts; after that drink Posset Drink wherein two
ounces of the Roots of Marshmallows have been boiled, and take the following
Clyster, viz. The Roots of Marshmallows and Lilies, of each an ounce; the
Leaves of Mallows, Wallflower, brank Ursine, and Camomel-flowers, of each a
handful; Linseed, and Fenugreek-seed, of each half an ounce: boil them in a
convenient quantity of Water to a pint and a half; make a Clyster, and after
the rejection of the Vomit and Clyster, let a large Dose of Liquid-Laudanum be
exhibited, viz. to twenty five drops, or fifteen or sixteen grains of Matthew's
Pills. If the Patient be old, and much weakened by the continuance of the
Disease, or it be a Woman much subject to Vapors, especially at the beginning
of the Paroxysm, and she void black and gravely Urin, then omit the Bleeding;
but in all other Cases proceed according to the Method prescribed.

Kidneys Vlcerated: Take of China-root sliced very small two drams, Golden-rod,
Maidenhair, Bettony, Mouse-ear, Agrimony, Comfrey, Scabeous, Bugle, red
Bramble-Leaves, Marshmallows, Pelletory of the Wall, and Plantain, of each half
a handful; then take one spoonful of French Barley, and a Stick of Licorice
sliced very small, a handful of Raisins of the Sun stoned, boil them softly in
a pottle of running Water to the consumption of a quart; and taking it off the
Fire, add two ounces of the Conserve of red Roses, stir and mix them well
together, and strain the liquid part through a fine Cloth, and keep it close
stopped in a Glass, and drink thereof every Morning fasting about half a
quarter of a pint pretty warm.

Kidney-Wort: It is otherways called Wall-penny-royal, or Wall-penny-wort: The
Juice of it being drunk with a little fine Sugar, is excellent, cooling, and
good in all Inflammations and unnatural Heats: Excellent is the distilled Water
of it in cooling a fainting hot Stomach, or heated Bowels, or hot Liver; it
takes away Pimples, or Redness in the Face, St. Anthony's Fire, and other
outward Heats and Inflammations; it also eases the Pain or Soreness of the
Kidneys, occasioned by the Stone or Gravel; it provokes Urin, and is available
for the Dropsy. The Juice being made into an Ointment, is excellent in easing
the hot Gout, or Sciatica.

Kidney-Wort: The Juice, or distilled Water being drank in very effectual for
all Inflammations and unnatural Heats. It cools the Bowels, Stomach, and Liver.
The bruised Herb, or the Place bathed with the Juice, or distilled Water, cures
Redness and Pimples in the Face, and all other outward Heats and Inflammations,
and has many peculiar Virtues for the Cure of the Stone, especially in the
Kidney. In Bleeding and Wounds it is very effectual, as also in the Gout and
most violent Pains in the Stomach, Bowels, and the like, helps Swellings in the
Throat, and is very good to heal the Blistering or Fretting of the Skin, by
being applied. Some hold it to be good in the Disease called the King's Evil.
An Ointment made of it, and some of the Skin of the Leaf laid upon them, is
excellent good in green Wounds, and to stay Bleeding of Wounds, or upon other
Occasions.

King's Evil: Take a handful of the Herb called White-Archangel, stamp it
small, and mix with it some Hog's-Lard, and apply it Plaister-wise to the
Swelling or Tumor; or, Take the lesser Daisie; or common wild Daisie, usually
growing on the Commons and in Fields, and stamp the Roots, and use them as the
former. Figwort is likewise applied with very good success in this Distemper.

King's Evil, another: Let a quart of new Milk just boil, and taking it off,
put into it two spoonfuls of Honey, which being dissolved with stirring, set it
on the Fire again, and let it boil about a Minute: so divide it into four
parts, and drink one part warm early in the Morning, another about ten, another
about four in the Afternoon, and the rest at Bed time: Do this daily a Month or
two together, or less. On the Days you Purge, which must be once a Week, if you
be a grown Man or Woman, you may take three quarters of an ounce of
Caryocostinum dissolved in Posset Drink, and keep your self very warm, and be
careful after it: Dress the Sores, if they run, with any drawing Cerecloath, or
a Plaster of Burgundy-Pitch. This Medicin, though not very promising, is yet
very famous for the many Cures done with it by a very charitable Lady, from
whose ingenious Chaplain the Receipt was procured.

King's Evil, another: Take the Roots of Pilewort a handful, bruise and boil
them in Hogs-Lard till they become crisp, after that press them hard out, and
boil in the same Lard as many more fresh ones, press them out again; and do
this the third time, and then keep the Lard wherein they have been boiled, and
with it anoint the grieved Parts twice or thrice a Day.

Kingfisher: This is a Waterfowl, blue, green and purple, very beautiful; it
builds in the Winter by the Seashore, when generally for fourteen Days there
is a Calm, which is the time of their hatching; which makes some believe this
Bird has an instinct of Nature to know when the Winds will be still, and
against that time prepares to build her Nest, and breed.

Kingfishers Flesh is exceeding good for Consumptive Bodies, wonderfully
restoring them, and making the Parties grow fat, fresh, and lively.

Take upon this Account of the Potentates two ounces, the Powder of Vipers a
dram; mix them together for a Dose, and give them to the consumptive Party.

Take of the Flesh dried to Powder in an earthen Pot, set one ounce of it in a
hot Oven, Amber half a scruple, Man's Skull a scruple, and it is a curious
Remedy for those that are troubled with the Epilepsie.

Kite: This is a Bird of Prey, and very ravenous; yet Nature has so ordered it,
that all Creatures shall one way or other redound to the Good and Benefit of
Mankind. Some People, as the poorer sort in Germany, eat the Flesh of this Bird
as a great Dainty; yet being a gross kind of Food, it is not used by us for
Food: However, Take the Powder of that Flesh a dram, volatile Salt of Amber
twelve grains, Sal Armoniack four grains: these being mixed for a Dose, are
prevalent against the Gout. Again, Take of the Flesh of a Kite in Powder one
dram, Salt of Man's Skull a scruple, Filings of Elk-hoofs, and native Cinabar,
of each ten grains: mix these for a Dose against the Epilepsie.

Kites-Ashes (of the whole Kite) given in the same manner, as beforementioned,
are prevalent against the fame Diseases, so also is the volatile Salt and Oil
made by distillation, as Oil and Salt of Man's Skull, which may be given from
twelve or sixteen grains to a scruple, in any convenient Liquor.

Kites-Blood: Anoint the Forehead and Temples with it, and it eases Pains in
the Head, and prevents strange and frightful Dreams, causes Sleep, and sets a
fair Complexion on the Skin: Made up with Oil of St. John's-wort and Wormwood
into an unguent, it eases Pains in the Joints, and is good to anoint the Head
and Stomach with, in case of the Falling Sickness.

Kites-Dung: Take of the Dung of a Kite, the younger the better, an ounce and
half, Camphire in fine Powder two drams, common Soap as much as will suffice to
make 'em into a Cataplasm. This applied hot, immediately eases the raging Pain
of the Gout, insomuch that several Persons of Note, who have been troubled with
this afflicting Distemper, have caused Kites to be taken, either the young
ones, or others, and kept them tame as charily as their Hawks, for no other
purpose than for their Dung.

Kites-Grease: This is good, to anoint old Sores and Swellings, also Pains and
Aches; it supples the Joints, and resists the penetration of sudden Heats. Iron
Instruments rubbed with it, and afterward heated in the Fire, become very
hard, and are rarely after subject to rust or decay, as some say.

Kites-Liver is good against the Gout and Epilepsie, and also Convulsions. Take
of the Powder three drams, oil of Rosemary and Lavender, of each five drops;
and make them up into one Dose.

Kites-Testicles: Take of the Powder one dram, extract of Satyrion one dram and
half; Powder of Vipers half a dram: mix them for a Dose, and for some time
being taken it helps Barrenness, and causes Fruitfulness; it is exceeding good
in Consumptions. To conclude, of a Creature so little taken notice of by most,
few have better or more Virtues to do good in these kinds.

Knapweed, its Virtue and Use: This Herb or Weed grows in Fields and Meadows
about the Borders and Hedges; its Virtue is to stay Bleeding both at the Mouth
and Nose, or any other outward parts, and those Veins that are broken, or
inward Wounds, as also the Fluxes of the Belly; it stays the distillations of
thin and sharp Humors from the Head upon the Stomach and Lungs; it is good for
those that are bruised by any Falls, Blows, or otherwise; it is very profitable
for those that are bursten and troubled with Ruptures by drinking the Decoction
of the Root and Herb in White Wind, and applying it outwardly to the grieved
Part; it is singular good in all running Sores, Cancers, and Fistula's, drying
up the moisture, and healing them gently without sharpness; it is of special
use for the soreness of the Throat, the Swelling of the Uvula and Jaws.

Knapwel: This grows in most Fields and Meadows, and about their Borders and
Hedges, and in many wast Grounds. As for the time it flowereth, it is in June
and July; and the Seed is soon after ripe.

This Herb stays the Flux at the Mouth, Nose, and other outward Parts, also
those Veins that are inwardly broken, or inward Wounds, as also the Flux of the
Belly: It stays the Distillation of thin and sharp Humors from the Head upon
the Lungs and Stomach: It is good for those that are bruised by any Falls,
Blows, or otherwise: It is very profitable for those that are Bursten, and have
Ruptures, by boiling the Herb and Root in Wine, and drinking the liquid
Decoction sweetened with Sugar, and applying the Herb and Roots so boiled as a
Poultis to the grieved Part: It is singular good in all running Sores, Cancers,
and Fistula's, drying away the Moisture, and healing them up gently: It does
the like to running Sores, or Scabs on the Head or other Parts: It is of
singular use for the soreness of the Throat, Swelling of the Uvula and Jaws, or
to stay Bleeding, and heal up green Wounds.

Knees Swelled: Take a handful of Goats Dung, and mix it with Barley-Meal, boil
them in Vinegar and Water till they become thick enough to spread as a
Plaster, and then apply them to the Swelling, often renewing. This Plaster
will quickly assuage the Pain, and in time remove the Swelling. It is also good
for Swellings occasioned by Pains of the Gout, or the like, in any Part of the
Body.

Knot-Grass: The common sort of this Grass (for there are diverse sorts of
Knot-Grass) has a Root hard, woody, and single, and many Fibers: It Is of an
astringent Taste, and has many Stalls sometimes standing upright, but oftener
bending toward the Earth. The Seeds are pretty large, triangular, and of a
dark Chestnut color.

It closes Wounds, and contributes toward their healing, as being drying and
astringent: It stops inwardly Fluxes, and outwardly the Bleeding of Wounds: The
Juice of it allays Inflammations, especially of the Eyes. A noble Man that
vomited Blood, and had used many other Medicines to no purpose, upon the using
this, viz. the Juice, had his Flux of Blood stayed, which else perhaps had not
ended but with his Life.

Knot-Grass: This kind of Grass springs up late in the Spring, and abides till
Winter, when all the Branches perish: The Juice of it is excellent in staying
Bleeding, being drank in steeled or red Wine: It stays Bleeding at the Nose,
being applied to the Forehead and Temples, or squirted up the Nostrils. It Is
good also for the Bloody Flux, stops the Courses: It is singular good to
provoke Urine, and is helpful against the Dysury, Gravel, Biting of venomous
Beasts, Rheums, Worms, Heat, Choler, Inflammations, Imposthumes, Gangreens,
Fistula's, Ulcers, Cancers, and Wounds in the Ears, with many such like
Distempers.

LAce, or Point: To Wash and Starch these, Put your Lace, or Point, on a Tent,
and make a strong Lather with Spanish-Soap, usually called Castile-Soap, then
with a small soft Brush dipped therein, rub your Point or Lace well, but with a
light and gentle hand, for fear of fretting it; continue to wash it on both
sides for four Lathers; then rince it in Spring Water or Pump-water, which is
all one: and after, pass it over on the wrong side very lightly with white
Starch made as thin almost as Water, and follow it with your Brush, then suffer
it to dry, and with a round Bodkin, or Skewer, open the holes or parts that
were closed in the washing, as also set in order the Gimp or Over-layings, if
it be Point, not suffering it to ruckle; then with a moderate hot Iron smooth
it gently on the wrong side, and set it out to Advantage.

Lace of Silver, etc. To cleanse this when it is tarnished, first rub it over
with burnt Whiting in Powder once or twice; then by dusting it clear from the
Whiting, and having ready some Powder of burnt Alom, run it over with that
finely sifted two or three times; and if the Silver upon the Lace be gilded, it
will restore its faded luster, and render it almost as fresh as at first; and
so you may recover the luster of any tarnished Plate, gilt or ungilt.

Ladies-Mantle is an excellent Wound-Herb, being hot, dry, and astringent; it
stops Bleeding and Courses: The Leaves, the Tops, and the Root, are given in
Potions for Wounds with success; as also are the Powders; the Plasters and
Ointments of it applied, are very good on that account. Rags dipped in the
Decoction of it, and applied to a Woman's Breasts when they are lax, makes 'em
round and solid. It agglutinates inward Wounds and Ruptures: And the Decoction
of it, or the Powder of the dried Herb taken in the Decoction, or in the
distilled Water, is excellent for curing Burstenness in Children.

Take of Ladies-Mantle, Sanicle, Golden-Rod, Sengreen Bettony and Agrimony, of
each a handful; Marshmallows, Fern, Flowers of Camomel, St. John's-wort,
Mugwort, the Buds of Briars, Origanum, and Tormentile Leaves and Roots, of each
a handful: put them into three Bags, and so boil them in the Faeces of
Red-Wine, and apply them one after another. These are very astringent, and
successful in stopping the Flux.

Ladies-Smocks, the Conserve: Take this Herb and Brooklime, of each two
handfuls; shred them small and bruise 'em, and then boil them in a quart of
fair Water till the greatest part of the Liquid is consumed: then wash them,
and put to them an equal quantity of Sugar, and make them into a Conserve: Take
of it six ounces, and, the Species of the three sorts of Saunders, and
Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each a dram and an half; Ivory reduced to Powder one
dram; Salt of Wormwood and Tamaris, of each a dram; make of all these an
Electuary with a convenient quantity of the Syrup of Coral, and take to the
quantity of a quarter of an ounce both morning and evening, and it is an
excellent Remedy for a hot Scurvy, and for removing Scorbutic Humors, etc.

Lamb: This Metamorphosis may at first seem somewhat strange, though we can
assure you it has been much in esteem, viz. to make Lamb of a Pig, in this
manner: Take a fat Pig, scald him, and cut off the Head, slit him, and truss
him up like a Lamb; then being slit through the middle, and flayed, boil him a
little while: then being draw'd with Parsley, as you do Lamb, roast it, and
dridge it, and serve it up with Pepper, Butter and Sugar, and it will not be
easily discerned from Lamb.

Lamb-stones Fried: Having parboiled the Stones, put Butter into a Pan, mince
the Stones small, and put them into it; then strain them with some Cream,
Pepper and Cinnamon made small; grate in some Parmisan or Holland-Cheese, or old
Cheshire-Cheese; and being strained, put them into the Pan again; and then
being well fried, serve them up with Sugar, and Rosewater. And in this manner,
without any variation, you stones.

Lamb-stone-Pye: Take six young Pigeons, as many Chickens, truss them and bake
them with six Ox-Palates well boiled and blanched, and cut into little pieces;
take six Lamb-stones, and as many Sweetbreads of Veal cut in halves and
parboiled, twenty Cocks-combs boiled and blanched, the Bo^toms of four
Artichoaks boiled, a quart of Stewing-Oysters parboiled, the Marrow of four
Bones seasoned with Nutmeg, Pepper, Mace, and Salt; fill the Pie with the
Ingredients, and mingle some Pistaches among them; grate in the Yolks of Eggs
hard boiled, and covering all with a thin leaf of Butter, close it up, and put
it into a little fair Water at the hole in the Lid: being baked, drain out the
Butter, and liquor it with Gravy and Butter beaten up with Lemon-pulp; or you
may bake it in a Dish, covered with a Bisket-Lid.

Lamb to Souce: Bone your Side of Lamb first, soak it well in Water and Salt,
wipe it dry, season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, and Sweet-Herbs shred small,
Coriander-seeds, Lemon Peel, and Salt; lay broad slices of Lard over the
Seasoning, then roll it up into a Collar, and bind it up in a linen Cloth:
boil it in Salt and Water, taking off the Scum, put in sliced Ginger, Nutmeg
and Fennel, with Parsley-roots; and when it is almost boiled up, put in a quart
of White Wind; and being boiled, take it off, and put in slices of Lemon, the
Peel of two Lemons, and twelve Bay Leaves, and keep it close in a convenient
Vessel for your use. In this manner you may souce a Breast of Veal, Kid, Fawn,
or Venison.

Lamb-like Venison: To order this that few shall discover it, Take Lamb, bone
it, and dip it in the Blood of a Pig, or any other wholesome Blood; parboil it in
Small-beer and Vinegar, three parts of the first to one of the latter: let it
stand all night, then put in some Turnsole, and bake it with Claret, Butter,
Pepper, Cloves, Mace, and some sprigs of Rosemary, and it will afford you an
excellent Dish.

Lameness in the Limbs: This is many times occasioned by sudden Colds, or
Humors settling in particular Parts. To cure or remove it, Take of Oil of Spike
and Earthworms, of each an ounce; mix them well together, and bath the
afflicted part as hot as may be well endured.

Lampreys, to Bake: Draw and split your Lampreys, take out the Strings in the
Back, flea them, and truss them round; then having parboiled them, let 'em be
seasoned with Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt: place a laying of Butter at the bottom
of the Pie, lay on the Lampreys with some sliced Onions, a few whole Cloves;
and covering it with Butter, close it up: wash over the Lid with the Yolks of
Eggs, and Beer or Saffron-water; and when it is baked, fill up the Pie with
clarified Butter beat up with a little Red Wine.

The Italians bake 'em in this manner; viz. The Skin being taken off, season it
with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, Cinnamon and Ginger; fill the Pie either with whole
Lampreys, or those that are cut in convenient pieces, with the addition of
Raisins, Currants, Prunes dried, Cherries and Dates; and covering it over with
Butter, close it up; and being baked, liquor it with strained Almonds, Grapes,
Raisins, Verjuice, Sugar, and Sweet-Herbs small chopped, and boiled all
together: then serve it up with Juice of Oranges, White Wind, Cinnamon, and the
Blood of the Lampreys: Ice it, and serve it up pretty hot; or you may keep it
cold, but not very long.

Lampreys in Pattypans, Baked: Roast your Lampreys very tender, basting it with
Butter; and being roasted or cold, put it into the Pans with Plain or
Puff-Paste, being first buttered underneath; then season it with Pepper,
Nutmeg, Ginger and Salt, Sweet-Herbs shred, Bisket-bread grated, slices of
Lemon, Currants and Dates, and so close them up; and being baked, liquor them
with Butter and White Wind, or Sack and Sugar.

Land-Fowl Boiled the French way: Take Green-Pease, and put them into boiling
Mutton-broth, with some thin slices of interlarded Bacon; and being near
boiled, put in some Parsley and bruised Aniseeds; strain some of the Pease, and
thicken the Broth; then add Pepper, grated Cheese, Pease or Flower, and
sometimes Saffron or Mint, as your Relish best suits: lay a few Sippits in the
Dish, and pour this Broth on the Fowls; garnish the Dish with Flowers, sliced
Lemon, and Spices, and serve it up. And thus you may order Sea-Fowl with
Green-Pease, or Lambs and Kids-Heads, only dridging them over with the Yolks of
hardboiled Eggs.

Land-fowl, to Carbonade: The Fowl being roasted cut them up, and sprinkle them
with Salt; then scotch and broil them, and make a Sauce with Vinegar, Butter,
and the Juice of Oranges, garnished with slices of Orange or Lemon.

Languishing of the Parts: Take half a pound of Licorice, bruise two ounces;
White Sugar Candy four ounces, Jelly of Calves-feet two pound; Mace, Cinnamon
and Nutmeg, of each a quarter of an ounce; White Wind a quart: boil them up to
the thickness of a Jelly, and strain them thorough a Jelly-bag, and eat of it
both morning and evening, at least five or six spoonfuls at a time.

Lapis Bedicamentalis: Take Hungarian Vitriol one pound, Salt of Nitre half a
pound; Ceruss, Alom, Bolearmenian, Salt of Glass, of each four ounces; Sal
Ammoniack two ounces; beat them all very carefully, and mix them with
White-wine-Vinegar; then bake them in an earthen Pot, over a gentle fire, till
they become as hard as a Stone, and then preserve it for use.

Larks to Boil: Truss them, and cut off their Legs and Heads; boil them (having
put a little Parsley and Sage finely shred into their Bellies) in Mutton-Broth,
or in Water seasoned with a little Salt, that has been boiled, and often
scumm'd before you put 'em in: then boil up, when the Broth or Water is half
consumed, large Mace, Dates, Marrow, Currants, Pepper and Salt; and being well
stewed together, lay them on fine carved Sippits, and thicken the Broth with
Almonds beaten and strained; add a little Rose Water and Sugar, and garnish
with Lemons sliced, Barberries pickled, Sugar and grated Bread strewed about
the Dish; and for Leer, strain grated Bread and hard Eggs beaten in Verjuice
and some of the Broth. And thus you may boil and dish up all manner of small
Birds well ^uced, as Quails, Rails, Thrush, Black-birds, Snites, VVheatears,
Sparrows, Feldefers, Martins, Ruffs, Brews, God wits, Knots, Dotterels, Pewits,
Strenits, Ollines, Gravelens, Red-Shanks, etc. But as for the latter ten, this
way is best approved by some Cooks; viz.

Let 'em be half roasted, and stick on one side a few Cloves as they roast;
save the Gravy, and put them into a Pipkin with it and a little Claret and
strong Broth so much as will cover them, some boiled Houshold-bread strained,
also Mace, Cloves, Pepper, Ginger, fried Onions, and Salt; stew them well, and
serve them up on fine carved Sippets: and sometimes, for change, you may
garnish with Lemons, and Sweet-Herbs shred pretty small.

Lark-Pye: Take a dozen of Larks fresh and good, two Penny Manchets, one pound
of Currants, a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon, one Nutmeg grated, a quarter of
an ounce of Mace finely beaten, a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, three Eggs,
and a little Salt; work all these together till they are very well mixed, and
make the Mixture into Balls as big as Walnuts; put them into the Bellies of the
Larks; then having placed them in order, put a pound of Butter and a Lemon
sliced over them, half a pint of pickled Barberries, and half a pound of
Citron, and Lemon candied; a quarter of a pound of Eryngo-roots, and a quarter
of an ounce of whole Mace: and when it is baked, put in Butter on the top of
it, and serve it up.

Lark-Spurs: The Juice of the Flowers clear the Sight, and strengthen it: it is
successfully used in Vulnerary Potions: the Decoction of the Flower in Wine,
and drank with a dram of Saffron infused into it, removes Obstructions.

Lasks: Take a dram of Rhubarb, Baum, Mint, old Pennyroyal, of' each a pugil
or little handful: boil them in Claret, or Red Wine, and drink of the Decoction
two ounces at a time in the morning fasting.

Lawn Faded, to Recover: Take the Decoction of Vervain a quart, the Water that
distills from the Vine when cut in the Springtime, as the Sap is riling, half
a pint; the Roots of Primroses and Rosemary-flowers, a handful of each steeped
a day in a quart of new Milk: mix all these together, and steep the Lawns in
the liquid part, being well strained from the grosser a night: when they are
next washed, they will thicken, and become fresh. And by this rule, Muslings,
Lace, and Tiffany are recovered.

Laxation of Parts: You must spread Emplastrum Divinum upon soft Leather, and
apply it to strengthen the Part weakened by the Sublaxation.

Lead-wort: This is good, bruised and applied to old Sores; also to kill Worms
in the Flesh, by washing the Parts with the Juice of it.

Legs Inflamed or Vlcerated: To cure this, Take a quart of Spring Water, four
ounces of White-Bread; add to it two ounces of Sheepssuet cut very small: and
having boiled it a little, add an ounce of Rosin finely powdered, and a quarter
of an ounce of searc'd Brimstone, and spread them well mixed and tempered on
Cloth or Leather, and lay it to the Part grieved, and it will give sudden Ease,
and in time work a Cure.

Leg of Mutton, to dress after the best manner, either Roast or Boiled in that
way they call Forced: Mince the Meat with Beef Suet or Bacon, Sweet-Herbs,
Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Garlic, raw Eggs, Chestnuts: then with all these together
fill the Skin of the Leg, out of which the Meat was taken in order to be
minced: prick it up, and either boil or roast it, according to your Discretion:
make Sauce with the remainder of the Meat, and other Ingredients that will not
go into the Skin, and with Gravy serve it up: garnish the Dish with pickled
Grapes or Barberries.

Leg of Veal: To dress this with Rice, or a Knuckle, put it into your Cauldron
or Pot, the Water being pretty hot; put some Salt to it, and then put in some
Mace, and Rice finely picked; wash some Raisins of the Sun, and when it is
tender boiled put in about a dram of Saffron, and to serve it up on fine carved
Sippits, with Rice all over it: pour on Broth, and run it over with beaten
Butter: otherwise cover it with Paste cut like small Lard, boiled in thin Broth
and Saffron, or in white Broth, with Fruit, Spinach, Sweet-Herbs, and
Gooseberries.

Leg of Veal, another way: Stuff the Veal with Beef Suet, Nutmeg and Salt; so
boil it, and keep it scumming; put in some Salt, Parsley, and Fenel-roots, in a
bundle bound up: then being almost boiled, take up some of the Broth in a
Pipkin, put to it some Raisins of the Sun, Mace, and Gravy; stew them well, and
let them be thickened, which is best done with grated Bread and the Yolks of
hard-boil'd Eggs; and before you dish up your Broth, have Parsley, Marjoram,
Thyme, Sorrel, Marrigold-flowers, and Spinach stripped or picked; bruise them
with the back of your Ladle, give it a warm, and dish up your Leg of Veal on
carved Sippits, and run it over with beaten Butter.

Leg of Veal, another way: To dress this, Take out the Meat, and leave the Skin
and Knuckle whole together; then with some Beef Suet mince the Meat so taken
out, as also some Sweet-Herbs; then season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper,
Salt, and three or four Yolks of hard Eggs, and cut into quarters;
Pine-apple-seeds, two or three Eggs raw, Pistaches, Chestnuts, and Artichoaks
sliced; then with all these so ordered fill up the Skin again, and prick it
with a Skewer, or sow it up close with white Thread; then boil it in two or
three gallons of fair Water, and a quart of White Wind, if you think it
convenient: scum it, and take up some of the Broth, and put to it Pistaches,
Chestnuts, Pine-apple-seed, Marrow, large Mace, slices of Artichoak bottoms;
stew them together, dish it on Sippets of fried Bread, put on Marrow, garnish
it with sliced Lemon, and the Peel; run it over with beaten Butter, and so
serve it up.

Leg of Veal Sour'd: Bone it, and Lard it, but first season the Lard with
Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and the Veal with the same and a little Salt, and then
strew minced Sweet-Herbs over it; roll it up like a Collar of Brawn; boil it or
stew it in an Oven with Water, Salt, and White Wind: serve it in a Collar,
whole or sliced; or fill it with Butter, the Liquor being put away, or bake it
with Butter in a Roll: Jelly it, and mix some of the Broth with Almond-Milk and
Jellies in slices of two Collars, and then serve it up.

Lemons: They are very Cooling; the Juice of them is taken with success in all
hot Diseases: it likewise, if mixed with a little unslack'd Lime, cures the
Itch, cleanses Spots, and destroys Worms in the outer-part of the Body, in
the Nose, or parts of the Face or Breast, where they many times appear with
their black Heads, even with the Skin like studs of Gunpowder: the Juice of
them only takes away Pimples, and Redness in the Face: and if made into a Syrup
with fine Sugar, it kills Worms in the Belly: it is given with success in all
Fevers: if you steep Pearl in this Juice a considerable time, they will
dissolve, or become as soft as Wax.

Lemon-Paste: Take Lemons that have plump and well-colored Rinds, put them
into Water, and in the boiling, shift them six times, till they are tender: the
first Water being seasoned with a handful of Salt; then put them into a Wooden
Vessel, but be sure not into any of Metal: beat them into a Pulp with a wooden
Rouling-pin or Pestle, and strain them with very hard wringing thorough a
coarse linen Cloth: then take somewhat more than what they weigh, in fine
Sugar, and boil up what you have squeezed out of your Lemons with it to almost
a Candy-height; then take it our, spread it pretty thin upon Plates, dry it in
a gentle Oven or Stove, turn it, and cut it out into what Form you please.

Lenten-Tansie: Take Tansie, Fetherfew, Parsley, Violet-leaves; bruise them,
and strain out the Juice into eight or ten Eggs well beaten; then stamp Almonds
with the Spawn of a Pike or Carp, and strain them with the Crumbs of fine
Manchet, Sugar, and Rose Water, and fry it thin in sweet Butter, or put the
Juice of the Herbs only strained with eight or ten Eggs; fry them in sweet
Butter, and dish them up with Sugar; or you may put a little Flower and
Rose Water to them.

Leprosy: Take crude Antimony well chosen and powdered, about one, two, or
three scruples, Morning and Evening, according to your Age and Strength, in a
spoonful of the Syrup of Clovegilliflowers, or Elder-berries: this, if need
require, may be continued four or five Months. So that if the first Dose prove
beneficial, in cases not urgent, a scruple or half a dram may serve, nor need
it be continued for so long a time.

Leprosy a specific: Take one ounce of Pomatum, the Flower of Sulphur a dram,
Sal Prunellae half an ounce; mix them very well into an Ointment, and with it
anoint the Part afflicted.

Lettuce: They are cooling to the Stomach, qualify Choler and Heat, dispose to
Rest, and increase Milk: they yield good Nourishment. In Phrensies, Madness,
and Burning Fevers, etc. let them be applied to the Temples, and the Coronal
Suture, and Wrists; but it is better to dip double Rags in Lettuce-water
wherein Sal Prunellae has been dissolved, viz. half an ounce to half a pint of
the Water.

Lettuce-Stalks, to Candy: Boil them tender in Water; and then having boiled up
your Sugar to a Candy, put them into it; let them boil therein, then take them
out, and lay them a drying in a warm place; and so put them up in Boxes as a
Sweet-meat, which much cools and moistens the Mouth. Being eaten when going to
rest, they cause gentle slumbers. In this manner you may candy Fenelstalks, or
any kind of Flower that is not extraordinary tender.

Lettuce-Water: This is an exceeding Cooling Drink: it allays the Heat and
Disturbances of the Brain occasioned by hot Vapors, and disposes to sleep.
Eating the Herb boiled or raw, it qualifies the Heat of the Stomach, also the
Effects of Choler, and increases Milk in Women, yielding good Nourishment; yet
it ought not to be eaten too excessively: Being applied Poultiswise to the
Coronal Suture and Temples, and also the Wrists bound about with double Rags
dipped in Lettuce-water wherein Sal Prunellae has been dissolved, viz. Half an
ounce of the Salt to a pint of the Water, it proves exceeding helpful in
Frenzies, Madness, burning Fevers, and suchlike Distempers, occasioned by
violent Heats, or Fermentations.

Leveridge-Pudding: Boil a Hog's-Liver very dry, and being cold grate it,
taking as much grated Manchet as Liver, sift them through a fine Sieve or
Cullender; season them with beaten Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmeg; you may,
if you please, put in a little Ginger, but no Pepper; put then half a pound of
Sugar, and a pound and half of Currants, half a pint of Rose Water, and three
pound of Beef Suet, eight Yolks of Eggs, and but four Whites; put these in the
small Guts of an Ox, or the great ones of a Hog clean washed, and beware of
breaking them in boiling, or you may do it in a fine Cloth sewed up narrow and
long.

Licorice is in Virtue, abstersive, cleansing, and allayeth the bitterness of
Humors, and therefore is very good for the Heat of the Urin, being chewed
especially whilst it is green or fresh; it allayeth Hunger and Thirst, and
retains that Virtue many Days: The Juice of it held, when very thick in the
Mouth, and there suffered to melt, has the same Effect. It is good for the
Breast and Lungs and is therefore successfully given to those that are
shortwinded, and breath with much difficulty, or such as are in Consumptions,
or Pleurisies. The Juice asswages prickings, not only of the Arteries of the
Lungs, but the Bladder also, and does excellently relieve Thirst, as being
tempered with moisture, and colder than our Nature. It is to be noted that the
Root, in which consist all these properties, is much better being fresh taken
out of the Ground, than when it is dry; and is exceeding more pleasant in the
Taste when used in Medicines.

Lignum Columbrinum: This is a great Expeller of Poison; the Wood, Bark, and
Root, being beaten grossly, and boiled in White Wind, and drank hot about a
quarter of a pint at a time.

Lignum Molucense: This is brought from the Molucca Islands in the East Indies.
This Wood is a great causer of Sleep. Taken inwardly or outwardly, it expels
hot Poisons, being rasped and decocted in Whitewine. It likewise remedies the
Biting of any venomous Creature Ten grains of the Powder of it being taken in
Rose Water, cures Wounds made by poisoned Arrows; yet half a scruple of it is a
Dose for the strongest Man. When it is used for Purging, the Party that takes
it must abstain from much eating: It purges Humors in general, but more
particularly, gross, clammy, and melancholy Humors. It is good for quotidian
Agues, and continual Fevers; for the iliack Passion, Wind-Colick, Dropsy, and
Gravel; for Difficulty of making Urin, Pain of the Joints and Scirrhus, and the
King's Evil. It kills all sorts of Worms and restores lost Appetite. Some use
it against inveterate Headaches, and the noises in the Head. The Indians keep
it so choice, that they will scarce let a Stranger see it, though the greatest
use they know of it is to catch Birds withal, by boiling it with Rice; and when
the Birds have eaten of the Rice boiled with it, they fall down in a Sleep; and
if they eat too much they dye. And if in taking it, it work too much, let the
Party take a little of the Decoction of Rice, and it will qualify it.

Lily of the Valleys: The Flowers and Leaves of this are held exceeding good
for the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Giddiness, and other cold Diseases
of the Brain. Take the Conserve of these Lilies, six ounces; of the Powder of
Male-Peony half an ounce, Man's Skull prepared in powder three drams; the Seeds
and Flowers of Male-Peony dried and powdered, of each two drams; Red Coral
prepared, Pearl, and white Amber, of each a dram; the Salt of Coral four
scruples, the Syrup of the Flowers of Male-Peony, a sufficient quantity to make
into an Electuary. Take of this two drams Morning and Evening, against any of
the beforementioned Distempers; but especially in Fits of the Apoplexy, etc.

Lily-Water: This is distilled from white Garden-Lilies in a cold Still as you
do Roses and other Simples. It is given with success to Women that have hard
Labors, and to expel the Afterbirth. The Root of these Lilies are admirable
in Cataplasms to assuage Pains and ripen Tumors: The Oil extracted from them,
has not only the same, but a more powerful Virtue. We find in several noted
Authors, that they have mainly contributed to the Cure of diverse troubled with
the Dropsy, viz. The Juice mixed with Barly-Flower, and made into Bread, and
eaten with their usual Diet, Thirty or Forty Days together.

Limbs to Comfort: Apply to the Part grieved a Plaster of Oxicrocium made in
this manner: Take two ounces and a half of Saffron, Ship-pitch, Colophony, and
yellow Wax, of each four ounces; Galbanum, Turpentine and Ammoniacum, Myrrh,
Olibanum, and Mastick, of each one ounce and three drams: to the melted Wax,
add the Pitch cleansed from the Dross and Strained, next to that the Colophony:
These being melted, take them from the Fire, and let them cool a little; then
add the Ammoniacum and Galbanum dissolved apart in Vinegar, and strained, and
boiled to the consumption of the Vinegar, and mixed with the Turpentine; then
sprinkle in Frankincense, Myrrh, and Mastick, in very fine Powder a quart; and
in conclusion, the Saffron finely powdered and well mixed, and so make it into
a Plaster.

This comforts and strengthens the Limbs, and is an excellent Emollient for
Aches, and to discuss cold Tumors, or any cold Humors settled in the Joints,
or afflicting the Nerves and Sinews, and consequently a very good Gout-Plaister.

Limbs, a strengthening Plaster: Take Minion powdered one pound, Cerusse
prepared half a pound, Soap ten ounces, common Olive-Oil a quart,
Orange-flower-water nine ounces; boil them according to Art, till they become
thick enough to spread on a Plaster.

This is very highly commended for strengthening the Ligaments, and the Matrix;
being spread upon a round piece of Leather, and applied; it also strengthens
the Backs of Women near Travel, and eases the Pains that frequently afflict
them on that score.

Lime-Tree: The Leaves and Bark of this Tree repel, dry and provoke Urin: A
Mucilage made of the Bark is good in Burns and Wounds. The Leaves bruised and
sprinkled with Water, discuss Swellings in the Feet. The Flowers are cephalic,
and of a very fragrant Scent. The distilled Water is much in esteem for the
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, and Giddiness; the Dose being from an ounce to an
ounce and a half. It is likewise a great Beautifier of the Face; and drank with
Water of Camomil it cures the Gripes. The Berries dried till reduced to powder,
are much commended for the Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes of the Belly. Being
mixed with Vinegar, and put up the Nostrils, the Bleeding at the Nose is stayed.

Limewater, to Make: Take a pound of clean quick Lime, slack it in a gallon of
warm Water, and let it stand till all that will subside be settled to the
bottom; and separation being made, the Water swim clear at top, at which time
it will often happen, that a kind of thin and brittle substance, almost like
Ice, will cover the surface of the Liquor: As soon as the Water is thus
impregnated, delay not to pour it off warily, and keep it well stopped. This is
useful on diverse occasions, as to wash Sores, supple Pains and Aches, cure the
Toothach, the Mouth being washed with it and a little Honey.

If it be designed for Consumptions, or Obstructions, it must be made thus:
Take a gallon of Limewater made as the former, infuse in it cold Sassaffras,
Licorice, and Anniseeds, of each an ounce; adding thereto half a pound of
Currants, or the like quantity of Raisins of the Sun stoned. The Dose of this
compound Limewater, is from four to five ounces, and may be taken twice a Day.

Limonade: To make this, Scrape the Lemon Peel as much as you think fit, into
Water and Sugar, and add a few drops of the Essence of Sulphur, with some
slices of Lemon, observing always to put half a pound of Sugar to a pint of
Water. This is very wholesome for the Stomach, creates Appetite, and good
Digestion, and is a very pleasant cooling Liquor; and in case of the Distemper,
called Furor Uterinus, Take the Feathers of a Partridge, burn them for a
considerable time under the Party's Nose, so that the Fume may ascend the
Nostrils, and drink a quarter of a pint of this Limonade after if.

Liniments for Hemorrhoids: Take of the Flower of Sulphur two drams, Oil of
Eggs half an ounce, Oil of Roses one ounce, mingle them for the Liniment for
application. Or,

Take of the Oil of Linseed, the Pulp of an Onion well baked or roasted in
Embers, of each two ounces; white Wax half an ounce: of these make a Liniment
Or,

Take Hog-Lice, and mash them, the Ointment of Poplar, of each an ounce;
Extract of Opium half a dram: mix them, and make them up into a Liniment. All
these are very proper to assuage the Swelling and Pains of the Hemorrhoids, and
other violent hot Swellings, occasioned by infectious Humors.

Liniment to prevent Scars of the Smallpox: Take Litharge of Gold prepared,
and well washed in Rose Water, of each one ounce; Oil of the four great Seeds
cleansed, bitter Almonds and Eggs, of each half an ounce; Nightshade and
Plantane-water, as much as is sufficient.

This Liniment is a great restorer of Beauty.

Liniment for the Sciatica: Take three new whelped Puppies, as many live Moles,
Earthworms one pound, Lees of Rosemary, Laurel, Lavender, Mother of Thyme, and
St. John's-wort, of each a handful: boil them in common Oil and red Wine, then
strain and press them strongly out, and to the Liquor add of yellow Wax and
Goose-grease, of each ten ounces.

This Liniment is much praised and commended for its excellent Virtue in easing
the Pains of the Sciatica, and all sorts of Rheuma tisms and Gouts.

Liniment for Tetters: Take Mercurial precipitate, and green Vitriol, of each
one ounce; Verdigrease and Borax, of each two drams; Juice of red Dock two
ounces; Hog's Grease, and new Butter, of each four ounces; pressed Oil of
Henbane one ounce.

This Liniment is excellent to cure Tettars, Ring-worms, or any other Sores.

Liniment to stay Vomiting: Take of the Oil of Nuts strongly pressed out, and
the Queen of Hungary's Water, of each half an ounce; distilled Oil of Wormwood
one dram, select Mastick finely powdered two drams, and then make up a Liniment
of it.

This being applied hot to the Stomach, immediately stays Vomiting, and eases
the Defects of the Stomach, removing the Causes that force violent Vomitings
and Strainings.

Links to Make: Take the Fillet of a Leg of Pork, and cut it Dice fashion,
season the Meat with Mace, Cloves, and Pepper finely beaten; mince a handful of
Sage, mix it with a handful of Salt, and put it to them; then hang the Guts in
the Air till the moisture is a little taken out of them, then fill them, and
hang them up a drying again; and when you spend them, boil, fry, or roast them
as you please: They also make a good Dish, stewed with diverse kinds of Meat.

Linen Scorched: To recover this Accident, if it be not gone too far, Take two
ounces of Fulling-Earth, half a pint of Whitewine-Vinegar, half an ounce of
Castilesoap, half an ounce of Hensdung, and with two Onions quartered, boil
them in a quart of fair Water, till it begins to be thick; then let it cool,
and being in a kind of a Jelly by putting in a little white Starch, spread it
on the Place so scorched; and if it be but lightly done, it will soon recover
it so, that in a wash or two, no marks of the Fire will remain.

Linen Stained: Take two ounces of Castile-Soap, boil it to a Jelly in a quart
of Milk, keeping it from any thick curdlings; then if your Linen has been
trained by Fruits, or the like, spread it on as you do Fulling-e^th, and suffer
it to lie on all Night; and that being taken off, wet the Place with the Juice
of Lemon; and in a wasting or two the Stains will disappear.

Lips Chap'd: Take the Brains of a Goose, mix them with that of a Buck or Stag,
and put to them so much Deers-suet, as will bring it into an Ointment, and with
it anoint the Lip; or for want of these, take Litharge of Silver, Myrrh,
Ginger, of each two drams beaten fine; and then with Wax, Honey, and Olive-Oil,
make them into an Ointment over a gentle Fire; and having rubbed your Lips over
with your Tongue to supple them, put this Ointment on a Linnen-Rag, and lay it
on your Lips when you go to Bed, and in the Morning you will find them reduced
to a smoothness, or at least in twice applying it. This may serve for the
Hands, Arms, Knees, or any other Parts appertaining to the Body.

Liquid-Amber: This is the Rosin that flows from a Tree that has Leaves like
those of Ivy: If is much used in Physic, it heats and strengthens, resolves,
and is Anodyne; it comforts the Brain, the Head being anointed with it; it
cures all sorts of Pains proceeding from cold Causes. It provokes Appetite,
strengthens the Stomach, and helps Concoction. It likewise gives Gloves a very
fragrant Scent. It resolves Tumors, and opens Obstructions of the Womb,
asswaging the Tumors of it. It is good to provoke the Courses. Some cut the
Wood of the Tree from which it flows into small pieces, and boil it, and take
off the Fat that arises from it, and sell it for the true Oil. Some
Apothecaries sell that for Liquid-Storax, when indeed it has little or nothing
of the Virtue of the Liquid-Amber, or Storax.

Liquor for Ulcers: Take the green Bark of Oak, bruise it well, and upon it
pour good Limewater, which before you are directed to make, and let the
Infusion continue till the Liquor has acquired a deep Tincture, and with this
wash any Ulcers, or old Sores, Bruises, or Wounds, if need require it, twice a
Day.

Liver Cooled: Take two Gallons of Whey new made, and boil therein one
Fennel-root, and one Mallow-root, their Piths taken out; bruise the Roots, with
Senna, Borrage, Bugloss, Violet-Leaves, Endive, Sorrel, Agrimony, Scurvygrass,
Watercresse, and Cinquefoil, of each a handful; Licorice six drams, Fennel-seed
an ounce; Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and Juniper Berries, of each two drams: boil
these in the Whey till one half be consumed; then strain out the Liquid part
into an earthen Vessel: being cool, bottle it up, and drink it as you find
occasion. It mainly fortifies the Stomach, and helps Digestion.

Liver Obstruded: Take Lavender-Cotten, when flowered, a handful, cut off the
gross Stalks that grow toward the Roots, concoct the rest in a pint of
Whitewine, sweeten it with some Powder of white Sugar Candy, and drink a
quarter of a pint of the Decoction Morning and Evening, as hot as may be. It
likewise removes Obstructions in the Kidneys and Ureters, is helpful in the
Jaundice, and kills Worms.

The Leaves and Flowers are also good to lay among Clothes, not only to give
them a good Scent, but to preserve them from sustaining any Injury by Moths and
Worms.

Liverwort: This is an excellent Herb for removing the Obstructions of the
Liver, and Stoppages in the Bladder and Ureters, by drinking the Decoction of
it in Whitewine. It is helpful likewise in the Jaundice: and by outward
Bathings, it cures the Itch and Gonorrhoea; and the br^sed Herb applied stops
the Blood in Wounds.

Loaves of Cheese-Curds: To make this, Take a Porringerful of Curds, and four
Eggs, and so much Flower as will make it stiff: after that, take a seasoning
quantity of Ginger, Nutmeg, and Salt, and so knead and mould the whole mass
into Loaves, and set it into an Oven moderately heated; when they begin to
change color, take them out, put melted Butter to them, with fine Sugar beaten
in Sack, and then serve them up as a dainty Dish.

Lobster Broiled: Being boiled, though but indifferently, lay them on a
Gridiron, or toast them against the Fire, keeping them basted with Vinegar and
Butter, or if you like it best, with Butter alone; and being leisurely done,
serve them up with sliced Lemon, Nutmeg, and Butter and Vinegar beat up thick.

Lobster Broiled on Paper: Slice the Tails round, and the Claws in long slices:
then Butter a Dripping-pan made of Paper, and lay it on a Grid-iron over a
clear Fire; then put some slices of it seasoned with Salt, the slices of
Nutmeg, and fresh Eel, Sageleaves, Rosemary-tops, and two or three Cloves; or
you may lay Bay Leaves, or Sweet-herbs chopped; or, if the Fire be too hot, do
it on Embers: and being well done, ^ve them up on a Dish or Plate, in the same
Dripping-pan: put to them the Juice of Oranges beaten up with Butter, and
garnish it with slices of Lemon.

Lobster to Farce: When the Lobster is half boiled, take out the Meat, and
mince it, season it with some Cloves and Mace beaten, and minced sweet Herbs
mingled among the Meat; then put Yolks of Eggs, Gooseberries, Grapes and
Barberries; sometimes the Bottoms of boiled Artichoaks cut Dice-fashion are
used, or boiled Asparagus; others will mingle Almond-paste with the rest; but
however, when the Composition is fixed, fill the Lobster-shells, viz. Claws,
Tail and Body, and bake it in an Oven not very hot; make for it a Sauce with
Gravy and White Wind: beat it up with sweet Butter, the Juice of an Orange, and
Anchovy dissolved in a little Water. To this Farcing you may sometimes put
Almond-paste, Currants, Gooseberries and Sugar, and make Balls with them to lay
about the Dish, and then serve it up with Venison-Sauce.

Lobster Fried: Take out the Meat of a boiled Lobster, slice it long-ways, and
flower it; fry it in sweet Butter, that it may be crisp and white, or put it in
Batter of Eggs, Flower, Salt, and Cream, roll it in this and fry it: then make
a Sauce with the Juice of Oranges, Claret, and grated Nutmeg; beat them up
thick with sweet Butter, rub the Dish over with a Shalot or an Onion; and
having garnished it with slices of Oranges or Lemons, pour on the Sauce, and
then serve it up to the Table.

Lobster Hash'd: Take off the Shells when the Lobsters are newly boiled, mince
the Meat very small, and put it into an earthen Pot or Pipkin with as much
Claret Wine as will near cover it; then add Salt, sweet Butter, grated Nutmeg,
sliced Oranges, and a few Pistaches; and when it is very well stewed, serve it
up on Sippits, being run over with beaten Butter, and garnished with sliced
Oranges, some cuts of Paste, or Lozenges of Puff-paste.

Lobsters Ielly'd: Take a Tench, draw him at the Gills; then put it into as
much Water as will conveniently boil it; season it with Salt, Wine-vinegar, and
five or six Bay Leaves; large Mace, three or four whole Cloves, and a bundle of
sweet Herbs: and the Fish being boiled, take it up, and rub off the Scales,
then strain the Liquor thorough a Jelly-bag, and put to it a piece of
Ising-glass washed and steeped, for that purpose, in fair Water, and boil it
very cleanly, and run it thorough the Jelly-bag: and then your Lobsters being
taken out of the Shells, lay them in a large clean Dish in slices, and run this
Jelly over them. You may, for variety's sake, make this Jelly of diverse
Colors, by putting to it Saunders, Turmerick, Turnsole, or any such like
Colors.

Garnish the Dish with Lemon Peel cut in branches or long slices, Barberries,
and fine colored Flowers. Thus you you may Jelly Craw-fish and Prawns; but
they must be laid in the Dish whole, when the shells are taken off.

Lobsters Marinated: To do this, Take them out of the Shells when they are
parboiled, lard the Tails with a salt Eel being parted in halves the longest
way of the Eel; fry them in clarified Butter, or Olive-Oil, and when they are
enough, put them into a Dish or Pipkin, and make a Sauce with Wine-vinegar,
White Wind, three or four sliced Nutmegs, and as many blades of large Mace,
some sliced Ginger, and ten or twelve Cloves, with two drams of whole Pepper,
and some Salt: put into this Sauce Winter-savoury, Thyme, Rosemary,
Sweet-Marjoram, Bay Leaves, Sage and Parsley; then slice three or four Lemons:
dish up the Lobsters, and pour these on the finely shred; and garnishing it
over with some of the Oil or Butter they were fried with, serve them up pretty
hot.

Lobster Pickled: Boil the Lobster in Vinegar, White Wind and Salt, then take
them up; and having Bay Leaves and Rosemary-tops, Savory, Thyme, large Mace,
and whole Pepper, boil them in some of the Liquor the Lobster was boiled in; in
the middle of the boiling put in whole Cloves, then place the Lobsters in a
Barrel, and put the Liquor to them, with the Herbs and Spice, and some
Lemon Peel. In this manner you may keep them a long time, and send them sweet
to any Part of England; which otherwise cannot be done: and when you serve them
up, do it with Spices, Peel, Herbs, and some of the Liquor.

Lobster-Pye: Take four boiled Lobsters, and a fat raw Conger, cut some of it
into square pieces as broad as may be; then take the Meat of the Lobsters, and
slice the Tails in two halves length-ways, as also the Claws, and season both
with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; then put Butter pretty thickly laid in the bottom
of your Pie, and lay on the slices of Conger, and then a layer of Lobster; thus
lay three or four layings till the Pie be full; then scatter some whole Cloves,
Butter and Whitewine, or only clarified Butter.

If you design to eat it hot, season it lightly; and being baked, season it
with Butter, White Wind, sliced Lemon, Gooseberries, green Grapes, or
Barberries, and so garnish it with slices of Lemon, some Red Beet-roots sliced,
or Red Cabbage-leaves finely cut into Flowers, etc.

Lobster Stewed: Take the Vinegar of Claret, Nutmeg, Salt and Butter, stew your
Lobster somewhat dry, dish it in a convenient Dish, and running over with
Butter, garnish it with sliced Lemon; or you may cut it into the fashion of
Dice, and warm it with White Wind and Butter, put it into a Pipkin with
Claret Wine, or Grape-verjuice, and grated Manchet, and so fill a
Scollop-shell, or other convenient thing, with it, and serve it up garnished
with Samphire.

Loches to Suppress: The sign of these, are a Swelling of the Belly, a heavy
Pain in the lower Parts, the Loins and Groin, Redness of Face, Difficulty of
Breathing, and the like. To remedy or suppress which, apply the Hysterical
Plaster to the Navel; then take this Electuary, viz. Conserve of Roman
Wormwood, and Rue, of each one ounce; Troches of Myrrh two drams, Castoreum and
English Saffron, Volatile Salt of Amber, Sal Armoniack, and Assa Foetida, of
each half a dram; make these with Syrup of Violets and Rose Water into an
Electuary, and take to the bigness of a Nutmeg every four hours. Then take of
Ruewater four ounces, compound Bryony-water two ounces, Sugar Candy as much as
will sweeten it into a Julip, and let the Party take her rest after the taking
what is prescribed, and the Effect will, no doubt, answer her Expectation.

Loin of Veal to Bake: If you put it into the Oven with the Bones, joint them
very well, season it with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper, and put it into your Pie;
put Butter to it, and close it up, being sure always to have a well-season'd
strong Crust, liquor it with sweet Butter. In this manner you may bake a Breast
of Veal in either Pie or Pasty, also a Rack or Shoulder stuffed with sweet
Herbs and Beefsuet.

London Plague-Water: See Aqua Epidemica.

Looseness: To stay it, boil a convenient quantity of Cork in Spring Water till
the Liquor taste strong of it; then sweeten it, and drink a pint at a time, and
in two or three times so drinking he will find the effects of it. Or, Drink in
the morning fasting a moderate Draught of your own Urine.

Lozenges of Flowers: Make a good Syrup of Sugar, then take the Blossoms or
Flowers that are wholesome, of what sort you please, shred 'em small, and beat
them in a wooden Mortar, and put in as many as upon boiling up will color the
Syrup of the proper Color of the Flower; then boil it with stirring till it
may be taken clean from the bottom of the Pan, and so thick that it will scarce
drop out of the Spoon: then pour it on a wet Plate, and wetting your Knife or
Spatula, spread it abroad to the thinness of a Crown-piece: then cut it like
Diamonds, or in what fashion you please, and as the Virtue of the Flower is,
and the Virtues of diverse Flowers treated of in this Book, so will the Lozenges
be available.

Lucatello's Balsom. See Balsom.

Lumber-Pye: Take grated Bread, Cloves and Mace finely beaten, Beef Suet cut
small into square pieces, then Veal or Capon minced small, with Suet and sweet
Herbs, Salt, Sugar, and the hardboiled Yolks of six Eggs, and about half a pint
of Cream; work them up in the Caules of Veal like Sausages, then put them into
a Dish, and bake them to a half, and so your Pie being ready, and dried in an
Oven, put them into it, with some Butter, Verjuice, Sugar, Dates, large Mace,
and Grapes, or Barberries, and Marrow; and when it is baked, scrape over some
Sugar, and serve it up.

Lumber-Pye, to Season: Take any cold Meat (Beef or Pork excepted,) shred a
pound of Beef Suet to every pound of Meat; then put to them two Nutmegs grated,
half an ounce of Cloves, and Mace finely beaten, a quarter of an ounce of
beaten Ginger, and the usual sweet Herbs shred very small; then work them up
together (the Meat being likewise minced small) with a little Salt, and six
Eggs, into Balls as big as Pullets Eggs, and put into the Pie one pound of
Currants, one pound of Raisins, and a quarter of a pound of Dates sliced, and
close up all with a pound of Butter conveniently dispersed among the
Ingredients. And if you will have it finer, make this Caudle and put into it; A
quarter of a pound of Sugar, a quarter of a pint of Canary, half a quartern of
Verjuice, the Yolks of three Eggs, and about a quarter of a pound of Butter;
boil them up to a thickness with a little Mace, and put it hot into the Pie,
when it is about to be served up to the Table.

Lunacy: This is a Distemper first seated in the Blood, and then afflicting the
Brain. When the Symptoms of it first begin to appear, by extraordinary Flushing
and Heat, and the Party talk wildly, Let Blood, but not too much, fourteen
ounces is sufficient: Then take a quarter of an ounce of Rhubarb thin sliced,
Angelica-roots an ounce, a sprig or two of Savine; boil these in a quart of
Spring Water till it consume to a pint, and let it be drank lukewarm at two
Draughts, an hour's time between each Draught, sweetened with Sugar, and the
Party put into bed, and a warm Caudle, or else some strengthening Broth
provided and supped up about an hour afterward: by a gentle breathing sweat the
afflicting Humor will be dispersed, and by degrees evaporate.

Lungs and Breast Diseases: Take the best Old Malaga, and distill it in a Glass
Cucurbite in Balneo Mariae: when you have drawn off the Spirit, change the
Receiver, and continue the Distillation, drawing off the Phlegm until there
remain in the bottom a substance like Honey; which pour out, and mix it again
with the Phlegm that you distilled last: drink of this Liquor two or three times
a day, putting into every Draught a few drops of the odoriferous Spirit of
Benjamin.

Lungs Infected: Take the Leaves and Seeds of Marshmallows, and boil 'em in
Milk or Wine with a few Aniseeds and bruised Licorice, and let the Party drink
half a pint pretty warm in the morning fasting.

Lungs Inflamed: Take the Leaves of Red Poppy-flowers a quarter of a peck,
infuse them in Spring Water very hot, but not boiling-hot, and let them stand
twenty-four hours, then wring them out: infuse the like quantity of fresh
Flowers, and having well pressed them after a convenient standing, boil up the
Liquor into a bath, till with its equal weight of Sugar it is made into a Syrup.

Half an ounce at a time is a sufficient Dose; and being exceeding Cooling, it
not only helps the Inflammation of the Lungs, but also Pleurisies; and is good
in most Heats, or hot Diseases, easing Pains in the Head, and causing rest.

Lungs to Purge: Take Agarick Trochiscated three drams; the Roots of Orris,
with the Blue or Skie-colour'd Flowers, Mastick and Hore-hound, of each a dram;
Turbith five drams; Sarcocol, and Troches of Alhandal, of each two drams; the
Species of Hiera Picra half an ounce, Myrrh a dram, and as much Sapa as will
amass them; and of this take half a dram at a time, and it gently purges the
Lungs, carrying off those Humors that chiefly create their Diseases, and
afflict them.

Lungs Rising: There is nothing better than the Water of Enula-campana-roots,
stamp the green Roots in a stone Mortar, and mix with them half as much green
Licorice; then distill it in a glass Still: Take of this Water half a spoonful
at a time, whenever the Rising does trouble you: mix it with as much Old
Malaga, if you cannot take it alone.

Lungs stop with Phlegm: Take Enula-campana-root well dried, Licorice and
Aniseeds, of each one ounce; Flower of Sulphur half an ounce, Sugar Candy six
ounces; make all into a fine Powder, and take thereof half a spoonful three
times a day.

Lungs Stuffed: Take the Syrup of Pennyroyal or Ground Ivy moderately tart,
stamp in it Rose-leaves and Mugwort, and make them with the Syrup and Sugar
into a Conserve; of which take a quarter of an ounce Morning and Evening.

Lung-wort, its Virtues: This is Astringent and Drying, stops Bleeding, and
cures fresh Wounds; stays the Flux of the Belly and the Courses; the distilled
Water, Powder and Syrup, are used with success for the Diseases of the Lungs,
as Short-breathings, Coughs, Consumptions, etc. That sort of it which grows on
the Oak, is excellent for curing the Jaundice, by taking a handful of it, and
boiling it in a close stopped Vessel, in a pint, or somewhat more, of Small-beer,
till half be consumed; and of this take three, of four ounces, as hot as may
be, both Morning and Evening.

Lupins to Boil: Take French Lupins and French Beans, and take away the Tops of
the Cods and the Strings, and then having a Pan or Skillet of fair Water
boiling on the Fire, put them in with some Salt, boil them up quick; and being
boiled, serve them up with beaten Butter and a little Pepper. Garnish the Dish
with Barberries, Lemon Peel and Endive, and so serve them up, having made a
Division or Separation of the awo sorts.

MAcaroons, to Make: Blanch a convenient quantity of Sweet-Almonds, by putting
them into hot Water, beat 'em to a mash in a Mortar, and strew on them between
beatings a little fine Sugar sifted; and when they are well mixed, add the
Whites of Eggs and Rose Water; and when they are of a sufficient thickness,
draw over your Wafers a Feather dipped in melted Butter, and take the Butter up
in, spoonfuls and lay it on them, and bake them in a gentle Oven, Iced over
with Sugar, dissolved, in Rose Water.

Madness or Frenzy: Take the Gall of a Hare, boil it in a quarter of a pint of
Whitewine: this being drank, causes the Party to sleep, and eases the Labor
and Disturbance of his Brain, until Vinegar be given him.

Maidenhair, a Syrup: Take two good handfuls of it, shred these small, and
boil them in two quarts of fair Water till a third part be consumed; then
strain it, and boil up the Decoction with Sugar to a convenient thickness, and
take hall an ounce at a time in any convenient Liquor. This removes the
tartarous and viscous Mucilage out of the Lungs, and is good for those that
have Coughs, Shortness of Breath, and Pains in their Sides, or in the Bladder
or Kidneys. The Powder of this Herb being taken four days together, provokes
Urine, expells the Stone and Gravel, and is of great use for Children in
Ruptures: Or for any of these, the speedier to facilitate the Remedy, you may
take the Syrup of Maidenhair, and Jubebs, of each three ounces; Linseed-oil,
newly drawn, two ounces; fine Sugar two drams: mingle them, and make a Lohoch,
and take about a quarter of an ounce every other Hour.

Maladies of the Skin: Take Oil of Roses half a pint, beat two ounces of
Litharge of Gold to dust or powder with Vinegar, add a little of the Oil, as
you bruise it in a Mortar with an iron Pestle, till the Litharge and Oil has so
overcome the Vinegar, that it appears not, and it becomes a kind of a whitish,
Ointment; then put it up for your use, keeping it close covered.

This takes away Spots, Pimples, Sun-burn, Morphew, and Yellowness of
Complexion; cures Itch, Scabs, Botches, Breakings-out, Tetters, Ringworms;
kills Worms in the Skin, makes it smooth, and forces out the watery Humors,
tending to Dropsies, by anointing with it.

Marchpane like Bacon: To make this, Take Marchpane-paste, work it with
Red-Saunders till it has colored it; then roll a broad sheet of white Paste,
and a sheet of red Paste, and so till there be three of the white and four of
the red one on another, in a mingled sort every red between; then cut it
overthwart, and it will look so like Rashers of Bacon, that it will deceive the
Eye, till you come to handle it: and so having dried it, you may keep it for
your use on any occasion.

Marchpane to Gild and Garnish: Blanch Almonds in hot Water, beat them well in
a Mortar; put to them Sugar finely sifted, beat them and mingle them till they
become a Paste; add a little Rosewater, then cover it with a sheet of Paper,
make Impressions round it with a Spuriron, or Marking-iron, used in Pastry; Ice
it over with Sugar, Rose Water and the White of an Egg beat up together: and
being drawn, garnish it with Comfies, cut Leas-Gold or Silver in diverse shapes,
and stick it on with Gumwater; then strew grated Biscuit and Carraways on it. If
it happens to be Oily in beating, to remedy this, put in as much Rose Water as
will make it as thin as Ice.

Marchpane like Hung-Beef: Work some of the Paste with Red Saunders, spread it
into a flatness; and the other being White, lay them one on another; and when
it is dried and cut fine, it will, at first sight, appear like Interlarded Beef.

Marchpane: Blanch two pound of Almonds, beat them in a Mortar into a fine
Paste, add to them a pound of fine Sugar, and by mixing them well together,
they will thereby become a good Paste. Observe, as you mix them, to prevent
their turning to Oil, you must put in a few spoonfuls of Rose Water, than cover
the Marchpane in a sheet as big as a Charner, and set an Edge about it as you
do about a Tart, and a Bottom of Wafers under it: then bake it in an Oven or
Baking-Pan, and when you perceive it dry and hard, take it out, and Ice it with
Rose Water and Sugar, being made as thick as Batter for Fritters: so with a
Wing-feather of a Duck or Goose, spread it on, and again put it into the Oven,
and when it rises high, take it out and garnish it with the Figured of Birds,
Beasts, Leaves, not the like, made of the same stuff, and sticking long Comfits
upright in it, serve it up.

Marrigold-Water, its Virtues: This is an excellent Water for Inflamed Eyes:
being dropped in them, it takes away the Inflammation and Redness; or a Rag
dipped in it, may be applied to the Eyes with the same success. The Flowers are
very Cordial and Hepatick, they provoke Sweat and the Courses: There is
therefore an excellent Conserve made of them, after this manner: Take of
Marrigold-flowers two ounces, Confection of Kermes and Hyacinth two drams of
each, the Powder of Pearl an ounce, and as much Syrup of Citron as will make
them into a Conserve, by mixing and bruising them well together with a
sufficient quantity of fine Sugar; take of it about a quarter of an ounce
Morning and Evening: it is a great Cordial for refreshing the Spirits, and a
Preservative against the Plague and Pestilential Fevers.

Marrigold-flower-Water: Take the Flowers of Marrigolds a quarter of a peck,
and distill, them in a cold Still; then take a fine linen Cloth, and wet it in
the distilled Water: this applied to the Forehead, helps Pains of the Head: The
Eyes washed with it, removes Inflammations; and drank in hot Diseases, is very
available and beneficial to the Party grieved.

Marjoram Conserved: Take the Tops and tenderest part of Sweet Marjoram, two
handfuls or more, as you require; a greater or lesser quantity of Conserve;
bruise it very well in a wooden Bowl or Mortar; add twice the weight in Sugar,
boil it up with Marjoram-water till the Sugar comes to the thickness of a
Syrup; then put in the beaten Marjoram, and it will be a rare Conserve.

Marks, to Prevent: In case of the Smallpox, Measles, or such violent
Distempers as leave Scars behind them, Take Litharge of Gold in fine Powder,
White-bread or Ceruss washed in Rose Water, of each an ounce; Oil of the
greater Cold Seeds, and of Bitter Almonds, and Oil of Eggs, of each half an
ounce; Nightshade and Plantane-waters, of each half an ounce, or so much as
will make it into an Ointment by grinding it in a stone Mortar, pouring to it
sometimes of the Oils, and sometimes of the Waters; and with this anoint the
Face and Hands when the Scab or Scurf is green, and it will keep them from
Pitting or Scars.

Marmalade of Cherries: Take Cherries not too ripe, fairest you can get; and
having stoned them, lay them in a Preserving-pan over a gentle Fire, so that
they only simper but not boil; then take out a part of the Liquor, leaving only
so much as will moisten them; then put in fine Sugar, and boil them up over a
quicker Fire, bruise them well, and continue strewing more Sugar till the
Color is very good, then take them off, and being well incorporated, put them
up into a Glass or glazed earthen Vessel, and they will keep a considerable
time; and being carefully looked to, and set dry, you will find it good for
twelve Months.

Marmalade of Red Currants: This is an excellent way, if well observed, viz.
Take of Red Currants when ripe, clean picked, squeeze out the Juice of some of
'em, and put the rest into it, adding the Juice of Raspberries; boil them
together gently, and when the Currants that were whole begin to break, boil up
an equivalency of Sugar to a Candy height, and put in the Currants, letting them
boil with the Currants again, and sprinkle into it Rose Water; and when it comes
to the thickness of a Marmalade, having taken off the Scum if it rises, put
them into a glazed Pot, being mash'd as they boil till none of them remain
whole: and so when this Marmalade is cold, slice it for your use, and it will
prove of an excellent Taste, and is good to moisten the Mouth and comfort the
Stomach in Fevers, or other hot Diseases.

Marmalade of Damascens: Take about two quarts of the largest Damascens when
they are ripe, but not overripe, pare off the Skins of three pints of them; put
'em into an earthen Vessel, placing those you have not skinned undermost, put
as much fair Water as will cover them into a Kettle or Pot; and when it boils,
put in the Pipkin, or other earthen Vessel into it, close stopped, so as the
Water cannot get in; and when they are, by this way of Infusion, tender, take
off the other Skins and Stones out of them all; then take their weight of
Sugar, put it to the Pulp, and set them together over a Fire, till it boil
apace: keep it clean scumm'd, and when it is boiled to a height, put it into a
glass for your use.

Marmalade of Grapes: Take White or Red Grapes, as you design the Marmalade for
Color, let them be gathered in a dry day, and dry them afterward on a Table
when they are separated from the Stalks; then boil them in fair Water, often
scumming them, whilst the Water is reduced to a third part, and then let there
be but a gentle Fire under them; and when you find it thickened, strain it
thorough a Sieve; boiling it once more, add a small quantity of Sugar, and so
put it up when cool, and cover it close for your use.

Marmalade of Pippins: Take the best Pippins when they are newly gathered, and
not too ripe, pare them, and take the Core out, then put to them their weight
in fine Sugar, put them into a Preserving-pan; and pour upon them as much
Spring Water as will cover them; boil them with a quick Fire, till you find
them by trial Jellied on a Plate when cold; then take it off the Fire, and put
into it a little of the Scrapings of Lemon Peel, and a like quantity of the
yellow Rind of Oranges boiled tender, (casting away their first Water, to
correct their Biterness,) cutting them into narrow slices, and so bruising them
all together into a Pulp; let the Substance cool in earthen Pans or Pots, and
set 'em in an indifferent dry place, strewing some Sugar over the Marmalade,
and it will keep well a Year or two.

Marmalade, the Spanish way: Take of ripe Pear-Quinces, pared and cored,
fifteen pound, three pound of fine-white Sugar, a quart of fair Water, stew
them over a gentle Fire, and as they grow dryer, add a little Rose Water, and
Whitewine or Canary, as the Scent best pleases; squeeze out the Juice and Pulp,
and put to it four pound of Sugar more, a little more Rose Water and
Orange-water, try it on a Plate, and if it comes clean off, it is sufficiently
enough; then take it off, and let it cool, put it in Boxes, and strew over it
some perfumed Comfits, and keep it close for use.

Marmalade White: Take six pound of Quinces, pare and core them, and then boil
'em to a Pulp, put to it two pound of Sugar moistened well with the Juice of
Quinces; boil them gently together at first, till the Liquor be swelled out of
the Quinces, and the Sugar dissolved, and all come into a convenient thickness
and so put it up for your use.

Marrow, a fine Dish: Take the Marrow of two or three Bones, cut it square like
Dice, and put it into a penny Manchet grated fine, with some Dates cut in
halves, and a quarter of a pound of Currants, seven or eight spoonfuls of Cream,
roasted Wardens, Pippins, or Quinces sliced, and two or three Yolks of raw
Eggs: season them with Cinnamon and Ginger; bake them, and serve 'em up.

Marshmallows: Though these are very common, yet they are of much Virtue and
Value in their Use, viz. the Leaves sod in Whitewine or Milk, and eaten, take
away Hoarseness; and being beaten with Sage-leaves, make a singular Poultiss
for Wounds, Bruises or Inflammations: They also are good against the Biting of
any venomous Creature, being applied Poultiswise with Leeks and Onions stamped
very small. The Juice, if dropped into the Ear, appeaseth the Tingling, Singing
or Buzzing Noise in the Head. The Herb and Root concocted till the Concoction
seem somewhat clammy, and sweetened, viz. the Liquid part, with a little Honey,
is successfully given to Women, to restore Strength, after a hard Labor in
Childbearing. The Seed, if powdered and drank with Red Wine, prevents excess
in, Vomiting. Six ounces of the Juice of Mallows, sweetened with a little
Sugar, extremely removes Melancholy, and are of such virtue, that they were
called by the Ancients Omnia Morbia, that is to say, Good against all Diseases.

Mallows Wild: These are another sort, which Physicians distinguish somewhat
from the former, though their Virtues are little less; being sod in White Wind,
or Water and Honey; they expedite the healing of Wounds, by warning them with
their Concoction: and being applied Poultiswise, they are good to allay the
Swellings of the King's Evil, draw Imposthumes to a Ripeness, allay
Inflammations of the Breast, and help Ruptures of the Fundament, Ventosities,
and Shrinking of the Sinews. The Leaves bruised, with a little Oil, are applied
for Bitings, Burns or Scalds. The Seed powdered, and drank in White Wind, is
good against the Dysentery, and Flux of the Belly.

Master-wort, its Virtues: It cures the Bitings of venomous Creatures, being
stamped and applied to the Wound with Bay Salt. It is given in malignant
Diseases, helps Expectoration, sweetens an offensive Breath. It Is also
accounted good for the Dropsy; and a piece of it stopped in a hollow Tooth,
eases the Pain thereof.

May-weed: This Herb, though very common, and of no pleasant scent, is
nevertheless of admirable Virtue: for, if boiled in Ale or Small-beer, with
Figs, Licorice and Aniseeds, of each an ounce, and the Decoction drank hot, it
eases the Colic, and all violent Pains in the Bowels: If heated between two
hot Tyles, with Elder-leaves, and applied, it draws the violent Heat of the
Fever from the Head. The Decoction in Whitewine is successfully given for the
King's Evil, and other Diseases.

Mead-White: Take Rosemary, Thyme, Sweet-Briar, Agrimony-wood, Betony,
Eyebright, Roman Wormwood, and Scabious, of each a like quantity, which is the
sixteenth part of a handful each; cover them with Water in a wooden Vessel open
at the top, and let them steep a Night and a Day, and then boil them very well
in another Water, till the color be very high, then in another quantity of
Water boil them up till the color looks green; and so let it boil as long as
any greeness continues: then with the Herbs in it, let it stand a Day and a
Night, and to every gallon of Water, put two pound of clear Honey, the Liquor
first strained from the Herbs, and when it will bear an Egg to Threepence
breadth above Water, work it together until the Honey is quite dissolved; then
after a Night's settling boil it again a quarter of an Hour with the Whites and
Shells of six Eggs, then strain it: let it cool, and put it up with Cloves,
Mace, Nutmegs and Cinnamon bruised together, being hung in the Cask in a Bag;
and if you require it to drink very speedily, take the Whites of two or three
Eggs, a spoonful of Yeast, and two spoonfuls of Wheaten-flower: beat them
together, put them into the Cask, and when it has worked, stop it up with Clay
and Bay Salt well tempered, and so it will keep long.

Measles: Take two or three grains of Saffron, dry it well by the Fire, and
then put it into a Rag, and tying it, infuse it in Posset-Ale, and then press
it; or it may be done in Mace, Ale, or White Wind, till all the Virtue of the
Saffron is exhausted in the Liquids, and let the Party drink it, keeping very
warm: And if in this Distemper, or the Smallpox, (for it is good in either)
there is a soreness in the Throat, do thus:

Take half a dram of dried Saffron, tie it as the other in a Rag, and boil it
in half a pint of new Milk till the Milk becomes very yellow, then boil in it a
Stay of Linen, and put it wet and warm under the Throat where the Sore is; and
when that is cold and dry, put on another so ordered: and this will in six or
eight Hours take away the Pain, or Soreness.

Meat to Roast: When a Capon, Chicken, or Fowl, has been long enough before the
Fire, and thoroughly hot, that they require basting, do them once over very
well with sweet Butter, dridge them over with Flower, and by so doing, it will
make a thin Crust that will keep in all the Juice, so that they are best
without any more basting till they are enough; then bast them well with Butter,
as before, which will make the Crust relent and fall away: this being done, and
they grow brown on the outside, sprinkle them over with a little ordinary white
Salt in gross Grains, then bast them over with Yolks of Eggs finely beaten,
continuing so to do till another Crust of the Eggs arise on them, and they are
sufficiently enough to dish, sauce, and serve up to the Table.

Medicine for the Stone: Take a Male-Kid of nine Months old, keep him up in a
close Place, and feed him with Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Pimpernel, Ivy, and
Lovage, and kill him in the Month of August when the Sun is going into the Sign
Cancer, and receive the Blood in a clean Vessel; take off the thinnest part,
and Water, and dry the rest in an Oven till it may be powdered. Take a dram of
it in Whitewine, wherein Onions, or Lily-roots, are infused.

Medlars to Preserve: Scald the fairest of them, when indifferently ripe, till
Skin may be easily taken off; then stone them at the Head, and add to each
pound of them, a pound of fine Sugar dissolved in the Liquor till it become
ropey: then take them from the Fire, and put them up in a close Pot for your
Use.

Megrim: Take a large handful of ground Ivy, commonly called Alehoof, wash it
clean, and dry it well by swinging in a Cloth, shread and bruise it a little
in a Mortar, boil it in a quart of strong Ale to the consumption of a pint, and
drink it hot in the Morning fasting. This cures Pains and Inflammations,
Defluxions in the Eyes, and is good against the Jaundice and Coughs of the
Lungs, Consumption, Stone, and Gravel Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen; and,
according to the Learned and Judicious Sir Kenelem Digby, being applied to a
Fellon like a Cataplasm, it cures it by ripening and kindly breaking it, being
admirable likewise for old Sores that want cleansing, if a little Honey and
Copperas be mixed among the Juice.

Megrim: This dangerous Distemper in the Head is removed by taking an ounce of
Honey, Whitewine-Vinegar, the White of an Egg beaten to Water, Pepper and
Frankincense, of each two drams: bruise and mix them well together with some
Flower, as much as will thicken them to a Past, and spread some of it on two
pieces of Silk, or Leather, and apply them to the Temples, observing to renew
them Morning, and Evening.

Megrim, or Vertigo: Take Aaron-roots, cut them small, and steep them in
Whitewine twelve Hours, then pour fresh Whitewine upon them, and steep them a
considerable time; then dry and reduce them to Powder. Take of this Powder two
ounces, Acorns, and Burnet, of each an ounce; Crab's-eyes half an ounce,
Cinnamon three drams, Salt of Wormwood and Juniper, of each half an ounce;
Sugar of Roses an ounce: make these into a Powder very fine, keep them close
stopped, and take a dram at a time in an ounce of Mint and Betony-water. This
is a good Cephalic, and Excellent, especially against the before mentioned
Grievances: It also removes Coldness and Weakness of the Stomach, Wind, Stone,
Quartan-Agues, and all tartarous Obstructions: The Dose, to a strong Body, may
be augmented to two drams. Take it in Canary.

Mellatons to Bake: Wipe them clean, and put them in a Pie made Scollopwise, or
some other quaint Device of Paistry; put them in whole, with their weight in
refined Sugar, close it up, and when it is baked, ice it over with Sugar and
Rosewater: Sometimes, for change, you may add small bits of Cinnamon, or whole
Cloves and sliced Ginger.

Melancholy: Take Borrage-flowers, Clove-Gilliflowers, Couslip-flowers, and
Conserve of Roses, of each an ounce; preserved Citrons two ounces, Alkermes
half an ounce, preserved Nutmegs, and Mirabolans, of each half an ounce; Bezoar
15 grains, Tincture of Saffron half a dram: mix these together, and make them
up into an Electuary with Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers, adding two or three
drops of Oil of Cinnamon, and take a quarter of an ounce at a time, and after
it a glass of Canary when you find your Spirits lumpish, dull, or heavy.

Melancholy, another: Before you eat any thing in the Morning, and so
consequently before every other Meal, drink a glass of Claret with a spoonful
of the Syrup of Glove-Gilliflowers; and after Dinner, a quarter of an Hour, eat
some Marmalade of preserved Quinces, or Citron.

Melancholy, another: Take Horseleeches, and place them to the Fundament, and
at Spring and Fall purge with Mechoacan-Ale, or some suchlike like easy
Purging-Ale, for the space of a Fortnight; then take Conserve of Roses two
ounces, Bugloss and Marrigolds the Conserve, of each an ounce; Powder of
Cinnamon one dram: make these into an Electuary with the Syrup of
Field-Poppies, and take about a quarter of an ounce at a time, washing it down
with a glass of Sack, or some warm Ale.

Melancholy, another: Take Borrage and Bugloss-flowers, the Conserve of them
half an ounce each; Alkermes, the Confection of it, one ounce; Diamber, a
penny-weight, Aromaticum Rosatum, two penny-weights; two Leaves of Gold: imbody
these well together, and make thereof an Electuary, and take a little of it
every Morning fasting, or at any time when you are Afflicted, Pensive, or
Melancholy.

Melancholy, a Cordial-Water: This Water the famous Dr. Butler recommended to
the World out of his large Experience of its Effects, viz. Take Pinks;
Marrigolds, the Flowers of Couslips, Clove-Gilliflowers, Stock-Gilliflowers,
single and damask Roses, of each three Handfuls; the Leaves of Baum, the
Flowers of Borrage, and Bugloss, of each two handfuls: infuse these damped well
in a quart of Canary, put them into a close earthen Bottle, or Jug, stopped
with a well boiled Cork, often shake them, and after two Days put to them
Anniseeds bruised one dram, Saffron two penny-weighty and within twelve Hours
after, distill them in a cold Still with a quick Fire, hanging at the Nose of
the Still a little Ambergrease and Musk in a fine Linnen-Rag; and when the
Water is distilled, put into it six ounces of white Sugar Candy in powder, and
put the distilled Water in a glass two Hours in hot Water.

This Cordial taken three spoonfuls at a time, three times a Week in the
Morning fasting, or oftener, if you find your self oppressed, or afflicted,
expels all melancholy Fumes, and infinitely comforts the Heart and vital
Spirits.

Melancholy, a Diet-Drink: Take Fumitory-Hops before they are ripe for
gathering, and Borrage, of each a pound; boil them in two gallons of
Spring Water, till they come to the consumption of half; strain out the Liquid
part, and sweeten it with Sugar Candy, or Honey, and let it stand about eight
Days to settle and digest, and drink a moderate Draught of it in the Morning
fasting, and the like at Night when you go to Bed, and it will much enliven the
Spirits, and remove, the Causes of Melancholy.

Melancholy to Suppress: Take Epithymum, Fumitory, the Flowers of Bugloss, and
Borrage, of each a quarter of a pound, Senna half an ounce, Poly-podium of the
Oak an ounce, Fennel-seeds two drams, Whey three pints: infuse them three
hours, and then boil them to the Consumption of a quart, whereunto add two
ounces of the Syrup of Roses, and when you drink half a pint of it warm in a
Morning, strained and settled, mix with it a dram of the Electuary or Roses; and
in two or three times taking, you will find wonderful Ease and Comfort: And so,
as often as you find your self oppressed with Melancholy, use it in the manner
prescribed.

Melion: This is cold and moist. Take of the Seed, and that of Pompion, half an
ounce, the Seeds of white Poppies two drams, and eight Almonds blanched; beat
them in a Mortar, mix them with a pint and half of Barlywater, strain and
sweeten it with fine Sugar, and make an Emulsion for the Heat of the Urin.

Melilot: This Herb mollifies and eases Pain, for which purpose it is
frequently used in Cataplasms To ease the Pains of the Pleurisy with it, take
the following Fomentation: Melilot and Pellitory, of each two handfuls; Betony
one handful: make a Decoction, and often wash the Breast, or Stomach with it.

Mermaid-Pye: Take a Pig, scald it, and bone it; and having dried it well with
a Cloth, season it with beaten Nutmeg, Pepper, and chopped Sage; then take two
Neats-Tongues, when dried and cold after boiling, and slice them in lengths,
and as thick as a half Grown, and lay a quarter of your Pig in a square or
round Pie, and the slices of the Tongue on it; then another quarter, and more
Tongue: and thus do four times double, and lay over all these some slices of
Bacon, scatter a few Cloves, put in some pieces of Butter and Bay Leaves, then
bake it; and when it is so, fill it up with pieces of sweet Butter, and make
your Past white of the Butter and Flower.

This Pig, or Mermaid-Pye, so called, is to be eaten cold.

Metheglin, its Virtues: Metheglin has been highly held in Esteem in this
Nation, and is of excellent use among us, if rightly made; nor can it be
otherways, since Honey, its principal Ingredient, is the Collection of so many
Herbs, Plants, and Flowers; and no doubt the quintessential part of them. It Is
an excellent Pectoral, good against Consumption, Phthisick, and Asthma: It is
cleansing, and diuretic, good against the Stone and Gravel: It is restorative
and strengthening, comforting the vital Part, and affords good Nourishment. To
make it then, take these following Rules.

Metheglin, a new way: Take Hyssop, Agrimony, Burnet, wild Thyme, Baum, Mint,
and Fennel, Rosemary and Angelica, and other suitable wholesome Herbs that have
strength in them, of each about a quarter of a handful: boil them in a
sufficient quantity of fair Water, till tender; then press out the Water, and
let it stand a Day and a Night to settle: draw off that part which is clear,
and put two quarts of Honey to two gallons of it, and so proportionably; let it
boil an hour, keeping it clean from the scum, then set it a cooling, and being
cold, add a little Ale-yeast, and put it into a convenient Vessel, covering the
Bung with a wet Cloth; and when it has worked, at three Days end take off the
Yeast, or leave it behind, by drawing it off, and putting it into another
Vessel, in which it must have vent for three Days longer: then stop it up
close, yet when you hear it make a noise, you must give it vent with a Piercer,
or else, if it force not out the Cork, it may happen to break the Vessel: If
you think convenient, you may make a Bag, and put in good store of Ginger
sliced, also Cloves and Cinnamon, suffering it to hang and infuse so, as not to
touch the bottom, and at two or three Months end, you may, if you think fit,
draw it off.

Metheglin another way: Take Spring Water, and boil it with Rosemary, sweet
Marjoram, Sage, Baum, and Sassaffras, until it has boiled three or four Hours,
the whole quantity of Herbs not needing to exceed one handful to a gallon of
Water, of each an equal proportion; and when it is boiled sufficiently, set it
to cool and settle a whole Night, then strain it, and add Honey the best, then
set it over the Fire, and take the Whites of twenty or thirty Eggs, beat them
very well, and when it boils, pour them in at twice; stir it well, and then let
it boil apace before you scum it: after it is scummed, take it off the Fire,
and pour it into any earthen thing to cool; and being cold, put five or six
spoonfuls of new Ale-yeast to it, stir it together, and then every Day scum it
with a bundle of Feathers till it has done working, and so put it up into a
Cask, if you can gee such a one, that has had Sack, or Malaga in it; and to
every gallon of Metheglin, put a quart of Sack, or one pint of Aqua-vitae, a
quarter of a pound of sliced Ginger, and two or three peels of Lemons and
Oranges in a Bag.

Metheglin-Physical: To order and prepare this, Gather the Herbs
under-mention'd in July, choose to dig them on a dry windy Day, if any such
happen, and keep them drying till the Michaelmas following, viz. Saxifrage,
Agrimony, Centaury, Thyme, Betony, brown Mint, and the Tops of Rosemary, of
each a handful: boil them in Spring Water till the Herbs have much altered the
color; then take it from the Fire, and cool it; put into the Wort, when it is
a little warm, about three pound of Honey-combs, temper and mix them well
together, and so run the Liquid part through a fine Sieve, or Strainer: then to
try its strength, put in a new-lay'd Egg unbroken, and if it bear it not, you
must put in more Honey till it will; then strain it again, and boil it over the
Fire a little, keeping it clean scummed, and so being cold, put it up into a
Barrel; and when it has done working, stop it up close, and draw it not off in
two Months, and it will purge Melancholy, much revive the Spirits, comfort and
strengthen the Heart, purge by Urin, and gentle breathing Sweats, and keep the
Party moderately drinking of it in a healthful constitution of Body.

Metheglin-White: Take Sweet-Marjoram, Sweet-Briar-Buds, Violets and
Strawberry-Leaves, of each a handful; a handful of Violet-Flowers, the double
ones, if they can be got; broad Thyme, Borrage, and Agrimony, of each half a
handful; and three or four Tops of Rosemary; the Seeds of Carraways, Coriander
and Fennel, of each two spoonfuls, and three or four Blades of large Mace: boil
these in eight gallons of running Water three quarters of an Hour, scum it and
strain it; and being lukewarm, put as much of the best Honey to it as will make
it bear an Egg, the breadth of a Sixpence above the Water; then boil it again,
so long as any Scum will rise, so set it to cooling; and when almost cold, put
in half a pint of new Ale-yeast, and when it has wrought till you perceive the
Yeast to fall, then put it up, and suffer it to work in the Cask till the Yeast
has left rising, filling it up every Day with some of the small Liquor; and
stopping it up, put in a Bag with a sliced Nutmeg in it, a few Cloves, Mace and
Cinnamon, all unbruised, and a grain of Musk. The best time to make it, is a
little before Michaelmas, and it will be excellent to drink toward the
beginning of the Spring.

Millet: This in some Countries is made of great Account for Food, but among
us, mostly for Physical uses, or uses tending to it, viz. Boiled and mixed with
Salt, and applied to the Belly, it eases the Pains caused by Windiness: mixed
with Camomil-Flowers, and boiled in Whitewine, it eases Pains in the Head and
Stomach; being mixed with many Medicines, it makes them keep long from moulding
and putrefying: cover fresh Flesh of any kind in a heap of it in hot Weather,
and it will preserve it a long time.

Milk to Dry up: Bath the Woman's Breasts with the Decoction of Colewort-Leavs,
and anoint it with the Juice of Plantane, and the Business will be effected.

Milk to Increase: Take Aniseeds, Licorice, and Fennel-seeds boiled in
Posset Drink: Some hold that the Fore-hoof of a Cow burnt to Powder, and a dram
taken Morning and Evening in a Glass of Canary, with the Yolk of an Egg, rarely
fails: or, far want of these, Ladythistle boiled in Milk, and the Milk drank
warm; or Fennel-seeds, and Cumin-seeds, bruised and boiled in Barley, has the
same Effect: likewise a Coney-skin, or Hair-skin, the fleshy sides being laid
on the Breasts when green.

Minced-Pyes: Take, if you would have them exceeding short and luscious,
Neats-tongues but a little salted, boil them, but not too much, pare off the
outside, mince the Meat of them very small, take a quantity of Marrow and
Beef Suet, shread them together; then wash and pick clean your Raisins and
Currants, mingle them then with the former, shread very small; so candied
Citron, or Orange-peel, which you relish best; dust in a little powder of
Cinnamon and Ginger: then having put these into your Coffin, put in a spoonful
or two of Canary, and the like quantity of Rose Water, into every Pie. To make
the Crust stand fine, and eat short, sprinkle the Flower, as much as there is
occasion, with cold Water, and work the Past with pieces of unmelted Butter:
and being brought into a form and thinness, the Crust, when baked, will far
out-doe that made with hot Water, and melted Butter, as the usual way is. You
may strew over the Tops a little ambered Sugar, and grind two or three grains
of Ambergrease, and half a grain of Musk, the which quantity will serve five or
six Pyes: But instead of Neats-tongues, if you please, Veal, Beef, or Calve's
Chaldrons, will do very well.

Minced-Pyes to Season: To do this, Take the Meat you design to make them on,
minced finely, when parboiled; let it lie pressed all Night, then put two pound
of Beef Suet, minced small, to every pound of Meat, mix them very well
together, and take half art ounce of Cloves and Mace beaten, half an ounce of
Nutmegs, the like weight of Cinnamon, and a little Salt, half an ounce of
Carraway-seeds, five Pippins minced small without the Core, a Lemon Peel
scraped, and a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, a pound of Dates, half a pound
of Sugar, a pound of Raisins of the Sun, two pound of Currants; mix them well
together, and put them to every pound of Meat and Suet.

Mineral-Crystal: To make this pure, Dissolve it when pretty well reduced to a
smalness before, in damask Rose Water, evaporate it, and then filter it warm
through a brown Paper, on which Rose-leaves are strewed, moistened with a little
Spirit of Sulphur, with a few grains of Musk and Ambergrease, and so let it
crystalize, and it will become a delicate mineral Crystal, pleasant in color
and smell, being endued with all the Virtues of exalted and pure Nitre. If is a
true Anodyn, and an excellent allayer of Thirst, extinguishing the
preternatural Heat of all manner of Fevers. It is a peculiar and special
Antidote against the Plague, and all manner of pestilential Infections. It
removes Stoppages of the urinary Parts, and provokes Urin, gives ease in the
Quinsie, in hot, sharp, and scalding Urin, and Gonorrhoea; and for these
purposes, it is best to take a dram of it in Wine sweetened with Sugar.

Mint: This is meant of that sort of Garden Mint, called Spear-Mint. Its
Virtues are very many, viz. Beat it and lay it to the Stomach that is weak and
wants digestion, and it comforts and fortifies it. It is a sovereign Herb to
restore the Smelling and Feeling to those, wherein they are much decayed; for
the first, being often held to the Nose, and for the other, the Decoction of it
very strong applied to the numbed part. The Leaves dried and powdered, given to
young Children, kill and bring away Worms: The Juice drank with Vinegar
stenches Blood; and with the Juice of sower Pomegrante, restrains Vomiting,
Hicups, and Colick-Passions. This Mint, with Rose Water, and grated Nutmeg,
laid on the Forehead, asswageth the Headache; and laid on the tender Dugs full
of Milk, it eases the Pain of them. Applied with Salt, it is good for the
Biting of Mad Dogs: And the Juice of it mixed with Honey, dissolved in Water,
being dropped into the Ears, eases the Pain of them. The whole Herb distilled In
a glass Alembick, in a Bath of hot Water, or otherways, four ounces being
drank, stays Bleeding at the Nose. Those that affect much Milk, to prevent
the curdling of it in their Stomachs, would do well to chew Mint in their
Mouths, and swallow the Juice after it. If Cheese be sprinkled with the Juice,
or Decoction of it, it will keep from Corruption, or Rottenness.

Mint-Syrup: Take about a pint of the Juice of Quinces when they are almost
ripe, the Juice of Pomgranets half as much, dried Mint six ounces, red Roses
two ounces; steep them in the Juices twenty four Hours, then boil it half away,
and strain out the rest, and with fine Sugar make it into a Syrup; and if it be
too thick, add a little Mint-water.

Mint-Water: Take Baum, Penyroyal, and Mint, of each a handful; Canary-Lees, a
gallon; and after the Infusion of twenty four Hours, put them into a Still of
Pewter, and keep a quick Fire under it: cover the Still with wet Clothes, and
put into the receiver as much fine Sugar as will conveniently sweeten it, and
then distill it over again. This is excellent in Fevers, or any hot pestilential
Diseases. It comforts the Heart, and strengthens the Memory; and given with
Syrup of Licorice, is good for Obstructions of the Lungs, and Difficulty of
Breathing.

Mirabilis: To make this Water, (so wonderfully commended by the Learned Sit
Kenelm Digby) Take Galingal, Cardamums, Cubebs, Mellilot-flowers, Mace, Cloves,
Ginger, and Cinnamon, of each a dram; bruise them small, and infuse them in a
pint of Celandine-Juice, and as much Spear-mint-water, half a pint of the Juice
of Baum, and one pound of the Flowers of Couslips, Rosemary, Borrage, Bugloss,
and Marigolds, of each two drams; three pints of the best Canary, a pint of
strong Angelica-water, red Rose Water half a pint: bruise the Flowers and
Spices, and infuse them in the Waters, Juices, and Wine, for twenty four Hours,
then distill them in a glass Still.

This Water is excellent against fainting Fits, comforts the Heart, is good in
Consumptions, the Spleen and Melancholy; it keeps the Countenance fresh and
young, and very much helps the decay of the Memory. Taken fasting it creates a
good Appetite, is excellent in internal Bruises, and indeed a better Cordial
for any pectoral Distempers, or Defects, cannot be founnd.

Miscarriage: In this it is proper, that young Women should not be ignorant of
the Symptoms, or Signs, threatening or forerunning Miscarriage; and some of them
are these, Sudden Pains in the Back, or Belly, the Breasts often filling and
falling; upon which, let her apply this following Cerecloath to the Reins of
the Back, or Breast.

Take the Roots of Bistwort, and Coriander-seed, of each two drams; unripened
Galls, Saunders, and Hypocistides, of each a dram; Labdanum, and Mastick, of
each half an ounce; Frankincense, and Bdellium, of each two drams: reduce those
that can be so served into a Powder, and with Oil of Mastick, Turpentine, and
Beeswax, make two or three Cerecloaths, and apply them sometimes to the Loins,
at other times to the Sides, and the Region of the Womb under the Navel, the
Party for a considerable time altogether avoiding any violent motion both of
Body, and agitation of Mind, as Excess of Joy, Anger, Melancholy, etc. relating
to the latter, also violent Sneezings, Coughs, Strainings, or Affrights.

Miscarriage to Prevent: Take Coriander-seed two drams, the Root of Bistwort,
Shavings of Ivory, and red Coral prepared, of each a dram; of white Amber, and
Crystal, of each a scruple; reduce all these to fine Powder, make them up into
Tablets, Lozenge-wise, with four ounces of Rose Water, and half a scruple of
the Confection of Alkermes, their weight consisting of each a dram. Take one of
these when you think there is any fear or danger of Miscarriage, they being
very Cordial, and great strengthners of the Matrix; and to confirm it the more,
take afterward some Powder of Pearl, or Coral, in a new-lay'd Egg.

Miscarriage to Prevent, another: Let the Party, who fears a Miscarriage, drink
in Morning fasting a draught of Sage-Ale pretty warm; and about an Hour after,
take Syrup of Garden-Tansie, thus made. Take half a pint of the Juice of Tansie
well strained, let it stand and clarify, and dissolve in it, the dross or
setlings taken off, a pound of fine Sugar, boil them up to the thickness of a
Syrup, and take a spoonful of it, especially when apprehension of danger is
conjectured, stamp likewise more of the Herb, and sprinkling it with Muscadel,
apply to the Woman's Navel, binding it on with a linen Roller.

Miscarriage, another: Take a sprig of Rosemary and Baum, a few Cloves, and a
small quantity of Nutmeg; put them into a pint of Claret, burn it, and then
beat the Yolks of three new-lay'd Eggs, and having taken off the Wine from the
Fire, brew it with the Herbs and Spices; then take the Cock's Treddles of six
Eggs, and the White of one, beat them to an Oil, and having taken off the
Froth, mix them with the rest, and so brew them over again with fine Sugar; and
when the Party feels any Pains that usually fore-run a Miscarriage in the Back,
or Belly, let her immediately take four spoonfuls of it.

Miscarriage, another: Take half a dram of Stitching-Silk, of a crimson Color,
cut it into small shreads or pieces, put it into the top of a new-lay'd Egg,
stop up the hole you put it in at with Beeswax, boil it till the White is only
curdled, and let the Party suck it up, keeping in motion, though gently for
some time after. This is used commonly by the Direction of the French Midwives,
and many of the more Judicious in England accounting it an effectual prevention
of Miscarriage; it having prevented many.

Mouth-Diseases: If the Mouth be canckered, Take a pint of Wine-Vinegar, (and
if you can get it, let it be that of Claret) Rue, red Mint, red Sage, and
Rosemary, of each a quarter of a handful, or as much as you can hold between
the Forefinger and Thumb; shred them small, and boil them in Vinegar, then
dissolve in the liquid part a spoonful of Honey, and half an ounce of Alom, and
half a spoonful of white Salt: wash the Mouth with it Morning and Evening.

Morello-Wine: To make this, Take half an Ame of White Wind, twenty pound
weight of Morello-Cherries, divested of their Stalks; bruise them so, that the
Stones may be broken, press out the Juice and pour it into the Wine: take that
which remains, and hang it in the Wine in a Bag, so that it may not touch the
bottom of the Cask; then stop it up, and let it continue a Month, at least,
before you draw it: You may put in Spices at your discretion, but it will be
very pleasant without it.

Mugget Minced-Pye: Boil your Muggets tender, and being cold, mince them small;
then put to it pieces of Lard, cut square like Dice, or interlarded Bacon, the
Yolks of hard Eggs cut in the same manner, also small pieces of Mutton, or
Veal, the same bigness; then put some Goosberries, Grapes, and Barberries to
them; season them with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and fill up your Pie, and lay
on it slices of interlarded Bacon, but very thin. Bake it, and liquor it with
Whitewine and Butter beaten up.

Mugmort, the Syrup: Take Fennel, Stone Parsley, and the Roots of Garden-Parsly,
Elecampane, French Orrice, Peony, and the bigger Madder, of each an ounce; the
Leaves of Penneroyal, Mugwort, Cretan Dittany, Savin, Arsmart, Marjoram,
Germander, Ground Ivy, Hyssop, St. John's-wort, Rue, lesser Centaury, double
Fetherfew, Bettony, and white Horehound; of each of these a handful; the Seeds
of Fennil, Annis, wild Carrot, Stone Parsley, Basil, and Rue, of each three
drams; Tartar of Montpelier two ounces: wash, cleanse, and bruise all the
Roots, infuse them with the Tartar pulverized twenty four Hours over a gentle
Fire in an earthen glazed Vessel well covered in three pints of Hydromel newly
made: cut the Herbs, and bruise the Seeds, and put them into an other glazed
Pot by themselves in ten pints of the said Liquor, covering the Pot, and
setting on hot Embers for twelve Hours: then boil the infusion of the Roots
over a gentle Fire for half an Hour, and mix the infusion of the Herbs with it,
and boil them together for a quarter of an Hour; strain out the Decoction, when
almost cold, and squeeze the Herbs: clarify the Liquid with the White of an
Egg, and five pounds of Sugar, boil them over a moderate Fire to the confidence
of a Syrup; then the Syrup being cold, incorporate an ounce of fine Sugar with
six drops of the distilled Oil of Cinnamon.

This Syrup is different from what are elsewhere met withal, and is chiefly
used for the Diseases of Women; to open Obstructions of the Matrix, and expel
Wind, to repress Vapors and Suffocations, also to provoke the Terms, and
evacuate the Impurities of the Matrix. It is good against Obstruction of the
Spleen, Liver, and Bowels, as well for Men as Women. The Dose is from an ounce
to two, alone or in Whitewine, or in opening Waters or Decoctions: it is also,
sometimes, to be mixed in Opiates, and other Medicines.

Mulberries, a Honey: Take of the Juice of red Mulberries a pint and a half;
then put to it a pound of clarified Honey; boil them up often wlth scumming, so
that the Honey may be well dissolved in the Juice; and a third part being
consumed, take it off, put it into earthen Vessels, and keep it close stopped, as
a curious cooling and cleansing Honey.

Mulberry-Honey: Gather Blackberries, and Mulberries, when they begin to ripen,
the Dew being on them, of each a quart; bruise them, and strain them, and put
to the Juices fine thin Honey two pound, and boil them over a gentle Fire to
the thickness of Honey, and keep it close for use.

Mullets Boiled: Save the liver and Roe of this Fish, and being boiled, take it
up and pour out the greater part of the Water, arid add to the rest a pint of
Claret, a bunch of Thyme, Marjoram, and Winter-savory, Salt, Vinegar, and two
Onions quartered, or sliced, and the Juice of a Lemon, also Nutmegs sliced, and
Mace broken; boil these till the Fish tastes strong of the Ingredients, then
dissolve into it two or three Anchoveys: season it with Salt, dish it up
garnished with stewed Oisters, and Bayleaves, and Sippits, if you please, under
it. This, though it mentions no number, may extend to what number you please,
the Materials being proportioned.

Mushrooms Fricased: Having stewed them, put away the Liquor, and put them into
a Drying Pan with a piece of Butter, some stripped Thyme, sweet Marjoram, and an
Onion shred very small, also a little Salt, and beaten Pepper; and when they
are fried, make a Leer, or Sauce, with three or four Eggs, dissolved with some
Claret Wine, and the Juice of two or three Oranges, grated Nutmeg, and the
Gravy of a Leg of Mutton; shake them well, and give them three or four tosses
in the Pan: dish them, and garnish the Dish with Orange and Lemon, and rub it
with a Shalot, or Onion, and so^ serve 'em up.

Mushrooms, the Italian way: Peel them, wash them, and boil them in a Skillet,
with Water and Salt, having boiled in the Water sweet Herbs before you put them
in, also Parsley and a Crust of Bread; boil and drain them from the Water, and
fry them with the best Olive-Oil: and being fried, serve them in a Dish with
Oil, but not that they were fried in, also Vinegar, Pepper, and fried Parsley;
or, for want of Oil, you may use sweet Butter.

If you would Stew them, Peel them, and take out the under part, and do it with
sweet Herbs, Pepper, Salt, White wine, and Gravy, over a gentle Fire: put to
them, when enough, some sweet Butter beaten up with the Juice of Lemon, or
Orange. These are good for those that are of a hot, or choleric Constitution;
but those of a cold or phlegmatic one, must eat them sparingly.

Mushrooms to Pickle: To do these that they may keep a long space, and not rot,
as many do that are not well ordered, Take the Buttons, as soon as they put out
of the ground, being gathered in a dry Day, wash them in Water, Salt, and
Vinegar; then scald them in the Decoction of Bay Leaves and Rosemary: put them
afterward into Glasses that they may be very closely stopped, and mingle among
them long Pepper, Blades of Mace, and slices of Nutmeg, and Ginger, and so
close 'em up with a Cover of Leather for your use.

Musk: This is an Excrescence, supposed by some to be a Tumor, or Swelling, of
corrupt Blood about the Navel of the Musk-Roe; which, after putrefaction and
ripening, becomes Musk in a perfect Cod, which, others affirm, falls off from
the Beast of its own accord: Being well prepared, it is not only a very sweet
Perfume, but also taken in Cordials, cheats and revives the Heart, and dispels
gross Vapors from the Brain; and is good against pestilential Diseases,
infused in Mint, Baum, or Rue-water.

Muskadines to Make: Take half a pound of refined Sugar, being beaten and
fearsed, put into it two grains of Musk, a grain of Civet, and two grains of
Ambergrease, and about two drams of white Orris-powder, beat them with
Gumdragon steeped in Rosewater; then roll it as thin as may be, and cut it into
Diamond fashion, like Lozenges, with your jigging Iron, and let them in some
warm Oven, or Stove; then put them into Boxes for use, and in this manner they
will keep all the Year.

Musk-Sugar, to Make: Bruise four or five grains of Musk, put it into a piece
of Cambrick, or Lawn, lay it at the bottom of a Pot or Glass, and sift fine
Sugar on it, stop the Pot close from Air, and set it in a warm Place, and in a
few Days the Sugar will have sucked up the Tincture of the Musk, and yield a
very pleasant Smell. Thus you may perfume Sweetmeats, or Comfits, by keeping
them up very close; but if the Air gets in, the Spirit of the Musk will
evaporate.

Mutton to Hash: Slice a Shoulder of Mutton thin, till the Bone is only left;
then put some Claret, sliced Onion, and Gravy to die Meat, the Tops of Thyme,
six Anchoveys, and three ounces of Capers; and the Meat, and other things
minceable, being reduced by that means small, take nine or ten Eggs, and the
Juice of a Lemon, or two, and make a Leer of them; then put the Meat into a
Drying Pan, and when it is thoroughly hot, put the Leer in and soak all
together over the Fire, till it be very thick: then boil the Bone with what
Meat is on it, and place on the top of your Meat, the Dish garnished with
slices of Lemon.

Mutton, the Turkish way; Cut your Mutton in thin slices, wash it in Vinegar,
and put it into a Pot that has a close Cover, then add clean picked Rice, and a
quantity of whole Pepper, and two or three Onions: let all these boil very
well, keep it scuming; then take out the Onions, and dish it in Sippets.

Mutton to pass for Venison: Take a Shoulder of Mutton, pretty large, but let
it be young and tender, strain the Blood of the Sheep amongst grated Bread,
then prepare your seasoning of ordinary sweet Herbs shread very small; take the
Bones out of the Meat, and roll them up in it, or stuff them in at convenient
places, then wrap it up with a Caul of Veal, lay it in the Blood to soak twenty
four Hours, prick it so with a Knife that the Blood may the more easily
penetrate it bake it and serve it as usually Venison is done; and it must be a
very curious Palate that can discover it from what it represents.

Myrrh: This precious Gum grows upon a low prickly crooked Shrub, with a smooth
Bark like Laurel, but the Leaves like Olives, and much rougher; yet out of this
Tree proceeds a Gum little differing in appearance from Drops, or Tears, but
afterward it becomes of a greener Color, and is clear and sweet to the Smell,
but not so to the Taste, it being somewhat bitter* The right Myrrh being drank
in Whitewine, abates the Fit of the Quartan-Ague: it is also very good in
Antidotes against Poisons and Hurts by venomous Beasts: It resists pestilential
Fevers and Plague; and being applied to Wounds, it expedites their Cure. And
many other excellent Virtues, not here mentioned.

NAils-Cloven: Mingle Turpentine and Wax together, spreading it as a Plaster,
lay it on the defective Nail, and as it grows, cut it away, and in a short time
it will be reduced as the other.

NAils falling off: Take Powder of Agrimony, mix it with the White of an Egg,
lay it on the Nails, and it will strengthen and confirm them; it will also take
away the aching, that usually attends them in such Circumstances.

Nails to grow: Take fine Wheat flower, mingle it with Honey, lay it on the
place where the Nail is defective, Plaister-wise, and the Nail will sprout out
and grow apace to its due proportion.

Nail-Pricking: If a Nail or piece of Iron, run into any part, so that it
causes a pain, or festering, Take Turpentine half an ounce, Beeswax the like
quantity, the Juice of Housleek, Burgundy Pitch, and Mutton-Suet, of each a
quarter of an ounce; mix them together into a Plaster, and by application it
will take away the Pain, and cure the Wound.

Nail-Scratching: It is held, that the Nails of the Hand scratching in some
Cases prove venomous; yet this is no more than the suffering it to fester, or
the Humors to flow to that place before prevented; to remedy it, and cure the
Wound made, Take Olive-Oil a quarter of a pint, Juice of Groundsil two ounces,
Beeswax, two ounces, Stone-pitch half an ounce: make these over a gentle fire,
into a Salve, and spreading it on Linen, or Leather, apply it to the place
grieved, and in two or three times changing, and anointing with Linseed Oil,
the danger will be past, and the Cure effected.

Nail wort: This is held exceeding successful, being applied to Imposthumes in
the Joints, and any Defects under the Nails, especially for Whitloes, Fellons,
and Nail-wheals.

Naples Biscuit, To make these so much in use: Take a pound of fine Flower, and
the like Weight of Sugar, eight Eggs, and two spoonfulls of Rose Water, an
ounce of Carraway-seeds beaten small: mix them well together, and put them,
when made, into a fit thinness with fair Water, into Tin Coffins, and bake them
moderately in a gentle Oven, glazing them over with Water, in which Sugar has
been dissolved.

Nature to restore: Take an Artichoke, and dress it with Milk; that is, first
boil your Artichokes in Water till the Leaves will just draw off, then put them
in New Milk, and boil them thoroughly; then bruise the Pulp in the Milk, and
add a little Mace and grated Nutmeg, sweeten it with Sugar, and eat often of it
with a Spoon. It exceedingly restores decayed Vigor, and strengthens not only
the Spirits, but the whole Frame of the Body. The Germans and French usually
eat the tender Stalks of this Plant boiled with Butter and Vinegar: the
Italians seldom boil the Heads, but eat them raw, with Salt, Pepper, Oil, and
Vinegar: they are moreover held to provoke Venery, and the Decoction of the
Buds drank, provoke Urine.

Navel pained: If a pricking or shooting in the Navel happen, which frequently
by communication extends to the Fundament, or Privy Parts, by its twitchings
and shootings, Take Oil of Roses, and Camomil, of each an ounce and a half;
Comfry the Herb, half a handful; bruise it, and fry it in the Oils a little,
then apply it plaister-wise, to the Navel as hot as can be endured: it also
takes away the Pains of the Belly, and causes the Rumbling of the Bowels to
cease.

Navel-wort Ointment: This is moderately Astringent, and therefore good for hot
Distempers or Inflammations: some use it for the King's Evil, and for the curing
Kibes, Chilblains, and the like.

Nauseousness: When the Stomach, or Appetite is offended in this manner, and
brought to a kind of Loathing, Take the Powder of the Seed of Common Fennel in
a Glass of White Wind, sweetened with Sugar, every morning fasting, till the
Offense be removed. This likewise wonderfully clears the sight, strengthens the
Stomach, and being mixed with pectoral Medicines, it relieves those that are
Asthmatick. It also resists Poison, and the Leaves of Fennel, boiled in Water,
wherein Barley has been boiled, increases Milk in Nurses; and a Concoction of
the Seeds and Leaves give ease to the Nephritick Pains, forces Urine, and expel
Is Gravel; the Roots provoke the Courses, open the Obstructions of the Spleen,
and Liver, and mainly help the Jaundice. The whole Herb shred and boiled in
Broth, takes away Fat, and keeps the Body in a good Proportion. Many other
Virtues are ascribed to it.

Neats-Foot Pie: To do this, boil the Neats Feet, then take out the Bones, and
put as much Beef Suet as will answer their quantity; mince them, and then
season them with Cloves and Mace, finely beaten; add then some grated Nutmeg
and Sugar, with a little Salt, put them into the Coffin or Past with some
Barberries, Currants, and Raisins of the Sun; bake it well, and serve it up hot.

Neats-Foot Pie, another: Take Neats-feet, and boil them tender, and when they
are cold, bone them, and mince them very small, seasoning them with Pepper,
Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, a little Salt, and a pound of Currants, a quarter of
a pound of Dates sliced, and a quarter of a pound of fine Sugar, with a little
Rose Water and Verjuice; stir them together in a Dish or Tray, laying a little
Butter in the bottom of the Pve, and on the Meat the Marrow of Three Bones,
stick some Dates on the top of the Meat and close up the Pie; and when it is
half baked, Liquor it with Butter and White Wind, or Verjuice, and Ice it, and
so set it in the Oven again, (...) it be baked; and then put into it Rose Water
and Sugar well beaten together.

Neats-Tongues to dry: Take Bay Salt, beat it very fine, so that it may be
sifted through a fine Hair-Sieve, and Saltpeter, of each a like quantity; and
having soaked your Tongues in warm Water, rub it on very well in every part,
especially at the root, then lay them in a place where they may be covered with
the Salt, and as that wastes, put on more; and when they become sufficiently
hard and stiff, then roll them in Bran till they are dry, put them into a Mold
a while, then dry them in a Kill, with a soft Fire; or for want of that
necessary Implement, you may hang them up in a Chimney where the Smoke comes
but little at them, and when they are sufficiently dried, press them out
somewhat flattish, and at length, and so put them in dry Boxes, and keep them
for use.

Neats-Tongues to dry, another: Take Bay Salt bruised small, and Saltpeter, a
like quantity; rub the Tongues well with a Linen Cloth, then put the Salt to
them, forcing it in, especially at the Roots; and as it wastes into Brine, add
more; when they are hard and stiff, then they have taken Salt enough. Roll them
in Bran, and dry them in a Mold over a Saw-dust Fire, or for want of such a
Material, hang them up in a Chimney; and when you boil them, let it be in
Spring Water, and it will make them look the redder.

Neats-Tongues, diverse ways: Take a Neats-Tongue, being boiled tender, blanch
and slice it into thick slices about the bigness of a shilling; fry it in sweet
Butter, and being enough, put to them some strong Broth, Gravy, Nutmeg, Salt,
and Saffron; stew them together, and then have some Yolks of Eggs, beaten up
with Grape Verjuice; put them into a Pan, and give them a toss or two, and the
Gravy and Eggs being pretty thick, dish it on fine Sippets, or make the same
with Cinnamon and Saffron: sometimes you may slice them as aforesaid, no bigger
nor thicker than a Three pence, and used in all points as before, but only add
some Onions fried, and stew it with Mushrooms, Nutmeg, and Mace, and serve it
up on Sippets, first rubbing the Dish with a Shalot; or you may stew it with
Raisins, Mace, and blanched Almonds, or Pistaches, Marrow, Claret Wine, Butter,
Salt, Verjuice, Sugar, Strong Broth, and Gravy, the Yolks of six Eggs, with
Vinegar or Grape-Juice, and so serve it up on Sippits.

Neats-Tongue roasted the French way: Boil and blanch it first, and when it is
cool, Take out the Meat at the great end, leaving the Skin whole; and having
minced it with Sweet Herbs and Apples, as also the Yolks of Eggs boiled hard,
and Beef Suet, beaten with Salt and Ginger, fill up the Skin again, till it
appear to be a perfect Tongue as before; and having stopped the hole with some
Mutton-Skin or Caul of Veal, lard it with small Lardings of Bacon, and tie it
to a Spit; and then being roasted, make Sauce with Gravy, Nutmeg, Butter, and
the Juice of Oranges, and serve it up with Lemons sliced, and pickled
Barberries.

Neats-Tongue Fried: Boil it first, and take it off; then cut it into thin
slices, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, and Cinnamon, dip the Slices into the
Yolks of Eggs, add the Juice of Lemon, and mix them together; then having your
Pan pretty hot with sweet Butter in it, take up the rest in Spoonfuls, and put
them in, then being fried enough, serve them up with White Wind, Sugar, and
Butter, well beaten together.

Neats-Tongues, the Italian Way: When the Tongues are boiled in an earthen
Vessel till they may be blanched, Take them out, and put them into some strong
Mutton, or Beef Broth, covering them very close, and having boiled them a
while, put in two or three large Blades of Mace, with a quarter of a pint of
Canary or White Wind, and some slices of interlarded Bacon; scum the Liquor
when it boils, and put in more Mace with some Ginger, Pepper, and Nutmeg. To
these add a few Raisins, Currants, Prunes, Sage-Leaves, Saffron and Cherries;
then slice the Tongues, and being well stewed serve it up on French Sippets.

Neats-Tongue Pie: To do this, Take a couple of large Neats-Tongues, set them
over the Fire in Spring Water, and parboil them, pare off the Roots and the
Skin, mince the Meat with Beef Suet, and a littte Parsley, sweet Marjoram,
Thyme and Pennyroyal; season it with grated Ginger, beaten Mace, Cloves and
Pepper finely sifted; add to these grated Bread and fine Sugar, and the Yolks
of three or four Eggs; make your Coffin into the fashion of a Tongue, and put
these in, bake it, and then make a Liquid of Butter and Verjuice with some
Sugar and Rose Water, and pour it in at a vacant place, left for that purpose,
or raising the Lid on one side.

Neats-Tongue Pie, another: Take fresh Neats-Tongues, boil, blanch, and mince
the Meat with four pound of Beef Suet by it self; mingle them together, and
season them with an ounce of Cloves and Mace, finely beaten, some Salt, half a
preserved Orange, and a little Lemon Peel minced, with a quarter of a pound of
Sugar, four pound of Currants, and a little Verjuice, and Rose Water, and a
quarter of a pint of Canary; stir these all well together, and fill up your
Pyes in Coffins of what Figure you shall think fit or convenient.

Neats-Tongue Pie, another way: Take a Tongue, and mince it raw, the Skin, as
much as may be, being pared off. Then take another, and boil it very tender,
cut it likewise into pieces, the bigness of a Walnut; mince with them some
Beef Suet or Lard, and lay some of the minced Tongues in the bottom of the Pie,
and the Pieces on it, and make Balls of the other minced Meat, as big as the
pieces of the Tongue, with some grated Bread, Cream, and Yolks of Eggs, the
Bottoms of Artichoaks cut like small Dice, Nutmeg, Salt, Pepper, and a few
sweet Herbs finely shred, Marrow, Grapes, boiled Chestnuts sliced, and slices of
interlarded Bacon; liquor it then with Gravy, Verjuice, and the Yolk of Eggs
well beat together; bake it, and as the former eats best cold, so this must be
served up hot.

Neats-Tongues another way: Make a hole in the rootend of the Tongue, Take out
the Meat, mince it small with the Fat of Bacon, or Beef Suet, season it with
grated Nutmeg and Salt, put to it then the raw Yolks of Eggs, Marjoram, Thyme,
and Pennyroyal minced small, Pepper and Ginger, and fill the Tongue with this
Composition, viz. the Skin from which the Meat was drawn out, wrap it then in a
Caul of Veal, boil it till it will blanch, then put it into a Pipkin, or other
convenient earthen Vessel, with some Claret and Gravy, Cloves, Salt, and
Pepper, grated Bread, and sweet Herbs, reduced small by chopping or shredding:
then add fried Onions, Marrow concocted in strong Broth, and laid over it; and
to complete it with a garnish, rake some scalded Grapes, when very green,
Gooseberries, the slices of Oranges, or Lemons, and so serve it on Sippets,
running it over with Butter well beaten, with the Whites of Eggs, and mixed
with the Powder of Cinnamon.

Neats-Tongue otherways: Boll a fresh Tongue very tender, and blanch it; and
when it is cold, slice it into thin slices, season it lightly with Pepper, and
Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, all finely beaten; then put into the Pie half a
pound of Currants, lay the Meat on, and stoned Dates in halves, the Marrow of
four Bones, large Mace, Grapes, or Barberries, and Butter; close it up, and
bake it: then liquor it with Claret, Butter, and Sugar, and so ice it over.

Neats-Tongue, to Roast: Take a Neats-Tongue tender boiled and blanched; and
when it is cold, cut a hole in the but-end, take out the Meat, and put in the
Meat minced with sweet Herbs finely shread, a Pippin, and two or three hard
Yolks of Eggs minced, as also Beef Suet and Bacon made very small; mix with all
these Ingredients, beaten Ginger, and fine Salt, fill the Tongue, and stop the
end with a Caul of Veal, lard it, and roast it, and then make Sauce with
Butter, Gravy, and the Juice of Oranges.

Neats-Tongue Stewed: Boil them first very tender, then slice them, and put
them into a Pan with fresh Butter, fry them a little, and so put them into a
Pipkin, or Stewpan, with some Gravy, or Mutton-Broth, large Mace, and sliced
Nutmeg, Pepper, Claret, and a little Wine, also a little Vinegar and Salt; and
when the Stewing at your discretion is almost completed, then put to the Meat
two or three slices of Oranges, Asparagus, Skirts, Chestnuts, and serve them up
on fine Sippits, cover them with Butter, slices of Lemon, and Marrow.

Neats-Tongues, another: Let your Neats-Tongues be seasoned with Pepper, Salt,
and Nutmeg; then lard them with Bacon, and let them steep in Claret all night,
and you may, if you please, add to it a little Vinegar; put in then Nutmegs
sliced, and Ginger finely pared, whole Cloves, and beaten Pepper, with a little
Salt; steep them in an earthen Vessel, and cover them up close, they being
undelayed with Sippets of Whitebread, some Cinnamon and Nutmeg grated on the top.

Nep, or Catmint: This procures the Courses, and being taken inwardly, or
outwardly alone, or with convenient Herbs to bathe them, or sit over the hot
Fumes of it, and by frequent use, it removes Barrenness, and the windy Pains of
the Mother; it is used likewise in pains of the Head, proceeding from cold
Causes, as Rheums, Catarrhs, Swimming and Giddiness of the Head, and is an
excellent Remedy for Windyness in the Stomach and Belly. It is profitable in
Cramps and cold Aches to dissolve the cold, and expel the Wind that afflicts
the Parts where they happen, and is used for Colds, Coughs, and shortness of
Breath. The Juice drunk in Wine is advantageous in Bruises. The green Herb when
bruised, applied to the Fundament for two or three hours, eases the pains of
the Piles: but the Juice being made into an Ointment, is the more effectual to
that purpose. The Scabs, or breaking out of the Head, are taken away, being
washed with its Decoction in fair Water, and has the same Effect upon the
breakings out of any other Parts tending to the like nature.

Nerves afflicted: Take the Roots of Male-Peony new taken out of the ground,
one ounce, of the Seeds of that Plant two drams, and with a sufficient quantity
of the Syrup of Peony, beat them up into an Electuary, of which take the
quantity of a large Hazel-Nut, or more if need require it, twice a day.

Nerves their Diseases to cure: Take of the Powder of Castor half an ounce,
Spirit of Castor half a pint; digest them in the Cold ten days, then strain out
the Spirit, and when it is well settled, take ten drops inwardly in any proper
Liquor. This not only strengthens the Nerves, and is good for the Diseases of
the Head, and Fits of the Mother, but provoke the Courses, and remedies
Deafness.

Nerves pricked: Take Peruvian Balsom, and warm it a little; then bathe it in,
where the grief is; and in a little time it takes off the acrimony of the
Sanies, from whence proceeds the Pain and Convulsion when we are wounded or bit
by venomous Creatures: It i^ excellent in staunching blood, insomuch that it is
affirmed, that the Beads in Peru and New Spain, from whence it comes, finding
themselves so hurt, by an Instinct of Nature rub themselves against the Tree
from whence it issues. It is of a dark color, fragrant Smell, and brought to
us in little earthen Jars.

Nerves Vncover'd: To Remedy this. Take the Oil which is thus prepared; Powder
grossly three or four ounces of the best Camphire, and having put it into a
Mattress, pour on of Spirit of Nitre, twice as much, stop the Vessel close, and
let it over a Pot half full of Water, pretty well heated, frequently stirring
it, to help forward the Dissolution; which will be done in two or three hours,
and by this means you will find the Camphire turned into a clear Oil, which
will swim above the Spirit, then separate it in a Viol for use. This is not
only used to touch the Nerves that lie uncovered, but for the caries of Bones:
yet this Oil is nothing but a Dissolution of the Camphire in the Spirit of
Nitre; for if you cast Water upon it, to kill the Force of the Spirit, it will
turn into Camphire as before.

Nerves Wounded: Take Horsetail, distill it, and if the Nerves be much hurt or
wounded, Take three spoonfulls of it, in a morning fasting; apply it likewise
outwardly: this stays bleeding, cures Ulcers in the Reins and Kidneys; and if
the Lungs be ulcerated, drink three ounces of the Decoction of it, or two
ounces of the Juice, morning and evening: a dram of Powder made of this Herb,
and taken in three ounces of Plantane-water, morning and evening, is held very
good for a Consumption.

Nettle Juice: This is good to stop bleeding, and ease the Pains in the Head;
being drunk it provokes Urine, and is helpful in the Dropsy: the Leaves of
Nettles made into a Poultis and applied to Inflammations and Tumors, allay
them; mixed with Hogs Lard and Flax-seed.

Nipplewort: Out of this comes a bitter Milk, or whitish Juice, which being
mixed with Woman's Milk, and a little Oil of Roses, and mingled well over the
fire in a Saucer, is greatly available to allay the Heat and Anger of sore
Nipples, and recover them so, that the Infant may suck without giving the Woman
any pain.

Niter: This is held an excellent Medicine for the Colic, or any Pains,
prepared after the following manner, viz. Take of the best Nitre an ounce, rub
it sufficiently in a clean Mortar of Glass or Stone, then grind it with half a
Scruple of Saffron, and of this Mixture take about half a dram at a time,
infused in about three or four ounces of Spring Water.

Nodes: These are a kind of Knots occasioned many times by Scorbutic Humors.
Take two drams of Rhubarb, boil it in half a pint of Ale, till it consume to a
quarter of a pint, drink it in a morning fasting; and anoint the place where
these Knots are, with Oil of Camomil, mixed with the Spirit of Wine, three or
four times, intermitting the first for a day.

Noise in the Ears: Take the Oil of Ben-Nut, drop it into the ear, and it not
only cures the Noises, but in a great manner helps Deafness. It cleanses the
Skin from Spots or Morphew, and the longer it is kept, the better it is. This
Ben-Nut likewise mixed with Honey, dissolves hard Swellings, and the
King's Evil; made up to a Poultis with Barly-Meal, it is good in the cold
Afflictions of the Nerves: Mixed with Meal of Lupins, it takes off the
Obstructions afflicting the Liver and Spleen; it subverts the Stomach,
occasions Nauseousness, and moves the Belly. It purges gross and clammy Phlegm,
by Vomit and Stool; wherefore it is good for a phlegmatic Colic.

Noise, a singing Noise in the Ear: This is usually the Forerunner of Deafness,
and few that have it to any purpose, escape the losing their Hearing,
especially for a time; therefore the best way is timely to prevent it: to do
which,

Take the Pills de Hiera, or Hiera cum Agarico, with which the Apothecary or
Druggist will furnish you. Take of them a dram at a time going to Bed, and
settle your self as well as may be to rest, and the next morning, take the
following Decoction, viz.

Take the Tops of Mint, Marjoram, and the Flowers of Wood-Roses, Bettony, Sage,
and Camomil, of each half a handful: boil them in a convenient quantity of
Water, 'till half be consumed; then taking them from the fire, let the Fume or
hot Vapor ascend into the Ears, by laying first one and then the other side of
the head over it; or you may drop three or four drops of the Oil of Amber
palliated with Oil of Roses, into the Ears, and stop them close from the Air,
when you go to Bed.

Nose Bleeding: To stay this speedily and effectually, Take the long things
that grow on Hazle-Trees before they Leave, by some called the Nut-Blossoms,
burn them so that they may be reduced to a Powder, but not to Ashes; and when
the Blood issues from the Nose, blow up some of it with a quill into the
Nostrils, and let the Party drink the Juice of Plantane, or Plantane-water and
Milk, and the Bleeding will stay: This also will stay inward Bleeding till
better Remedies can be obtained, though many times, of it self, it is
effectual, and there needs no other, unless some large Vein be broke, or some
extraordinary Flux of Blood otherways happens.

Noses to Dress: This is meant of an Ox, Steer, Cow, etc. Boil them tenderly,
and then fry them in sweet Butter; and when fried drain the Butter from them,
and put to them the Powder of Nutmeg and Anchoves dissolved in fair Water and
Whitewine, with a little Salt and Mutton-Gravy: give all these a warm over the
Fire, and serve them up in a Dish; then run it over with Butter beaten up with
the Juice of Oranges, Marrow, Sageleaves, fried Parsley, and the Yolks of Eggs.

Nurses Milk to Increase: Take of Earthworms an ounce, wash them well, and dry
them so that they may keep sweet, and yet be reduced to a Powder; then take
half a dram, or two scruples for a Dose in a Glass of Canary.

Nutmegs are somewhat Astringent, and Stomachick, Cephalic and Uterine; help
Concoction, discuss Wind, take away the offensive Fumes of a strong Breath, are
good in the Palpitations of the Heart, and prevent Faintings, lessen the
Spleen, and stop Looseness and Vomiting, provoke Urin, and quicken the sight;
are of great use in Fluxes, especially the Bloodyflux, having all the Virtues
necessary for a Medicin fit for these Diseases: The Oil cleanses and defends
the Bowels from sharp offensive Humors, and eases the Pains that frequently
afflict them: The aromatic quality, consisting in the airy spirit, penetrates
the noble Part, and administer Comfort, whilst the gross and earthy part dries
up Ulcers, and cicatrises them: Candied Nutmegs, or as they come over with
their green Husks about them, are good in all cold Diseases of the Head, as
Palsy, and other Diseases of the Nerves, and Womb, and are very Cordial: And
notwithstanding all these Virtues in this one small Simple, yet if it be taken
immoderately, that is, in too great a quantity, it proves very hurtful,
occasioning sleepy Diseases, seeing they are very Narcotick, insomuch that
Tavernier relates, That when these Nuts ripen in the Molucoa-Islands, where
they, chiefly grow, the Birds of Paradise come flocking to feed upon them;
which they have no sooner done to any purpose, but a Giddiness seizing them,
they fall on the Ground in a profound Sleep, or Doziness, and lie so long
before they recover, that swarms of huge Ants that frequent those spicey Woods,
frequently eat off their Legs, or intolerably sting, and kill them in earnest.

Nutmeg to Candy: Take a pound of fine Sugar, a quarter of a pint of
Rose Water, and Gum Arabic three penny weight; boil them up to near a Candy
height: then having soaked your Nutmegs in Water, put them into it in an
earthen Vessel, cover it close that the Air may not come in, no more than
through the porous Part, and keep them in a warm Place twenty Days, and they
will be of a Rock-Candy, etc.

Nut-Oil: Take small Nuts, break them in a Mill, or otherways; take out the
Kernels, lay them in warm Water rill the Skins or Husks come off them, then
steep them in warm Sallad Oil; and when they swell, take them out and press
them, and a curious Oil will issue from them: put them into a glass Vessel, and
let it settle and digest twelve Days in a warm place; then use it as occasion
requires. It is good for cold and moist Swellings, or Pains in the Joints; or
Burns, Scalds, and Tumors, especially mixed with the Ointment of
Marshmallows, and likewise that of Tobacco.

OAk-Tree: This Tree in every part is astringent, but especially the Bark, the
Decoction of which is good for the Bloody Flux, or Spitting of Blood. The
Acorns are Diuretic, and the distilled Water of a young Oak is good for Women's
Diseases. Those that are cut for the Stone use a Bath of it, made of the Bark,
to heal the Wound or Incision. The Galls that grow upon outlandish Oaks, not
only make Ink, but are of many singular Virtues, as being powdered and drank in
White Wind, to dissolve the Stone, or Gravel; ease Pains in the Bladder, or
Reins, and cleanse the Stomach, causing a good Digestion.

Take of the Water of Oak-Buds, and Plantain, of each three ounces;
Cinamon-water Hordeated, and Sprup of dried Roses, of each an ounce; Spirit of
Vitriol two or three drops, to make it pleasant and sharp, and take it Morning
and Evening: it is excellent to stay immoderate Courses, and to prevent them.

Oats: They are Physically moderately drying, resolving, and restringent; they
are cool, and therefore boiled in Posset Drink, in Fevers they are good; being
heated, and put into a Bag and laid (...) the Side, they ease Pain^ as likewise
by such application, the Headache: The Ale made of them, cools and purifies the
Blood, and eases the Heat and Pains in Urin: A strong Decoction of them eases
the Flux in the Belly; and boiled with Figs, Licorice, and a little Honey, in
Ale, they ease the violence of the Cough, or Cold; and in a little time, the
liquid part drank often as hot as may be, removes the Cause, and the Effects
consequently cease

Odoriferous-Water: Take the Roots of Florence Orris, and Benjamine, of each
one ounce and half; the best Storax six drams, Lignum Rhodium half an ounce;
Aromatic Reed and Labdanum, of each two scruples; Flowers of Benjamine on
scruple: beat them into Powder, and put them into a Matras, and let them
macerate twenty four Hours in Balneo Mariae lukewarm, in a pint of Rose Water,
the Matrix being stopped, and then distill them in the same Bath a little
hotter; and mxing with this Water-Musk and Ambergrease six drams, keep it as a
Water of a curious, wholesome, and odoriferous scent, to scent, or perfume Rooms,
Gloves, or what else requires it.

This, for its admirable pleasant Scent, is called Angels-Water: It likewise
contributes much to the luster of the Face and Hands, being washed in it, mixed
with a little of the Water of Fumitory. The Sediment dried and mixed among
Clothes, gives 'em a fine Perfume, and drives away Moths, Worms, etc.

Oesepius Prepared: Take of the uncleansed Wool from the Neck, Buttocks, and
Shoulders of a tired Sheep, and infuse it in hot Water frequently, till the Fat
swims upon the Water; then squeeze the Wool, pour the Water out by way of
brewing frequently from one Vessel to another, till the Froth arises; then let
it stand till the Froth sinks, and take off the Fat that swims on the surface
of the Water, and froth the Water again, by pouring it from one Vessel to
another; and so continue to do till no more Fat appears: then wash all the Fats
with Froth in fair Water, keeping it continually stirring, and changing the
Water often, till what is superfluous be washed away; and until, upon the Taste,
it makes no biting on the Tongue: then put it into a well glazed earthen,
Vessel, and keep it for use.

This is good to anoint old Sores, also for Scabs, Itch, Botches, or Boils,
Excoriations, or Gallings, etc.

Oil Anti-Epileptich: Take the Shavings of a dead Man's Skull, that died a
violent Death, four ounces, Amber pulverized two ounces; mix them together, and
put them into a glass Retort, fitted with a Recipient, and distill them in a
Sand-Bath with a gradual Fire; distill the Oil mixed with Spirit, Phlegm, and
volatile Salt.

This Oil is beyond compare for the Epilepsie: A few drops of it taken in some
cephalic Waters, as that of Bettony, Pellitory, Camomel, or Mint, you may take
from three or four to five drops: Anoint with it, in great Pains, the insides
of the Nostrils, Temples, and the sutures of the Scull, and immediate ease
ensues.

Oil of Bays: Take the ripe Berries, bruise and boil them a good space in
Water, then strain it out; press the Berries hard, and when the liquid part is
cool, skim gently the Salt that swims on the Decoction, which is the Oil, and
is good to extenuate, calefie, and dissipate Wind in the Stomach: it dissolves
cold Diseases in the Head, and eases the Pains of the Colic.

Oil of Bitter Almonds: Take bitter Almonds, dry and purge, bruise and calefie
them in boiling Water, then strain it out; and press out the Oil. This Oil does
very much attenuate, and dissipate Wind, cures the Noise of the Head, by
^opping into the Ears; monifies the Stubbornness of the Sinews, and opens
Obstructions of the Liver.

Oil of Bitter Almonds, another: Take bitter Almonds two ounces, putting to
them half an ounce of Sperma Ceti; bruise them, and extract an Oil; and with it
anoint the Face when the Smallpox is drying; and by often doing it, it will
make them shell kindly, without leaving any Marks.

Oil of Camomel: Take the Flowers of Camomel, the white Leaves taken away,
bruise them, put them into a considerable quantity of Oil, and let them infuse
in the Sun, or some convenient Heat, covered with a single linen Cloth a
considerable time, then press out the Oil, and keep it for use. This is
Anodyne, and gives ease in the Colic and Pleurisy, by bathing the affected
part: It is also given in Clysters, to the same effect, with good Success.

Oil of Camomel, another: Take the Flowers, bruise them, and put them into
Olive-oil, let them stand twelve Days, boil it a little, take it off and press
out the Oil and Juice, put the Juice, or Oil, in a Glass, and put in ^esh
Flowers. This eases Pain in the Joints, softens Swellings, closes Chops, or
Cracks in the Skin, and supples stiffness of any Member, and, in a great
measure, gives ease, by being anointed with it very hot, or a linen Rag dipped
in it, fixed to the place grieved,

Oil of Cinnamon: Bruise four pound of Cinnamon, infuse it in six quarts of hot
Water, leave it to digest in an earthen Vessel close stopped for two Days; then
pour the Infusion into a copper Alembick, fit the receiver to it, and lute the
Joints with a wet Bladder, distill with a pretty good Fire three pints of the
Liquor; then unlute the Alembick, and pour into it, by inclination, the
distilled Water, and at the bottom you will find a little Oil; put it into a
Viol, and stop it close; distill the Liquor as before, and then return the Water
into an Alembick. Take the Oil found at the bottom of the Receiver, and mix it
with the first, repeat this Cohobation till no more Oil arises. This Oil
strengthens the Stomach, eases Women's Deliverances, the Courses, and much
increases Seed.

Oil for Deafness: Take pressed Oil of Leeks, bitter Almonds and Laurel, of
each two ounces; Spicknard, Castoreum and Coloquintida shred, of each a dram;
Juice of Rue, and Whitewine, of each an ounce and a half: put these into a
Matras close stopped, and let them digest twenty four Hours in a lukewarm
Balneo Mariae; then increase by degrees the heat of the Bath, and boil them to
the consumption of the moisture: then strain and press the Oil out for use,
mixing afterward with it six grains of Musk.

This Oil put just warm into the Ears, a drop or two at a time, wonderfully
helps Deafness in those that were not born so; but such as were born deaf very
rarely recover, though some foolish pretenders to all manner of Cures, will,
for the fake of your, Money, promise infallible Success.

Oil of Eggs: Take the Whites of twelve Eggs, beat them so that they become a
kind of an oily substance, extract that and put one spoonful of the Oil of
Tartar to it; mix them well together, and set them in the Sun, so that at the
bottom a thick settlement will remain; take then the Oil that swims a top off,
and put it into a Viol, and let it stand in the Sun till it becomes as white as
a Curd. This is exceeding good for Pains, Aches, Bruizes, or any hot Humors
settling, also for Burns or Scalds

Oil of Eggs, another: Take Yolks of Eggs, and put them in a Pot over the Fire,
let them stand till you perceive them to grow black, then put them in a Press,
and an Oil will squeeze out of them, which is excellent good in all manner of
Burns, and Scalds, Blasts by Lightning, or ill Airs.

Oil of Elder-flowers: This is made with the Flowers infused in good Oil when
well beaten, and the Oil after a considerable standing pressed out. This Oil
Discusses Mollified and Resolves.

Oil of Exeter: Take two handfuls of Sage, Thyme, and the green Sprigs of wild
Vine, a handful each; Hyssop two handfuls, St. John's-wort one handful,
Bay Leaves two handfuls, Goose-grass one handful, Rosemary two handfuls,
Peneroyal two handfuls, Camomel, white Lilies, Lavender, Dragon-leaves and
Wormwood, of each two handfuls; Mint, Sweet-Marjoram, Pellitory of Spain,
Fetherfew, and Angelica, of each one handful: stamp these very small, put them
into a Pot, with as much fair Water as will cover them, till the Water be in a
manner consumed; then put to it two quarts of Couslip-flowers steeped about a
Month in the Oil of Olives, with two quarts of Whitewine, and as much
Olive-oil, boil them to^her an hour or two till they are almost drained dry:
then press out the Oil very hard from the Herbs, and put it up in a Glass. This
is excellent good for dressing old Wounds and Sores, and gives ease in Aches,
and violent Pains of the Colic.

Oil of Fennel: Take two handfuls of the tops of Fennel, and put it between two
iron Plates, or clean Tiles, when they have been well heated in the Fire; and
pressing them hard, you will find an Oil come out, or oily Liquid, good to
anoint the Stomach with in the Phthisick, or any Inflammations.

Oil of Foxes: Take a Fox of about a Year old, flea, disbone it, and cut it to
pieces: put to it four ounces of common Salt, Spring Water as much as will
serve to boil it; boil it in an earthen glazed Pot, covered over a gentle Fire,
so long that the Bones start out; then strain out the Broth, and squeeze the
Flesh till all the moisture comes from it: then put to it Dill and the Tops of
Thyme, fresh gathered, of each two handfuls; Sage, Rosemary, and ground Pine,
of each one handful; Salladoil four pound: return the Broth into the Pot, and
having put in the Herbs and Oil, cov^ (...) very close, and let it stand twenty
four Hours in a warm Bath; make it boil for two Hours, and then strain it
strongly, pressing out the substance. Then separate the Oil, and keep it for
your use

This powerfully digests and discusses cold Humors that fall on the Nervous
and Membranous Parts: It is proper against all Infirmities of the Joints,
Rheumatisms, Sciatica's, and cold Gout, and may be applied hot to the Parts
alone, or mixed with other proper Unguents.

Oil of Juniper: Take the Berries of Juniper gathered from the beginning of
August to the end of September, bruise them and infuse them in Spring Water
three or four Days, and the Water of the first Infusion will serve for the
rest; then take two Alembicks, the one full of Berries, and the other half full
of the Infusion; (let them be made of earthen Ware:) put these into the Earth,
one on the top of the other, or conveniently fastened upon the other: after
having strained it with a Cloth, put it into a Furnace, and when cold open it,
and gather the Oil on the top, leaving the Water to run out, and let it take as
little Air as may be. This is excellent good for Strains or Afflictions of the
Sinews and Nerves, and is used with Success in the Pains of the Gout.

Oil of Lilies: Take of Costus, Mastick, Calamus Aromaticus, Oil of Pellitory,
and Carpobalsom, of each an ounce; Cinnamon and Cloves of each half an ounce;
Saffron three drams: when you have bruised them, infuse them in Water twenty
four Hours, then boil them a little; and having taken them from the Fire, pour
in Oil of Olives two pound, the Leaves of Lilies eight ounces, set them forty
Days in the Sun: then strain it, and take off the purest Oil that swims on, the
top, and take it as an excellent Remedy against the Pains of the Gout, as also
for the Headache, and many other Use.

Oil of Lizards: Take pressed Oil of Walnuts, depurated, three pound, and three
ounces of Whitewine, put them into a glazed earthen Pot with a narrow Mouth,
set in Balneo Mariae, boil it till it is exceeding hot; then take green
vigorous Lizards, in number twelve, fifteen, or twenty, as they are in bigness,
suffocate them in the scalding Oil; and having well stopped the Pot, boil them
to the consumption of their moisture: then strain and press them, and reserve
the pure Oil for use.

Oil of Lizards is commended for making the Hair grow on bald Heads, etc. It is
a Specific to cure Burstermess, the Bowels being first put up, and the Party
anointed with it very warm, then laying on the Panicle that incloses the
Intestines of an Animal moistened with this Oil, and strewed over with some
astringent Powder, binding on a good Pillow to keep the Bowels tight.

Oil of Mace: Three or four drops of it fasting, in a little Broth, eases the
Pains of the Colic and Strangury; it comforts the Heart and Stomach, and helps
cold Diseases of various kinds.

Oil of Mint: Take the Leaves of sown Mint, bruise them, let them macerate with
the Juice in the Oil of Omphacine, and change and boil it as you do Oil of
Roses. This greatly strengthens the Stomach, a few drops being taken in Wine,
Beer, or Ale, and the Stomach anointed with it; it also helps Concoction, and
does many other good Offices, proper to an excellent pectoral Oil.

Oil of Mustard Seed: Take two pound of the plumpest Mustard Seed, four pound
of Olive-oil, grind them together, and let them stand nine Days; then press out
the Oil, and keen it for your use. It is exc^t in case of the Palsy, Gout,
Itch, or any other suchlike Maladies.

Oil of Nard: Take of Spicknard, out small and bruised, three ounces, strong
Wine five ounces; put them into a strait-mouthed glazed earthen Pot, and let
them infuse in a moderate hot place; then add half a pint of Oliveoil, stop up
the Pot, and keep it in a boiling Balneo Mariae till the Wine be almost
consumed: after that strain and press it strongly, then separate the Oil from
the faeces, and keep it stopped very close for your use.

This Oil is proper to Heat, Digest, and Attenuate, being a moderate Closer; so
that it is very useful against Cold and Windy Afflictions of the Brain,
Stomach, Liver, Kidney, Spleen, Bladder, and Matrix; it unstops and purges the
Brain; Cotton being dipped in it, and put to the Nostrils, asswages the Pains
of them; it is good against the Palfie and Shaking of the Nerves, also Tumors,
Suffocations, and Stranglings of the Matrix, being used as a Pessary; it is
also used, by way of Injection, to assuage and allay Pains, or heat of the
Bladder.

Oil for the Nerves: Boil Neats-feet, and you will find an oily quality
swimming on the top, scum it off, and purify it; and in case of any
Afflictions of the Nerves, anoint the Place grieved with it as hot as can be
endured, and it will extremely strengthen them, taking away Pains, Aches, or
Weakness in the Back, Reins, Muscles, Joints, or Nervous parts, when anointed
with it Morning and Evening. It likewise cures a wasting Consumption, or Pining
in any part of the Body, being anointed often with it, by reason it nourishes
the fleshy, or musculous Parts, adding strength to them; but is more powerful
in its operation, if you take a pound of it with the Oils of Amber, Lavender,
Rosemary, Oranges, of each an ounce; Camphire half an ounce: mix these well
together, and in case of Strains, Coldness, or Weakness of the Joints anoint
them with it, chafing or rubbing it in warm, you will find wonderful ease, and
a cessation of Pain: it makes likewise the Skin plump and smooth.

Oil of Orris: Take the Roots of Florentine-Orris, and of the purple Flower,
two pound; also a sufficient quantity of the Water wherein the Roots of Orris
are boiled; of sweet Oil washed six pints; boil them in a double Vessel, put in
fresh Roots and Flowers till the watery part is consumed; then press out the
Oil, and keep it for use.

This Oil, or Ointment, digests crude Humors, dissolves hard Swellings,
mollifies and discusses, digests, and eases Pains.

Oil of Osprey: Take thirty Scorpions, Oil of Bitter Almonds two pound; put
them into a narrow-necked Vessel, and let them digest for thirty Days in the
heat of Summer in the Sun; then strain it out, and keep it close stopped.

This is good against the Stone or Gravel m the Kidneys, the Reins being
anointed with it, as also the Share and Perinaeum; and injected into the urinal
Passage, it is also good against the Bite or Sting of any venomous Creature,
and the malignity of the Plague. Some think it should be used only as an
Ointment; but others hold it may be given inwardly against the Pains of the
Colic and Stone, the Dose being from one to two drams in any Powder or Vehicle.

Oil of Roses to Make: Gather the Buds of those Roses, called Provence-Roses,
take the Flower off clean without Stalk or Seed, and put to them the Juice of
other red Roses a pint; then put them into five pound of Oil Omphacine, which
is without Salt, and let them stand a considerable time in a glass Vessel close
stopped, viz. the space of eight Days in the Sun, if possible, after boil them
three Hours, strain them, and put in fresh Roses into the Liquid: do so twice
or thrice, then being strained, boil the Liquid in a double Vessel, till the
Juices be consumed; and then put it up for your use. This is extraordinary
strengthening and cooling: It thickens and stays Fluxes, and helps gnawing
Pains of the Bowels, if taken in a Clyster; or, otherways, in a little
Whitewine, with some. Syrup of Licorice.

Oil of Roses, another: Take sweet ripe Oil, often washed, and red Roses full
blown, bruised, and gently boiled in a double Vessel; but the thirtieth time
you place it in the Sun, it must remain there forty Days, then keep the Oil and
Roses together without expression. This Oil mollifies, heals Burns and Scalds;
if mixed with powdered white Lead, and the White of an Egg dropped in the Ears,
it eases the Pains of them; and in the Eyes, refreshes the Sight.

Oil of Rue is made in the same manner as that of Roses, and has excellent
Virtues in it to warm and strengthen the Joints and Nerves, and is good for
Convulsions and Palsies.

Oil of Rue: Take the Leaves of Rue, shred them small, put about two handfuls
of them into an earthen Pot, with a quart of Olive-oil, let them stand twelve
Days; then boil them to the consumption of a third part; strain it, and keep it
close. Four or five drops of it drank in White Wind fasting, is good against
pestilential Fevers, Plague, or any infectious Disease.

Oil of Saffron: It Is excellent to provoke Sleep, by anointing the Forehead and
Temples with it; mixed with a Woman's Milk, it stays the Fluxion of the Eyes.
It destroys St. Anthony's Fire, the grieved Part being often anointed with it;
being drank in Wine, it chears the Heart, etc.

Oil of Savin: This is made in like manner as the Oil of Elder-flowers: It
cures and cleanses Ulcers, and takes away the Scabs in Childrens Heads, being
anointed with it.

Oil of Scorpions: Take those of a middle size, when the Sun enters Leo, to the
number of thirty; Oil of Bitter Almonds a quart: set them in the Sun forty
Days, then press out the Oil, and keep it close stopped.

This is a good Oil for the King's Evil, old Sores, Cancers, Inflammations, and
Defects of the Skin: It gives ease to the Stone, the Reins and Flanks being
anointed with it, and cures the Biting of poisonous Creatures.

Oil of Swallows: Take about sixteen young Swallows, whole Camomel, Rue, and
the greater and lesser Plantain, Pennyroyal, Bay Leaves, Dill, Rosemary, Sage
St. John's-wort, Costmary, of each a handful; common Oil two quarts, Spanish
Wine a pint. If you take as much May-Batter as Oil, and boil these in it, it
will have the Name and Consistence of an Ointment. This is exceeding good to
anoint lame or decrepit Members withal; also to bath old Aches, and for Pains
and Weakness in the Joints.

Oil of Violets: This is made of Omphacine-Oil, and Flowers of Violets, by
infusion, and then pressing out the Oil: It Moistens, Cools, and Mollifies.

Oil of Violets, another: Take the Flowers of blue Violets, clean picked from
the Stalks, two handfuls; Oil of sweet Almonds, or Olive-oil, a pint; put them
in a glass Vessel, and let them stand in the Sun ten Days, shifting the Violets
as the former, and in every thing ordering them alike, and anoint any part that
is grieved with Aches, or Pains, occasioned by Heat or Swellings, and you will
find ease.

Oil of Vipers: Take live Vipers, large, fat, and vigorous, in number twelve;
the best Olive-oil two pound; strong Whitewine two ounces: put the Oil into an
earthen Vessel well glazed within. Let it boil in a hot Bath till you cannot
endure to put your Finger into it; then plunge the Vipers one after another
into the Oil, and when they are stifled, pour in the Wine prescribed; cover the
Pot, and let it boil till the moisture of the Vipers is almost consumed; then
strain and press out the Oil, and separate it from the rest, and keep it for
use.

This is chiefly commended for taking away the Deformities of the Skin, as
Tetters, Scurf, Leprous Ulcers, and highly esteemed for those Ulcers that are
caused by a venereal Poison; the use of it externally, is alone, or in
Liniments, or Pomatums: It is also recommended for asswaging the Pains of the
Hemorrhoids, and to facilitate the Delivery of Women, the whole Region of the
Belly being anointed therewith.

Oil of Wall-Flowers: Take ripe Oil one pint, Wall-flowers four ounces; bruise
them, and infuse them in a Warm place, and so press out the Oil. This Oil
strengthens the Nerves and Joints, and is good for the Palsy and Cramp.

Oil of Wormwood: Take the Leaves and Tops, and bruise them, then put them into
the Oil, and order it as Oil of Roses. This helps the Pains in the Bowels:
Drops of it in Whitewine create a good Appetite, and restore the Lungs.

Ointment for Aches: Take, five or six young Swallows, Tendrings of
Strawberries, Rue, Lavender, and Bay Leaves, red Nettle-Tops, Wormwood, and
Horehound, of each one handful; the Gall of an Ox, and about six black Snails,
Oil of Olives half a pint: stamp the Swallows in their Feathers whole, with the
other Ingredients reduced very small, then add half a pint of Olive-oil, and
about two ounces of May-Butter, put them into an earthen Pot well glazed, set
them over a gentle Fire, and keep them continually stirring: then strain the
Ointment through a linen Cloth, and anoint the Parts grieved with it very
hot: It eases most Pains in the Joints, Slips, Strains and cold Humors that
afflict the Serves.

Ointment for Burns: Take the Juice of Housleek, Grounsil, and Plantain,
Omphacine Oil of Roses, a little Bole-Armoniack grated, and the White of an
Egg; beat them up together till they come to art oily substance, and then
anoint the Place where any Scald or Burn has happened; and so doing often, it
will draw away the Heat, and remove the Pain.

Ointment for Imposthumes: Take Olive-oil two pound, white and yellow Beeswax,
Rams-suet from the Kidneys, clarified Rosin, black Pitch, and
Venice-Turpentine, of each half a pound; the best Mastich finely powdered two
ounces: make these into an Ointment over a gentle Fire.

This is excellent good to break all Imposthumes, as also pestilential
Carbuncles, and venereal Buboes, by reason the Consistence of this is harder
than almost any other Ointment, and it is to be used from the first breaking of
Imposthumes, till the Cure be perfected.

Ointment for Scalds: This is excellent either for Scalds, or Burns; Take a
pound of Hog's Grease, Whitewine a quart, the Leaves of the lesser Sage,
Wall-Ivy, and Ground Ivy, the bigger sort of Marjoram, and Housleek, of each
two handfuls: shred, beat, and boil them over a gentle Fire, to the consumption
of the moisture, stirring them often, and then strain and press them strongly,
and keep the Ointment in a glazed Pot for your use, and use it with success.

Ointment, another: Take sweet Butter two pound, melt it over a moderate Fire,
put into it, when taken off the Fire, as much Snow; then scum off the Butter
that swims above the Snow-water, and add to it an ounce of Venice
Ceruss-powder, Camphire a dram, mixed with a little Spirit of Wine, and make
them up into an Ointment over a gentle Fire.

This Ointment, among the Professors of Surgery, has a great Esteem: For it
not only cures common Burns, or Scalds, but those with Gunpowder, Lightning,
melted Sulphur, or Lead, if curable.

Ointment for the Smallpox: If you would prevent Scars, and pitting in the
Face, Hands, or any part of the Body, Take a piece of fat rusty Bacon, with the
Rind off, and put it on a Spit, set a pewter Platter under it with fair Water,
and let the Fat drop into; and when it has dript away as much as is convenient,
beat the Dripping and the Water together about a quarter of an Hour, and let
them stand till they are cold; then pour out the Water, and pass the Fat with
mixing through two or three Waters, till all the saltness, and offensive Scent
is gone: then wash it in Rose Water, and put it up in a Gallypot; and when you
use it, melt it and p^tle it on your Face with a Feather, often so doing till
the Scabs and Scurf come clear away, and a delicate smooth Skin appears under
them.

Ointment for Sores, Old or New: Take Honey of Roses, and common Honey, of each
four ounces; Oil of Turpentine an ounce and three quarters; Barly-water half a
pint; the Yolks of two new-lay'd Eggs: mingle them well, and keep them stirring
over a gentle Fire, till the Water is near consumed, and they become an
Ointment: then dip Rags and Pledgits in it, and lay to the grieved Place, often
renewing them.

Ointment for the Spleen: Take Whitewine-Vinegar four spoonfuls, red
Holly-hock, Mallow, and Briony-roots, the Pith taken out, of each a pound;
sprinkle them with the Vinegar: let it steep in, and then boil them till the
Roots be very soft, then stamp them and strain out the Juice. Take Boars-grease
a pound and a half, sour leavened Bread four ounces: mingle them together in a
Mortar, and then sprinkle some more Vinegar on them, and over a gentle Fire
make the liquid part into an Ointment, and in the Morning rub the place where
the Spleen is with a warm coarse Cloth, then lay on it a, piece of blue woolen
Cloth, wet in the Water of a Man-Child, as hot as can be laid on, and when it
waxes cold, take it away, and dry the Skin with a warm Cloth, and bath in some
of the Ointment warmed in a Sawcer; rub it well in, and lay upon it a quilt of
black Wool, and in so doing often, you will find extraordinary ease.

Ointment for Ulcers: Take six pound of Butter made the latter end of May, or
beginning of June, boil it over a gentle Fire, clarify it, and take away the
dregs, then add yellow Wax four pound, Rosin two pound, and Venice-Turpentine
one pound: make these into a proper Ointment over a gentle Fire.

This Ointment is very solid, that it may continue on the Parts grieved, and is
not only proper for the Cure of Ulcers in the Legs; but for Tetters,
Chilblains, Chaps, and Rifts of the Breasts, and other Parts of the Body.

Oisters: The Flesh of this Fish is nutritive, Stomachick, and restorative in
Consumptions, being either pickled, stewed, roasted, or eaten raw; they open
Obstructions of the urinary Parts, and increase Seed; eaten raw, they cause a
good Appetite, and are easy of Digestion, confirm a weak Stomach, and create
good Nourishment to decayed Members. There are Waters, Oils, Spirits, and
volatile Salts, drawn from Oisters in this manner.

Take five quarts of large Oisters, when out of the Shells, put them into a
Cucurbit, and in Balneo Mariae distill off the Water to dryness, that it is
Phlegm, with very little volatile Salt in it. This may be used in all Cases where
a Milk Water is requisite. Then put the dried Oisters at the bottom into an
earthen Retort, or a glass one well coated, fixing to it a large Receiver; and
upon the Fire, though not too violent, draw off the Spirit, Oil, and volatile
Salt: let the Fire at first be very gentle to bring forth the remaining Phlegm,
then increase it gradually, that the Spirit may follow in white Clouds; then
continue the Fire, increasing it to the highest degree: so will the volatile
Salt and Oil ascend and come forth, which rectified, separate and keep for use.

The Salt restores in Consumptions. It is good against all Diseases of the
Head, Brain, and Nerves, as the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Vertigo, Lethargy, and
Palsy; as also Pleurisies, and all Obstructions of the Lungs and Breast,
Stoppages of Urin, Jaundice, and the like: You may take it from four grains to
twelve. The Spirit has the fame Virtue, but is weaker; and therefore may be
taken from twenty four to forty, fifty, or sixty Drops. The Oil smells very
strong, and therefore must be rectified. The smelling to it is good against
Vapors, and Hysterical-Fits, especially being anointed on the Nostrils. Take
of the Oil two ounces, Spirit of Niter one ounce: mix and digest them ten Days,
then add eight ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine, and digest it a Month;
filter it, and keep it close. This opens Obstructions, and prevails powerfully
against the Obstructions of the Bowels. The Dose is from twelve to thirty drops.

Oisters Broiled the Dutch way: Take two quarts of large Oisters, open and
parboil them in their own Liquor: put them into a strainer, and then into a
Pipkin, with some Mace, Butter, and slices of Onions; then stew them, and after
that lay the Shells on a Grid-iron, and put two or three of them into a Shell,
and there let them broil or Stew in their Liquor; and so setting them on
Plates, fill them with beaten Butter, and serve them up.

Oister Chewits: Take three quarts of large Oisters ready opened, and parboiled
in their own Liquor, then wash them in warm Water; dry them, and mince them
very fine, season them lightly with Salt, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon,
Carrawayseeds, some minced Raisins of the Sun, sliced Dates, Currrans, Sugar,
and half a pint of Whitewine: mingle all together, and put Butter in the bottom
of the Pies; so fill them up and bake them. These must be very small Pyes, and
ten or twelve of them served upon a Plate together.

Oisters, another way: Take the largest, wash them in warm Water, then parboil
them, and save the Liquor, and steep them in Whitwine-Venegar, sliced Nutmeg,
large Mace, whole Pepper, Cloves, a little Salt; and having given them a warm
on the Fire, set them off, and let them steep two or three Hours; then take
them up, and dry them, and dip them in a Batter made of Flower, and the Yolks
of Eggs, some Salt, and Cream, and so fry them; and when they are fried, keep
them warm: then take some of the Spices, Liquor of the Oisters, and some
Butter, beat them up thick, with some slices of Orange, or Yolks of Eggs, and
dish the fried Oisters over a Chafingdish of Coals: run the Sauce over them
with the Spices, and garnish them with Barberries, and grated Manchet, and then
serve them up.

Oister-Ielly: Take ten Flounders, two small Pikes, or Place, and four ounces
of Isinglass finely cleansed, boil them in an earthen Vessel in two quarts of
Spring Water, and as much Whitewine, with some sliced Ginger, and large Mace;
and being boiled to a Jelly, strain it through a Strainer into a pretty deep
Dish, and when it is cold, pare the top and bottom, and put it into a Pipkin
with the Juice of six or seven Lemons to each two quarts of Jelly, also three
pound of fine Sugar beaten with the Whites of twelve Eggs. Rub altogether with
a Rolling-pin, and put among the Jelly, being melted, but not too hot; set the
Pipkin on the Fire to stew, put into it a grain of Musk, and as much
Ambergrease well rubbed, and let it stew half an Hour on the Embers: then stew
the Oisters in Whitewine, their own Liquor, and the Juice of Oranges, Mace,
sliced Nutmeg, whole Pepper, and some Salt; and having dished them with some
preserved Barberries, large Mace, or Pomegranatekernels, run the Jelly over
them, and garnish them with preserved Lemons, large Mace, and preserved
Barberries.

Oister-Pye: Parboil your Oisters, and season them with Pepper, Salt, and
Nutmegs, and the Yolk of hard Eggs; and the Pie being made, put a few Currants
in the bottom, and lay on the Oisters, with some sliced Dates, blades of and
Barberries; then put on Butter, and close it up, and bake it: then liquor it
with Butter, Whitewine, and Sugar beat up together.

Or this way: Season them as before, but boil them not; put in two or three
Onions cut in Quarters, but leave out the Currants, and Sugar, slice a Nutmeg on
them, as also hard Eggs must be laid in halves with large Mace, and
Barberries; liquor them as before, only add to the Liquor, Juice of Oranges.

Oister-Shells: Take the inward part of the Shell, that is of a shining White,
or Pearl color, and reduce it to powder by calcining: It eases
Heart-burnings, and the Pain of the Stomach, and Colic; as also other Pains of
the Bowels, proceeding from sharpness of Humor; it chears the Heart, and has
almost the Virtue of Pearl.

Olives, their Virtues: Olives are gathered, either that Oil may be extracted
out of them, or that they may be reserved for Banquets by pickling them in Salt
and Water; The Olive has in it a very restringent Virtue; for the Decoction of
the Leaves in a Clyster, stays the Flux of the Belly, and the Juice with
Whitewine, or fair Water, being often drank, restrains the Bloody Flux: The
Sap distilling out of the Olive Tree, or that out of as the Wood where it is
burning, cures the Itch, Tettars, and Ring-worms. Leuk-Olives, especially being
eaten, provoke Appetite, and get a good Stomach: The Oil extracted, or rather
flowing from them of its own accord, is of singular Virtue, being either
applied outwardly, or nwardly, according to the indisposed Parts of the Body:
It loses and mollifieth the Belly, abateth the force of Poison taken
inwardly; and if any Venom, Burn, or Scald, happen on the outward Parts, bath
it well with this Oil. It is so generally approved, that few Oils, Unguents, or
Salves, are compounded without it.

Oleum Magistrale: Take a quart of the best old White Wind, Olive-oil three
pounds, Hypericon half a pound, Carduus Benedictus, Valerian the least, and
Sage, of each four ounces; steep them in the Wine and Oil twenty four Hours,
then boil them in a nealed Pot, or copper Vessel, keeping them stiring over a
gentle Fire, till the Wine is consumed; strain it, and melt in a pound and half
of Venice-Turpentine, then set it again on a soft Fire a quarter of an Hour,
add Olibanum five ounces, Myrrh three, Sanguis Draconis one ounce, and make it
into an Ointment. It Is good against Sores, Wounds, Gunshot, Blasts by
Gunpowder, and Pains in the Joints.

Onion: This is proper to such as are afflicted with cold vicious Humors,
because they procure Sleep, and help Concoction, prevent sower Belchings, open
Obstructions, force Courses, and the Urin, promote insensible Transpiration;
but are not proper to be taken by those that are of colerick Constitutions,
because they disturb their Heads, and cause troublesome Dreams, and offend the
Eyes; an old Onion steeped in Water a Night's time, and the Water with a little
Honey given the next Morning, kills the Worms in Children: a large Onion filled
with Venice-Turpentine, and roasted, softens hard Swellings, laid Plaisterwise;
also opens them: a raw Onion, stamped with Salt, draws the Fire out of Burns,
or Scalds; and the inward Cloves, under the several Coats of a raw Onion, laid
to the Gums, ease the Pains of the Toothache.

Opiate-Plaister to Make: Take the great Diachylon four ounces, Quicksilver
two ounces, Opium one ounce; mingle them, and make them into a Salve, with a
very gentle heat, and apply Plasters of it to any Part afflicted with Pains or
Aches.

Opiate for the Toothach: Take Camphire two drams, Castor half a dram, Opium
one dram; bring these into a powder, mix them with the Syrup of Gilliflowers,
and make an Opiate.

This asswageth the Pains of the Teeth very speedily, and if any of them be
rotten, put a very little of it into the hollow Tooth, and leaving it there, it
will ease it.

Opthalmick Ointment: Take Oil of Roses two ounces, Narbone-Honey half an
ounce, choice Aloes, and Sarcocol, of each two drams; infuse them three Days in
a Woman's Milk without stiring, yet shift the Milk very gingerly, powder of
white Trochiscs of Rhases, Bolearmoniack, Tutty prepared, of each four
scruples; white Vitriol, and Sugar-candia, of each one dram; Powder of Saffron,
Myrrh, and Olibanum, of each two scruples; Thebeian Opium fifteen grains: make
of these an Ointment according to Art.

This is excellent for Infirmities of the Eyes: Put to this purpose a large
drop of it into the Eye, and sleep upon it, and in the Morning when you rise,
wash it with white Rose, or Plantane-water; and so order it once or twice after
the first time, and you will find wonderful Benefit.

Oranges to Dry: Rasp or scrape off their outward Rinds, cut them into halves,
and take out their Pulp; lay them in Water three or four Days, then shift them
into fresh Water, and boil them tender, shifting them likewise in boiling, to
take away their bitterness: When they are tender, take them out, and wipe them
with a clean Cloth, and put to them as much clarified Sugar as will cover
them, and let them boil leisurely two Hours: then take them off the Fire, and
put them into an earthen Vessel for four Days; then set them on the Fire again
till they be thorough hot: let them drain, and take fresh Sugar, boil it to a
Candy height, and put your Oranges to the hot Sugar; which being boiled up,
take out the Oranges, and lay them on a Wyre, or Sieve, to dry in a Stove, or
Oven, and within ten Days they will be dry, and fit for use. In this manner
Lemons are candied.

Orange-Marmalade: Take the fairest Rind Oranges, cut them in halves, and take
out the Pulp, boil the Peels tender in fair Water, often shifting, to take out
the bitterness; then take them up, and squeeze all the Water from them, beat
them in a stone Mortar with the Pulp of three or four yellow Pippins; then
strain, and boil it with stirring until it become thick: take it from the Fire,
and lay it on White Paper, and take as much refined Sugar as the Pulp weighs,
put it into a Pan, with as much Rose Water as will melt it; boil it to a Candy
height, and put the Pulp into the Sugar, keeping stirring till it rises from
the bottom of the Pan: then put it into Boxes, and so into a Stove uncovered;
and when it is tolerably dried, cover it up for your use.

Oranges, a Past: Take Oranges well colored, and boil them in Water, shift
them six or seven times in the boiling, and put into the first Water a handful
of Salt; then beat them in a wooden Bowl, with a wooden Pestle: strain out the
Pulp, and take the weight of Sugar equal to them; boil it up to a Candy height,
dry it on Plates, and fashion it as you please: And in this manner you may make
Past of Lemons, or Citrons.

Oranges: The Water of these, besides the pleasantness of the Fruit, and other
Advantages that arise from them, being distilled in an Alembick, by paring the
Oranges, and putting the Peels into a convenient quantity of low Wines, or
Spirits, is not only excellent in Scent, and may be sprinkled as a Perfume to
give a fragrancy to what you please to asperse it on, but is very good in
pestilential Fevers: It strengthens the Heart and the Brain. Three or four
spoonfuls taken going to Bed, causes likewise a gentle breathing Sweat. The
Juice of Oranges is cold, and therefore resists Corruption, and is given with
a little Sugar, successfully to cool and temperate the Blood in Fevers and hot
Diseases.

Orpin: This kind of Herb is vulnerary and astringent, and is chiefly used for
healing Ulcers of the Bowels, occasioned by the Bloody Flux, also for Ruptures
and Burns. It Is held excellent in easing Pains both in fresh Wounds, and old
Ulcers. The Herb roasted on Embers, and mixed with Hogs-Lard, cures a Fellon.

Ostiocolla: This is a kind of a Stone found in Saxony, Silesia, etc. and grows
in the Sand like a Coral. It is of a glutinous Quality, and therefore of
excellent use for binding and knitting broken Bones, immediately breeding
Matter for a Callus, and thereby hastening the Conglutination. The Dose, in
subtle Powder, is from one to two drams in any convenient Liquor, and outwardly
to be applied to the Place in a Cataplasm, or Emplaster. Aldrovandus affirms,
That broken Bones being rightly placed, and tied up, it heals them, being used
outwardly with a mixture of the Oil of Cranes-Bill, and inwardly with red Wine.
It dries and binds without Agrimony, and is good against Poison and the Plague.

Ouzle, its Dung: Half an ounce of the Dung of this Ouzle, or Blackbird, mixed
with two ounces of the Juice of Lemons, and a dram of the Powder of Camphire,
and applied to the Face, or Hands, takes away Freckles, Lentils, and other
Deformities of the Skin. The Flesh of this Bird frequently eaten, wonderfully
restores Consumptive People, and gives ease to the Colic Pains, and is held to
be prevalent against the Dysentery, and Infection of the Plague, especially the
raw Flesh being applied to the Sore, draws out the Poison.

Oxgall to Beautify: Of this an excellent Cosmetick is made in the following
manner:

Take four pints of the Galls of an Ox digested twenty four Hours in Balneo
Mariae; Roach Alom, Salt, and of glass powdered, of each one dram; mix them
well, and put them into a Matras, stop it carefully, and expose it in May to
the heat of the Sun, shaking it four or five times a Day; then filter the
Materials, and in the filtered Liquor put two ounces of Porcellane powdered
very fine, and dissolved in the Spirit of Vinegar; Borax and Sperma-Ceti, of
each an ounce; sweet Sublimate, and Camphire, of each three drams; then expose
them to the Sun again ten Days, often shaking the Ingredients: then filter the
Liquor, and keep it for its proper use.

Oxymel Simple: Take of the best Honey four ounces, of Spring Water, a pound,
or pint; boil them till half the Water be consumed, then pour them into a pint
of Whitewine-Vinegar, and let them boil to the thickness of a Syrup, and take
about half an ounce at a time. This extenuates gross Humors, and carries away
slimy Matter, opens old Obstructions, and Obstructions of the Lungs, with
Phlegm, and what Causes arise from shortness of Breath.

PAin of the Bladder: Take of Pulegium, and Spicknard, of each a little
quantity, bruise them, and putting them into a little Bag, apply it warm, as
near as you can, to the Place grieved, at the same time drinking about a
quarter of a pint of the Decoction of Horehound, boiled in a like quantity of
Wine and Water.

Pain in the Eyes: Take Melilot-flowers, the Flowers of Marigolds, and Elder,
of each a handful; Linseed, Fenugreek, Fleawort, Cummin, and Quince-kernels, of
each half a scruple; French Barley half an ounce, Damask Roses half an ounce,
Spring Water a pint and half; mix and make a Decoction, with which foment die
Forehead, Temples, and Eyebrows, being sufficiently warm: and by Efficiently
warm: and by often using it, the Pain will not only be abated, but the Eyes
will be very fresh and lively, the sight more quick and penetrating than usual.

Pains in the Loins: Take of Quick-sulphur half an ounce, beat it into Powder,
mix it with an ounce of Hogs-lard, powder the Seeds of wild Mint, add a little
Wheat Flour, and make them into a Plaster, or Ointment, with a little Wine
over a gentle Fire, and apply it warm to the Place grieved, often renewing it.

Pain of the Stomach: Take a quantity of green Peach-leaves, bruise them with
Knot-grass, boil them in Whitewine to the thickness of a Poultis, and apply
them warm to the Stomach; or, Take Rue, Dill, Cummin, and Smallage, of each
half a handful: boil them in a pint and a half of Whitewine, the Leaves picked
clean from the Stalks, then add three pound of Olive oil, boil them again; and
being taken from the Fire, dip therein so much unwashed Wool, as, spread pretty
thick, may cover the Stomach: lay this where the Grief is most apparent pretty
hot; and when the heat has dried up the moisture, anoint the Stomach with Oil
of Nard, and walk about with a quick motion. This remedies that Disease of the
Stomach likewise called Nausea.

Pannado to Make: Take a quart of Spring Water, and put it on the Fire in A
Skillet, then cut A Penny white-Loaf in slices, about the bigness of a
Sixpence, and as thin as a Wafer, and lay it on a Dish placed on a Chafing Dish
of Coals; then put it into the Water with a handful of clean picked Currants,
and a little large Mace: and being boiled to a sufficient thickness, season it
with a little fine Sugar beat well and dissolved in Rose Water.

Parsley: It has many Properties in Physic, as well as for Kitchen uses, viz.
the Decoction of the Leaves, or Roots thereof, opens the urinary Passages,
brings away Sand and Gravel, eases Colic, and the Pains in the Reins, being
used in the nature of a Fomentation upon the grieved Parts: And the Seed is of
the greatest Virtue in those Matters; it voideth Windiness in the Bowels, and
is good in the Biting of any venomous Creature. The often eating of Parsley, or
drinking the Juice of it, sweetens the Breath. Being bruised with the Crumbs of
fine White-bread, and applied, it heals Tetters, and Ringworms, and asswageth
the Swelling of the Dugs. It diminishes the Milk of Women in Childbed.

Past of Apricocks: Take the ripest Apricocks, pare them very thin, and set
them in a Preserving-pan over a gentle Fire, with as much Water as will keep
the bottom of the Pan moist; then break them, and stir them about with a
Skimmer, suffering it to stand till the moisture consume, and they come to
something of a dryness: then with Sugar boil them to the thickness of a
Conserve; and so, by continuing longer, it will become stiff in order to a Past.

Past of Cherries: Boil some of the ripest Cherries till they are reduced to a
soft Pulp, then strain them through a coarse Cloth, or hair Bag, and boil a
fourth quantity of Pippins, not over-ripe, till they are very soft: then take
away the Core and Rind, and mash them into Pulp: add to these an ounce of fine
Sugar to every pound, spread it then on Plates, and fashioning it as you
please, let it dry for your use.

Past to scowre the Hands: Take the Husks of Bitter Almonds half a pound,
bruise them in a marble Mortar, sprinkling on them a little Salt and Aquavits,
then add two Yolks of Eggs, and Narbone Honey one ounce and half; Orris-roots,
finely powdered, one ounce: mix and mould them well together, and make them
into a Past, and use it as you see occasion.

This is excellent to cleanse the Hands, and is easily prepared: There is
little occasion for wetting it in Water; for it may be used as it is prepared,
if you let it not dry too much.

Parsly-Water: This must be distilled from the Leaf, Root, and Stalks, in
Balneo Mariae, being gathered in the beginning of the Spring. It Attenuates,
Opens, Cleanses, and is Hepatick and Diuretic, insomuch that many allow it to
cure all Pains and Effects of the Stone, where the Party frequently and freely
drinks of the Water: but this is certain, that being exceeding Diuretic, it
nevertheless forces without Pain, and makes the Urin come freely from those
that have had Obstructions for many Years; and, in some, it has brought away
the Urin with ease, after it had been totally obstructed for many Days. It may
be taken from six ounces, sweetened with white Sugar Candy, or alone, to eight,
or you may add to it ten or twelve grains of Salt of Tartar, or what other
Diuretics you think convenient.

Pear-Pie: Take Wardens, or other hard Winter-Pears, bake them with a little
Water, and a good quantity of Sugar, in a Pot covered with a Lid of Dough. Let
them not be fully, baked e're you draw them: then quarter them, taking off the
Rind and Core, raise a Coffin of Past, and between every laying scatter a few
Cloves, Cinnamon, and candied Orange-peel cut small; and putting in the Liquor
that issued from them in the Pot, let them bake to a fitness.

Pear-Pie, another: Bake your Pears first in an Oven, either upon the Stone, or
in a Pot; peel and core them, put them in halves into your Coffin, with some
slices of Quinces between them, and the shaving of Lemon Peel, some whole
Cloves, Cinnamon, and Sugar; and when baked, raise the Lid on one side, and put
into it some Cinnamon Powder, beaten up with Sugar and Rosewater, and so serve
it to the Table, either hot or cold, as you please.

Pear-Pudding: Take a cold Capon, or one half roasted, which is the best of the
two; then shred some Suet very small, as also the Meat taken off the Bones,
with half as much grated Bread, and two spoonfuls of Flower, beaten Nutmegs,
Mace, Cloves, and Sugar, as much as will season it, half a pound of Currants,
the Yolks of two Eggs, six Pears, the Pulp of them, and as much Cream as will
make it up into a kind of a Past; then make it up into the fashion of a Pear,
stick a piece of Cinnamon for the Stalk, and for the Head a Clove.

Pearls to Whiten: Take half an ounce of Bean-flower, Lime, and Eggs an ounce,
white Salt a pound, Water of Confound, Alcohol of Wine eleven ounces; distill
the Water; and if you wash solid or clouded Pearls in it, it will restore them
to their native Luster.

Pectoral Pills for the Lungs: Take Tears of Storax two drams, Juice of Spanish
Licorice a dram and half; Tincture of Saffron four scruples, Labdanam,
Olibanum, Myrrh, and Extract of Opium, of each a dram; Ambergrease a scruple,
Syrup of Citron-peels, as much as suffices to make a mass for Pills.

These Pills stop Defluxions on the Lungs, and assuage Coughing. The Dose to be
taken, is five or six grains at Night.

Pepper boiled in White Wind is good against the Ague, and in most cold
Diseases, but is more commonly used in seasoning Meats, than in Physic; and
indeed is more proper in the general to that purpose, by reason its dryness
qualifies the moisture that ever abounds in many Meats, and causes it to digest
kindly in the Stomach.

Perfumed-Cakes: Take Benjamin four ounces, Storax two ounces, Laudanum a dram,
Cloves, in number, twelve, Calamus Aromaticus a dram, and a little Citron-peel:
Take a new glazed earthen Pot, and boil the Benjamin and Storax in it in half a
pint of Rosewater for an Hour, if the moisture holds long, without being
evaporated; then put in the rest of the Materials, mentioned in a little Linen
Bag, adding more Rose Water: and when they have boiled a while, take them off,
and strain them through a Linen Cloth: and so soon as cold, there will be a
curious perfumed Past.

Perfume for Confection: Take of Myrrh a scruple, Musk, or Civet, the like
quantity, Oil of Nutmegs as much: infuse them in Rose Water, and with it, when
well dissolved, sprinkle your Confections, or Sweetmeats, and they will have a
curious pleasant Scent, which will likewise add much to the flavor in the Taste.

Perfumes of Flowers: Extract, through a Retort, after the manner of
Aquafortis, the Spirit of Saltpeter, or common Salt, and keep it close stopped
in a Bottle; then take what quantity of Violets, Roses, or other Flowers you
will, and put into an Alembick with an ounce of the Spirit of the said Salt, a
pint of Spring Water, and so proportionably till the Alembick be full, and let
them infuse twenty four Hours till you see the Water well colored, which pour
out by inclination into another Glass, and it will carry with it the color and
smell of the Flowers infused, though it leaves the Flowers fresh, as if they
had been newly gathered.

Perfumed Powder: Take Florence-Orris a pound, dried Roses a pound, Benjamin
two ounces, Storax one ounce, Cloves two drams, yellow Saunders an ounce and a
half, Cloves two drams, a little Citron-peel; beat all to fine Powder in a
Mortar: put to this twenty pound of Starch, or Rice, ground; mix it well, and
finely fifting it, keep it very dry for use, and it will prove an excellent
perfuming Powder.

Perfumed Wash-Balls: Take what quantity of Musk you please, dissolve them in
sweet compounded Water; then take about the quantity of one Wash-ball of the
Composition, and mix it together in a Mortar; then mix and incorporate them
with your Past; and making them up into Balls they will all of them retain a
curious perfumed Scent.

Perfum'd-Water: Take Calamint, Storax, Benjamin, Cloves, and Mastick, beat
them well together, and put them into Aquavitae, or the Spirit of Wine in a
glass Viol, and when the Liquid is changed to a red color, infuse in it a
grain of Musk, strain it, and keep it for use.

Pericarpium for Agues: This, especially for the Tertian-Ague, has been often
tried with good Success, viz. Take a handful of Rue, newly gathered, half a
handful of Sage, a spoonful of Bay Salt, and a spoonful of good Vinegar; beat
all these well together into an uniform Mass, which must be divided into two
parts, and make thereof two Wrist-plaisters, to be applied at the usual time
before the coming of the Fit, and to be renewed, as occasion requires, till
they grow dry and troublesome.

Phthisick, a Remedy: Bruise a handful of Bettony-leaves, put to them half a
pound of Honey, half an ounce of Licorice-powder, and Pine-Apple-kernels, that
have been boiled in White Wind bruised small: make these into an Electuary, and
let the Party take about a quarter of an ounce at a time.

Some for this have only eaten the Lungs and Heart of a wild Goose boiled with
Hyssop, and have found great ease by it; yet I cannot but recommend the former
to be the more effectual in the Cure.

Pickled Artichoaks: Take the best Bottoms of Artichoaks, parboil them, and
when they are cold, and well drained, dry them in a Cloth to take away as much
of the remaining moisture as can be; then putting the Bottoms, without the
Choke, and but a few Leaves remaining on, into an earthen Pot, boil some fair
Water, scum it till no more will rise, and mix with it so much Salt that it
will bear an Egg; put these to the Bottoms: then melt sweet Butter, pour it on
this Water, and it will, by spreading, make a Coat to keep the Air out; then
tie it over with Paper, or Leather, and they will keep all the Year: so that
having occasion to boil them for serving up at Table, lay them in Water six
Hours to take out the Brine, then boil them.

Pickled Oisters: Take about a quart of the largest Stewing Oisters, with the
Liquor that comes from them, wash them clean, and wipe them; put to them a pint
of fair Water, half a pint of Whitewine-Vinegar, and half an ounce of whole
Pepper, a handful of Salt, and a quarter of an ounce of large Mace: put Liquor,
and all together, into an earthen Pot over a soft Fire, let them simper, but
not boil, about a quarter of an hour; then take them up, and put them into a
little fair Water and Vinegar, till they are cold, and then put them into the
Pickle they were boiled with, and Pot 'em up close for your use.

Pig to Dress: To do this the French way, which is highly approved, The Pig
being scalded and drawn, spit it, and lay it to the Fire; and when it is
thoroughly hot, take off the Skin, cut it off the Spit, and divide it into
twelve pieces: then take Whitewine and strong Broth, and stew it therein with
an Onion of two minced very small, as also some stripped Thyme, Pepper, grated
Nutmeg, and two or three Anchoveys, some elder Vinegar, Butter, and Gravy, beat
up well together: dish it up with the Liquor it was stewed in, lay slices of
French Bread under it, garnished with Oranges and Lemons under and upon it.

Pig to Dress, another way: Scald, draw, and wash it clean, put a Crust of
Bread, and some Sage in the Belly, prick it up, and spit it, roast it, and bast
it with Butter, then salt it; and being roasted fine and crisp, make Sauce with
chopped Sage, Currants, a little grated Nutmeg boiled up in fair Water and
Vinegar; then add a little grated Bread, the Brains, some Barberries, and
Sugar: give these a warm or two with good stirring, and adding a little beaten
Butter, divide the Pig's Body, and Head, take off the Ears, place them on the
Shoulders, and so serve it up: Or, this way,

Mince some sweet Herbs, as Sage, and Pennyroyal, roll them up on Balls, with
some Butter, and prick them in the Pig's Belly; roast him: and being roasted,
make Sauce with some Butter, Vinegar, the Brains, and some Barberries, and
serve it up: Or,

Flea it, only the Head, and truss the Head looking over its Back, fill the
Belly with a Pudding made of grated Bread, Nutmeg, a little minced Suet, and
two or three Yolks of raw Eggs, a little Salt and Cream; roast it, and prick it
up, bast it with Yolks of Eggs: being roasted, squeeze a Lemon over it, and
dridge it with grated Bread, Pepper, Nutmeg, Salt, and Ginger; then make a
Sauce with the Yolks of hard Eggs, minced Vinegar, Butter, and the Gravy, and
serve it on this Sauce.

Pig to Souce: Scald a young Pig, and boil it in fair Water and Whitewine, a
quart of the latter to a gallon of the former, put to it a dozen Bay Leaves,
Ginger sliced, and Nutmegs quartered, and half an ounce of whole Cloves; let it
be boiled tender: then take it out, and lay it a cooling; which done, put the
Liquor it was boiled in, into a Tray, or Pan, and put it in, so that it may lie
covered, adding only a little Salt, and White-wine-Vinegar; and in this manner
it will keep a long time.

Pig-Pie, Court fashion: Take off the Skin of a young Pig, and cut it into
quarters, season it with Pepper, Ginger, and Salt, finely beat and mixed, lay
it in a Coffin of Past made in the fashion of a Pig, shred a handful of
Parfley, and about six Sprigs of Winter-Savory; strew this over the Meat, and
on that the Yolks of two or three Eggs, hard boiled and grated small; upon that
a f^w Blades of Mace, and some Bunches of Barberries, a handful of Currants
washed and picked, and half a handful of fine Sugar, half a pound of sweet
Butter spread thin, so close it, and let it soak in an Oven not overheated,
about three hours; then beat up a pound of Butter, with a little Sugar, pour it
into it, and serve it up with a little Sugar scraped over the Lid.

Pigeon-Pye: To order and season this, Take an ounce of finely beaten Pepper to
a dozen of Pigeons; put Butter rouled up in Balls, with a little fine shred
Parsley, into the Belly of your Pigeons, and two pound of Butter is sufficient
for the whole Pie, wherein are only a dozen of Pigeons, sprinkling them
likewise with a little Salt, before you close up the Coffin.

Pigeons, Water of them: To make an excellent Cosmetick, Take this way, Gut two
young Pigeons, and cut them in pieces, grated White-bread half a pound, Peach
Kernels, and the four great cold Seeds c^eansed, of each four ounces: The
Whites of twelve Eggs, and the Juice of four Lemons; macerate them twelve hours
in two quarts of Goats Milk, then distill them in Balneo Mariae. To the
distilled Water put Borax, Camphire, Sugar Candy, burnt Alom, of each three
drams; set them in a Glass in the Sun, three days, then fifteen days in a cool
Cellar; filter the Water, and keep it for use.

This smooths, beautifies, and wonderfully preserves the Complexions, if the
Face, Hands, or other parts be washed with it twice a day.

Pigeon Water, another: Take six ounces of the Powder of choice Myrrh, two
young Pigeons, gut them, and cut them in pieces; put to them Whey and Canary,
of each a quart, the bigger Housleek, Juice of Lemons, and ripe Pippins, of
each one pound; water of Roses and Lillies, of each half a pint; two Whites of
Eggs: mix these together in a glass Alembick, distill them in Balneo Mariae,
and preserve the Water as an excellent Beautifier and a restorer of a fresh and
lively Color: Or,

Take Strawberries a pound and a half, Flowers of Lillies, and Beans, of each
half a pounds; Roach Allom and Stone-Allom, of each an ounce; Sal Gemmae,
Nitre, Verdigrease, of each two drams: infuse them fifteen days in
Malmsey-Wine, Narbone Honey, Whitewine Vinegar, of each a pint: distill them in
a moderate Sand Bath, and keep the Water as very rare and excellent to take
away Freckles, or Morphew, from the Face, if you dip Linen in it, and lay it
on the place going to Bed, and wash it off the next morning with Water of
Lillies.

Pike to Boil: Take as much Whitewine and Water as will cover it: set the
Liquor to boil, cleanse the Civet, and truss him in a round Ring, scotch him on
the back, and when the Liquor boils, put him in, and make under it a quick
Fire; being boiled enough, take him up, and for Sauce, take Whitewine-Vinegar,
Mace, whole Pepper, a handful of Cockles, or Oysters boiled, or fried, sweet
Herbs, finely shred, and the Liver of the Fish minced, and scrape in a little
Horseradish: these being boiled together, dish up the Pike on Sippets, and beat
up the Sauce with sweet Butter and minced Lemon, garnishing with sliced Oranges
or Lemons.

Pike Broiled: Split it, and scotch it with your Knife, on the outsides, as
you do a Herring; then Salt it, and having the Gridiron very hot, lay it on a
clear fire, bast it with Butter, and turn it often, and being broiled stiff and
crisp, serve it up with beaten Butter, Juice of Lemons, and Wine-Vinegar,
garnished with slices of Oranges or Lemons, and the tops of Rosemary.

Pike to Fry: Cleanse it well from the slime and blood, dry it, and flowring
it, roll it round in your Pan, or slit it, and fry it pretty crisp with sweet
Butter; then for Sauce, beat up Butter, Claret, Oyster-Liquor, Nutmeg, Salt,
and garnish it with sliced Oranges, Lemons, Barberries, and fried Parsley.

Pike Hash'd: Bone and scale it: then mince it with good fresh Eel; then put in
some sweet Herbs finely minced, and stripped Mace, Ginger, beaten Nutmeg,
Pepper, and Salt, stew it in a Dish with a little Whitewine and sweet Butter;
and when it is stewed sufficiently, serve it on fine carved Sippets, and lay on
some large stewed Oysters, some fried in Batter, others green with the Juice of
Spinach, others yellow with Saffron; garnish the Dish with them, and run it
over with beaten Butter.

Pike to Roast: Scrape him well, and take out the Entrails, lard the back with
Pickle Herring: then take Claret Wine and large Oysters, and having seasoned
the Oysters with Pepper and Nutmeg, stuff the Pike's Belly with them,
intermixed with Rosemary, Thyme, Winter-savory, sweet Marjoram, and some slices
of an Onion; then sow up the Belly, and with two flat sticks about the breadth
of a Lath, bolster up the sides of the Pike; then bast him with Butter and
Claret Wine, beat up together, having tied Rosemary and Bays to keep off the
heat coming too much where the Laths do not defend it from the scorching; and
when it is wasted, or roasted, take it off, and take out what is in the Belly
of it, and with what has dropped from it, some beaten Butter, and Claret, dish it
up.

Pike Souced: Draw it, and wash it clean from the blood and slime, and then
boil it in Water and Salt, putting it in when the Liquor boils up, and
suffering it to boil leisurely, season it well with Salt, but beware you boil
it not too much, nor in more Water than what will just cover it; and if you
design to keep it long in the Souce, you must put as much Whitewine as Water,
with some Wine, Vinegar, slices of Ginger, large Mace and Cloves, when the
Wine, Vinegar and Water boil, adding a little Lemon Peel, boiling it up quick,
but not too much: then pour on the Liquor, and cover it up close, and when you
serve it in Jelly, dish and melt some of the Jelly, and run it all over;
garnish it with Bunches of Barberries, and sliced Lemon, and when you serve it
up, you may lay round the Dish, diverse small Fishes, as Bleak, Dace, Gudgeons,
Roach, or the like, for the greater setting off, and ornament.

Pike to Stew: After you have dressed your Pike, open the back, and lay it as
flat as if you were to fry it; then lay it in a large Dish, and put Whitewine,
so that it may cover it; set it on the fire, and let it boil gently till the
Scum arise; then take it off, put to it Currants, Sugar and Cinnamon, as much as
will season it; cover it close then with another Dish, and stew it a little
longer: after this, put in a good quantity of Butter; then dish it up with
Sippets, and the Liquor it is stewed in, garnishing it with Barberries, and
stewed Prunes.

Pike Stewed, the City-way: Take your Pike, splat it, and lay it in a dish, and
when the blood is washed out, put to it as much Whitewine as will cover it, and
set it a stewing, and when it boils, put in the Fish, and scumm it; then put in
some large Mace, whole Cinnamon and Salt, and being well-stewed, dish it up on
Sippets finely carved.

Then thicken the Broth with two or three Yolks of Eggs, some thick Cream,
Sugar, and beaten Butter; give it a warm, and pour it on the Pike with some
boiled Currants, and boiled Prunes, laid all over it; as likewise some Mace,
Cinnamon, and Bunches of Barberries, and sliced Lemon; garnish with the same,
and scrape on fine Sugar. In this manner you may stew Carp, Bream, Barbel,
Chevin, Roach, Conger, Gurnet, Tench, Dace, Perch, or Mullet.

Pikes to Souce and Ielly: The Fish being scalded and cleansed, bone it, and
season it with Nutmeg and Salt; roll up three or four Pikes like Brawn or
colored Eel, and bind them in that posture; then put them in a clean Cloth,
and boil them in Water, Whitewine, and Salt, with the Spice; observing always,
that the Pot boils before you put them in; keep it scummed, and add some large
Mace, and slices of Ginger: If you only intend to souce them, boil them not
down so much; but if they are to be Jellied, put to them some Isinglass, and
serve them up in the Collars, standing in the Jelly: and thus you may do with
Eels, Tench, Salmon, Congen, etc.

Pike, and White-Broth: Here the Pike must be cut into three equal pieces, and
boiled in Water, seasoned in a little Salt, and sweet Herbs when it boils, beat
in the Yolks of six Eggs, with a little Sack and Sugar, melted Butter, and some
of the Broth: then dish the Pike, putting the Head and Tail together, cleave
the middle piece in two, and take out the Backbone, put one piece on the one
side, the other on the other; blanch all, pour the Broth on, and garnish it
with Sippets, fine Sugar, or Ginger, and serve it up.

Pills against Cachexies: Take Trochiscs of Alhandal half an ounce, Galbanum,
Myrrh, Aloes, and Amoniack, of each three drams; Mercury precipitated, prepared
with Gold, two drams; Scamony, Jalap, the whitest Agarick, one dram and half;
pressed Oil of Nutmegs one dram; Amber, Cinnamon, and Cloves, the Oil of each
six drops; Extract of Juniper as much as will make these into Pills.

The Pills are much commended for remedying what they are proposed for; also in
Quartan-Agues, Dropsy, and Jaundice, and the Retention of the Menstruums; the
weight of each Pill must not exceed two grains, and they may be taken two or
three of them as often as is necessary.

Pills Diuretic: Take Chios Turpentine, and white Vitriol finely powdered; mix
them into a mass, and make Pills of them exceeding small.

The vomitive quality of the Vitriol, being corrected by the Turpentine, the
Pills work good Effects, especially in all difficulties of making Water, being
given from half a dram to a dram.

Pills for the Dropsy: Take Elaterium, and Extract of Aloes prepared, with the
Juice of French Orris, of each half an ounce; choice Mastick made into Powder
two drams: make them up into Pills, according to Art, as small as is convenient.

These Pills powerfully purge Hydropick-Waters; they are to be taken in a
Morning fasting, from six to twelve, or fifteen grains, using them as often as
occasion requires.

Pills for the Green Sickness: Take Extract of Mars, prepared with Musk, one
ounce; Aloes-Succotrine, prepared with the Juice of Succory, six drams; Extract
of Rhenbarb half an ounce, Extract of Saffron two drams, distilled Oil of
Cinnamon six drops; mix them to a mass, and so make small Pills of them.

These Pills cure the Greensickness in young Virgins, the Party so grieved
taking a scruple at a time in a Morning fasting, and drinking after them two or
three ounces of Wormwood-wine, and walking after that about an Hour, for
several Mornings together.

Pills for the Stomach: Take Extract of Licorice, two drams and a half, Tears
of Storax two drams, distilled Oil of Cinnamon six drops, Extract of Saffron
four scruples, Labdanum, Olibanum, choice Myrrh, and Extract of Opium, of each
one dram; Ambergrease one scruple, Syrup of Citron-peel, as much as suffices to
make them into a Mass, and so into Pills.

These are excellent to stay Defluxions that fall upon the Lungs, and to
assuage the violence of Coughs. The Dose is from five or six to eight or ten
grains.

Pimpernel: Of this there are three sorts, the one grows very great, and has
long Roots; the other sort is little, the third bears red Flowers, and grows in
most Gardens: the Roots of the two first, in which consists their main Virtue,
boiled in Whitewine, are very good for Pains in the Reins and Bladder, caused
by the Stone; for it drives out Gravel, and the long retained Urine. The Juice
of the Root drank in White Wind, is good against all Poisons, or infectious
Airs, and the Biting of venomous Creatures: It is used with success in the
Plague, the Root being stamped and laid to the Sore. As for the third sort,
though little differing in likeness, yet in Virtue it does from the two former;
for it is more restringent in Taste, and very nourishing; for which cause it may
be thought to be of a binding nature: wherefore it stays the Dysentery, and
other Fluxes and Vomitings proceeding from colerick Humors, or Causes; it
heals Wounds and Ulcers, and is of special use in Ointments that are made for
Wounds in the Head, and for Cankers: Some Physicians have much commended it in
the Cure of pestilential and contagious Fevers, concluding that the often
drinking the Juice of it in Wine, or other convenient Liquors, is a sovereign
Preservative against the power of those dangerous Diseases.

Plague to Preserve from: Take Barberries, when they are ripe, steep them in
warm Water, that the Husks, or outward Skin may come off; then dry them that
they may be beaten to Powder with a little Salt, and when you find your self
somewhat discomposed by the effects of ill Airs, hot or feverish, mix this
Powder with strong Vinegar, about two drams, in half a quarter of a pint, and
drink it up warm, and keep your self warm also, that you may sweat upon it; but
if you find your self under such apprehensions, shivering with Cold, you must
take the Powder in strong Wine.

Plague-Sickness: Take Water of Scabious, Endive, Rue, and red Roses, of each
four ounces; white Dittany, Tormentile, white Coral, Gentian, and
Bole-Armoniack, with Terra-sigillata; reduce those that are to be powdered
separately: Infuse them in the Water in a glass Vessel, and drink about an
ounce at a time pretty warm, keeping the Body warm after it: Or,

Take a Viol, or some other Glass, and fill it to the third part with
Venice-Treacle, the other third part with Brandy, or Spirit of Wine: mix these
well together by shaking, and take Morning and Evening half an ounce in two
ounces of Mint, Rue, or Baum-water.

But of all others in this contagious Distemper, this occurs as a very much
approved Remedy, viz.

Take Wallnuts when the green Husk is on them, and before the Shell is hardened
underneath; put them, when bruised, to steep in White Wind eight Days: then
with some Baum, Rue, and Tops of Fetherfew, and Wormwood a little bruised, put
them into an Alembick, and distill them; then when you drink an ounce and a half
of the Water, which you may do Morning, Noon, and Night, put into it some
perfumed Comfits, and stir them well about till they are dissolved.

Plague Sore to Break: Take Bay Salt, Rye-meal, and the Yolks of Eggs as many
as will make them into a Past; then spread it on a piece of Leather, and apply
it to the Sore, or Carbuncle, and it will draw the Poison to a center, so that
the Sore will ripen; and being broke, the Infection will come away: to expedite
the Cure of which, when it is broke, put the Rump of a live Chicken to the
Mouth of the Sore, so that its vent may be placed on it, and it will draw the
Infection into the Body of the Chicken, insomuch that in a short time it will
dye, and so will one or two more, if the Infection be great; but when they
cease to do so, it is a sign the Poison is exhausted, and the Party in a very
fair way of recovering Health.

Plaster of Bay Berries: Take of Bay Berries two ounces, Myrrh, Mastick, and
Frankincense, of each half an ounce; Honey just warmed four ounces; powder
Costus, Bay Berries, and Cyperus finely together, and mix with the Honey;
powder the Myrrh, Mastick, and Frankincense apart, and put them to the other:
then add the Oil of Bay Berries, Turpentine, and Wax melted together, and so
make a Plaster.

This expels Wind, and strengthens the Stomach, also eases Pains proceeding
from Cold and Weariness.

Plaster for Bruises: Take Oil of Olives six ounces, yellow Beeswax an ounce
and half, Ammoniacum and Bdellium, of each half an ounce; Galbanum, Opopanax,
and Oil of Bays, Lapis Calaminaris, and either of the Bithworts, Myrrh, and
Frankincense, of each two drams; refined Turpentine an ounce, Litharge of Gold
powdered four ounces: boil the Oil and Litharge together, keeping them
stirring, and when it will not stick to your Fingers take it from the Fire, and
melt the Wax into it, add the Turpentine with the Gums, afterward the Powders;
and being cold, put in the Oil of Bays and Frankincense, and make it into a
Plaster.

This Peracelsian Plaster is good for Bruises, and all manner of Aches.

Plaister-Cleansing, etc. Take the Mucilages of Raisins of the Sun, Figs, Roots
of Marshmallows, Linseed, and the Seeds of Fenugreek, Bird-lime, the Juice of
Orris, Squills, the Oil of Sheeps-feet, Dill, and Camomil, of each eight
ounces; Litharge of Gold powdered finely one pound; Turpentine three ounces,
Rosin of the Pine, and yellow Wax, of each two ounces: mix the Litharge well
with the Oil, and boil it over a gentle Fire, keeping it continually stirring
till it grows thick; then take it off, and being a little cool, add the
Mucilages, being first boiled with the Oil, and strained, and gently boiled to
the consumption of the superfluous moisture: after that add the Bird-lime, and
Squills, boil them till the Juices are consumed, and whilst they are boiling,
melt the Wax and Rosin, take them presently from the Fire, and mingle with them
the Turpentine, so well stirring the Mass, that it may be brought to the
consistence of a Plaster.

This is called the Great Diachilon-Plaister, and is excellent in cleansing and
healing, also to assuage Swellings and Inflammations; for it very much
discusses and softens.

Plaster for the Head: Take two ounces of clarified Rosin, Stone-pitch an
ounce, Turpentine and Labdanum, and Pidgeons-Dung, of each half an ounce; Gum
of Juniper and Nutmeg, of each two drams: dissolve the Turpentine with the
Labdanum, in a hot Mortar, and mingle the rest, so that it may be made into a
Plaster; and if any Cause requires it to be stronger, add the Powder of
Euphorbium, and Pellitory of Spain, and black Pepper, of each about two
scruples.

This wonderfully strengthens the Head, and eases the Pains of it, the Crown
being shaved, and it applied Plaisterwise to it, as also to the Temples. Though
upon many occasions, it is applied to the Soles of the Feet to draw down the
Vapors that afflict the Brain.

Plaster of Mastick: Take three ounces of Mastick, Bole-Armoniack washed in
red Wine one ounce and half, red Roses six drams, Myrtle-berries, and Ivory, of
each half an ounce, Turpentine, Colophony, Tacamahaca, and Labdanum, of each
two ounces; Oil of Myrtle four ounces; Beeswax a pound. The things that are to
be powdered, powder apart, melt the Wax and the Oil together, and take it from
the Fire, and add the Turpentine, and afterward the Roses, and Bole-Armoniack,
the Ivory being finely powdered; order the Mastick in like manner, and so being
well mixed in a Mortar, that is pretty hot, make them into a Plaster.

This laid to the Stomach, very much strengthens it; as also stays Vomitings
and Defluxions.

Plaster of Melilot-Simple: Take of yellow Rosin clarified eight pound, yellow
Wax four pound, Mutton-suet of the Kidneys, cleansed from the Skin and Fibers
two pound; melt them, and add to them green Melilot cut small five pound; and
being thickened, bruise it with the afore-mentioned Ingredients, and bring it to
the Consistence of a Plaster.

This draws very gently and therefore is commonly used in dressing of Blisters,
and in gentle Swellings, and Tumors.

Pleurisse: Distill about the end of May three handfuls of Burnet, or as much as
you think convenient; and the grieved Party, drinking of this, Morning and
Evening, about half a quartern at a time, will find wonderful ease, and in a
little time be restored.

Polonia to Make: Take the Fillets of a Hog, mince them very small, and do the
like by Sage, Pennyroyal, and Thyme, of each half a handful stripped from the
Stalks: then season it with beaten Ginger and Pepper finely sifted, put it into
a Hog or Sheep's great Gut, and lay it in Water and Salt three Nights: then
boil it gently for fear of breaking, and hang it up in a Chimney, or dry place,
and they will keep a long time.

Pomatum: Take Baconlard, and by washing it well, and often melting, take out
the Salt, then boil a handful of Oats, and some white Starch in it, and strain
out the oily part, which is of excellent use for Chaps, Sores, Burns, Scalds,
as also to make the Skin supple, smooth, and plump.

Pomegranet: Of these there are three sorts, Sweet, Sharp, and Winy; and the
quality of them all is Restringent, but not alike; for by their Taste you may
judge their difference, and their Grains are more binding and drying than their
Juice, the Rind more than the Grain, and the Blossoms have the same Virtue with
the Fruit. The powder of a Pomgranet dried in an Oven, in a new earthen Pot
close stopped, is singular good to stay the Flux of the Belly. The Leaves of the
Pomegranet-Tree well beaten, and the Juice of them mixed with the Oil of Roses,
does very much help the inveterate Pains of the Head; and so sovereign it is,
that most hold that no venomous Creature will come near the Boughs of it: for
which reason the Ancients laid them in their Beds, and stuck them about their
Houses.

The Decoction of the Root of a Pomgranet-Tree being drank, kills the large
Worms in the Belly, and causes them to be cast out.

Pork-Pie: The Pork you intend to put into Pies, must have the Skin taken off;
then cut the Pork in streaks, and take half an ounce of Ginger, and the like
quantity of Pepper well beaten, slice or scrape in two Nutmegs, season it
pretty well with Salt, and put in a little fair Water that has been well boiled
and scummed; and so bake it sufficiently, and serve it up.

Poppy-Red: The Flowers are very cooling and assuage Pain, and bring Sleep to
weary Eyes; and therefore are chiefly used for Fevers, Pleurisies, and
Quinsies, and other Diseases, especially of the Breast, that need cooling
Medicines, and for immoderate Fluxes, The Conserve, the distilled Water, and the
Powder of them are greatly in use; but the Syrup most.

To make it, Take the fresh Flowers of Red Poppies two pound, and pour upon
them two quarts of Spring Water well warmed, press them out the next Day, and
infuse the quantity of fresh Flowers in the Liquor, as before; then strain it,
and put in as much Sugar as the Liquor weighs, and so make it into a Syrup, by
boiling it to a thickness over a gentle Fire.

Poppies, a Syrup: Take the Heads of black Poppies freshly gathered six ounces,
and of white ones, not thoroughly ripe, eight ounces, Aqua Coelestis two
quarts; boil them to the consumption of one quart of the Liquid, and put
therein Sugar and Penids, of each eight ounces: boil them to a Syrup. This is
excellent good to allay the Heat of the Forehead, or when it too much afflicts
the Brain. It is given with success in Frensies, or to those that are restless,
and cannot sleep well, as also for Catarrhs and Coughs.

Pottage: To make this very excellent, nourishing, and conducing to Health and
Strength, take the Knuckle end of a Leg of Veal, very largely cut, put into it
a gallon, or six quarts of Spring Water, a pint of Oatmeal sifted very fine,
Pennyroyal, Parsley, Thyme, and Winter-savory of each a little Faggot, or
bundle, unshread; also Sweet-marjoram, Sorrel, Violet and Marrigold-leaves: you
may let it stand a whole Night over a gentle Fire, and boil it up the next
Morning, with some Mace, Currants, Hartshorn Shavings and Sugar; then strain
it, and eat it warm.

This is very good against a Consumption, or any Defect in the Lungs, or
Stomach.

Powder of Amber: Take six ounces of Bean-flower, and pass it through a fine
Sieve with four ounces of Cyprus-wood, two ounces of Saunders, two ounces of
Benjamine, and half an ounce of Storax, two drams of Calamus Aromaticus, and as
much Laudanum; pass these likewise through a Sieve, and to two pound of the
Composition add four grains of Ambergrease, and half an ounce of Pomander,
Privet beaten and sifted, which you must mix in a hot Mortar with Amber; then
mix them altogether, and keep them in a glass Bottle close stopped, and make of
it sweet Bags to perfume your Clothes.

Powder of Aromatick-Rosatum: Take red Roses, the Whites at the bottom of the
Flower, the Leaves clipped off, 15 drams, Licorice finely scraped seven drams,
sharp and quick biting Cinnamon five drams, Wood of Aloes, and yellow Saunders,
of each three drams; Mace, Cloves, Indian Spicknard, Gum-Arabick, and
Gum-Tragacanth, of each two drams and half; Cardamoms the Lesser, and Galangal,
of each one dram; Ambergrease two scruples, and Oriental Musk one scruple:
reduce these into a Powder by beating and sifting, etc.

This is excellent good to strengthen the Brain and Stomach; it dissipates
superfluous Humors, and moisture of the Entrails, resists Putrefaction,
creates Appetite, and stays Vomiting, and want of Retention in the Intestines,
and is proper to strengthen and restore those that have been weakened by long
Sickness. The Dose is from half a scruple to half a dram in Wine, or any
convenient Liquor.

Powder to create Cheerfulness: Take the Seeds of Clove, Basil, Zedoary, or
Setwell, Saffron, yellow Saunders, Cloves, the outward Peel of Citron dried,
Galangal, Nutmeg, Mace, Calamint, and Storax, of each three drams and a half;
Anniseeds, Shavings of Ivory, Thyme, Dodder of Thyme, Oriental Pearl prepared,
and the Shavings of the Bone of a Stag's-Heart, of each one dram; Ambergrease,
Oriental Musk, and Leaves of Gold and Silver, of each a scruple: make these
into a very fine Powder.

This corrects the cold and moist temperature of the Stomach and Liver; it
helps Digestion, restores the Appetite; it is very good against Weakness, and
Palpitations of the Heart, also to restore a good Habit of Body, and to create
a good Complexion, to keep the Breath sweet, and sweeten it when it is
defective; to restore decayed Strength, and dissipate Melancholy, proceeding
from an internal, or no real Cause. The Dose is from ten to twenty grains in
any convenient Vehicle.

Powder, the Countess of Kent 's: Take the black parts of the Claws of large
Sea-Crabs four ounces, River-Crabs Eyes, oriental Pearl, and red Coral
prepared, of each an ounce; Roots of Contrayerva, and white Amber, of each six
drams; the Bone of a Stag's-Heart four scruples, Bezoar-stone three drams,
Saffron two scruples: make these into a fine Powder, and sprinkle it with an
ounce and a half of the Spirit of Honey, and mixed with Jelly of Vipers, you
may make it into Trochiscs, letting them dry in the Shade, to be powdered, as
occasion requires, for the better preservation of its Virtue.

This Powder is highly in Request for the Remedy of Epidemical Diseases,
particularly in the Smallpox, or Measles. It is also used in the Plague, as
well to preserve from the Infection, as to cure it, when taken, by reason it
mainly strengthens the Heart, and other vital Parts, against Infections, and
the malignity of the beforementioned Diseases. Not only the English, but other
Nations approve it, and use it with wonderful Success. The Dose is about ten
grains.

Powder of Diamargaritum: Take oriental Pearl prepared half an ounce, red Roses
cleansed, and Flower of Water-Lilies, and Violets, of each three Drams; Wood of
Aloes, Saunders, red and yellow; Roots of Tormentil, and white Dittany,
Myrtle-berries, Cinquefoil, Grains of Kermes, Melon-seeds, Endive, Sorrel,
Shavings of Hartshorn, Ivory, white Coral, and red Coral prepared, of each two
drams; Ambergrease, and the Leaves of Gold, of each half a dram; oriental Musk
four grains: make these into a fine Powder.

This wonderfully strengthens the noble Parts, restores the languishing force,
and cures swimming and fainting Fits. It is good in Fevers, and other Diseases:
It is given to asthmatick and consumptive Persons, and to such as are wasted
and brought low by sickness. The Dose is from ten to twenty grains, in Wine, or
any cordial Water: It may be taken in any pectoral Electuary, in Sugar, or with
any convenient thing, as you please.

Powder for the Gout: Take Hermodactyls, Turbith, Costus, Mechoacan, and
Scammony, of each a dram; white Sugar Candy two drams, powder them very fine.

This Powder purges Serosities that lay a Foundation for it, or nourish those
Humors that occasion the Pains. The Dose is from a scruple to a dram, taken in
a Glass of Whitewine in a Morning fasting, and fasting two Hours after it.

Powder, called Hungarian-Powder: Take Hungarian-Earth, and Bole-Armoniack, of
each an ounce and an half; Stones of Jacinths, Smaragds, Saphires, Rubies,
white Coral and red prepared, oriental Pearl, Roots of Tormentil Woolfsbane, or
white Dittany, yellow Saunders, Shavings of Unicorns-Horn, and Ivory, of each
half an ounce; the utmost Rind of Citron and Sorrel, of each three drams; that
which is biting three drams; Saffron and Cloves, of each half a dram; fine
Leaves of Gold in number twenty five, The Unicorn's Horn and Ivory must be
rasp'd very finely, the Stones and Coral must be also beat to a curious Powder.

It is used frequently, especially in cold Countries, for malignant Fevers, and
all epidemick Distempers; also against all sorts of Poisons, being dissolved in
Cordial-water, and sweetened with Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers, Lemons, or
Pomegranet, and taken fasting from half a scruple to a dram; and being made
into Tablets, and taken fasting, it has almost the same Effect, especially
against pestilential Airs.

Powder to Incarnate: Take Olibanum, Sarcocol, Myrrh, Mastick, Aloes, and
Mummy, long and round Bithworts, of each an ounce: bruise and make them into a
fine Powder.

This cleanses Wounds, and causes the Flesh to grow, being laid to them alone;
or mixed with Ointments, or proper Waters, as Camomil, Bugloss, Mint, Rue, St.
John's-wort, Blood-wort, etc.

Powder of the Three Saunders: Take of every Color, viz. White, Red, and
Yellow Seeds; of Violets, and red Roses, of each half an ounce; Pontick Rubarb,
Juice of Licorice, and Shavings of Ivory, of each two drams; Gum-Tragacanth,
and Arabick-seeds, of Endive, Mellon husked, also Purslain-seed, of each a
dram: make them into Powder according to Art.

It is highly commended for Diseases that proceed from Weakness, or ill habit
of the Liver, to temper the heat of the Intrails, and to digest and discuss
Matters gathered together at the going off, or conclusion of Agues: It is very
proper in Heart-faintings, Jaundice, and Phthisick, and is internally given in
Potions, Opiates, and Electuaries, and outwardly applied in Frontals, Epithems,
and Liniments.

Powder to whiten Teeth: Burn the finest sort of Pumice-stone, Cuttle-bone
white Coral, and Cream of Tartar prepared upon Porphyry, the Roots of Florence,
Orice finely powdered, of each half an ounce; Sal Armoniack in Powder a dram,
Musk and Ambergrease, of each three grains: mix them well together, and make a
Powder.

This Powder cleanses and whitens the Teeth. You may use it as it is, or mixed
with Syrup of Coral, or dried Roses, or Syrup of Roses. Or to save all this
Charge, if your Teeth be sound, Rub them with a fine Pumice-stone, and they
will be as white as Ivory.

Powder of Violets: Take the Roots of Florence-Orris one pound, yellow Saunders
five ounces, red Roses four ounces, Storax, and Benjamin, of each two ounces;
Cyprus, and Tops of Marjoram, of each one ounce; Lignum Rhodium half an ounce;
Cloves, Aromatick-reed, and Flowers of Lavender, of each two drams; make all
these into a Powder, but not very fine, and it is an excellent Perfume to put
amongst Linen, Silks, or any Apparel, etc.

Precipitate against the Iaundice: Take Crocus Martis, prepared with Sulphur
one ounce; the Leaves of Senna and Rubarb, of each half an ounce; the best
Cinnamon, Salt of Wormwood, and Tamarisk, of each two drams; Saffron a dram:
powder what are capable of being powdered, and with a sufficient quantity of
the Syrup of Mugwort make an Opiate.

The Dose is from two grains to seven, mixed with a little Vinegar, and made up
into a Bolus, or mixed in Whitewine, or some proper Decoction, and take as
often as occasion requires.

Prevention of Agues: Take the gratings of Angelica-roots, Flower of Antimony,
of each half a dram; the best Canary three ounces: infuse them in a cold Place
for forty eight Hours, and pour off the clear part for two Doses.

This is a singular good Vomit for the prevention or Cure of Agues of all
sorts, being given in a Morning fasting, when an Ague is expected, or about
four or six Hours before the coming of the Fit.

Primrose made into a Syrup, and decocted, is good for phlegmatic and
melancholy Diseases, and Fluxes of the Belly, and to strengthen the Stomach of
weak Persons.

Pudding of Cream: Take grated Bread, mix it with a like quantity of Flower,
some minced Dates, Cinnamon and Nutmeg finely beaten, Beef Suet, warm Milk, Eggs
and Sugar; then take half the Pudding for one side, and half for the other,
make it up round, and put some Butter into the middle of it, on the other side,
aloft on the top, and put it in a Cloth, when the Liquor boils, into your Pot;
and being boiled, cut it in two, and serve it up with Butter, Sugar, Verjuice,
and Rosewater.

Pudding Excellent: Beat the Yolks of three Eggs with Rose Water, and half a
pint of Cream; then setting it over a gentle Fire, put in about the quantity of
a Pullet's Egg of sweet Butter; and being melted, mix the Eggs and that
together, and season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, and Salt; then add as much grated
Bread as will make it as thick as Batter, and about half an ounce of Flower,
with a dozen blanched Almonds beaten: then all being mixed together, take a
double Bag, wet and flour it, and put in the Batter; and when it is boiled,
serve it up with Rose Water, Verjuice, Butter, and Sugar.

Pudding in Sweet-Herbs: Steep a Penny white Loaf in a quart of Cream, and only
eight Yolks of Eggs, some Currants, Sugar, beaten Cloves, Mace, and Dates, with
the Juice of Spinnage; then add Saffron, Cinnamon, and Nutmeg, Sweet-marjoram,
Thyme, Savory, Pennyroyal minced very small, and some salt Beef Suet, or Marrow.

These Puddings are excellent for stuffing of roast or boiled Poultry, Kid,
Lamb, Veal, or Breast of Mutton.

Puff-Past, the Best way: Take a pound and a half of Butter to every quarter of
a peck of fine Flower, likewise six Eggs, (observing only to put half a pound
of the Butter at first to the quarter of a peck of Flower) then roll it up ten
times one after another, and put Flower and Butter every time to it, as you
beat it with your Rolling-pin, till it is so incorporated, that it becomes a
pliable Past.

Purple-Violet, its Use and Virtues. It is in its nature temperate, and very
fit to alter and change the ill quality of Humors, and to evacuate them
chiefly. Violets purge Choler, and qualify the vehemence thereof: They are
good for the Pains in the Head which proceed from Heat; cause gentle Sleep, and
mollify the Pricking of the Breast, and of the Lungs, and are profitable
against the Quinsie, and the falling of the Palate in the Mouth, and
Inflammations of the Breast, and Side, and Stomach-Thirst, being dried and
concocted in Whitewine; They open Obstructions of the Liver, and cause
Inflammations to cease: They are very good in the Jaundice, Black or Yellow:
The Syrup mollifies the Belly, and is good in Pleurisies: and indeed is a
Flower more to be admired by all in Physic than for its charming Color, and
fragrant Smell.

QVails to Roast: Truss them, then chop some Sweet Herbs, and Beef Suet
together, and put into their Bellies; put them on a small Spit, and at the
first heating, bast them with Salt and Water, after that with Butter, and
dredge it with Flower: make Sauce with Gravy, in some of which an Anchovey or
two has been dissolved, as also a sliced Shalot or two boiled; squeeze in the
Juice of two or three Oranges and Lemons, and garnish with Lemon Peel, or
slices, and some grated Manchet, a few whole Cloves, and some Bay Leaves; and
so pour on the Sauce, and serve them up as hot as they can be got from the Fire.

Quaking-Pudding: Take new Cream a quart, blanched Almonds half a pound: beat
the Almonds very finely, boil them in the Cream, and then strain them: put in a
Blade or two of Mace, and season it with Rosewater and Sugar; then take five
Whites of Eggs, beaten up with Powder of Cinnamon, and two or three spoonfuls
of fine Flower, put in what was left in the Strainer; so make it into a
thickness and boil it: serve it up with Cinnamon, Sugar, Rose Water, Butter,
and Verjuice.

Quartan-Ague: Take a dram of the Powder of the black Tips of Crabs-Claws, and
take it in any convenient Vehicle or Conserve, twice or thrice, without
remitting any Day when the Distemper comes.

Queens-Bisket: Take twelve ounces of Flower, and a pound of fine Sugar, twelve
Eggs, yet the Yolks but of nine of them, to prevent their being too yellow;
take what Anniseeds and Corianderseeds you think convenient, beat and mix the
Materials very well together till they become a soft Past; and to make it
lighter, if you think it convenient, you may add a little Yest. Let this Past
be put on a Paper, or in Coffins, about two Inches broad, and four in length;
which put on a Tart-pan into the Oven moderately hot, and when they begin to
turn brown, take them out, and lay them on a Paper in so dry a Place, that they
may be kept from relenting.

Queen of Hungary's Water: Take Maidenhair two handfuls, Scabeous a like
quantity, the Tops of Lavender half a handful, Borrageflowers two ounces,
Rosemary-flowers half a handful, Fumitory the Tops of it three ounces, gathered
when flowered, Dew swept off the Grass, or Corn, or gathered in a clean Napkin,
and so wrung out, one quart; cut the Herbs small, and put them into the Liquid
to steep in a moderate warm Place, or in the Sun, for forty eight Hours; then
add a quart of fair Water, and as much new White Wind, put them into a cold
Still, and draw off the Water till no more will come, put it into Bottles, and
stop it up close, and use it as occasion requires with a little white Starch
put into it finely powdered, and shaked till dissolved.

This Water was found out by Elizabeth Queen of Hungary, who used it to
preserve her Beauty; which she did to such a wonder, that in her extreme Age
she appeared young and beautiful, insomuch that the King of Poland desired her
in Marriage.

Queens Perfumed-Water: Take Benjamin four ounces, Storax two ounces, yellow
Saunders one ounce, Cloves two drams, two or three pieces of Orris, half a
Citronpeel Cinnamon half an ounce, two Nutmegs, and about two quarts of Water:
put all these into a new glazed earthen Pipkin, and let them boil over a gentle
Fire till half the Liquid is consumed: then take about six grains of Musk
powdered, with about as much Sugar as the bigness of a small Nut, which
dissolve with a little of the Water: then strain it all, and put it into a
Glass well stopped, and use it as a curious perfuming Water to scent Rooms, and
sprinkle on Linen, etc. The Dregs likewise dried and powdered, make a good
Perfume.

Queens Sweet-Water: Take red Roses, and a quart of damask Rose Water,
Muskadine and Orange-flowerwater, of each three pints; Water of
Melilot-flowers, Flowers of Myrtle and Garden Costmary, three pints: put all
the beforesaid distilled Waters into a glass Bottle, to which add a pound of
Benjamine in Powder, Cloves, Cinnamon, and Orange-peel dried; and finely
bruised; stop the Bottle close, and suffer it to continue so a Month before you
use it, and then it will yield a very fragrant Scent.

Quicksilver Purified: Put half a pound of the Powder of Sulphur in a large
earthen Pot well glazed, set it on a hot Coal-Fire, and put a pound and a half
of flowing Mercury into a piece of Shamoys Leather, tie it in a hard knot, and
when the Brimstone is well melted, drop the Quicksilver upon it, and press the
Knot between your Hands, so that it may pass through the Pores of the Leather,
stirring the Substance in the mean time with a wooden Spatula, and continuing
the pressing forth, and stirring the Mercury till it is all pressed through,
and uniting with the Sulphur, they appear a black Mass: then let it cool, and
beat it into Powder, and so put it into an earthen Pot proper for Sublimation;
join to the Mouth of that another Pot of the same bigness, with the bottom
uppermost, having stopped the hole with a piece of Paper; begin the Sublimation
with a gradual Fire, increasing it some Hours, by which means the Mercury being
incorporated with a portion of Sulphur requisite for it, it will sublime to the
top of the uppermost Pot, leaving some f^ces in the lower Pot; then when the
Vessels are cold, you will find the Mercury sublimated into Cinnabar of a very
red Color, veined with long brown glittering Streaks; but the Color will
appear more fresh and lively, when it is broken in pieces and ground; and
therefore it is that the Painters make use of it in this manner.

Quiddany: This may be made of Quinces, Plumbs, Apples, Pears, Apricocks, or
any other Fruit that is suitable: and to do it, Take of the preserved Fruit you
intend to make it of, and add a pound of the Fruit separate from the Stones,
Rind, or Cores boiled till it may he beaten into Pulp; add then a pound of fine
Sugar, and when it comes to the thickness of a Jelly, let it cool.

Quince-Cakes: To make the red sort, Take the Syrup of Quinces and Barberries,
of each a quart, and about a dozen of Quinces pared and cored; boil them till
they are very soft, and strain the Pulp or liquid part, and boil it up with six
spoonfuls of fine Sugar, till it be candy proof: then take it in a Ladle,
fashion it on Plates into Cakes; and letting it cool, dry them in a Stove, or
in a gentle Oven, soon after the baking is over.

Quince-Cakes Transparent: Take a pint of the Syrup of Quinces, and a quarter
of a pint of the Syrup of Barberries; boil and clarify them over a gentle
Fire, scumming them clean; then add twenty ounces of fine Sugar, stir them well
together on the Fire: and when it is taken off, till it be almost cold, spread
the Pulp as before, and make your Cakes into what fashion you think proper.

Quince-Cakes White: Take a quart, and half a pint of Water, boil it up, and
add so much fine Sugar as will heighten it to a Candy; then pare about a dozen
large Quinces, core them; and when they begin to be soft in other Water,
wherein you may first set them over the Fire, take them out and beat them into
Pulp, and so put that Pulp into the boiling Sugar and Water before mentioned,
and let them continue there a long while; then make them into Cakes on a Plate:
If you would have them very white, clarify your Sugar with Whites of Eggs,
that you first sweeten your Water withal.

Quince-Cream: Roast four or five ripe Quinces, quarter them, take out the
Core, and cut them in thin slices; then boil them up gently in a pint of sweet
Cream, with a whole Race of Ginger; and when it comes to a thickness, strain it
out, adding so much Sugar and Rose Water as will sweeten and scent it.

Quinces a Ielly: Take some of the Decoction and Inside of the Rind of the
Quince, or other Fruit, that has boiled long in a considerable quantity of
Water: The Decoction being made, let it wast in the Sun, or before the Fire,
and so boil it up to a Jelly with a quart of Isinglass.

Quinces to Pickle: To do this, that you may keep them green all the Year, Take
them when they are not quite ripe, wash them in Salt and Water, and rub off the
Scurf, if any be on, and let them lie in that water twenty four hours, boil up
a Pickle of Wine-Vinegar, put into it a handful of Bay Salt, a few blades of
Mace, and some Cloves, with six or seven Bay Leaves; put the Quinces into it
scalding hot, and parboil them: then put them with the Pickle into an earthen
Pot, and so they will keep, and be of use for Tarts, or what other use you
please to put them to.

Quince-Pye: Take preserved Quinces, separated from the paring and the Core;
then make a Syrup of Spring Water, with fine Sugar boiled up in it, and take as
much as the Quinces weigh; to every pound add a pint of the Syrup, make the
Syrup in a Preserving-pan, and being scummed and boiled, put the Quinces into
it; boil them till they be well colored, and then put them into the Pies in
halves, or quarters; make them in fashion round, either in Pies, Tarts, or
Patty-pans, with a cut cover; but before you bake them, put in more fine Sugar,
and leave the Syrup to put in after; and then Ice it. Thus you may do by
Wardens, Pippins, hard Pears, or green Codlings.

Quinces to Preserve: Take of Apple Quinces, when moderately ripe, lay them a
while after they are gathered, on fresh Straw, or new Hay, for three or four
days, covered so that they may sweat a little, and evaporate the superfluous
Moisture: then pare them very thin, and boil them in Spring Water till they are
very soft: then cut them in Quarters, take out the Cores, and mingle the Pulp
with the Water, ten Quinces, and two spoonfulls of Sugar being sufficient to
boil up a Pottle of Water: and when it is boiled to a thickness, put in the
Quinces you intend to preserve, and let them boil till they contract a greener
Color than natural, then put to them some more Sugar; the scumm being taken
off, put them up in an earthen glazed Pot, and stop them close.

Quinces Raw: To keep these all the year, Take some of the worst Quinces, and
cut them into small pieces, boil them in Water, putting to each Gallon three
spoonfulls of Salt, and as much Honey; and so let them boil till the Water
becomes very strong of the Quinces, and when it is cold, put in a quart of
Whitewine Vinegar, and then put the best Quinces into the Liquor, close them up
in an earthen pot, and they will keep fresh all the year, so that you may use
them for Marmalades, or other Matters, at any time.

Quince-Seed, an Oil: Take the Seeds or Kernels of Quinces, bruise them; and
put them into a Drying Pan with a little Wine. Let them be well stirred
together, till they are so hot you cannot endure your Finger on them; then put
them into a Canvase Bag, and press out the Oil with a considerable strength;
and having both Oil and Water you must separate them.

This Oil is very good against all Pains in the Stomach, helps Digestion, and
is good against windiness in the Stomach, and Bowels, bringing it away. It
inciteth to Venery, and is good against the Hemorrhoids and Pustles, the Parts
afflicted being anointed with it.

Quinces the Syrup: Take three quarts of the Juice of Quinces, settle it well,
and clarify it from the Dregs, and boil it over a gentle fire till half be
consumed: then add three pints of Claret, or a deeper Red Wine; four pound of
White Sugar, Cinnamon a dram and a half, Cloves and Ginger two scruples; and
boil them up to a Syrup. Let it cool by Degrees, and keep it close stopped in
Glass-Viols for your use; this mixed with Water of Endive, is very cooling and
excellent in Fevers, and other hot Diseases, two or three spoonfuls being taken
at a time.

Quince Tart: Pare and slice your Quinces very thin, season them with Candied
Citron, and beaten Cinnamon, and andied Orange scraped small, or raw Orange, or
Lemon Peel, or Carraway or Anniseeds; put ten Pippins to six Quinces, and
according to the bigness or littleness of your Tart, half the weight of the
Fruit in Sugar; then close it up, and bake it, and Ice it over with Sugar
dissolved in Rose Water, and make your Tarts into what Forms you please, and
serve them up. Scrape over them Sugar and Powder of Cinnamon.

Quince Tart: Take Quinces newly gathered, or kept very dry in straw, pare them
thin, and take out the Cores; and being cut in four quarters, slice them thin;
then take Pippins, or any hard Winter Fruit, gathered before they are ripe, and
using them in the same manner, lay a Laying of each, scrape an Orange-Peel, and
scatter it among the Layings; then add Syrup of Quinces, and on the top of all,
strew fine Sugar mixed with a little Powder of Cinnamon, and close up the Coffin
in what Fashion you please, baking it well in an Oven not heated with too quick
a fire.

Quinsies to Cure: Bruise thirty two ounces of purified Saltpeter, put it in a
crucible which must be put in a very hot Fire in a Furnace, and when the
Saltpeter is melted, put to it an ounce of Flower of Sulphur, by a spoonful at
a time, so that the matter will presently fall into a flame, and the more
volatile Spirit of the Saltpeter will evaporate; and when the flame is over,
the matter will remain in a very clear Fusion. Then with a pair of Tongs, Take
out the Crucible, and turn it upside down into a very clean Basin a little
warmed.

This beaten into Powder, is taken with good Success in the dangerous Distemper
called the Quinsie. It also cools and works by Urine in burning Fevers, and
other Diseases, that proceed from Heat and Obstructions, and the Running of the
Reins. The Dose is from half a dram, to a dram, and may be taken in any proper
or convenient cooling Liquor.

Quinsies Description, etc. This Grievance does most frequently happen between
the Spring and Summer, the first Assault of the Fever is seconded by the Pain
of the Inflammation of the Jaws, which together with the Swelling of the Uvula,
Tonsils, and Larynx, renders the afflicted Person unable to swallow, and
scarcely to breathe. In this case, let blood in the Arm, and take away as much
as the Constitution of the Party will conveniently bear; then anoint the
inflamed part with Honey of Roses impregnated to a very high degree of Acidity,
with Spirit (not Oil) of Vitriol, or Sulphur, and presently after, take the
following, (not after the usual manner, but only hold it in the Mouth till it
is hot, and then spitting it out, renew it with that which is cool,) viz.
Plantane-water, Rose Water, and Frog spawn-water, of each four ounces; the
Whites of three Eggs, beat and reduced to Water, Sugar Candy three drams; mix
them well, and make a Gargarism of them.

Quinsey: Take Milk warm from the Cow, and Album Graecum, a pint of the one,
and half an ounce of the other; Honey of Roses two spoonfuls, Verdegrease half
a dram; boil them a little, then strain it out, and Gargarize the mouth and
throat often with the Liquid part, putting to thin it more, a little Borrage
Water.

This is likewise excellent for any sore Throat, Tumors, or Pains of the Mouth
and Jaws.

Quintessence of Honey: This is the curious Extract of Honey, and is very
useful in diverse Diseases and Grievances, viz. It helps the Cough, or
Catarrh, Palsy, Fallingsickness, and pains of the Milt, and diverse other
Diseases; and its said, that if two or three drams be given to a Party
struggling for Life, or gasping for Breath, it will for a while bring them to
themselves again.

Quinque Nervia: This Herb is astringent and vulnerary, the Juice is good
against spitting and pissing of blood. The Essence of the Juice taken with
Spirit of Wine, does the same. The distilled Water of it is good against
spitting of blood, and the Phthisick. The Infipissate Juice stays the Courses,
heals all inward Griefs of the Body and Inflammation, and is more effectual
than any other sort of Plantane. This being one of the narrow-leaved sorts,
called by some Ribwort.

Quinque Folium, or Cinque-Foil: The root of this is dry and binding, and is to
he taken from one to two drams in Powder. It stays all manner of Fluxes of the
Bowels, and Fluxes of the blood, in any part, Catarrhs and Defluxions on the
Lungs, and allays the sharpness of Choler, eases the Pains of the Gout and
Gonorrhea's; the Juice of it, is good in Fevers and hot Diseases; an Infusion
of it opens Obstructions.

RAbbits, a Fricasie: Take your Rabbit, and cut it in pieces, put it into the
Drying Pan, put in half a pound Of fresh Butter, and let it boil, then put in
your Rabbit, and let it be half enough: then take it out, and clean your Pan,
and put in some Water, and let it boil; then put in one slice of Onion stuck
with Cloves, and a little whole Pepper, a Bunch of Thyme, and a little
Limon-Peel, and let them boil together a while; then take out your Onion and
Thyme, and put in your Rabbit: then shred some Marjoram, Thyme, Parsley,
Limonpeel and Nutmeg, and strew on your Rabbit in the Pan; then take three
Yolks of Eggs, and beat them well, and a Piece of fresh Butter, and a quarter
of a pint of White Wind, or a spoonful of White-wine-Vinegar, and beat with
your Eggs; then put them into the Pan, and let the Pan be kept shaking and
stirring with a spoon, till they be thick, then pour them into your Dish, and
serve it up to the Table.

Rabbits Fricassed: Take young Rabbits, and cut them into small Pieces, mince a
handful of Thyme and Parsley clean picked; season them then with Nutmeg,
Pepper, and Salt; take two Eggs and a half, a quartern of Verjuice, beat them
together, throw them into the Pan, and having sliced it when enough, dish it up
in Sippets with Butter and Verjuice.

Rabbits to Hash: Wash them, take the Flesh from the bones, and mince it small;
then put to them a little strong Broth, made of Mutton or Veal, some Vinegar,
and a Shalot or two, with a little grated Nutmeg: Let it stew, and then shred a
handful of Parsley; then half a pound, or as much as will serve, of Butter:
Toast Bread for Sippets; serve it up, garnished with Limons.

Rabbits to Stew: Take a couple of Rabbits of about three months old, half
roast them, and so take them off the Spit, cut them into handsome pieces, and
put them into a Dish with the Fat and Gravy that fell from them, and as much
Water, with half a pint of White Wind, after boiling and scumming, as will
cover them; then put in a piece of fresh Butter and Ginger, finely grated, with
Pepper and Salt, and two or three Pippins minced: Let these stew about an hour,
over a gentle fire, and dish them up with Sippers.

Radish; or, Horseradish: This is in some places found wild, but most usually
planted in Gardens, increasing much in most shadowy places: it flowers in July.
The Juice of it given in drink, is held to be very effectual for the Scurvy. It
kills Worms in Children, the Juice being drunk in convenient Liquors, or the
Root laid, bruised Poultis-wise, to the Belly; by the latter means it takes
away the Pain of the Sciatica, Joynt-Ach, or the hard Swelling of the Liver and
Spleen: The distilled Water of the Root and Herb is better taken with a little
Sugar. That called the Garden-Radish, is vulgarly known; and though it be but
of bad Digestion, yet it has some good Qualities with it; for though it is held
when eaten raw in Sallads or the like, to breed ill Humors, and corrupt blood;
yet it wonderfully helps those that are afflicted with the Stone and Gravel,
and the stoppage of Urine; and the Juice of these Roots made into a Syrup, is
exceeding good to purge Urine.

Radish, a Syrup: Take of the Roots of Garden, and Wild Radishes before they
begin to run to Seed, of each a handful; cut off the Tops, and wash the Roots
very clean, three ounces of the roots of Saxifrage, Kneeholm, Butchers-Broom,
Sea-Holly, Petty-whin or Cammock, or Ground-Furz, Parsley, Fennel, of each
alike, in all about a handful; Leaves of Bettony, Pimpernel, Thyme, the tender
Tops of Nettles, Cresses, Samphire, and Maidenhair a handful in all, and of
each alike: The Fruit of sleepy Nightshade and Jubebs, of each Ten ounces, the
Seeds of Parsley, of Macedonia, Carraways, Seseli, yellow Carrots, Grummel,
Bark of Bay-tree-root, of each two drams, Raisins stoned, and Liquorice, of
each four drams; boil them in five Quarts of Water, till two be consumed; then
strain it, and dissolve in it two pound of purified Honey, and Four pound of
white Sugar Candy, so make it into a clear Syrup, seasoning it with an ounce of
Cinnamon, and as much Nutmeg as suffices: the making of this is worth the Cost
and Labor; for it excels all other in expelling the Gravel and Stone,
scowers the Kidneys and Bladder, and eases pains in the back, opening
Obstructions in the Uriters; and mixed with Lenitives, causes Urine, when at
any time restrained.

Ragwort: This has several Names, as Stammerwort, Seggrum, St. Jame's-wort: It
flowers in June, or the beginning of July, the Seed of it being ripe in August.
The Decoction of the Herb is good to wash the Mouth that is sore, or has
Ulcers, also for Hardness, Swelling, or Impostumations, it being very cleansing
and healing in such Matters; as also helpful in the Quinsie, and King's Evil:
It stays Catarrhs, thin Rheums, and Defluxions into the Eyes, Nose, or Lungs,
proceeding from the Head. The Juice is singular good to heal green Wounds, to
cleanse and heal old Ulcers in the Privities, and other Parts of the Body; as
also inward Ulcers or Wounds; and puts a stop to the malignity of running
Cankers, and hollow Fistula's, hindering their spreadings, and is much commended
for Aches, or Pains in the Nerves, fleshly Parts or Sinews; also the Sciatica,
or Pain in the Hip or Huckle-Bone, to bathe the Place with the Decoction of it,
or anoint it with the Ointment of the Herb bruised and boiled in Hogs-Lard with
a little Olibanum, and Mastick in Powder.

Rails to Boil: Cut off their Heads and Legs, truss and put them into a Pipkin
of strong Broth, add to them Currants, Dates, some Blades of Mace, half a pint
of Whitewine: Pepper, Salt, and a piece of Butter; and when they are all
together stewed enough, place them orderly in a Dish upon Sippets, thicken the
Broth with grated Manchet, melt a little Sugar in Rose Water, put the Broth to
them, and serve them up garnished with Lemons, or Oranges sliced as a dainty
Dish.

Raphanus, or Radish: Though no great notice is taken of this Root, but the
eating them with Sallads and Provisions, yet there are many excellent Virtues
in it. The Root of the Garden Radish cleanses, attenuates, and opens, and in
the Stone is of great Virtue for expelling it, and provoking Urin; if cleanses
the Stomach of slimy tartarous Humors, and opens the Obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen, Reins and Womb, and distributes the Chyle. The Seed, which has all
the Virtues of the Root, is hot in the third Degree, and dry in the second;
wherefore two drams of it is successfully given in a spoonful of Wormwood-water
for killing the Worms in Children, and removing the Gravel and Sand from the
Kidneys and Bladder. A distilled Water of the Roots and Leaves, beautifies the
Face and Hands by taking off the Spots, Scurf, and making the Skin smooth and
fair, if often washed with it. A Syrup of the Juice is excellent against the
Stone, (to make which, find the Receipt in this Work.) It is a singular Remedy
against the Scurvy, helps all Obstructions, and the Asthma's, old Coughs, and
shortness of Breath.

Rasberries: These are very Cordial and good in Taste: The Syrup much avails
in Fevers To make which, take these Directions: Of the Juice clarified, and
Sugar, take an equal quantity, boil them to a Syrup, and stop or cover the
Vessel close: It is very cooling and pleasant, and is to be given in hot
Diseases. Again, Take the Syrup of Rasberries and Clove-Gilliflowers, each two
ounces; of the Juice of Kerms one ounce: make a white Mixture, and take a
spoonful every Morning; and it is an excellent Cordial for Women before
Delivery.

Raspis, a Ielly of: Take of the Fruit pretty ripe, set them over the Fire in a
Posnet, and extract the thin Juice, cooling the bottom of the Skillet, as you
find occasion, with fair Water: then strain them with a fine Strainer, and when
as much is taken as can be, add the like weight of Sugar, and boil them up into
a Jelly.

Raspis, a Syrup: Take nine quarts of Raspis, or Rasberries gathered dry, and
clean picked, put them into four quarts of Canary in an earthen Pot, and paste
or lute it up very close, keep it in a cool Place ten Days; then distill them in
a Glass or Rose-Still, adding a fourth part of the former quantity, and fresh
Berries, and Wine: and when all the color is taken out of the Berries, strain
out the remaining Liquid part, and put as much Sugar as will boil it up into a
Syrup, keeping it scumming during the boiling.

Rattle-Grass: Of these there are two kinds, viz. Red and Yellow. The first of
these is used to heal up Fistula's, hollow Ulcers, and to stay the Flux of
Humors, and Fluxes of Blood, being boiled in Claret, or other red Wine, and
drank hot about a quarter of a pint at a time.

The Yellow sort is by some called Cocks-Comb, and is held to be good for those
that are afflicted with Coughs, Catarrhs, and the like; or Dimness of the
Sight, if the Herb boiled with Beans, and a little Honey added to it be drank,
or dropped into the Eyes.

The whole Seed being put into the Eyes, draws out any Skin, Film, or Dimness
from the Sight without any trouble or pain.

Rawleigh, Sir Walter his Cordial-Water: Take a gallon of Strawberries, put to
them a pint of Aqua-vitae, and so let them stand four Days: then strain them
out, and sweeten the Liquid part with fine Sugar, and add, if you please, a
grain of Musk. This greatly revives the Heart, and is good, a spoonful or two
taken at a time, in violent Fevers.

Red drying Ointment: Take Olive-oil two pound, and white Beeswax half a
pound; melt them together over a gentle Fire; then take them off, and stir them
together with a wooden Spatula till they begin to thicken, and when they are
cold, add the following Powders, viz. Calaminaris-stone, and Bole-Armoniack, of
each four ounces: Litharge of Gold, and Cerusse of Venice, of each three
ounces; Campbire one dram: grind the Calaminaris and Bole-Armoniack upon a
Stone, and fierce it through a fine hair Sieve, and powder the Litharge very
fine, and so put all the Powders into the Ointment, stirring it till it becomes
cold: then add a drop or two of the Spirit of Wine.

This Red Ointment is drying and cooling: it closes and strengthens, and stops
Defluxions that fall upon the Parts. It digests and consumes the superfluous
moisture of Wounds, and Ulcers, and is of great use to finish the healing Part,
and hasten the Cure, etc.

Redness in the Eyes: This often proceeds from the over-abundance of Blood that
flows into the Eyes; and in this case it is necessary, if need require it, to
bleed by Cuping-glasses, applied to the Shoulders; and on the contrary side to
open the Head-vein, and purge the Body; and outwardly to apply such things to
the Eyes, as may repercuss and drive back the Humors offending. To do which,

Take the White of an Egg, beat it up to a very fine thinness with Woman's
Milk, and drop it into the Eyes by degrees, cooling and keeping them close when
it is dropped in. Or,

Take Linseed, boil it in Water, and wet a Sponge in the Decoction, and lay it
warm on the Eyes: Or do it in like manner with the Decoction of Fenugreek and
Camomil; or the Juice of Nightshade beaten up with the Oil of Roses, and the
White of an Egg; and dip a Linen Cloth in it, and lay it on the Egg, when you
lie down to take your rest.

Redness of the Eyes: Take Camphire a quarter of an ounce, Dragons-Blood and
Bolus, of each half an ounce; Verdegrease bruised and sifted very fine, an
ounce: infuse these in a pint of the distilled Water of large Plantane, with
often shaking them; wash the Eyes with the Water often, and it will take away
the Redness and Pains, assuage the Swelling of the Eyes that have long so
continued, and may be used as an excellent Mouth-water for impostumated Sores
or Ulcerations.

Reins Hurt: Take Pellitory of the Wall, wash it, and boil it in Whitewine, or
squeeze out the Juice only into the Wine, and drink it, applying the Herb to
the Reins likewise, as a Poultis.

Reins Running: Take a Parsnip, slice it very thin, and boil it soft in the new
Milk of a Red Cow, till it looks very white: take it out, and mash it with the
Juice of Oak-Apples, or for want of them, Acorns or Oak-leaves; and sweetening
it with a little Sugar beat up in Butter, eat of this Morning and Evening
moderately, for three or four Days successively.

Rest-Harrow: The Bark and Root provoke Urin, expel Gravel, ease the Pains of
the Teeth and open Obstructions of the Liver, being infused in Wine, or in
Possetdrink, and drank fasting.

Restrictive Ointment: Take two quarts of Olive-oil dried, Whortle-berries half
a pound, Green Services, and the Juice of Whortle-berries, of each a pound;
Roach-Alom a pound and half: put the Berries into a large earthen Pot well
glazed, pour in the Oil, and dissolve the Alom in the Juices, and so put it in
with them, and cover the Pot: set it boiling in a Bath till the moisture is
near consumed, then press out strongly the Matter; and having separated the Oil
from the Faeces, take the same Oil three pound, white Beeswax nine ounces,
melt the Wax in the same Pot and Bath, then the Pot being taken off, stir the
Ointment with a wooden Spatula; and when it thickens and grows half cold, take
Cypress Nuts, Whortle-berries, Pomgranet-flowers, and Rinds of Garnets and
Acorns, the Stones of Grapes, and Ox's Thigh Bone calcined, Grains of Sumach,
Burnt-Alom, Mastick, Acacia, and the middle Rind of Chestnuts; calcine the Bone,
and burn the Alom in an ordinary Fire; then beat them into Powder with the rest
of the Ingredients the Mastick excepted, which must be beaten apart; and
having sifted the Powders thus prepared, mix them with the Ointment, stirring
it till it becomes cold.

This is a good Styptick Ointment applied with success to the Reins to
strengthen them; also the Ligaments of the Matrix, the Descent whereof it
hinders, and prevents Abortion, by anointing the entrance thereof, and the
lower part of the Belly. It is also successfully used to close the Neck of the
Matrix after Lying-in, and to consolidate what Defects may have happened in
difficult Labor: It is also very proper against the Relaxation of the strait
Guts, applied without, and put into the Fundament; and to stop the unreasonable
Loss of Blood in Women, applied to the Region of the Reins and Liver, and all
the Belly: It is also laid upon the Stomach to stay Vomiting. This Ointment
causes not Heat, and is the best known for Cleansing and Consolidation.

Rheubarb: The Root only of this Indian Drugg is here preferred: It is an
excellent Medicin, gentle and without danger, wherein many Virtues are
comprised: It cleanses and fortifieth the Stomach and Liver, heals the Pains
and Prickings of them, clears the Blood, opens and heals all Maladies that
proceed from Stoppages, as the Jaundice, Dropsy, Swelling of the Spleen, and
long Fevers: It is good against Spitting of Blood, and stops it. It may be
moderately taken at all convenient times without danger. The chewing of it
purges Choler and Phlegm. It is excellent boiled and taken in Posset Drink
before the cold Fit of an Ague comes, and is indeed extolled by all ingenious
Physicians for the most excellent of Roots that ever was brought into this
Nation from any Foreign Parts.

Rheum: Take a pint of Malmsey, or Muscadel, boil it gently, thicken it to a
kind of a Syrup with five ounces of fine Sugar: then put in half a quartern of
the distilled Water of Horehound; and being cool, bruise a Licorice-stick at
one end: and when you take it, which will be best toward Bedtime, dip the
bruised end of the Stick in it, and suck from that about as much as comes to an
ounce at a time. This is excellent good likewise against Colds, and cleanses
the Stomach and Lungs of offensive Matters.

Rheum to Dry up: Take Lettice-seeds, white Poppey-seeds, and Purslain-seeds,
of each a dram; Tragacanth, Gum-Arabick, and Saffron, of each half a darm;
Opium three grains: bruise and powder these, and make them up into a Past
Lozeng-wise, with Syrup of Red Poppies; and when you take one of them in a
Morning, and at Night, bruise it, and put it into a little Wine; then keep your
self warm, and as much from the Air as may be.

Rheumatick Eyes: First gently Purge the Head and Body, and let the Patient
sweat a little: Then use the following Powder for the Eyes:

Take Tuttia prepared an ounce and a quarter, Red Coral, and Yellow Mirobolans,
of each a quarter of an ounce; Pepper half a dram: powder them very finely, and
strew some of it in the corners of the Eyes: This do frequently, and the Rheum
will be removed; and then by washing, the Sight may recover its clearness. Or,

Take Rainwater, boil in it Myrtle-seeds, and Gallnuts, fine Bolus, and
Cyperus-nuts; and with the Decoction well strained and settled, wash the Eyes
Morning and Evening.

Rice: This nourishes mainly, but it is made of more easy Digestion, than to
be eat as the Turks use it with their Mutton, and other Meats, with only
boiling it with them as we do Roots or Herbs; being boiled in Cows-Milk, or
Almond-Milk, it is very good to give to such as are troubled with the Lax, and
Colic. The Flower of it is very good in repercussive Plasters. It stays
Inflammations in the Breasts of Women, and helps them. The Decoction of Rice
is very profitable in Clysters, given in Laxes, or Fluxes; and boiled in your
common Drink, it allays Heart-burning and the Heat of the Liver.

Rickets: Take about six Shell-snails, and if you can get them, those that hang
about Wines, wash them when taken out of the Shells, and boil them in a pint of
new Milk, to the consumption of half of it: then take out the Snails, put in
Bread and Sugar, and give it the Child troubled with the Rickets to eat; and
let it do this Night and Morning for nine or ten Days, and use the following
Ointment for anointing the Back, Stomach, and other Parts afflicted, viz.

Take Oil of Olives half a pint, two ounces of the Oil of Camomil, two drams of
Mace beaten very fine, grate into these some White-bread, set them into an Oven
in an earthen Pot, when the Bread is drawn, and the Oven pretty hot; then
strain it and use it warm.

Rickets, another: Take four or five handfuls of Shell-snails, put them in a
course Linen Bag, and hang them up, setting an earthen Vessel under to receive
the moisture that droppeth from them, and with it bath the Joints of the Child,
and other Parts grieved, Morning and Evening.

Rickets, another: Take fresh Butter, Sanicle, and Red Mint, of each one pound;
stamp the Herbs very small, then incorporate them with the Butter, and put them
over a gentle Fire, till you can press out a Juice or Ointment pretty green,
and anoint with it the Parts grieved, especially the Breast, if any Affliction
of this kind be of continuance; and do so in other Parts before a warm Fire,
and keep out the Air as much as may be.

Roach-Alom, its Virtues: Take Roach-Alom an ounce, beat it into Powder, and
add as much Vitriol likewise in Powder; dissolve these in Spring Water, and
filter it after they have stood a considerable time.

This cures all manner of Tettars, Ringworms, Herps, Scurf, Morphew, or
Breakings-out in any Part of the Body, tending to Deformity, if the Place be
washed with the Water these were dissolved in, two or three times a Day. This
Alom-water, without the Vitriol, is good to cleanse Wounds, and Ulcers: And
being burnt in a rusty Fire-shovel, or on an old iron Plate, till it becomes
light, spongy, and white, the Powder of it will consume by degrees, and with
little pain, the moist and spongy Flesh, and Excrescences in Wounds and Ulcers,
and in the Lips, commonly called Proud Flesh. It also hinders Corruption,
dissipates and dissolves humid Tumors. It whitens the Teeth, being rubbed with
it, and fastens them: and being mingled with Sage-Water, and Honey, is good
against the Scurvy, or Defects of the Gums, that make them shrink away and
decrease, that many times the Teeth fall out.

Roast Oisters: Take large Oisters, cut them out of the Shells into a Vessel
with their Liquor, but so, that no Gravel may be among them; set them then on
the Fire covered, till they are scalded, draw eight or ten stripes of Lard
through each Oister, seasoned with Nutmegs, Cloves, and Pepper very finely
beaten and sifted; then put them on two small Lard-spits, tie them together,
and in the roasting bast them with Anchoveys dissolved in Water, dridge them
over with fine Bread, and then with what falls from them, make a Sauce, only
add the Juice of a Lemon; and when they are pretty brown, take them off, and
serve them up.

Roast Sea-Fowl: Draw them, and truss them, roast them larded, or unlarded, as
their Particulars require; then take some Claret-Vinegar, two or three
Anchoveys, the Gravy in which the Gizards were boiled, with Pepper, some hard
Yolks of Eggs beat up but very thinly with these: and garnish them with stewed
Oisters and Lemon slices, or Camphire and Bayberries.

Rob: There is a Rob made of Barberries in this manner: Put to the Juice of
Barberries one pound, or a pint, half a pint of white Sugar, and with the
gentle heat of the Bath make it into a due thickness.

This is excellent good in hot Diseases, quenches Thirst, and cools the
Stomach, and creates an Appetite.

Rob; or, Juice of Licorice: Take the Roots well cleansed and bruised, but yet
so gently, that the Liquor may not fly away. Infuse the bruised Roots three
Days in fair Water, so much as may rise two Inches above them; and after it has
boiled a little, press out the Liquid part, and boil it with a gentle heat to
the due consistence of a Rob or Juice.

This is exceeding good for Coughs, and most Diseases of the Lungs. Of this, as
of the former, you make take half an ounce at a time twice or thrice a Day.

Rocket, or Cresses: This is called Winter-Rocket, or Winter-Cresses; it
Flowers about May, and Seeds in June: It provokes Urin, helps the Strangury,
and helps Gravel and Stone: It is successful in the Scurvy, good in cleansing
Wounds. The Juice or Decoction being drank, or outwardly applied to Ulcers and
Sores, by its sharpness cleanses them.

There is another sort called Garden-Rocket, which is more used in Sallads than
Physic. But another sort called the Wild-Rocket, is more strong and effectual
to help Digestion and provoke Urin. The Seed is applied to cure the Biting of
venomous Creatures, and expel Worms that breed is the Body. The Herb boiled, or
stewed, and Sugar added to it, is very available in the Cough, or Cold,
especially taken by Children. The Seed often taken in Drink, takes away the
ramish Scent of the Skin It increases Milk in Nurses, and abates the Swelling
of the Spleen; and mixed with a little Honey over a gentle Fire, if you anoint
the Face with it, it will cleanse the Skin from Spots, Morphew, and other
Discolorings; and in Vinegar it takes away Freckles and Redness, not only in
the Face, but in other Parts; and mixed with an Ox-gall, it smooths slight
Scars, Wrinkles, Marks with the Smallpox, Black and Blew Spots, and the like.

Rocket-Wild: This is hot and dry, and its chief use is to stimulate Venery,
and is a preservative against Apoplexies; outwardly applied as a Poultis, it
draws out Thorns and Splinters.

Rosa Solis: The Herb or Plant so called, or in English Sun-dew, is hot and dry
in the third degree, sharp and quick, and of subtle Parts. The Leaves beaten
with Salt, and applied, are held to raise Blisters and Exulcerations. The
distilled Water of the whole Herb, is very Cordial, and held by Physicians to
be greatly available in the Consumption, salt Rheums distilling on the Lungs,
Wheesings, and Shortness of Breath: also heals Ulcers of the Lungs, comforts
the Heart, and revives the fading Spirits.

A distilled Water called Rosa Solis, being by all held to be a very excellent
Cordial, an Essence of the Juice strengthens the Stomach, Head, Heart, and
Liver, also the Bowels, and gives ease to Wounds: It is very famous in the
Epilepsie, Blague, and all sorts of malignant and pestilential Diseases. Held
in the Mouth it cures the Toothach, and drank in a Glass of Wine it provokes
the Terms, and expels the Birth. The Herb is held to cure Quartan-Agues, if
applied six Hours to the Pulse, and the Party bathed with the Water, or
Decoction of it, and often repeated. The distilled Water drawn in a glass
Still, is of a glittering yellow Color like Gold.

Rosa Solis, the Court way: Take of Aqua-vitae two quarts, Sugar finely
powdered a pound and a half, common Water a pint and a half; boil them up to a
little thickness, but not to the consistence of a Syrup: then put to it half an
ounce of Cinnamon powdered, and when it is boiled up, strain it through a
Cloth with two grains of Musk, and half an ounce of Sugar Candy.

Rose-Lozenges: Take Provence or Damask-Roses when they are in their prime of
flowring, beat them very fine and small, yet lose as little of the Juice and
Scent as may be; then sprinkle over them Citron, or Lemon-Juice, cover them
close, and add as much fair Water or White Wind, as will boil them up a little
till they become tender: then having fine Sugar boiled up to a Candy height,
put them into it boiling, exempted from the Water and Juices, and keep them
well stirring about a considerable time: then take cut the Sugar and Roses, so
mixed, with a Spoon, and lay it on Pye-plates; make it thin as is convenient,
and cut it out into what form you please.

Rosemary-Water: Take the Flowers and Leaves of Rosemary when they are at their
best, half a pound, of the Root of Elicampane four ounces, Red Sage a handful,
Cloves three ounces, and a like quantity of Mace, Ani-seeds twelve ounces; beat
the Spices separately, and the Herbs together; put to them four gallons of
Whitewine: and having infused them for the space of seven Days, distill them.

This Water greatly comfort the Heart, removes Pains of the Stomach,
creates a good color, and gently purges the Blood by breathing Sweats.

Rose Water: Take Roses, when just blown, before they open too much, and lose
their fragrancy in the Air, gather them when the Sun has dried off the Dew or
Moisture; and having picked the Leaves from the Stalks, without suffering any
Seeds to scatter among them, spread them on a clean Carpet free from Dust, till
they are altogether free from any moisture: then put them into a pewter Still,
and make a Fire under them gently by degrees, and fasten your Bottle, or
Receiver to the Nose of the Still, tying Paper, or Linen about it, to keep in
the scent; and so corking them up, when full of the Water, within an inch of
the Cork, set them in the Sun two or three Days, and then in a warm Place
especially, lest the Frost take them, and either break the Bottles, or spoil
the Scent of the Water.

Roses, an Oil Compound: Take fresh Red Roses bruised one pound, Juice of Red
Roses four ounces, common Oil four pound, put them into a glazed earthen Pot
with a narrow Neck, and stop it well: set it in the Sun to macerate, and having
boiled it in Balneo Mariae, strain and press out the Liquor, and return it into
the same Vessel again; do the like two or three times: then purify the Oil,
and keep it for use. If there be any moisture in it, it will be easy to
separate it, because it falls to the bottom.

This Oil dulcifies and dissipates Fluxions that fall upon the external Parts.
It extinguishes Inflammations, and hinders the descent of the Humors, and
appeases Pains; it tempers the heat of the Stomach, and the heat in the Reins;
it asswageth the Pains in the Head, as also Deliriums, and provokes Sleep,
dulcifying the sharp Humors that interrupt by their Acrimony. It must be
warmed before you anoint the Part with it. It may be also internally given
against the Worms and Dysenteries, from half an ounce to an ounce: It is good
to anoint the Parts upon Fractures, and Dislocations of Bones. It is mixed with
equal Parts of Vinegar of Roses, to anoint the Head when shaved, for the
abating the Vapors that ascend in burning Fevers, which too frequently cause
want of Sleep, and Deliriums. This Oil also mixed in Pain-easing, and
dissolving Liniments, and Cataplasms, and softening Plasters, to give them the
consistence of Searcloath, is of singular use. The same way that this is
prepared, you may prepare the Oils of Myrtle, Melilot, Elder-Water, Lilies or
Nimphaea, Chamomil, Violets, Lilies, etc.

Roses-Red, Dry: There is a Syrup however to be made of these, upon necessity;
and to do it, Take two quarts of Water, make it pretty warm, and infuse in it
for the space of twenty four Hours four or five handfuls of dried Roses; and
when the Scent of them is gone mostly into the Water, put fresh ones, and
squeeze them at the taking out, and into this Water dissolve two pound of white
Sugar, and so dissolve it into a Syrup.

This mitigates the hot Diseases of the Brain, asswages Thirst, strengthens the
Stomach, causes Sleep, stays the Flux of the Belly, and agglutinates and
mundifies Ulcers.

Roses, a Simple Oil: Take fresh Red Roses bruised two pound, the Juice of them
half a pound, and common Oil five pints; put them all together in an earthen
glazed Pot covered, and let them, if possible, macerate thirty or forty Days in
the Sun; then boil them in Balneo Mariae, and press out the Oil very hard, and
keep it for use.

It is cooling, asswages Heat, mollifies Swellings, and is good in Burns, or
Scalds.

Roses-White Infused: To infuse Roses, and bring them to a Syrup, Take of White
Roses half a Peck, clean picked from the Stalks, infuse them over a gentle Fire
in a gallon of Spring Water, strain out the Water, and squeeze the remaining
Juice out of the Roses into it. Take of this Water five pints, to which the
Gallon ought to be consumed in infusion, clarified Sugar four pound, boil them
over a gentle Fire to the thickness of a Syrup.

This Syrup extracts thin offensive Choler from the Intrails, and waterish
Humors from the Stomach; and is very good to be given to Children, old People,
and such as are weakened by Sickness, and the like.

Rosin, its Virtues: The Rosin of the Larch or Turpentine-Tree, is hot,
emollient, cleansing, healing, vulnerary, and pectoral, etc. it heals Ulcers in
the Lungs, helps and stops the Gonorrhoea. It gently provokes Urin, and opens
the Obstruction of the Reins, Uriters, and Bladder. The Dose in Powder is from
one dram to two drams. Outwardly, it is used in Balsams, Ointments, and
Emplaisters. It softens Tumors, and ripens them, if made up with Beef or
Mutton-suet. It ripens and heals Felons and Whitlows, and cures them when they
break, cleanses Ulcers, and heals green Wounds; is much available in the Pains
of the Gout, and all other Aches, and Pains proceeding from a cold Cause. Helps
Strains and Hurts of the Nerves and Muscles, and strengthens weak Limbs.

Of this, Spirits, Oil, and Balsam, are extracted, by distillation, in a large
Retort in Sand, distilling first with a very gentle Heat, till all the Phlegm,
and Spirit, (in which is contained the volatile Salt) is come over; and then
gradually increasing the Fire to force over the Oil and Balsam, which are to be
rectified from Colcothar, or Bonet Ashes.

This Spirit is very Excellent: For it takes off the tartarous Mucilage in the
Lungs, Reins, Breast, and Stomach, Uriters, and Bladder, It hinders the
generation of the Stone and Gout. The Dose is from one to three drams.

The Oil dissolves Tumors of the Gout, strengthens the Nerves, cures the
Palsy, Tumors, Wounds, and Ulcers, and all manner of Convulsions, Cramps,
Aches, Pains, Strains, and Bruises proceeding from a cold Cause, or Violence,
the Part grieved being often anointed with it. The Balsam has the same Virtue,
but not so penetrating, and therefore is mostly used in the curing old Sores,
Fistula's, Ulcers, Pain in the Gout and Sciatica's, etc.

Rue: This is for its wonderful Virtues called the Herb of Grace. It Is very
Attenuative, Incisive, and Digestive, Resolutive, and Provocative. It drives
out Windiness, by reason of its heat in the third Degree, and not only sharp in
Taste, but bitter also, by reason whereof it may resolve and penetrate gross and
clammy Humors; and through the same qualities provoke Urine. It consists of
subtle Parts, and is numbered among Medicines, which are great dryers; and
therefore it is good against Inflammations, asswaging any lustful Appetite. The
Seed boiled, and drank in Wine, greatly resists Poison. The Leaves eaten alone,
or made into a Conserve; if the Party take half an ounce fasting, it resists
ill Airs, causes pestilential Fevers, and consequently the Plague. The
Decoction drank, eases Pains in the Breasts and Sides, Inflammations of the
Liver, and the Pains of the Gout; also the Shaking of Agues. Being eaten raw,
it clears the Sight, and is good against Difficulties of Breathing, and the
Cough. Being mixed with French Cherries dried, it allayeth the Pains and
Heaviness of the Eyes: and with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, it eases the
Headache. Being bruised and put up the Nostrils it stays Bleeding. The
distilled Water of it infused into an equal portion of Wine and Rose Water, is
very sovereign for any Pains in the Head, or Stomach.

Rue of the Meadow: This is to be found on the Borders of moist Meadows, and by
Ditch sides, flowring toward the end of July, and beginning of August.
Dioscorides highly approves it for Bruises, and the healing of old Sores, being
applied to them Poultiswise, or they washed with the Juice: The distilled Water
and Flower of this Herb have the like Virtue Some People use it shred among
common Potherbs in their Broth, for opening Obstructions of the Body, and to
render it soluble: But the Roots clean washed, shred, or sliced and boiled in
Ale, I hold to operate more in that kind, than the Leaves; yet they provoke
Stool, but very gently. The Roots boiled in Water, destroy Lice and Vermin,
incident to humane Bodies, by only anointing the Places with their Decoction.
Camerarius tells us, That it is in great Esteem in Italy, as an Antidote
against the Plague, and that the Saxons use it with success in the Yellow
Jaundice.

Ruffy's Pills: Take of the best Aloes two ounces, Myrrh and Saffron, of each
an ounce: mix these finely powdered with as much Aromatic as will make them
into Pills. These taken one at a time as big as a Pea, help Concoction, and
Digestion, clear the Stomach, and create a good Appetite, and are much
available against pestilential Airs and Contagions.

Ruffs, and Redshanks, to Boil: Take these Fowl, put them upon a Spit, and lay
them to the Fire with a little Basting, till they are half roasted; then having
Water boiling in a Pipkin; after you have stuck at few Cloves about them, put
them into it, (but it must be very little;) and when they have taken a warm or
two, put out all the Water to a pint: then put in some Claret Wine, and strong
Broth, a few Mace and Cloves, with the Gravy that dropped from them when they
were roasting, then and some Pepper, Ginger, fried Onions, and Salt: stew all
well together, and serve them up on Sippets.

Rupture: Having a good Truss, Take Comfry half a handful, bruise it well with
the Filings of Iron, spread it thin on a Plaster of Diatulum, and apply it to
the Rupture, and keep it close up: and by often renewing it, great Advantage is
found.

Rupture to Cure: Take Cyprus Nuts, make them into Powder, and take Juice of
green Hops, or the tender Tops, mix them well together; and having the Bowels
put up, and well trussed, lay it at the bottom of the Belly, and in all
convenient Places, as a Plaster; and as it dries, supply the place of it with
a moist one.

Rupture on the Navel: The Rupture, or Burstenness, is generally known by the
falling down of the Bowels into the Cods, though there is a Rupture that
appears above the Privy Parts, or at the Navel of Men and Women, the Rupture
of the Navel being known by a swelling, or hanging out of the forepart of the
Belly. To remedy this, Take Comfry tow ounces, stamp it well, mix it well with
an ounce of Beeswax over a gentle Fire till it can be brought into a Plaistor,
and apply it to the Navel. But if the Rupture be great, often renew it; and
anoint the Backbone of the Party with Bears-grease, chafing it in hot; and let
the Party take Morning and Evening a dram of the Herb Thorough wax in a little
Wine.

Rupture, a Plaster: Take Daisie-roots, the like of wild Tansie and Comfry, of
each half an ounce; Mastick a quarter of an ounce, Pomgranet-flowers, and the
Juice of Sloes, half a dram of each; Hares-wool clipped small one dram,
Stone-pitch two ounces, Bird-lime an ounce, Wax five drams, Oil of Roses as
much as will make them into a Plaster, and apply it to the Intestines, being
put up, and a Truss over them, to secure them. You need not take off the Truss,
but when you renew the Plaster, which need not be under five or six Days. Or
use this, viz.

Take of Cyperus-Nuts two ounces, Myrrh and Cyperus-Roots, Marjoram, Galls,
Juice of Sloes, and Frankincense, of each an ounce: then dissolve an ounce of
Gum-Tragacanth in Wine, and temper the rest with it; and then over a gentle
Fire, by well mixing, and a consumption of the moisture, make it into a
Plaster, and lay it on the Runture.

Rupture through Water: This is a hydropical watery Humor in the Liver, Veins,
and Pores, which falls down into the Cods, and is known by the swelling of
them, and the Navel. To remedy this, Take Mastick one ounce, Cyperus-Nuts half
an ounce, Gum-Tragacanth half an ounce: bruise them, and temper them well
together with Oil of Roses, and then apply it, and use this Purgation, viz.

Take Turbith a quarter of an ounce, Ginger one dram, white Sugar three drams,
temper them well together, and let the Party take it every fourth Day in
Wormwood-wine, or Water; and the other Mornings between them, Water of Baum,
Bettony, and Wormwood, of each an ounce and half; Vinegar of Squills an ounce:
mix them together, and drink them fasting.

Rupture through Wind: In this Case the Party must, during the Cure, eschew all
such Meats and Drinks as cause Windiness in the Body, as Milk, sweet Wine,
moist Fruits, Pease, Beans, Turnips, etc. then take Sulphur-Vine two ounces
finely beaten, Grains half an ounce grossly beaten, Cammomil-flowers a quarter
of an ounce: sees these in a pint of Spring Water till a third part is
consumed: then dip a Sponge in it, and apply it to the Place as hot as may be,
renewing it five or six times a Day.

Rupture-Wort: This is mostly found on dry, sandy, and rockey Places. It is
Excellent in the Curing of Ruptures, not only in Children, but also in those of
Years, if the Distemper be not too inveterate; by taking a dram of the Powder
of the dried Herb in a glass of Wine for a considerable time: or the distilled
Water or Juice of the green Herb taken in like manner. It helps likewise all
other Fluxes in Men or Women, Vomitings, and the Gonorrhoea, and Running of the
Reins, by being taken either of the ways mentioned. It helps those that have
the Strangury and Stoppage in Urine, Stone or Gravel in the Reins, or Bladder;
helps Stitches in the Side, or griping Pains in the Stomach and Belly,
Obstructions of the Liver, Worms, Yellow-Jaundice, Defluctions, and foul Ulcers.

Rushes: These some hold so inconsiderable, that it is of no value, but for
making Candle-Wicks: But learned Physicians, who have searched more curiously
into the abstruse Retirements of Nature, are not of their Opinion. Dioscorides,
Galen, and Pliny agree, being powdered and drank in Wine, it stays the Lask
in Women's Courses, provokes Sleep, (but must be taken with caution, lest they
cause Pains in the Head.) The Root boiled in Water to the consumption of a
third part, does mainly help the Cough.

Rye: This grain boiled in Water or Wine to a strength, and drank, viz. the
Decoction, kills Worms in the Belly, and brings them away, especially if
Coriander-seeds be boiled with it.

SAdness to Expel: Take the Herb called Cranesbill, Rue, and Pulegium, of each
as much as may be held conveniently between the Thumb and Forefinger; dry them
in an Oven, and beat them into Powder: and being mixed with a little Sugar, and
Powder of Licorice, make them up into little Balls, or Lozenges, with
Cinnamon Water, or Rose Water, and eat them as you find occasion.

Saffron: The best Saffron is that which tinctures your Hands upon a gentle
touch, and smells somewhat sharp, and is not very brittle. In property it is
good for the weakness of the Stomach, and faintness of Heart; and being taken
in a small quantity of Wine, it preserves from Drunkenness, and heals the
Bitings of Serpents, and Stinging of Spiders: It is restrative. The too much
Smell thereof is bad for the Brain, and the taking too much of it is
troublesome to the Spirits.

Sage: This is a singular Remedy against all cold and phlegmatic Diseases in
the Head, and against all Pains of the Joints, either being taken in Drink, or
applied in Fomentation; wherefore it is very good for those that have the
Falling Sickness, or subject to Lethargies, or have at certain times their
Members benumbed, or senseless: It avails much against the Defluxions of
Phlegm, and Maladies, incident to the Breast; and is very advantageous for Women
with Child to eat it often, especially if they are subject to travail before
their time; for it keeps the Child in the Womb, and does quicken it. If a
Person subject to spit Blood, takes three or four spoonfuls of Honey with the
Juice of Sage, double the quantity, in a Morning fasting, the Blood will be
stayed in twice or thrice so doing. The use of Sage in Pottage, and otherwise,
serves to sharpen the Appetite, and cleanse the Stomach, that is oppressed with
ill Humors. In fine, when there is any occasion for heating, drying, or
binding, use this Herb as a very good Medicine.

Saland-Grand: To make this of minced Meats Mince Capon, Veal, dried
Neatstongue in slices, Lettuce shred, small Olives and Capers, Mushrooms
pickled, Samphire, Broom-buds, Lemons or Oranges, Raisins, Almonds, Potato's,
Caparoons, or Crucifix-Peas, Currants, pickled Oisters, and Tarragon. To dish
this up, Take a little Tarragon and Lettuce, mince them small, and put the
several Things by themselves, and garnish the Dish with Oranges and Lemons
sliced, or in quarters.

Salmon Fried: Take the Rand, Chine, or Jowl of Salmon, and fry it, cut in thin
slices in sweet Butter; and when you perceive it begins to grow crisp, prepare
your Sauce with Claret, sweet Butter, grated Nutmeg, the Juice of Oranges, and
the Liquor of pickled Oisters, heat them over a gentle Fire with continual
beating, and pour them on the Fish; and for garnish, lay Sage-Leaves and Parsley
fried in Butter, but not too crisp.

Salmon-Pie: Take a convenient piece of fresh Salmon, two quarts of Shrimps, or
Prawns, and the like quantity of opened Oisters, a quarter of an ounce of whole
Mace, the like of beaten Ginger, and four Anchoveys: mix what can be
conveniently so ordered, spread the bottom of the Pie with Butter, lay in the
Fish, and scatter the seasoning all over it, and uppermost another laying of
Butter.

Salt-Diuretick: Take the Urin of a healthful Man, and put it into as much
Hungarian Vitriol powdered as it is capable to dissolve; make the Dissolution in
a large Vessel, that there may be room for Ebullition, which being ceased, put
the Liquor into a glass Cucurbit covered with its Head, and distill off the
Phlegm and Spirit in a Sand-Bath, first with a slow Fire, then with a gradual
Fire increased, and sublimate the volatile Salt at last.

Salmon to Roast: Take a Jowl of Salmon, or a Rand, and divide it into four
pieces, season it with Salt and grated Nutmeg, stick in it whole Cloves, and
put it on a convenient Spit, laying on it likewise a few Bay Leaves, and Sprigs
of Rosemary: then bast it with Butter, and save the Dripping to mingle with
other Butter, to be served up in Sauce, mixed with Verjuice, the Juice of
Oranges, and garnished with the slices of Oranges.

This Salt composed of the volatile Salt of Urin, and several acid Particles of
the Vitriol, vigorously expels serous Humors by Urin, the Passages whereof it
opens. It is to be taken in Whitewine, Diuretick-Waters, or Decoctions, from a
scruple to a dram. It is very available in Dropsies, dissolved in opening
Decoctions; for which purpose you may mix the Spirit with your usual ordinary
Drink. The Phlegm applied to the Gout, asswages the Pain thereof. It is also
good to allay the Inflammations of the Eyes.

Sarsaparilla, an excellent Drug, much used in many Distempers. It is a very
long Root, not much unlike to a small Cord, brought out of the Spanish West
Indies. It Is given in a Dyet-drink, ordinarily for the Cure of the French Pox,
or Gonorrhoea, and King's Evil. To do this, Take a gallon of Water, mealy
Sarsaparilla split, a handful; Raisins stoned, blue Figs split, and blue
Currants, of each two ounces; Licorice, Carraways, Anniseeds, and
Juniper-ber^ies, and Fennelseeds, an ounce of each bruised: mix and steep them
twenty four Hours in the Water, then boil it to the consumption of one half;
strain it out and suffer it to settle: then when it is cold, bottle it up,
putting into each Bottle half an ounce of white Sugar, and a quarter of a
bruised Nutmeg.

Sarsnets to Wash: Take your white Sarsnet, and spread it on a smooth clean
Board long ways, soap it well, yet let it remain on but very thin, then raise a
gentle Lather with a small hard Brush, by brushing it the right way of the
Silk; and so in order turning it, do the other side in the same manner: then
cleanse it with fair Water, and make a new Lather hot, and so renew it three
times with turning; then cast the piece into hot Water, where a little Gum,
with a small quantity of Smalts has been dissolved; let it lie so covered a
convenient time, fold it smooth, and dry it as well as you can, by clapping it
between your Hands, and so dry it over Brimstone, spread it on a Table, and
iron it on the right side.

Black Sarsnets are managed the same way in washing, though they are generally
rinced in Small-beer, without any Gum, or on a Woolen Cloth.

Colored Silks may be washed as white Sarsnet, avoiding the blue Water, or
drying over Brimstone, for that fades their Color.

Sauces for Beef-Stakes: (1.) Beat Butter with the Juice of Lemons, and garnish
with slices and sprigs of Parsley. (2.) Gravy and Butter. (3) Mustard, Butter,
and Vinegar (4.) Butter, Vinegar, minced Capers, and grated Nutmeg; and if you
design to garnish them sundry ways, take either Parsley, Sage, Clary, Onions,
Apples, Carrots, Parsnips, Skirts, Spinach. Artichoaks, Pears, Quinces sliced,
and fry them in Butter, and they indifferently serve for any sort of fried
Meats whatsoever, acaccroding as your Palate best relishes, as Udders,
Sweet-breads, Tongues, Rabbits, Chickens, and the like.

Sauces for Chickens Roasted: (1.) Gravy and the Juice, or slices of Oranges.
(2.) Mutton-Gravy, the Gravy of the Chickens, Verjuice and Butter. (3.) Butter
and Vinegar boiled together with a little Sugar. Make thin Sippets of Bread,
lay the reast Chickens on them, and serve them up hot. (4.) Wash a good handful
of Sorrel, stamp it, prepare thin slices of Manchet, and put them into the Dish
with some Vinegar, and the Juice of the Sourel, Sugar, Gravy, beaten Cinnamon,
and beaten Butter, some slices of Lemon and Orange, and strew thereon Cinnamon
and Sugar. (5.) Sliced Orange, White Wind, Cinnamon, Rosewater, and a few
Blades of Mace, Ginger, Sugar, and beaten Butter, set them on a Chafing Dish of
Coals and stew them: then place some slices of Manchet round the Dish, finely
carved, and the Chickens being roasted well, lay them into the Sauce, and serve
them garnished with slices of Lemon, Barberries, and Parsley.

Sauces for Duck, or Mallard: (1.) Vinegar and Sugar boiled to a Syrup with two
or three Cloves, and a little Cinnamon, or Cloves only. (2.) Gravy of the Fowl,
Oister-Liquor, a whole Onion boiled in it, Nutmeg, Anchovey; and if lean, farce
and lard them. (3.) Onions sliced, Carrots cut Dice fashion, boiled in strong
Broth, and Whitewine, or some Gravy, minced Parsley, Savory shred small, Mace
and Butter well stewed together. This may indifferently serve for diverse kinds
of wild Fowl, but more particularly for Waterfowl.

Sauces for Green-Geese: (1.) Mince Sorrrel, and Sage, stamp them with Bread,
and the Yolks of Eggs hard by boiling, and grated, or sliced Pepper, Salt, and
Vinegar. (2.) Stamp Sorrel, White-bread, and the slices of Pippins, or other
hard Apples, put Wine-Vinegar and Sugar to them; then press out the liquid Part
through a fine Cloth, put it into Sawcers, and scraping Sugar into it, serve
it up. (3.) The Juices of Lemon, Sorrel, grated Bread and Sugar: Garnish with
Parsley, the slices of Lemons, or Oranges; or, for want of them, with
Barberries, and Tops of Rosemary, and so serve them up. These Sauces may serve
likewise for young Ducks, Teal, or Widgeon.

Sauce for Green-Geese: Take the Juice of Sorrel mixed with scalded
Gooseberries, and served on Sippets and Sugar with beaten Butter.

Sauces for Hares: If a Hare be roasted, take the following Sauces as your
Palate best relishes.

(1.) Beaten Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg, and Pepper, boiled Prunes in Whitewine
(2.) Currants strained, muskefy'd Biscuit bread beaten to Powder, Sugar and
Cloves boiled in Water to the thickness of a Grewel.

Having made these Sawces, or prepared them for making, Take the Hare, flea it,
and lard it over with small Lard, stick it with Cloyes, and put a Pudding into
the Belly of it, made of grated Bread, grated Nutmeg, beaten Cinnamon, Salt,
Currants, Eggs, Cream; make it stiff and good, fill the Hare and roast it; and
if you desire to have this Pudding green, put to it the Juice of Spinnage, or
Parsley; if yellow, Saffron, or Turmerick; if red, Turnsole.

Sauce for Hens, or Pullets, Roasted: Take the Yolks of six hard Eggs, minced
small, put them in White Wind, or Wine-Vinegar, with beaten Butter and the
Gravy. (2.) Juice of Oranges, Pepper, Salt, and Gravy, boiled with the Neck,
Liver, Heart, and Gizzards, and add Mustard if you please. (3.) Beer, Salt, the
Yolk of three hard Eggs minced, or grated Bread, three or four spoonfuls of
Gravy; and when these are well beat up, put in two or three slices of Orange,
or Lemon, with Lemon peel shred small. (4.) Beaten Butter, with Juice of
Orange, or Lemon, White or Claret Wine well mingled and beat up with the
Butter. (5.) Take Gravy and Claret Wine, boil in it some slices of Onion,
Nutmeg, and Salt, serve it up with slices of Orange and Lemon. (6.)
Oister-Liquor, an Anchovey or two, sliced Nutmeg, Gravy; and rub the Dish with
Onion, or Shalot. (7.) The Yolk of Eggs hard boiled, and Lemon Peel, mince them
very small, and stew them in Whitewine, Salt, and the Gravy of the Fowl.

Sauce for Land-Fowl: Take boiled Prunes, and strain the Pulp into a little of
the Blood of the Fowl; add then Cinnamon and Ginger finely beaten, boiled with
a little Sugar to an indifferent thickness, and serve in the Dish, with the
Gravy of the Fowl.

Sauce for a Loin of Veal: Take Thyme, Pennyroyal, Mint, Sage, and Marjoram,
boil two Eggs hard, and shred the Yolks of 'em with a little Salt, and grated
Nutmeg; then the Herbs being shred in, boil them together with a few Currants,
beaten Cinnamon, Sugar, and some whole Cloves, dish it on this Sauce, and
garnish it with slices of Oranges.

For a Leg of Veal the following Sauce.

Stuff it with Beef Suet seasoned with Nutmeg Salt, and the Yolks of two or
three raw Eggs well mixed with the other: then make Sauce with the Gravy that
drips from it, when the Fat is blown off; and giving it two or three warms on
the Fire, squeeze in the Juice of two or three Oranges: Garnish it with
Violet-flowers, Parsley, and Oranges sliced.

Sauces for Pigs: When your Pig is drawn, prick up the Belly with a Crust, and
a little chopped Sage in it, or a Pudding of grated Bread, Currants, and beaten
Mace, lay it to the Fire, but not too near at first, for fear of scorching; and
when it is a quarter roasted, if you bast it not well, then bread it with
grated White-bread, Currants and Sugar bruised together, and dried again, so
that they may stick on: then being roasted, draw it, and serve it whole with
this Sauce, viz. White Wind, Cinnamon, whole Cloves and Sugar, boiled up to a
Syrup, and the Gravy with what else fell from it. (2.) A little grated Bread,
the Pigs Brains, Sugar and Barberries, with a little beaten Butter. (3.)
Vinegar, Butter, the Yolks of hard Eggs, minced into the Gravy of the Pig; boil
these up, and serve them as a Sauce. (4.) White Wind, some strong Broth, or a
minced Onion, some stripped Thyme, grated Nutmeg, and the grated hard Yolks of
Eggs, some Anchovies and Pepper beaten small, Butter beaten up with Elder
Vinegar, and the Gravy that falls from the Pig. (5.) Two or three Yolks of raw
Eggs, beat up, grated Nutmeg, Sugar, Currants, Cream, Salt and Pepper, Sugar and
Cinnamon.

Sauces for roast Pigeons: (1.) Gravy and the Juice of Oranges. (2.) Fill their
Bellies with minced Parsley, and when roasted, beat up some Butter and Vinegar
thick, and put the Parsley to it. (3.) Onions stewed with Gravy, Claret Wine,
and a little Salt, and garnished with Parsley and Marigold-flowers. (4.)
Vine-Leaves roasted in the Bellies of the Pigeons, minced, and put into
Claret Wine and Salt, beaten up with Butter and Gravy.

Sauces for Rabbets: (1.) Beat Butter, and rub the Dish with Onion or Shalot.
(2). Sage and Parsley minced, rolled in Balls, in Butter, and fill the Belly
with this stuffing. (3.) Beaten Butter with Lemon and Pepper. (4.) According to
the French Fashion, Onions minced small, and fried and mingled with Mustard and
Pepper. (5.) The Rabbits being roasted, wash the Belly with the Gravy of
Mutton, and add to it a slice or two of Lemon.

Sauce for Red-Deer: (1.) Sweet Herbs small minced and boiled with the Gravy
only, or Whitebread boiled with Water pretty thick, without Spices, putting to
it some Butter, Vinegar, and Sugar. (2.) The Juice of Oranges, Lemons, and
Gravy beat up well. (3.) A Galladine Sauce made with strained Bread, Cinnamon,
Sugar, Vinegar, Claret Wine, and some beaten Ginger, finely strained, or you
may add a few Cloves and Sprigs of Rosemary. (4.) If you will stuff or farce
any part of the Deer convenient to be so used, stick the piece chosen with
Thyme, Rosemary Savory, or Cloves, or else with all manner of Sweet Herbs,
minced with Beef Suet: lay the Caul over the side, or half of the Haunch, and
so roasting it pretty well, serve it up with any of the forementioned Sauces,
garnishing with Oranges, Lemons, and red Beet Roots.

Sauces for Roast Mutton: Gravy, Capers, Sampire and Salt, stew them well
together in two Waters; Onions, Claret Wine, sliced Nutmeg, and Gravy, boiled
up with three whole Onions, stewed in strong Broth or Gravy, White Wind,
Pepper, Pickle Capers, Mace, and three or four slices of Lemon.

Sauces for Roast Pork: (1.) Gravy, minced Sage and Onions boiled together with
some Pepper. (2.) Mustard, Vinegar, and small Pepper, well beat together. (3.)
Apples pared and quartered, and boiled in fair water, with some Sugar beaten up
with Butter. (4.) Gravy, Vinegar, sliced Onion and Pepper, boiled up together.
The Sauces thus ordered, you may take a Chine of Pork, and draw it with Sage on
both sides, when it is on the Spit, then roast it; and so you may do by any
other Joint of Pork, viz. Loin, Pack, Breast, Spare-rib, or Harslet of a Bacon
Hog; being salted a night or two.

Sauces for any kind of Sea-Fowl roasted: Make a Galladine with grated Bread,
Cinnamon, and Ginger beaten, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, a pint of
White-wine-Vinegar, and a quart of Claret, boil them up and strain them, add a
few whole Cloves, and boil them again with some sprigs of Rosemary, add a
little red Saunders, and boil it thick as Grewel; and putting a sufficient
quantity into a Dish, place the Fowl in it: And this especially is an excellent
Sauce for Whoopers, Swans, Cranes, Shovelers, Herns, and Bitterns.

Sauces for Stuble Geese: (1.) Sour Apples, or Pippins, boiled to a Pulp and
strained, add to them Sugar, Vinegar, Gravy, Barberries, grated Bread, Mustard,
beaten Cinnamon, and boiled Onions strained. (2.) Slices of sour Apples boiled
in Beer, mash them, and put in Sugar, and beaten Butter; and for variety, add
Barberries, and the Gravy of the Fowl. (3.) Take the Gizards and Livers minced
small with Sage Beets, sweet Herbs, and sprinkled with Salt; add minced Lard,
and fill the Belly of the Goose, sow tip the Rump, or Vent, tie the Neck with a
Packthread, and roast the Goose: being roasted, take out the Farcing, put it in
a Dish; and then put to it the Gravy of the Goose, Pepper, and Verjuice, give
it a warm on the Fire, and serve it up. (4) The French Sauce for Geese, are
only Butter, Mustard, Sugar, Vinegar, and Barberries.

Savory: Of this Herb there are two kinds, one like to Thyme, and the other
greater, and more branched. The latter being used as a Cataplasm, with
Wheat Flour sod together in Wine, is available against the Sciatica; but the
use of it is chiefly good for healthful Persons, whether it be in Pottage, or
Sauce, or otherwise; and being dried in the shade, and brought into Powder, it
may be used instead of Spices.

Sausages to Make: The best way to do this, is to take a Leg of Pork that has
lain an Hour or two in Salt and Water, Take off the Fat, and mince the Lean
very small, and shred into it Beef Suet, season it with half an ounce of beaten
Cloves, and an ounce of Pepper, and the like quantity of Mace beaten fine,
shred small, a handful of Sage and Rosemary, and break in about a dozen Eggs,
and mix all well together; then fill the great Gut of a well washed Hog, and
boil them gently: then dry them in a Chimney, and they will keep excellent good
for a very considerable time.

Sausages without Skins: To make these, Mince the Lean of a Leg of Pork very
small, having first taken out the Sinews and Strings; then add two pound of
Beef Suet finely shred, and two handfuls of red Sage, a little Pepper, Salt,
and Nutmeg, with a piece of an Onion: mingle them, being all finely minced and
beaten, having put in two or three Yolks of Eggs; and so with a small matter of
Flour, make it into a Past in lengths, or Balls: and when you fry it, cut it
out in pretty thick slices.

Scabious: This Herb, though wild, and mostly growing in the Field, is of
excellent use. The Herb and Root boiled in Wine, or the Juice of it, or the
distilled Water of it, cures Imposthumes, Pleurisies, Coughs, or other Diseases
incident to the Breast, or Lungs. It Is good also in the Quinsie, Plague, Ulcers
in the Fundament, Itch, and likewise for Beautifying.

Scabs: Take the Roots of Celandine, Wormwood, and red Dock, of each a handful;
Laurel and Ivy-Leaves, of each half a handful: bruise them well, and fry them
in Butter till they become crisp: then strain out the Butter with hard
pressing, and keep it as an Ointment of special use in all manner of Scabs,
Breakings-out, Botches, or Blains; and if mixed with a little Powder of
Sulphur, it is excellent for the Itch, and to hinder the biting of Bugs, or
cure those that are Bit.

Scabious-Water: Take four handfuls of Scabiousflowers, a handful of the tender
Tops of Comfrey-flowers, of Fumitory four ounces, Roots of Orris three ounces,
Baum, and Celandinetops, of each a pugil: distill these in a cold Still with
four ounces of Almonds blanched, and steeped in warm Water till they swell.

This is an excellent Beautifier, and causes a fresh Color.

Scalds to Cure: Take a quart of sweet Cream, then wash, pare, and slice a
handful of Fern-roots; boil them together in an earthen Pipkin with two ounces
of Dove's-Dung finely powdered; or, for want of that, Hen's-Dung for the space
of half an Hour, or till, by continually stirring it, it jellies, or thickens:
then let it cool, and so spreading some of it on a Cloth, apply it to the
Place scalded. So by often applying, the Fire will be taken out in a little
time, and the Pain removed.

Scaily-Nails to take off: Take the Seeds of wild Mint, and Linseed, of each a
quarter of an ounce; bruise them and mix them with Honey; make a Plaster, and
fix it on the Nails, and in a little while they will fall off, and other sound
ones grow in their stead.

Scaily-Spots: To remedy these rough and unseemly Deformities of the Skin, Take
half an ounce of Nigellaseeds, bruise and boil them in a quart of strong
Vinegar until half be consumed; then add as much of the Oil of Walnuts, as
will, when strained, and a little more boiled, reduce it to an Ointment; with
which anoint the Place often, and it will make it smooth and beautiful. This is
likewise a Remedy for the fretting and gauling of the Skin, and Itch.

Sciatica: Take four handfuls of Straw-berries, boil them in a quart of Water,
and having bathed the grieved Place with the liquid part strained from them
very warm, dry it; and then anoint it with this Ointment, viz. Unguentum
Dialtheae one ounce, Honey half an ounce, Beeswax a dram: mix them over a
gentle Fire, and make an Ointment for the aforesaid use: and by often
anointing, the Pain will cease.

Scorbutick-Water: Take the Juices of Scurvigrass, and Water of Pimpernel
depurated, of each three pints; fine white Sugar two pound: make them into a
Syrup over a gentle Fire.

The use of this Syrup is very successful, taken in scorbutic Maladies, from
one spoonful to two in any scorbutick-waters, Mint, or Penny-royal-waters, etc.

Scorbutick-Water of Scurvigrass: Take the Bark of Capers, Tamarisk, Ash-Tree,
Polypode-roots of the Oak, of each two ounces; Watercresses, the Tops of Baum,
Agrimony, Germander, and Ground Pine, of each two handfuls; Fenel, and
Aniseeds, Carduus-Benedictus, of each one dram and half; the Flowers of Broom,
St. John's-wort, Centaury the Less, Elder, and wild Thyme, of each a pugil: let
these be infused in Fumitory-water, and Whey, of each three pints, Whitewine
two quarts; add Oxymel of Squils one pound: then strain them, by pressing out
the Liquor very hard; dissolve in it Troches of Capers, six drams; after distill
it in an Ash-bath, and take two ounces at a time for Pains in the Stomach,
Vapors arising to the Brain, Breakings out, Scurfiness of the Body, Nodes, or
Knots in the Skin; and for carrying off all gross and ill Humors by Sweat,
Stool, or Urin.

Scurvigrass-Bath: Take Scurvigrass and Fumitory, of each a handful;
Fenugreekseeds three ounces and a half; Flowers of Mellilot two handfuls, and
of Camomil one handful; Mallow-roots, Brooklime, and Mugwort one handful and
half; the Seeds of Water-Bettony, and Parsley, of each three ounces and half;
Bay Leaves a handful: boil these in two gallons of fair Water to the
consumption of a quart.

This removes hard Swellings, and Pains in the Joints, allays the Pain,
occasioned by excessive heat, restores shrink'd Nerves and Sinews; and is good
in easing Pains of the Gout, being applied to the grieved Part.

Scurvigrass, its Essence: Take Scurvigrass, Fumitory, Germander, and Wormwood,
of each three handfuls; of Orange-peel, six drams: digest them with Spirit of
Scurvigrass, and Elder, of each so much as suffices, to the Extraction of their
Tincture, and let them be strongly pressed out, and put of the former Herbs and
Powder into the straining; and do this three or four times: and when it is
clarified by settling, add of the Spirit of Fern, and Scurvigrass, of each
three ounces and a half; Spirit of Tartar nine drams: mix them, and take it
from twelve to twenty drops in Ale, Beer, Wine, or any other convenient Liquor.

This is good against Fits of the Mother, Falling Sickness, Oppressions of the
Stomach, Afflictions of the Matrix, and cause Urin.

Scurvigrass Physick-Wine: Take Watercresses, and Wall-rue, of each one
handful, wild Radish-roots, and Roots of Polypody, of each two drams; black
Hellebore-roots, and Jalap, of each one ounce; the Leaves of choice Senna one
ounce, the inward or yellowest Rind of an Orange two ounces, best Cinnamon one
dram and a half, crude-Tartar three drams. These being cut, and grofly bruised,
put them into a thin Bag, sew them up, lay them by in a stone Pot, and pour
upon it two quarts of Whitewine; let it stand eleven Days, draw it off, and
take three ounces, or more, according to the Strength of your Body.

This purges Choler, and Melancholy, cleanses the Stomach, and eases Pains in
the Bowels, causes gentle Sweats, and cleanses the Blood.

Scurvigrass-VVine: Take the Juice of Scurvigrass, Watercresses, Brooklime,
Sorrel, all depurated, of each a quarter of a pint; Rhenish-wine two quarts,
Roots of Horseradish, Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, cut into thin slices, of
each an ounce and half; two Nutmegs bruised: put all into a stone Bottle, stop
it very close, and keep it in a cold place for use.

Taking Morning and Night a quarter of a pint, cures the Scurvy to a wonder,
and purifies the Blood.

Scurvigrass-Wine, another: Take of fresh Scurvigrass four handfuls, beat it
very small, pour upon it two quarts of Rhenish Wine, let it stand in a cool
place three or four Days; then strain it, and let it settle, and so draw it off
from the dregs.

Drink of this half a quarter of a pint fasting, and it will purify the Blood,
help Digestion, take away pricking Pains, and Heats, or Flushings in the Face
or Body, provokes Urin, and evaporates noxious Humors by sweat.

Sena: The best of it is that which is brought from Alexandria in Egypt. It
purges Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; it cleanses the Heart, Liver, and
Brain, also the Spleen and Lungs, and all Parts of the Body; it is profitable
for all Accidents of them: It opens the Internals, and delayeth the Injuries
of growing old Age, causing exhilaration, or Joy in the Mind. The Leaves
decocted with Camomil are exceeding good to wash the Head for the fortifying
the Brain and Sinews, and Sight and Hearing; as also, in all such Diseases as
proceed from melancholy Humors: likewise for Ulcers, or Palsy, Headache, and
Falling-evil. It fortifieth the Heart, especially when mixed with some Violets
and Cloves concocted in Whitewine; and being mixed with infusion of Roses, or
laxative Syrup of Roses, it is an excellent Purge for all evil Humors. There
is a Syrup made of Sena.

Senses to Refresh: To enliven the Senses, and restore the Memory, Take a
handful of Baum, bruise it and steep it in Whitewine in an earthen Vessel well
glazed, and covered; then put it into an Alembick, and of the distilled Water
take every Morning fasting a spoonful, and fast an Hour after it.

Sharpness of Vrin: Take the dried stuff that divides the Lobes of the Kernels
of Wallnuts, beat them to a Powder, and take about a dram at a time in a
draught of Whitewine or Posset Drink, or in any other convenient Liquor.

Shoulder of Mutton, with Disters: Take a Shoulder of Mutton, roast it with
Oisters, stuffed in the most convenient Places of it; then make Sauce with some
Gravy, Claret Wine, Pepper, grated Nutmeg, sliced Lemon, and Broom-buds, giving
it a warm or two: then dish the Mutton, the Oisters being taken out; put the
Sauce to it, and they in it, and garnish with sliced Lemon, and Barberries.

Sickness-Falling: Take half a dram of the best Amber, beat it into fine
Powder, and take it once a Day, when the Stomach is most empty, in a quarter of
a pint of Whitewine.

Sight-Weak: Take Eyebright, sweet Fennel-seeds, and fine Sugar, of each an
ounce; reduce them to Powder, and mix these together, and take the Composition
from a dram to two or more, as occasion requires.

Sinews Hurt: If these are any ways bruised, pained, or swelled, Take Lavender,
the Stalk, Leaves, and Flower, cut them small, put them into Whitewine, and
distill them through an Alembick, washing the Parts grieved with the said Water;
and drink abut two ounces of it Morning and Evening, and wash the Forehead and
Temples with it, in case of any Pains there, by reason of any Afflictions of
the Brain, from which the Sinews and Nerves originally proceed.

Skin Infected: Take the Roots of Vines, boil them in Water with the Seeds of
Vetches, commonly called Tares, and Fenugreek, of each a handful; and
therewith wash the Places where ill Humors are apt to settle.

Skin to keep open: If an Issue in the Skin is not easily kept open, but too
apt to dry up, Take Lapis Infernalis an ounce, Crown Soap an ounce and half,
Chalf-finely powdered six drams; mix them altogether carefully, and keep them
close stopped, and when you use them, mix them well together, and lay over it
Plaisterwise.

Sleep to Procure: Take Water Lillies half a handful, Opium one dram, steep
these, the Lillies being bruised, in three pints of Malmsey, twenty four hours,
then put in an ounce of Salt finely beaten, Poppy-seed a dram, Lettice-seed
three drams, distill them in Balneo Mariae.

The Dose is from half a dram to a dram, when the Party is going to Bed. There
is likewise an Ointment to cause Sleep, viz. Take about half an ounce of Oil of
Violets, Henbane-seed, and Mandragora-roots, of each half a dram, Saffron and
Cassia-wood, of each a Scruple, Oil of Olives six ounces, Oil of Mallows, as
much; bruise and mix these till they may be reduced to an Ointment, over a
gentle Fire, by pressing out the unctuous Matter, and with it anoint the
Breasts, Forehead, and Temples when you would go to rest.

Smack Elixir: Take the distilled Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves, and Wormwood, Citron
and Orange-Peel, of each six drops, refined Sugar, finely beaten, Spirit of
Wine rectified, and Mint and Orange-flower-water, of each six ounces: mix them
well, and make an Elixir.

This Elixir is exceeding good in all cold Infirmities of the Stomach, as also
to fortify the Nobler Parts. The Dose is from two drams to half an ounce, in
Wine, Ale, or the like.

Smallpox, the Scars thereof: To prevent these, Make a Liniment of Rose Water
four ounces, Hogs-lard two ounces, Oil of Rosemary halt an ounce, Tuttia one
dram: These being made into a Liniment, anoint the Face, Hands, and Neck, just
as the Disease is in its declining, and the Scabs begin to dry.

Sores: Take a solution of Sublimate, and having made with Quicklime a strong
Limewater that will bear an Egg, drop it gradually on the Sublimate, till it
will precipitate on more redish stuff at all; and when you perceive the Liquors
act on longer visibly upon one anther, pour the Mixture into a filter of
Cap-paper, which retaining the Orange color precipitated, will transmit an
indifferently clear Liquor, which must be kept close stopped in a glass Viol,
viz. to wash the Part grieved.

This is exceeding good in old Sores, Ulcers, Breakingout, and other suchlike
Diseases.

Sores of the Mouth to Heal: Take the Leaves of Marshmallows, and boil them in
Wine, wherein Honey has been dissolved, add some Rochalom in powder, then press
out the liquid part very hard, so suffer it to stand and cool: and with this
Decoction wash and gargle your Mouth and Throat, if it be sore.

Sore Nose: This often happens through the Effects of the French Disease, not
perfectly cured, and many times in the Mouth, as well as the Nose. For Remedy
then, Take the Juice of common Hounds-tongue, and that of Plantane, of each
three ounces: boil these Juices to a thickness over a gentle Fire, adding to
them Oxymel Scilliticum, and anoint the sore Part often; or dipping a linen
Rag in it, thrust it up the Nostril, if the grief be mostly there.

Sores Old: Take Aristolochia Longa, Aloes Epatica, of each an ounce: make them
into a Powder, and with Honey of Roses work it into a Past; and having cleansed
the Sore with Oil of Tartar, or the Decoction of Myrrh; spread some of the Past
on a Leather, or pliant Cloth, and lay it to the Place grieved; and in twice
or thrice renewing it, you will find wonderful success in the Cure.

Sores Putrefied: Take Milfoil and Sanicola, of each half a handful; boil them
in Water, and strain the liquid part through a linen Cloth, and with the
Decoction, mix the Meal of Fenugreek, the Fat of a Goat, and as much Olive-oil
as will thicken them, and make them into an Ointment over a gentle Fire: with
which often anoint the Sores, and it will heal them.

Sore Throat: Take a piece of greasy linen Cloth, so much as being double may
make a Bag in the from of a Stay to reach from one side of the Throat to the
other, and contain as much Matter as may make it of the thickness of an inch,
or more: then filling it with common Salt, heat it thoroughly and apply it to
the Part affected as warm as may be well endured; and when it grows cold, apply
another like it well heated, and so continue to do forty eight Hours, if the
Remedy be so long needed. This makes the Kernels fallen down, retire to their
proper places, and abates Swellings.

Speech lost: This is not meant of those that are deaf from their Infancy, and
so consequently dumb; but of such as through accident or hoarsness are deprived
of their Speech. To remedy this, Take Ireos half an ounce, Pennyroval, Hysop,
and Licorice, of each three drams; Gum-Tragacanth, and bitter Almonds, Kernels
of Pines, Cinnamon and Pepper, of each one dram and a half; Figs, Dates, and
Currants, of each two ounces; red Styrax three scruples and a half; cut the
Fruits small, and powder the rest, and to every ounce add three ounces of
Sugar, and make it into an Electuary with Honey, or Syrup of Hyssop, and take
in the Morning fasting, and at Night going to Bed a quarter of an ounce,
washing it down with warm Ale: and so do for five or six Days and Nights, and
the Cure will be effected.

Speckles: For these, or Pimples, th t are not angry or fiery, Take the Blood
of a Hare warm, if you can get it, and the Oil of Cinnamon, and anoint the Face
with it.

Specifick-Purge: Take raw Antimony, and Sal Amoniack powdered and mixed
together, of each six ounces: sublime the combustible red Flowers, according to
Art, and of them take four ounces; of the best Nitre take eight ounces: let
them fulminate in subliming Pots, and gather the Flower without wasting any of
it; dulcifie the Flower with hot Water till there be on more saltness
remaining: upon this Powder dried over a very gentle Fire, pour rectified
Spirit of Wine four Fingers breadth above the Matter, put them all into an
Alembick with a Receiver luted to it; then distill them at first with a gentle
Fire, increase it by degrees that the substance may come to a dryness: expose
the Powder, being perfectly dried, to the Fire for the space of an Hour, and
keep it for use in a close Box, or Gally-pot.

This remarkable Preparation of Antimony is sudorisick, powerfully provoking
Sweat, pens the Belly gently, being taken at a distance from Meals, from twenty
to thirty grains in some Conserve, in a Bolus, or dissolved in some agreeable
Cordial-water.

Speedwel: The Male sort of this Herb is of excellent Virtue for opening
Obstructions of the Lungs, for the Colic and Spleen, and is an Antidote
against the Plague, and is helpful in Wounds, curing the Itch. We have it from
good Hands, That a large Dose of the Decoction of this Herb, taken for some
time, expelled a Stone from the Kidney of a Woman that had been tormented with
it for fifteen or sixteen Years. Also a Woman that was accunted Barren seven
Years, conceived upon taking the Powder of it in the distilled Water for a
considerable time. The Syrup is of great use in the Disease of the Lungs; and a
Person who had a very dangerous Ulcer in his Leg, found Ease, and in a short
time a Remedy, by washing in the Water of it, and applying wet Rags dipped in the
said Water, by taking away the Inflammation, and all the Symptoms that
accompanied it. One who had a Fistula in the Breast, and in vain had used
diverse Medicaments, it is said, was cured with this Water, by inwardly taking
it. Rags dipped in it, and applied hot, do make Scabs fall away in Children,
and then wash them over with Water of Fumitory and Whey. But for all these
Experiments, the Reader may try them as occasion offers, and be more amply
satisfied. The Virtues of this Herb are many.

Spirit-Antiscorbutick: Take Elder and Juniper Berries, and bruise them; the
Seed of Scurvigrass, Carduus-Benedictus, and Garden ^ses, of each two pound^,
put them all into a convenient Vessel; and having mixed with them a pint of
Ale-Yeast, set them to ferment in a Stove, or hot Place; and when that is over,
distill them, and preserve the Spirit.

Spirit Epileptick: Take the Flowers of Lily of the Valley, Lavender, Sage,
Tillet, Primroses, and Rosemary, of each two handfuls; gather the Flowers in
their season, and macerate them altogether in six pints of the Spirit of Wine
rectified; then add to them Misleto of the Oak, Roots of Valerian, and
Male-Peony, of each four ounces, being bruised and macerated eight Days in a
pint of Malmsey, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs, of each half an ounce; mix
them altogether, and distill them in a glass Cucurbit covered with its Head in a
Sand-bath, and preserve the Spirit as a very excellent one.

It is very proper for the ease and cure of Epileptick Diseases. It is to be
given from two drams to half an ounce, alone or mixed with cephalic Liquors,
It may be also put up the Nostrils, applied to the Temples, and other Parts,
for easing Pains, and preventing the arising of Vapors to the Brain, which
occasion Fits and Disorders.

Spirit of Salt: Take the finest white Salt, and dry it over a Fire, or else in
the Sun, so powder it finely to the quantity of two pound weight; mix it well
with six pound of Potters-earth finely powdered, make them up into a Mass very
hard with Rainwater, as much as will conveniently do it, from this Mass, by
dividing into Balls, in the bigness of a Hazle-nut, and let them dry in the Sun
a considerable time; and when they are dried, put them into a large earthen
Pot, or a Glass that may be luted, a third part of it being left empty, place
the Retort in a reverberatory Furnace, and fit to it a large Receiver, luting
the Joints, and give a moderate heat to warm it, and so make an insipid Water
drop forth; and when white Clouds succeed those drops, pour out that which is
in the Receiver: and having re-fitted it, lute the Joines close, and by degrees
encreale the Fire to the last degree of all; and so in this condition continue
it twelve or fifteen Hours, when all that time the Receiver will be hot, and
full of white Clouds: but when it grows cold, and they disappear, then unlute
the Junctures, for the operation is at an end; and then you will have the
Spirit of Salt in the Receiver. So pour it into a glass or earthen Bottle, and
stop it with Wax.

This singular Spirit has an aperitive quality, and therefore is used in Juleps
to an agreeable Acidity for such as are subject to the Stone, or Gravel; it is
also used to cleanse and whiten the Teeth, also to fasten loose Teeth, being
^empered with a little Water, and to consume the rottenness of the Stumps.

Spirit of Salt, Dulcified and Sweet: Mix equal Parts of Spirit of Salt, and
Spirit of Wine, set them two or three Days in Digestion in a double Vessel in a
gentle Sand-Bath.

This is taken more safely inwardly than the former, because it is less
Corrosive: It may be given from four to twelve drops in some proper Liquid.

Spirit of Scurvrigrass: Take the Bark of Ash Tree, Roots of Fraxinel,
Tamarisk, and Capers, each one ounce and half; Polypody of the Oak two ounces,
wild Radish three ounces, Scurvigrass-Leaves four handfuls, Watercresses,
Brook-lime, Sorrel, and Spleen-wort, of each three handfuls; Bay Berries, and
Juniper Berries, of each six drams; the Tops of the lesser Centaury a handful;
Seeds of Citron, Mustard, Carduus-Benedictus, of each halfan ounce; Cloves,
Ginger, Cinnamon, and Nutmeg, of each three drams: these being cut and bruised,
digest them in a warm Sand-Bath, in a gallon of White Wind, and three pints of
good Brandy for three Days: then distill them in Sand by an Alembick.

Of this twenty drops is a sufficient Dose for the Scurvy, and all the other
Distempers attending it, as Pains, Prickings, Shortness of Breath, Foulness of
the Lungs, Yellowness of the Teeth, decaying of the Gums, and the like. This is
called the Golden Spirit of Scurvigrass, easing the Pains of the Belly in
Children, and killing Worms. But for the latter, ten or twelve drops may serve.

Spirit Uterine: Take the Roots of round and long Bithwort, Piony, and the
lesser Valerian, of each two ounces; Castor one ounce; dry Tops of Wormwood,
Mugwort, Tansie, Fetherfew, Elder, and Camomil-flowers, of each a handful:
shred and bruise all together. Let them macerate three Days in two quarts of
the rectified Spirit of Wine: then distill them according to Art, and keep the
Spirit for your use.

This is excellent, and most effectual to suppress the Vapors that arise from
the Matrix, and to open Obstructions. It is to he given from one to two or
three drams at a time in Hysteric Waters, or Decoctions: It may likewise be
put up the Nostrils, or applied to the Temples, or Navel, with good Success.

Spirit of Wine to Distill: Take the Wine and Lees of what sort you think
convenient, put it into an Alembick, draw it off, and rectify it into what
height you please. It is excellent, taken in cold Distempers, or to mix with
any Cordial Water, to temper them with heat, according to the degrees the
Distempers require, for which they are to be taken. The Joints afflicted with
cold Pains, being bathed with it, ease them: It Is good in the Gout and
Sciatica, the afflicted Parts bathed with it, and is used for Lacca to change
Silver to a gold color, as also in Varnish, and in making up sundry Medicines.
Baum, Rue, and the Leaves of Walnuts being beaten and made up into a Conserve
with it, resist the Plague and pestilential Fevers.

Spirit of Wine, another: This Spirit, when made the best way, is drawn from
Branny chiefly, and not of that which is usually called Wine. Four gallons then
of the best Brandy must be mixed with four quarts of ordinary Salt, and put
into an Alembick, or Bay Salt dried and finely powdered. Lute the Head, and do
it over a gentle Fire, lest being too long a drawing it off, it waft and
consume too much; that which is the highest or rectified part being fired, will
burn all away; but the second Spirit will not do so.

This makes curious Tinctures in chemical Operations, and being upon other
occasions outwardly applied, it discusses Tumors, and cures Burns, if taken in
time: It also eases the Pains of the Gout, and cold Pains in the Joints.

Spitting Blood: Take Ash-leaves, and the Seeds of Nettles; boil them, when
well bruised, in Whitewine: put to the Decoction a little Sanguis Draconis,
Spodium, and Bole-armoniack: then these being infused, strain it again, and
drink half a quarter of a pint mixed with half an ounce of the Syrup of red
Roses.

Spots, or Stains: If in Silk, caused by Grease, Take the Bone of a
Sheep's-foot, burn it to powder, and beat a red-hot Tobbaccopipe into Powder
also: then sift these, and mingle them together. Take of this Powder, and lay
on the Spot; then lay on it the back of a Spoon that has a red-hot Coal in the
hollow of it; and then the heat, if the Grease be little, will cause the Powder
to suck it out.

Spots of Pitch and Rosin are taken out by applying Oil of Turpentine, rubbing
it in, and letting it lie, and it will crumble away: so likewise Tar will rub
out like a speck of Dirt.

Spots in the Skin to take away: Take Water of Talk, and Lemon-juice; infuse in
them the Roots of Mandragora, and let them stand five Days in the Sun, or some
warm place, and then strain out the liquid part, and with it bath the Spots:
and in often so doing they will disappear. Or, for want of these, wash them
with the Water of Radishes, drawn by an Alembick, and anoint the Skin with the
Meal of Orobo mixed with Honey.

Spots in Stuff, or Woolen: Take Fullers-earth two ounces, Castile-soap an
ounce, the fine siftings of coarse Bran half an ounce: mix these with fair
Water, make them up into a kind of Paste, and lay then some of it on the Spot;
and being then a little moist, let it dry on before a gentle Fire.

Stains that come not by Grease are taken out by boiling Lemon Peel in
Small-beer, with a little Copperas, till it be very strong of them: then with a
hard Brush rub up the place with it, and take it out again after a while with
fair Water, wherein a little Castilesoap has been dissolved.

Stanching Blood: Take round Mushrooms, or Puffballs, in Autumn, when they are
full ripe; break, them warily, and save carefully the Powder that will fly out,
and the rest that remains in their Cavities, and strew this Powder all over the
Part affected, binding it on with a Liniment, and the Bleeding will be
immediately stayed.

Stephens's- Water: See Doctor Stephens's- Water.

Stiffness of the Sinews to supple: Take twelve Frogs, Hogs lard one pound, Oil
of Bays two pound, and Bayberries dried and reduced to Powder two ounces: boil
them together sufficiently, then press them through a linen Cloth, add then
white Incense in powder one ounce, and make the Liquid into an Ointment over a
gentle Fire, with which anoint the Parts often, and it will comfort the Sinews,
and restore them to a limberness, and make them very supple; and always after
anointing, wash it with the following Decoction, viz.

Take the Roots and Leaves of Agrimony, with the Roots of Mallows, boil them in
Water till they be tender, strain out the liquid part, and bath with it.

Stinging of Insects: If you are stung with Wasps, Hornets, Bees, or the like,
Take Juniper Berries when ripe and bruise them, then distill them through an
Alembick; and not only wash the place stung, but drink about a quarter of a
pint of it with an ounce of the Juice of Rue.

Stiptick-Water, the New Way: Take Colcothar, or red Vitriol, which remains in
the Retort after the Spirit is drawn out, Sugar Candy, and Burnt-alom, of each
half a dram; the Urin of a young Lad, and Rose Water, of each half an ounce,
Plantain-water two ounces: mix them well together for a considerable time, then
pour the Mixture into a Viol, and when you separate it, do it by inclination
for use.

This is so excellent for stopping Bleeding, that a Bolster dipped in it, and
applied to an open Artery, and held there a while, it has stayed the bleeding
of it. A Pledget thrust up the Nostrils does the like for the bleeding there.
Taken inwardly, it cures the Spitting of Blood, and Bloodyflux, etc. The Dose,
taken inwardly, is from half a dram to a dram, and it may be given in the Water
of Knotgrass, Nettles, or Wood Sorrel. This Water is excellent for any one to
carry about them, and may upon any Accident happening save a Life, that the
Effusion of Blood, if not speedily stopped, may carry away with it.

Stomach Hot: When you find any great Heat or Burning in your Stomach, Take
green Housleek, bruise it and press out the Juice; then over a gentle Fire make
it into a Syrup with white Sugar.

This is likewise excellent good, a quarter of an ounce taken at a time for the
Heart burn.

Stomach Pained: If the Stomach be afflicted with Pains occasioned by
windiness, or Causes proceeding from the defect of the Milt, Take an ounce of
Cinnamon, Rapontici and Galangal, as much; put to them, when bruised, half a
pound of Sugar, and lay it, when boiled up to a height, on Plates, make them
into Lozenges: Take one at a time, and drink a glass of Wine after it, and it
will work gently; so that in often taking, your Thirst will be much abared.

Stomachical Tincture: Take Agrimony two drams, small Centaury-tops one dram,
Coriander-seeds bruised one scruple, Sassafras, Shavings and Bark, one dram;
Gentian-root half a dram, Zedoary-root ten grains: put these to three quarters
of a pint of boiling Spring Water, cover it, and let them steep twelve Hours:
then strain it, and Bottle it up.

It exceedingly fortifies and refreshes the Stomach, eases it of Pains and
Gripings, and prevents the Iliac-Passion.

Stone, the Cause and Cure: The Stone is engendered of vicious and slimy Phlegm
in the Reins and Bladder, where by heat it petrifies and takes to it self the
hardness and nature of a Stone.

To dissolve and bring away this, Take of the Tops of Borrage, Fenel, Parsley,
Endive and Succory, Spearage and Beets, of each a little handful; shred them
and boil them in three quarts of Rhenish-wine, drink a quarter of a pint of it
Morning and Evening; and once a Week, take a Clyster made of Mallows,
Groundsil, Southernwood, and Fetherfew boiled in fair Water, and mixed with two
ounces of brown Sugar, especially if the Affliction be in the Reins.

Stone, or Gravel: Take thirty or forty Drops of Spirit of Castor in a Glass of
Rhenish Wine every Morning fasting.

Stone and Gravel: Take four gallons of running Water, four pound of fine Sugar
in powder, Eringo-roots, and Raisins of the Sun stoned, of each one pound; a
branch of fresh Rosemary: boil all these together till half be consumed; then
work it up with a little Yeast, tun it, and put the Peel of a fresh Lemon into
it: when it has done working, you may Bottle it if you please. Of this drink
Morning and Evening, and whenever you are adry.

Stone and Gravel, another: Take the White of a new-lay'd Egg, and beat it well
with a Spoon in a Porringer for a quarter of an hour; then let it settle, and
take off the Scum: mix the Clear with two spoonfuls of Whitewine, and four
spoonfuls of red Rose Water, and put to it one ounce of Sugarcandy in Powder:
mix all well together, and take it in the Morning fasting, and another at Night
going to Bed. Continue this seven Days.

Stone and Gravel, another: Take of the Juice of Leeks, Onions and Radishes, of
each two pound; Juices of Lemons, Pellitory, and Mouse-ear, of each half a
pound; Calx of Crystal, and Pidgeon's-dung, of each half a pound: digest it for
ten Days, then distill it. You may give it from one dram to half an ounce at a
time in Rhenish Wine.

Stone and Gravel, another: Gather the Leaves of Golden-Rod when it is in its
greatest Vigor, dry them in the shade; and when you are troubled with the
Stone or Gravel, take one ounce thereof (made into subtle Powder) in a small
Glass of White Wind and Milk, of each a like quantity; repeat this as often as
there is cause for it. When the Herb is green, you may boil a handful of it in
Whitewine Posset Drink, and drink it instead of the dried Herb, which is to
keep all the Year.

Stone and Gravel, a Diet: Forbear eating of Eggs, all salt and tart Meats and
Sauces, Pork, Milk, or any thing made of Milk, except Possets, Cabbage,
Colworts, Colliflowers, and suchlike: let your Diet be Mutton, Veal, Rabbit
and Fowl, and the quantity moderate; let your Drink be of the midling sort, and
not too stale. Forbear drinking Claret, drink Spanish Wine rather than French.

Strain: The Strain or Sprain being newly contracted, Take a handful of
Wormwood and bruise it well in a stone Mortar, then put to it the Whites of two
Eggs beaten; make a Poultis of it, and lay it to the grieved place.

Strangury: This is caused either from the Urin's being over sharp, which
provokes the expulsive Faculties to expel it before any quantity be gathered
together, or that the retentive Faculty to the Bladder is weakened through some
distemperature, especially of Cold, or else through some Ulcer, or Inflammation
of the Bladder, to which the Urin coming, does extimulate the expulsive
Faculty; or lastly, when the Womb, or Bowels being inflamed do trouble or
distend the Bladder. To remedy this,

Take Cassia one dram, Manna two grains, Violets, Sorrel, and Purslain, of each
a pugil; Licorice, Prunes, and the Leaves of Mallows, of each two ounces:
bruise and boil these in two quarts of Whey till a fourth part be consumed;
strain out the liquid part, and sweeten it with Honey, and drink a quarter of a
pint as hot as may be fasting, and an hour after take a quarter of an ounce of
the Oil of Violets, and half an ounce of the Oil of sweet Almonds mixed
together.

Straitness of the Breasts: This is frequently occasioned by evil Humors
settling in the Breasts. To remedy which,

Take Taxus-Barbatus, Fennel, and Licorice, of each a little handful: boil them
in Water and Wine a like quantity; and when they become tender, strain the
liquid part through a Linnen-cloath; sweeten it with Sugar, and take about a
quarter of a pint of it pretty hot in a Morning fasting.

This likewise removes Hoarsness, or Defects occasioned by Cold, or tough Phlegm.

Strengthening the Bowels: Take Cloves, or Chives (not Bulbs) of Garlic and
swallow at convenient times one or two of them without chewing.

Stump-Pye to Season: Take Veal or Mutton mince it raw, and make it up into
Balls about the bigness of large Walnuts; then put half an ounce of Pepper,
half an ounce of Nutmegs, and half an ounce of Cloves and Mace; Marjoram,
Thyme, and Savory cut small, then add a pound of Currants: mix these well
together, and put them to two pound of the Meat; then work them up into Balls
of the aforesaid bigness with six Eggs, and at the closing up put a pound of
Butter dispersed among them in little Balls as big as Marbles. Then make a
Caudle with a quarter of a pint of Whitewine, half a quartern of Verjuice, the
Yolks of three Eggs, and a little whole Mace: then putting in about a quarter
of a pound of Butter when they are well beaten up and thickened over a gentle
Fire, put it into the Pie; and so closing the Lid, bake it in an indifferently
well heated Oven.

Surfeit-Water: Take what quantity of Brandy you please, and steep a
proportionable quantity of red Poppy-flowers in it, the black Bottoms being
taken off; and when the color is extracted, press them out, and put in fresh,
and so do till the Brandy is of a deep Tincture; then slice in Nutmeg, Ginger
and Cinnamon, of each two drams, to a quart of the Brandy, and add an ounce of
fine Sugar likewise to every quart. Then keep it close stopped, and it is
excellent good for Surfeits, Wind, or Illness of the Stomach.

Sweat to Provoke: Take the Herb or Plant called Rape, the Roots of Plantain
the Lesser, and Knot-grass, of each a handful; bruise them well, and boil them
in Vinegar, strain out the liquid part, and take about a quarter of a pint of
it going to Bed, and keep your self warm, and it will purge out the ill Humors
by a gentle breathing Sweat.

Swelling to Break: Take of salt Butter half an ounce, Leaven one ounce, white
Mustard Seed two drams, Garlic one dram, Oil of Camomil three quarters of an
ounce: bruise and mix these together, and apply them hot Poultiswise, spread on
Colwort-leaf, suffering it to lie on four or five Hours; and then if the Matter
be soft, and the Skin not broke, open it gently with a Lancet, or potential
Cautery of Cantharides; and being opened, for its speedier Cure use this
Decoction.

Take round Aristolochia, Agrimony, Self-heal, Parslyroots, and Gentian, of
each an ounce; boil them in half a pint of Wine, and as much Water; and tenting
it with proper Unguents, lay on this consolidating Plaster.

Take the dried Leaves of round Aristolochia one ounce, Frankincense, Mastick,
and Myrrh, of each two drams; Aloes-succotrine one dram, Litharge four
scruples, red Lead two scruples, Meal of Lupins one dram; make these into a
very fine Powder: then dissolve Deers-suet one ounce, Oil of St. John's-wort
six drams, washed Turpentine half an ounce, Beeswax three ounces; and being
well incorporated over a gentle Fire, put in the Powder, and make all into a
Plaster.

This is admirable in any Tumors, or Swellings, and more-particularly in
Plague-Sores.

Swelling when the Gout ceases: To Remedy this, Take the Ashes of burnt
Oister-shells, or rather the Powder of them, when they are calcined, the Ashes
of Spongel and Dodder, of each an ounce: boil them in a pint of sharp Vinegar,
and a quarter of a pint of Water; and with the Decoction bath the liquid part
as hot as may be endured.

Swelling of the Liver, or Milt: Take the Leaves and Berries of Ivy, infuse
them when bruised ten days in Whitewine; then boil it till the Wine is nearly
consumed, strain out, by hard pressing, what liquid part remains, and put to it
a like quantity of Olive-oil, and half the quantity of Beeswax, and therewith
being warmed over a gentle Fire, anoint the Place nearest to the Internals, so
grieved, as hot as it may be endured; and in so often doing, you will find
great Advantage thereby.

Swelling of the Matrix: This is frequently caused by Ventosities, or Windiness
after the Birth of Children. To Remedy it. Take Mustard Seed, or Rape-seed, and
boil them in Water, make a Fomentation, and inject it: but if it happen through
inflammation, or evil purgation, attended with an Ague, let the Party take a
dram of the Powder of Peony-roots in warm Broth, fasting, in which has been
boiled the Flowers of Chamomil.

Swallow-Water: Take twelve Swallows out of the Nest, cast them whole into a
glass Alembick, add thereto the Shavings of a Man's Skull three ounces, Castor
one ounce and a half, Powder of Misleto one ounce; Juice of the Roots and
Leaves of Male-Peony six ounces, Water of the Flowers of Tillet, Lavender, and
Lily of the Valley, of each a pint and a half; Vinegar of Squills half a pint:
macerate them over a gentle Fire the space of forty hours; then distill them in
a moderate Sand-bath, and keep the Water for use.

It is an excellent corrected Anti-Epileptick-Water, and has particular Virtues
against that Distemper. It is given about a spoonful in the Fit, and may be
continued every Day, as occasion requires, after the use of general Remedies.

Swelling of the Yard: Take the Juice of the Herb called Cauda Equina, mix it
with the Juice of Endive, and take four spoonfuls Morning and Evening; or, Take
the Water of the Herb distilled through an Alembick to the like quantity,
anointing the grieved Part with a Mixture of the Oils of Mallows, Roses, and
Earthworms.

Syrup of Citron-Iuice: Take three pints of Citron-Juice extremely purified,
put it into a glass or glazed earthen Vessel; then dissolve therein six pound
of fine Sugar, stir it till the Sugar be wholly incorporated with the Juice;
continue stirring, as well when it is off, as when upon the Fire, and observe
that you make use of no Vessels for the preparation of this, or any other Syrup
of acid Juices, but such as are made of glass, or glazed Earth; for if they be
of Metal, the Acids will take their Tincture and spoil.

This is a great cooler, and therefore given in Fevers and hot Diseases; also
to cut Phlegm, and gargarize sore Mouths.

Syrup of Coral: Take four ounces of red Coral well chosen, beat it into Powder
on a porphyry Stone; moisten it with Rose Water, and being dry, put it into a
glass Cucurbit, and pour on it three pints of the Juice of Barberries well
clarified; put the Cucurbit in a Bath of Ashes moderately hot forty hours,
stirring the Ingredients from time to time with a wooden Spatula; then filter
the Liquor through a brown Paper; weigh it, and return it into a glass Cucurbit
set in Balneo Mariae; dissolve in it the double weight of Sugar, and it is
excellent in pestilential Distempers.

Syrup of Elder: Take ripe Elder-berries, bruise them well, press out the
Juice, and put to a gallon a pint of Canary, or Muscadel, boil it to the
consumption of almost one half, keeping it well scummed; and when it is hot off
the Fire, put in the Sugar, and stir it about: then set it on again till it
thickens to a Syrup.

This cleanses the Stomach and Spleen, takes away the Obstructions of the
Liver, by taking a spoonful fasting, often.

Syrup Epileptick: Take Misleto of the Oak, Roots of Peony, the Shavings of a
dead Man's Skull that died a violent Death, of each half an ounce; Flowers of
Lily of the Valley, Rosemary, Lavender, Sage, and Marigolds, of each a little
handful: bruise the Misleto and Roots, and put them together with the Shavings
of the Skull and Flowers, into a Matras, and pour on them one pint of rectified
Spirit of Wine; and having well closed the Vessel, let them macerate a Week
together over a moderate Heat; then with a gentle heat draw off half the Spirit
of Wine, and preserve it apart. The remainder being pressed, reduced, and
filtered, bring it into the consistence of a Syrup with eight ounces of the
finest Sugar; then aromatize it with two drops of distilled Cinnamon.

This Syrup is very highly commended for the Prevention and Cure of the
Epilepsie. It is to be taken alone, and fasting, from half an ounce to an
ounce: You may reinforce the Dose with a dram of the Spirit drawn off, and mix
the Syrup with cephalic Waters, or Decoctions.

Syrup of Rhubarb: Take of the best Rhubarb, and the Leaves of Senna, of each
two ounces and a half; a handful of Violet-flowers, Cinnamon one dram and a
half, Ginger half a dram, the Water of Bettony, Bugloss, and Succory, of each a
pint and a half: let these infuse over warm Ashes, or Embers, a Night, the
liquid part being well pressed out through a close Strainer; and then boil it
up with Sugar to a Syrup, adding to it four ounces of the solutive Syrup of
Roses.

This is a very curious and gentle Purge, and may be safely given to Children
and weak People upon any urgent occasion, they being kept from taking Cold upon
its reception. The Dose is from one ounce to an ounce and a half. It expels
evil Humors, fortifies the Stomach, and causes a good Digestion, kills Worms
in Children, and causes gentle breathing Sweats.

Syrup for Rheums: Take Syrup Jubebs, Syrup of Corn Poppy-flowers, and dried
Roses, of each an ounce: mix these together, and take half a spoonful at a time.

Syder to Make and Order: Take your Apples, as you fancy the Syder most
convenient to your Palate, viz. either Red-streaks, Pearmains, Pippins,
Golden-Pippins, etc. when they are indifferent ripe, so that upon shaking they
will fall with tolerable Ease: bruise or grind your Apples very small; and then
putting them into a Hair-Bag, squeeze out the Juice in a Press by degrees, and
not over-hastily: put up the Liquid part into a Cask seasoned by burning a Rag
in it, at the end of a Stick, dipped in Brimstone, when the Smoke is
evaporated, and the Vessel washed with a little warm Liquor that has run
through the second straining, or Husks of the Apples: and to make it work
kindly, put in a little Flower and Honey made up in a Past, and enclosed in a
thin Rag; so let it stand in a moderate warm place six or seven Days; and then
draw it off from the Lees or Settlings into another Cask so ordered or Bottle
it up at your discretion. But in Bottling take care to leave an inch space from
the Cork, lest it working or fermenting again, it either force out the Cork, on
break the Bottles. Or if such Danger appear by the singing of the Air through the
porous Part of the Cork, you may open them and give them vent, or have a Quill
run through the Cork, which you may stop and open at pleasure with less danger
and difficulty. And so of the Cask, in Winter keep it in a warm place for fear
of chilling or freezing: and in Summer in a cold Place, lest it ferment; and
that tainting it, it grow musty or thick. You may likewise preserve it from
these latter, by putting a little lump of Loaf-Sugar for it to feed on.

Syder of Codlins: This is usually made for present spending; for it will not
keep longer than Autumn, though it is of an excellent Taste, and very pleasant,
and sparkling to the Eye; and so called Summer-Syder. To do this, Take your
Codlins when they begin to be ripe, and lay them in Hay or Straw three Days,
after they are gathered, to sweat a little; then cut them in quarters, and take
out the Coar and Kernels, and bruise them as the former; squeeze out the Liquid
part, and let it run into a Vessel beneath the Press, through a very fine Hair
or Tiffany-Sieve, that may stop the Fragments that will come away with it.
Being drawn off, warm it over a gentle Fire, but suffer it not to boil, scum
off the part that bubbles up, and sprinkle into it some fine powdered white
Sugar Candy; then put it up into a Cask, and with a little of it, heat about
half a pint of Ale-Yeast, and pour it in very warm; and so let it work for
Twenty four Hours, then draw it off into another Cask, or Bottles, and leave
either of them open ten or twelve Hours in a cool place till it is fit to stop
up close: and so ordering it, it will be fit to drink in eight or ten Days, and
have a curious cooling tart flavor with it.

Syder another way: Take such Apples as are suitable to your Palate, pare them,
and cutting out the Core and Kernels, slice them, and boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water till a third part be consumed. A Peck of sliced Apples to a
Barrel of Water, when first put in, before the consumption, is sufficient. Then
strain the Water from the boiled Apples, and pour it on three Pecks of bruised
Apples that are not boiled; and so letting it, after fourteen or fifteen Hours
steeping, run from them; then press out what will not otherways come away by
the swelling of the Apples, and put it up for use. Let it work sufficiently;
then stop it close, and be careful to mind it, also giving vent, if there be
occasion, lest it force the Cask, or Bottles; and when it is fined, it will be
in Color and Taste like Champaign Wine.

Syder another Way: Take a peck of Apples and slice them, and boil them in a
Barrel of Water, till the third part be wasted; then cool your Water as you do
for Wort: when it is cooled you must pour the Water upon three measures of
grownd Apples; then drain out the Water at a Tap three or four times a day, for
three Days together; then press out the Liquor and Tun it up: when it has done
working, then stop it up close.

Syder its Spirit: This may be gained without distilling, and the better way by
setting a Hogshead of Syder to freeze in Winter, and so the strength of it
retiring to the middle, (which will be about twelve or fourteen gallons, when
the weaker part is overpowered by the cold^ let it out by broaching with a hot
Iron. It will prove stronger then Canary, and much of the Taste.

This Way is frequently used in New England, and other Places, where they have
great plenty of Syder.

TAblets of Saffron: Take Saffron of Vitriol of Mars half an ounce, Earthworms
washed in Wine, dried and pulverized, one dram, Cinnamon Powder, very fine,
half a dram, refined Sugar boiled in Mugwort-water six ounces: mix them well,
and make them into Tablets, called Tablets of Saffron of Mars.

These Tablets are proper to open Obstructions of the Bowels, and particularly
those of the Matrix. The Dose is from two drams to half an ounce: they are to
be taken fasting in a Morning, and about an Hour after drink two or three
spoonfuls of Wormwood Wine.

Taffety-Tarts: Take fine Flower a quarter of a peck, the Yolks of twelve Eggs,
sweet Butter two pound, Yeast a quarter of a pint, Sugar two ounces: mix these
well with hot Liquor till they may be made into a stiff Past, roll it up into
small Balls, and then into thin Plates with your Roller: wash round the Brims
of them with new Milk; then boil Pippens soft, take off the Peel, and scrape
off the Pulp from the Core; mix the Pulp with a little Sugar, Rose Water, the
Scrapings, and candied Orange-peel, and a little Marmalade of Quinces: make
them up in the forms of Tarts, bake them in a gentle Oven, after you have dried
them first in a warm Place, and serve them up scraped over with Sugar, and
sprinkled with Essence of Violets, or Roses.

Talk-Water: Take of the best Talk six pound, slit it in five pieces, put it in
a thin Canvas Bag, and let it down into a Well, or any deep damp place, by a
Rope, that it may hang about a Yard from the Water, with a Vessel under it, to
receive the dropping when it moistens.

Let it hang there ten or twelve Days, then take the Water you find and distill
it with as much of the Water of Fumitory in a cold Still.

This is an excellent Beautifier, makes the Skin smooth and plump, giving a
rosy Blush, and wonderfully preserves a youthful and healthy Complexion in Men
and Women.

Tansie: The Juice is good, but the Conserve is most approved. It Is used for
the Gripes, Stone in the Kidneys, Worms in the Belly, Obstruction of the
Courses, and the Dropsy: It resists Putrefaction, and brings away or expels
putrified Blood: It is good for the Scurvy, and purifies the whole Mass of
Blood, enlivening the whole Body; but especially for the Dropsy it is taken
with good success.

Tansie the New Way: Take about twelve or thirteen new-lay'd Eggs to three
pints of Cream, yet put in but seven of the Whites of the Eggs, and strain out
a pint of the Juice of Spinach, or Endive, and Sorrel, six or seven spoonfuls
of the Juice of Tansie, Nutmeg sliced small, and half a pound of fine Sugar,
with a little Rose Water and a little Salt beat together: then fry it in a
clean Pan, that it be not blacked, with Butter. Serve it up with Sugar,
Rose Water, and Orange-juice.

Tansie, another way: Take a penny Manchet, grate it very fine, add a handful
of fine Flower, and the Yolks of six Eggs; then grate in two Naples Biskets:
make these thin into a Batter with Rose Water and Canary; then add two ounces
of the Juice of Garden-Tansie, after it is well clarified and settled, and an
ounce of the Juice of Clary, with a little beaten Cinnamon and Sugar: Fry these
in sweet Butter over a gentle Fire, till it becomes somewhat brown, but beware
of burning it, for then it is spoiled: then serve it up sprinkled with
Rose Water, wherein Saffron has been infused, and scrape over some Loaf-sugar.

Taragon: This is used frequently in Sallads to correct the coldness of other
Herbs, and their Crudities. It is good for cold Stomachs, procuring an
Appetite, and expelling Wind: It provokes Urin and the Courses, opens
Obstructions; and being chewed, evacuates Phlegm, and eases the Pains of the
Teeth.

Taragon-Poultis: Take of Taragon a handful, Ruetops half a handful,
Brionyleaves five or six; bruise them well, and mix them with two ounces of the
Oil of Water-lilies.

This is an excellent Poultis, to allay Inflammations in Swellings, ease Pains
in the Belly, by being applied to the Navel pretty warm; suddenly draws to a
Head, and breaks Plague-fores, or other Swellings caused by internal Corruption.

Tar-Water: Take of the best Sweeds Tar, refined from its dross, or settling,
six pound, put it into a thin earthen Vessel, and set that Vessel in a cold
Still; make under it a gentle Fire, and when there comes a thorough Heat, a
thin Vapor will ascend and distill into your Receiver; or for fear of injuring
the bottom of your Still, you may have such an earthen Vessel as will shut
close with the head of your Still.

This is an excellent and approved Water for all dry or old Sores, Scurfs,
Scabs or Ulcers, being washed or bathed with it. It likewise eases the Pains of
the Gout, or any Pains occasioned by coldness in the Joints. A Lint dipped in it,
and applied, eases the Pains in the Teeth: the Temples bathed with it eases the
Pains in the Head.

Tart of Green Pease: Boil the Pease tender, and pour them out into a
Cullender, season them with Saffron, Sugar, and Salt, add sweet Butter, and
then close up these Materials in a Past or Coffin: when it is baked, ice it
over with Sugar and Rose Water: put in a little Verjuice, and shake it well;
and so scraping a little Sugar on the Lid, serve it to up.

Tart of Green Sprouts: Take green Sprouts, and give them a scald in hot Water,
lay them a draining, and so mince them small, and put them into fine Paste, and
garnish them with Herbs, season them with Lard melted, and Beef-marrow, and an
Onion stuck with Cloves and Pepper, and some thin slices of interlarded Bacon
between the interlayings of the Herbs, and so cover it up with some Paste; and
when it is baked, put in some Gravy, and the Juice of Lemon, and serve it up.

Tart of Pistaches: Cut the Pistaches, and green Citron, and put it into fine
Past, and season it well with Sugar and Cinnamon, with the Juice of Lemon, and
cover it up; when you serve it, put Orange-flowers flowers to it for garnish,
or other candied Flowers.

Tart of Rice: Boil the Rice, when clean dressed, in Cream, or Milk; and when
it is tender, put it into a Dish, and season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, and
Cinnamon, a little Pepper, Salt and Sugar, the Yolks of six Eggs, and the Juice
of Oranges: bake it in a gentle Oven; and being enough, draw it: then scrape
Sugar on the Lid of it, and so serve it up.

Tartar, the Cream soluble: To make this Soluble, Take Cream of Tartar, as much
as is convenient, dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of hot Water; then
gently drop into it Liquor of Salt of Tartar till the Ebullition cease,
evaporate the superfluous Moisture, and the soluble Cream of Tartar will
remain; for the quantity of the fixed Salt surmounting the Acidity of the Cream
of Tartar, breaks the union of its parts, and insinuating its pores, makes it
dissolvible in cold Water, or cold Liquors; whereas, otherways, it could not be
dissolved, but in those that are boiling hot.

For Soluble Emetick Cream of Tartar take this Rule, Take Crocus Metallorum,
mixed with Salts and Cream of Tartar, of each two ounces; pulverize them very
finely, and let them macerate for fifteen Hours in three pints of cold
Spring Water: then digest them as long in a moderate Sand-bath, and at length
increase the Fire, and let them boil gently; filter the Liquor, and evaporate
it till a thin Film cover it, then set it in a cool place to crystalize.

The Parts of the Tartar-Cream being disunited by the fixed Salt remaining in
the Saffron of Metals, is easily dissolved in cold Water, and fitted to purge
upward and downward, giving it from two to three, four, five, or six grains, in
Broth, or Wine, or some other convenient Liquor.

Teal Boiled: Take the largest sort of Teal, draw them and pick them clean,
then take about a dozen stewing Oisters, Thyme, Sage, Winter-savory and Parsley
clean stripped and cut small: make them with a little Butter and Pepper into a
Ball stiffned with Flower; and the Fowl being trussed, put this into the Belly,
tying the Neck and Vent very close, then put the Fowl into the Water when it
begins to boil: being boiled tender, dish them on Sippets, with Gravy,
Anchovy-sauce, and the Herbs; laying the Oisters, with some Lemon Peel and
Parsley, about the Dish for garnish.

Tears to Prevent: If Tears or watery Humors are usually standing in the Eyes,
hindering the Sight, and being much troubled, Take of Aloes Epatick two drams,
infuse them in about half a pint of Whitewine, and Rose Water, of each an equal
quantity, and wash the Eyes with the Liquid part Morning and Evening; or else
foment them with the Water of Stechado's.

Teasle, its Decoction: This is usually called Fullers-Thistle; the Roots of it
boiled in Wine help to cure Ulcers, and Warts. There is a Water that is
received in the hollowness of the Leaves of this Plant as it grows, after a
shower of Rain, which, by long standing there, becomes good for the
Inflammations of the Eyes, also to take away Spots from the Face, and beautify
it. The Herb boiled in Wine purges by Urin.

Teeth to Fasten: Take a pint of Red or Claret Wine, and about two drams of
Japan-earth, dissolve it as much as may be; then pour off the Clear, and wash
the Mouth with it often: or, Take Sage, and Winter-savory, boil them in
Spring Water till the Water is strong of the Herbs; then put into a pint an
ounce of Honey, and half an ounce of Alom, boil it a litile till the latter are
dissolved: and then it being strained, wash your Mouth with it at convenient
times.

Teeth to keep Sound: Let the Party, if it can be agreeable, frequently rub his
Teeth with the Ashes that remain in a Pipe after it is smoaked, washing it
afterward with fair Water. Or, Take the Juice of Housleek, and Scabious, and
wash your Mouth with it once or twice a Week in the Morning.

Teeth to make Firm: Take the Ashes of Vine-sprigs, and those of the Root of
Burdock, put them into Vinegar, let them steep about six Hours; and then first
wash your Mouth with fair Water, and afterward with Vinegar strained clear from
the Ashes, and it will fix and preserve the Teeth to a very great Age.

Teeth Offensive: If your Teeth, by reason of their Rottennest, or Humors
settling under them, cast an ill savor, to remedy it, Take four ounces of
Cummin-seed, sees if in a quart of Whitewine with some Tops of Baum and Mint,
till a quarter of a pint be consumed: and with this wash your Mouth Morning and
Evening.

Tench-Pye: To order this, and season it well, Take about six Tenches; and
having made the Coffin, lay a laying of Butter, and some Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and
Mace lightly scattered over it; then lay in the Tench, put over them some more
Butter and Spice, with a few blue Currants clean washed, and pour in about a
quarter of a pint of Claret, then bake it well: when enough, take it out, and
put in more Butter at the spout, and serve it up with some fine Sugar dusted
over it.

In this manner you may season a Carp-pye, but three of them, if any thing
large, are sufficient in one Pie.

Tender Eyes: Take the Water of Plantane, Eye bright, Pimpernel, and the Oil of
Roses; beat them up together, and wash or anoint the Eyes with them, and the
Sight will be much strengthened.

Tenesmus: Mix Balsam of Sulphur, made with Oil of Turpentine, with Linfeed, or
some other suchlike convenient drying Oil, till the Balsom be thereby so well
allayed, that it may be well endured; then let the Party dip a Finger in it,
and use it as a suppository once or twice a Day.

Terms to Provoke: Take for three Mornings together, about the expected time of
the Menses, a dram, or a dram and a half of the Galls and Livers of Eels dried
and reduced to Powder, in a Glass of Whitewine or Canary.

Tetter: To cure this, Take black Soap a quarter of an ounce, Bole-armoniack
two drams, Oil of Turpentine three drams, Beeswax half an ounce, and
Bears-grease one ounce; make these up into an Ointment, or thin Plaster, and
apply it to the Place, renewing it every Day, and a speedy Cure will ensue.
This also breaks the Whitloe, and is excellent against Scalds or Burns.

Tetters to Kill: Take of burnt Alom. Ginger, and Flower of Brimstone, of each
a like quantity: mix them well, and incorporate them with fresh Butter, so much
as when melted will bring them into the consistence of an Unguent; and with it
anoint the Part afflicted, as hot as can be well endured, when you are going to
Bed, and let it continue on all Night; and when you rise wash it off with
Celandine-water: but upon going to Bed take a little Gascoin-powder in a
spoonful or two of Treacle-water to prevent the Humors being driven into the
Mass of Blood, which oftentimes happens when this is not on, bathing the Place
with Celandine-water.

Thorow-war: The Decoction of this Herb in Wine, of the Leaves powdered, are
applied successfully in Ruptures and Contusions. Some hold it is a proper
Remedy for the King's Evil, also Fractures, and an Erisipela's.

Thoru-Apple: An Ointment made of the Juice of the Leaves, and Hogs lard, is
excellent for Burns and Scalds. The Seed is to be avoided, because taken for a
time it occasions Madness.

Throat Sore: Take Verjuice of Grapes an ounce, best Honey half an ounce, crude
Alom about a dram and a half, Rock, or Spanish Salt half a dram: make these
into a thinness, and with a fine Rag at the end of a small Stick, or Wyre,
thrust it as far as is convenient into your Throat where the Sore is, and bathe
the Place grieved with it. Do this often, and between every two times make a
gargling with some Plantane and Rose Water.

Throat-wort: This Plant, especially the Root, is astringent and drying, and
therefore the Decoction is excellent at the beginning of Ulcers and
Inflammations of the Mouth and Tonsils, and for other Diseases that require
astringent Remedies.

Thrush: This is usually incident among Children, and frequently proves very
dangerous: wherefore to Remedy it, Take an Egg, open the top of it, and take
out the White and Yolk, and fill the Shell with the Juice of red Sage, and set
it on hot Embers till it simpers; then skim it with a Knife's point whilst any
Scum will rise, and take as much Alom beaten as the bigness of a small
Hazle-nut, and half a spoonful of Honey, which when the Juice begins to wast,
put in to fill it; so let it boil a little: and having cooled it, rub the
Party's Mouth with a little of it, washing it afterward with the Juice of Sage.

Thyme: (here I mean the wild sort) It is hot and dry, and consequently forces
the Courses and Urin. It is Cephalic, Uterine, and Stomachick, and therefore
good a-against Spitting of Blood, Gripes, and Convulsions, etc. Outwardly
applied, it eases the Pains of the Head, and Giddiness, and disposes to Sleep.

Thyme, its Virtues: These are very great, as will appear to any one that does
but observe, That it provokes Urine: it does heat, and being taken in Drink,
does purge the Internals, and expectorates all nauseous and ill Humors of the
Lungs by Spitting: four drams of Thyme dried and reduced to Powder, being taken
fasting in a glass of Canary, by often repeating, eases the Pains of the Gout;
for it gently purges Choler and other sharp Humors: It is good also for
Diseases in the Bladder; and a dram being taken in an ounce of Water and Honey,
is good for such as have their Bellies begin to swell, for the Sciatica, and
Pains in the Reins, Sides, and Breast; for Inflammations and Stitches about the
forepart of the Belly; for Melancholy Persons, and for those that are troubled
in Mind and much given to Frights and Fears upon slight occasions, if three
drams be taken in an ounce of Honey and Vinegar well tempered together: it is
also profitable against the Inflammations of the Eyes, and the vehement Pains
thereof, and much revives the Sight. There is an Oil extracted from it of the
color of Gold, which comes forth with a Water, when the Herb being fresh and
green is distilled in a Bath of hot Water. This Oil smells like a Citron, and
is very tart in taste: its Virtues are to heat all cold Parts; but by the way
note, That for what has been mentioned, Black Thyme must not be chosen; for it
corrupts the Temperature, and engenders Choler; and therefore it must be
that which bears a carnation Flower, or that which bears a white one.

Tickling: This is caused by defluxions of Rheum, and is often very
troublesome. To remove it, Take Olibanum and Venice-Treacle, of each a like
quantity; incorporate them well, and make them up into little Pills, and let
the Party take a dram of them; and if need require it, a scruple or two once or
twice a Day.

Tiffanies Faded: To recover these, Take the Water of Vervain a quart, half a
pint of the Water that distills from the Vine when it is cut in the Spring, etc.
a handful of the Roots of Primroses, and as many Rosemary-flowers; to these put
a quart of new Milk, and boil them together with two ounces of Alom in Powder:
strain out the Decoction, and steep your Tiffanies in it twenty four Hours; and
then washing them out, they will not only look much whiter, and be the more
capable of a gloss. In this manner you may do by Lace, Muslins, or Lawns, if
the substance of them be not too much decayed.

Tiffanies to Wash: Take the best crown Soap, and soap them on their Hems, or
Laces; and with a gentle Hand pass them over three Lathers, and afterward
rince them, keeping them as much as may be likewise from the Air, and dry them
over the Flame of Brimstone: then add a quarter of an ounce of Smalt to a pound
of Starch; and if it be convenient, add the bigness of a Hazle-nut in Alom,
which you may dissolve, boil it to a fineness, and charge it lightly upon your
Tiffanies and dry them being wet by a Fire, still clapping them in your Hands;
and when they are clear, shape them by a Pattern you design them for, iron them
with a smooth though quick Iron, till they shine, and you will find little
difference as to the gloss between them and new. Some, instead of Starch, use
Gumwater: but this I leave to your Discretion.

Tincture of Amber: Reduce five or six ounces of yellow Amber into an
impalpable Powder, put it into a Bolt Head, and on it pour Spirit of Wine the
height of four Fingers, and stop the Head with another to make a double
Vessel; and when you have exactly luted the Junctures with a Skin or wetted
Bladder, place it in Digestion in hot Sand, and leave it five or six Days till
the Spirit of Wine is sufficiently tinged with the Amber color, then decant
the Tincture, and put more Spirit of Wine to the Matter, and so digest it as
before; then having separated the Impregnation, mix it with the other, and
filter them, and so put them into an Alembick, and distill them with a soft
Fire. About half the Spirit of Wine, which might before serve, may do in this
last. Keep the Tincture which you find remaining at the bottom of the Alembick
close stopped up.

You may take ten drops of this in some convenient Liquor for the Apoplexy,
Palsy, or Epilepsie; and it is much commended for the helping Women in most
Distempers of the Head, or Affliction of the Brain.

Tinctura Sacra: Take of the Species of Hiera Picra one ounce, Canary a pint:
infuse the former in the latter in some cool place the space of seven Days,
shaking it two or three times a Day, and then let it stand till the Wine looks
clear.

This wonderfully cleanses and strengthens the Stomach, is good for the
Jaundice-Dropsie, ill Habit of Body, and for opening Obstructions in the Liver
and Spleen. Three spoonfuls may be taken at a time, or more or less, according
to the Age and Strength of the Party afflicted.

Tincture of Saffron: Digest in eight ounces of Treacle-water two ounces of
Saffron for the space of six Days; then the Tincture being strained out, keep
it close stopped for use. You may take of this half an ounce at a time in a
glass of Wine, or any other convenient Liquor.

This is wonderfully efficacious in chearing and comforting the Heart,
concocting the crude Humors of the Breast, helps the Jaundice, and is good
against the Infection of the Plague, and is of singular validity in driving out
the Smallpox, but in that case you must be wary in taking too much of it, for
fear of inflaming the Blood.

Toasts, or Balls, etc. Fried: Take a boiled or raw Pike, mince it and stamp it
into some old fat Cheese grated into it, season it with Cinnamon, Sugar, and
boiled Currants, add the Yolks of hard Eggs grated; and these being all well
mingled together, you may make them up into Toasts, Balls, Pastils, or any such
little things, as you please; and frying them with sweet Butter, and grated
Nutmeg, they will taste wonderful pleasant: but the chief use they were devised
and intended for, was to lay about the Dish, or under sundry sorts of fried
Meats, the better to set them off, though they eat very curiously.

Tobacc^o: Though many are ignorant of any use of this Plant than in smoking,
it has nevertheless many other ways of singular Virtue, viz. It resists
Putrefaction, provokes sneezing; the smoking of it stops Catarrhs, and
disposes to rest, takes off Weariness, and suppresses the Fits of the Mother:
It is a good Preservative in Plague times. A Gargatism of it cures the
Toothache, and dissolves the Tumor of the Uvula. A Bath of it, or the green
Leaves applied, cure Leprosy, the Itch, kills Lice, and heals Wounds, cleanses
Ulcers, and takes out the Fire of Scalds, or Burns. The Smoking of it
strengthens the Stomach, helps Concoction, and gently moves the Belly; but is
not good to be taken, especially to any excess, by those of a hot Constitution,
because it dries up or evacuates too much moisture: It eases Pains in the
Teeth, a hollow Tooth especially, being stopped with it, either as it is, or the
Cinder of it not burnt to Ashes. And in case of the Palsy, take the green
Leaves of Tobacco, and infuse them in old Mallaga, and rub the Parts afflicted
with the liquid part after Sweating: this has been often tried with success. A
Pipe lighte^d, and the Smoke forced up the Fundament, eases the Colic, or
Pains of the Belly; it also cures the Fits of the Mother, and Faintings.

Tobacco Salve: To make an excellent Salve of Tobacco, Take the Juice of green
English Tobacco one quart, Olive-oil a pint, with as much Turpentine, Wax, and
Verdigrease, as will thicken them over a gentle Fire to the consistence of a
Plaster.

This is excellent for Cuts, Bruises, Burns, Scalds, Gunshot, and to be applied
to the Place which any venomous Creature has bit or stung.

Tongue-Pye: In the first place, Take a Neat's-tongue well boiled, blanch it
and cut it in thin slices, as also some interlarded Bacon, and lay a Laying of
the Bacon between every Layings of the Tongue; but let the Bacon be cut much
thinner and lesser in quantity: then take half an ounce of Pepper, two large
Nutmegs, and three Anchoveys, forbearing to sprinkle any Salt: after this make
a Leer with half a pint of Claret Wine, and some Gravy, the Yolks of three
Eggs, a piece of Butter, and grated Nutmeg, boil them up to a considerable
thickness: then when the Pie is to be served up, put it in with a Funnel at the
Pipe, or open Place left for that purpose. And by this method you may order and
season a Hare-pye to the best Advantage to please the Palate.

Toothache: To ease the violent Pain of the Teeth, with which old and young are
too frequently afflicted, Take two parts of Lisbon-Sugar, and one part of black
round Pepper, fine them into Powder, and put them into a Spoon over two or
three well kindled Coals; and when the Sugar begins to relent, take off the
Spoon, and whilst the Mixture is soft, form it into little grains, the size to
shape the hollowness of your Tooth, and stop it in as close as may be; and so
renew it as you find the first wast.

Toothache, another: Take Henbane-seed, and Hyssop-seed, bruise them very
small; then put as much Sweeds-Tar as will fix them together, to make then up
into little Pellets, and stop these into the hollowness of the Tooth, tied up
in a little fine Rag.

Toothache, another: Take Ginger, beat it fine, and sow it up in a fine Rag,
more long than broad; then so^ it in the Spirit of Wine, la^ it to the Root of
your Tooth^ and though by its Heat it may at first cause the Nerve of the Tooth
to rave a little; yet in a short time, being often dipped and applied, it will
altogether take away the Pain. Or, for want of this, take what follows, viz.

Sees clarified Honey one ounce in two ounces of Rosemary-water, or
Hyssop-water; and taking off the Scum that will arise, put in the sine Dust of
Pepper, let it consume till a blackness ensue, and it thickens; then dip into
it a Sage Leaf, whilst it is hot, and lay to the Tooth, and the Pain will
presently abate.

Tooth to make Fall out: If you have a loose and troublesome Tooth, or one that
is hollow and offensive, that you would remove, Take the Shavings of Hearts
horn, burn it to Powder, mix with it a little slacked Lime, the Tallow of a
Ram, and the Juice of a white Lily and Plantane-root, stop it into the Tooth,
in a Rag, if hollow; or otherways, lay it to it between the Cheek and the Gum,
and it will in a little time, fall out without any pain at all.

Tooth not Hollow: If there be no hollowness in the Tooth, or visible defect,
and yet it achs, Take the Root of ^ack Hellebore, commonly ^lled Bear's-foot,
scrape off the Rind, and cut a pretty slice, and lay it to the Tooth between
your Gums, and the inside of your Cheek, avoiding the Rheum that it will
occasion; and so renew it with a fresh piece. If you fancy, by a strange sort
of a stirring, at certain times, that there are Worms in your Teeth, sprinkle
some Henbane-seed and Frankincense, on a Pan of Coals, hold a Funnel, the broad
end over, and let the narrow Spout be placed to the bottom of the Tooth that
the Fume may come to it; and if there be any place for them to do it, the Worms
will creep out; If they do not, it will however kill them.

Tooth-Wort: The greater sort of this is excellent for Ruptured and inward
Wounds, and for Diseases rising from Defluxions, by taking two drams of the
Powder in Broth successively for several Days. It likewise eases Pains and
Aches in several Parts of the Body.

Tormentil: This is drying, and very astringent, and therefore is very powerful
in the Fluxes of the Belly and Womb; and being mixed with vulnerary precious
Ointments and Plasters, it festinates the Cure of Wounds, old Sores, and
Ulcers. From half to a whole dram of this, taken in Wine, is greatly commended
for curing an Epidemick Dysentery; Rhubarb being used before, if occasion
require it.

Treacle, Remedy for Agues: Take of Venice, or London-Treacle, put it into
about four ounces, of White Wind: then put it into a Vessel close covered, and
let it simper for half an hour over the Fire, but not boil, stirring or rather
shaking it sometimes about, and take it pretty hot about two Hours before the
Fit comes on, and let the Party keep close in a warm Bed, in order, to sweat;
and repeat this two or three times.

This was experienced by the famous Sir Kenelm Digby, and by him ordered to be
given to diverse Persons; which was rarely given without Success.

Treacle-Spirit: To make this, Take the Roots of Master-wort, Angelica,
Athamantick, Spignel, and the bigger Valerian, of each three ounces;
Juniper Berries, and the Seeds of Bishop's-weed, and Seseli of Marseiles, of
each an ounce; approved Treacle four ounces: The Roots and Seeds being bruised
together, macerate them eight Days in two pints of rectified Spirit of Wine:
then make your Distillation, and preserve the Spirit.

This Spirit resists very powerfully all sorts of Poisons: It may be taken in
Spanish-Wine, or any Cordial Liquor, from one to four drams: It may be also
applied to the Nostrils, Forehead, Temples, and Sutures of the Skull, for
Head-achs, Fainting Fits, or Drousiness of the Brain.

Treacle-VVater: This is the most Excellent sort of all. To make it, Take the
Roots of Gentian, Angelica, Master-wort, Valerian, and Contrayerva, of each two
ounces; Citron-rinds, and Orange-peels, Cinnamon, Cloves, and Juniper Berries,
of each an ounce; Tops of Water-Germander, Rue, and St. John's-wort, of each
one handful: infuse them to three Days in Spirit of Wine, and Waters of Nuts,
and Blessed Thistle, of each a quart: then add four ounces of approved Treacle:
distill the whole in a Sand-Bath, and keep the Water close stopped for use.

This is an excellent Water to resist Poison, and to fortify all the noble
Parts, being taken from one dram to half an ounce. Some make a Treacle-water,
by dissolving the Treacle in equal parts of Spirit of Wine and Vinegar, using
it without any Distillation; but Reason and Experience tells us this is far
more Excellent.

Tre-foil, or Bucksbane: The Decoction of it in White Wind is good against the
Scurvy, as also, for Pains in the Limbs. The Leaves boiled in Beer, and taken
hot, ease Pains in the Bowels; but being bitter, it is best taken in any
lenitive Syrup.

Trembling, a Remedy: If the Members tremble and shake, that you cannot at
certain times hold them still, though no cause of Fear, Danger, or Defect, is
evident to cause it, anoint the crown of the Head, the Hair being shaven off,
and the other Parts especially where you find the Trepidation, with Oil of
Cinnamon, and drink two drams of the Water that is made of Man, or Swine's
Blood, brought to putrefaction, with Aqua-vitae, or Spirit of Wine, and
afterward distilled: and this must be frequently repeated for a Month's space.

Troches Pectoral: Take of white Sugar a pound, white Sugar Candy, and Penids,
of each four ounces; of the Roots of Florentine-orris half an ounce, white
Starch an ounce and half, Licorice six drams, with a convenient quantity of the
Mucilage of Tragacanth extracted in Rose Water: make the Materials into
Troches, that they may be perfumed, as occasion requires it, with four grains
of Ambergrease, and three of Musk.

These are Excellent for Coughs and Catarrhs in Winter, and for the preventing
taking Cold in such whose Occasions constrain them to Travel in damp and foggy
Airs.

Troches of VVinter-Cherries: Take of Winter-Cherries three drams, Gum-Arabick,
Tragacanth, Olibanum, Pine-nuts, bitter Almonds, white Starch, Juice of Lemons,
Bole-armoniack, and the Seeds of white Poppies, of each six drams; Melons,
Cucumbers and Gourds, of each three drams and a half; Smallage, white Henbane,
white Amber, and Earth, of Lemons and Opium, of each two drams; and with the
Juice of fresh Winter-Cherries make Troches. The Dose is two scruples to be
taken at a time.

This is excellent for expelling Gravel from the Bladder, or Kidneys, and to
provoke Urin.

Trochiscs of Benjamine: Take Benjamine, and the Ashes of a Sallow-Tree, of
each an ounce; Rosin and Storax prepared a like quantity; sweet Tacamahacca,
and Lignum Aloes finely powdered, of each half an ounce; Ambergrease a dram,
Musk half a dram, Zebit six grains, distilled Oil of Lignum Rhodium, Cinnamon,
and Cloves, of each six drops: make up these with Gum-Tragacanth extracted with
Rose Water.

These are more excellent than any, as casting a more fragrant and incomparable
sweet Smell.

Trochiscs Odoriferous: Take the Powder of green Willow-coals three ounces,
Labdanum two ounces, Storax and Benjamine, of each half an ounce; Mastick,
sweet Tacamahacca, and yellow Amber, of each two drams; Lignum Rhodium a dram
and half: make them up with the Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth extracted with
Rose Water, and dry them in the Shade.

This is an excellent Perfume for Chambers and Rooms of Entertainment, as
likewise to drive away ill Airs, and bad Scents.

Trochiscs, another Way: Take the Coals and Ashes of Rosemary, beat small, and
sifted finely, four ounces, Labdanum two ounces, Storax and Renjamine, of each
an ounce; Roots of Cyprus, Aromatic, red Mastick, and Amber, of each two
drams, Cloves one dram, Musk, Civet, and Ambergrease ten grains, the Mucilage
of Gum-Tragacanth, extracted with Orange-flower-water, as much as will make
them up, and suffer them to dry as the former.

These give an excellent Odor, and are very wholesome to the Brain, and drive
away offensive Vermin and Insects, being burnt on Coals.

Trotter-Pye: This is done with Wardens, Quinces, Pears, etc. and you may
either take them severally, or altogether quartered, or sliced raw; it in
quarters, put some whole ones among them; if sliced, beaten Spices, and a
little Butter, and Sugar, taking to every twelve large Quinces a pound of
Sugar, and a quarter of a pound of Butter, close it up and bake it; and when it
is well baked, mash the Fruit; then put in some Cream, and Yolks of Eggs well
beaten, and stir them altogether: then cut the Cover into five or six pieces,
Diamond fashion, put in a little Rose Water, and scrape Sugar over it.

Tumor in the Eye: This is otherways called a Phlyctena, or a little Tumor in
the carneous Tunicle of it. To remove it, Take the Decoction of Mucilages, and
dress the Eye with if for some time to ripen the Tumor; then with a steady
Hand open it with a Lancet, or Needle, and press out the offensive Matter: then
cleanse and heal the Part with Honey dissolved in a little Saga-water. But when
the Tumor is beginning, and not great, if you have not the Decoction of
Mucilages, you may dress the Eye with the Mixture of equal parts of the Water
of Melilot, Chamomil, and Bettony.

Tumor of the Knee: Take a green Colwort-leaf, with red Veins, or Streaks,
pare off the Ribs flat and almost level to the rest of the Leaf; then with the
haft of your Knife bruise it, and apply it to the Part affected, renewing it
three or four times a Day. This also allays any Heat or Pain by other means;
and draws gently, mostly evacuating the Humor by Sweat.

Tumor to Ripen: Take eight, ounces of fat Figs, two ounces of white
Lily-roots, two ounces of Bean-flower, (or Meal:) boil them, the Figs and Roots
being bruised, in as much Water as will reduce them to the consistence of a
good Poultis; which spread to a good thickness, and lay warm upon the Part, and
shift it often till it becomes dry.

Tumors Sharp: Take Spring Water a gallon, put into it a good handful of dried
Sage, let it boil till it be strong of it, at what time put in about two ounces
of Spanish Cake-soap; and when it is dissolved, the Concoction is complete: and
with this, and Stuphes, foment the Part grieved warm for a considerable time
together. This is excellent good to allay and disperse all Tumors accompanied
with sharp and afflicting Humors.

Tumor in the Throat: To cure or remove this, which indeed is sometimes very
dangerous: Take a quart of new Milk, put into it a handful of Mallow-leaves,
and a like quantity of the Leaves of Nightshade: shredding them small, and let
them boil till the Herbs be tender; then put to them an equal quantity of the
Crumb of White-bread, so that being stirred with the other Ingredients, it may
be reduced to the consistence of a Poultis, amongst which scrape a little
Bole-armoniack fine in powder; and so spreading it on a Stay, lay it to the
Throat warm as may be well endured, and as it cools and dries supply it with
another.

Tumor in the Throat, another: To Remedy this dangerous Defect, gargarize your
Mouth with Wine of Pomgranates, and Barly-water mingled together; also take
Syrup of Poppies, and Syrup of Mulberries, of each a quarter of an ounce;
Rose Water three ounces: temper them together, and not only gargarize your
Mouth with it, but mixing a little Honey and Bole-armoniack with it, swallow as
much as will lie on a Knife's-point Night and Morning, and it will allay the
Swelling, and ease the soreness.

Turbut Boiled: Draw the Fish, and wash it clean from the Blood and Slime, put
it into boiling Water and Salt, and suffer it to boil very leisurely, keeping
it scuming, and add more Salt in the boiling; and when the Water begins to
shrink, add a little Whitewine and Vinegar, Mace, Ginger, and two or three
Cloves, with some Lemon Peel; and when it is boiled and cold, put in a sliced
Lemon, or two, and take up the Fish, and keep it in an earthen Pan, with the
Liquor it was boiled in, close covered. Your Liquor you boil it in, must never
be but little more than will cover it; and the Fire must be gentle, over which
it is boiled, for fear of breaking.

Turbut to Fry: Slice the Fish, then hack it with your Knife, and it will be
ribbed, fry it with Butter till it is near brown; then drain the Butter from
it, and the Pan being made clean, put it in again with Claret, Ginger, and
Nutmeg, sliced Anchovy, Salt and Saffron beaten small, and so fry it till, half
the Liquid be consumed; then put in a piece of Butter, mix it well with the
rest, and mince a Lemon into it; then having rubbed the Dish with Onion, or
Shalot, serve it up in what you last fried it in.

Turbit to Sowce: Having boiled it, put it into Vinegar, Salt, and Whitewine,
with some of the Water it was boiled in; then add some Spices, as Cloves,
Nutmeg, and Ginger, some Tops of Fennel, and Bay Leaves, keeping it close
covered.

If you would eat it hot when boiled, pour on it some stewed Oisters, lay
slices of Lemon, and run it over with beaten Butter, place Sippets conveniently
in the Dish, and stick it over with fried Bread. Or, Serve it up with beaten
Butter, sliced Lemon, sweet Herbs boiled and minced, Onions and Barberries cut
small.

Turbut to Stew: To do this the best way, Cut it in slices, and fry it; and
being half fried, put it into a Stew Pan, or convenient Dish, with Claret,
grated Nutmeg, and three or four slices of an Orange, a little Verjuice, or
Vinegar, and some sweet Butter; and when it is sufficiently stewed, dish it up,
and run it over with beaten Butter, sliced Lemon, or Orange and Lemon Peel, and
so serve it up.

Turkey-Pye: For this, to season it well, you must take half an ounce of
Cloves, finely beaten, with a little Mace, Pepper beaten one ounce, Nutmegs
sliced thin, or scraped one ounce and half, a quarter of an ounce of whole
Mace; then put four pound of Butter in the Pie, mix more Salt than Pepper, and
forget not to put two pound of Butter to every peck of Flower: And in this
manner you may season and order a Goose-pye.

Turkey Roasted: Draw the Fowl, and take sweet Herbs, and shred them, and put
them into a Linen Bag with Butter and Spices, and so put it into the Belly;
then bast it as it is turning on the Spit with hot Water, till it is as it were
parboiled; and drying it with a fine Cloth, bast it with Butter, and dridge it
over with a very few Crumbs of Bread and grated Ginger: and when it is roasted,
serve it up with Anchovy-sauce, small Herbs minced, and the Juice of Lemon;
garnishing it with Lemon Peel, Tops of Hyssop, or Winter-savory.

Turkey Souced: Take one or two fat Turkeys when they are well dressed, take
out the Bones, and tie up the Flesh in the manner of a Sturgeon, put into your
Vessel two quarts of White Wind, one of Water, and one of good Vinegar: make it
boil, and pretty well season it with Salt, then put in the Flesh, and let it
boil till it be very tender; and when it is sufficiently boiled, Take it out,
and taste the Liquor; and if it be wanting in sharpness, put more Vinegar, and
when it has boiled a little, put it into an earthen Pot; and when cold, put in
the Liquor it boiled in, quite covering it; so suffer it to remain three Weeks,
or a Month: then serve it up as you do Sturgeon, with Elder, and Vinegar, and
garnished with Fennel. Thus you may pickle a Capon, only then you must lard it
with great Lardings before.

Turnip-Bread: Take about half a Bushel of the middling sort of Turnips, not
sticky, but such as will boil soft; being pared and boiled, press out the Water
very hard till they are quite dry, beat them then in a Mortar, and mix with the
Pulp about two pound of fine Wheat Flour, and two ounces of Carraway-seeds;
put in a pint, or somewhat more of new Ale-yeast, mould it up as other Bread,
and let it be well soaked, and it will not only look, but taste like Bread. This
is not only made for saving Charges in poor Families in a dear Year, but of
late has been much in esteem for Consumptions, and those troubled with
shortness of Breath and Ptissick; being very wholesome and nourishing.

Turpentine Plaster: Take four ounces of the best refined Turpentine, two of
Beeswax, one of Honey, a quarter of an ounce of Verdigrease, Deers Suet two
ounces, Oil of Roses and Lillies, of each an ounce: make these into a Plaster
over a gentle Fire, by well stirring and mixing together.

This is exceeding good to draw Swellings to a Head, ease cold Pains, Aches, or
Numbness of the Joints; to draw out Thorns, Splinters, rusty Iron, broken
pieces of Swords or Gunshot; and is a very singular Drawing Plaster on all
Occasions, where the Humors are stubborn.

Tutsan: This stays Bleeding: the bruised Herb or Juice applied, stays spitting
of Blood, or hinders the blood from flowing inwardly: the Juice being drank
with a little Cinamon-water and the Spirit of Wine.

VAlerian: Half a spoonful of the Powder of the Root of this Herb before the
Stalk springs, taken in Wine, Waters, or Milk, once or twice, helps those that
are troubled with the Falling Sickness: The Leaves bruised are usually applied
with success to slight Wounds, and have a power, when decocted in any
convenient Liquor, to purge upwards and downwards, and give, if the Party be
careful of himself, fine gentle breathing Sweats.

Vdders Baked: To do this the Italian way, Boil the Udder of a Heiffer tender,
then let it stand till it cools, cut it into small square pieces like Dice,
season them with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Cinnamon, Salt, Pistaches, or the
Kernels of Pine-Apples, Dates, and slices of Marrow; then put them into the
raised Past of a Pie, not making it above an inch high, like a Custard, and of
Custard-past, prick it and dry it in an Oven, and put in the Materials before
mentioned, and to them some Custard stuff made of Cream and Eggs, Salt,
Rose Water, and a little dissolved Musk: bake and stick it with the slices of
Dates, candied Pistaches, and scrape fine Sugar on it.

Vdder-Pye, another way: Lard a young Udder with great Lard, season it with
Nutmeg, Cloves, Pepper, and Mace; and when it is boiled tender, and when it is
cool, wrap it in a Collar of Veal, having seasoned it again with the Spices,
and a little Salt, lay some slices of Veal in the bottom of the Coffin of your
Pie, and place the Udder on them, the which cover with other slices of Veal,
and for seasoning, put Lard and Butter, and close it up; and when it is
sufficiently baked, liquor it with clarified Butter, if you design to use it
cold; but if hot, put in White Wind, Gravy, and Butter well beaten up together.

Veal, the Chine to Broil: Cut the Chine in three or four pieces, and lard them
with small Lard, season them with Salt, and broil them, laying under them some
Sprigs of Rosemary, Bay Leaves, and Sage, dust them over with a little Flower;
and being broiled, serve them up with Gravy, the Juice of Lemon, nd beaten
Butter, as a commendable Dish.

Veal, a Leg to Broil: Cut it round the Leg in Slices, or in rowls as thick as
your Finger, and lard, or not lard them at your discretion, broil them softly
on the Embers, beat up Butter, Gravy, the Juice of Oranges, and the Yolk of
Eggs for Sauce.

Veal to Boil: Here I mean a Breast of Veal, a Joint unusually boiled. To do
it, Make a Pudding of grated Manchet, minced Suet, and minced Veal, season it
with Pepper, Nutmeg, and a little Salt, three or four Eggs, Cinnamon, Currants,
Dates, Raisins, Cream, Sugar, and Pepper: mingle them well together, fill the
skinny end of the Breast with them, prick it up, then put it in a Pan, or
between two Dishes, and stew it with strong Broth, Gravy, Whitewine, some
Marrow, sliced Dates, and a few Blades of Mace; run it over with Butter,
Grapes, Lemon-slices, and Barberries. Or thus, Joint it well, and parboil it,
put it into a deep Dish, or Stew Pan, with some strong Broth, and a bundle of
sweet Herbs, some Mace, and slices of interlarded Bacon, some Capers, a few
Cloves, and half a dozen sprigs of Camphire, the Yolks of Eggs and Whitewine:
slew these to a tenderness, and serve them up on fine carved Sippets.

Veal Forced diverse ways: (1.) Mince some Veal with Beef Suet, shred sweet
Herbs small, then beat Cloves, Mace, and Pepper, put in some Yolks of Eggs,
grate in Bolonia Sausages and old Cheese, season it with Salt. (2.) Grated
Cheese, Calves-brains, sweet Herbs, and Spices, Saffron, Eggs, Gooseberries,
and Grapes. (3.) Raw Eggs, Marrow, Butter, sweet Herbs, Lemon Peel shred small,
Ginger, Cinnamon, and Sugar. And these may indifferently serve for Kid, Lamb,
or Venison, that is to be forced or stuffed.

Veal-Pye to Season: Take an ounce of Cloves and Mace finely beaten, a quarter
of an ounce of Pepper, and a quarter of an ounce of whole Mace, half a pound of
Currants, and two ounces of Salt. These are sufficient to season a Loin of Veal,
or any proportionable Joint fitting to be put into a Pie; there must be added
like wise two pound of Butter. And this seasoning is very suitable for a
quarter of Lamb, if it be put in Past.

Vein to Stop: In case a Vein be cut or broke, to stay the excess of Bleeding,
Take Olibanum two ounces, Aloes-Hepatick one ounce, a little Wool of a Hare,
the White of an Egg: mix these together, and dipping a Liniment into it of
Flax, apply it cold to the Place, suffering it to stick on a Day or two; then
if you see occasion, take it off with Oil of Roses.

Veins Windy: To expel offensive Windiness that afflicts the Veins, Take the
Powder of Licorice, Carraway-seeds, Sugar Candy beaten small, of each an equal
quantity; to which put Rhubarb in powder a third part, with a like quantity of
Cream of Tartar in Powder. Take as much as will lie on the point of a Knife
three or four times a Day as it is, or in a glass of Wine, and so continue to
do for about seven Days.

This gently purges, very much cools the Blood, and by expelling the Wind,
eases Pains, and many Disorders that are occasioned by it.

Venetian Wash: Take the Whites of twelve Eggs, when indifferently hard boiled,
and cut them very small, Endive small shred six ounces, Purslain-leaves a
handful, Juniper, and Ivy-berries just gathered from the Tree, of each a good
handful; Fern-roots four ounces, the inner Bark of Elder, and Barberry-tree, of
each two ounces: bruise those well in a stone or wooden Mortar, and infuse them
in two quarts of Rose and Bettony-water, each a like, twenty four Hours; then
draw them off in a cold Still, till the moisture be entirely extracted from the
Herbs, and bottle up the Water, corking it close; and when you use it, put a
little Flower of Almonds in it, and shake it about.

This is highly commended as a great Beautifier in most Courts of Europe.

Venison to Broil: Take half a Hanch of fat Venison, cut it into slices half an
inch thick, salt and broil them on pretty quick Embers; and when they are well
soaked, bread them and serve them with Gravy only. And in this manner you may
broil a Side of Venison; or boil it first in fresh Water and Salt, and then
broil it, and dridge it, and serve it up with Gravy, Vinegar, and Pepper. As
for the Chine broil it raw, bread it, and serve it up with Gravy.

Venison Counterfeited: Take a Buttock of Beef, cut it down the long ways with
the grain, beat it well with a Rolling-pin, and broil it on the Coals; and when
it is cold lard it; then put to it some Whitewine-Vinegar, Pepper, Salt,
Cloves, Mace, and Bay Leaves: so let it lie three or four Days, and bake it in
a Rye Past; and when it is cold, fill it up with Butter, and let it stand ten
or fourteen Days before you cut it up, and it must be a very curious Palate
that can distingush it from Venison of red Deer.

Venison to Counterfeit, another: Take Ram, or Wether, steep it in warm Blood,
either of a Goat, Pig or Sheep, and season it as you do Venison; the Bones
being taken out, and a little Claret Wine added, bake it in a Pot, or Pie.

Venison-Pasty: Take four pound of Butter to a Peck of Flower, and make it up
into a Crust or Past with cold Water; beat the Past with a Rolling-pin, and
likewise so order two pound of Beef Suet beaten small: then put the Suet into
the Pasty both at top and bottom; (take notice likewise that you put the Whites
of twelve Eggs into the Crust:) then your Meat being boned, or the Bones broken
to pieces, rub it over with an ounce of Pepper, and as much Salt mixed with it:
or if you take out the Bones, you may put them well broken into a Pot, with a
little Claret, fair Water, Pepper, Salt, and a slice or two of Nutmeg, and bake
them, that so the Liquor may serve to put it into the Pasty when it comes out
of the Oven, in order to be served up at the Table. And this way, without
alteration, Mutton, or Beef-Pasties may be ordered; and the latter among the
more ignorant, so ordered, will pass for Venison.

Venison to Pot: Take a Haunch of a fat Buck, not lately hunted, bone it and
beat three ounces of Pepper, twelve Nutmegs grated, and a sufficient quantity
of Salt to season it: mix the Spices and Salt with White-wine-Vinegar, wash the
Venison over with it; then make holes in the lean sides with a Knife, and stuff
it as you do Beef, with Parsley small shred; and then put it into a convenient
earthen Pot, with the fat side downward: then clarify three pound of sweet
Butter, and put it to the Venison, cover your Pot with a Past, and let it stand
in the Oven five or six Hours: then take it out, and with a vent press it down
to the bottom of the Pot; and letting it be cold, take the Gravy from the top,
and boil it about half away, then put it with the Butter to the Meat again.

Venison to Souce: Boil Water, Beer, and Vinegar together, and having taken off
the Scum, put in Bay Leaves, Thyme, Savory, Rosemary-tops and Fennel; and when
it boils, put in the Venison, let it parboil, then press it and season it with
Salt, Pepper, and Nutmeg.

This takes away the Scent when tainted, and it will keep in this Souce-drink a
long time; and so you may bake it to be eat cold or hot.

Venison to Stew: Slice it out, and put it into your Stewing-dish, set it on a
heap of Coals with a little Claret Wine, a Sprig or two of Rosemary, and half a
dozen Cloves, a little grated Bread, Sugar and Vinegar; so let it stew together
a while, then grate one Nutmeg into it, and serve it up.

Venison Tainted: If you would recover your Venison when Tainted, Take strong
Ale, and as much Vinegar as will make it sharp, boil it with some Bay Salt, and
make a strong Brine, scum it, and let it stand till it cools; then lay your
Venison to steep in it twelve Hours, press it and dry it, then parboil it,
season it with Salt and Pepper, and it will be fit for use. Or,

Bury it in the Ground, where there is a kind soft sweet Mould, and the Earth
will draw to it the strong Scent, and the Venison will become sweet.

Verjuice to Make: Gather Crabs as soon as the Kernel turns black, and lay them
in a heap to sweat; then take off the Stalks, and separate the Rotten, or much
bruised, if there be any, put them into a Trough, and stamp them with a Beater,
or grind them in a Mill: then put them in a hair Bag, of coarse Cloth, lay it
in a Press, when full with the Mash of the Crabs, and by pressing down the
Board upon it, squeeze out Juice, and put it into a Barrel; stop it close, and
set it in a warm Place for ten or twelve Days, and it will become excellent
Verjuice.

Vervaine: There are many wonderful Virtues attributed to this Herb, or Plant:
It Is Cephalic and Vulnerary, used for Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
also in Diseases of the Eyes, and the Stone, for Ails in the Breast,
Bloody Flux, and Tertian-Ague; to heal Wounds, and cause easy and speedy
Delivery in Women. It is outwardly used for Redness of the Eyes, Pains of the
Teeth, Headache, Quinsie, Glandules of the Jaws, and Falling of the Fundament;
for Pains of the Spleen, and cleansing Ulcers. The distilled Water of it
applied outwardly to the Head, and four ounces taken inwardly with four drops
of Spirit of Salt, are held to ease Pains in the Head, though proceeding from
different Causes. Forestus relates, to his knowledge, That two Persons, when
all other Applications failed, were cured of inveterate Head-achs, with only
applying this Herb green.

Vinegar in Balls to Make: Take the Berries of the Bramble, when half ripe, and
dry them, and when they are sufficiently so, make them into Powder, and with
strong Whitewine-Vinegar make them into Balls as big as small Nuts; then dry
them, and put them up into wooden Boxes, and when you have occasion to use
them, take Wine, or for want of it, a little Water, or Stale-beer, and dissolve
a Ball in it, or so much as you have occasion for, and it will immediately
become a strong Vinegar.

Vinegar Common: The usual Vinegar made with us is ordered in this manner, Take
a midling sort of Beer, indifferently well hopp'd, put into it when it has
worked well, and is grown fine, some Rapes, or Husks of Grapes, usually brought
home for that purpose, mash them together in a Tub; then letting the Rapes
settle, draw off the liquid part, put it into a Cask, and set it in the Sun as
hot as may be, the Bung only covered with a Tile, or Slat-stone, and in about
thirty or forty Days it will be a very curious Vinegar, and may pass in use as
well as that made of Wine, if it be fined and kept from musting.

Vinegar for Digestion* Take eight drams of Sea onions, a quart of Vinegar, as
much Pepper as Onions, Mint, and Juniper Berries; let them infuse, and drink a
spoonful at a time before Meals.

Vinegar of diverse Sorts: (1.) Take good Whitewine, and fill a Runlet full,
leave it unstop'd, and set it in the Sun, or in some hot Place, and it will
soon turn, and become special Vinegar. (2.) If your occasion requires Vinegar
in have, put some Pepper, Salt, and sour Leaven mingled together, and a hot
Steel, stop it up, and let the Sun, or some other warmth come to it. Or, for
the more speedy way, put Whitewine, or Claret into an earthen Pot, stop the
Mouth with a piece of Past, and put it into a brass Pan or Pot boiling with
Water; let it be there about half an Hour, and it will grow sour.

Vinegar of Elder: Gather Elder-flowers before they be too much blown, pick
them clean from the great Stalks, and dry them in the Sun when it is not too
hot; so put a handful of them to a quart of the best White-wine-Vinegar, and
let it stand about twelve or fourteen Days, then strain it, and draw it off,
and put it into your Vessel, letting a quart be put in very hot to make it
ferment in the Cask, and so stop it close for use. It is very pleasing to the
Palate, good for those to use in Sauces, or otherways, that are troubled with
Pains in their Heads; as also, by dipping a Cloth in it, or making a Poultis
of Mallows and Chamomil, and applied to the Head, it wonderfully eases it of
Pains caused by heat.

Vinegar of Foul Wine: Boil it and scum it very clean, suffering it to continue
over the Fire till one third is consumed; then put it in a Vessel, and put some
Chervel to it, stop it close, and in a short time it will prove very good
Vinegar. You may make Vinegar of any Flowers, Herbs, Fruits, or Roots, by
putting them into the Vinegar, and infusing them till the Vinegar is tinctured,
or grown strong with the taste and smell of them.

Vinegar of Pepper: Fill a Bottle with the best Wine-Vinegar, then take a good
quantity of Pepper, put it into a long Cloth sowed up like a Bag, and put it
into the Vinegar for the space of Eight Days, with a string to it, that it may
be drawn out at the end of that time.

Vinegar of Roses: Take the Buds almost blown, of red Roses gathered dry, and
the Whites and Stalks cut away, shred them, and dry them after in the Sun a
considerable time, put them into a^ earthen Vessel, and put to a pound of Roses
two quarts of the best Whitewine-Vinegar; stop them up close, and let them
infuse eight or nine Days: then draw off the Vinegar, press out what remains in
the Roses, and bottle it up for use.

Vinegar of Roses, another: Take red Roses, not quite blown, cut away the white
Bottoms when the Leaves are plucked from the Stalk, about one pound, and dry
them in the Sun; then put them in six quarts of White-wine-Vinegar, and set it
in the Sun about forty Days: then strain it, and let the Infusion be repeated
with fresh Roses; and so strain it out, and keep it for use.

This is used mostly in Sauces, but it is indeed extraordinary good made up
into a Syrup with Sugar, to cut Phlegm, gargle the Mouth, and to be used in
cooling and astringent Medicines.

Vinegar of Roses, another: Dry your Roses with Elder-flowers, then put them
into a double Glass, or stone Bottle, set them in the Sun, or in a warm Oven,
and put Whitewine-Vinegar to them, and so let them infuse for ten Days, and tie
a Rag over the Mouth of the Bottle, that the Vinegar may strain through it.

Vinegar of Treacle: Take one ounce and half of the Roats of great Celandine,
the Roots of Angelica, Masterwort, Bithwort, Gentian, Valerian, Burnet, white
Dittany, Elecampane, and Zedoary, of each a dram; the Leaves of Mousear, Sage,
Scabious, Scordium, Dittany of Creet, and Blessed Thistle, of each a handful;
great Plantain-root a dram and half; the Seeds and Bark of Citron, of each one
dram and half; Saffron three drams, Bole-armoniack one dram, Hartshorn a dram
and half: tie up the Hartshorn, Dittany, and Bole-armoniack, in a fine Rag,
and for five or six Days infuse it with the other Ingredients in five Pints of
sharp Vinegar in a well stopped Glass by a moderate heat: strain out the Vinegar,
then put into it to dissolve six drams of the best Treacle, and shake it often,
and so do when you use it.

The Dose is half a spoonful at a time in some convenient Liquor. It is of
excellent use to prevent pestilential Fevers, the Plague, ill Airs, and noisome
Vapors, being taken fasting in a Morning.

Violets Simple: To make the simple Syrup of Violets, infuse the Flowers of
blue Violets twice or thrice, till they by boiling have lost their Scent; then
with a convenient quantity of Sugar boil up the Water to a Syrup.

This asswageth sharp Humors, and Pleurisy, and is good for the Headache, and
against the Heaviness of the Heart, and hinders disturbing Dreams.

Violets Syrup of: To make the compound Syrup of Violets, Take the blue
Violet-flowers fresh gathered, the white ends clipped off, and free from
Stalks, two ounces; the Seeds of Quinces and Mallows, of each one ounce; Jubebs
and Sebestens, twenty of each: boil Gourds, or their Seeds in five pints of
Water till one half be consumed; then take them out, and put the other things
mentioned into it: and having strengthened it with their Scent and Taste, so that
little or none remains in themselves, press them into the Liquid, and so with
fine Sugar boil it up into a Syrup.

This mitigates Catarrhs, and Hoarsness, and wonderfully helps Coughs, or
Colds, and is good in most hot Diseases.

Vipers Biting: As soon as any one is bitten, (for if the Poison be diffused
through the Mass of Blood, the Experiment cannot be warranted) a hot Iron may,
as hot as the Party can endure it, be held near the Wound till it has, as some
term it, drawn out Poison, which sometimes like a yellowish Spot will stick to
the surface of the Iron.

Viper Biting, another: Take white Horehound and Plantain, of each half a
handful; beat them into the nature of a Poultis, and apply it speedily to the
Place afflicted 'e're the Poison spread in the Blood, and drink at the same
time the Juice of them, which is very good against the Jaundice, and not only
for the Biting of the Viper, but other venomous Creatures.

Vipers-Grass: This is by many eaten with their Meat, having a kind of a taste
and sweetness of a Parsnip. It Is applied with success against the Biting of any
venomous Creature, also in pestilential Fevers, Giddiness, Melancholy,
Palpitations of the Heart, Falling Sickness, Obstructions of the Bowels, and
Diseases of the Womb; for the Jaundice and Dropsy, if taken at the beginning.

In case of any kind of Fevers, Take of the Root of Scorzonera, and Angelica,
of each six drams; of the Leaves of Wood Sorrel, with the Roots, two handfuls;
rasp'd Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each half an ounce; Licorice two drams: boil
these in a sufficient quantity of Water wherein Barley has been boiled, to the
consumption of a pint and a half; and having strained the Liquor, add of the
Composition of Scordium-water, and of the cold Scordium-water of Saxony, of
each three ounces, Syrup of Rasberries three ounces: mingle them well, and make
an Apozem, of which take three or four ounces at pleasure, though the Fever be
violent.

Virginia Trout to Make: This, as it is usually done, is only the cutting off
the Heads of pickled Herrings, and the Bodies being laid twenty four Hours in
Water, wash them, and season them with Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper, and a
little red Saunders; then mince some Onion and Lemon Peel, season them with
Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper, and a little red Saunders; then mince some
Onion and Lemon Peel, strip a few pickled Barberries, and sprinkle them on
between each Layer of the Fish: and when they are thus ordered, put in a pint
of Claret, and tie on a double wetted brown Paper on the Pot, and so set it in
the Oven with Houshold-bread; and being drawn and cooled, they will look as red
as Salmon, or Trout, taste curiously, and eat altogether as well.

Ulcers in the Breast: Take Millepedes, otherways called Wood-lice, or
Sows-lice, wash them clean, dry them with a Linnen-cloath, and beat them very
well in a glass, or marble Mortar, and press out the Juice that comes from
them; and if the Mass be too dry, you may agitate with them a little Whitewine,
or Ale, which penetrating and softening them, the Liquor may the better part
with its Juice: Half a dram of which take in two spoonfuls of Whitewine fasting
in a Morning.

Ulcers to Cleanse: Take four ounces of Turpentine, and wash it in
Scabeous-water, the Yolks of two Eggs, and an ounce of Barly-meal, Saffron,
Sarcocol, Mastick, and Frankincense of each half a dram: bruise and mix them
well together, and make them a Plaster, with the addition of clarified Rosin,
Honey, and Oil of Roses.

This being applied, not only cleanses Ulcers, but ingenders in them new Flesh
where it is wasted, and makes, after the Cure is past, the Skin smooth again.

Ulcers External: Take the gross Stalks of red Colwort, dry them pretty well,
then put them into an earthen refining Pot, or suchlike, and put them on a hot
Fire, till they are reduced to Ashes, and apply those Ashes to the Ulcer, or
take the green Bark of an Oak, chop or bruise it very small; pour upon it
Limewater freshly made: let it infuse till the Liquor has a duskey color; and
with this Water wash the Ulcer twice a Day.

Ulcer in the Mouth: To remedy this, Take a pound and a half of white Sugar,
the Juice of Pomgranates clarified a pint: mix these well over a gentle Fire,
and bring them to the consistence of a Syrup, and gargle the Mouth with it,
also the Throat, as far as may be, very often, and it will bring away the
Corruption, and Cause the Sore to heal: It is astringent, and also strengthens
the Stomach.

Ulcers, another: Take one dram of Corrosive Sublimate, reduce it to fine
Powder, and dissolve it in a quart of fair Water, suffering it to lie there
four or five Days in a light Digestion; then drop in it as much Sal-armoniack,
or as much Oil of Tartar per Deliquium as will precipitate it all; then filter
it carefully, and keep it close stopped for use, viz. To dip Pledgets into it,
and apply them to the ulcerous Part once, twice, or thrice a Day, as you see
occasion.

Vlcus Vteri: Take Asphaltum, or the true and choice Bitumen Judaicum, reduce
it to a curious fine Powder, and take of it about a dram at a time in any
proper Vehicle, once or twice a Day, as you see occasion.

Vmble-Pasty: To make a Pasty, or Pie, after the newest fashion, Cut the Umbles
in small pieces, and do the like by fat Bacon: mix them together, and season
them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg, fill your Pasty, or Pie, with the
Materials, having a little stripped Thyme, and shred pieces of Lemon scattered
among them; then cover them with slices of Butter and Bacon very thin, and
close it: let it soak well in the Oven, and when it is drawn, beat up Butter
with Claret, Lemon, and stripped Thyme, and serve it up hot.

Vmble-Pye: Make a Laying of minced Beef Suet in the bottom of your Coffin, or
Slices of interlarded Bacon; cut the Umbles in pieces as big as small Dice, and
your Bacon in like form, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and fill your
Pie with it, and close it up with slices of Bacon and Butter: when it is
enough, pour in at the place you have left vacant, Butter and Claret beat up
together, and so serve it up at the Table whilst it is hot. Be sure it be well
baked, or it is altogether spoiled.

Unguent for St. Anthony's- Fire: Take Vervine, Pimpernel, and Bettony, of each
a handful; bruise them, and put them into three pints of Whitewine; boil them
in a fined Vessel, if possible, then strain them, and set the Decoction over a
gentle Fire again in a glazed Vessel: then take washed Turpentine three ounces,
Rosin one pound, new white Wax four ounces: when these are melted, and well
mixed, add to them Mastick-powder one ounce, and the Milk of a Woman that has
born a Male-Child two ounces: make these into an Unguent, or Ointment, over a
gentle Fire, and anoint the Party afflicted with this hot Distemper, often
bathing it in, and it will repel the Heat: It is also very necessarily used for
Fistula's, Cankers, and hot Swellings in the Joints and Sinews.

Vnguentum Aegyptiacum: Take Verdigrease five drams, good Honey fourteen
scruples, strong Vinegar seven scruples: boil them together till they
incorporate to the thickness of an Unguent, and be of a purple color.

This forcibly cleanses inveterate Ulcers, and consumes proud, spongy, and dead
Flesh.

Vnguentum Album: Take Ceruse four ounces, Litharge half an ounce: let them
steep a while in Rose Water, then put them into a Mortar, and by degrees pour
in so much Rose Water as they can conveniently soak up, continually stirring
them till they are formed into an Unguent; then add a little Whitewine-Vinegar,
and of Camphire one dram and a half.

This Ointment is very cooling, it asswageth Pains occasioned by Heat and
Inflammations, heals Excoriations, and takes away Scabs, and the Itch.

Vnguentum Apostolorum: Take Turpentine, white Wax, Beeswax, and Rosin, of
each sixteen scruples; Opopanax, and Verdigrease, of each two scruples;
Amoniacum sixteen scruples, long Aristolochia, and great Incense, of each six
scruples; Myrrh, and Galbanum, of each three scruples; Bdellium six scruples,
Litharge nine scruples; Olive-oil two pound: mix the Litharge with two ounces
of the Oil, and let them stand five Hours; then boil it gently till it be as
thick as Honey, keeping it continually stirring, and take it from the Fire,
putting in the Wax and Rosin, being dissolved with the Oils: then whilst it is
cooling, put in the rest of the Gums dissolved in the Vinegar, boiled and
incorporated with the Turpentine, then the Aristolochia, Myrrh, and a little
Frankincense finely powdered, and sprinkled on the rest; then make the whole
Composition into an Ointment, the Verdigrease being put in last.

This, by detersion, purges and cleanses Wounds, and dangerous Ulcers, also
Fistula's, wastes dead Flesh, and increases the new.

Vnguentum Aureum: Take yellow Wax six ounces, the best Olive-oil two pound,
Turpentine two ounces, Rosin and Colophonia one ounce and half, Olibanum, and
Mastick, of each one ounce; Saffron a scruple: dissolve Wax in the Oil, and so
putting in the rest finely bruised, make an Unguent; and when they are all well
incorporated, take the whole Mass from it, and put in the Turpentine, stirring
it about that it may dissolve and imbody with the rest.

This is excellent in fresh Wounds, and makes them speedily heal.

Vnguentum of St. Cosme and Damian: Take Bettony, Pimpernel, and Vervine, of
each a handful; stamp them, and put them into five pints of Whitewine, boil
them together in a tin Vessel to the consumption of a third part; then strain
out the Liquid part, and set it over a gentle Fire again in a glass Vessel;
then take Turpentine washed six ounces, clarified Rosin a pound, new white
Beeswax four ounces: and when they are melted together in the same Glass, or
Pot, add to them an ounce of the Powder of Mastick, of a Woman's Milk, who has
newly born a Male-Child, and another a Female-Child, of each two ounces; make
them into an Unguent, by incorporation, over the Fire.

This wonderfully avails for Wounds, or Bruises in the Sinews, as also
Cankers, Fistula's, and St. Anthony's Fire, the grieved Places being bathed
with it hot.

Vnguentum Enulatum: To make this, Take the Roots of Elecampane sod in Vinegar,
and bruised, one pound; Hogs-lard, and Olive-oil, of each three ounces; new
Beeswax one ounce, Quicksilver extinct, and Turpentine washed, of each two
ounces; common Salt beaten half an ounce: mix the Lard, Wax, and Oil well
together, by melting over a gentle Fire, then add the Elecampane, Quicksilver,
and Salt and then the Turpentine, [take care to kill the Quicksilver with a
little Grease, and Turpentine,] and so mix them well to the thickness of an
Ointment.

It is an excellent Ointment for Scabs, Itch, Scurf, Breakings-out, Botches, or
the like.

Vnguentum, Populeon: Take the Buds of Poplar freshly gathered one pound,
macerate them in three pound of Hogs-lard prepared, for the space of two
Months; then take of the Leaves of red Poppey, and those of Mandrake, Henbane,
and the tender Crops of Black-berry, Bramble, Nightshade, Lettuce, Stonecrop,
Housleek, great Burs, and Penny-grass, of each three ounces; White Wind a pint:
bruise them, and mix them with the Buds of Poplar, and set them in a warm Place
eight Days: then add a pint of strong Vinegar, and boil them tiil it be
consumed, which may be known by casting a little of it on the Fire; then strain
it, and keep it close for use.

This Unguent is good to assuage the Burning of the Fever following the Ague,
Heat afflicting the Brain, Parts of the Head and Kidneys, by anointing those
Parts with it where the Grief is predominant; and the Temples being anointed
with it, mightily provokes Sleep,

Vnguentum Vulpinum: Take a Fox, and draw out the Intrails, and take Sage,
Rosemary, Juniper-leaves, and Berries, Dill, wild Marjoram, Lavender, and
Chamomil, of each half a pound, stamped and well bruised in a stone Martar; and
the Fox being cut in pieces, put him with the Herbs into a Vessel of eight
gallons, add two quarts of Olive-oil, and a pint of Neats-foot-oil, Calves and
Deers-suet, Badgers-grease, and Goose-grease, of each a pound and a half;
Water, with Salt dissolved in it pretty strong, three quarts, and as much
Malmsey, or Mallaga: boil them till the Water and Wine appear as consumed, and
that the Flesh and Bones of the Beast be separated asunder: then press it hard
through a Linnen-cloath.

This is a sovereign Ointment for all manner of Aches, and to restore the Limbs
and Joints lamed through the Pains of the Gout.

Unicorn Stone: This is of very great Virtue. It is mostly found in Germany,
Moravia, Saxony, and Silesia, in subterraneous Caverns, where Nature has laid
it up for the use and benefit of Man. It is drying and binding, and stops all
manner of Fluxes of the Belly, Gonorrhoea's, Bleeding at the Nose, Hepatick
Flux, and all other Fluxes of the Blood, by strengthening the Stomach, Heart,
and vital Spirits. It is also profitable against the Apoplexy, Vertigo,
Falling Sickness, and diverse other Diseases incident to the Head and Brain, the
levigated Powder being given to a dram, or four scruples, in any convenient
Liquid. It is also good against the Pestilence and Plague, and all manner of
malignant Fevers; likewise the Measles, Smallpox, Purple, or Spotted-fever,
etc. It is also held powerfully to resist Poison, whether inwardly or outwardly
injurious, the Biting of Serpents, or any other venomous Creature, by causing a
gentle Sweat, and driving the Poison from the Heart. It is good against
Faintings and Swoonings, and Passions of the Heart, Heart-burning, and
Palpitation, the Disease of the Viscera, by absorbing the acid Humors, when
daily taken from half a dram to a dram, for a certain time, in some proper
Cordial-water, or Wine.

Voiding Blood: Take two drams of Henbane seed, and as much of white
Poppy-seed: mix them, after they are well beaten, with an ounce of the Conserve
of red Roses, and of that take fasting, as near as you can, the quantity of a
Walnut. Or,

Take Plantane-leaves a considerable quantity, bruise them, and press out the
Juice, do the like by about six ounces of Comfrey-roots, sweeten it with a
little fine Sugar, and drink it up, and you will soon find a restraint of
Bleeding, though it come from several Parts.

Vomiting in Children: To stay this, when excessive and dangerous, many times
caused by Worms in the Stomach, Take dried Rue, and Frankincense, of each a
dram; heat them to a fine Powder, and give it them in a Glass of Rhenish, or
Wormwood-Wine.

Vomiting to Provoke: Take the Rind of the Root of an Elder-tree, bruise it,
and steep it in Whitewine all Night, so that the Wine may be very strong of it;
drink off the Wine only lukewarm the next Morning fasting, and it will gently
cleanse the Stomach and Belly.

Vomiting to Provoke, another: Take a pound of the green Husks of Walnuts, a
pound and a half of the Roots of Garden-Radishes, a pound of the green Leaves,
six ounces of Asarabacca, and four ounces of Radish-seed; pour on them three
pints of Whitewine-Vinegar, and let them digest a Day or two: then distill it in
a glass Vessel in hot Water.

Two spoonfuls of this will cause a strong Body to vomit; therefore those that
are weaker, may take only a spoonful, or one and a half, to prevent any
overstraining that it may occasion.

Vomiting to Stay: Take Spearmint-water four ounces, Syrup of Quinces two
ounces, and Cinnamon Water two drams. Take of this two or three spoonfuls at a
time.

Vomiting to Stay, another: Take about half an ounce of Cloves, bruise them
grossly, put them into a pint of Ale, with half an ounce of Lemon, or
Citron-peel, boil them over a gentle Fire to the consumption of a third part:
and then drink it cold, when strained, adding a spoonful or two of the Juice of
Sage.

Vomiting to Stay, another: Take bruised Cinnamon two ounces, rectified Spirit
of Wine a quart; infuse them four Days in a large Vessel very close stopped,
shake it twice or thrice a Day, and dissolve apart half a pound of Sugar Candy
in a quart of Rose Water, and so mingle the Liquors together, and put to them
four grains of Musk, and half a scruple of Ambergrease.

This mightily relieves the Stomach when oppressed with Cold, or Phlegm, and
consequently stays Vomiting. It is also good to stay the Looseness, ease the
Pains of the Colic, and other griping Pains.

Vrin White as Clay: This denotes an ill Digestion, a bad Stomach, and a bad
Liver, and if in it there appears any shining Beams, it denotes an Impostume in
the Milt, or if the Urin be white as Whey, thick and little in quantity, it
betokens the Flux. To Remedy this,

Take Grommol, Saxifrage, Parsley, and Sage; then boil them in stale Ale, and
drink the Liquid part Morning and Evening. You may use them also in your
Pottage, shred in the nature of Pot Herbs.

Vrin to Stop: If the Party cannot contain the Urin, Take the Roots of
Male-peony, yellow Amber, red Coral, and choice Gum-arabick, of each a
sufficient quantity; reduce them to a fine Powder, mix them well, and let the
Patient take from ten to twenty grains twice a Day. Or this, viz. Take a
spoonful at a time in any convenient Liquid.

Vrin Stopped: Take the Roots of wild Garlic, by some called Crow-Garlick, wipe
them clean but do not wash them: bruise them very well in a stone or glass
Mortar; strain out the Juice, and putting it into a glass of Whitewine, drink
it off upon an empty Stomach, taking it once or twice a Day, and you will find
great Benefit thereby.

Vrin Stopped, another: Take Oil of Walnuts, put it into a Drying Pan, then put
into it some Chervel picked well from the Stalks, and apply it pretty warm
poultis-wise to the Navel; or, if need be, to the Os pubis, or Share-bone. For
want of Walnut-oil, you may do it with Hogs-lard.

Vrin Stopped, another: Dissolve a little of the best Spanish Soap in half a pint
of Whitewine, and pass it through a woolen Filter, or Strainer; put to it by
infusion five or six grains of Saffron, divide it into two Doses, and take one
two Hours after the other, especially if the first does not operate well: but
if it does, you may stay a longer time. This, by the way, is taken for Urin
that is not very obstinate.

Vrin Stopped, another: Take the Powder of a Stag's Pizle a dram, Crab's-eyes
calcined the like quantity; the Juice of Garlic, or strong Onions half an
ounce; Burdock-root finely sliced a quarter of an ounce; Powder of Steel half a
dram; Bay Berries well bruised an ounce, Hartshorn Shavings a quarter of an
ounce, and two drams of the Shavings of Ivory: boil or infuse these over a
gentle Fire in a pint of Rhenish Wine, strain out the liquid part, and let the
Party drink half a pint as hot as Milk new taken from the Cow, Morning and
Evening, or oftener, if the Stoppage be great, and it will remove in a little
time the Obstruction, and cause a free Passage of Urin, etc.

Vsquebaugh: To make this the right Irish way, who were the first Inventors
that we can hear of: Take two gallons of rectified Spirit, half a pound of
Spanish Licorice, a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun, three ounces of
Dates sliced, the Tops of Thyme and Baum, of each a pugil; the Tops, or Flowers
of Rosemary two ounces, Cinnamon and Mace well bruised, of each an ounce;
Anniseeds and Coriander-seeds bruised likewise, of each two ounces; Citron, or
Lemon, and Orange-peel finely scraped, of each half an ounce: let these infuse
in a warm place forty eight hours, with often shaking together, and somewhat,
if it may be, increasing the heat; then let them stand in a cool place for the
space of a Week, sweeten it with Sugar Candy, and so draw off the Liquor, and
press out the Liquid part that remains in the Ingredients. For a weaker sort;
put other Spirits to them, and do as before.

This is not only pleasant to drink, but moderately taken greatly preserves the
Lungs against cold Distillations of Rheums, and other Defects that afflict
them, and incline them to Consumption. It lengthens the Breath, cheers the
Heart, and keeps out ill Airs occa^oned by Damps and Fogs, etc.

Vteri Prolapsus: Apply to the Navel a pretty large Cupping-glass, but suffer
it not to continue too long on, a quarter of an Hour being the longest, for
fear of injury, especially to the Navel String.

Uvula Falling: Take Coriander-seeds, and Rue, in Powder, boil them in
Mint-water, and sweetening it with a little Sugar, often gargarize the Mouth,
and it will be remedied.

Uvula Relaxed: Take bluish Pease, or, for want of them white ones, chew them
so long till you reduce them to the consistence of a Poultis, and lay 'em warm
on the Crown of the Head to the breadth and thickness of a Crown piece,
shifting it for fresh ones when you rise, and go to Bed.

WAlnut-Water: Take green Walnuts before they have any hard Shells in them, two
pound, Rue, and Carduus, of each a handful; Roman Wormwood, and Baum, of each
half a handful: bruise all these together, and infuse them in a gallon of
Mallaga, draw off the Water in a cold Still, and keep it close stopped for use.

An ounce of it at a time Morning and Evening, expels Vapors, keeps out
infectious Airs, restores Appetite, and causes good Digestion; creates a fresh
and lively Countenance, and removes Pains in the Stomach.

Walnut-Water, another: Take Walnuts with the green Husks on, before they come
to a hard Shell, one pound and a half, Roots of Radishes the like quantity,
green Asarabacca six ounces, the Seeds of Radishes four ounces: bruise and
infuse them in three pints of Whitewine-Vinegar for three Days, and then distill
them in a leaden Still till all the moisture be exhausted.

Take an ounce or two of this Water fasting in a Morning, and it fortifies
against the Infections of evil Airs, raw Damps, or Fogs, and purifies the Blood.

Walnuts to Preserve: Take green Walnuts before they have contracted a hard
Shell under them, pierce them with a Needle, and boil them in three or four
Waters to take out the bitterness; and when they are tender, to twelve pints of
the last Liquor put twelve pints of ordinary Sugar; boil it up, and clarify it
with Whites of Eggs: then strain it, and boil it to a Syrup; and sticking some
Cloves, Mace, and Cinnamon, in the Nuts, put them into the Syrup when cold.

These Preserved Walnuts are very Cordial, Pectoral, and Stomachical: they
strengthen it, and cause a good Digestion, and are excellent in Fluxes, and
Loosenesses; also, an Antidote against the Plague, and all poisonous and
pestilential Diseases.

Warts: Take May-Butter, melt it in a moderate Heat, mix it well with as much
Oil of Tartar, per deliquium, as will cause a sensible, but not considerable
strong Taste, and\ make it into an Ointment; and with it often anoint the Warts
as hot as you can well endure it, and they will either sink, or peel off.

Warts Bloody: For these, Cut off the Warts, or Knobs of the black Elder, and
Mallows, of each three ounces; of the Syrup of Comfrey one ounce: let the Party
take four spoonfuls immediately, and so continue to do four or five times a Day.

Warts to Remove: Wash the Warts often with the hot Blood of a Pig, suffering
it to dry on them; then wash it off with Lie of Wood-ashes, and lay on a
Plaster of Elder-bark mixed with Oil of Turpentine.

Wash: If you would have your Skin of a sweet and fragrant Scent, Supple, and
of a lively Color, Take Baum, and Hyssop, of each a handful; the Boom of
Peaches, and Garden Musk, (a Herb so called;) infuse them with an ounce of
Frankincense beaten to Powder, and four drams of the Oil of Spicknard in two
gallons of fair Water, over a moderate Fire: strain them, and wash your self
with it, or make a Bath of it; and it will not only render you amiable and
charming, but contribute to the settling a healthful Constitution.

Water for Bruises: Take two handfuls of Scabious-flowers, of Smallage,
Bay Leaves, Pennyroyal, and Chamomil, of each a handful; the Powder of Myrrh
half an ounce, Hartshorn two ounces: bruise the Herbs, and put them to infuse
in two quarts of Mallaga; then distill them, and let the Party drink two ounces
of it Morning and Evening.

It is excellent good for internal Bruises, or Hurts; also, for Spitting of
Blood, and Inflammations.

Water for Cankers: If you are troubled with a Canker in the Mouth, etc. Take
Sage, the Bark of Elder-Tree, Comfrey, Sorrel, and Endive, of each two
handfuls: stamp, and strain them, when infused twelve Hours in two quarts of
Whitewine, gargle your Mouth with it, or anoint or wash the Place with it
elsewhere, and it will make it at a stay, and in a little time heal it.

Water for the Headache: Take Roses, Bettony, and Elder-flowers, Sage,
Chamomil, and Marjoram, of each four handfuls; Lavender, and Wheat-bran, of
each two handfuls: boil them in about two gallons of fair Water. With this bath
your Forehead and Temples, and put your Feet info it, as into a Bath, as hot as
may be, and then repose your self after it, keeping warm, taking inwardly a
quarter of a pint of Mint and Bettony-water. And in so doing twice or thrice,
the Pain in the Head will cease, and the Brain be much comforted.

Water for Heat: For Hear or Pimples in the Face, or hot Inflammations in the
Eyes, take this recommended Water. Take white and red Rose Water, of each a
pint; Tutty-stone in Powd^r, Aloes Epatick, fine Sugar, and Rosemary flowers,
of each an ounce; put them in a double Glass, and place them in Balneo Mariae
five or six Days, yet frequently, in the mean space, move and shake them
together; then with the Water wash your Face, Eyes, and other Parts inflamed or
breaking out with Heat, and it will, by a constant use, remove it, and make the
Skin beautiful,

Water to cool the Liver: Take Barberry-leaves, and Wood Sorrel, of each two
handfuls; Plantane-roots, and Leaves, a handful; Mellonseeds, Borrage, and
Comfryflowers, of each an ounce: bruise them well, and infuse them in a gallon
of Spring Water; distill them in that Water, and drink a quarter of a pint of it
fasting, with the Syrup of Limon, Citron, or Violets, and walk about a while
after the taking thereof.

Water for the Plague: Take a pound of Celandine, Rosemary, Baum, Mugwort, Rue,
Pimpernel that is found amongst the Corn, Dragons, Mugwort, Scabious, Agrimony,
Bettony, Angelica, Pellitory of Spain, Carduus, Marigold-leaves and Flowers,
Borrage-leaves and Flowers, Rosa-solis, Fetherfew, Pellitory of the Wall, red
Sage, Setwell, Mother of Thyme, Devils-bit, and Tormentil, of each a good
handful, with a few Sprigs of Rue, and Walnut-leaves, or green Walnuts bruised:
bruise them well, and let them infuse in a sufficient quantity of White Wind
three Days, and as many Nights, keeping the Pot they are in very close, yet
often shaking it, that the Ingredients may move in the Wine; then distill the
Wine and Herbs, and set the Water that is drawn off close stopped in glass
Bottles, where the Sun may come to them.

The best time of distilling this Water is in May, if the Materials, by reason
of the forwardness of the Spring, may be had so early. Ten spoonfuls of it may
be taken Blood-warm, to prevent the Plague: and this must be done when the
first Symptoms of it appear. And upon taking it, walk about till you sweat
again, for the space of an Hour, not eating or drinking after it for the space
of two Hours, or more; and then go to Bed upon it. If it chance to cause you to
Vomit, it is a sign it has taken the better Effect.

This is also good against Agues, or any infectious Diseases of the Stomach,
being taken before the Fit, or Infection too far seizes.

Water for the Stone: Take Saxifrage, Pellitory of the Wall, Mother-Thyme,
green Sage, Radish-roots sliced, of each of them a handful: steep the Roots and
Herbs a Night in Milk, and the next Morning distill them.

Two spoonfuls drank fasting, with as much White Wind, is good also to provoke
Urin, and prevent Stoppages.

Water for Ulcers: To cleanse Ulcers, use this Water as the most Excellent,
viz. Take red Rose Water, and Plantane-water, of each a pint; the Juices of
Housleek, Nightshade, and Pimpernel, of each two ounces; red Roses half a
handful; Myrtle and Cyprus-nuts, of each half an ounce; the Rind of a
Pomegranet three drams; St. John's-wort half a handful, Flowers of Mulleyn a
pugil, Myrrh and Frankincense, of each a scruple; Honey of Roses four ounces:
distill them when beaten, mixed, and well infused: and of this Water take a
pint, and dissolve it in six ounces of the Conserve of Roses, and one ounce of
the Syrup of dried Roses, with twelve drops of the Oil of Sulphur: when it has
infused a while, press out the Liquid part, and wash and bath the grieved Place
with it often, and it will heal it.

Weakness after Delivery: Take Syrup of Violets half an ounce, and as much of
Citron-syrup; add to these two drams of the Powder of Rhubarb, and an ounce of
Treacle-water, with as much Diascordium dissolved in it as will lie on a Groat;
and to these add half a pint of Hyssop-water: let the Party take an ounce at a
time, and after it some Broth, or warm Posset Drink; the Woman likewise taking
great care of her self after it, for fear of catching cold, by her too timely
rising, or stirring: for then the Cold has opportunity to penetrate and settle
in the open Parts of the Joints, causing Numbness and Pains in the Limbs; and
sometimes by such violent Intrusions, ferments the Blood to a Fever. And if any
such thing unfortunately happen, Take the Powder of Elecampane an ounce, the
Conserve of red Roses two ounces, Pomgranet-seed powdered an ounce: decoct them
in White Wind, and drink it warm.

Weakness to Help: Take the Powder of Vipers an ounce, Diaphoretick-Antimony
half an ounce, clear yellow Amber two drams, Sugar the weight of all that have
been mentioned before, and fine Starch the like quantity: make them into a Past
with Spirit of Wine, and then into small Cakes, of which one may be a
sufficient Dose.

This is successfully used to strengthen the Blood, and to strengthen those
that have been, or are weakened with Sickness.

Weakness of Stomach: Take Baum and Mint, boil them in Whitewine with some
Rosemary-tops or Flowers, and Peeling-off of a Lemon, and drink a quarter of a
pint of the Decoction half an Hour before Meals. Or for this, Wormwood and
Gentian infused in your Drink, is very much available.

Web in the Eye: To remove this Offense of the Sight, Take Shell-snails, and
burn them to Powder, beat it fine, and sift it; add to it the Powder of
Cuttle-bone: put these into Alom-water wherein Honey is dissolved, and shake
them about: when the Water is thick with the powder, drop some of it into the
Eye with a Feather, keeping the Lids closed a while, and turn your Eye to and
fro that it may fret off the Film, or Skin that hinders the Sight: and in often
so doing, it will wear it away.

Wen to Cure: Take a Limestone, and slack it in small Soap-lees; then mix it
with a little Soap, spread it as a Plaster, and lay it to the Wen, and anoint
it often with the Lees the Lime was slaked in, and it will sink and destroy it.

Whitepot to Make: Take two quarts of Cream, or new Milk, put in half an ounce
of Mace, a piece of Cinnamon, and half a Nutmeg sliced; chip off the Crust from
a Penny White-loaf, slice it very thin, and lay the Slices in the bottom of a
Dish, cover them with Marrow, and put the Yolks of a dozen Eggs to the Cream,
or Milk, well beaten with Rose Water, and sweeten it with Sugar: then take out
the Spices, fill up a broad Basin, in which the Bread and Marrow is laid; bake
it, but not in too hot an Oven: and when it is enough, scrape white Sugar over
it, and serve it up.

Whitewine that has lost Color: To recover this, Rack it from the Lees, and if
it be a faint tawny Wine, put in Coniack-lees, putting the Wine upon them,
rolling them over, and beating them: and in the space of ten or twelve Days
rack it off, and it will be of a white Color, and drink very brisk.

Whitewine to mend its Color: Take three or four gallons of new Milk, or less,
according to the quantity of your Wine, put it into the Hogshead, and roll it
to a good mixture: then letting it settle, open your Bung, and put in three or
four ounces of Isinglass, and as much Loaf-sugar; then fill up the Hogshead,
and roll it three or four times over: and so bring it by that means to a color
and fineness.

Whitewine to Mend: If your Whitewine have an ill Taste, draw it half off, and
to either of the halves put two gallons of Morning's-Milk, a handful of Rice,
and as much Bay Salt; mix or beat them well together with a Paddle-staff for
half an Hour, then fill up the Hogshead, and roll it well, and turn it over in
the Lees; and so you may broach it in two Days, and it will drink very
pleasantly.

Wine, called Blessed Wine: To make this, Take Crocus-Metallorum in Powder one
ounce, Mace in Powder, or grossly bruised, one dram, Spanish Wine a pint and a
half: infuse the Crocus and Mace in the Wine a considerable time, and then pour
off the Liquid.

This is a very good Vomit, and more frequently used than any other; and among
others it is used with great success in curing the Dropsy, Jaundice,
Phthisick, and Diseases in the Head; also, in the beginning of Fevers, and
before the coming out of the Smallpox. It must consequently in these Cases do
a great deal of good by freeing the Parts from the peccant Humors.

The Dose is half an ounce, an ounce, or an ounce and a half at a time: but the
Age and Strength of the Patient is in these Cases to be considered. And the
best times to take Purges is in the Afternoon, having first eaten a light
Dinner.

Wine of Cherries: Take out the Stalks, and the Stones of your Cherries, bruise
them with your Hands clean washed, or a wooden Ladle; and after twelve Hours
fermenting together, strain them through a Napkin, press out the Juice into an
earthen Stein; and after you have taken off the Scum and Froth, cover it close:
and when it is settled, pour it off by inclination to ferment in your Cask with
Sugar, and this will give it a deep Color: then bottle it up, tie down the
Corks to prevent flying out; and in ten or twelve Pays you may drink it.

This is a great cooler, chears the Heart, and revives decaying Nature; is good
against Fits, and violent Pains in the Head. But Note, This is meant of the
best red Cherries.

Wine of Currants: Take a pound of Currants, pick them clean, and wash them well,
and putting them in an earthen Vessel pretty deep, pour on them about six pints
of fair Water very hot, in which three spoonfuls of new Ale-yeast has been
dissolved; then stop it up close about sixty Hours, that it may work and
ferment: and as soon as you find it to your liking, let it run through a
Strainer to leave behind the exhausted Currants and Yeast, and so bottle it up,
and it will be exceeding quick, and pleasing in Taste.

This is not only pleasant to drink, but advantageous to the Body sundry Ways:
for it cools the Liver, cleanses the Blood, and is take with good success in
all hot Diseases.

Wine Lowering: Take an ounce of Roach-alom, and powder it, draw from the
Hogshead four gallons, then strew the Powder of Allom in it, and beat in well
for half an Hour, then fill it up, and set it on broach: and by this means,
within three Days, if you be careful not to let it take vent, you will find it
a curious Wine.

Wine Medicinal: Take the best old Mallaga a quart, Rhenish-wine a pint, Baum,
Rue, red Sage, Maiden hair, and the Leaves of Germander, of each an ounce
bruise and boil them gentry in Wine till a third Part be consumed; then add
Pepper, Ginger, and Nutmeg, of each three drams: beat them well, then put to
them an ounce of Venice-Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of Angelica and
Saffron-waters: and having well boiled them, strain out the Liquid part, and
drink half a quarter of a pint Morning and Evening, or oftener, if you see
occasion and it is excellent good against the Infections of the Plague,
Measles, Small pox and Spotted-fever; also, to prevent the Infections by ill
Airs afflicting the Lungs by Coughs, Catarrhs, etc.

Wines to Back: The best time to do it is when the Wind sits full North, the
Weather clear and temperate, in the increase of the Moon, and when she is under
the Earth, and not in the full height,

Wine Roping: To alter this, Take a course Linnen-cloath, and place it before
your Bore when you have set it abroach; then put in your Linen, and rock it in
a dry Cask: then put in five or six ounces of powdered Alom, and jumble them
well together; and so upon settling, it will be fined down, and become a very
clear and pleasant Wine.

Wine to Scent well: Take two ounces of Brimstone, and half an ounce of
Calamus, mix them well together in a pint and a half of Borrage-water, melt the
Brimstone in a Pan and add the rest to it, and dip in so many Linnen-cloaths as
will soak it up, and put them into the Hogshead: then take out your Ashes, and
rack your Wine, and so put into it a pint of Rosewater, and roll it well half
an hour, it being stopped down close: after which, let it lie still two Days; and
by this means, this, or any other Gascoin, or red Wine, will have a very
pleasant Scent.

Wine of Squils: Take the Roots of white Mountain-squills seasonably gathered,
slice them, and lay them a drying for a Month, and put a pound of them into a
glass, and poor on them four quarts of good old Whitewine: infuse them for the
space of forty Days, and then take out the Squills.

This is likewise a gentle Vomit, but most commonly used with Vinum-Benedictum,
or the Blessed Wine; so that an ounce of it may be taken with half an ounce of
the other.

Wines Vicious to Meliorate: Take a pint of clarified Honey, a pound of Water
wherein Raisins have been steeped, half a pint, and a quarter of a pint of
Claret, or Whitewine, as to what you propose it to: boil them over a gentle
Fire till a third part be consumed, scum it continually in the boiling, and put
it pretty hot into the Wine, and let it stand with the Bung out; then put in a
Bag of Spices, and it wilt fine either new or old Wine that are fouled or
decayed, and give them a curious Smell, or Taste; if when it has rested five or
six Days you add white Mustard Seed bruised hang it in a Canvasbag.

Woman in Labor: Take of Cinnamon finely powdered one dram, Amber likewise
finely powdered half a dram; mingle them in a quarter of a pint of Claret, and
let the Party drink it.

This is accounted a most approved Medicine to help a Woman in the time of her
Travel, and cause an easy and safe Labor.

Womb to Cleanse: Take a large old Onion, the whitest that may be, cut it in
pieces, and boil it in a pint of Water very soft; strain and press it, and take
about a quarter of a pint of the Decoction at a time, putting thereto an ounce
of the fresh Oil of Wallnuts, and the expected Effects will be completed by it.

Worm in the Head: If any Worm, or Earwig, has crept into the Head whilst you
sleep, to destroy, or bring it away, Take three or four Cloves of Garlic,
stamp them in a Mortar, or any other convenienient Utensil: then lay them in
clean Water to soak a while, and so wring out the Juice with a clean Cloth, and
put a few drops of the Liquor into the Ear; and it will either kill the Worm,
and work it out with the Wax, or cause it to come out at the Nose. It is also
good for Noises, and Dizziness in the Head, and brings away the Furr and Scurf
that many times causes Obstruction in the Hearing, and much lessens it.

Worms: Take Rhubarb a dram, Wormwood half a dram, Coralline a scruple,
Currants four ounces: beat them to a Conserve, and mix it with Syrup of Violets
till it becomes an Electuary, and give the quantity of a Nutmeg in a Morning
fasting, dissolved in a little warm Ale, or Wine.

This is noted by Dr. Wetherborn to be of excellent use to kill Worms in
Children.

Worms in the Teeth: If you find, when you put hot things in your Mouth,
something to stir in your Teeth, or Gums, Take black Pepper a quarter of an
ounce, beat it to Powder, and sift it finely; then put it into a quarter of a
pint of White Wind, and boil it over a gentle Fire: then take some of it, and
hold it as hot as may be in your Mouth, and it will make those that can, crawl
out, and kill those that are imprisoned, whereby the Pain and Defect, thereby
occasioned, will presently cease.

Worms in Children: Take the green Husks of Walnuts, Rue, and Baum, beat them
very fine, put as much Sugar to them as will make them into a Conserve; and to
make them the more pallatable, let it be taken in two or three spoonfuls of
Canary, to the quantity of a large Hazle-nut at a time.

Wormwood: This Excellent Herb is under the Dominion and Government of Mars.
Its Virtues are very singular, viz.

It is good for Inflammations of the Liver, and Stomach, and profitable for
those that are sick of the Dropsy, the Leaves being made into a Confection
with Sugar. It is of a restringent quality, bitter, and sharp, altogether being
hot; it is comforttable, and drying; and therefore it purges downwards, and
drives into the Urin and Excrement all choleric Humors; it principally
comfort and fortifieth the Heart and Stomach, being infused in Wine. The
Tops of it, and Roots of Dandelion decocted in Water, are powerful Expellers of
the Humors that occasion the Jaundice. The Juice of Wormwood, wherein the
Kernels of Peaches are bruised and infused, kill the Worms in any Part of the
Body. The Conserve of it taken fasting, preserves from Drunkenness, sharpens
Appetite, and is a sovereign Remedy, for those that are troubled with Stuffings
or Stoppage of the Stomach, if the Juice thereof be drank with Whitewine, or
Vinegar: mixed with Milk and Honey, it is good to rub those that are afflicted
with the Squinsie. The Fume of the Decoction, the Mouth, or Ears held over it,
eases their Pains; and being infused in Wine of Raisins, it eases the Pains
and Pricking of the Eyes, they being washed with it. Being mixed with Oil of
Roses, and a Stomach that has been long weakened, anointed therewith, it
mightily strenghthens it. With Figs, Vinegar, and Darnel-Meal, it is good,
applied outwardly and inwardly, against the Dropsy and Spleen. Dried and
powdered, it defends Clothes from Moths and Worms.

For a continued Dropsy, Take two pounds of the Tops of Wormwood, make it into
a Conserve with as much Sugar, and let the Party take half an ounce at a time,
three or four time a Day.

VVormwood-VVater: Take two gallons of new Ale, but well settled, and very
clear, a pound of Anniseeds, and half a pound of Licorice; bruise them together
very sine; then take two handfuls of the tender Tops of Roman Wormwood, and put
them with the other Ingradients into the Ale: let them infuse twelve Hours, and
then distill them in an Alembick. The Water will be stronger, if instead of Ale
you put Low-Wines, or Spirits, drawn off decayed Fruit of Grocery-Ware, and
Molossus.

VVormwood-VVine: To make this, Take small Rochel, or Campaign-Wine, put into
it a few drops of the extracted Oil of Wormwood; mix it well together by
brewing: then let it fret, and contract a Body twenty-four Hours, and it will
procure by drinking it, a lost Appetite, and much enliven Nature.

Wormwood-VVine, Physical: Take of Wormwood well dried, and seasonably gathered
a handful, to a gallon of Wine, and put into that, according, to proportion,
what quantity you please: let it infuse in a close stopped Vessel till the Wine
is tinged sufficiently of the Wormwood.

This Wine is successfully taken to heat and cleanse the Stomach. It is good in
the Dropsy, and excellent in the procuring a lost Appetite.

VVound-Bleeding: To stay the Bleeding of any Wound, Take the tender Tops of
Nettles, bruise them between your Fingers till they have lost their stinging
quality; then stamp them together with a little white Sugar, and lay them on
the Wound. Or this,

Take fifteen of the smalllest Earthworms, and a handful of the inner Bark of
the Elder, half a quartern of red Wine, and as much Sallad-oil, viz. Oil of
Olive, a good handful of the Herb called Mouse-ear, and a piece of fine Sugar,
as much new Wax, with a very little Salt: bruise them, and stamp them well
together; and having well incorporated them over a gentle Fire, apply them as a
Poultis, or Plaster, to the Part from whence the Effusion of Blood-proceeds.

VVounds Green: Take Oil of St. John's-wort two ounces, Venice-Turpentine the
like quantity, set them over a gentle Fire, and put to them a little Balsom of
Kiel; incorporate them, and keep them as an excellent Balsom for green Wounds
of any nature whatsoever.

VVounds to Incarnate: Take the Meal of Orbus, Tutty, Opopanax, and round
Aristolochia, of each two drams and a half; Hog-fenel half an ounce, Blood-wort
Leaves dried and powdered a quarter of an ounce, Flower-de lize five drams,
Myrrh three drams; the greater and lesser Centaury, of each two drams: by
drying, bearing, and finely sifting make this into a Powder, and mix it with
Ointments, or Plasters, suitable to the purpose, to make Flesh grow up in the
Wounds where it has been destroyed, or wasted.

VVound-Powder: Take Dragons-blood, Aloes, Frankincense, Quicklime, and
Copperas, of each a like; incorporate them, and being finely powdered with some
Cob-webs, and Whites of Egg, apply it to the bleeding Wound, and it will easily
stay the Flux of Blood, prevent Putrefaction, and contribute much to the
cleansing and healing of it.

VVound-Salve: Take a quarter of a pound of clarified Butter, Virgins-wax half
a pound, Turpentine four ounces, and two or three Yolks of Eggs: beat them to
Froth, and put to them four ounces of red Rose Water, and two drams of
Sugar Candy powdered and dissolved in the Rose Water: mix these with as much
Flower as will make them into a thickness over a gentle Fire, keeping them
stirring till they become a Plaster: apply this to green Wounds, or others,
that have not been of too long standing, and it hastens the Cure.

VVrinkles to Smooth: Take the Oil of Swallows an ounce, the like quantity of
the Oil of Mandrake, half an ounce of the Oil of Pomgranet, and half an ounce
of Ews-Milk: incorporate them to the thickness of an ordinary Pomatum over a
gentle Fire; then add four ounces of the Cream of Almonds, spread it thin on a
Forehead-cloth, or Fillitring, and lay it to the Forehead, or other Part,
keeping it up tite and smooth: and in so often doing, the Wrinkles will
dis-appear, especially in a great measure. It also smooths a rough Skin in any
Part.

YArd Imposthumated: If a Man's Yard be Imposthumated, let blood, but not over
much, either in the Foot or Arm: dissolve Aloes in White Wind, and dip a Linen
Cloth in it; then bind it about the Yard, and often wash it with the Liquid,
and if there be any ventosity, or windiness of the Belly, use a Fomentation of
the Decoction of Aristolochia-rotunda; or if the Testicles be affected with the
Imposthumation, Take Bean-flower, Barly-meal, the Leaves of Henbane, of each a
like quantity; put to them Oil of Roses, mix them well together, by braying in
a Mortar, and apply them as a Cataplasm, often renewing it as the moisture drys
up, and wash the Testicles with Rose and Spearmint-water.

If any descending of the Bowels happen upon, these or the like Occasion. Take
Acacia, and some Cyprus-Nuts, dried Rue, Bay Berries, Nut-Galls, and
Gum-Arabick, of each a quarter of an ounce; bruise them in a Mortar, and sift
them into a fine Powder: make them into a Plaster with Beeswax and a little
Hogs Lard; put up the descending Bowels, and apply it to the bottom of the
Belly, drinking each morning White Wind wherein Cyprus Nuts have been decocted.

Yard Swelling: Take the Fat of a Loin of Mutton, about the Kidneys, mix it
with the Powder of Pumice-stone, and a little Salt finely burned and beaten to
Powder; make a kind of a Plaster, and put it round the Yard, where the
Swelling is most apparent, and after that, wash it with the Decoction of
Marshmallows, and by so doing twice or thrice, the Swelling will cease.

Yarrow: This Herb grows in the Fields, and has many long Leaves spread on the
Ground, and finely jagged and divided into many small Parts: its Flowers are
white, and some of them sometimes enclining to red, and stayed in Knots, among
diverse green Stalks arising from the Leaves; some call it Nose-bleed, others
Milfoil: it flowereth about the latter end of August. An Ointment may be made
of it, which is excellent in curing Wounds, and is proper for such as have
Inflammations. It stops the Terms, being drunk in White Wind, when decocted
therein; as also the Bloody Flux. The Ointment of it is a good Healer of Ulcers
and Fistula's, especially such as abound with Moisture. The Hair being anointed
with it, it stays its falling off, especially washing the Head before with the
Concoction of it. Inwardly taken, it strengthens the retentive Faculties of the
Stomach; it helps the Running of the Reins, and such as cannot hold their Urin.
The Leaves chewed in the Mouth, ease the Pains in the Teeth, and is briefly an
Herb of a very drying and binding Quality.

Yawning: Where the Party is too much addicted to this, which occasions
unseemly Proportions and Features in the Face, Take the Juice of Housleek, and
the Powder of a Frogs Skin in a Glass of Whey fasting, in a morning; or they
may be taken in any other convenient Liquor, if you think convenient.

Yellow Color: If the Face, of any part of the Body be of yellowish Tawny
Color, by Sickness or Defect in Nature, to remove it, and restore a whiteness,
Take the Roots of Turnips and Acorns, wash them and distill them in an
Alembick, and a very fine Water will come from them; of this Water let the
Party drink sweetened with Sugar ever morning for a Month or two together, and
wash the Skin or Part, over, with the Water of Fumitory and distilled Eggs, and
so the yellowness, or other unpleasing Color, will disappear, and give place
to a better.

Yellow Color to make: Take the yellow Chives in White Lillies, Saffron, and
Tartar, steep them in Gum-water, or Buckthorn-berries; when they are dried,
heat them in Water till they swell, and then press them out, and these afford a
pleasant Color, which with a little Gum Arabic dissolved in it, you may
likewise write with, and the Letter being burnished on blue Paper, will appear
like Gold, especially if a Shell of Gold be mixed and dissolved with them.

Yellow Iaundice: Take Artemisia, and of Scolopendria, of each a handful,
Wormwood the third part of a handful, boil them in new White Wind, or any that
is not sharp till the third part of Three pints be consumed, putting in the
Wormwood last; then strain out the Liquid part, pressing it very hard, and
having sweetened it with Sugar, let the Party afflicted drink about a quarter of
a pint every morning for Nine days successively, by renewing the quantity, and
it will prove of great Advantage.

Yellow Iaundice: another. Take Ivy growing round, or twisting an old Oak, when
it is flowered, boil the Flowers, Leaves, and tender Bark of the top Branches
in Whitewine, of a medium, between sour and sweet; infuse half a dram of
Saffron in a pint, and let the Party drink it hot morning and evening for a
Week or more, if occasion requite it: or, if there be a hardness of the Liver
occasioned by this Disease.

Take an ounce and a half of the Oil of Roses, of the Juice of Wormwood, Oleum
Nardinum, and Mastick, of each half an ounce; of the powder of Squinantum,
Spodium, Cassia Lignea, and Cauda Equina, of each two drams: make them into an
Ointment with Beeswax, as much as is sufficient to do it, and anoint the Parts
nearest to the Liver often with it, as warm as may be, having first bathed the
Place with warm Vinegar; your hand, when you bathe it in, being anointed with
Oil of Mastick. If the Distemper be far gone, decoct Rhubarb in Beer or Wine,
and drink it morning and night, keeping your self warm in a Bed, or in a
stirring Posture, which is better, for an hour or two after; and in so often
doing, the Humors will be dispersed, and Nature thus helped, cast out the
Crudities that occasion the Distemper.

Yew Berries: These are excellent good for Pains in the Bowels, Obstructions of
the Stomach, and in Fluxes of the Belly, if boiled with White Wind and a little
Mace, and being strained, the liquid part drunk fasting.

Yexing to Remedy: Take the Juice of Quinces, and boil of them and Honey each
one pound and half, put to them a pint and a half of Vinegar, and boil them up
together; then put in Ginger three ounces, of white Pepper one ounce, and boil
them again till they may be made into an Electuary; and take a quarter of an
ounce at a time as often as you see occasion: or you may bruise Rue, infuse it
in White Wind with Cummin-Seeds, and drink it, sweetened with a little Honey.
This remedies likewise the Hickup, and is good against the Chin-Cough.

Youth to Preserve: Take Oil and Myrrh, of each half an ounce; Oil of Roses a
like quantity, Oil of Sweet Almonds two ounces: mix these well together, and
anoint the Face and Hands with them, warmed in a Sawcer over a gentle fire: or,

Take the Waters of Fumitory mixed with that which is distilled from a young
Pig, of each a quarter of a pint; add then the Decoction of Rosemary in
VVhitewine, half a pint: and with this wash every Morning when it is gently
heated; also gargle your Mouth with it, and it will not only fasten your Teeth,
and keep them from aching, but preserve them from rotting, and keep them clean,
and very white.

APPENDIX.
TERMS of ART, and Hard Words, that may be met with in this Work, Explained.
A
ABstergent, wiping. Acrimony, is a Quality that is biting upon the Tongue.
Acid, is a thing very sharp, viz. Liquids, Herbs, etc. Agglutinate, to glue
together. Alexipharmick, resisting Poison. Alternately, by Turns. Anodyne,
gives ease. Aperitive, opening. Aqueous, watery. Aromatic, odoriferous, or
Spicy smells. Asthma, Difficulty of Breath. Attenuate, to thin. Attractive,
Drawing. Astringent, Binding.
B
BItuminous, of the Nature of Pitch. Bulbous, Round Rooted.
C
CAlifie, to heat. Capillary, Hairy. Cardiack, Cordial. Caries, Rottenness.
Carminative, expelling Wind. Cataplasm, a Poultis. Cephalic, proper for the
Head. Cholera A pleasant Evacuation of Choler upward and downward. Compress, a
Linen Cloth often folded. Concreted, Thickened. Consolidates, makes sound or
whole. Corroborate, to Strengthen. Cosmetick, Beautifying.
D.
DIabetes, a vast Evacuation of Urin. Diaphoretick, Sweating. Decant, to pour
gently of, and leave the settling behind. Decoction, a boiling of the Liquor to
any thing. Digest, to Dissolve. Dilate, to open wide. Diluted, made thin.
Discuss, drive away. Detergent, cleansing. Detersive, cleansing. Diuretic,
force Urine.
E
EBullition, boiling. Effusion, shedding. Emollient, softening. Empyema, a
Collection of Matter in the Breast. Epatick, proper to the Liver. Epithem, an
outward Application to the Stomach, Heart, or Liver. Erosion, a Gnawing.
Errhine, a Medicine drawn up the Nostrils. Excrescent, growing up. Exhilerate,
to make merry, Expectorate, to bring up the Matter from the Lungs.
F.
Fibers, Strings. Filtrate, to strain through a Paper. Faeces, Dreggs.
Frontals, an Application to the Forehead. Fungous, any thing spongy.
H.
HUmect, to moisten. Hysteric, Vaporous.
I.
INcarnes, Breeds Flesh. Indurate, to wash hard. Inspissated, thickened.
L.
LEnitive, mild or gentle. Levigate, to make Smooth. Ligature, a binding of
Linnen-cloath. Linctus, a Medicine for the Lungs. Lithontriptick, a breaking
the Stone. Lotion, a particular Bath. Lubricating, Smoothening. Luxations,
Members out of Joint.
M.
MEmbranous, Fibrous. Millepedes, Hog-lice. Mucilaginous, Slimey.
N.
NArcotick, occasioning Sleep. Nephritick, belonging to the Reins. Nerve, a
porous substance.
O.
OBlong, longer than Broad. Obtuse, Blunt. Oedamatous, Phlegmatic.
P.
PAlpitation, a Beating of the Heart. Paralytick, subject to Palsy.
Paregorick, disposing to Sleep. Perennial, lasting. Pulmonick, proper for the
Lungs.
R.
REfrigerate, to cool. Repercuss, to beat back. Repress, to beat down.
Resinous, of the nature of Rosin. Rupture, a Burstenness of the Belly.
S.
SCirrhus, a hard Tumor. Sextiary, somewhat above a pint. Siccity, Dryness.
Soporifick, gives Rest. Specific, a particular Remedy for some peculiar
Distemper. Splenetick, proper for Spleen. Spontaneously, freely of its own
accord. Stagnating, standing still. Stomachick, proper for the Stomach.
Styptick, Astringent. Sublimated, raised to the Neck of a Vessel. Succulent,
Juicy. Sudorifick, procuring Sweat. Suppurating, bringing to Matter.
T.
TAblets, little pieces cut out like Lozenges. Thoracick, proper for the
Breast. Torrification, Roasting. Tumor, a Swelling.
V.
VEgetable, an Herb. Vehicle, some proper Water to take a Powder, or the like
in. Viscous, slimy, tough, clammy. Uterine, proper for the Womb. Vulnerary
Potion, a Drink for healing Wounds.
A Catalogue of such Instruments and Utensils as are requisite in Pivate
Houses, for the use of those that are desirous to compound Medicines, etc.
A Great Marble Mortar, and another of Brass. A Rowler to roll Lozenges.
Spatula's of different sizes. Copper Pans to make Decoctions. An iron Ladle to
prepare Lead. A Grinding-Stone, and Mullet. A Pulping-Sieve, a Hair-Sieve
covered, Hippocras-Bags, and little Cotten-Blankets for straining. Scales and
Weights. Presses. Rasps to rasp Hartshorn, Woods, Quinces, etc. A square
wooden Frame, with a Nail at each corner to hold the Strainer. An incision
Knife. A levatory Probe. Syringes to make Injection. Forceps to draw Teeth, and
a Lancet. Cupping-Glasses, Gallypots, Boxes, and Glasses to keep Oils, Syrups,
Waters, etc. Cauteries to make Issues. Pipes, with Fenestals. Needles fit for
Sutures, Ligatures, Bands, Swaths of Linen and Woolen. Powders and Waters to
stay Bleeding. Pledgets, Compressers, and Boulsters. A Bathing-Tub, or Chair.
An Alembick, and small Still; with Receivers.

These will pretty well suffice any private Practitioner; and if necessity
requires any tiling more, you may furnish your self at leisure.

Meat and Drink observed for the contributing to Health, and the Preservation
of it.
NOurishment is a necessary Part for the Preservation of Health: for as they
are temperate, or intemperate; so good or evil Juices have their Effects in the
Body of Men and Women, as the Food we eat is of hard or easy Concoction, or
Digestion. The Temperate is such Meats, as being taken in due order, cause no
Distemper, as Bread well made of Wheat. The Intemperate are those, that by
some quality do alter the State of our Bodies; as for example, Wine, Mustard,
Garlic, Leeks, Onions, etc. do heat: and so does Pottage made with hot Herbs,
as Hyssop, Thyme, etc. Bread made of Barley, Grapes; and Pottage made with cool
Herbs, as Lettuce, Sorrel, etc. do cool.

Some kind of Nourishments breed Phlegm, some Choler, some Melancholy, and some
Excrements only. Those that principally generate good Blood, are these, viz.
Red Wine, Milk, Eggs, the Flesh of Hens, Capons, and Birds, are to be
preferred before any other sorts of Flesh, either Kid, or Veal, because they
generate better Juice. Black and thick VVines breed ill Juice: the like does
Beef, Goats-flesh; but worst of all, that of Bulls, Brawn, and Ram-flesh. Bread
that is made of yellow and sweet Wheat, well dressed, is best for Nourishment.

All manner of Pease breed VVind, and increase Melancholy. Beans that are
green, are cold and moist, and generate crude Blood and VVind: Dried Beans are
cold, and dry; so that the Flowers thereof are much used in Cataplasms that are
to dry and cool, as in hot Impostumes of the Paps. Rice is a great Binder, and
therefore used in Clysters to stop Lasks: it generates thick Juice, and
Obstructions in the Veins, if it be much eaten. All Fish do of themselves yield
a cold and moist Nourishment, and much Phlegm; yet let the quality of Meat be
never so good, too much in quantity, or unseasonably taken, will cause the
Nourishment to prove Evil: for Gluttony, and Intemperance are the greatest
Maintainers of the Physicians. Therefore, if we regard our Healths, we should
eat and drink to live, and not live to eat and drink; and certain it is, that
those who regard their Healths, ought to be moderate in both: and therefore it
is the best way to eat little at a time, that there be always a good Appetite
and Digestion; likewise to keep due order and time in our Meats and Drinks.
Good Wine is nourishing; as also the Liquors of our own Country growth that
have Age and Clearness.

Labor and Rest, how thy contribute to Health.
MOderate Labor, or Exercise, where the whole Body is actively employed,
contributes much to Health, by stirring the Humors, and sweating out what is
noxious or offensive: but the Body continuing in idleness, gathers much Phlegm
and Excrements, which would be dissipated by Exercise; for it helps the natural
Heat, quickens the Spirits, makes the Senses the better perform their several
Offices, opens the Pores of the Body, and by perspiration wastes the Excrement
that other ways would afflict it: finally, it comfort all the Spirit and
Members, that they may the better undergo their Function. In Exercise, consider
first the time, which is the fittest before Meat; secondly, the manner of the
Exercise, which is general, or particular, as playing at Ball, or Leaping
particularly, as when one Part only is exercised, as the Legs by walking, the
Arms by another Motion; the Belly is stirred by riding, and the Lungs by much
Discourse, or loud calling. Now as there are many Conveniences by Exercise
used in due quality and time, so are there many inconveniences and dangers
proceeding from Rest and Idleness; as Crudities, Obstructions, Stone in the
Reins, and Bladder, Gouts, and Apoplexy, and sundry others: and it not only
dulleth the principal Instruments of our Body, but also of our Mind.

Sleeping, and Waking, how they contribute to a healthful Constitution.
SLeep is a Rest and Quietness of the Body in its (...) and a Cessation of the
animal Spirits and Faculty (...) Sense and Motion: It fortifieth the Strength,
(...) Digestion; corrects the Passions of the Mind, and is caused when the
Brain is possessed with Vapors that ascend, which by the Brain's Coldness are
turned into Humors, and these close the Conduits of the Nerves; for when we
are waking, the Animal Faculties, as Sense, Motion, and all are at Work; but
when we sleep, the natural Functions are better performed, because the Heat
goes into the Bowels, whereby is made Digestion: but this is meant by Sleep in
the night; but sleeping in the day is hurtful: for the Sun draws the Heat and
Spirits unto the outward Parts of the Body, and being many times suddenly
wakened by Noises, etc. the Concoction begun is not perfected, but it fills the
Stomach with Crudities and sour Belchings, and the Brain is filled with gross
Vapors, and Excrementitious Humidities, and is the Cause of diverse Sicknesses,
as Catarrhs, etc. and in the night, not to exceed 8 hours sleeping is the most
healthful, because a longer time hinders the Evacuation of the Execrements
both upward and downward, and the Natural Heat, which is not idle, draws from
them some ill Vapors into the Veins and principal Parts of the Body, there to
become some Matter for a Disease.

Also in our lying down to sleep, we must observe to do it on the right side,
that the Digestion may be more easy in the bottom of the Stomach, which is
hotter, and about an hour after, if you be waking, you may turn on the Left
side, that the Liver with its Lobes may embrace the Ventricles, and as a Fire
under a Furnace, hasten the Digestion; but lie as little as may be on the Back
or Face; for Excess of the first often causes Inflammations of the Reins and
Stone, Palsy, Convulsions, and the usual Diseases proceeding from the Spinal
Marrow: The latter causes Defluxions and Rheums. Nor sleep too soon after Meat.
Note, That painful Sleep in Sickness is a bad Sign; but easy Sleep, a good
sign of Recovery.

To be over wakefull and watching, corrupts the Brain, debilitates the Senses,
moves Crudities, and alters the Spirits, breeds heaviness of the Head, and
wasting and falling away of the Flesh.

A Bill of Fare, of such Varieties as are in season for every Month in the
Year, of all sorts of necessary and convenient Provisions, in Decency and Order.
JANUARY.
BRawn and Mustard. Boiled Capons in stewed Broth, or white Broth. Two Turkies
in Stafaldo. A Hash of twelve Partridges, and a Shoulder of Mutton. Two Bran
Geese boiled. A Farced boiled Meat with Snites or Ducks. A Marrow Pudding
baked. A Surloin of Roastbeef. Minced Pyes, ten in a dish, or any other Number
as you please. A Loin of Veal. A Venison Pasty. A roasted Pig. Two Roasted
Geese. Two Capons, one larded, and Custards.

Second Course.
Oranges and Lemons. A side of Lamb roasted. A souced Pig. Two Couple of
Rabbits, one Couple Larded. A Duck and Mallard, one Larded. Six Teals, three
Larded. Six Woodcocks, three Larded. A Warden-Pye, or Dish of Quails. Dried
Neats-Tongues. Six Pigeons, three Larded. A souced Capon. Pickled Mushrooms.
Pickled Oysters and Anchovies in a Dish. Twelve Snites, six Larded. An Orangado
Pie, or a Tart Royal, of dried and wet Suckets. Sturgeon. A Turkey, or
Goose-Pye. Jellies of five or six sorts, Lay Tarts of diverse. Colors. A Plate
of Sweet Meats.

FEBRUARY.
Collops and Eggs. Brawn and Mustard. Four Rabbits hashed. A Grand Fricasie. A
Grand Sallad and a Chine of Roast Pork.

Second Course.
A Lamb Roasted whole. Three Widgeons. A Pippin Pie. A Jole of Sturgeon. A
Bacon Tart. A Cold Turkey-Pye. Jellies, and a Tart-Royal.

MARCH.
Brawn and Mustard. A fresh Neats-Tongue and Udder in Staffaldo. Three Ducks in
Staffaldo. A Roasted Loin of Pork. A Venison-Pasty. A Steak-Pye.

Second Course.
A side of Lamb, six Teal, three Larded, A Lamb-stone-Pye. Two Hundred of
Asparagus. A Warden-Pye. Marinated Flounders. Jellies, Ginger-bread, and Tarts
Royal.

APRIL.
A Bisker, cold Lamb. A roasted Haunch of Venison. A Goslin. A Turkey. Chicken,
Custards and Almonds.

Second Course.
A Side of Lamb in Joints. Eight Turtle-Doves. A cold Neats-Tongue Pie. Eight
Pigeons, four of them Larded. Lobsters, and a Collar of Beef. Tansies.

MAY.
Scotch Pottage, or Skink. Scorch Collops or Mutton. A Loin of Veal. An Olive,
or Pallate-Pye. Three Capons, one of them Larded. Custards.

Second Course.
A Lamb whole. A Tart Royal, or Quince-Pye. A Gammon of Bacon-Pye. A Jole of
Sturgeon. An Artichoke-Pye hot, and Bolonia Sausages. Tansies.

JUNE.
A Shoulder of Mutton hasht. A Chine of Beef. A Venison-Pasty cold. A cold
Hash. A Leg of Mutton roasted. Four Turkeys. Chickens, and a Steak-Pye.

Second Course.
A Jane, or Kid. Rabbits. Shovelers. A Sweetbread Pie. Olives, or Pewits.
Pigeons.

JULY.
Muskmellons. Pottage. Boiled Pigeons. A Hash of Caponets. A Grand Sallad. A
Fawn. A Custard.

Second Course.
French Beans, or Green Pease. Four Gulls, two Larded. A Codling-Tart, green.
Portugal Eggs of both sorts. Selsey-Cockles broiled.

AUGUST.
Scotch Collops of Veal. A boiled Breast of Mutton. A Fricasie of Pigeons. A
stewed Calves Head. Four Goslings. Four Caponets.

Second Course.
Twelve Dotterells, six of them Larded. Tarts Royal of Fruit Wheat Ears. A
Heath-Pout-Pye. Marinated Smelts, a Gammon of Bacon, and Selsey-Cockles.

SEPTEMBER.
An Olio. A Breast of Veal in Staffaldo. Twelve Partriges Hasht. A Grand
Sallad. A Chaldron Pie and Custards.

Second Course.
Rabbit. Two Herns, one Larded. A Florentine of Tongues. Eight Pigeons roasted,
four of them Larded. Four Pheasants. Pouts, two, Larded. A Cold Hare-Pye.
Selsey-Cockles broiled.

OCTOBER.
Boiled Duck. A Hash of a Loin of Veal. Roast-Veal. Two Bran Geese. A
Tart-Royal. Custards.

Second Course.
Pheasant. Pouts and Pigeons. Twelve Knots. A Potato-Pye. A Turbut and Selsey
Cockles.

NOVEMBER.
A Shoulder of Mutton stuffed with Oysters. A Loin of Veal, a Roasted Goose,
and a Venison Pasty.

Second Course.
A Larded Hern, and one not Larded. A Souced Turbut. Two Pheasants, one Larded.
A Collar of Beef. A souced Mullet and Base. Jellies and Tarts of Fruit in
season.

DECEMBER.
Stewed Broth of Mutton, and Marrow-bones. A Lambs-Head, and White-broth. A
Chine of Roast-beef, minced Pyes. A Turkey stuck with Cloves. Two roasted
Capons, one Larded.

Second Course.
A young Kid or Lamb roasted whole. A Dish of Partridges. Bolonia Sausages. A
Dish of Anchovies garnished with Mushrooms and pickled Barberries. A Dish of
Caveer and Pickled Oysters. A Quince-Pye, and a Dish of Woodcocks; and if on
Christmas Day, Plumb-Porridge, and Minced Pyes.

Terms of CARVING now in Use.
LEach that Brawn. Break that Deer. Lift that Swan. Break that Goose. Sauce
that Capon. Spoil that Hen. Frust that Chicken. Unbrace that Mallard. Unlace
that Coney. Dismember that Hern. Disfigure that Peacock. Display that Crane.
Untach that Curlue. Unjoint that Bittern. Allay that Pheasant. Wing that Quail.
Mince that Plover. Wing that Partridge. Thigh that Pigeon. Border that Pasty.
Thigh that Woodcock: And the Word in Carving proper to all manner of Small
Birds is to Thigh them.

To Dismember a Hern.
Having taken off both the Legs, lace it down the Breast with your Knife, and
raise up the flesh; then take it quite off with the Pinnion, and so stick the
Head in the Breast, and set the Pinnions on the contrary side of the Carcass,
and the Legs on the other side, so that the Ends of the Bones may meet across
over it, and the other Wings cross over the top of it.

To Unbrace a Mallard,
Is, to raise up the Pinion and Leg, but not to take them off; then raise the
Merrythought, and lace it down on either side the Breast with your Knife,
bending it to and fro.

To Sauce a Capon.
Lift up the Right Leg and Wing, and so array forth, and lay him in the Dish as
if he were to fly.

To Allay a Pheasant.
Raise the Leg and Wings as it were a Hen, and put no Sauce but Salt.

To Wing a Partridge.
Raise his Legs and Wings, and if you mince him, sauce him with Wine, Powder of
Ginger, and Salt, and so setting him on a Chafing Dish of Coals to warm, serve
him up.

To Wing a Quail.
Raise his Legs, and Sauce it with Salt.

To Display a Crane.
Unfold the Legs, and cut off the Wings by the Joints; then take up the Wings
and Legs and Sauce them with Powder of Ginger, Mustard, Vinegar, and Salt.

To Dismember a Hern.
Raise the Legs and Wings, and Sauce him with Mustard, Vinegar, Powder of
Ginger, and Salt.

To Unjoint a Bittern.
Raise the Legs and Wings, and Sauce it with Salt only.

To Untach a Curlew.
Raise the Legs and Wings as a Hen, and put nothing but Salt to it.

To Unlace a Coney.
Lay it on the Back, and cut away the Vents; then raise the Wings and the
Sides, and lay the Bulk and the Chine together; Sauce them with Vinegar and
Powder of Ginger.

To Mince a Plover.
Raise the Legs and Wings, and put only Salt.

To Thigh a Woodcock.
Raise his Legs, and dight his Brains; but in the ordering of a Snite you must
raise the Legs, Wings, and Shoulders: And so in the Case of other sort of Small
Fowl. But as to some Larger, take the following Directions.

Swan to Lift.
Slit her downright in the middle of the Breast, and so clean through the back
from the neck to the Rump, and cleanly and handsomely part her in two halfs,
that you break not, nor tear the Meat: Lay the two halves with the slit side
downward in a fair Charger; throw Salt about it, and let your Sauce be
Chaldron, served up in a Sawcer.

To Rear a Goose.
Break the Goose contrary to the former way, viz. Take off her Legs very fair
from the Body, cut off the Belly-piece round and close to the lower end of the
Breast, lace her down with your Knife on each side, your Thumb's breadth from
the bone, in the middle of the Breast; then take off the Pinion on each side,
and the Flesh which you first laced, raise it quite up from the Bone, and take
it from the Carcass with the Pinion; then cut up the Bone which lies before in
the Breast, called the Merrythought, the Skin and the Flesh being upon it; then
cut from the Breast another slice of Flesh quite through; take from the Bone,
and turn the Carcass, and cut it asunder, the Backbone above the Loins, and
take the Rump bone-end, and lay it in the Dish with the Skinny side upwards,
lay it at the fore-end of the Merrythought with the Skinny side upwards, and
before that the Apron of the Goose; then lay your Pinions on each side
contrary, and in like manner place the Legs behind them, that the bone-end of
the Legs may stand up cross in the middle of the Dish, and the Wing-Pinions on
the outside of them; put under the Wing-Pinions, on each side, the long slices
of flesh that you took from the Breast Bone, and let them meet under the
Leg-bones, and let the other ends lie cut in the dish between the Legs and the
Pinions: pour your Sauce of Mustard, Apples, and Sugar, well mixed, under the
dish, and sprinkling on Salt, you may serve it up with Gravy Sauce, or what
others you are furnished withal in the foregoing Treatise.

To cut up a Turkey or Bustard.
Raise the Legs up very fair, and open the Joint with the Point of your Knife,
but take them not off: then lace the Breast down on both sides, and open the
Breast-pinion, but take it not off; then raise the Merrythought between the
Breast Bone and the top of it: then lace the flesh on both sides the
Breast Bone, and raising up the flesh called the Brawn, turn it outward on both
sides, but break it not, nor take it off: cut off the Wing-Pinions at the
Joints next the Body, and stick on each side the Pinion where the Brawn was
turned out; but cut off the sharp end of the Pinion, and take the middle piece
that will just fit the Place.

This way you may Carve up a Capon, or Pheasant; but in the Capon cut not off
the Pinion: but in the place where you put the Pinion of your Turkey or
Bustard, you must put the Gizzard of your Turkey, on each side half.

Sewing of FISH.
First Course.
MUsculade, Minews in Sew, of Salmon, or Porpos, baked Herrings with Sugar,
Green Fish, Pike, Lamprey, Porpos roasted, baked Gurnet and Lamprey.

Second Course.
Jellies red and white, Dates confection'd, Conger, Salmon, Dorey, Birt,
Turbut, Trout, Holibut: For Standard, Bace, Mullet, Chevin, Soles, Lamprey
roasted, Tench in Jelly.

Third Course.
Fresh Sturgeon, Bream, Perch in Jelly, a Jole of Salmon, Sturgeon, Welks,
Wafers, Apples and Pears roasted with Sugar Candy, Figs of Molisk, Raisins,
Dates with minced Ginger and Ippocras.

Fish Carved.
In this Case you must look to the Peason, Furmity, Tail and Liver, and see if
there be a Salt Porpos, Sole, Turrentine, and do after the form of Venison.
Hak'd Herring, lay it whole on a Trencher or Plate, and then White-Herring in a
dish; open the back and take the bone out and Roe, and have your Mustard at
hand. Of Salt Fish, Green Fish, Salt Salmon, or Conger, pare away the skin.
Salt Fish, Mackarel, Marling, Stock Fish and Hake, with Butter; and take away
the bones and skins. As for a Pike, lay the belly on a Plate or Trencher, with
sufficiency of Pike Sauce, a salt Lamprey, gobbing it in seven or eight pieces,
and so present it.

A Place to be ordered this Way. Put out the Water, cross it with your Knife,
and cast on Salt and Wine. Bace, Gurnet, Mullet, Roach, Chevin, Perch, Sole,
Whiting, Haddock, and Codling, raise either of them by the back, take out the
bones, and cleanse the belly.

As for Carp, Bream, Sole, or Trout, order the back and belly together: but for
Conger. Salmon, Sturgeon, Houndfish, Turbut, Thornback and Halibut, cut them in
the dishes, the Porpos about the Tench; in his Sauce cut two Eels and Lampreys
roasted, pull off the skins and take out the bones, and put to them Vinegar and
Powder of Ginger. A Crab must be broke asunder in a dish, then make the shell
clean, and put in the stuff again; temper it with Vinegar, and Ginger-powder,
then cover it with bread and heat it. As for a Jole of Sturgeon, cut it in thin
slices, and lay it round about the dish, serving up Oil and Vinegar in Saucers.

Fresh Lamprey Baked; open the Pasty, then take White-bread and cut it thin,
and lay it in a dish with a spoon, and take a Gallentine and lay it on the
bread with Red-wine, and Powder of Cinnamon; then cut a Gobbin of Lamprey,
mince it thin, and lay it in the Gallentine, and set it on the fire to heat.
Fresh Herrings, with Salt and Wine. Shrimps well pickled. Flounders, Gudgeons,
Minews, and Muscles, Eels and Lamprey, Sprats, are good in Sew. Musculade in
Worts, Oysters in Gravy, Minews in Porpos, Salmon in Jelley, white and red;
Cream of Almonds. Dates in Comfits. Pears and Quinces in Syrup with
Parsly-roots. Mortus of Hound-fish raise standing.

Sauce for Fish.
Mustard for Salt Conger, Herrings, Salmon, Sparling, Salt-Eel and Ling.
Vinegar with Salt Porpos, Turrentine, Salt Thirlepole, Sturgeon, Salt Whale,
Lamprey, with Galentine. Verjuice with Roach, Dace, Bream, Mullet, Flounders,
Salt Crabs. Chevin with Powder of Cinnamon and Ginger. Green Sauce with Green
Fish, and Holibut Cottle. But fresh Turbut will serve well with Mustard.

The Most Acceptable Pieces to be presented at the Table to Friends or
Strangers.
IN Boiled Chickens present the Breast, and next to that, the Leg; for in all
boiled Fowl, the Leg is better accounted than the Wing, though in roasted ones
the contrary; especially if Wild-Fowl. In Pullets, Turkeys, Capons, Geese,
Duck, Mallard, Dottrel, Pheasant, and such like, the Merrythought is most
acceptable; and the Wing next, or the Leg; and the next part is that laced down
on the Breast Bone, in Roasted Fowl.

In Butchers Meat, present the Inside of the Sirloin of Beef; and in other
pieces that which is curiously striped with fat and lean: and so in boiled
Beef. In a Loin of Veal, choose the Nut-piece or Kidney-piece. In a Leg of
Mutton, the little round bone that is on the inside, above the handle; for this
is greatly in esteem among the Curious. I heard of a Hungry Gentleman who came
from Hunting to the Remainder of a Leg of Mutton, who would not eat because he
thought Clownish greasy Fellows had had the handling of it, since they had not
the Understanding to choose that bone before all the other parts of it.

In a Shoulder of Mutton, present that between the handle and flap. In a
roasted Pig, the under Jaw and Ear, especially to Women; next those, the
Neck-piece. In a Hare, Coney, or Leverit, the Middle-piece, or the Tail-piece,
called the Huntsmans Piece. In Fish, the Jole, or that Part next the Head, or
in Shellfish the Claw of a Lobster or Crab.

If Fish, or sliced Flesh be in Paste, touch it with your Fork, Knife, or
Spoon, raise it handsomely, and lay on a Plate the best you find, with a piece
of the Lid. As for Tarts, Custards, Cakes, and Sweetmeats, you must present
them, cut or whole, as their bigness is, on the point of your Knife.

Napkins to Lay in a pleasant Sight at a Table, after the Forms of sundry
Creatures, etc.
TO do this in the Form of a Cock, fold the Napkin in the middle, so that the
two Selvages may come together; then pleat it at its full length in small and
close Pleats, as hard as possible you can friese it; but in that be sure to
keep it as close as may be: then open it again, within a fingers breadth of the
middle, and join the Pleats together again, put in a good handsome round Loaf
under the middle in the fold, put the edges of the Napkin on the Loaf, and then
pull out the Head and Beak of the Cock out of the middle of the Napkin, which
you must raise on high, and make him a Comb, Wattles, and a Beard, of some red
Stuff, and for the end of the Beak, you may make it of a large Quill, which may
be fashioned like a Cocks Beak, with a little Gum-Dragon steept in
Orange-flower-water: then pull out and fashion him a Tail out of the other end
of the Fold, raise it as high as may be.

Like a Hen and Chickens: Pleat your Napkin like the former, but instead of
putting your Selvages on the bread, you must make many little Heads of
Chickens, as if they were coming out from under the Wings of the Hen,

Like a Hare: Pleat your Napkins in the same manner as you did that of the
Cock; then open them, and lay long Loaves under the Plate in the middle; then
draw a Scut out of the Fold, and four feet out of the four corners of the
Napkin, and put in a small Loaf at one end under the Fold, and so form out the
head, ears, and neck.

Like a Pig: Pleat your Napkin overthwart in very small pleats, and pinch it,
and then put in a large long Loaf between the middle near the end, and at the
other end another Loaf for the head; then fashion the head, ears, and tail: as
for the feet, you may make them out of the four corners, and a tail out of the
middle of the Napkin.

Like a Turkey: First fold your Napkin as for the Cock, and put a large Loaf
under it, and make a Comb of a bit of red Taffaty that may hang down on its
Beat, and stick the head, and throat with small flowers of different Colors;
then pull out a Tail at the other end of the Fold, and the Wings from both
sides.

Like a Carp: Make a Band about half a foot wide at one end of your Napkin, and
make it so that the Hemm may join to the end of the Band that is indifferently
large; then pleat it at its length, and pinch or freeze the band, but leave the
breadth of your four fingers without freezing all the rest, to within four or
six fingers breadth of the end, which you must leave unfreez'd to make a Tail;
then open the band, and put in a round Loaf to fashion the head, and a long
Loaf for the fashion of the body: So you may fashion a Pike, and many other
pretty Devices, that will be very taking and pleasant at an Entertainment.

How to keep Alive and fatten diverse sorts of Choice Wild Fowl, etc.
TO bring up a Hern the best way, is to take it out of the Nest before it can
fly, and put it into a large Barn where there are many cross Beams; let it have
a convenience of Water, and feed it with raw flesh cut into convenient pieces,
either of Beef or Liver, or Dogs flesh, but no Swines flesh, keeping the place
sweet and clean; for they much delight in it; and in this manner you may bring
up and fatten Pullets, Gulls, Bitterns, and the like.

To feed Partridges, Pheasants, Quail, and Wheat-ears, do it with good Wheat
and Water, giving it them Morning, Night, and Noon; but if you would have them
extraordinary Crammed Fowl, then take the finest dressed Wheat-meal, mix it with
Milk, and make it into Pasts; and ever as you knead it, sprinkle in the Grains
or Corns of Wheat, then make several Crams, and dip them in Water, and give
every Fowl according to his bigness, that his Gorge may be well filled, and so
in Fourteen Days they will be Fat beyond Measure, and thus you may do by Turtle
Doves, or Pigeons.

To feed Godwits, Knots, Gray Plover, and Curlews, Take Chilter'd Wheat, the
finest sort, and give them Water thrice a Day, Morning, Noon, and Night, which
will be very effectual, do as you did by the former,

To feed Black-Birds, Thrush, Feldfair, or any small Birds whatever, being
taken Old and Wild; It is good to have some of their Kind Tame among them, and
then putting them into great Cages of Three or four Yards Square, to have
diverse Troughs placed therein, some filled with Haws, some with Hemp, and Rape
seed, and others with Water; the Tame teaching the Wild to Eat, and the Wild
finding such alteration of Food, they will in Twelve or Fourteen Days grow
exceeding Fat, and fit for the Kitchen.

Ducklings are Fatted with Pulse or Grain, and store of Water. Goslings, with
Skeg-oats, boiled and given them thrice a Day. Geese, by putting them into Pens
which are close and dark, and there feed them thrice a Day with store of Oats,
and Split Beans, and give them Water and Barly-meal mixed together. For
Chickens, when the Hen has forsaken them, make a Past of Wheat-meal, and Milk,
and wet it often in Milk when it is rouled up, and let not the Crams be too
big, for fear of Choking them. To Fatten Capons, make Crams of Barley-meal and
Milk, and keeping them up in a Coop, give them their full Gorge, Three times a
Day, and so that they may easily go down, let them be dipped in Milk. For
Turkies, having Coopt them up, place Two Troughs, one full of Water and Barley,
and the other full of Old dried Malt, and they will be very Fat in a Month.

FINIS.

