Happy be Lucky. OR, A Catalogue of Books to be sold by Lottery, wherein no Man
puts above a Shilling, and the Fortunate Lotts are above one half; the
Adventurers may repair to D. Newman at the Blind Bear in Rebel-Lane; where the
Lotts will be drawn the next Fast Day.
PARS SECUNDA.
1. HOcus Pocus: Or Machiavil Ecclesiasticus, A Treatise containing and fully
describing the whole Art of Ecclesiastical and State-Juggling. In large Folio.
By Politico-Theologus, a North-Countrey Anabaptist Episcopizing in the South.
2. Regula Sancti Henrici: Or a Collection of all the Canons which authorize
Bishops to wear Blew Cloaks and Jack-Boots, when they are to take care of other
Men's Wives: Compiled by Car. Al -- n; and Dedicated to the Reverend Father (in
what you please but God) H. Ld. Bp. of L --. 3. Hoc est Corpus: Or
State-Transubstantiation, A learned and elaborate Treatise (stolen from the most
able Popish Writers) wonderfully proving the Miraculous Conversion of a Lawless
Convention into a Legal Parliament, by the Irish Saint, but an English Devil.
4. Non est Inventus: Or an Answer to a Treatise entitled, A HUE and CRT after
the Ne plus ultra of a Latitudinarian Conscience; Dedicated to the Ld. N -- ms
Chaplain at N -- ich. 5. Annus Mirabilis: Or the Year 1694 divided into 8
Quarters, Demonstrated from Two late Acts of Parliament; The one for 4
Quarterly Payments of a Land Tax; The other for 4 Quarterly Payments of a Poll
Tax: Published for the Satisfaction of all Free Englishmen, if any such can be
found. 6. Infoelix Arbor: Or John Le-Mot Honywood's Legacy to the House of
Commons, being Two pence a piece to all his Brother-Pensioners, to buy each of
them an H -- r, That they may speedily follow his good Example. Opus Posthumum.
7. Or^s Depopulatio: Or the Art of drawing Teeth with Gunpowder; Being an
extraordinary Invention lately discovered by an Enn^sk^lling Captain; and now
made Public for the Benefit of all little Operators and Corn-cutters, By Sir
Humph^^y G -- re. 8. Dulcis odor Lucri, etc. Or the Justice and Reasonableness
of Licensing 10000 Bawdy Houses, in order to raise a M^ll on Fund, for carrying
on a Villainous (a Vigorous it should be) War against France: Made out as clear
as the Sun in a Cucumer, being a dainty fine elegant Piece, By a Lady of
Honor. 9 Jas Belgicum: Or a Justification of the present Imposition of Tunnage
and Poundage, extravagant Taxes and Polls, excessive Fines, illegal
Imprisonments and all the Arbitrary Proceedings complained of, without Cause,
in the late Reigns, and actually practiced in this. By a Pensioned Conventioner
and sworn Enemy of his Country, Licensed by Sir G. T -- y: Printed by R.
Baldwin, and are to be Sold in St. Stephens Chapel near Westminster Hall. 10.
Creatio Reformata, i.e. Moses whipped into a Hand-Basket, or Genesis reduced to a
Chaos, being an excellent Translation done from the Original, by the Master of
the Charter House. 11. Dimidium plus Toto: Or the Art of telling lipt Money,
when we can catch it; a very concise Piece, by Hogan Mogan, etc. Published for
the Benefit of all Sorts of Persons in the Kingdom, but especially for the City
of London and Lombard Street. 12. Petitio Principii: An elaborate Treatise to
prove War the only Way and Means to support the Gospel of Peace; or that
Sanguis Martyrum and Semen Protestantis Ecclesiae are inconsistent Terms. By
the Reformed Sinect: or the London Divines. 13. Arcana Imperii: Or the French
King's Cabinet Council unlocked: Being a rare Mysterions Piece, Showing the
Ways and Means of buying Towns without Money, maintaining Armies without
Necessaries, seeding his Subjects without Bread, with many other admirable
State Politics: Dedicated to the House of Commons, with an humble Petition,
That the like Arts may be discovered and speedily put in Practice here for the
Public Good; lest it should be too late, and our Invention fail us, when all
our Money is gone. 14. Ars numerandi: Arithmetic a fine Science; or John
Partridge's Skill of multiplying 2256 by 6, to prove that on May the 20th and
22th 1685, the perjured Salamanca Doctor had 13536 Stripes upon his brawny
Shoulders. Dedicated to Robin Hog. 15. Monoculus: Or Dr. L -- n with one Eye
(and that none of the best) seeing more Piracy in Privateering, than the
Learned Dr. O -- sh with both. A very useful Piece, especially for all Seamen
in Service under the present Government; whereunto are added certain Devotions
and Prayers fitted for their Use, when they go to be hanged. 16. Malum
necessarium: Or a Pea to keep open the Issue of Schism. Dedicated to Don Juan
Aquilonius, by Corah Inventor of the Bar^ccian Manuscript. 17. Jara Perjura,
etc. Or Perjury no Sin; A very necessary Treatise in these Times, for the
Satisfaction of all tainted Consciences, very learnedly and elaborately
Performed by the Master of the Temple. 18. Messalina: A very pleasant Treatise,
Recommended to all Ladies, especially about the Court; Wherein is clearly
proved, that a Woman lying with a hundred Husbands de facto, does not Cuckold
her Husband de j^re By Dr. Sherlock's Wife. 19. Nemo tenetur ea impossible: Or
an Apology for Non payment of Taxes, they being too Many and too Mighty for our
Purses. By a Lover of his Country 20. Davas omnia, etc Or the Belgic
Leviathan; A Treatise showing the Instrumental Cause of all the intolerable
Miseries, that have lately beialn these once Three flourishing Kingdoms.
Dedicated to the Dutch Stadt-holder. 22. Hysteron Proteron: Or Martha's part
preferred before Mary's; A Sermon lately preached by the Vicar of Bray, and
Dedicated to the Children of this Generation. 22. Ego non sum ego: A large
Treatise learnedly proving it lawful to assert and use the equivocating,
reserving and deposing Doctrines, and all other the worst Principles and
Practices of the Papists, provided it be done demurely, and at least under
Pretense of advancing the Protestant Religion. By Simon the Pilgrim, 23. (...).
A Curious fine Cobweb Piece, to prove that it is much better to live under five
hundred Tyrants, than one lawful King. By a Republican Club: Published to show
what they would be at. 24. Intus and in Cute: Or the Anatomy of a Pensioned
Parliament Man, Showing 1st. his Original Disposition or Propensity to such a
Place, from a Necessity of Protection from his Creditors; 2dly. his Methods of
acquiring it, viz. by wheadling, fawning, cringing, scraping, swearing, lying,
etc. and 3dly. his Behavior in it, which is to sell his Country to reimburse
himself, etc. together with some Politic Reflections on such as pawn their
Liberties and Properties for the Sake of Roast-Beef and Strong Drink:
Recommended to all the pretended Freemen of England. 25. Speculum Rebellium: Or
the Description of a strange Mirror, wherein a Williamite cannot look, but he
will either see a Knave's or a Fool's Face, 26. Politicis atque Poetis
quidlibet, etc. Or the History of the cutting of the Throats, of Men, Women and
Children, and burning Towns in all parts of England, in one Day, by five
hundred starved Irish, who were almost frighted out of their Wits, as not
knowing where to hide themselves. 27. Eques aversus: Or an Art to make all
Persons acknowledge, That a Man faceth his Enemy all the time that he runs
away, by sitting with his Face toward the Horse's Tail, A Dutch piece, very
useful in time of War; and Dedicated to the Mighty General of the Confederate
Forces.
PETITIONS.
1. The humble Petition of Dr Fowler, That the Cross upon the Dial-Plate at
Cripplegate (being a great Offense to the Eyes of weak Brethren, when they gape
to see what a clock it is) may be effectually rased, and the Figure XII put in
its place. 2. The humble Petition of Sir William Cooper, and others, to the
Honorable the House of Commons, That whereas many of the Honorable Members of
the House are shamefully in Debt, and their Creditors are an Eyesore to them,
notwithstanding their Privileges, All the Members of the said Honorable House
may from henceforth be freely and clearly discharged of their Debts, or have
full Liberty never to pay any. 3. The humble Petition of Sr. W. H-y-v-d to the
Honorable House of Commons, That if the Wife of any Member of the said House
(while her Husband is busied day and night, in contriving Ways and Means how to
undo his Country to serve the King) shall, for want of due Benevolence, make
him a Cuckold and get the Pox, it shall only be called a Rheumatism, and she
shall be cured at the public Charge. 4. A Petition of Right presented to their
U -- ships, by the Watermen and Carmen in and about the City of London, wherein
they set forth their Grievances, That by the Means and Encouragement of the
encroaching House of Commons, their Rights and Privileges, contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, are manifestly invaded by the Licensed
Hackney Coach men. 5. The humble Petition of Dr. Titus Oats to the Honorable
House of Commons, against Robin Hog alias Stephens, for Usurping his
Profession, and endeavoring to monopolize his Salamanca Arts and Sciences of
Impudence, Perjury, etc. Printed for the Author. 6. The humble Petition of
Evidence Fuller, That though he had not Wit enough to make so great a Knave as
he would; yet since his Miscarriage proceeded from an hearty Love to Villainy,
and a devilish Devotion to the Government, he may be discharged out of Prison,
and allowed a Pension, promising that upon his Releasment he will never rest,
till he has found out greater Rogues than himself, and much fitter for the
Service of the Government. 7. The humble Petition of the Soldiers and Seamen's
Wives to both Houses of Parliament, That it may be speedily Enacted that they
and their Children shall never be Hungry, seeing they are not able to endure
their cries for Bread, when they have nothing to give them. 8. The Hamble
Petition of Miin Here Benting to Sr. William Ashurst Lord Mayor of London, That
his Lordship would be pleased to spare him his Chaplain Stephens, because he is
the fittest Man for him, they having been both of a Trade; promising that in
lieu of him he will send his Lordship a Dutch Anabaptist, who may be much more
serviceable to him. 9. The Humble Petition of Dr. Littleton, to the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Privy Council, That an Order may be issued out to
him to draw up an Information of Piracy against Mr. Bradshaw, it being the only
sure way left to dispatch him, the very Sight of whom is such a Plague to his
Doctorship, that he fears it will provoke him to put out his other Eye, that he
may not be able to see his own Shame. 10. The humble Petition of the Poor in
and about the Cities of London and Westminster, That since Money is grown so
scarce, and their Society so numerous, that Begging will not maintain them, it
may be lawful for them to Steal a little. Delivered at Kensington, and Signed
by above 10000 Hands. 11. The Humble Petition of the Bankers in behalf of all
Clippers and Coiners, That not only they be not farther prosecuted, but that
they may be incorporated into a Society, with special Privileges and
Encouragements for a speedy supply of Moneys, which otherwise in a short time
will be all gone.
Acts of Parliament.
1. An Act of Parliament, That whereas the Members of the House of Commons, for
diverse Reasons, are become ashamed to demand the ancient Allowance formerly
paid by the respective Places for which they were elected, they shall from
henceforth immediately upon the return of their Election be made Pensioners of
the Crown; That instead of Representatives of their Country they may become
the King's Servants, and so be enabled when they make any sweet Presents to ^^k
their own Fingers. 2. An Act of Parliament, That whereas the numerous and
liberal Pensions given to Members of the House of Commons cannot so calm all
their Spirits, but that some of them, upon particular Occasions, are very apt
to grow mutinous, there be allowed extraordinary the Yearly Sum of 200000 l. to
his Majesty, to be dispersed among them at his Discretion upon emergent
Occasions, over and above all Pensions, by the name of H^sh-money. 3. An Act of
Parliament, That the name of Lombard street be changed to Lumber-street, and
that the unnecessary Bankers be removed thence and sent to Holland, and in
their Room be placed Pawn-Brokers, Apprizers and Seller of Second hand Goods;
that people who have parted with all their money, may know where to dispose of
or sell the Furniture of their Houses. 4. An Act of Parliament, That Right
shall be Wrong and Wrong Right; that Truth shall be Lying, and Lying Truth;
That the poor who are starved here shall be reported to be starved in France;
and that all the Barbarities committed by P. O. be charged upon the French
King. 5. An Act of Parliament, That ^^e French King shall restore the two
thousand five hundred Merchants Ships and upwards, which he has taken from us,
under this penalty, that if he do not, we will speedily lose or make away all
the rest, and so utterly undo all his Privateers by leaving them no Prizes to
take. 6. An Act of Parliament to make P. O. Invulnerable, that he may no more
so shamefully run away, as he did at Landen; as also to encourage him to carry
on a Vigorous War against France. 7 An Act of Parliament, That P. O's Nose be
pared, or laid on one Side; because it shadows his Brains, and stands in his
Light, that he can neither see his Enemies, nor his proper Advantages,
Cases of Conscience and Queries.
1. Since Rebellion is forbidden by Divine Authority under pain of Damnation,
as strictly and in as express Terms as any other grievous Sin, Whether we may
not as lawfully Authorize men to Perjure themselves, murder, whore, steal, bear
false witness, or commit any other crying Sin, as to rebel against their
lawful Sovereign. 2. Whether an Act of Parliament can secure a Man from
Damnation, who in Obedience to it violates the known Laws of God? 3. Whether
that is properly called a Christian State, where they set up their own Laws in
direct Opposition to the Laws of God and of Christ? 4. Whether when King
James's Health was proposed to be drunk, in regard he was Q. Mary's Father, Mr.
Emerton did not pertinently propose this Question to be first resolved, Whether
she acknowledged him as such? 5. Whether John of Lambeth, though he seem not to
approve of some means they used, did not implicitly confess, That heath thought
all parties whatsoever to be in the Right when he made this Complaint in his
late Sermon, That the Zealots of all parties had got a scurvy trick of lying
for the Truth? 6. Whether it be not to work a Miracle, equal to any among the
Papists, to make those Fathers in a Church who never were Sons of it? 7. What
Course we must take to raise Six Millions next Year, when all our Money is
likely, (...) swallowed up this Year in the Exchequer Funds, and from thence to
be transported to Holland? 8. What will become of the Vigorous War against
France when all our Money is gone? 9. Whether our Fund Merchants and Purchasers
of Revenues in the Exchequer, be not like Aesop's Dog, who let go and lost the
Substance to catch at the Shadow? 10. Whether Fleet. Shepherd did not give a
more satisfactory Answer to King James's Declaration than Dr. Welwood, when
(King James's Declaration being produced) he lustily swore, That his (...) the
P. of O. had taken the right course to make no Declarations be believed, by not
keeping the least tittle of any of his own? 11. Whether our Weathercock
Swearing Clergy would not cry out a blessed Reformation, if their dear Dutch
Savior William HENRY P. O. alias King de facto, should (to which he is in a
fair way) (...) the Old Proverb or Prophesy, viz, As Henry the Eighth,
destroyed Monasteries and Cells,
(...) HENRY the Ninth, shall pull down Ch^^^es and Bells.


