A Charge Given AT THE General Quarter Sessions OF THE PEACE For the County of
SURREY HOLDEN At Dorking on Tuesday the 5th day of April, 1692. and in the
Fourth Year of their Majesty's Reign.

By the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire

One of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County.

LONDON, Printed for John Newton at the three Pigeons over against the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1692.

TO THE Right Honorable George Earl of Berkeley, etc. Custos Rotulorum of the
Country of Surrey.
My Lord,
WHen I Petitioned your Lordship to appoint the Easter Sessions, at Dorking, I
little expected the Honor the Gentlemen on the Bench were pleased to do me in
choosing me for their Chairman; but when I was forced to submit to their
Commands, in accepting an Office for which I was so ill qualified, I was
extremely surprised at the unusual Compliment the Grand Jury first, and then
the Court, made me, in desiring me to Publish the Charge I gave them. All the
importunities I could use, proved insufficient to excuse me from appearing thus
in Public; and I was forced out of deference to their Judgments, and obedience
to their Orders, though with the greatest Reluctance, to execute on my self a
Sentence so Severe. For though there is nothing in these Papers that an honest
Man need be ashamed of; yet the World will be apt to judge of them, not
according to the sincerity of the Author, but the exactness of the performance
And there ought to be Wit, and Eloquence, Sense, and Judgment, as well as a
good intention in those that appear in Print. I am sensible, My Lord, how
deficient I am in the first mentioned Qualifications, and therefore I thought
it necessary to beg your Lordship's Protection for this Discourse. And indeed,
whether I consider your Lordship as a zealous Patron of Religion and Vertae, or
as a true Friend to the Interests of your Country, and, by consequence,
entirely devoted to their Majesty's Service; or whether I consider the High
Office your Lordship so deservedly enjoys in this County, and the Obligations I
owe your Lordship for honoring me with your Friendship; in all these respects,
my Lord, there can be no Person so fit as your Lordship, to defend the
following Sheets from the Censures of Atheistical Libertines, and Seditious
Malcontents. If we were to judge of the Strength of these two Parties by
their Clamor, and their positiveness in what they assert, then Religion,
Virtue, and Loyalty might justly be apprehensive of them as dangerous and
formidable Enemies. But those Arguments had need be irrefragable that can
persuade a Man of Sense, either that Wickedness and Goodness are of the same
intrinseck Value, and equally eligible; or that a Despotick Monarchy is
preferable to the excellent Model of our English Government. And though they
were Masters of as much Wit and Art as the Epicurean Poet, or the Malmsbury
Philosopher, (whose Dictates they for the most part Copy after) yet Principles
that are in themselves false, and, besides that, undermine the Public
Security, and destroy the private Happiness of Mankind must never hope to be
generally entertained, unless they have better recommendations than superficial
Sophistry, and smooth Language. But, my Lord, it is the proper Business of a
Dedication to be on the Defensive: and therefore I shall not engage my self any
farther in this Quarrel. -- I have only this to say in behalf of my self, that
whoever thinks I have prostituted my Pen either to Revenge, Covetousness, or
Ambition, is very much mistaken; for as I never received any personal Affront
or Injury from the last Government, so neither do I expect or hope for any
profitable Employments, or great Places under the present: But am as free on
the one hand from Malice, as I am on the other from Flattery. By this the World
may see I have no private Aims, but have sincerely and freely declared the
Genuine and Vnbyast dictates of my Reason. And these I presume to shelter under
your Lordship's Patronage; and since I have been, as it were, forced to Print
these Papers, it is no small comfort to me that I have thereby an Opportunity
publicly to own your Lordship's kindness in appointing, at my request, the
last Sessions at Dorking, and in giving me reason to hope that that place shall
now and then, by your Lordships grant, share an advantage from which it has
for some time been excluded, and which, I assure my self, they will for the
future deserve better by prevailing with the Justices to fill the Chair with a
person fitter for that Employment, then,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obliged, Obedient, and Humble Servant, HUGH HARE.
Betchworth Apr. 12. 1692.
Sur' ss. Ad. General' quarterial' Session. Pacis Domini Regis and Dominae
Reginae Com' Sur' tent' in and pro Comitatu praedicto apud Dorking in eodem
Cmitatu die Martis in Septimand proxima post Clausum Pasch' scilicet, quinto
die Aprilis, Anno Regni Dom. Will' and Dom. Mar. Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regis and Reginae, sidei Desensorum, etc. quarto coram
Justiciariis ibid assignatis, etc.

ON Reading the Address of the Grand Inquest, for the body of this County at
the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, now held for this County at Dorking;
whereby it is desired that the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire would please to permit
his Religious Learned, and Loyal Charge now given to the said Grand Inquest to
be Printed. The Justices now present in Court, do Concur and Agree with the
said Grand Inquest in their Address, and do desire that the said Mr. Hare would
please to permit his said Charge to be Printed.

Per Cur. Exr. per Will. Smith Cler. pacis Com. Sur. Praed.

Sur'ss. WE whose Names are subscribed, being the Grand Jury for the said
Country, do, Present our Humble Thanks to the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire Chairman
at the general Quarter Sessions held at Dorking, in the said County, the 5th.
of April, 1692. for his Religious, Learned and Loyal Charge; and do hombly
desire, that for the Advantage of this County, for whose Benefit it was
intended, he would permit the same to be Printed.

Tho. Baker Tho. Vincent Valentine Hayward John Isted John Goldhawke Thomas
Francis Will. Luck John Hill Miles Dudley John Woodman John Stilwell John Rowod
Tho. Harther John Knight Tho. Spong Walter Lonhurst Tho. Cannell John Page
Michael Green Will. Wood Will. Wood Jo. Gardener Joseph Bignold Charles King
Richard Hubbard
A Charge Given AT THE General Quarter Sessions OF THE PEACE For the County of
SURREY HOLDEN At Dorking on Tuesday the 5th. day of April, 1692.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
AS the Necessity of Government flows from the Corruption of Humane Nature, so
the Strength, the Glory, and the Honor of it consist in the regular
Administration of Justice; and as without the one, Societies cannot be upheld,
so without the other, all Communities would be but little better than well
modelled Combinations to oppress, cheat, and ruin the weaker and submitting
part of Mankind. Not, but that the advantages of a Political Union are so
Considerable, that it may be doubted whether Tyranny it self, though as
execrable as that formerly practiced by the Roman, Nero, and in these our Days,
revived with many Additions by the French Louis, be not rather to be chosen
than a wild and confused Anarchy. This State, exposes Men to the Frauds and
Violence of all their Neighbors, and the extravagant Caprices of the Mobile;
and the other, subjects whole Nations to the mad Frolicks and brutal Passions
of a slattered and abused Tyrant.

Both extremes are very Dreadful, and as much to be deprecated as a raging
Pestilence, or any other common Calamity: While the mean between them, from
which they both so far deviate, is a Copy well drawn from that Great, and not
to be parallelled Original of God's Government of the World, whose only end is
to promote the happiness of his Creatures, as the Peace, Safety and Public
good of the People, ought to be no less the Aim of all Rulers, than it is the
Reason why Government was at first Instituted. How happy therefore, and how
much to be valued are the Constitutions and Laws of England, whereby we are
delivered from both Extremes? We neither lie under the Terror of an Arbitrary
Power, nor are we cast loose to the Wildness of ungoverned Multitudes; we
neither groan under the Tyranny of a French Army, nor the Madness of the
Lawless Rabble. Our Laws are Writ neither on Sand, nor with Blood, for they are
neither easy to be Defaced, nor cruel in their Execution; but are known and
established Rule, whereby we are taught how to administer Justice, and whereby
as Men's Rights are limited, so their Passions are restrained, and the Public
Peace is settled on a secure Foundation. Prerogative and Property which are so
much abused as pretenses for Oppression on the one Hand, and Sedition on the
other, are by our Laws so well disposed and regulated, that being twisted
together in a mutual Defense, they afford our Island a safer Protection than
the Ocean that surrounds it; and having crushed all the Domestic Enemies that
secretly Project our Ruin, strike a Terror on those Foreigners, that would
Invade our Repose. The Subject I am upon is so Copious and so Pleasant, that
should I follow my own Inclinations, I should wast that time in Speaking which
may be much better spent in Acting for the good of our Country. Therefore I
shall make my Charge as short as conveniently I may, being fully sensible that
you all know, as well as I, the Business for which we are here met together.
And I am sure they serve the Government best, who though they may want
Eloquence to give it its due Praises, yet have courage enough to defend and
preserve it when disturbed by any Enemies. In which number are to be reckoned,
not only that Ambitious, Bloody and Perfidious Prince (that Ishmael of our Age,
Genesis 16.12.
whose Hand is against every Man, and every Man's Hand against Him) with whom
we are at this time necessarily engaged in a just and honorable War, for the
common Safety, Liberty, and Repose of Europe; but also those more dangerous
Enemies, our Domestic Ones: I mean all Profane, Lewd, Debauched, Traitorous,
Seditious, Lawless and disorderly Persons, who Blaspheme God, and Dishonor
themselves; who conspire the ruin of the Government, under whose Protection
they live, and censure all its Proceedings; who Rob, Murder and Oppress the
Innocent, and, in a word, disturb the Public Peace. Of all which sorts of
People I may truly say, that as they are a Scandal and Reproach to Humane
Nature, so do they naturally weaken the Foundations of any Constitution, and
must in time, if not duly repressed and punished occasion its overthrow.
Therefore the Laws of England have several ways wisely provided Remedies for so
great an Evil, and Preservatives against so dangerous a Distemper. Among which,
I may reckon the chiefest to be the Court of Quarter Sessions, which is four
times in a Year held in every County. A Court so Honorable, that it receives
its Authority by a special Commission from their Majesty's, in which the
highest Subjects of England think it an additional Dignity and Privilege to Act
for the Public Good, and in relation whereunto the King himself is by our Laws
styled the Principal Conservator of the Peace: A Title, glorious without Pomp,
and clearly expressive of the weighty Burden annexed to Royalty! And as our
Office is Honorable, so is it likewise very Ancient; for besides, the Reasons
we have to believe that this, or something very like it, was Contemporary with
the Original of our Own, and most other Governments; besides, Hollinsh. 8.
this (I say) our Chronicles inform us that William the First, commonly called
the Conqueror, about the fourth Year of his Reign, which is above Six Hundred
Years ago, ordained Justices of the Peace. Though the first particular Statute
we meet with concerning it, Stat. 1. E. 3. c. 16.
is of a younger date, viz. the first Year of Edward the Third's Reign. How
generally useful and serviceable to the Country this our Authority has been
found to be, needs no other Proof, than the considerable enlargements it has
since that time received.

Whereas the High Commission Court, the Star Chamber, the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and several other Courts, being found to deviate from their Original
Institution, and instead of giving Ease, Relief, and Security, to become
Burdensome and Oppressive to the Subjects, have been suppressed by Authority
of Parliament. But the Wisdom of the Nation instead of vacating our Power, has
in several Particulars extended the Limits of it; for they could not but be
sensible of the vast advantages that every Man receives by so frequent and so
regular, so cheap and so easy an Administration of Justice, whereby all
violences are checked, and the Infringers and Disturbers of the Public Peace,
are hindered from triumphing in their unpunished Villainies.

That Peace is in its self the greatest Temporal Blessing that either Nations
or private Men can enjoy, is not only evident from the unavoidable Miseries and
Calamities that attend the contrary State, and cloud the Glories of the most
successful Conquerours; but also from the high Encomium the Holy Spirit gives
of it throughout the Blessed Scriptures. It was all along promised to the Jews,
who then were God's peculiar People, as the greatest reward that he could
bestow on those who were obedient to his Laws; And whenever they notoriously
swerved from this Divine Rule, how severely did they feel the Prophet Isaiah's
Denunciation executed upon them, Isai. c. 57. v. 21.
There is no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked: which is literally verified as
to all Mankind, whether we consider them united into several Political
Societies, or under the Character of private Persons; in both stations Peace
and Security, Quiet and Comfort, are at as vast a distance from them, as they
are from Innocence and Integrity. One of the Characters under which our Blessed
Savior's Birth was foretold, and his extraordinary Qualifications described,
is this, he shall be called -- The Prince of Peace. Isai. c. 9. 7. 6.
When this Prophecy was fulfilled by our Savior's Mysterious Incarnation, the
whole World was at Peace, the Gates of the Temple of Janus which had so long
stood open, were then shut, and when the joyful Tidings of our Lord's Birth
were Proclaimed by Angels to the Shepherds, Men of an innocent Life, and a meek
and sedate Temper, this Seraphick Hymn concluded the Gracious Message on which
they came; Luke c. 2. v. 14.
Glory to God in the Highest, on earth Peace, good will toward Men.

How noble a Title does our Savior in his first Sermon on the Mount, bestow on
the Peace Makers, whom he not only declares Blessed, but also promises that
they shall be called the Children of God: Mat. c. 5. v. 9.
That God of Love and Peace, who by the Gospel of Peace, which his Eternal Son
promulgated to the World, has made all Mankind capable of everlasting
Salvation. It would be vain presumptioh in me to enlarge any farther on the
Blessings of this happy State, whose praises have been so fully celebrated by
the Voice of God and the Tongues of Angels; and after all that can be said of
the Strength, the Beauty, the Pleasure, and all the other desirable
Consequences of Peace, Tranquillity, and Freedom, (for Peace is not to be wished
for, when it wants those main ingredients in its composition) the advantages
and the delights of it, are rather to be felt than expressed. But as necessary
as it is For the well being of Mankind, and the cementing of Societies, we must
look upon it, not only as the Reward, but as the Natural Product of Justice;
which being a virtue whereby we are always ready to yield to every one their
due, how can that be called a state of Peace, wherein God, to whom, as he is
our Creator, we owe the greatest Honor and Reverence, is daily blasphemed and
affronted by the Profane and Licentious; and wherein Men's reciprocal Duties to
each other are so little regarded, that Treasons and Murders, Robberies and
Oppressions, Frauds and Rapines, and the worst sort of Rapine, Extortion, are
daily committed with impunity? This is no more a state of true Peace and well
grounded security, than a Lethargy, is a state of bodily Health, or a
Conscience seered and stupefied with the daily perpetration of the greatest
Villainies, is a state of Grace and Salvation. But I hope it is not our
misfortune to be in these Circumstances, at a time when we are particularly
ordered by their Majesty's, (who are themselves admirable Examples of Piety and
Virtue) to see all our good Laws against Vice and Debauchery, and all manner of
disorderly and irregular Actions, duly and impartially put in Execution,
Therefore that we may, if it be possible, see those days the Psalmist speaks
of, Psalm. 85. v. 10.
When Righteousness, and Peace shall kiss each other, I shall recommend to you
(Gentlemen of the Jury) and to all others concerned in it, to search and
enquire after, to present, inform against and prosecute according to Law, all
Offenders against the Rules of Justice; which as it relates to different
Objects, I shall distinguish under these two general Heads, of Moral and Civil
Justice. Under the former is comprehended all Profaneness, Vice and
Immorality; and under the latter, all Treasons, Murders, Felonies, and
Breaches of the Public Peace, and all other Crimes which you are Sworn to
inquire into, and present, according to the best of your Skill and Knowledge;
and I doubt not but you will acquit your selves of this your Duty, with all
Honesty, Diligence, and Impartiality, remembering the Solemn Obligation you have
laid upon your Souls, and the strict account that you must at the last day give
of your Actions, before the great Tribunal.

Gentlemen, The Offenders against Moral Justice are those who are guilty of
profane Cursing and Swearing, of Perjury and Subornation, of the Profanation of
the Lord's Day, of Drunkenness, Adultery, Fornication, and all other dissolute
and disorderly Practices, which do still abound in this Kingdom,
notwithstanding the many good Laws in force against these Crimes; which Laws if
they were duly and impartially Executed, Vice and Debauchery would be much less
Impudent, Scandalous, and Contagious, than now they are; and consequently the
Guilt of National Impiety, would not so loudly call for Vengeance. Gentlemen,
we neither want good Laws, nor due encouragement from our Superiors, nor yet
good. Magistrates of the Higher Rank; but the Constables, Headboroughs, and
other under Officers, have so little Religion or Honesty in them, that their
negligence in Informing and Prosecuting, renders our pains as it were,
ineffectual for the promoting a general Reformation of Manners. Therefore I
must give it you particularly in Charge, to make a strict enquiry into the
Defaults and Neglects of all Petty Constables, Headboroughs and Tythingmen, in
the Execution of their Office; but more especially you are to enquire whether
they have duly Executed the Order of the Quarter Sessions holden for this
County at Kingston in October last; Printed Copies whereof have been affixt to
the Doors of Parish Churches, and in other Public Places; that as the Officers
of some particular Hundreds have been minded of this their Duty, by a Monthly
Petty Sessions kept for the same purpose by the Neighboring Justices; so the
whole County should, by this more Public Act of the Quarter Sessions, know
that it is the unanimous Resolution of us all to do our Parts toward the
punishing and repressing these Vices so justly hateful to God and to all good
Men. And Gentlemen, let me once more tell you, it is your Business to enquire
into, and make due presentment of the neglect or connivance of all Officers of
Justice concerned in the Execution of these Laws; for since we find by
experience, that they have so little regard either to the Glory of God, the
good of their Country, or the performance of their own Oaths, it is highly
conducive both to their own good, and to the better demeanor of their
Successors, that they fhould be made Public Examples of, and suffer Fine and
Imprisonment as the Bench shall think fit.

Gentlemen, I am sorry the prevailing Wickedness of the Age has made this
digression of mine so necessary; I shall now proceed to discourse farther to
you on the several parts of Moral Justice, and after I have represented to you
the Nature of those Vices which are contrary to it, and the Penalties our Laws
annex to such Vices; I shall just hint to you some weighty and indispensible
Obligations, which you, as well as other Officers of Justice lie under,
diligently, zealously and impartially to join in the promoting so good a Work.

And first, Gentlemen, the daily increase of profane Cursing and Swearing is a
thing seriously and sadly to be considered. Men are now grown so hardened and
riveted in this Blasphemous Custom, that one may justly wonder at the Merciful
forbearance of Almighty God, in not punishing those impious Wretches by an
immediate stroke of his Almighty Vengeance; in not consigning them, in the very
instant of their Wickedness, to that Devil whose Protection they so often
invoke, in not sinking them quick into that irrecoverable State of Damnation
they so zealously imprecate upon themselves, for the confirmation of some
trifling matter, not worthy a wise Man's notice, and perhaps sometimes of a
downright falsehood! This is an Immorality so unworthy of any one who professes
himself a Christian, that even an honest Heathen would have blushed to be
surprised in it; for though their Religion was false, and their Gods were
fictitious, yet they were rather guilty of an immoderate Superstition, than of
any thing that so much as bordered upon Profaneness, which, of the two Errors
in Worshipping the Deity, is far the more inexcusable. And as this Sin is very
dishonorable to God, so is it in this particular extremely dangerous to Humane
Societies; in that it makes Men careless and inconsiderate of what they assert
or promise, though they confirm it with the most Solemn Oaths. Hierocles.
For (as a wise Heathen excellently observes) from a common custom of Swearing,
Men easily slide into Perjury; therefore (says he) if thou would not be
Perjured, do not use to Swear. And how can it be consistent with Reason, that a
Man, who hourly provokes God by rash and vain Swearing, should boggle at a
false Oath, whenever his Lust, his Covetousness, his Revenge, or his Ambition
prompt him to it, and importunately demand to be gratified, though at so vast a
Price? Besides this, at how low a rate do they value their immortal Souls, who
expose them to the Wrath of God and Eternal Damnation, by a Sin from which they
cannot reap the least Profit or Pleasure? For, whereas the Covetous, the
Revengefull, the Voluptuous, the Ambitious; nay, the Apostate himself, may at
the day of Judgment plead, (though even their Plea will be rejected as
frivolous and insufficient) the strength of Temptation, and the irresistible
Violence of Fear, Anger, or Desire; the common Swearer will have no pretense or
excuse to allege in his behalf, but that which will heinously aggravate his
Guilt, the inveteracy of an ill Habit, and the prevalency of Atheistical
Examples. Since therefore every single Act of this Sin, much more a daily
repeated Custom of it, is a direct contempt of the third Commandment; Exodus c.
20. v. 7.
(Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain,) and of the
dreadful Penalty annexed to it; as likewise of that Expression of our Savior,
St. Mat c. 12. v. 37.
(By thy Words thou shall at the last day be Justified, and by thy Words thou
shall be Condemned.) We may reasonably Conclude, without exceeding the Limits
of Charity; that none who are habitually guilty of this Profaneness, can
seriously believe and lay to heart the Principles of the Christian, or even of
Natural Religion, which so strictly and positively forbids it. But there is no
need at present to enlarge any farther on this Argument; for I hope, Gentlemen,
I have said enough to dissuade you from conniving at the negligence of the
under Officers, in punishing so enormous a Crime; for which the Land too justly
mourns, and to which our Laws have affixed the following Penalty; namely, Stat.
21. Jac. 1. c. 20.
Twelve Pence for every profane Oath and Curse. The Forfeitures fall to the
Poor of the Parish where the Offense is Committed, and the Offender is to be
Prosecuted within twenty days after; if the Oaths or Curses are uttered in the
hearing of any Justice of the Peace, there needs no farther Proof, but
otherwise the Offense must be proved before any one Justice of the Peace, by
the Oaths of two Witnesses, or the Confession of the Party Offending. In either
of which Cases, if the Penalty cannot be satisfied, by a Distress and Sale of
the Offenders Goods, then every such Offender, if above the Age of Twelve
Years, must be set in the Public Stocks for the space of three whole Hours,
and all under that Age must be Whipped by the Constable, or the Parent, or the
Master, in his Presence. This Statute is ordered to be Read twice a Year in all
Parish Churches, by the respective Ministers on Sunday after Evening Service:
Therefore, Gentlemen, you are to enquire whether this Act has been so Read,
and to present all Ministers that have neglected it: For such neglect, though
there is no Penalty annexed to it, is yet a High Contempt of their Majesty's
Laws, and Punishable in this Court.

2. Next to Profane Swearing and Cursing, we must consider the Sin of Perjury
and Subornation, which, as I before observed, does in a great Measure deduce
its Original from, and owe its increase to the impious Custom Men have taken up
of interlarding their careless Talk, and even the common Civilities of
Conversation with rash and vain Oaths. But, Gentlemen, as the Sin of this is
much greater, so are the Consequences of it much more Pernicious to private
Persons, Families and Societies, than those of the other. It is an Offense both
against Moral and Civil Justice; being a willful and deliberate Breach not only
of the third Commandment, Exodus c. 20. v. 7. v. 16.
(Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain,) but also of the
Ninth: (Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor;) and the
certain Consequences of it are, the Oppression, and ruin of innocent Persons,
who too often lose their Lives, their Estates, and their good Names, and have
Infamy and Beggary entailed on their Posterity by the false Attestations of
perjured Rascals. 1 Kings 21. v. 13. St. Mark. c. 15. v. 28.
By these Naboth fell a Sacrifice to the Covetousness of Ahab, and the Pride
and Cruelty of Jezabel; and our Blessed Savior himself who had done nothing
amiss, was numbered with the Transgressors; the innocence and the usefulness of
his Life being too weak a Defense to preserve him from the Malice of his
Enemies, and from being Condemned by a partial Judge upon the incoherent
evidence of his perjured Accusers. Nor can we, I hope, so soon forget, that
among the many Blessings of the late Reign, we daily saw this Villainy boldly
and triumphantly perpetrated. No Man who wished well either to the Church or the
Laws of England, was safe from the informations of Mercenary Wretches:
Fictitious Conspiracies were every day Hatched, and Judges and Juries were so
corrupted, that the one gave their Opinions, and the other their Verdicts
according to the Directions they received from Court; no Man was safe in his
Innocence, nor secure in his Property; and Trials and Proceedings which should
have been exactly Consonant to Law and Reason, to Justice and Mercy, were
become only a more Solemn and Ceremonious method of completing our Ruin. It
has been thought an Offense against the very Law of Nations, to poison a
Fountain of which even an Enemy was to drink. How great a Crime then must it
be, and how near a kin to Sacrilege, to corrupt the Laws which are the very
Fountains and Springs of Political Life? And to make those the instruments of
Oppression and Wrong, which should be our greatest Security and Relief? And yet
this was done by a Prince, to whom his Flatterers with a Folly and Impudence
equalty egregious, ascribed the Sacred Epithete of Just; for whose return,
several unnatural Englishmen so ardently Pray, though the certain Consequences
of it must be the involving the Nation in Blood, and the entailing upon us
Popery and Slavery, and giving a free inlet to all manner of Vice, Profaneness,
and Immorality. But Providence has been so Merciful, as to reject these
inconsiderate Petitions; and to bless us with a continuance of the happiest
Government that ever Nation enjoyed, and the best Governors that ever swayed a
Scepter; whose Reign is as Glorious a Reverse to the last, as Trajan's to
Domitian's Constantine's to Dioclesian's, that of our Virgin Queen to the
Tyranny and Persecution of her Bloody Sister. Under their present Majesty's,
the Public Perjury I have been speaking of, is generously Discountenanced, and
when Discovered, never fails of being punished as severely as our Laws will
allow. But however, I am afraid, in private Causes, Perjury and Subornation do
still too much prevail to the utter ruin of whole Families; therefore for the
preventing the deplorable Consequences of so great a Villainy, and for the
punishing all those that shall be convicted of it, our Law declares, that
whosoever shall procure any Witness or Witnesses, by Letters, Rewards,
Promises, or by any other Sinister means, Stat. 5. Eliz. c. 9.
(which, the Law calls Subornation) to commit wilful and corrupt Perjury in
any Court, or before any Judge of Record, shall for every such Offense forfeit
the Sum of Forty Pounds, and for ever after be disabled from being admitted as
a Witness in any Case whatsoever. And as for the Person who is suborned, or,
without Subornation, perjures himself as aforesaid, he forfeits the Sum of
Twenty Pounds, and is to suffer fix Months Imprisonment without Bail, and to be
for ever after discredited as a Witness: One Moiety of Penalties on this Act
belong to the King and Queen, and the other is given to the Persons aggrieved,
as a small reprizal for the losses they sustain by the Perjury. But in Case the
Suborner be not able to pay the Forfeiture, he is to be Imprisoned without Bail
for six Months, and to stand upon the Pillory: And the Person who is Suborned,
or Perjured, is in case of the like disability to have his Ears nailed to the
Pillory. Too small a Punishment for so flagitious a Crime, and (as our
Experience shows us) very insufficent to restrain the Practice of it; while
Petty Larcenies have a more infamous Brand set upon them, and several small
Robberies are punishable with Death; the perjured Person and the Suborner after
all the mischiefs he has done, pays but a small Fine out of his ill gotten
Store, suffers a short Imprisonment, and a slight Disgrace, and loses only,
what we cannot suppose he ever much valued, his Reputation; at least any
farther, than it may prove serviceable to his Villainous designs. But till our
Representatives shall think fit to provide a more effectual Remedy for this
growing Evil, I must particularly recommend it to you, Gentlemen of the Jury,
and earnestly press you to put this Act in Execution, as far as in you lies;
that is, by Inquiring, Presenting and Indicting all Persons who fall under the
Censures of it: For, unless you do so, (as far as shall any ways come to your
Knowledge) you break your own Promissory Oath; I mean, the Solemn Appeal you
lately made to the God of Truth, who will not fail to avenge it on your Selves
and your Families, and also involve your selves in the dreadful guilt of
conniving at the Perjuries of others, and of abetting all the Injuries and
Oppressions, that shall fall upon the Innocent, and which might have been
prevented by a Vigorous and timely Prosecution. But, Gentlemen, I hope you do
not think I mistrust your Integrity, or your Diligence, while I mind you of
your Duty, and use the most persuasive Arguments that occurr, to press you to
it, especially in a Point so absolutely necessary as this is. For, Gentlemen,
you are to look upon all such Perjured Wretches not only as Robbers and
Destroyers of private Persons and their Families, but also as Traitorous
Conspirators against Humane Society. For what Methods can the Wisdom of Men
invent for the ending of Strife, and the decision of doubtful Matters, if the
Sacred Obligation of Oaths, to which even the Heathens had so tender a regard,
proves ineffectual for this Purpose? And when Matters are come to this pass,
what can preserve the World from falling into Confusion? What can hinder
Mankind (who are naturally so suspicious of one another) from being reduced to
that State of War, in which a late Philosopher erroneously affirmed them to be
originally Created, but an immediate interposition of the Divine Providence?
For amongst all the Instruments of Ruin and Mischief that ever were devised,
none is of more pernicious Consequence to Humane Society, than Perjury and
Breach of Faith: Prove. c. 25. v. 18.
According to the Observation of the Wisest of Men. A false Witness against his
Neighbor is a Maul, and a Sword and a sharp Arrow, a Pestilence that usually
walks in Darkness, and a secret Stab and Blow against which many times there
is no possibility of Defense. The serious Consideration whereof made the
Psalmist cry out with so great earnestness, as (God knows) we also have at this
day very much Reason to do; Help, Lord, for the Righteous Man cease, Psalm. c.
12. v. 1.
and the Faithful fail from among the Children of Men.

3. The third Immorality which is to be corrected, is the Profanation of the
Lord's Day; and this is as notorious a Breach of the Fourth Commandment, as
rash and vain Oaths and Curses are of the Third, Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11. v. 7.
and as Perjury and Subornation are both of that and of the Ninth; yet how
generally this Sin also is practiced, I am ashamed to think. Remember thou keep
Holy the Sabbath Day, v. 16.
were it not (as it most certainly is) a Divine Command; yet it is one of the
most: prudent and useful Constitutions that ever was made. Arch-Bip. Sharp's
Sermon June 28. 1691. p. 22, 23.
For (to speak in the Words of an Eminent Prelate of our Church) to the keeping
up the Religion of this day, we owe in a great measure that the very Face of
Christianity has hitherto been preserved among us. And were it not for this,
for any thing I know, most of us in a very few Years would become little better
then Heathens and Barbarians. And so great an Influence toward the making Men
better, or at least keeping them from growing worse, has this Practice always
had; that, you may observe, the most Profligate Men among us, who for their
Wickedness come to an untimely end, do generally impute their falling into
those Sins which caused their Death, to their breaking the Sabbath, as they
commonly express it. -- Thus far that Eminent Prelate. -- It Is true, Gentlemen,
there, is a wide difference between the Jewish and the Christian Sabbath; for
though the Law of Moses prohibited all manner of work to be done on that day,
Exodus 31. v. 15, 16.
under the penalty of Death to the Children of Israel; (which was Executed on
the Man who gathered Sticks on the Sabbath Day, Number. c. 15. v. 36
for the supply of his Necessities;) yet our Blessed Savior who was the Lord
of the Sabbath, wholly abolished the Ceremonial part of this Law, St. Markc. 2.
v. 29.
(that being peculiarly appropriated to the Jewish Nation) and continued the
Moral part of it in its full Force: Allowing, both by his Example, and by
verbal Permission, any work of Necessity or Charity to be done on that day.

Thus Scripture, and Reason teach us, and this likewise do the Laws of England
permit; though at the same time, they are very strict against all those
Profanations of the Lord's Day, which proceed either from Men's Covetousness, or
their Licentiousness.

Thus all Carriers, Waggoners, Carters, Stat. 3. Car. 1. c. 1.
Wain-men and Drovers are prohibited to Travel with any Horse, Wagons, Carts,
or Cattle on the Lord's Day, under the Penalty of forfeiting Twenty Shillings
to the Poor of the Parish where the Offense shall be Committed: All Butchers
that Kill or Sell, or cause to be Killed or Sold, any Meat on the Lord's Day,
or are Privy or Consenting to such Slaughter or Sale, forfeit in like manner
Six Shillings and Eight Pence for every Offense. The Offense must be proved
before any one Justice of the Peace, by the Oaths of two Witnesses, or by the
Confession of the Party, unless the Fact were done in the View of a Justice of
the Peace, and then the Law requires no farther Proof. The Offenders must be
Prosecuted within six Months after the Offense is committed; and the
forfeitures are recoverable, either by Distress and Sale of the Offender's
Goods, or by Bill, Plaint, or Information Prosecuted at the Quarter Sessions
for the County. And where any Parish shall rather choose this last Method for
recovering their Money, you must be ready, Gentlemen, on your Parts, as we
shall be on Ours, to give all possible encouragement to these Prosecutions,
unless they shall plainly appear to be Malicious. Nor, Gentlemen, are these the
only Profanations of the Lord's Day, that our Laws take Cognizance of, Stat.
29. Car. 2. c. 7.
but by a Statute of a later Date: All Persons that shall on the Lord's Day, or
any part thereof, Sell or expose any thing to Sale, shall forfeit the Goods so
sold, or exposed to Sale, to the Poor of the Parish where the Offense is
Committed. Thus also, whosoever being of the Age of Fourteen Years or upwards,
shall on the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, exercise any worldy Labor,
Business, or Work of his ordinary Calling, shall in like manner forfeit for
every Offense, the sum of Five Shillings: -- Thus all Drovers, Horse-Coursers,
Waggoners, Butchers, Higlers, or any of their Servants, who shall Travel or
come into their Inn on the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, shall in like
manner forfeit for every Offense the sum of Twenty Shillings. The Offenses
against this Act must be prosecuted within ten days after, and the View of a
Justice of the Peace, the Oath of one Witness, or the Confession of the Party
Offending, made before any one Justice of the Peace, is a sufficient Proof: And
in Cafe (as it may sometimes happen) the Offender has no Goods to be
Distrained and Sold, and is not able to pay these Forfeitures, he is then to be
set publicly in, the Stocks by the space of two Hours. And besides these
Penalties, this Statue exempts the Hundreds from answering the losses which may
happen by Robbery, to those who Travel on the Lord's day; since such Journeys
are not supposed to be undertaken out of necessity, but choice. -- Thus far our
Laws restrain and punish those Profanations of the Lord's Day, which a covetous
desire of gain is apt to induce Men to. Nor is the penal Prohibition of those
Disorders which proceed from an Irreligious Licentiousness, less severe: For to
the end that these Profanations of the Lord's Day, Stat. 3 Car. 1. c. 1.
and the ill Consequences attending them, may be prevented, our Laws strictly
prohibit all Meetings and Assemblies of People out of their own Parishes, and
all concourse of them within their own Parishes, for all unlawful Sports and
Pastimes, under the Penalty of three Shillings and four Pence for every
Offense, to be forfeited to the Poor of the Parish, where the Offense is
committed; the Penalty is leviable by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods,
and in default of sufficient Distress, the Offender is to be set publicly in
the Stocks by the space of three Hours. The Prosecution must be within a Month
after the Offense, and the Oath of one Witness, or the Confession of the Party,
before any Justice of the Peace, or the View of any one Justice of the Peace,
is a sufficient proof to convict the Offender. -- This was a good Law, Stat.
29. Car. 2. c. 7.
but yet too liable to many Evasions and Abuses; therefore a farther provision
has since been made by a later Act: That all Persons shall, on every Lord's
Day, exercise the Duties of Piety and true Religion, under the penalty of Five
Shillings, in like manner forfeited to the Poor of the Parish for every
Offense, which is to be Prosecuted within ten Days after, and proveable, as
aforesaid, by one Witness upon Oath; and if the Offender be not able to
satisfy the Penalty, then he must be set Publickiy in the Stocks, by the space
of two Hours. And nothing can exempt any Man from falling under the Censures of
this Act, but works of Necessity and Charity, which as I observed before, both
Reason and Scripture allow of: For Sports, and Pastimes, Revellings and
Disorders, are certainly inconsistent with the duty of the Day, as Buying, and
Selling, or exercising any Trade or Calling.

The fourth Immorality which our Laws endeavor to suppress, is Drunkenness:
Stat. 1. Jac. 1. c. 5.
A Vice on which one of our Statutes fixes this infamous Character; That it is
Odious and Loathsome, that it is the Root and Foundation of Bloodshed,
Stabbing, Murder, Swearing, Fornication, Adultery and such like enormous Sins,
to the dishonor of God, and of our Nation, the overthrow of many good Arts,
and Manual Trades, the disabling of diverse Workmen, and the general
Impoverishment of many good Subjects, abusively wasting the good Creatures of
God. This charge, though it may seem severe, yet is it, as our Experience
informs us, a very true and lively Description of the sad Consequences and
Fatal Effects of this brutish Immorality. Therefore for the repressing this
Vice, our Laws have provided a Punishment, not only for the Drunkards, but also
for the Innkeepers and Victuallers, that Harbor, Entertain and Encourage
them. For, as the Preamble to one of the Statutes relating to this matter
informs us, Stat. 1. Jac. 1. c. 9.
The Ancient, True and Principal use of Inns, Alehouses, and
Victualling-Houses is for the Receipt, Relief and Lodging of Travelers, and for
supply of the wants of those who are not able to Buy in their Provisions of
Meat and Drink by greater Quantities; but was never meant for Entertainment and
Harboring of Lewd and Idle People, to spend and consume their Money and their
Time in a Lewd and Drunken manner. Therefore for the restraining these Abuses,
Stat. 4. Jac. 1. c. 5.
and for the better repressing the vice of Drunkenness, every Taverner,
Innkeeper, Alehouse keeper, or Victualler who shall suffer any Person to
continue Tippling in his House, Stat. 1. Car. 1. c. 4.
and shall be thereof Convicted before any Justice of the Peace, by the Oath of
one Witness, or by his own Confession, or by the view of any Justice of the
Peace, shall for every Offense forfeit Ten Shillings to the Poor of the Parish
where the Offense is committed; the Penalty to be levied by Distress and Sale
of the Offender's Goods, and if there be not a sufficient Distress to be found,
then the Offender is to be committed to the Common Gaol, till the Forfeitures
be truly paid.

And if the Constables or Churchwardens (to whom the Warrant is directed)
shall neglect their Duty in levying these Penalties by Distress and Sale as
aforesaid, or in default of such Distress, shall not within twenty days next
ensuing, certify it to some Justice of the Peace, they shall severally forfeit
for every Offense the Sum of Forty Shillings, recoverable in like manner as
is before mentioned. Besides this Penalty of Ten Shillings, the
Ale-house-keeper who shall be lawfully Convicted of the aforesaid Offense,
Stat. 7. Jac. 1. c. 10.
is disabled to keep an Alehouse for three Years after such Conviction; and if
he does, he falls under the Penalties of keeping an Unlicensed Alehouse. And
as this restraint is laid on Innkeepers and Victuallers, so likewise there is
a Punishment appointed for tbose that shall be guilty of the Sin of
Drunkenness; who being thereof convicted as is above mentioned by the Oath of
one Witness, Stat. 21. Jac. 1. c. 7.
shall for every such Offense pay 5 s. to the Poor of the Parish, where the
Offense is committed; and if there is no Distress to be found, and they are not
able to Pay, then they must be set Publicly in the Stocks by the space of 6
Hours. And if the Constable, or other inferior Officer shall be found to be
remiss in Executing this Law, then he is to forfeit 10 s. in the like manner,
and to the like uses. -- There is also the Penalty of 3 s. and 4 d. for every
Offense, or (in case there be no Distress to be had) 4 Hours sitting in the
Stocks is imposed on every one who shall be found or can be proved (in the
manner of proof abovementioned) to continue Tippling in any Publick-House: And
so highly does our Law detest this Immorality, that whosoever shall be a second
time Convicted of Drunkenness, is to be bound to their Majesty's (with two
sufficient Sureties) in a Recognizance of 10 pounds Penalty for his good
Behavior. Those who are guilty of Drunkenness or Tippling, are not punishable,
unless they are Prosecuted within six Months after the Offense is committed;
but as to Innkeepers, Ale-house-keepers and Victuallers, who incurr the
Penalties of these Laws, there is no time limited for their Prosecution.

Gentlemen, the Offenses against these Statutes concerning Drunkenness and
disorders in Alehouses, are to be diligently enquired into, and duly presented
at every Quarter Sessions; as likewise are all defaults of Underofficers, in
conniving at them, and neglecting to bring them to condign Punishment: I doubt
not but you will do your parts in it, and you may assure your selves, we shall
deal with them as severely as the Law will allow us. You are likewise to
enquire and present all Persons who presume to keep Alehouses without a
License from the Justices of the Peace, Stat. 3. Car. 1. c. 3.
that they may undergo the Pains and Penalties appointed by Law.

Gentlemen, in the next place, all notorious Adulterers, and Fornicators,
Bawds, and Whores, and all Masters, and Mistresses of those infamous Houses,
that Harbor and Encourage them, fall under the Cognizance and Censure of the
Law. And since I cannot say there is already so sufficient a provition made for
the punishing and preventing the increase of so scandalous a Debauchery, which
is a (deliberate and presumptuous Violation of the 7th. Commandment) as all
good Men wish to see; Exodus c. 20. v. 14.
yet (besides the Censures of the Spiritual Courts, which are very seldom
exerted on these Occasions, unless they have the Prospect of a tedious and
expensive Suit) we can inflict some Punishments upon them. Dalton c. 124. S. 3.
For Bawdery is an offense Temporal, as well as Spiritual, and is against the
Peace of the Land; therefore, Gentlemen, you are to take care to enquire and
present all such Persons, who being duly convicted before us, shall suffer the
utmost Severities the Law will allow of. And I think I shall not strain the
Sense of the Statute, St. 7. Jac. 1. c. 4.
if I comprehend all the abovementioned Offenders under the Notion of Idle and
Disorderly Persons; to whom any two or more Justices of the Peace (but most
properly the Majority of them in their Quarter Sessions) may assign a severe
punishment and hard Labor in the House of Correction, for so long time as
shall be thought Necessary for their Chastisement and Reformation; and for
deterring others from following such pernicious Examples. And as for those
keepers of Public Houses, who, contrary to their Licenses, maintain, harbor,
and abett these Disorders, (whereby the Youth of the Nation are corrupted, and
rendered unfit to serve their Country;) upon your presentment of them, we will
take care not only to Punish them as severely as we may by Fine and
Imprisonment, but also to suppress them, and to have the forfeitures of their
Recognizances estreated into the Exchequer; as shall likewise be done to those
who suffer in their Houses irregularities of any other Nature, as Drunkenness,
the Profanation of the Lord's Day, and the like, of which I have before spoken.
And Gentlemen, to sum up all that I have to say upon this Head, you are to
consider, 1 Cor. c. 10. v. 8.
That Adultery and Fornication are sins so abominable in the Eyes of God, that
as a punishment for it, 23000 of the Israelites, who were seduced into these
Impurities by the Daughters of Moab, fell in one day of a Plague inflicted on
them by an immediate Vengeance from Heaven. Therefore, Gentlemen, for the
averting God's Wrath from us, we are all concerned in our several Stations, to
punish and repress these Vices as Phinehas did, without respect of Persons;
such only, I mean, as are liable to our Censure. Besides, these Crimes which
are so frequently and so impudently perpetrated, there are some others also
which may not improperly be ranked among the offenses against Moral Justice.
But, Gentlemen, the proof of some of them is so difficult, and they are so
seldom practiced, that I shall but just put you in mind of them, and that you
are to enquire and present all Persons that have invocated, entertained or
employed any wicked Spirit, or have used any Witchcraft, Charm, or Sorcery;
this is a sin of a very deep die, being dirctly against the first Commandment,
Exodus c. 20. v. 3. Stat. 1. Jac. 1. c. 2.
and is punished with Death both by the Law of God, and by a Statute made in
the first Year of King James the First; but it is so hard a matter to have full
proof brought of it, that no Jury can be too cautious and tender in a
prosecution of this Nature. However, where the Evidence is clear and
undeniable, you must proceed according to your Oaths.

You are also to enquire and present all Persons that have depraved the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Blessed Lord and Savior, either by Word
of Mouth, or otherwise; Stat. 1. Ed. 6. c. 1.
who being convicted shall suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine and Ransom at the
King's Will and Pleasure if they be prosecuted within three Months after the
Offense is committed.

You are also to enquire if any Person has Depraved, Despised, Stat. 1. Eliz.
c. 2.
or Derogated from the Book of Common Prayer, by any Enterludes, Plays, Songs,
Rhimes or other open Words; or has compelled any Minister to use any other
form of Worship; for in this Case the Oftender that is guilty of so great an
Irreverence to God, and disrespect to the Government, both in Church and State,
shall for the first Offense forfeit to their Majesty's 100 Marks, for the
second Offense 400 Marks, and for the third Offense, all his Goods and
Chattels, and shall suffer Imprisonment during Life.

You are also to enquire if any Restor or Vicar (who keeps a Curate) has
neglected once in a Month to read the Common Prayer in his Parish Church; Stat.
14. Car. 2. c. 4.
for all Incumbents guilty of this Neglect, shall upon complaint made on Oath,
by two credible Witnesses, before two Justices of the Peace of the said County,
forfeit to the Poor of that Parish 5 pounds a Month; and if the Penalty be not
paid in ten days after fuch Conviction, then his Goods are to be Distrained and
Sold for that purpose, Stat. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 4.
by a Warrant from the said Justices. Lastly, you are to enquire, if any Person
have maliciously Struck, or drawn any Weapon in any Church or Churchyard, to
the intent to strike another, the Offender who is Convicted hereof, shall have
one of his Ears cut off; and if he have no Ear, then he shall be Marked in the
Cheek with the Letter F, in token of a Fray-maker; and the Law reputes it to be
so ungodly and irreligious an Action, that all persons guilty of it, are
declared to be Ipso Facto Excommunicated, which is the highest Censure and
Penalty the Christian Church can inflict.

I have now, Gentlemen, gone through the first part of my Charge, I have not
knowingly omitted any point that is Material, and as for smaller Defects, I
doubt not but your Experience in the Proceedings of this Court will fully
supply them. If the time would allow me, I should in the next place urge you to
exert your utmost Vigor and Diligence in punishing and putting a stop to those
Violations of Moral Justice, which are so notoriously prevalent among us, and
which (unless they are speddily reformed by a due severity) seem to threaten us
with extraordinary punishments from Heaven, by representing to you at large the
weighty and indispensible Obligations that lie upon you to do your parts
toward the promoting so good a Work. But I hope it will be sufficient to hint
to you these three Considerations, viz. 1. That you are Men and Christians. 2.
That you are Englishmen, and (I hope) all of you well wishers to the present
Government. 3. That you have bound your selves by a Solemn Oath, impartially to
enquire and present those who are guilty of these scandalous Debaucheries; and
those Petty Constables, Headboroughs and other Underofficers, who by their
Neglect and Connivance, without any regard to their Duty, or their Oaths, have
encouraged these Vices; or have made defaults in any other things that relate
to their respective Offices. Gentlemen, if I had time, I should enlarge on
every one of these three particulars. -- But I assure my self, your own
Conscience will press these thoughts home to you; and I doubt not but we shall
find by your presentiments, that you have a well grounded Zeal for the Glory and
Honor of God, a true Love to your Country, and a sincere and affectionate
Loyalty to their present Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, (upon whom next
under God, our safety wholly depends) and a tender and conscientious regard to
the sacred Obligation of an Oath; which being a Solemn Appeal to the Almighty
and All knowing Judge, and Avenger of all Falsehood and Unrighteousness, will,
if not faithfully performed, entail God's curse on your selves and your
Families; Zach. c. 5. v. 4.
according to that of the Prophet Zachary, A Curse shall enter into the House
of him that swears falsely by the Name of God.

Gentlemen, I shall now proceed to the second part of my Charge; which
comprehends all offenses against Civil Justice. This is a subject so Copious,
that (having detained you so long in the former part of my Charge) the time
will not permit me fully to declare to you, every particular Offense, within
the compass of our Commission and of your Cognizance. Therefore, Gentlemen, you
are to expect only a short Summary, of the most material Points of your Duty;
in drawing up of which if I am less exact than is usual, I hope you will impute
it to my want of skill in these Affairs; and to my Disability (which makes it
self every way too apparent) worthily to execute this important Office, with
which my Brethren, who are all of them much fitter for it, have been pleased to
Honor me.

Civil Justice is a Virtue of a very large extent; for thereby we are obliged
even by Natural Religion to deal with all Men as we would St. Mat. c. 7. v. 12.
be willing, were we in their Circumstances, and they in Ours, they should deal
with us. And if this is a debt we owe to all Men, then certainly our own
Countrymen, who enjoy the same common benefits of Security and Protection, may
much more expect it from us. And to this end that the Rich and the Poor may be
equally safe in what is their own, the Laws have not only declared what that
is, but have also appointed Punishments for those that shall transgress these
Limits and invade any other Man's Property. Now, Gentlemen, those Persons who
may legally claim this Justice at our Hands, or in case it be refused them, may
appeal to the Law for satisfaction for the injury, are either our Superiors or
our Fellow Subjects. To the former, namely our Parents, whether Political or
Natural, we are obliged by the fifth, Commandment to pay Obedience, Tribute,
Reverence and Honor; Exodus 20. v. 12. v. 15.
to the latter, namely our Fellow Subjects, we are obliged by the eighth
Commandment to render whatsoever is by Law due unto them; and when by Force or
Fraud we take or detain from them any of their Legal Rights, we are guilty of
Theft. But to proceed: Of Governors and Magistrates, there are two sorts, --
Supreme and Subordinate. -- By the Supreme Magistrate, you know, none can be
meant besides our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen; against whom the
Offenses which you are to enquire of, and present, are High-Treasons,
Praemunire's, and Misprisions of Treason.

High Treason is a Crime punishable with Death; Stat. 25.
and whoever compasses or imagines the death of the King or Queen, Ed. 3.
and declares it by some Overt Act, whoever levyeth War against the King,
whoever shall counterfeit the King, Stat. 1.
or Queen Regnants, Great Seal, Sign Manual, Privy Segnet, or Privy Seal; Mar.
c. 6.
whoever shall counterfeit the Coin of this Realm, or any other Coin permitted
by the King's consent to be current in this Kingdom; or whoever shall bring
over from beyond the Seas any counterfeit Coin, Stat. 1. and 2. P. and M. c. 11.
knowing it to be false, and shall make payment thereof, in deceit of the King
and his People, or shall clip, impair, or falsify any such Coin as aforesaid;
or whoever shall obtain or receive from the Bishop of Rome, Stat. 13.
or any Authority of that See, any Bull, Writing, or Instrument Written or
Printed, Eliz. c. 2.
or shall Use, Publish, Stat. 18.
or put it in Ure, or shall be reconciled to the Bishop or See of Rome, by
virtue of any such Bull, Eliz. c. 1.
or shall persuade any Person to be reconciled by virtue of such Bull; or shall
abett, or conceal such Offenders, and Offenses; or whoever shall by any other
ways or means withdraw, or endeavor to withdraw, Stat. 23.
any to the Romish Religion, or whoever shall be so withdrawn, Eliz. c. 1.
or whoever being a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or any other Priest, Stat. 3. Jac.
1. c. 4.
Deacon, Religious or Ecclesiastical Person of the Church of Rome, and being a
Native of this Realm, shall come hither, or into any of their Majesty's
Dominions; Stat. 3. and 4. Guil. and Mar.
or lastly, whosoever during the Present War with the French King, shall Send,
Load, Transport, or Deliver, or cause to be Sent, Laden, Transported, or
Delivered, for the use of the said French King, or any of his Subjects residing
in any part of his Dominions, or in any place in his Possession, any Arms,
Ordnance, Powder, Bullets, Pitch, Tarr, Hemp, Masts, Cordage, Iron, Coals,
Lead, or Saltpeter; or whoever of their Majesty's Subjects shall without
License from their Majesty's voluntarily go or repair, or imbark in any Vessel
with an intent to go into France, or any Dominions of the French King.
Whosoever Gentlemen, commits any of the Facts abovementioned, and all their
Aiders, Abetters, Counselors, and Maintainers are guilty of High Treason. And
by the Statute of the 25th of Edw. the 3d. it is likewise High Treason to kill
the Chancellor, Treasurer, or any of the Justices Assigned to hear and
determine, being in their Places doing their Offices. All these Facts,
Gentlemen, are High Treason, and you are to enquire and present them. In the
next place Gentlemen, you are to enquire of such Offenses against the King and
Queen, Stat. 27.
which fall within the Statutes of Praemunire's. Eliz 3. c. 1.
This Law was made to preserve the Crown of England, from the papal
Encroachments and Usurpations, and to prevent Foreign Appeals in Cases
determinable in the King's Courts. So jealous were our wise Ancestors of the
freedom and independancy of the Regal Power, and of their own Liberties, that
near two Hundred Years before the Reformation, in the darkest times of Popery,
there was no less a Penalty than being put out of the King's Protection, being
fined at the King's Pleasure, and being imprisoned without Bail till that Fine
should be paid, and their Lands, Goods, and Possessions Forfeited to the King,
unless they should come in and receive their Trial within two Months after
Summons; no less a Penalty (I say) than this was provided for all such as
should Sue to any Foreign Court, or to any Spiritual Court within this Realm,
to defeat or impeach the Judgment given in the King's Court; Stat. 16.
as also for all such as should on this account, R. 2. c. 5.
purchase or pursue (in the Court of Rome or elsewhere) any Excommunication,
Bull, or other Instrument against the King, his Crown, or Realm; or should
bring, receive, notify, or execute them here in England; and for all their
Procurers, Maintainers, Abettors, and Counselors. For in Treasons, Murders,
and Praemunire's; all the Offenders are Principals, and are so punishable. It
would be too tedious, Gentlemen, to receite to you the several Statutes that
have been made (especially since the Reformation) concerning Praemunire's. It
is enough to inform you in the General, that they are mostly levelled at Popish
Recusants, and at such as by word of Mouth or Writing, shall defend the
Authority the Pope or any Foreign Prince may pretend to have over the King, and
People of England. And Gentlemen, I must not omit taking notice to you, that an
Act made in the last Sessions of Parliament, Entitled, An Act against
Corresponding with their Majesty's Enemies, Declares, Stat. 3. and 4. Guil. and
Mar.
That if any Person during the present War with the French King, shall Send,
Load, Transport, or Deliver, or cause to be Sent, Laden, Transported, or
Delivered for the use of the said French King, or any of his Subjects residing
in any part of his Dominions, or in any place in his Possession, any Goods,
Merchandises, Wares, Or Commodities, shall incurr the Pain and Forfeiture of a
Praemunire. This Act is so exceeding useful for the Nation in this present
juncture, that I must particularly recommend it to you diligently to enquire
and present all Offenders against it. In the next place, Gentlemen, you are to
enquire and present all Misprisions of Treason; Dalton c. 141.
which Word signifies in our Law, Negligence, or Oversight, in not revealing
to the King, his Council, or some Magistrate, a Treason which any Man knows to
be committed, or about to be committed; for it is a high Crime, and the
Consequences may be very dangerous, for any one though not consenting to it,
(for that comes within the Statutes of Treasons) to conceal so Capital an
Offense. Therefore, for Misprision of Treason, the Offender shall forfeit to
the King his Goods, and Chattels for ever, and the profits of his Lands, during
his Life, and also shall be imprisoned during his Life. And (Gentlemen) now I
am discoursing to you concerning such Offenses as do most immediately strike at
the Persons and Government of the King and Queen; I must take notice to you of
three sorts of Men, of whom we have at this time no small Reason to be
Apprehensive, and they are these, Popish Recusants, Protestant Recusants, and
Protestants who though they have taken the Oaths to their present Majesty's,
and enjoy the Benefit of their Protection, do yet make it their business to
libel and censure the Government, and in their Words and daily Behavior, show
themselves disaffected, and to give them their due Character, are but one
Degree from Traitors. By Popish Recusants, I mean those Subjects of England,
who divide their Allegiance between the King and the Bishop of Rome, whom they
look upon as Christ's Vicar on Earth, and of whose Church and Communion they
are. On this Account they refuse to take the Oath of Supremacy (which excludes
the Pope's Power in spiritual Matters) to any Prince, though of their
Persuasion, and if the Pope interposes his Authority in Excommunicating or
deposing any Protestant Prince, (whom out of their Catholic Charity they are
pleased to call Heretics,) they fail not when an Opportunity offers to rise in
Rebellion against them, and (as they did in Queen Elizabeth's Time) to join
with any Foreigner, whom the Pope Commissions to invade their Native Country,
and reduce it to an Italian, a Spanish, or which is worst of all, a French
Slavery. How much their Loyalty is to be relied on, their Principles and their
Practices; especially in the Reigns of that Glorious Queen, and her peaceful
Successor, do abundantly testify; and I hope while the Spanish Invasion, and
the Gun-power-Treason, continue recorded in our History as undeniable matters
of Fact, while Papists deservedly lie under an Exclusion from all Offices of
Trust and Profit, and even from the Privilege of Voting in Parliament as Peers,
which some Mercenary Time servers in the late Reign were pleased to call their
Natural Birthright, and inseparable from their Persons, while, I say, these
things remain as they are, and while we remember (as I hope we allways shall)
the great dangers the Church and Nation were lately in by the bigoted zeal of
a Popish Prince, and the inveterate Malice of the Roman Catholics then armed
with Power, I hope we shall not fail on all Occasions but especially at this
time, to have a watchful Eye over their Conduct. All the Mercies our present
King has extended to them both here and in Ireland, (Mercies to be paralleled
by none but those of the Almighty!) cannot yet unhinge them from their
dependence upon France, and their Subjection to Rome, nor put an end to their
vain Expectations of seeing our present happy settlement wholly unravelled, and
their own Religion again established, and ours utterly extirpated by the the
victorious return (which they with for, and we all deprecate of the late King,
and his pretended Son. Therefore since nothing will make them Friends to this
Government, Prudence directs us to use the best Caution we can against their
Hellish Designs; and since there are many good Laws in Force against them,
there is great Reason that they suffer those Penalties, (especially such of
them as stand out in defyance to the Government) that are provided for them.
And Gentlemen, it is your Business to enquire and present all Popish Recusants,
and I doubt not but you will express your Affection to the Government, by doing
your Duty in this Particular.

By Protestant Recusants, I mean those Protestant Subjects of England, who
refuse to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to the present King and
Queen. It may, I confess, seem a Paradox that notwithstanding the many
Calamities we felt in the Late Reign and those more grievous ones we daily
expected, when the making and repealing of Laws, should have been in the Power
of a Packed Parliament, and when the protection of our Religion, the defense of
our Rights, the disposal of our Lives, Liberties and Estates; and in a Word,
the Administration of Justice should have been entirely commmited to a French
and Irish Army, and to a Cabinet Council of Jesuits; notwithstanding this
gloomy Prospect, which reduced us even to the Brink of Despair; notwithstanding
the Miraculous deliverance out of these Extremities, that the Divine Providence
afforded us at the critical Instant, notwithstanding those returns of Gratitude
which we owe to God the Author, and to our present King, the successful
Instrument of so great a Mercy; notwithstanding, the late King's refusal to do
his Subjects that Justice which his Coronation Oath obliged him to, and which
the Prince, out of great kindness to this Nation, at a vast Expense, and an
inexpressible hazard to his own Person, came over to demand, notwithstanding
the Late King's Voluntary Desertion, his throwing up the Reins of Government,
and leaving us in a state of Anarchy and Confusion, notwithstanding the calm,
deliberate and free Proceedings in Calling, Choosing, and Convening our
Representatives, notwithstanding the Regular and considerate Methods that wise
Assembly followed; in determining the great Point of the Abdication, and
placing their present Sacred Majesty's in the vacant Throne, notwithstanding
the manifest Reason all private Men have in such Cases to submit their own
Opinions to the Public Decision of so August a Body, notwithstanding the many
Dangers and Difficulties, Fatigues and Hazards, the indefatigable Labor and
incessant Diligence and anxious Cares which have ever since that time denied
his Majesty that Ease, Repose and Comfort, which the meanest Man here enjoys;
notwithstanding all this was undertaken merely for our Benifit and Safety,
Peace and Preservation, (for excepting our Savior, and the Bl. Martyr K.
Charles the 1st. never did any Prince wear a Crown so full of Thorns)
notwithstanding, (I say) the King's Personal Merits which (without Flattery I
speak it) deserve an Universal Empire upon Earth, and doubtless will be
rewarded hereafter with one of the brightest Crowns in Heaven, notwithstanding
all this, and much more which I could add, would the time permit me, it may (I
say) seem Paradox, but yet, it is too notorious that there are some Protestant
Recusants, who will not be persuaded they owe any Allegiance or Duty to this
Prince. His Royal Endowments and Accomplishments shine so bright, that as much
his Enemies as they are, they are forced to acknowledge that he possesses them
in the highest Degree, and though they cannot love, they must admire him for
them. But all this while they think him an Intruder on the Rights of another,
and some of them are so bold as to call his Glorious Reign a Prosperous
Usurpation, and not a whit more to be justified then that execrable one of
Cromwell. I have not time, nor is it my Business at present, nor indeed is
there any need of it after so many excellent Treatises have been written upon
the Subject; to argue in defense of the Revolution and the present Settlement
of the Nation. Those that are its Friends require no farther Satisfaction, and
those that are its Enemies, are resolved to continue so, though its Advocates
had the Energy and Eloquence of Angels. Some of them indeed (but how few are
they!) I am so charitable as to believe cannot comply with this Government out
of an Error of their understandings, rather than a perverse Obstinacy of their
Will, and those who are so unhappy as to be under this mistake, form no Cabals
against the Government, encourage no seditious Conventicles, send no traitorous
Embassies to France, offer no incense of Flattery to that proud Tyrant, make no
public Assignations for Rioting and Debauchery on such Days as their Majesty's
appoint for a National Humiliation; nor in a Word, make it more their Business
to incense the People against the Present Government, and to involve us in the
Calamities of a Civil-War, that we may be the easier Prey to the great
Leviathan of Europe, than to keep a Conscience void of Offense, toward God and
toward Men. Act 54. v. 16.
This (Gentlemen) is the Character of such a Jacobite, (for in that Title the
whole Party pride themselves) as is not dangerous; he considers himself as an
Englishman and a Christian, and though his Conscience (being misinformed) will
not permit him to be actively serviceable for the Government; yet he looks on
this Scene of Affairs to be much more Eligible than the last, and thinks it an
unpardonable ingratitude to a Protestant Prince and Princess, whom he cannot
but highly esteem (as the only refuge for all the reformed Churches) to
Sacrifice not only them, and his own Country, but also all Europe to an opinion
which Nineteen parts in Twenty of the most Learned and Pious Men in the Nation
reject, and almost all the Princes and States in Christendom disallow, and
which if it could universally prevail, would only make his Ruin the more
tolerable, because he should have so many Millions of Companions in his
Misfortune. To such a Man as this, (if any such can be found) I can truly say
as the Roman Orator did of himself upon another Occasion, Me natura
Misericordem, patria severum; crudelem nec patria nec natura esse voluit. My
Nature inclines me to be Compassionate; a hearty Zeal for our Religion, and
Concernment for the public Welfare of my Country may perhaps have made me a
little severe, but neither my Natural Disposition, nor the temper of the
English Nation, nor the Genius of the Protestant, that is the true Christian
Religion, will allow me to be cruel. And indeed if the Honor and safety of the
Government would allow it, for my own part, the most impudent and inveterate of
the Factious Crew should be quietly permitted to spit their venom, and to ruin
their own Cause (as they will at last) by their foolish and indiscreet
Management. But a Government legally established and regularly administered (as
ours is) must not tamely suffer the insults of a few Pedants and Mechanics;
such as those whom neither Prudence nor Modesty will restrain within the Limits
of their Duty, must be taught it by the severe Discipline of the Law.
Therefore, Gentlemen, it is your Business diligently to enquire and duly to
present all such disaffected and seditious Persons, and we will take care to
see them punished according to the utmost rigor of the Law. But, Gentlemen,
after all that I have said of the Popish Recusants, and of the Protestants who
are disaffected to this Government, and will not take the Oaths; both these we
may look upon as our Friends and Adherents, if we compare their Character with
that of those Protestant, who swear Allegiance to their Majesty's, only that
they may worm themselves into places of Trust and Power, and so have the better
Opportunity to betray us When an Enemy declares he will seek our Ruin: Self
preservation prompts us to be upon our Guard, and to make Preparations for our
own Defense: But what way is there to keep our selves from being destroyed,
when the plausible disguise of Friendship, hides the snare from our Sight, till
our Experience tells us, it is impossible to recover our Fall? It would seem a
high Degree of ill Nature to suspect those of Treachery, who confirm all their
Protestations of Sincerity by the sacred Bond of an Oath; and indeed in such a
Case one ought not to be too ready to suspect, 1. Cor. c. 13. v. 5.
for Christian Charity thinks no Evil, but yet when Men's Discourse, Actions,
and Behavior, show the secret Inclinations of their Hearts, we may then judge
of the Tree by its Fruits. St. Matthew. c. 7. v. 20.
When Men who have taken the Oaths to the Present King and Queen, and perhaps
by that means enjoy some Office of Trust under the Government, nay perhaps,
when they stand in Competition with a Man more truly and sincerely Loyal, and
carry their Point against him, either by Force, or Fraud, Bribery, or some
other Artifices, too mean for the Spirit of an English Gentleman, to stoop to:
When I say, such Men as these, shall take (nay seek) all occasions to magnify
the Grandeur, and the Power, the Courage, the Justice and the Policy of the
French Monarch, to envy the Happiness of his Subject, and to applaud the vast
extent of his Conquests, to rejoice at every small Advantage he gains over us,
to wish every Merchant Ship that is outward or homewards Bound may fall into
his Hands, to aggravate our Losses and detract from our Victories, as if the
one were irreparable and the other not worth taking Notice of, to repine at our
Plenty, and to mourn at our Taxes, which are light Burdens in Comparison of
those our Neighbors about this time bear, to censure the most justifiable
Proceedings of this Reign, and to palliate the most enormous excesses of the
Last, to triumph at Tourville's burning a small Village on the Western Coast,
and doing some small Damage to our Fleet, and to be struck with Melancholy at
King William's Victory at the Boyne.

When I say, Men's Actions are so contrary to their Professions; what can we
think of them but that they are the most egregious Hypocrites in Nature, a
scandal to Mankind, and a reproach to the Religion they Profess! And such as
these certainly deserve to be uncased, that the World may see them in their
proper Colors, and stamp upon them that Brand of Infamy they so well deserve.
For whatever Mercy the Government may be so generous as to extend to its
Declared Enemies, these certainly cannot be so impudent as to put in for a
Share. The Jews openly preferred Barrabas to our Savior, St. Matthew. c. 27. v.
21. St. Mark. c. 15. v. 13. St. Matthew. c. 26. v. 49. c. 27. v. 5.
and it is not improbable that some of those very Men who so loudly cried out,
Crucify him, came in afterward, and proving Converts to the Christian Faith,
received their Pardon. But Judas that Son of Perdition, who betrayed his Lord
with a Kiss, and the smooth Complement of Hail Master, found no place for
Repentance, but being overwhelmed with Despair, became his own Executioner.
And if the Men I have been speaking of did but seriously consider the guilt of
breaking so Solemn an Oath, they would either heartily repent of it as the Jews
did of their Malice to our Savior, or else follow the steps (in his End as
well as in his Treachery) of their great Apostle Judas. In the mean time
(Gentlemen) it is the Duty of all those who wish well to the Government, to
discover such Villains and bring them to Punishment; for else if they go on
still in their seditious Practices, and pervert the Trusts they have committed
to them to the ruin of our present Settlement, we shall too late be sensible
by sad experience that tho they have the voice of Jacob, yet their hands are
the hands of Esau: hands full of Treachery and Rapine, Fraud, Deceit, Genes. c.
27. v. 22.
and Blood! Therefore, Gentlemen, I hope you will not fail to enquire and
present such Men, who, tho they have Sworn Allegiance to the Government, yet
boldly express their disaffection to it by Seditious Speeches and malevolent
Reflections. I have now, Gentlemen, declared to you at large, in relation to
your Inquiries and presentiments, the Duties you owe to God and to the King; to
the former, Fear and Reverence; to the latter, Honor and Allegiance. I now
proceed to discourse to you of the Duties owing to subordinate Magistrates,
which are these: A respect to them on the account of the Character they bear,
and a due Submission to their Legal Orders, for our Laws are so careful to
preserve the Chain of subordinate Government entire, that it is Murder to kill
the meanest Officer in the Execution of his Office, and to abuse him in it, or
for it, is a high Contempt and punishable in this Court; as are also all
Contempts of the under Officers toward us their Superiors, in neglecting to
obey our Orders and execute our Warrants, and likewise all Disobedient, Saucy,
and unmannerly Behavior of any other Person that is brought before us. These
things Gentlemen, you are to enquire and Present.

In the next place, Gentlemen, you are to enquire and present all Offenses
against that Civil Justice we owe to our Fellow Subjects, and they are these,
1. Petty-Treason, of which all those are guilty who being Wives, Children,
Servants, or private Clergymen, Murder their Husbands, Parents, Masters,
Mistrisses, Diocesans or Ordinaries. For all these Offenders owe Faith, Duty,
and private Obedience to the party Murdered. After Petty-Treason, the next
Felony you are to present (for these and several other Crimes come under the
general Denomination of Felony) is Murder. This when it is committed upon
Malice prepense, is called willful Murder, and the Offender has no Benefit of
his Clergy, and within this comes also Malice employed, where a Person suddenly
kills another without any Provocation given, or stabs a Man who has no weapon
drawn. Manslaughter is where a Person kills another upon present heat or a
sudden Passion, in this Case the Offender is allowed his Clergy. The next
Crimes to be enquired and presented (as' Felonies) are Rapes, Burnings of
Houses, Burglary, and all sorts of Robberies, whether on the Road or in Houses
open or shut, stealing of Horses or other Cattle abroad, or elsewhere. Thefts,
Petty Larcenaries, and the return of any dangerous Rogue into this Realm,
without License, after he has been Banished, is Felony, and enquirable in this
Coutt, as are likewise all manner of Felonies whatsoever. You are likewise to
enquire and present all Trespasses against the Peace; and these are Assaults,
Batteries, Blood-sheds, Maihems, forcible Entries, forcible Detainers, Riots,
Routs and unlawful Assemblies. What these are, I doubt not but you all very
well know, and therefore I shall not spend time in defining them to you, but
only tell you again, that it is your Duty to enquire and present them. In the
next place, Gentlemen, you are to enquire and present all Libellers, Barretors,
Extortioners, Frauds, and Deceits, the neglect of all Constables, Headboroughs,
and Tything-Men, in doing their Duties,(especially as to, all Matters relating
to the punishing and repressing of Vice and Debauchery, concerning which I have
already discoursed to you at large;) as likewise the neglect of all Overseers
of the Poor, and Surveighers of the High ways, in relation to whom I desire you
to take Notice of the Two Acts of Parliament passed this last Session,
concerning the Poor and the High ways; of which I would give you the Heads if
the Time would allow me. You are also to enquire and present all Disorder
between Masters and Servants; all Fore-stallers, Ingrossers, Regrators,
Destroyers of the Game, and disordered Victuallers, and you are to enquire and
present all Annoyances, as Disorderly Ale-house-keepers, Cottagers, Receivers
of Inmates; the defaults of Highways and Bridges, and the permission of free
Passage to Rogues and Vagabonds, who ought to be severely punished, and sent
back to the Places of their legal Settlement. Gentlemen, I am sensible I may
have omitted several particulars of your Duty, but since you cannot (as I
suppose) be ignorant of them, that will not excuse you from presenting these
and all other Offenses that come to your Knowledge. As to those Points that I
have so largely insisted on, I must tell you plainly, that I expect you use
your utmost Diligence; I had almost forgot to hint to you one Reason, as strong
as any that can be drawn from Interest, why you should punish all Immoralities
with the utmost rigor of Law, and that is, the daily increase of the Poor in
almost every Parish, so that in some places the Rates for the Poor exceed the
public Taxes assessed by Parliament, for c^rrying on the War. Whereas I dare
boldly Affirm, that if common Swearers, prophaners of the Lord's Day;
Drunkards, Tiplers, and those Innkeepers, Ale-house-keepers, and Victuallers,
who suffer Disorders in their Houses, duly paid the Penalties appointed by Law,
almost every Parish would be eased of half their Charge, or if that continued,
it would be a light Burden and a very tolerable Grievance, in comparison of
the Immoralities and Disorders that have overspread the Nation, You are also
to consider that all these Forfeitures do of right belong to die Poor; they
have as good a Title to them as any Man has to his Estate, and certainly to
rob and defraud the Poor is a Crime above the common Level; and those who
connive at it are undeniably Accessaries to it. To Conclude, Gentlemen, let me
once more desire you to remember your Oaths, and in order to the discharging
your Duty with the greater Sincerity and Diligence; let me advise you to fix in
your Minds a strong Idea of the general Appearance we must all one day make
before the great Tribunal, in Comparison of which the most Solemn and August
Court of Judicature here upon Earth, (though it may in some small Measure
represent it to our Thoughts) is but a piece of formal and vain Pageantry. And
now, Gentlemen, without detaining you any longer, I dismiss you all to your
several Inquiries.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
LAtely published a Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion, in several
Essays. Or a light of Nature, a Guide to Divine Truth, by Mr. Tim. Nourse, and
sold by John Newton in Fleet Street.


