What is TRVTH. OR, The Pattern IN THE MOUNT. WHEREIN Many places of Scripture
are (in pursuit of Truth, and the Churches Peace) explained. AND Therein, most
false Opinions and Heresies (both Modern and Ancient) are clearly detected and
refelled.

By Tho. Harby.

This is Zion, whom no man seeks after,

Jer. 30.17. They shall no more hurt, nor destroy, in all mine holy Mountain,
says the Lord,

Isa. 65.25. O magna vis veritatis, quae contra hominum ingenia, calliditatem,
solertiam, contraque fict as omnium insidias facile se per se defendit.

Cic. in Orat. pro Marc. Coelio. LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1671.

The AVTHOR.
Reader,
THY satisfaction, whosoever, in the solution of Pilat's Question, and the
Title of this Treatise, is my Design therein: Therein also I have (with some
care and diligence) endeavored to add all due brevity to perspicuity, and to
decline the too common Compilation, in taking much Matter and many Errors out
of other Authors, to bring a Book into a large Volume, to little or evil
purpose, and pretend it to be my own.

The Quotations I confess (which the Reader may well dispense with, if quoted
to truer tendencies) may differ in their ends for which many quote them: Nor
are the footsteps of foregoing Writers, my Rules to follow; but (not wedded,
with some, to vulgar Errors; nor affecting selfish singularity) my Design is to
exert the sober Truth.

The Reader may perhaps find some parcels of this Treatise in Books lately, or
not long extant; yet they differ much in their Ends, something from the manner
that I wrote them. Wherefore, of the Writers of them, I may have cause, in
part, to say as some did: Quem recitas, meus est, O Fidentine, libellus,
Sed, male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.


For, so careless were some Trustees of my Protographs, others so intent to
make the Notions in them, their own, and themselves the reputed first Assertors
of them; that I could not shun those occasions: I only therefore request the
Reader, not to impute to me, That I take any Notions (by them abused, but at
first my own) out of the Works of those pilfering Writers.

This Treatise (because the way of dilucidation therein, and the matter of it,
is somewhat unusual) may seem (at least in primo limine) a little hard to some,
but is made more easy by reading on in order, and so it clears it self: But
some perhaps (not trusting to the Title) would see substantial Testimonials
(from persons of worth and estimation) of the accounts they give of it; and I
were much unworthy and unfaithful, should I hide the Candles of such
Burning-lights, under Bushels. Take therefore, out of many,

First, The Testimony of the Right Reverend Doctor Saunderson, late Bishop of
Lincoln; to whom I read of it four hours every day, for four days, when it was
but an Embrion, and not come to that Form and Perfection that now it is.

Secondly, The Testimony of sundry Ministers consentient in the same Record.

Lastly: The Testimony of the Learned Beck of Ipswich, who read it all. He was
sometimes Captain in the King's Army, and faithful to his Trust, and might, be
a Leader to many, for Learning, Piety, and Integrity of life: Of him the Right
Reverend Bishop Hall affirmed, That he was the best Scholar that ever he
ordained, as Mr. Stinit of Bacton in Suffolk (who was ordained with him)
witnesses: The Testimonies follow. Reader farewell.

Thy Friend T.H.

The Testimony of the Right Reverend Doctor Saunderson, late Bishop of Lincoln.
Whereas sundry persons, as well Ministers as others, have under their hands
(the handwriting of one of whom is to me well known) given approbation to a
Treatise written by Mr. Tho. Harby the Bearer, and entitled, The Pattern in
the Mount; of the Contents and purpose of which Treatise, the Author (having
read part of it to me) gave a fair and rational account. I do hereby testify,
That (so far as I am able to judge by the proportion of what I heard read) I do
conceive the said Treatise may be profitably published as conducing to the
fuller and clearer understanding of sundry Prophesies of holy Scripture, and
that the Author deserves encouragement and furtherance toward the publication
of the same.

Rob. Saunderson, Rector of Boothby Paynel Linc.


WE have, read over the First Part of Mr. Tho. Harby's Treatise, which (for
Brevity, Language, Order, and chiefly for Matter of necessary use, and not
usually found in Authors) may seem (in our opinions) to surpass most Works of
Modern Writers, at least of this nature: Nor have we found such full
satisfaction in any. And we conceive it may be a most powerful means to evince
and unite (a work most needful and grateful in these times)
dissenting-Brethren, Sects, and Heterodox Professors: And those many and
material Additions which he (to our knowledge) has made therein, fully assure
us, that he must be the Author of it.

John Green, Rector of Owsden in Suffolk.
Isaac Key of Margetting in Essex.


These (not eyewitnesses of the said Additions, nor doubting in the least of
the truth of them) witness all besides above written.

John Smith, Rector of St. Mary's Colchester.
Dan. Sutton, Rector of Chilton in Suffolk.

TRact atum hunc (cui Titulus; Quid est veritas) egregia Domini Harby opera
exaratum, vel doctissimorum lectione dignissimum pronuncio.

April 3. -- 67. Cave Beck Rector St. Helenae Gippovisensis.


These Suffrages (because perhaps none fuller can be given) may serve:
Therefore I pass by (for brevity) the Testimonies of sundry Doctors in Oxford,
and elsewhere; and of many other Divines.

What is Truth.
ALL men (both good and bad) busy themselves about Truth or Error, both which
have their rerespective Seats or Subjects.

The more proper Seat of Truth Theological amongst men, is the Mystical Body of
Christ (the Church of God) which is called, The Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.

Wherefore, what Truth, and what Error is, and what their Subjects (the true
Church, and true Church-Opposers) are, is the grand Duty of all (Ministers and
Magistrates especially) to be resolved in: for, if they seek to support Truth,
and suppress Error, and know not what the true Church, or her Antithesis is,
nor what that Truth is that discovers both, they but beat the Air both in
preaching and practice; or at least their best endeavors bring forth little:
wherefore, that we may clearly discern betwixt Truth and Falsehood, and thereby
betwixt the true Church and all Societies that falsely take the title of it; we
shall consider that great City (the Subject of Errors) which is spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified, Rev. 11.8. For, that
City (because the Witnesses of Christ were killed in it, and Christ was
crucified in the Type of it) must needs be that City of grand impugnation
against the Gospel Church, by Prophets predicted. This City had (conform to its
own Triplicity) three Heads; The Dragon, the Beast, and the False Prophet,
Chap. 16.13.

We shall show, First, What this threefold City is.

Secondly, What those three Heads of it are.

Thirdly, Which of those three Heads was the chief Builder of this threefold
City; or when, and by whom it was built. And

Fourthly, What the Holy City, or true Church (contrary to that threefold City)
is; and give an account of her:

First, As Primitive in Heaven, and clothed with the Sun, till about 407. And

Secondly, As fled into the Wilderness, and trodden under foot by the free
Denizens of this threefold City.

Fifthly, We shall show what the Epocha's of those three Heads, and of this
threefold City (all synchronizing with eight others) are.

Sixthly, We shall give the shortest Epitome (if possible) that may be, of the
Mystery of Iniquity, by showing the Series of some transactions of those twelve
Epocha's, for 1260 years.

Seventhly, We shall give some short Rules of Direction to judge rightly of
Prophetical times.

Lastly, We shall show the great (and that manifold) Utility, and necessity of
the right knowledge of Prophetic and Symbolical Scriptures; and, therein, of
these twelve Intervals or Epocha's: Of these, at first succinctly for the
Readers more ready apprehending of what he reads: And no more at present; but
after more at large. And first:

CHAP. II. What this threefold City is, or, What those three parts of it are.
ITs first part (Spiritual Sodom) are sensual loose Professors (common
Swearers, Whoremongers, Drunkards, etc.) Such in all Sects, as practice the
manifest works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19. that disclose their sins like Sodom: to
wit, Such in the Antitype as the Sodomites were in Type, but Professors.
Spiritual Egypt is worldly, churlish, uncharitable (but more formal)
Professors, whose practice is perfidious fraud for filthy Lucre; to wit, Such
in the Antitype as the Egyptians were in Type, but Professors: For, Egypt laid
her grasping Talons of sordid Tenacity both upon Man and Beast (even upon that
which was the Lords Inheritance) from which prey, all the Plagues of Egypt
could not withdraw her.

Thirdly, The Antitype where (or in whose Type) our Lord was Crucified, are
proud, persecuting, blind, rashjudging Professors; such in the Antitype as the
Pharisees were in Type, by whom especially our Lord was Crucified.

Sensuality is the sin of Spiritual Sodom: Of Spiritual Egypt, greedy Avarice;
Truth-opposing Pride, Envy, Ignorance, and Seditious Discords are the sins of
Antitype, and Apostate Salem, in whose Type our Lord was Crucified.

CHAP. III. What this threefold City's three Heads (the Dragon, the Beast, and
the false Prophet) are.
THe Dragon is the first Head in Scripture Order. There were two Dragons: The
first was the Representative of Pagan Romes Or Empire, containing ten Kingdoms.
Decapolity. The second, the principal Inductor, and Raiser up of Papal Rome.
The first Innate in the Roman Empire; The second a foreign Invader of it: The
first was Imperial under his sixth Head, when John wrote the Apocalypse: The
second was, at first, the Military Leaders of the Armies of those Northern
Nations (Huns, Goths, Franks, Vandals, etc.) that (invading the Nations of the
Empire) vanquished most, made all tributary, translated the Empire, plundered,
burnt, and almost depopulated Rome the Metropolis of it, about the year 412;
and made their own Leaders Kings over those conquered Nations.

The first was, for the most part, Pagan, till about the year 292, when he
began to be bound for 1000 years, from the beginning of the Reign of
Constantius the first: From that time he was interrupted in his Reign, till he
was cast out of the greatest part of his Power about the year 324, at, or not
long before, the Council of Nice, Rev. 12.7. He (from that time) continued
partly Pagan, partly Arrian, or otherwise Heretical, till about four hundred,
and ten, or twelve: And he (his rage increasing all that time against the
Primitive Church) improved that power he had in persecuting of her. But (not,
or not long prevailing, and his power railing) D^cter Hammond in Apocal. 17.
he (about the year 400) invocated the Aid of the second Dragon (the Military
Leaders of those foreign Nations of the North) Hammond, and Salvian (quoted by
Hammond) calls those Nations Barbarians; But I only assert, and shall show,
that the Heads of those Barbarians were the original of the second Dragon at
his first rising.

That second Dragon (invited, revocated by the first) came, but did not
strengthen the Hands of the first, but (in four hundred, and ten, or twelve)
swallowed him up: that is, He, then, took away him that had let the Rising
up of Papal Rome, and destroyed him till the thousand years expired, but
indeed, for ever. For, As Eliah was said to come, when John came, for his like
zeal; so this first Dragon was no otherwise (after his 1000 years binding)
loosed, than in his like Persecutors, as the Reader may easily observe in the
sequel. Texts that hold sorth this first Dragon, are Rev. 12.3, 4, 7, to the
13. Chap. 17.3, 7, to the 14th. Chap. 20.2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10.

The second Dragon (that destroyed that first, fallen, and bound before, for
ever, as aforesaid) drove also the Primitive Church into the Wilderness (into
the secret Subterfuges of obscure latency) for 1260 years, Chap. 12.14. and
gave his Power (which he took from her, from the translated Empire, and from
the falling first Dragon) to the (by him first wounded) Beast Beast with Ten
Crowns.
Decadiademick, Secular, and Papal: But he (by giving his Power, the Supremacy
therein, as aforesaid, to that Sea-born Beast) had weakened his own Kingdom,
which the Mahumetans (by their power) resupported; And loose Christians are the
more Spiritual part, and support of it.

Here some hasty Readers (having no power to stay for full satisfaction in its
due place) may say: But when, and how did this second Dragon give his Seat,
Power, and great Authority to the Sea-born Beast, Secular, and Papal?

To these, I confess, I am the more ready to return some satisfaction (perhaps
sufficient) at present; because never any Writers (that I find) have observed
that there were two Dragons, and, therefore, could never take notice which of
those two gave power to the Beast; Nor did ever any (that I find) observe what
that Beast was, or when, or how he rose up: But, that there were two Dragons,
which of the two gave power to the Beast, and what that Beast was, and when,
and how he rose up, will both evidently and briefly appear (though by a
somewhat unwilling digress) by this disquisition: An open door also to unfold
the more difficult (but most needful to be unfolded) Texts in the Prophets, and
Apocalypse will be, thereby, made. And first;

I Answer: Alaricus Oros. lib. 7. chapter 39. Hammond chap. 17.
(having driven Honorius into Ravinna) took, plundered, and burnt Rome, about
the year four hundred and ten, or, as some write, four hundred and twelve, and
died about the same year at Cosentia: Him his Kinsman, Athaulphus, Carrion 290.
Baron. anno 411.
succeeded, Head over his Army, and Supreme in Italy; He (returning to Rome
with full Resolution to demolish even the Rumes of it) was averted from his
purpose by Placidia, Marcel. Prosp. Helvic
Sister to Honorius, whom he had married: He in her Right ( Honorius being
Childless) might expect to Succeed (as partly by Conquest in Italy) over all
the Empire: She (by earnest entreaties) persuaded him to spare the sad remains
of that City, and to depart out of Italy, spoiled already. This was not (no
doubt) her single Design, but her Design driven on, and owned by the Senate,
and by a better Council at Ravenna: He, hereupon (having received further
supplies of Moneys for himself, her, and his Army)marched with her into Spain
to subject it to himself. Ed.
Hereupon his Soldiers slew him, because he had left Italy, and therein
quitted a certain Fruition for a doubtful event, which (without much
difficulty, and no less danger) they could not expect prosperous. Thus he left,
near Conquered Italy, and taln Rome (drunk with the blood of Martyrs, and
drunk, at that time, with her own blood) to the then newborn Beast, Secular
and Papal, whose first Head was then wounded with the stroke of a Sword, as it
were unto death, Revel. 13.3, 12, 14. to wit, By the Sword of this second
Dragon prevailing, at the same time, under Pharamond in France, and under
Alaricus in Italy. He prevailed not only against the Primitive Church, Imperial
Rome, and the then falling, and dying first Dragon (all which let, and
should let [till then thus taken out of the way] the rising up of Papal Rome,
and of the Seaborn Beast, her secular Head) but he prevailed also (and might
easily prevail) against that Secular Beast, and wounded as it were unto death
(in the day of his birth, and when but beginning to rise out of the Sea) his
first, and best Head: For, Rome Ruled over the Kings of the Earth; And the
Senate, with an Emperor, Ruled both her, and them: But the besieged Senate
Ruled Rome (with great grief, and no great Power) without Bishop, or Emperor;
And in that feeble, and afflicted Senate did this Sea-born Beast (all wounded
as it were unto death, in the day of his birth, by the Sword of this second
Dragon) rise up: For, the City (says the learned Hammond) was divided into
three parts (so her Antitype was to be near the day of her Dissolution, Ham. in
Apocal. 16, 19.
Chap. 16.19.) One part was Pagan, another Heretical, and the third part
Orthodox, but grossly Apostate in manners. Concerning the Heretical part, I
observe little; But the Pagan, or Heathen part, was (for Number, and Power)
most prevalent all the time the City was besieged, until it was taken. Id. in
Apocal 175 Sozom. chapter 9. Carrion.
For Attalus (a professed Heathen) was so high in Power, and Favor with the
People, that he would be Caesar, aut nullus, and not be joint Emperor with
Honorius. So was Symachus (Lieutenant of Rome) a Pagan; And such was the Senate
for the most part, which appears in that they sent the said Symachus Legate to
Honorius at Ravenna, to Request that the Heathen Rites might be Restored: Thus
it appears plainly, that the Heathen part was the greatest in that afflicted
Senate of besieged Rome. But that major part, was no part of this Beasts
wounded Head, which was after healed; but the last part of the first Dragons
last, and dying Head, which was never healed, but then went into lasting
perdition, Apocal. 17.11. For, after two years siege, and (as I rather compute
the time) in 412, were those Pagan Senators, and Imperial Rome numbered, and
finished. Then came her, and their Plagues in one day; Death, Mourning, Famine,
Fire, Chap. 18.8. which those Barbarians (with barbarous hands) had chiefly
inflicted upon those Heathen Senators, and Citizens (that had invited,
revocated and consided most in them) and that to their utter, and final
excision. But the flying Senators, and others (that fled to the Sanctuaries of
the more Orthodox, but Apostate in manners) found, thereby, a bare, and hard
exemption from imminent death. And these (thus scarce escaped) Senators, and,
perhaps some others in somewhat like condition, were the visible original of
the first Head of this Sea-born Beast, weak and wounded, to be a witness to the
truth performed, as was thrice foretold in three sacred Texts of Scripture in
the same Chapter, Apocal. 13.3.12.14. Here the Scissers of eternal death, and
final excision parted the last dying Head of Pagan, and Imperial Rome from the
first (at first sick, and deadly wounded) Head of Papal Rome. And I saw one of
his Heads wounded, etc. and his deadly wound was healed, verse. 3. wounded by
the Sword of this second Dragon: Healed (began to be healed) when Atholphus
(remitting Rome, and most of Italy, into the feeble hands of that wounded
Senate) made them Temporal Lords over Rome, Italy, and other Nations, over
which that City (for some time after) claimed some Jurisdiction.

Then also their Bishop began to be (partly by the said Donation, partly by the
Senates Assent, partly by his own Usurpation) preferred to the largest
Superintendency.

Thus this Papal Superintendent Spiritual began to be suited with a fit Power
Secular. For, these (near slain, but surviving) Senators were (Primitiae
Papales) Papal Romes first Fruits, and (though at first most feeble) her first
Powers Secular: Because they (and they first) allowed sufficiently their own
Bishops Supremacy over all Bishops and Churches, if not over all Kings and
Councils. For, so soon as Athaulphus had remitted Rome and Italy to that
wounded Beast, his Bishop (fallen Romes Bishop, Innocent the First) returned (but
no Emperor with him) to Rome, and Ruled, as by principal Authority (both
Spiritual and Temporal) that reviving Beast, and likewise Rome, and Italy,
which that second Dragon (in Athaulphus, as one chief Head of him) had given to
that almost dying Senate. And the Dragon gave (began early to give) his Seat,
Power, and great Authority to the Beast: He continued in giving his power, in
several Conquered Nations, for about 200 years space; but I may not digress
from the matter in hand to insist upon so long a subject. To show when, and how
he began to give his Power (the Supremacy therein) to that Beast is sufficient
at present.

Innocent (immediately after his Return) claimed (and labored much more hard,
than any had done before him, to obtain) Universal Supremacy over all Bishops,
Churches, and Councils, as plainly appears by his own practice witnessed, and
by his own Letters (and those very many) recorded by Osiand. Du Pless Host.
circa An. 417.
Augustine, Osiander, and others: For, the Emperors absence was Innocents
advantage to augment, and exercise a more uncontrouled Power: And Honorius (a
good Prince, and Orthodox, but of no great Capacity to Govern) came no more to
Rome to Reside there to the day of his death. For, the Romans (at least some of
them) are said to hate Honorius because he left Rome, and went to Ravenna,
therefore he remained there. Phil. Morn. Hist. de Papal. circa An. 570
And his Successors (some having the Title of Emperors, but scarce the power
of Kings) made Ravenna the place of their Residence: Rome was never more
Imperial, but ever after Papal.

The Senate and Bishops of Rome (in the absence of Honorius, and as by his
Authority) acted many things to further their own Designs, and in Defense of
the Church. For, He, and his Brother Archadius, with their Councils (for they
had both Orthodox, and Heterodox Councils cooperating to some good) were the
two Wings of that Great Eagle ( Theodosius the Great) which were given to the
Gospel Church to flee into the Wilderness (into the secret subterfuges of
obscure latency) for 1260 years, as from those two texts unfolded, will plainly
appear, Revel. 12.6, 14.

The Orthodox (incorrupt in manners) were (in Innocent's time, when the Grand
Apostasy began) very few. The Heterodox Papal (for I pass by all other Sects of
those times) were very many: The false Doctrine of those Heterodox was not then
manifold, but very much dangerous to Princes, to the Primitive Faith, to all
true Professors. Osiand. P. 473.
They held that the Church was built upon Peter, and so upon the Pope, as
Peter's Successor: The Orthodox held that the Church was built upon Christ, whom
Peter confessed.

This Doctrine of the Heterodox was very dangerous to the true Church, because
a Doctrine contrary to the Foundation of the true Faith, holding the Head
Christ, Col. 2.19.

Secondly, A Doctrine dangerous to Princes: For, if the Church was built upon
Peter, and so upon the Pope as his Successor, Then all Kings, and Councils,
must submit to him as the greatest; because the Church cannot be built upon the
greatest of them.

Thirdly, This Doctrine was almost universal in the body of Apostasy, and so
violent in its course, that the Pillars, and chief Fathers of the Primitive
Church seemed shaken therewith: For, Crediderunt Hieronymus, Id.
and Augustinus Ecclesiam super Petrum fundatam; sed retractantes ambo
dixerunt; Super Petram, Christum, quem Petrus agnovit: Both Jerome, and
Augustine were induced to believe, that the Church was built upon Peter; but
both retracting, said, upon Christ the Rock, whom Peter confessed.

This was the Doctrine of the pride of the Son of Perdition, never delivered to
the Church by Christ, and his Apostles; a Doctrine of blasphemy against God, of
deceit to men, of rebellion against Princes; A Doctrine, perhaps inconsistent
with any true Church, or sincere Professors, but generally held forth, and
earnestly contended for (as the chief part of their Faith) by Papal Rome, in
the very beginning of the grand Apostasy.

Secondly, The Manners of these men, and times, these Texts show, Rev. 18.2, 5.
where they are fitly compared to a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird, to
an habitation of Devils, etc.

The Reader may also see the Learned Hammond quoting Salvian; Also St. Jerome,
Augustine, and others set down in the sequel.

Innocent's Successors added many Nations (and Italy more absolutely) to the
Papal Decarchy, of which in its due place.

Here the Reader may easily observe both a manifest, and a manifold concurrence
of Prophetic Scriptures with the performances of them; As first, with the
final excision of the first Dragon, the fall of Imperial Rome, the profligation
of the Primitive Church; And all these were powerful, and prevailing
Impediments (till then thus taken out of the way) that let the rising up of
Papal Rome, 2 These. 2.6, 7.

Secondly, With the rising up of the second Dragon, by whom these impediments,
aforesaid, were taken out of the way; the Church driven into the Wilderness;
her Witnesses killed, Chap. 12.14. Chap. 11.7.

Thirdly, With the rising up (those Impediments thus removed) of the
Decadiademick Beast, Secular, and Papal, Chap. 13.1.

Fourthly, With the wounding of his first, and best Head, by the Sword of the
second Dragon, verse. 3.12, 14.

Fifthly, With the healing of that Head by the second Dragon's Donation of
Authority to him, induced to it chiefly by the design and procurement of the
false Prophet, as will after appear, verse. 2, 3, 12, 14.

Sixthly, With the Primitive Churches flight from the face of that second
Dragon for 1260 years, Chap. 12.6, 14.

Seventhly, With the two Wings of that great Eagle, which were given to the
Gospel Church to flee into the Wilderness, verse. 14. For, all Ages (past and to
come) cannot possibly afford a time so inevitably necessary and appositly
consistent, wherein the two Eagles-wings could be given to the Gospel Church,
as only this very juncture of time aforesaid: These two young Princes (or
Emperors) governed both by bad and good Governors, had (which signified the
truth of this Series of things) this Word, or Motto, Math. endeaux.
Summa cadunt subito; intimating, That the taking away, or fall of him that
let (to wit, Rome Pagan, and Imperial) and the profligation of the Primitive
Church fell out (as in Scripture predicted) in their time. A threefold cord is
not easily broken: But this sevenfold concurrence of sacred Prophesies with the
performances of them, (and those performances coinciding in the fame time) may
irrefellibly prove the certain commencement of the grand Apostasy; Pagan Rome's
final ruin; Rome Papals Era; the exact time of the rise of the Sea-born
Beast, her Secular Head; the fixed period when the first Dragon finally expired,
and second aspired; As also how, and when that second Dragon gave (began to
give) his seat and power to that Sea-born Beast: How he continued to give his
power in Italy, and other Nations, for about 200 years, I leave it (as too long
to relate here) to its proper place. Doctor Weames de Lathoquar. Christ. Synag.


Prophesies, and their performances, (thus concurring) are called (says
Weames) Parallels, and give (says he) the greatest light to the Scriptures:
that is, to the readers of them.

To the Readers of them; Not because they are fulfilled, but known when, and
how they were fulfilled: For, all these Prophesies came to pass above twelve
hundred years since, yet have not given much greater light (so far as I find)
to any by their being so long fulfilled, because they were never perhaps in all
that time, known whether they were fulfilled, or not, or when, or how they were
fulfilled. This may fully refel that common, fond, and wicked Conceit of
Hypocrites, and, too much, of true Saints: Prophesies (say they) when they come
to pass, need no other Explication: That Is the clearest, fullest, unfolding of
them: We shall therefore wait patiently upon God, till they be performed, and
then we are sure to find their true and certain meaning. Events best show what
those texts intend. This is the common Plea (not only of some true Saints,
perhaps, but) chiefly of Hypocrites, as it was of their Type (the Pharisees) by
whom our Lord was Crucified? They expected (still expect) the Messiah in future
to come, who came before; therefore Crucified him come, whom they earnestly
desired should come according to the Scriptures; which (with due sedulity) to
search, they profanely neglected: They had, no doubt (as Modern Hypocrites
have) their prejudices against Prophetic Scriptures, and in them, against the
things that belonged to their peace; might say (in the proud folly of furious
Jehu) What peace do such Scriptures produce? So their Antiype (formal
Professors) have like prejudices of pride and ignorance against the same
Scriptures, and in them, against those things that principally belong to the
peace and prosperity of all Princes and People: These can (with like folly)
readily say; What peace, what prosperity comes by this kind of knowledge? We
busy our selves about better things, mind more necessary concerns. Thus
Hypocrites harden their own hearts against the knowledge of those things, that
chiefly belong unto their peace, and (under a blind pretense of minding the
most serious things) embrace (as the Pharisees did) base inanimadvertency, and
brutish ignorance: Our Savior (weeping for them) said of their Type; Had
thou known, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace:
But they, expecting those things (come before) to come in future, never found
that day, nor those things: Profane disregard to Prophetic Scriptures, puts
out quite all the eyes of Providence: So formal Professors follow (or rather
far out-go) their footsteps; see not (in no wise will see) those things that
belong unto their peace: For, formal Professors feed their own folly with
deceits, affect to walk in the admired sparks of their own Fires (empty
impertinencies) and (forsaking the means of their own safeties) tread
under-foot the things, and those Scriptures that principally appertain to the
peace of all People. For this profaness (and it was most just with God) even
the Gospel Church (as her followers trod under foot this knowledge, those
things) was given to the Gentiles to be trodden under foot for 1260 years,
Apocal. 11.2, 3.

But, Fabula narratur surdis; Sacred Prophesies (with the Promises, and
Threatenings therein) and the performances of them, are, to formal Hypocrites,
as Stories told to deaf, or dead men: Common Herds have as good care to know
how, or when Promises were performed, and Prophesies fulfilled: Therefore,
their Forefathers (men of like base, and brutish inanimadvertency) perished,
with common Herds, in the Flood: But they that hate this dangerous, and
degenerous wickedness of slothful Hypocrites, may (from this contrary Fountain)
find an open Gate to good manners (the surest grounds of firm peace) at present
a sevenfold compliance of performances with those texts that foretold the
fulfilling of them: And likewise how, and when this second Dragon began to give
his Seat, and Power to the Sea-born Beast.

Nor are these seven Parallels (or Prophesies performed) a sevenfold, but
indeed, a seventimes sevenfold, coaltern record to each other, irrefellibly
confirming the truth of each others performance.

This second Dragon drove the Primitive Church into the Wilderness, translated
the Empire, cut off the feeble and dying remnant of the first Dragon, raised
Papal Rome by taking away all that let, and by giving his groat Authority so
taken (the Supremacy therein) to her Secular Head; favored somewhat from the
first, and by degrees received the Faith of the Church of Rome: Therefore, this
second Dragon is the first Head, in Scripture order, of Papal Rome: Him these
texts hold forth, Rev. 11.7. Chap. 12.14, 15, 16, 17. Chap. 13.2, 4. Chap.
16.13.

The second Head of this threefold City, was Papal Romes Power Secular, or
Beast with ten Crowns: How, and when he rose up we have sufficiently shown; and
shall his Progress: At present we shall show his Disparities (to distinguish
him) from the first Dragon.

John saw that first Dragon, Chap. 12.3. Or the Scarlet colored Beast, Chap.
17.3. To wit, One and the same Dragon, or Beast, in those two texts. He saw
this Beast also, Chap. 13.1. But he saw not both alike: He saw that first
Dragon of Pagan Rome Historically and Prophetically (as past in part, and in
part to come) when he wrote the Apocalypse.

But he saw this Sea-born Beast (not Historically, or as past in part, but)
Prophetically, as to come entire after the fall of that first Dragon: to wit,
the future rising up of his first Head, or him in his first rising, Revel.
13.1. And first,

He saw that first Dragon (or Scarlet-colored Beast) Historically, or as past
in part: Five are fallen (says the text) chapter 7.10. that is, Five Heads (the
Supreme Powers of Pagan Rome Crowned in their Kings, Consuls, Decemviri,
Dictators, Triumviri) were then fallen, or past, when John wrote.

And one is, verse. 10. that is, the sixth Head (crowned in the Emperors) then
existed when John wrote. Thus far he saw that first Dragon historically, or as
past in part. So,

Secondly, He saw also that first Dragon Prophetically, or as to come in part:
And one is not yet come; and, when he comes, he must continue a short space;
that is, the seventh Head should come, and came, about 292, when Constantius
was made Caesar, and (somewhat siding with the Primitive Church) began to
support Her: His Son declared fully for Her: This was, Divisi Caput Imperii
divisum: The divided Head of the divided Empire; when some of its Supreme
Powers sided with the Primitive Church, some with the Pagans: therefore, this
Head (because thus divided) continued but a short space, and ended about the
year 324, when Constantine and his Armies ( Michaels Substitutes) had cast him
finally from his seat of chief Power, and his place was found no more in
Heaven, Chap. 12.7, 8 etc. Howbeit, he recovered Power (though not Supreme) for
a short time. For,

Lastly, His eight Head, who was of the seven (who existed an eighth, but sick
and scarce perfect head of that dying Dragon) was the Paganoarrian (or
otherwise Heretical) Head under Constantius the second, Julian, Valens, etc.
This Head aspired about 340, and expired (together with that first Dragon) for
ever in four hundred and ten, or twelve; Then this Sea-born Beast (by the false
Prophets procurement, and the second Dragons preferring of him) succeeded.

Secondly, John saw the first Dragons ten Horns all uncrowned, Chap. 12.3.
Chap. 17.12. But he saw the ten Horns of this Beast all Crowned, Chap. 13.1.
They (the ten Horns of the first Dragon) were Pro-consuls, Presidents, or
Deputies, subject to the Senate and People of Rome, who ruled over the Kings
(and chiefly those Kings) of the Earth, whom, notwithstanding, the text calls
Kings that had received no Kingdom as yet, Chap. 17.12, 18.

But these ten Crowned Horns of this Beast were absolute Kings, or supreme
Powers subject, legally, to none, but linked together by the chain of the false
Prophets supposed true Catholic Religion, Chap. 13.1, 12.

And this tenfold disparity (proved from the text, and the testimonies (by
necessary inserences) of all Chronologies of those times) evidently resels that
universal opinion (so far as I find) of all Expositors upon those places: to
wit, That the Decacerastick Dragon, or Scarlet-colored Beast, in the 12th and
17th Chapters; and this Beast in the 13th Chapter, are all one, and the same
Dragon, or Beast; And it irrefellibly proves, that this Beast in the 13th Chap.
is signally different, and distinct from that red Dragon, or scarlet colored
Beast in the 12th and 17th Chapters.

This may seem abundantly sufficient to satisfy the Reader at present;
Howbeit, I shall make it much more clear in the sequel. For (until this, and
many like gross, grand, and I might say, general mistakes be removed) no
Apocalyptick true Key can possibly be contrived. How the false Prophet Bicorne
rallyed this Papal, Secular Beast's ten Kingdoms under him, we leave it to the
sequel, where we handle it at large. This Beast these texts mention, Apocal.
13.1. to the 8th. Also verse. 12, 14, 15. chap. 14.9, 11. chap. 15.2. chap.
16.2, 10, 13. chap. 19.19, 20. chap. 20.4, 10.

Thirdly, The false Prophet is the third Head of this threefold City. There
were three false Prophets; the Sensual, Secular, and Spiritual: The first was
the Pseudoprophetick Seer of the second Dragon; First, as Paganoarrian, after
as Mahumetan, and (in all times of his Epoche) over sensual, loose Christians
in all Sects. This Seer (ascending with the second Dragon out of the bottomless
pit, when he sallyed out of the North about 406) is not that false Prophet
intended here in he Text: But the Bicorne Beast is the false Prophet here
intended, Revel. 13.11. whose two Lamb-like Horns are the two false Prophets,
Secular and Spiritual. The first Horn (or Seer Secular) was the Clergy of the
Papal Decapolity that owned the Popes Supremacy over all Bishops, and Churches,
but not over Kings and Councils: This Horn Secular was the mouth of the
Decadiademick Beast Secular; and there was given him a mouth (says the text)
speaking great things, etc. Chap. 13.5. This mouth, or Horn Secular, was
(Vinculum unitatis, and Catena amoris) the linck of Amity, and bond of Unity
betwixt the ten Nations of Papal ROME.

I call this Horn [Secular] because he was given (as a Pseudoprophetick
prolocutor, or mouth) to the Beast Secular and Papal, for the purposes
aforesaid. But,

The second (the Spiritual) Horn was, more absolutely Temporal than the former,
and elated (in Spiritual pretended proprieties) above him: This Horn was such
of the Supreme Papal Clergy, as owned the Popes Supremacy (not only over all
Bishops, and Churches, as the former did, but) over all Kings, and Councils,
and over all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4.

These two Horns (or Seers Secular and Spiritual) will be more distinctly
apparent in the Guelsick and Gibeline Factions when we come to speak of them.

This Spiritual Horn was both Temporal and Spiritual, but claimed his Temporal
Supremacy over all Powers Secular from his pretended Spiritual Right of
Apostolic Succession, and therefore more properly Spiritual.

This may suffice the Reader at present, to know what is meant by the Dragon,
the Beast, and false Prophet; and by their three Seers, or Pseudoprophetick
mouths, Chap. 16.13. For, This Horn (as Spiritual) was the mouth of the false
Prophet; As Secular, was the Civil Representative of his Body Temporal. This
Series (though perhaps sufficiently clear at present) will be much more
apparent in the sequel: These Texts demonstrate this Bicorn-Beast, Rev. 13.11,
to 16. Chap. 16.13. Chap. 19.20.

Here is (may some say) a very fair Indication of three Representatives (the
Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet) and its very probable, That these three are
the three Heads of this threefold City; only we could wish, that the premises
were a little more plain, and the truth apparent; that these three are
(undoubtedly, and undeniably) the three heads of this threefold City.

I Answer; And the great City was divided into three parts, Chap. 16.19.
There Is this threefold Cities three parts: And these three Heads are (as heads
are set above their bodies) set down a little above this threefoold body in the
13 verse of the same Chapter; the words are these: And I saw three unclean
Spirits like Frogs, come out of the mouth of the Dragon, out of the mouth of
the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, for they are Spirits of
Devils, etc. Here Is a threefold cause (three Spirits of Devils) of a threefold
division devolved (from the three Heads of it) upon this threefold body; Bodies
(by Spirits from their Heads) receive sense, and motion; And therefore, this
threefold Body was to be divided into three parts, because those three unclean
Spirits (proceeding from its three Heads) were Spirits of Devils, causing
divisions: For (so the Text says) they went forth to the Kings of the Earth to
gather them to battle, verse. 14. And this influence (as the threefold cause
from those three Heads) and that threefold effect, or division in this
Tripolity, proves (by an inevitable necessity) the Community of those Heads,
and this Body in a threefold individuum; which we find here (at its
dissolution) divided into three parts, as we find it erected of three parts at
the first Constituting of it, Chap. 11.8.

I have thus far distinguished and described this threefold City of the grand
Apostasy, and declared who, and what Her three Heads were. But (because
[Contraria juxta se posita maxim elucescunt] Contraries compared together,
best appear) we shall now show what her Antithesis (the Holy City, or true
Church) is, and handle and compare both together, that both may better appear
to the Reader.

CHAP. IV. What the Holy City, or true Church (contrary to this threefold City)
is, with an account of Her; First, As Primitive in Heaven, clothed with the Sun
till about 407. And, Secondly, As fled into the Wilderness, and trodden under
foot, by the Free Denisons of this threefold City, for 1260 years.
CAin and Abel were born of the same Parents, in one and the same Family; so
the true Churches Antithesis took beginning in the true Church at the beginning
of the grand Apostasy: That Apostasy brought forth Antichrist Sensual, Secular,
and Spiritual, which had long struggled with the true Saints (like Jacob and
Esau) in the Womb of the Primitive Church, but were then (about four hundred
and ten, or twelve) brought forth.

Howbeit, Antichrist Sensual had his head, power, and enlargement from those
Foreign Nations of the North, at the Inundation of those Barbarians upon the
Christian World: And those multitudes of Military Forces (in whose Van the
second Dragon, after 400, advanced to the Imperial seat, and overspread the
Christian Empire) cannot be accounted so well any part of the body of Apostasy:
but revolted loose Professors in the Church (conjoined in one body sensual with
those Barbarians) made up the body of Antichrist sensual.

The five wise Virgins slept; the five foolish slept also: So the primitive
Church, and Saints fell; And her (Church, and Saint persecuting) professors, in
her, fell also: They fell, but not internally and totally; but these fell
totally to the Apostasy of Antichrist.

The true Church, and Saints, were the holy City, even then after they were
fallen, and whilst they were trodden under foot by the Gentiles, Chap. 11.2. but
Her, and their persecutors (falling totally) chiefly Constituted (that Cities
Antithesis) this threefold City, called spiritually Sodom, etc. that trod and
contemned the true Church as aforesaid; They, treading her under foot; and she,
trodden under foot by them, are, both, distinctly and apparently held forth in
the verse abovesaid, as also in the 8th verse, etc.

For, These three sorts of Professors (the Sensual, Earthly, and Devilish) in
all Sects, make up the whole body of the man of sin; but they most, that fell
from Faith, or manners in those ten Nations, over whom the Representatives of
the Primitive Church once presided; because these Nations were chiefly
Antichristian, that sometimes, held forth Primitive found Doctrine, and
Manners, and have since revolted from one, or both, which appears in These. 2.3.
where the Apostle (immediately before he describes the man of sin, and
foretells his coming) infers a necessity of falling away first before he could
come; which evidently implies, That the body of Antichrist was to be an
Apostate body, made up at first (for the most, and chiefest part) of Revolted
Church Members.

Many Expositors upon the place call that falling away, That grand and general
Revolt of the Gospel Church from Faith, and Obedience. But what that falling
away was, and how, and when the Church fell, and fled into the Wilderness, we
shall further show in part, at present, but more fully afterward.

The certainty and duration of that defection (which could not be total in the
true Church) fully appears in two several Texts of one and the same Chapter,
Rev. 12.6, 14. And the Woman fled into the Wilderness, verse. 6. And to the
Woman were given two Wings of a great Eagle, that she might flee into the
Wilderness, etc. verse. 14.

Into the Wilderness: that is, into the secret subterfuges of obscure Latency:
And the time of Her continuing there is expressed in both Texts. Two Texts (in
one and the same Chapter) are the sacred twofold Testimony of the God of Truth,
showing the certainty and duration of her defection. But she could not in such
sort, flee, until she fell from Heaven, wherein she stood before she fled,
verse. 1. Heaven was her primitive station; Her conversation (contrary to that,
aforesaid, triplicit Iniquity) was in Heaven till near about 407. I shall not
here stand to show how she stood in, and fell from Heaven, in a twofold
respect; For her standing was both Temporal and Spiritual.

Her Temporal standing (for the Text refers, not without the other, to that)
was from about 292, to the time aforesaid, as the sequel will clearly show.

Her Spiritual standing in Heaven (her more Heavenly Conversation) was all the
time of Her primitive station: that is, She (as she ever should) held forth so
long (contrary to Sensuality, Covetousness, and Pride) Sobriety, Equity, and
Veracity.

Secondly, Sound Doctrine.

Thirdly, Right Church Discipline.

What Sobriety, Equity, and Veracity (because little looked into, and perhaps,
less discerned) are, we shall show afterward.

This threefold true Gospel Obedience (opposite to Sensuality, Avarice, and
spiritual Pride) with right Discipline, and sound Doctrine are (the true
Churches Cognizance) the certain marks of the true Church, which, whilst in
Heaven clothed (more spiritually clothed) with the Sun, she held forth. But
(about the year 407) her Members and their Successors fell, some a tanto, some
a toto; They that fell only in part, fled into the Wilderness, and were
persecuted (because they fell, and fell but in part) by those that fell wholly
to the Apostasy of Antichrist.

And we find a third sort, more free from that defection, and less forward to
fly, whom the Text calls a Remnant; And the Dragon (says the text) was wroth
with the Woman, and went, and made War with the Remnant of her Seed, which kept
the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17. Where
they are not taxed either with falling away, or flying, but are witnessed to
have kept the Commandments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus; And that, even
then, after the revolting Church was fled into the Wilderness from the face of
the Serpent; to wit, Of the second Dragon.

These Champions of Christian courage (Sons of Fortitude) that kept the
Commands of God, when the rest of the Primitive Church were (some in part, some
wholly) fallen, might seem (for they were but few) like Caleb and Joshua, Meses
and Aaron, when all Israel besides was fallen away (in part, or in whole) from
Faith in the Promises, and Obedience conform to God's Commands, Numb. 14.10.

Nor is it like that those Professors, that stood best, were free from falling
in part, or held out long against the force of the second Dragon, but followed
the flying Church into the Wilderness also: For, when the prototype Church (
Jacobs Family) fled into the Wilderness, and so into Egypt (her place there
prepared of God) there was not one (that we find) that staid behind, or fled
not from the Famine.

Nor may we imagine, That they that fell wholly to the Apostasy of Antichrist,
fell wholly from sound Doctrine (for they fell little from that at first) but
from (the fruits of it) Obedience conform to Faith. For, the Devils believe and
tremble, but fell wholly from all Obedience; and therefore (though they fell
not at all, that we find, from the Doctrine of Faith) they fell totally. So the
Children of the total Apostasy (in the beginning of the grand defection) were
too forward to do the works of their father the Devil, and (though they, like
him, sell little at first from the Doctrine of Faith) fell wholly from
Obedience to oppose the Truth, and persecute the Witnesses of it: Therefore,
their Apostasy (though they fell little, or had not fallen at all from the
Doctrine of Faith) was total, as the figless fig tree (though perhaps, the
fullest of leaves) was wholly fruitless. For, Waters often ebb and stow with full
currents, in the same channels; so sound Doctrine is the Channel, in which some
men may, and do run the ways of God's Commands; And sound Doctrine is also the
same Channel, wherein many men (as the Pharisees, who said, but did not, did)
may, and do run (in full currents) quite contrary Courses to impugn the
practice of Gospel Truth, and persecute the Witnesses of it. This is the
greatest Apostasy gilded with Hypocrisy: For, If the light of the eye (says
our Savior) be darkness, how great is that darkness? So, If sound Doctrine it
self be (by uncharitablness) perverted to misapplications, or made to oppose
the Truth, and persecute the Assertors of it; that is the greatest Apostasy both
from Faith and Charity; Therefore, they that fell a toto, totally fell from
Faith of veracity, or from seeking after sincere obedience, to impugn it, and
persecute the doers of it by a constant current of opposition, though many of
them fell little, at first, from the Doctrine of Faith: For, gross Heresies, or
Doctrine greatly corrupt, are more peculiar to sensual Antichrist (such as the
Arrians were and Mahumetans are) than to Antichrist Secular, and Spiritual,
that fell less from the Doctrine of Faith, and perhaps more from manners, to
manners not so sensual, but more injust, and merciless, which the sequel will
clearly show.

But at present, we shall begin to compare both (both the holy City, and City
of Apostasy) together, that thereby both may plainly appear.

And first, They that fell least, and they that (when they fell most) fell but
in part, made up that Mystical Body of the holy City (the persecuted,
scattered, and afflicted true Church) that was given into the hands of the
Gentiles to be trodden under foot for forty two months. And those
Church Members, that fell wholly to the Apostasy of Antichrist, were the most
proper body of that City of Apostasy, and the principal part of those Gentiles,
that trod under foot the holy City (the revolted true Church) for forty two
months, which (we shall find) are 1260 years, Rev. 11.2, 3. Wherefore, the
Gospel Church, whilst in Heaven clothed with the Sun (whilst Her conversation
was contrary to that triplicit Iniquity of the man of sin) was conspicuous
because in Heaven so clothed.

And the Reader may observe, That when she (even her Witnesses) changed her
shining Raiment for sable Sackcloth, fell, and fled; She (falling but in part)
was even then (though much less) distinguishable from Apostates a toto, that
(about four hundred and seven, ten, or twelve) began to constitute (as the
major, Phil. Mo^h. Hist. de Papat. p. 2.
or chief part of his Mystical Body) the Antichrist predicted by Prophets and
Apostles: Wherefore, the Lord D^ Plessis says, That the Man of Sin is an
Estate, whereof the Apostasy is the Body. That is, Not a single person, but
(for the most part) a Political body Apostatical. Aquin. in Apocal. cap. 13.
Antichrist (says Aquinas) is a Body, or Corporation, not a Man: That is, Not
a single person either individual, or successive, but a body politic.

Augustine (keeping also the conformity of a City) calls him properly (though
not so comprehensively under the notion of the Beast and his Image) Civit as
impia, and Populus infidelium contrarius Populo sideli, and Civitati Dei, lib.
20. de Civit. Dei, page 1215.
the wicked City, and People unfaithful (contrary to the faithful People, and
City of God) Qui velut fidem prof^^entur, and infideliter vivunt; fingunt se
esse quod non sunt, vocant ur que non veraci effigy, sed fallaci imagine,
Christiani. Ib. Et in Hom. 11. in Apocal. page 679.
who, as it were, profess the Faith, and live as they that believe not; that
feign themselves to be what they are not, and are called (not according to
true, but false appearance) Christians. Thus we see this Learned Father makes
the man of sin to be exactly the very same that I have done, and gives for
substance the same description of him; to wit, That this Corporation, or City,
contrary to the People of God, are a People Apostate (not, or not so much, from
the Doctrine of Faith, but) from Manners; Not Infidels, but (professing the
Faith) Livers like those that believe not; and are only (in a verbal
profession, and false appearance) Christians.

These Christians of false appearance (repugnant to the City of God) cannot be,
but by a Synecdoche partis (as Augustine calls them) the Beast, and his Image;
but are in all Sects, and Nations (chiefly within the tenfold Pale of Papal
Rome) both the threefold Body, and three Heads of this triplicit City of
Apostasy, called spiritually, Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was Crucifud.

What City or Corporation of Apostasy this is, this Text further shows; and
says, It is a great City, Rev. 11.8. None of its Type Cities, or Countries
(though all great) could equal it in its dimensions: that is, neither Sodom,
nor Egypt, nor Babylon, nor Jerusalem, nor Rome Pagan could ever equal Her
greatness: They were but single Cities, or Countries; but this was constituted
of ten parts, or Nations: And the tenth part (says the text) of the City fell,
Revel. 11.13. Chap. 13.1.

Secondly, This City is here further distinguished from all her Types; they
were but literal Cities, or Countries; but this is a Spiritual City;
Spiritually called (says the text) Sodom, etc. that is, A Mystical Corporation
(according to those Writers Record) of wicked ones, who least, or at least,
little seem to themselves, or sensual eyes, to be what they are; and therefore
Spiritual.

Thirdly, This Spiritual City is further distinguished in the text to be
threefold; Spiritually called (says the text) Sodom, and Egypt, where also our
Lord was Crucified: that is, Tenfold in her dimension, but threefold in matter
and form: A monstrous Chaos of many Sects of evil manners: A Miscellaneum of a
manifold confusion, but all referred and confined in the text, to three more
general Classes, or Orders of Professors.

These three sorts of Professors (conform to the filthy manners of Sodom and
Egypt, and of cruel and hypocritical Jerusalem) Constituted (as the whole
matter of it) the tenfold body of Antichrist: Nor is there, nor can there be,
any other substance or matter in that body, but these three sorts of Professors
only; For, all that is in the world (says the Apostle, 1 John 2.16.) is the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life. And these are the
threefold form of that matter, which makes that matter be what it is.

But (may some say) there is more in the body of Antichrist than these three
lusts; For, the Mahumetans are filled with Infidelity, Modern Sects with
Deceits; The Jews are fast bound in Chains of blindness (though they cannot be
accounted, so properly, any part of the Apostasy) the present Papists surpass
their Predecessors in unsound Doctrine and Idolatry; And gross ignorance, and
barrenness in good works overspreads almost all Professors.

I Answer; That (though all these Iniquities superabound in the body of
Antichrist, yet) they make, and perfect no more, nor any other than these three
lusts; because all sins in all Sects, spring from this threefold Fountain, and
are the very same lusts exerted, or the fruits and effects of them.

Lust (Covetousness) is the root of all evil; therefore, this threefold lust
must be the root of all evil in the World, and that most prevalent in (its
proper subject) this threefold body. For,

Spiritual Sodom, and her Head (the Dragon) is the proper subject of the lusts
of the Flesh, whose works are manifest, Gal. 5.19.

Spiritual Egypt, and her Head (the Beast) is the more proper subject of the
lust of the Eyes (worldly avarice) whose works are more wicked, and less
manifest.

The Antitype where (or in whose type) our Lord was crucified (censorious,
proud, blind, pharisaical Professors) and her Head (the false Prophet) is the
proper subject of Spiritual Pride (self-love, self-elation) whose works are
most wicked, and least manifest, 2 These. 2.4, 9, 10.

Such as the Soul is in the body, such is this threefold Lust in the body of
Antichrist; Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet: These three Lusts are the
Trinity (the threefold supreme object) of the Antichristian World. For, sensual
satisfaction of the lusts of the flesh under loose forms, or the free pursuit
of sinful pleasures in some formal way of Worship is the supreme object, which
Spiritual Sodom seeks after.

And, if Spiritual Egypt may obtain wealth and worldly preferment to satisfy
the greedy lust of her eyes, and may but deeply deceive (indeed her self) by
some outward way of Worship: This is the supreme object after which she seeks.

So, If the Antitype where (or in whose type) our Lord was crucified
(Professors proud, and Pharisaical) can but have wealth without hand, or heart
to use it, and may but obtain (what Diotrephes drove at) Pre-eminence in
Churches (though it be by depraving men of parts, or piety, or by taking peace
from the Earth) this is, as it were, all in the world (the supreme object) she
looks after. For, this was her grand design till Phocas (not perhaps by free
grant) conferred it upon her: wherefore, these three lusts (though linked by a
promiscous complication in many Professors) are all (the efficient, and object
of all wickedness) that is (says the text) in the world.

And, If the Spirit of Truth assert, That this threefold lust is all that is
evil in the world, then how can any man doubt, or dare deny, That these three
lusts are all that constitutes and denominates the whole body of Antichrist in
(their proper subjects, its three parts) Spiritual Sodom, and Egypt, where also
our Lord was crucified.

The Premises are also plain in those three Temptations wherewith Satan
assailed our blessed Savior: He (first tempting him to sensuality) said, If
thou be the Son of God, command that these Stones may be made bread.

Secondly, He (tempting him to worldly Covetousness) showed him all the Nations
of the world, and said, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me.

Lastly, The Devil (tempting him to the most desperate lust of Spiritual pride,
and sin of presumption) set him upon a Pinnacle of the Temple, and said, Cast
thy self down; for, it is written, He shall give his Angels charge over thee.

And why did not the Devil tempt him to something more, or by something else,
than these three lusts?

Because there was nothing else, or more to tempt him to, or to tempt him by;
for, all that is evil in the world is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and pride of life: And, therefore, must be all that constitutes and
compleats the whole body of Antichrist.

Thirdly, The truth of the premises appears in the Parable of evil grounds:
for, we find three evil grounds (the Highway, the Thorny, the Stony) and no
more; because there are no more grounds mystically and truly evil, but only
Sensual, Secular, and Spiritual Antichrist, serving the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the eyes, and pride of life; and therefore called spiritually, Sodom,
and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. For,

Fourthly, The Apostle plainly explicates those former texts by a threefold
Epithet, James 3.15. The wisdom (says he) of this World, is Earthly, Sensual,
and Devilish.

These three Epithites, abundantly confirm the truth of this City's triplicity,
and also show what I mean by Antichrist Sensual, Secular, and Spiritual. And,

First, By Sensual Antichrist, I mean such Professors as are profanely loose,
carelessly ignorant, or grossly heretical.

Secondly, By Secular Antichrist, I mean such Professors as are (according to
the Apostles Epithet) Earthly; that is (for so the word sometimes imports)
Worldly, Covetous, or Earthly-minded Professors, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical. I also often use it (as it more usually imports) for Lay Persons,
and Powers Civil, or Temporal.

Thirdly, By Spiritual Antichrist, I mean such Professors whether Temporal, or
Ecclesiastical) as exert, or hold forth Spiritual wickedness; to wit, spiritual
pride, busy ignorance, bloody faction, blind and rash censures, etc. that is,
such in the Antitype, as (by such practices) most crucify Christ mystical, and
kill his Witnesses, as their type (the Pharisees) were chief of those that
crucified Christ in Person.

Wherefore, I mean, by Antichrist Sensual, Secular, and Spiritual, such in all
Sects, whose wisdom (or indeed whose lusts) are (according to the words of this
text) Sensual, Earthly, and Devilish: And this the Reader may observe, as a
rule, in reading the sequel of this Treatise.

All that is in the World (says John) is the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and pride of life, Joh. 2.16. And the wisdom of this world (says
James) is sensual, earthly, and devilish: That is, The threefold Antithesis to
Gospel Truth, and the Church of God is sensual, secular, and spiritual
Wickedness, which (in those three sorts of Professors aforesaid) wholly
constitutes this threefold City.

Fifthly, That which confirms, yet more fully, the truth of this City's
triplicity, is that threefold division of it, which should forerun its final
dissolution, Rev. 16.19. And the great City was divided into three parts: These
words (well understood) fully prove, That those three sorts of Professors are
(in opposition to the holy City, or true Church) the triplicit matter of this
threefold City.

This City ( called, in the 11th Chapter, spiritual Sodom, etc.) is called (in
this 16th Chapter) Babylon the Great: We shall therefore, further enquire what
this City was, and why thus called (in two different texts) by two different
Appellations. And first,

What this threefold City (in the 11th Chapter) was (for matter and form) we
showed before; And that City (divided into three parts in this 16th Chapter) is
the same City which we find, in the 11th Chapter, made up of the same three
parts.

Nay (say some Assertors of gross absurdities) there are but two parts in your
supposed threefold City; For, Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified, are but two parts, because but two places are expressed.

The folly of this common Cavil will easily appear thus: Suppose I name two
places, and infer a third; As Leicester, Lutterworth, where also our late King
was beheaded: So the text names two places, and infers a third; Spiritual
Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified: Here Is the same numeral
parity (mutato nomine) of parts, or places.

But it were absurd, beyond belief, for a man to say; There are but two places
in the instance illated, because but two ( Leicester, and Lutterworth)
literally expressed: For, The King was beheaded in neither: But there was a
third place (where the King was beheaded) as clearly inferred, as if it had been
literally expressed, which place was then the saddest and most direful place of
all the three. So, it is no less senseless to say, The City in the text had but
two parts, because but two places (spiritual Sodom, and Egypt) are literally
expressed: For, Christ was not crucified in Sodom, nor Egypt; But a third place
(both in Type and Antitype) is as clearly inferred, as if it had been literally
expressed: to wit, In the Type that bloody City of blind Devotion (Proud,
Factious, Pharisaical Jerusalem) where our Lord was crucified: So this Antitype
City necessarily infers a third (spiritually proud, factious, hypocritical)
Polity, that (though not primarily) should, especially, crucify Christ
Mystical, and kill his Witnesses Rev. 11.2. Dan. 7.25. But,

Some (not thus satisfied) say, That City was but one: So say I, so say the
texts; but, that it subsisted of a threefold matter, or of three parts, the
texts say expressly; And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great
City: There that City is but one; But called, spiritually Sodom and Egypt,
where also our Lord was crucified. There Is the three parts, or threefold
subsistence of that City; And the great City was divided into three parts,
chap. 16.19. There Is that City, in existence one, but of a threefold
subsistence implied.

Some observe, That Jerusalem (at the destruction of it) was divided into three
parts. The learned Hammond observes, That Rome Imperial was (at its
destruction) divided into three parts (Hoathens, Heretics, and Orthodox much
Apostate in manners: And the text says expressly, That his City (the Decapolity
of Papal Rome) should be (about the time of the dissolution of it) divided into
three parts. And why into three parts at its dissolution; but because it was,
at first, constituted of three parts, and subsisted of the same three parts,
after the constituting of it: to wit, of a sensual, secular, and spiritual
matter, called Spiritually, Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified;
because serving the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and pride of
life, and misled by a threefold wisdom of worldly folly; The wisdom of this
World (says the text) is Sensual, Earthly, and Devilish.

This threefold City subsisted (as the three parts of it) of this threefold
matter aforesaid; not distinguished by distance of place (though not wholly
without that) nor by an unmixt juncture of the matter, gross, and entire;
because commixed (at least in a great measure) by a promiscuous confusion. For
Example, The Composition of Pilulae Ruffi, is made up of a threefold matter (
Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron) not of each unmixed; but this threefold matter,
incorporated, makes one Mass, wherein each part has, notwithstanding, its
peculiar propriety, and operation; So these three sorts of Professors (the
Profane, Proud, and Worldly) made up (as one Mass) this great City (the
Decapolity of Papal Rome) by a promiscuous complication of all three.
Therefore, the threefold division of it is, or may be, much after the
similitude of that threefold division of Rome Imperial, observed (as aforesaid)
by the Learned Hammond. We shall examine and compare the threefold sub-antitype
in our Saviors time with its Prototypes, and their and its Antitypes: And,

First, There was then (in Judea, and Jerusalem) a sensual subantitype-part,
whom the proud Pharisees called Sinners, and our Savior, Publicans and
Harlots: These were (for sensuality of life, and dissolute looseness) indeed
Sodomites in Judea and Jerusalem, and agreed well with Sodom as their
Prototype, and with their Antitype Spiritual Sodom, which is only such loose
dissolute professors in all Sects of the Papal Decapolity, as (under some
careless, trivial form, and profession of Christianity, or, perhaps, even
without that) follow after Sensuality, as the Sodomites did: The wisdom of this
world (says the text) is (first) Sensual.

Secondly: A second sub-antitype-part in our Savior's time, was the Secular
part of Judea, and of its Metropolis, minding (like literal Egypt) Earthly
things: Pharaoh and his Servants (to secure that Kingdom by contrary means)
slew the newborn males of Israel (such Cockatrice-egs are hatched by
covetousness) So Herod also to secure a Kingdom (an Earthly Kingdom also) slew
the newborn males of Israel at the birth of our Savior: Pilate and others
expressed the same wisdom (covetous self-destroying wisdom) at the death of our
Savior: And what was this second part, but Egypt plainly sprung up (as a
Sub-antitype) in Judea: Here Is the very identity of the same wisdom, the
reality of the same works betwixt both the Secular parts of these two Kingdoms:
And this Sub-antitype part (as it exactly agrees with its Prototype, literal
Egypt) agrees exactly with its Antitype, Spiritual Egypt, whose wisdom of
earthly avarice has the same superscription with that of the Sub-antitype in
our Savior's time, and with its Prototype.

This second part seeks (like Nabal) worldly gain by that wisdom, and wicked
frugality, that produces indeed (with the loss of their lives, and souls) the
loss of it.

This second part (these Professors of Woolf-like wisdom and greedy avarice)
are ever very busy in buying and selling; yet will not buy, but sell the
Truth; or (if they do) will pay no price conform and adequate to the worth of
it, nor recompense the Witnesses thereof according to their just deserts: Come
(says Pharaoh, when he went about a work of this wisdom) let us work wisely:
And these ( Egypts Antitype) will needs seem more religious and sober, than
Spiritual Sodomites are, and, in buying the Truth, can go a wiser and cheaper
way to work, till (through the folly of this earthly wisdom) time, truth, and
their life are all lost together: The wisdom of this world is (secondly)
earthly.

Thirdly; The third part in the Sub-antitype was the Pharisaical part, most
blind, proud and bloody: We find the Prototype, by our Savior himself, thus
expressed: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them that are sent, etc. Mat. 23.37. That is, The Hierusalamites, Apostate
Predecessors (their Prototypes in pride and cruel Persecutions) killed the
Prophets, and stoned those that were sent unto them: And their succeeding
Sub-antitype (the Pharisees in our Savior's time) followed, or rather far
exceeded their examples for factious pride, and blind and bloody ignorance:
They (by heady prejudices, rash censures, and wicked surmises) persecuted the
Apostles, killed the Saints, and crucified Christ the King of Righteousness:
The same wisdom of spiritual pride works in their Antitype the same wickedness,
serves to kindle Seditions, to create Cavils, to multiply contradictions
against the Truth and its Witnesses, and to raise much strife of words to
wicked purposes, as their Type (the Pharisees) did against our Savior; Of whom
he expressly said (which is rather more true in their Antitype) You are of your
father the Devil, etc. The wisdom of this world is (Thirdly) Devilish.

This third part in the Prototypes, and the Sub-antitypes, was most infamous
for cruelty: And this third, Antitype-part (in all Se^s of the Papal Decarchy)
is the most direful impugner of Gospel Truth, and persecutor of the Witesses of
it. But I have spent time too much about this trivial Cavil.

This City therefore (we clearly see) subsisted (at its first building) of
three parts, as it was to be (before or about its final dissolution) divided
into three parts. And

Secondly; It Is called spiritually, Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified, as an aggregate of all three, in the first building of it: But
called Babylon in its dissolution, because divided (as Babel into speeches)
into a confusion of many modern Sects and Sub-divisions, but chiefly into three
parts.

That this City subsisted of three parts, is proved sufficiently: But what that
City (so subsisting) is, remains to be further proved; which I shall show in
part here, but more fully when I come to handle the Epocha's of the six Vials
and six Trumpets synchronizing therewith, in 1260 years: For the most judicious
Writers (so far as I find) are apt (more or less) to mistake this City.

The most (or almost all) Orthodox Writers misconceive that City (in Apoc. 17
and 18 chapters) to be Papal Rome, and the same City in the 11th and 16th
chapters; because that City (in the 17th and 18th chapters) is called Babylon
the great; and that City in the 11th chapter is in the 16th chap. so called
also; wherein their gross mistakes may be clearly manifest. For,

That City (called Babylon the Great in the 17th and 18th chapters) was (more
properly and literally) the literal City of Rome Pagan and Imperial; because
five of her heads were fallen, and the sixth existed when John wrote, which was
above three hundred years before the first head of Papal Rome did, or possibly
could aspire: For, Intus existens prohibet alienum; It was impossible for Rome
Papal to rise up in power, until Pagan and Imperial Rome (that let, and
should let her rising up) was taken out of the way, as the Apostle expressly
foretold, and I shall prove from primitive Fathers in its due place, 2 Thessalonians.
2.7.

Herein the learned Hammond (in expounding those 17th and 18th chapters, to
intend Pagan and Imperial Rome) did not much deviate; for they did not intend
Papal Rome otherwise than as that City in the said chapters (to wit. Pagan
Rome) was the penultimate Antitype of Prototype Babylon, and might be (in some
respects only) a Prophetic shadow of her immediate Antitype, Rome Papal; And
Shadows and Substances are distinct things. But,

That City in the 11th and 16th chapters (called also Babylon the Great, ver.
19.) was (contrary to the tenants of many learned Writers) Rome Papal only,
without the least relation to Pagan Rome; because we find it standing under the
six Vials and Trumpets, and falling under the seventh Trumpet and Vial, whom
Rome Pagan and Imperial never reached; And so the most reformed Writers, almost
generally, maintain: That the transactions of the seven Trumpets and seven
Vials respect Papal Rome only, though they miserably (if I may say it) confound
those Vials and Trumpets, and transactions under both. But,

The Epoche of the six Trumpets, or (which is all one) of the Witnesses
Sackcloth-Prophesie, is 1260 years, chap. 11.3. And the Epoche of the six Vials
of the Plagues, and Wrath of God, or (which is all one) of the Witnesses
smiting the Earth with all Plagues, was 1260 years, chap. 11.3, 6. And the
Period of the sixth Trumpet and sixth Vial conterminates (as the beginning of
the first Trumpet and first Vial began) the duration of this triplicit
Decapolity of Papal Rome, chapter 11.13, 15. chapter 16.17, 19. Therefore, this
threefold City of Papal Rome must have (of necessity) the same Epoche of 1260
years, with the six Vials and six Trumpets; And that more inevitably, because
that time is also the express predicted duration of this City (treading under
foot the holy City) and of her proper head, chapter 11.2, 3, 8. chapter 13.5. And this
may make the premises no less than fully concludent. But,

The proper Epoche of Pagan Rome (from the time that Pompy reduced Judea under
its Jurisdiction to the dissolution of it) was about 460 years, which are 800
years less than was the Epoche of this threefold City: Therefore, it follows
irrefellibly, That this City (called Babylon the Great, in the 17th and 18th
chapters) must of necessity be the literal City of Pagan and Imperial Rome.

But it follows inevitably, That this City, in the 11th and 16th chapters
(called also Babylon the Great) must be the tenfold Tripolity of Papal Rome.

Nay (say some) that City in 17th and 18th chapters is one and the same City,
because both have one and the same Names, and are both called Babylon the Great.

I answer: Prototype, or literal Babel, was called Babylon the Great, Dan.
4.30. Therefore that City in the 17th and 18th chapters, and that in the 11th
and 16th chapters, must be Prototype and literal Babylon, because they have the
same Epithet and Appellation; Sed faedissima foret inconsequentia: This
absurdity is most shameful: For, Prototype Babel only was, in her time, Babylon
the Great, Dan. 4.30. And Rome Pagan and Imperial was (as the penultimate
Antitype) Babylon the Great, only in her time, Rev. 17.5. and 18.2. And so Rome
Papal (a Spiritual City, containing sometimes ten Nations) was (and she only in
her time) Babylon the Great, Rev. 11.8. and 16.19. This the Reader may
carefully observe, and seek diligently to discern the distinct intents of those
Texts to avoid confusion: For such dangerous and universal mistakes in
Scriptures are the seeds of wicked Sedition, of endless Dissatisfaction betwixt
Dissenting Brethren, and oppose Truth and Peace.

But all Papists, and some Reformists, will have all those Texts to intend
Pagan Rome only, which is true only in those Texts of the 17th and 18th
Chapters: But those Texts in the 11th and 16th Chapters, hold forth Papal Rome
only, as we have proved, and shall further prove: Therein all Papists, and some
Reformists (though not mistaken in the former Texts) are much mistaken. But,

Secondly; All Reformists besides will have all those Texts to hold forth Papal
Rome only, and thereby strengthen the hands of the Papists exceedingly against
themselves, and against the Truth: For (say the Papists) That City in the 17th
and 18th chapters (we are sure) was Pagan and Imperial Rome, which is so clear
from the Texts, that it is impossible to have the least Plea for any just ground
against it; Because five of its heads were fallen, and one existed when John
wrote, which was above 300 years at least (as the Reformists themselves affirm)
before Rome Papal was in being.

But the Reformists themselves, almost generally, confess with us, That all
the said Texts hold forth one and the same City: And we certainly know (by
irrefellible record from Sacred Scripture and Church History) that the City in
the 17th and 18th Chapters, was Pagan and Imperial Rome, and we are sure it is
one and the same City (for that the Reformists themselves confess) with that in
the 11th and 16th Chapters: Therefore that City, in all the said Texts, must be
(even by the necessary and inevitable concession of all Reformists) Pagan and
Imperial Rome, and has not the least relation (though all Reformists,
confessing it indeed, affirm the contrary) to Papal Rome: wherefore (not the
Scripture, but) the Reformists (by their mistakes in them) charge us with much
falsehood; But the Scriptures themselves charge them as their Corrupters, and
our false Accusers: For if all those Texts hold forth (as all Reformists
confess, and we affirm) one and the same City; Then that City (we are sure)
must be Pagan and Imperial Rome; for those Texts in the 17th and 18th Chapters,
intend (against all contradiction, or any plea to the contrary) Pagan and
Imperial Rome.

Thus the Protestants (in a manner jointly and generally) give their power
against the Papists, to the Papists against themselves, and (by these and many
like mistakes in Scripture) strengthen their hands against the Truth: Such
mistakes (or this only) are enough to maintain the Papists (whom they should
reprove and refel) in their opinions to eternity.

And these, and many such mistakes amongst Papists, amongst Protestants, and
amongst Professors different from both, keep back (till they be refelled, and
those mistakes removed) all Societies of dissenting Brethren from concentring
in one Spirit of Truth and Peace.

But if it undeniably and irrefellibly appear, That those Texts in the 11th and
16th Chapters hold forth Papal Rome only, with her Subdivisions: Then, de illis
actum est, their work is done for them: They must be (as he that had not on his
Wedding Garment) for ever speechless and remain silent: Or rather they and
their Sects, shall (as the Text foretold) give glory to the God of Heaven,
chap. 11.13.

Benhadad sent Bands of Soldiers to take Elisha in Dothan, but they mistook
the City, and mistook the Man, went to seek both in Samaria; and mistook at
first that City also: Therefore, they were far from accomplishing their
Master's design that sent them: So the best Writers, and Expositors, are sent
by their great Master in Heaven, to the great City of Confusion (complex of
many Sects) to convert Papists and Infidels, to resel Errors and reform
Manners; to convince and unite dissenting-Brethren. But then here is the misery:
They mistake this City, or the meaning of those Texts that hold it forth:
Therefore (it seems to me) some of them have cause to fear (till these, and
many like mistakes be removed) lest they should fall short of accomplishing
their Masters design that sent them.

Here some strong pleaders for gross mistakes may object, and thus say, Corah
and his Company coming to Moses, told him he took too much upon him: But we may
much better say of you, You take too much upon you, are very bold, too proud,
in thus reproving even the best Expositors.

I answer: It Is the strict charge of the living God, Thou shall not hate thy
Brother, but reprove him plainly: And faithful obedience to this Command is
the effect of humility, and fruit of Charity: But they that hinder or oppose
this practice, or reprove fidelity in this duty, seem rather to hold forth the
pride of the Son of Perdition.

Secondly: Nor will I willingly run the hazard of Eli's partiality, and only
say, It Is not well done, it is an ill report, but rather by plain reproof
discharge my duty: Is the Church of God (like Joseph's garment) all rent (as by
some evil beast) by means of many gross mistakes and errors in Opinions, and
Manners? And is this a time for many (if not the most learned and religious)
Writers and Expositors, to multiply mistakes, to increase errors in opinions
and manners, to contend earnestly for them, as if they were the Faith
delivered, and to corrupt and deceive themselves, and others by persisting so
doing.

Nor do I here denote these few, but many (precedent, subsequent) gross
mistakes, which make men not know whether they should be Papists, or
Protestants, or neither; nor are they certain whose dictates to observe, what
Sect to follow: Wherefore do Reformists hold Papists in suspense? why halt they
themselves betwixt pluralities of opinions? Let them, at least learn to know
their mistakes in opinions and manners, or meddle not with Papists: For, till
this be first done, they but fortify the Papists, and their subdivisions in
their errors against themselves, and create discords in, and amongst those
that dissent too much already: Hence it occurreth, That the Christian World,
and even the Church of God, are so dangerously divided, that those divisions
threaten to destroy States and Churches: Full conviction, therefore, in few
words, may stand in stead in this sad juncture of time, First seek the
Righteousness of the Kingdom of God, and Forms (the strife of these times) must
follow: what true Forms of Godliness (not repugnant to the present Government)
are, and what the power of it is, will (I hope) both briefly and plainly (in
its due place) appear: For (not from, but about these) most, and the most
dangerous mistakes arise.

Errors in Opinions and Manners are (in their effects) wildfire in the Church
of God, and Governments of Men; So these times too truly testify: Wherefore,
it is the duty of all to endeavor (first and above all) to quench those Church
and State-consuming flames: So Discords may cease, dissenting-Brethren be fully
satisfied, firm Peace procured to all people: Therefore, this endeavor (the
more it is contradicted or disowned) is every man's first and chief duty: But if
any Writers think I do them the least wrong by these reproofs, let them plead;
I impetrate no partiality: Let them (be they few or many) give their conjoynt
Objections in writing: But, if any bring more convincing evidence, I shall
humbly and thankfully acknowledge my satisfaction from their hand. But,

Secondly, Some may say; That City in the 17th chapter (and that in the 18th
chapter is the same) is called Mystery, Babylon: Therefore it must be Papal
Rome.

I answer; Rome Heathen and Imperial (chiefly when the Orthodox, apostate in
manners, were supreme) was called Mystery, Babylon; because her Iniquity, and
Mystery of that Iniquity, increased as the Papal Apostasy increased, until she
was temporally translated in four hundred and ten, or twelve, and spiritually
devolved into Papal Rome: But that this City can be Papal Rome, cannot possibly
be credible to any sensible person (that well considers it) for the reasons
aforesaid, and those that follow. But,

Thirdly; Heathen Rome (even before apostate Christians had the power) might be
Babel mystical, because she was not literal or Prototype Babel: And thus also
she (in Scripturesense) was, or might be called Mystical Babylon. But,

Fourthly; The title and epithet of Mystery, was more meet for literal Rome,
when her Apostate Christians had power, than for Papal Rome at her first
commencement: Because literal Rome at last, and not Papal Rome at first, had
the greatest Mystery, or deceitful plea, to be the Apostles successors in found
doctrine and good manners, for their late predecessors had been such: but they
themselves were fallen (say the Texts and Church History) to be an habitation of
Devils, etc. chap. 18.2. Hieron ad Marcel. viduam. Idem cont. Jovin. lib. 1. Et
in Lib. Didiani de Spirit Sanct.
Therefore St. Jerome himself applies all those texts in the 17th and 18th
chapters (as The Purple-Whore, Mystery, Babylon, and an habitation of Devils,
etc.) to Imperial and Christian (but Apostate) Rome, and not to Rome Papal: And
the Athority of a primitive Father, of so great note, together with the record
of Scripture, and Church History, may abundantly counter-ballance the
groundless contrary opinions of all other mistaking Writers. For,

Fifthly; Rome Imperial and Christian, but Apostate in Manners, was a Mystery
(a man would think) of more Iniquity than Papal Rome ever was for many Ages
after her first commencement, because she was (a little before her final
excision) fallen to be the Mother of Abominations and Filthiness, (which Rome
Papal, her daughter, inherited) and became (Terribilis, miscens Sanctis
Aconita, Noverca) no more a nursing Mother, but a most cruel Stepmother to the
then flying true Church, and to the chief of the primitive Fathers: For, her
whole Fraternity (to a man) conspired against St. Jerome, Ibid. Salvian lib. de
pro vid.
as himself witnesses; And she became (as Salvian testifies) more intolerable
for her filthiness, than the very Arrians (the worst of Sects) were: The
harvest of her Abominations (her Avarice, Iniquities, and black Conspiracies
against the best of Saints) was (as Rome Papals sins now are) fully ripe
immediately before her final downfall: Therefore Theodosius (that great and good
Emperor) loathing to die upon such a dunghill, lived with St. Ambrose; Jerome
fled (as from a Captivity) from her before her approaching fall, and God called
his People out of her, lest they should partake of her sins, and receive of her
plagues. But,

Contrarily; Papal Rome (though mystical also, and called a Spiritual City,
chap. 11.8.) was called, The place prepared of God to preserve his Church for
1260 years, from the rage of the second Dragon, chap. 12.6, 14. For, those two
texts, in one and the same chapter, are not only a twofold Witness in the Word
of Truth, but the Experience of Ages does also witness; That there was never
any other place, that ever did, or possibly could preserve his Church in such
sort so long, but only Papal Rome with her Subdivisions: She was more a
Nursing-Mother, than a Stepmother, for about eight hundred years, to the
Gospel Church, a fit place prepared of God for her defense as aforesaid, and
ever had, and still has (which the sequel will clearly show) a reverend esteem
for St. Jerome as chief of the primitive Fathers, whom Apostate Rome primitive
(by joint confederacy) conspired against: Therefore, this City in the 11th and
16th chapters (and not that in the 17th and 18th chapters) must be the tenfold
Spiritual (...), or City of Papal Rome, humbled, and somewhat reformed at first
(and so prepared of God) by the then late dreadful fall, and translation of
Imperial and Christian Apostate Rome: I pass by (for brevity in this place)
those several joyful Acclamations and Alleluia's of the Church in the 19th
chapter, which she expressed in, under, and at the beginning of Rome Papal, after
the fall of Christian Apostate Rome; which Alleluia's, as also above 800 years
of the first Dragon's binding, fell out, and were fulfilled in the first times
of the Beast, and false Prophet Papal, chap. 19.20. and chap. 20.4. But the
perfect dilucidation of these things (though intelligent Readers may at present
perceive them) appertain to their due places in the sequel, where we handle
them at large.

Sixthly; This threefold City, and the Holy City co-indent in a contrariety:
But the Court without leave out, for it is given to the Gentiles, and the Holy
City shall they tread under foot, etc. chap. 11.2.

The Holy City: There Is the City of God (the Gospel Church) trodden under foot.

They (those Gentiles that trod her under foot) There Is this threefold City, in
the 8th verse more fully set forth.

Both are Cities: Therein they co-indent.

The Holy City shall they tread: There Is their enmity, or contrariety.

This contrariety, and its cause, is threefold. And first,

The Holy City is contrary to Spiritual Sodom, in opposing sensuality.

Contrary to Spiritual Egypt, in impugning sordid tenacity.

Contrary to Apostate Salem, in opposing factious pride and ignorance.

This threefold opposition from the Holy City, is the sum of all Christian
duty: Herein (or in nothing) must all Ministers exercise their Preaching, and
they, and all Saints their practice, for their own Salvation, and examples to
others.

The contrary opposition from this threefold City, is the sum of all iniquity
in the tenfold body of the Apostasy of Antichrist: What that threefold Iniquity
(because wrapped in the darkest mystery of deceit) is, we shall show in its due
place, and so seek to remove many gross mistakes, in manners, amongst all
Sects, Societies of dissenting Brethren, and (too much) amongst true Saints,
that so men may better know how, and what to reprove, or preach against, and a
right means to true peace and prosperity plainly appear: For, How shall they
preach (the Text says) unless they be sent? And we may say (I say not of all)
of too many; How shall they be sent to reprove, that know not how to reprove?
or to preach, that know not what to preach (know not what Manners, what
Opinions to approve, what to preach against:) By this means deadly strife and
discords are built upon mistakes frequently every where; but Peace inviolable
is not, built upon the pillar and ground of truth. But

The Holy City or true Church, is no literal, but a Spiritual City: For her
Type (the Jewish Church) was a Spiritual, and no literal City, but sometimes
scattered in all the 127 Provinces from India to Ethiopia, Esth. 8.9. and 9.30.

So her Antitype (the Holy City, or Gospel Church) is no literal, but a
Spiritual City, scattered in many Nations and Church-Societies: Her Saints sit
down, some in Spiritual Sodom; some in Spiritual Egypt, some in Apostate Salem;
Some are settled in this Society of dissenting Brethren, some in that Sect.

And so her Antithesis ( Papal Rome, called Babylon the great in the 16th
chapter) is no literal, but a mystical City, because called (spiritually
called) Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified, chap. 11.8. And
because extended as far in all Sects and Nations as the Holy City (trodden by
her under her feet) is scattered. For,

Seventhly; This City (say the texts in the 11th and 16th chapters) was a great
City; Nor Sodom, nor Egypt, nor Pagan Rome, nor Apostate Salem, could ever
equal her greatness: Literal Egypt was a large Nation, and the place (to the
whole Type-Church) of her refuge, and defense from the famine: So this City
(called expressly Spiritual Egypt, chap. 11.8.) was also the place prepared of
God for the whole Gospel Church; Her place (I say) of refuge and defense from
the face of the second Dragon for 1260 years, chap. 12.6, 14. Wherefore, As
Type- Egypt was a National City; So this City (Antitype- Egypt, complex of many
Sects and Nations) is a City of Nations, and so the Text expressly asserts, v.
9. And they of the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, etc.

And Nations; And what of them? shall see their dead bodies; where? in the
street of this great City, ver. 9. This City (as Egypt was a Nation) was a City
of Nations: That those Nations in this City were at least ten, we shall show in
the sequel. But Literal- Rome (that now is) is (by the estimate of many
Writers) but the tenth part in extent to Pagan- Rome: And it were very absurd
to imagine, that Rome that now is, (the (...) of modern Writers) but the tenth
part (as many modern Writers account) of the greatness of Rome-Pagan, can be
Babylon the Great, or the tenfold Body of the grand Apostasy.

Herein, therefore, Papists, and Reformists are both mistaken: All Papists (few
or scarce any excepted) misapply all those texts in the 11th, 16th, 17th and
18th chapters (that mention a City) to the City of Heathen and Imperial Rome,
and bless themselves in their security, as not at all concerned therein: In
those texts of the 17th and 18th chapters they are not mistaken; but much
mistaken in those texts of the 11th and 16th chapters, which intend (as we have
proved, and I shall further prove) Papal- Rome only with her subdivisions. But,

The Reformists mistakes herein are twofold: For they misapply all the said
texts to Papal- Rome, to which those in the 11th and 16th chapters only (and
not those in the 17th and 18th chapters) appertain.

Their second mistake herein is manifest: for they misapply all those texts to
Papal- Rome, and intend thereby Rome-Literal: But the City (in the 11th and
16th chapters intended) is no Literal, but a Spiritual City, complex of many
Sects and Nations, as the texts themselves expressly show, and we have fully
proved. Howbeit, I deny not, that Rome-Literal (that now is) is one chief
Spiritual Metropolis in the Decapolity of the Apostasy of Antichrist, and may
fall by fire or sword like other Cities; But the Decapolity, or tenfold City
aforesaid, is the Spiritual City properly intended in the texts of the 11th and
16th chapters, as those in the 17th and 18th chapters held forth Rome-Heathen
and Christian, apostate in manners, by whose fall in 412, Rome-Papal (or this
tenfold City of Apostasy) rose up.

Weapons made up of mistakes are powerful means to destroy all those that use
them, most dangerous to the true Church. Such weapons in her hands against
Papists, or others, will never prosper: Let it therefore be her chief care to
cast away those weapons far from her.

Lastly; These two great Cities (Pagan and Papal Rome, both called Babylon the
great) are further sigually different and distinct: In their times, stated. In
the durations of those times. In their sins. In their Plagues.

In their Times stated; The last beginning, when the first ended, about four
hundred and ten or twelve.

Secondly; In the durations of those times: The proper Epoche of the first
being but about 460 years: But, of the second, 1260 years.

Thirdly; In their sins: The sins of the first being (for the most part, or
until she drew near her dissolution) literal and sensual; But, of the second,
more spiritual. And therefore.

Fourthly; They signally differ in their punishments: For, the Plagues of
Heathen and Imperial Rome (she being a literal City, and her sins more literal)
were literal Plagues (As, literal Death, Famine, Fire) chap. 18.8. But
Rome-Papal (she being a spiritual and an expansive City of ten Nations) could
not be capable of a literal circundation by an Army, nor of being consumed by
literal Famine and Fire: Her Plagues (she being a City of another nature) are
expressly set down to be of another kind, chap. 11.13. and 16.18, 19, 20, 21. As
by a tenth part of her falling, And the rest glorifying God by sincere
repentance, and true conversion, ver. 13, etc. And this City (by this, and all
these undeniable demonstrations) is the threesold City of Papal- Rome,
(containing many Sects and Nations) which the texts in the 11th and 16th
chapters intend only: But I am ashamed to insist thus in reselling such plain
absurdities (though it be some fault in Saints) of fond pleaders for errors in
opinions and manners: Let the Reader observe the further refutation of like
mistakes, as he finds them in the sequel.

This Cities triplicity, and what this City is, thus fully proved, irrefellibly
proves these truths: First, That the Churches Antithesis cannot be any one
single Person, City, Sect, or Nation; but a threefold Politic Body, complex of
many Persons, Sects, and Nations. Secondly, That this threefold City, and the
holy City, are Synantitheses, or contrary to each other. Thirdly, That this
contrariety betwixt both consists (on this threefold Cities part) in sensual
profaneness, worldly avarice, and spiritual pride.


And (on the Holy Cities part) in that sound Doctrine and sobriety that brings
equity.

Secondly, in Mercy.

Thirdly, In Veracity, or Fidelity to keep Gods commands (what is possible)
without violation: And these three are the three fruits of Faith, Hope, and
Charity: For; He, that has unfeigned faith, fears God; He, that fears God,
is careful to judge, and do (as for and before him) righteous judgment:
Righteous judgment (the root of obedience) is the more proper fruit of faith:
For; the Doctrine of true faith teaches righteousness, and true faith it self
lays hold on Righteousness unto justification, and (by exerting righteousness)
shows forth Sanctification.

Secondly, He that has true Hope, hops for mercy from God, and therefore
shows mercy to men: Mercy is the more proper fruit of hope.

Thirdly, Fidelity to keep Gods commands (the fruit of Charity) is umbelicus
obedientiae, the bond of obedience and Girdle of truth, without which all good
works of mercy and equity fall away, and Faith and Hope have no force: If you
love me says our Savior) keep my Commandments: Veracity or Fidelity (the
fruit of love is the keeping or a sincere care to keep Gods commands, conform
to Gospel-rule: This, thus far, may briefly serve (as a Synopsis of the Body of
Divinity) to show that the Mystery of God, and the Mystery of Iniquity (with
the Series and Effects of both) are, which the sequel will show at large.

It is needful here (before I proceed) to show the evils, mistakes in opinions
and manners produce, with the necessity and difficulty of their removal: The
removing of them (as the only one thing necessary) is of transcendent utility:
For, if God not sparing Moses, his friend) would have killed him because he had
not circumcised his Son, how much less will he spare these that espouse (the
real uncircumcision) errors in manners and opinions instead of the knowledge
of the truth and practice of is: Therefore, not to remove them is most
dangerous, the greatest misery; their removal the greatest mercy.

The World (says the Text) lies in wickedness: That is, all its parts and
subdivisions (I wish true Saints were free from this fault) lie (like Birds
caught with Lime, or Jonah wrapped in weeds) in the wickedness of errors, in
opinions and manners; therefore the Plagues of the wrath of God (the hail
stones of his ire) are so vehement, accute, fierce, and frequent; from which
Plagues (that threaten perdition) they can no way fly, but by removal of those
mistakes: little safety to themselves (without that) can they look for; nor
hope to have any firm unity, or faithful amity from Professors of different
persuasions, Papists, Turks, nor scarce one with another: Every man (till
missuppositions in opinions) (the seeds of miserable dissension, and perfidious
enmity) be removed) must have just cause to fear from all hands, and say
Perditus ensem Haesurum Jugulo jam puto, jamque meo: It is therefore high time
that Men and Saints seek to remove those mistakes, that threaten to remove them
from the Earth.

Mollis ibi victoria, ubi amor, sola veritate, vincit.
All mistakes (by full and friendly conviction) may be removed, when violence
avails nothing; The hardest knots are easily untyed by gentle loosening, when
pulling hard the cords ties them the faster: This is the means to remove those
mistakes, and that the means (the only means) to remove those plagues. But

Secondly, So great is the difficulty of this Christian duty, that few are
sound fit to discharge it, Therefore whiles many pretend to remove mistakes,
they make many, and remove none: For, all Professors (few excepted) are wilful
(by earnest contending) to defend their errors in opinions and manners, as the
strong man that kept the house, would not forsake his holds.

Therefore the world sits in darkness by means of mistakes: because the written
Word (the derivative Fountains of Light) are darkened by them; so that men draw
missuppositions for truth, from them, and rather multiply than remove their
errors in opinions and manners.

The smoke (says the Text) of the bottomless pit, darkened the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Air (possibly the light of Reason, and the light of
Religion) and what was that smoke but mistakes (instead of truth) exalted, that
even the Scriptures are darkened thereby; therefore, the inevitable necessity
of their removal is manifest. But

As this Christian duty is the chief duty of all (of all Ministers and
Magistrates especially) so the difficulty to discharge it further appears from
those oppositions that attend it: If any man (fit for it) does endeavor it, so
far is he from finding due assistance, that all envious competitors of pride
and ignorance (as Corah's Company against Moses) cry out against him, as one
that boasts in vain, seeks praise of men; they tell him he is too proud, and
takes too much upon him: For it has ever been the Infallible character and
practice of proud Hypocrites, to deprave, in (this manner, those men: Howbeit,
the ingenuous concession of very many (convinced of their mistakes,) I must
acknowledge. But the chief strength of all difficulties, in the discharge of
this duty, is from the censorious and rash detractions of many of the most
Learned, and seeming most Religious that mistake (of all mistakes the most
dangerous) the rash Spirit of truth contradicting pride for the spirit of
truth, not knowing of what spirit themselves are: For, even they (if any man be
fit for this duty) detract (as if they were impatient to abstain from unbridled
temerity) from his works before they know them, from his words before they hear
them, and from his writings before they read them: So are they too ready to
aspire unto that Pharisaical pride by which Christ was crucified, and fall into
the condemnation of the Devil; whereas, were they so noble as not to censure
before they see, hear, or read, they might possibly find no cause of cavil, nor
perhaps of dispute: And this is all I humby request at their hands.

The Priests of the Lord bore the Ark upon their shoulders, so should all
Saints support the truth (which the Ark figured) in Theory and Practice; But
(nititur hoc humer is hominum genus) this sort of censorious men (I say not men
of any sound judgments) set to their shoulders (not as the Priests of the Lord
to support the truth, but) to cast it down to the ground, and tread upon it,
that so (minding the praise of men, and private gain) they may establish their
own brain sick conceits for substantial truths: These are men (for the most
part) of much confidence, that consider little; Men of much velocity in lavish
loquacity, whom the multitude admires; Too quick to move a question, to make
objections; most slow to see, and remove mistakes; Men prodigal in endless
disputes of verbal impertinency: From these men the most irrational and
greatest oppositions arise to retard all hands held forth to discharge this
needful Christian duty: But he that minds this necessary and indispensible duty
to God and man, must not regard (besides sordid neglects) the worst insolences
of vile ingratitude, nor many difficulties, I shall therefore humbly endeavor,
in this Treatise, to remove those mistakes in Opinions and Manners, that
chiefly hinder the true Prosperity and Unity of all Church-Societies, Sects,
and Nations.

CHAP. V. Which of those three Heads of the aforesaid threefold City was the
chief Builder of it; or when, and by whom it was built.
THe Founder of it was the false Prophet: For the times and the Laws (says
Daniel) were given into his hands, Chap. 7.25. That is, dominion over all
Powers Spiritual, and over the Potentates of the Earth was given him, therefore
he was the fittest, and most able to be the Master builder of this threefold
Mystery of Iniquity.

He began to build about the year 407, and had brought his Fabric to a good
forwardness (had almost finished it) in 607.

The threefold matter of which he made it, what it was we showed before, and
likewise its threefold form: Of that threefold matter (sensual, worldly, and
proud Professors) he made Antichrist sensual, secular, and spiritual in the
once Decapolite pale of Pagan Rome, and brought all those three into one great
City, called (says the Text) Spiritually Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord
was Crucified.

He also bound the three Heads of it (the Dragon, the Beast, and himself) in a
seeming firm bond of deceitful amity: Connubio aajanxit stobilitria Numina
mundi: He bound Antichrist sensual, secular, and spiritual, and those three
Heads of their triplicit body (as it were) in a bond of Wedlock: The tenure of
that Obligation was the false Prophets supposed Catholic Religion, confirmed
by many dreadful, false miracles; Doctrine, for the most part, fundamentally
sound, but shallow (carelessly, contentedly shallow) and by his peremptory claim
of priority from his pretended right of Apostolic Succession.

The Premises are plain: First from Scripture, Rev. 13.12. And he causes the
Earth and them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast: For, that beast
(next himself the Head cornerstone) was the strongest support of his City of
Apostasy; therefore it follows, and he deceives them that dwell upon the Earth
by means of those Miracles, which he had power to do in the sight of the beast,
ver. 14. That beast was the seven headed Hydra of Rome-Papals Power Secular,
that bod ten horns; and all (though not at first) crowned, Rev. 13.102.

He causes (says the Text) the Earth to worship the first beast; to wit, that
beast, that is, he ^new by deceit them that dwell upon the Earth ^as supposed
living, but indeed dead stones) into the building of this threefold City, and
made that ten crowned beast (though he intended himself Supreme): Secular head
of it: For, what was this Unity or Grand Faction of Iniquity (thus wrought by
the false Prophets deceit, upon those that dwelt upon the Earth) but the
tenfold body on Apostasy, which the false Prophet built by rallying the Nations
through his lying miracles, which he wrought in the sight of the first beast:
Thus, and by this means, chiefly did the false Prophet build this threefold
City, as it appears plainly from Scripture, and will no less appear, in its due
place, from Church History.

He also (by that beasts joint help) built this City, therefore the Text says:
And he deceives them that dwell upon the Earth by means of those miracles
which he had power to do in the sight of the beast: And why in the sight of the
beast, but that he might be assisted by him?

The three Heads were co-assisting this building, the Dragon afforded matter
and power, the beast was the Magazine of both, and made (by the false Prophet)
the instrument to use that matter, and power to perfect this threefold City;
the false Prophet was the Master builder of it: For, the Dragon (by the false
Prophets procurement) gave his power and Authority (the Supremacy therein) to
the beast: And the false Prophet was the disposer, or chief orderer of it, that
he might usurp Power over all unto himself; therefore, he sought to strengthen
that beasts hands exceedingly, subjugating by deceit the Nations under him: And
therefore the Text says, he deceives those that dwell upon the Earth by means
of those miracles, which he had power to do in the sight of the beast: Miracles
were for confirmation of Doctrine, and to ratify the Offices and Messages of
Prophets and Apostles, Exodus 4.5, 8. Heb. 2.4. So the false Prophets miracles
terminated (as in their next and immediate effects) in the deceitful
confirmation; First of his message, and next of his seeming, sound, or somewhat
Fundamentally sound, but shallow Doctrine, which was (though Homousian, and so
far fundamentally sound) both carelessly corrupt and shallow.

And first, To confirm his pretended Apostolic message to them that dwelt upon
the Earth, that he might build the Nations in the political body of his beloved
City, and make them (by deceit) the matter of it; therefore the false Prophet
pretense to be sent to preach (for how should he preach unless he were sent)
was one principal means, at first (and in all his Sects) whereby he deceived
them that dwelt upon the Earth: And this means (his supposed message or
pretense to be sent to preach) is the first means in order, whereby he deceived
them that dwell upon the Earth, and built this City.

The second means was (the next, and immediate end of his pretended message)
his Doctrine of deceit, which was somewhat fundamentally sound (as we showed
before) but carelessly corrupt and shallow: For such Doctrine served best to
make him deceive, and be deceived.

The third means (and that in order to confirm both his message and Doctrine,
was his false miracles: And he deceives them (says the Text) that dwell upon
the Earth by means of those miracles etc. where we clearly see, that the Spirit
of truth asserts: That the false Prophets chiefest power to deceive the Nations
was (as the fountain of deceits) in his false miracles: For, the Text says
not; He deceived them that dwell upon the Earth by his false Doctrine, or
pretended message (though he did that by both) but he deceives (says the Text
them that dwell upon the Earth by means of those miracles, etc.

Every simple Impostor can deceive by unsound Doctrine, but these miracles
which the false Prophet wrought, were (as it were) miraculous deceits: Those
miracles, what they were, and when, and how wrought, we shall show afterward.

Them that dwell upon the Earth: There Is the matter of this threeforld Cities
building. And he deceives them, there is the manner and chief means (in his
Apostolical pretense, doctrine, and miracles) by which he built this threefold
City.

He (the false Prophet) there is the Master Builder or it.

And, If he had power, in such sort, to deceive them that dwelt upon Earth, and
could thus compel, frame, and mould the Nations by deceit; then he must needs
have power to deceive the second Dragon; did deceive him, caused him to accord
with the wounded beast, and give him his power; and caused both to communicate,
or consign their powers to himself, Rev. 13.2, 4. Dan. 7.25. For, there were
two Dragons as we showed, and shall after more fully show: The first was Rome
Pagans power secular till about 324, when his former might was much abated: But
he retained some strength till about 412.

The second Dragon was, at first, the prevailing power of the Nations of the
North, that began to translate Rome Imperial about the year 407. This second
Dragon (by his military achievements, and enrichments thereby) became the
fountain of power to Papal Rome, and a free dispenser of it: For, he gave his
power, seat, and great Authority (the Supremacy therein) to the (by himself
wounded, but after Decadiademick) beast secular, and papal.

But the false Prophet, that seduced the Nations, deceived this second Dragon,
opened his mouth of deceit (and the earth opened, says the text, her mouth)
and swallowed up that Dragons mighty flood, chap. 12.15. He in some sort
swallowed up that Dragon also: That is, He (the mouth of the earth, or Oracle
of that mouth) drew by deceit that Dragon with his forces, and Nations, to
embrace the unity of the Church of Rome, which was chiefly done from about 407,
in the space of 200 years.

He gave (but the false Prophet persuaded him to give) his seat and power (the
Supremacy therein) to the then rising beast secular, and Papal, and persuaded
both to give, or submit unto himself the pre-eminence of power: For, the first
five hundred years (after the false Prophet began to put his deceitful hand to
this wicked work) were times of reciprocal donations, and receptions of great
gifts to, and from the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, and from those that
dwelt upon the earth: And so the text says expressly, Rev. 11.10. And they that
dwell upon the earth shall send gifts one to another: As we shall also amply
show (in its due place) from Church History: therefore, those gratifying times,
by sending gifts one to another, were the false Prophets chief edifying times,
wherein he was most successful in building by deceit, this threefold City: For,
as Christ (that Prince of true Prophets) built his Church upon the sure rock of
truth; So, this false Prophet Bicorne, built her Antithesis (this threefold
City) upon the seeming rock of false appearance and deceit.

And, that it was the false Prophet that built this City by deceit, the text
expressly tells you, chap. 19.20. Where this grand Master of false miracles is
expressly called, the false Prophet that wrought miracles before the beast to
deceive: He had the unhappyness to tie (not the True-love-knot of Christian
Charity, but) ternos, tribus nodis, colores, three heterogene twists in a
threefold cord of wickedness.

That threefold twist was begun (but weakly begun) about the year 407. But,
about the year 620, it was a threefold cord not easily to be broken: then the
false Prophet seemed somewhat to slack his hand: that work never went on so
well after: But about 250 years before Atropos should cut that cord by a final
excision) it began to be divided into three parts, and much raveled into Modern
Sects: Into three parts, perhaps Papists, Turks, and dissentors from both: And
the great City (says the text) was divided into three parts.

Lastly, To these Arguments, and Scripture evidences (sufficiently proving that
the false Prophet was the Master builder of this threefold City) we shall add
Church History for the full, and irrefellible proof of it: But that would take
up more time, then I can spare otherwise then in its due place.

CHAP. VI. What the Epochaes of those three Heads, and of this threefold City
(all synchronizing with eight other) are.
WE shall first unfold the meaning of the word (Epoche) because some may except
against the usual acceptance of it.

Era, Epoche, Olympias, Lustrum, etc. are computations of times.

Lustrum is not the first year of five (though that be the beginning of it) but
the space of five years.

Olympias pro quadrennio usurpatur, is the space of four years.

Era significat numerum computum, and proprie terminum a quo numeramus, is the
computation of time from its beginning, but, more properly, the beginning of
it. But

Epoche is a word, literally, of a much fuller expression, and signifies not
(...), principium (though it comprehends that) but is the time of any thing
from the beginning to the end of it.

Epoch (say some) ab (...), retinere, sistere, is the retention or duration of
the time of a thing.

Epoch (says another) intervalla dicuntur, quod in illis sistantur, and
terminantur mensurae temporum, are the spaces betwixt two termini, which (as
the first, and last parts of those Epochaes) begin and end the durations of
them.

Epoch Apocalypseos (says Mead) sive statueris principium, etc. If they have
a principium, they must have a Period, and consequently an Interstitium of time
betwixt both: I might make the like irrefellible inferences from many Authors,
that thus take the word for two termini, and the duration of time betwixt both:
And thus I take the word (Epoche) especially, because it serves best to explain
my meaning in this Treatise.

The Intervalls, or Epochaes, I shall here insist upon, are in all twelve; And
all twelve synchronize in the same duration of 1260 years: we shall first
propose, or nominate all, and after prove them.

The first, second, and third Epochaes are of the Dragon, Beast, and false
Prophet (that Cities three heads) and are proved from these texts, Apocal.
16.13. chap. 12.14. chapter 13.5. Dan. 7.25. chap. 12.7.

The fourth is of that threefold City of the same duration, and is proved from
those texts aforesaid, and sundry others.

The fifth is of the Churches flight and defection.

The sixth is of her duration in her place prepared of God: And these two
Epochaes (which mutually unfold each other) we shall prove from These. 2.3. Rev.
12.1, 6, 14.

The seventh is of her being trodden under-foot of the Gentiles, proved from
Rev. 11.2, 8, 9, 10, 11.

The eighth is of the death of the Witnesses (not so killed, but as they might
Prophecy in sackcloth all the time of their lying dead) which we shall show
from Rev. 11.7, 9, 11. and from other texts.

The ninth is of the Witnesses prophesing in sackcloth, proved from chapter 11.3,
6. chapter 12.6, 14.

The tenth is of the sounding of the six Trumpets, proved from the texts
aforesaid, and chapter 10.6, 7, etc.

The eleventh is of the pouring forth of the six Vials, proved from Rev. 11 6.
chapter 16.17.

The twelfth of the restraint of Spiritual rain, proved from chapter 11.3, 6. Luke
4.24. James 5.17.

Lastly, We shall give an Epitome of the denominant matter, and transactions of
these twelve Epochaes for 1260 years. All these twelve Epochaes are of a longer
duration, by above a 1000 years, then any type-Interval that I observe in
sacred Scripture; And all twelve are longer (by above 800 years) then the
proper Epoche of Pagan Rome, or of the first Dragon: Therefore, all these
twelve Epochaes must of necessity appertain to the transactions of Papal Rome,
as we shall instantly show. We shall also (in few lines) labor to make the
premises so plain, both from those texts, and Church History, that the
judicious Readers may rightly judge them fully concludent: For the miseries of
men and Saints surpass all sorrows in this particular; That they halt betwixt
pluralities of opinions in this threefold dark labyrinth of errors, and are
scattered into sundry Sects: And what may redress, what means may remedy those
dreadful miseries?

I answer, The full manifestation of these Epochaes in the true Series of the
matter of their denominations, may be ( silum certissimum) a most sure guiding
thread out of this threefold furnace of afflictions, and Abyss of intricate
evils.

Nor need it be thought impossible to prove them all; nor perhaps to make them
fully concludent: For God has ordained two lawful witnesses to establish every
truth; And two testimonies, for each Epoche, from sacred Scripture, may make
them fully concludent, which are the fewest we find for each: Howbeit, we shall
(in the sequel of this Treatise) reduplicate this double testimony (of it self
sufficient) by ample Church History of consonant record.

Full mouthed men (the least in force) we fear not much, nor the floud-gates of
rash and railing folly, nor do we much dread that mis-apply'd assertion [
Scriptura symbolica non est argumentativa] which some are pleased to abuse to
blaspheme the Scripture: what the right meaning of that saying is, we shall
show afterward; But I return.

We shall speak of this threefold body, and of its three heads conjunct,
because they are necessarily, concurrent in their Epochaes. This threefold City
(being the triplicit body of those three heads, the Dragon, the Beast, and the
false Prophet) must have with them the same Epoche: For bodies, and their heads
are so inseparable; That when either cease to be, both discontinue: But the
second Dragons duration (and he is the first head of this threefold City) was to
be 1260 years, as will clearly appear from Rev. 12.6, 14. Therefore this
threefold body Politic must have the same Epoche: But here I must further
distinguish betwixt the two Dragons; because their far different Epochaes
clearly distinguish betwixt both, and (excluding doubt) denote irrefellibly,
that there were two. I have often before briefly hinted, that there were two, but
shall here (as in its more proper place) fully prove it, and clearly
distinguish betwixt both.

The first was Roman; The second, at first Teutonick: The first was originally
Pagan; the second (when he first invaded the Primitive Church, and vanquished
her Witnesses) was Paganorian, after a Papal, then Mahumetan: the first was the
head of Pagan; the second the raiser up of the first head of Papal Rome:
without the first, Pagan Rome had never been; without the second, Papal Rome
(as a body is not brought forth without an head) had not been born: For, he
(her first head in Scripture order) took away him that let her rising up,
These. 2.7. That is, he translated Rome Imperial about the years four hundred
and seven, ten, or twelve; Drove the Primitive Church into the Wilderness,
killed her Witnesses, and then took away the weak remnant of Pagan Rome by a
final excision; All which let (till then thus taken away by this second
Dragon) the rising up of Papal Rome.

And when the time of those two Parents (the Earth, and the Sea) was come to
the Birth, and there was no strength to bring forth the Bicorne, and
Decacerastick beasts Papal, then did this second Dragon (though he wounded both
those Infant, new born beasts with a sword) give power to their two Parents to
bring them forth by affording what furthered (in that grand design) their sick
desires: For he took away all that let, and filled other Nations of the
Empire (besides Italy) with his Armies, that they could not hinder it: He also
gave strength and means of growth to those two Parents (by him first wounded)
Offspring: For, he gave his power (the Supremacy therein) to that Decarch
secular, and Papal, whom the Sea brought forth, and likewise power to the
Bicorne beast, Rev. 13.2, 4. chapter 11.10. Dan. 7.25. That is, he (immediately
after he had taken and burnt Rome) lest the ruins of it (with Italy almost
ruinated) to the wounded beast and false Prophet Papal: For, Honorius (that
good Emperor, though a man of no great gifts) durst not, at least did not
reside any more at Rome: And that second Dragon (in some process of time)
consigned his kingdoms to the false Prophets care, embracing himself the unity
of the Church of Rome: He, several ways, and at sundry times, gave his seat,
and power (which he took away from those he took out of the way as aforesaid)
to the beast, and false Prophet: wherefore.

He that is taken out of the way, and he that takes him away, must needs be
two: But the first Dragon, and Imperial Rome (that let the rising up of Rome
Papal) were taken out of the way: But he that took away the first Dragon with
Rome Imperial was this second Dragon, 2 These. 2.6, 7. Rev. 13.24. which also
Church History has confirmed and will more fully confirm; Therefore there must
be inevitably two Dragons, the second taking away the first, and the first
taken away by the second; which also we find apparent from Reason, Scripture,
and Church History.

The first we find in Heaven, and we find the Woman (the Gospel, and Primitive
Church) in the same Heaven of power at the same time, Rev. 12.1, 3. But she had
not (at her first ascending into that Heaven of authority) such full power as
that first Dragon had: For, he stood before her (in the time of Constantius the
first, and in the beginning of Constantines Reign) to devour her Child so soon
as it was born, ver. 4. That is, to destroy every man that might (as a
Christian Prince, Emperor, or Magistrate) defend the Church.

The Woman, or Gospel Church, was then in Heaven in a double respect, or in a
twofold acceptance of the word, Heaven; but the Dragon only in a single
acceptance of it.

And first, the word Heaven holds forth an holy conversation; And, in this
acceptance of the word, the Church was then said to be in Heaven (shining in
the splendour of her Primitive Graces) and not then fallen from Heaven, nor fled
into the Wildernesses, where her good works were much more dark, and less
visibly conform to Gospel Rule.

Secondly, She (not only had her conversation in Heaven, but) was ascended also
into the Heaven of power, and Authority in the Roman Empire, and sat upon part
of that Dragons throne whereon that Dragon sat Supreme; And, in this respect,
both she, and that first Dragon were said to be in Heaven; that is, in the
Heaven of high power, and Authority in the Roman Empire: For, in that Heaven of
an holy conversation with the true Church, that Dragon never was, nor could be:
His conversation was not in Heaven, but quite contrary to her Heavenly
conversation: Nor was he in Heaven: That is, (as some assert) in the true
Church: For, both the Church and he are said to be in Heaven, and he not in
her, or for her, but before, and against her: But he was in Heaven, that is, he
inhabited the Heaven of high power, and Authority in the Roman Empire, and was
far above the Primitive Church at her first arrival into this Heaven: For, we
find her there crying, traveling in Birth, and pained to be delivered, that
she might bring forth a Man-child (a Christian Magistracy, or power secular) to
protect her from that red Dragons bloody persecutions; And we find him standing
before her to devour that Man-child, or Christian Magistracy, should she
produce any: But she brought forth a Man-child says the text: That is, a
Christian power secular, and Military ( Michaels substitutes) that overcame
that Dragon and cast him out, so as his place was found no more in the Heaven
of Supreme power and Authority in the Roman Empire.

He strove various ways, and at several times to regain his place; regained
some power, but his place was found no more in Heaven: He had some power for a
very short space, power to persecute the Church, but prevailed not: He never
after arrived to Supreme Power in the Roman Empire, but was, soon after,
deprived of his being, and, (about 412) cast into the bottomless pit forever:
By this it may plainly appear impossible that this Dragon should give his seat,
and power to the beast secular, and Papal, when he himself had none to give,
and when that beast was not in being, who existed not till that Dragon (that
let, as the text says, his rising up) was taken out of the way: But the
Dragon (says the text) gave his seat, power, and great Authority to the beast:
Therefore that was the second Dragon.

But, for the Readers irrefellible eviction, we shall consider the Paterns, or
Prophetic Types, and compare them with their Antitypes: And first, we find the
type-Woman (the Jewish Church Primitive, Jacobs Family) in Heaven, adorned by
an heavenly conversation, having the Sun, Moon, and twelve Stars her Lights,
and guides, Genesis 37.9. So we find her Antitype (the Gospel Church Primitive) in
Heaven also, having the Sun, Moon, and twelve Stars her Lights, and guides,
Rev. 12.1. Thus we see, that the Prophesies of the old Testament (even in
Genesis) were not finally fulfilled (as some affirm they were) at the death of
our Savior, or at the destruction of Jerusalem, but, signally, ecchoed forth
future transactions far beyond those times; But of this we shall give (after a
short progress) full proof.

The type-Woman ( Jacobs Family) was (as it were) ascending into the Heaven of
power, become more mighty (says Pharaoh) then the Egyptians: therefore, that
Dragon (for so the Scripture calls Pharaoh expressly; the Dragon Ezech. 29.3.)
stood before that woman to devour her Man-child: And this Dragon of Rome Pagan
(that Dragons Antitype) stood before the woman (the Gospel, and Primitive
Church, ascended into the Heaven of power) to devour her Man-child also, so
soon as it was born, Rev. 12.4.

The type-Dragon ( Pharaoh with his servants) were cast out of their Heaven of
power into the Sea; Sank as a stone in the mighty waters; The Sea covered them
for ever, Exodus 15.10. So (his, and their Antitype) this Dragon of Rome Pagan
with his Angels (servants, and Officers) were cast also out of their Heaven of
high power (as a great Millstone cast into the Sea) into the bottomless pit for
ever more, Rev. 12.9. chapter 18.2. chapter 20.3.

The type-Dragon, Pharaoh (thus sinking himself for ever) had then no seat, or
authority to give to another: And this Dragon of Pagan Rome (his Antitype) thus
sinking for evermore, had no seat, power, or authority to give to the Seaborn
beast secular, and Papal, who also existed not till after that Dragon fell for
ever as aforesaid: Thus we see the Prophetic type ( Pharaoh with his servants)
is so apposite to its antitype (the first Dragon, and his Angels) that it seems
a real, and literal relating of it: Both perished without power; both had not
to give; both did not give the least power to any other: But the Dragon gave
his power and great authority to the beast, Rev. 13.2.4. Therefore that was the
second Dragon.

We shall now examine another Pattern, or Prophetic type, and compare it with
its antitype: How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the morning? How
art then cut down to the ground, Isa. 14.12.

Who was this that thus fell from Heaven, and who was thus cut down, but only
the Representative of the Kingdom of Babylon?

And from what Heaven did they thus fall, but from the Heaven of high power,
and authority in that Kingdom?

And this Dragon of Pagan Rome (the Representative secular of subantitype
Babel, Rev. 17.5.) was cast down from Heaven unto the Earth, chap. 12.8. And
what was this Heaven, out of which he was thus cast, but the Heaven of high
power, and authority in the Roman Empire: And thus Mead, and most expositors
expound the word Heaven, in those texts, to be high power; and authority; and,
indeed, those texts thus explain themselves: This was that Heaven of power,
wherein this first Dragon stood, when he stood before the Woman to devour her
Child: For, in any other Heaven, he could not stand with the Primitive Church.

And how did type Babel, with her secular head, fall from this Heaven of power?
And how did her penultimate antitype, or sub-antitype (Rome Pagan) and her head
(the first Dragon) fall also from the same Heaven of power, and authority, unto
the Earth? I answer, type Babel, and her head secular, fell from that Heaven,
when she fell into the hands of Cyrus, that subdued both her, and him.

And sub-antitype Babel (Rome Pagan) and her head (the first Dragon) fell also
from their Heaven of power, when they fell into the hands of Constantine, and
his armies ( Michaels substitutes) that conquered both her, and him about the
year 320.

But type Babel, and her captivated head, rebelled in the days of Darius
Hystaspes, Heylyn Goeg.
for twenty months: But she, and her fallen head (by that Robellion) fell lower
from Heaven unto the Earth: For, her Rebels, in her, slew the women of that
City, that they should not hinder them in their designed work; ^rog. Pomp. ap^d
Justin. lib.i.
And Sopyrus (by a policy cruel to himself) betrayed the men into the hands of
Hystaspes: So she (as a further progress to her final depopulation) lost very
many both of her men and women: She (raising that Rebellion to regain her
place) was exceedingly weakened thereby: It quite brake that conquered power,
which she had in pieces and her place was found no more in heaven.

So, the first Dragon (the then fallen head of sub-antitype Babel, or Rome Pagans
sudu'd representative) rebelled also against the Gospel Church, and her
Masculine Offspring, that had subdued him: He persecuted the woman (persecuted
her, chiefly, under the form of an Arrian in the time of Constantius the
second, Julian, Valens) but prevailed not; the Primitive Church prevailed
against him, and his place was found no more in heaven. But:

Thirdly, Seleucus (after type Babel, to her own utter ruin, Heylyn Geog.
had rebelled as aforesaid) drew five hundred thousand of her Citizens out of
her, to inhabit his (by him new built) Selusia: wherefore; As Cyrus drew her
River dry, and so subdued that City at first; So Seleucus (draining that City
of her Inhabitants) brought her to the next door to eternal desolation, which
soon after followed: For, the place where she formerly shone like a refulgent
Star, was a Forest, where the Kings of Persia used to hunt in St. Jeroms time:
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning. And so;

When the first Dragon (the captive head of sub-antitype Babel, or Pagan Rome)
had rebelled against the Gospel Church, and his Victor, her Manchild: Then he,
and his Angels (falling the faster from heaven for that Rebellion) were cut
down to the ground: For, the Churches Eagles of high power in the Roman Empire
(the Orthodox Emperors, Valentinian, and Theodosius, with his Sons) bound him
(the more for that Rebellion) with cords which he could not cast from him, and
with strong chains (their strict Edicts against Arrians, and Heathens) which he
could never break: Therefore (thus begirt with the bands of eternal death) he
besought the second Dragon (the Barbarians of the North) to pity his deplored
estate: That second Dragon (mindless of his miseries) came about 407, and
(about 412) trod his feeble and dying remnant under his careless feet: Thus
dyed that Dragon (poor as Codrus) not having any inheritance, nor heir to
inherit.

But the Dragon gave his seat, and great authority (the Supremacy therein) to
the beast; therefore that was the second Dragon. That beast secular, and Papal,
blasphemed them that dwelt in Heaven, Rev. 13.6.

By heaven there, is meant the heavenly conversations of Saints, whom that
beast blasphemed. Rejoyceye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them, chap. 12.12.
There; by heaven, is meant (not only the heavenly conversations of Saints, but)
the high power, and authority of the Primitive Church, prevailing against the
first Dragon, and possessing his throne of power, and authority in the Roman
Empire, out of which heaven of power he was cast as aforesaid: For, he had no
other heaven, held no other: That was his only heaven in which he was, where,
and when, John saw him in heaven.

And this was that heaven, in which the Primitive Church stood with him (when
he stood before her) and was there without him (after he was cast out) when her
Manchild or secular head, sat sole Monarch in the throne of the Roman Empire.
But rejoice ye Heavens, etc. By heavens here, is more especially, meant the
Western Empire and Churches, that were more heavenly minded, more Orthodox, and
more fruitful in good works (conform to Gospel rule) then the Eastern Churches
were, who were much more corrupt with Heresies, Arrianism, and evil manners;
And therefore (as they scarce could be counted true Churches, and so called
heaven) were called the earth, and the Sea: Woe unto the Inhabitants of the
Earth, and the Sea: For; The Devil is come down to you, having great wrath,
because he knows he has but a short time, ver. 12. For, That first Dragon
(acted by the devil, and therefore called the Devil) got by Rebellion, so much
power (for a short space) against the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the Sea (
Egypt and the East Empire) as to persecute many precious Saints in those
infimous out-places, that less regarded the truth of the Gospel in Doctrine and
manners: Socrat.
But he prevailed not (or very little) against the Western Churches, who were
much more sound in fa^^^ and manners, and, therefore called Heaven: Rejoyc^
(...), and ye that dwell in them; woe unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the
Sea, etc. But; Of this I have written at large in my Tract against Chiliasm.

This first Dragon thus prevailed (under his eighth and last head, and, chiefly
under the form of an Arrian) against the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the Sea
( Egypt, and the Eastern Empire) from the death of Constans to the death of
Valens, about 18 years: Then was he bound (as we have shown before
sufficiently) by Theodosius, and his two Sons with a new recruit of chains so
strait, that he could scarce breath, or rather must breath his last: Then
(seeking aid of the second Dragon) that Dragon came, but did not succor him
(sad, poor, dying, distressed) but destroyed for ever (about 412) the feeble
relicts of him: Therefore, this first Dragon had not then, nor long before, any
free power, seat, or authority: But the Dragon gave his seat, etc. Therefore
that was the second Dragon.

The first Dragon was Draco devictus, a Dragon subdued by a woman: She overcame
him by the blond of the Lamb, and the word of her testimony, chapter 12.11. But
this second Dragon overcame that woman, drove her into the wilderness, killed
her witnesses: To wit, about four hundred and seven, ten, or twelve, when their
testimony (by which they overcame the first Dragon) grew (at least in works)
weak, or in the words of the text) when they had finished that testimony, chapter
11.7. chapter 12.14, 15, 17.

The first Dragon was an A Native born.
Indigena in the Roman Empire; the second an A forreiner by descent.
Alienigena from the North: Rome Pagan was the last, clearest, fullest type of
the Antichrist predicted by Prophets and Apostles; Rome Papal was the antitype,
or substance shaddowed forth by many types, but (last and above all) by Pagan
Rome, whose head the first Dragon was, as the second was the first head in
Scripture order (because the raiser up) of Papal Rome.

But, before I proceed, I must first resell sundry opinions of many Learned
writers: For some affirm, that all Prophesies under the Law were fulfilled at
the death of our blessed Savior, or at the destruction of Jerusalem: So they
cut off the Prophets from giving testimony to the Apostles, and the Apocalypse.

Secondly, some affirm, that all the Prophesies in the Apocalypse (except the
Dragons binding for 1000 years, whom they also except in vain) were fulfilled
about 412, at the excision of Rome Imperial: Then there can be no second
Dragon, beast, or false Prophet commencing then; And then this (if not the
whole) design of the Apocalypse may seem a dream: I must therefore take away, of
necessity, these cardinal obstacles, in the way of my progress, to explicate
those intricate Scriptures that are most needful to be unfolded, and to make
the Plain thereby the more perspicuous. And first, we shall prove (though we
have done that, perhaps before sufficiently) that the Prophets bare clear
record to the Predictions, prophetic promises, and comminations in the
Apostles and the Apocalypse, and reached even Papal Rome. That there were two
Dragons needs no dispute: Further proof of it might seem superfluous: Howbeit,
even that also will hereby necessarily and irrefellibly appear.

The world (so far as I find) never took notice that there were two; nor do the
Learned Grotius, Hammond, and others (that I see) observe it, because they
(stating the period of the Apocalypse, and all prophetic Scriptures about the
year four hundred and ten, when Rome Imperial was translated) so exclude both
the second Dragon, beast, and false Prophet, with Papal Rome, and all modern
Sects, and, so doing, must exclude (though they would except them) the
Mahumetans also, from being any part of the Churches predicted Antithesis.

The more literal fulfilling of the Apocalypse (in many things) they, with Mead,
and many others, have learnedly observed, which literal fulfilling in many
things (they find, and I confess) ended much about the years four hundred and
ten or twelve.

But, of many things that relate (not to Pagan, but) to Papal Rome, they take
little or no notice; nor are they misguided, but by a general mis-supposition,
which may necessitate even the most Learned to the same mistakes: For, their
not observing that there were two Dragons (which also never any that I find
observed-) necessitates them (if not all expositors) to the same aberrations.

Doctor Hammond (or as well any other Learned or rational) did, or might (had
his suppositions been right) very rationally thus argue: The Dragon (for
neither he, or any other perhaps, supposed more than one) ended (with the
computation of the Apocalypse) for ever, in four hundred and ten or twelve.

But the Dragon, beast, and false Prophet had all one and the same synchronick
Epoche ending as aforesaid.

Therefore, after four hundred and ten or twelve, there could be never any
Dragon, beast, or false Prophet, much less any of them (after that time, as
they could not be before) applied to Papal Rome: Papal Rome (whom the Apocalypse
it self thus absolveth) must therefore remain free for ever from any such
imputation, as being any part of the body of Apostasy, or of the Antichrist
predicted by Prophets and Apostles: His, and their arguments (were those
suppositions right) are very rational, and, indeed, the very truth.

Nor did the Learned Grotius, Hammond, and others (as it seems to me) much
observe: That (as some Rocks re-eccho the first sounds given, three or four
times, Thog. Pomp. apud. Juslin. l. 2.4
as Trogus Pompeius witnesses, and I have often observed) so some prophesies
sound forth several successive transactions in four or five reverberations: For
example:

The prophecy in Daniel, of the abomination of desolation, struck first
Prophetically upon the cruel practices of Epiphanes, and sounded forth the Jews
sad calamities by his merciless persecutions, but did not terminate there, but
sounded forth also the Jews desolations at the destruction of Jerusalem: And
when you shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel (says our
Savior) etc.

Daniels dimidium hebdemadis of the same duration, and denomination, and makes
Daniels prophecy of the desolation, at the destruction of Jerusalem to be in
the third Reverberation: The conformity of that half week of years (in its
duration, and denomination) to its type under Epiphanes, and its anti type
under the Apostasy, appears from these Texts, Dan. 9.26, 27. Rev. 11.2, 3.

The duration of that half week of years under Epiphanes, and the Pharisees (as
in types) was 1260 days literal, but, in their anti types 1260 years. The
desolations in those types were more literal, but, in their antitypes more
Spiritual, Rev. 11.7, 8, 9, 11. As we shall also further show from those Texts
in its due place. Nor did Daniels prophesies of the desolation end in
Epiphanes, nor in that half week of years under the Pharisees, nor in the
destruction of Jerusalem, but reached (in the fourth Reverberation) that
tenfold desolation of the Primitive Church, persecuted by Rome Pagan, and
Imperial: For, if our Savior himself did adjudge and declare the literal
desolations of the legal Temple, to be the abomination of desolation spoken of
by Daniel; to wit, a sub-antitype of Daniels prediction, (as was that under
Epiphanes) then how much more must this tenfold desolation (not of literal, but
living stones; not of the legal Temple, but the Gospel Church) be the
abomination of desolation in the fourth Reverberation from Daniels prophecy;
And, especially in the time of Dioclesian, when his triumphant Pillars
(importing the Gospel Churches utter desolation) were erected.

And that the Reader may run and read this desolation (as Daniel predicts it)
let him read his express description of it in chapter 7.7, 23, 24, 25. where he may
easily observe: That the Text holds forth; first, the fourth Kingdom and (its
head) the fourth beast, with ten horns uncrowned: to wit, Rome Pagan, and her
head (the first Dragon) in the fourth Reverberation.

Secondly, That the same Texts hold forth (as we shall instantly show) Papal
Rome, and her secular head (the Sea-born beast Papal with ten horns crowned) in
the fifth Reverberation from Daniels prophecy.

Thirdly, that the said Texts hold forth a little Pseudoprophetick horn rising
up among the ten horns of Pagan Rome all uncrowned: And,

Fourthly, that the same Texts hold forth the (at first little)
Pseudo-prophetick horn Papal, rising up among the ten horns of Papal Rome, all
crowned.

Fifthly, the Reader may also observe from those Texts, that this little horn
of Rome Pagan should make (in the fourth Reverberation) a most dreadful
Church-desolation, should wear out the Saints of the most high, says the text,
ver. 25. And,

Sixthly, the Reader may observe also from those texts, that they hold forth
(and that principally) the little horn Papal, that produced the greatest
Church-desolation: For, as the texts point forth the little horn of Pagan Rome
by his rising up amongst the ten horns of the fourth Kingdom; So, they point
out the little horn Papal (that rose up among the ten horns, as the former of
Pagan, of papal Rome) by his distinct Epoche (as we shall instantly show) of
1260 years, which (because eight hundred years longer then the proper Epoche of
Pagan Rome) is altogether inconsistent with that little horn of pagan Rome, and
consistent only with that of Rome papal: For, as the seven heads of Rome Pagan
and Imperial were first, Seven Mountains, and also seven Kings; So Daniels
prophecy, in the seventh Chapter, pre-figured and described the Decapolity,
first, Of Pagan, and also of Papal Rome.

That the text holds forth the fourth Kingdom (the dominion of Rome Pagan, to
distinguish it from the Greek Kingdom, which was the third) is evident from the
text, which expressly calls the representative of it, The fourth Beast, and it
the fourth Kingdom, Dan. 7.7, 23. And,

Secondly, we find expressly from the text, That that little horn ( Roman,
Pagan, and in the fourth Kingdom, and therefore in the fourth reverberation
from Daniels prophecy) produced a most direful Church-desolation: For, that
(at first little) Pseudo-prophetick horn was (not to pull down a Temple of dead
stones, or made with hands, though it had some hand in that also, but) to wear
out (says the text in Daniel) the Saints of the most high.

And what performance more sitly, and literally accommodates that Prophetic
description, then Dioclesians persecutions, which his pillars (with this
Inscription) expressed: Baron. Annal. an. 303.
Deleto ulique nomine Christi: For, that Church, and Saint-desolating horn was,
at first, the little Pseudo prophetic horn Pagan, predicted by Daniel, and so
continued to be under the four first heads of that fourth Kingdom, till it grew
great in Julius, Augustus, and the succeeding Emperors, who (adopting the
title, and office of the High Priest) were summi Pontifices, and chief
persecutors of the Church and Saints: For; All the Edicts for the ten
persecutions, and for the eleventh also, were issued forth by that
Pseudo-prophetick horn Pagan raised to power in the persons of the Emperors,
but, at last turned Arrtan: And,

Secondly, that little horn in Daniel 7th. shaddowed forth also the
Bicorne-false Prophet papal, but pre-signified not, in the least, either
Epiphanes or any other power except as aforesaid.

Therefore, that little horn in Dan. 7th. (having no relation to Epiphanes) and
that in Dan. 8. and 9. ver. are not the same, much less did that little horn in
Dan. 7. terminate (as many expositors assert) in Epiphanes: For, the fourth
beast (amongst whose ten horns the little horn in the 7. chap. rose up) was the
Supreme power of pagan Rome: But Epiphanes was but head of a fragment of power
in the divided Kingdom of the third beast, Dan. 8.21, 23.

The fourth beast was great in power; So was Epiphanes: But Epiphanes was not
that fourth beast: For, the fourth beast devoured (says the text) the whole
earth, chapter 7.23. And Epiphanes was mighty in power, but not (says the text) in
his strength, chapter 8.24. that is: He was far inferior for strength, to the
first horn of the third Kingdom, who was also far inferior in power, to the
fourth beast: therefore, Epiphanes was not that fourth beast, or that little
horn, that rose up among those ten horns of that fourth Kingdom: But,

The false Prophet (Roman and Pagan) rose up among the ten uncrowned horns of
that Roman Decarch, whom Daniel calls the fourth beast, Dan. 7.7, 8. Rev. 17 3,
13. And the false Prophet Papal rose up amongst the ten (not uncrowned as the
former were, but) crowned horns of the Sea-born beast Papal, Dan. 7.7, 8. Rev.
13.11, 12. etc. But Epiphanes came up (not among the ten horns of Pagan or
Papal Rome, but) out of one of the four horns of the third Kingdom, Dan. 8.9.

The Series, therefore, of reiterated Echoes runs in this order: Daniel,
prophetically describes the practices of Epiphanes, and fore-tells Jerusalems
desolation, by his cruel persecutions in chap. 8.9. to the 15. ver. 23. to 27.
chap. 12.6, 7.

Secondly, Daniels half week of years (wherein Christ exercised his prophetical
Office for 1260 days) was adumbrated (in its curation and denomination) by the
times and transactions of Epiphanes, and was sounded forth, as in a second
Echo, from those texts aforesaid; nor did the Pharisees less shadow forth the
Antichrist, (then Epiphanes did) in that half week of years, and the
transactions of it: For, though that half week of years (three years and an
half, 1260 days) held forth some outward import, or show of joy, and of a
Kingdom, yet; It was the sad time of the King of righteousness, rejected of his
own: And of his kingdom dejected, desolate, and trodden under soot: And (as the
antitype witnesses were to prophecy in sackcloth 1260 days annual, Rev. 11.3.
So) Christ, and his Apostles prophesied (as it were in sackcloth) to that
gainsaying, rebellious and bloody people of the Jews, for 1260 days, as their
antitype should do so many years: Christ also (weeping over Jerusalem)
prophesied the destruction of it: That half week of years (or 1260 days) was
the type-duration of the Witnesses sackcloth prophecy for the desolations of
Zion.

Thirdly, the Fews desolations, at the destruction of Jerusalem did resound (in
a third Echo) from the same texts, as we see in Math. 24.15. Dan. 9.27.

Fourthly, these texts in Daniel strike also Prophetically, upon those sad
desolations of the Primitive Church, wrought (as we have sufficiently shown) by
the Pseudo-prophetick (at first little) horn of Rome Pagan in the fourth
reverberation. And,

Fifthly, the same texts in Daniel (as we have shown, and shall sufficiently
show) are re-ecchoed by those most dreadful and durable desolations of the
Gospel Church, devolved upon her by Papal Rome in the fifth reverberation. But

Secondly, those texts in Dan. 7. and that little horn there, do nothing
respect Epiphanes, or Daniels half week, or the destruction of Jerusalem
(either as inter-adumbrations, or subantitypes) but strike (immediately and
directly) upon the Decapolities of Pagan and Papal Rome: Therefore, that little
horn in Daniel 8th. did (but that in Daniel 7th. did not at all) import
Epiphanes, much less did that little horn in Dan. 7. terminate (is most writers
affirm it did) in Epiphanes.

Expositors (that will run with the multitude into gross mistakes) make it not
their industrious care to try the truth by sacred record, and Scripture-rule,
but rush on in the common roads of received opinions, wherein most Writers have
long misled the way: These seem (as in many other) in these assertions, to err
by consent.

The little horn (say they) in Dan. 8th. is Epiphanes; And I affirm it. But,

The little horn (say they) in Dan. 7th. is Epiphanes: And why Epiphanes?
Because this also is a little horn: And here is the ground of their judgment:
One seeming circumstantial parity in two texts against many substantial
disparities in many texts, which they see not, and consider not: This is to
admit, and allow of one false witness in judgment, and exclude an hundred true
ones.

Secondly, the red Dragon (say they) in chapter 12.3. and that beast in the 17th.
chap. are one, and the same beast: And so they say right: But the beast (say
they) in chapter 13.1. is also the same beast: And why the same? Because he also
had seven heads and ten honrs: This conclusion, or inference is most absurd and
unjust: For, Qui quicquid statueris part inautita altera aequum licet) haud
aequus fucrit; Its most unjust just to conclude those beasts in the three texts
to be one, and the same from the like numbers of their heads and horns, and not
see or consider the real disparities (even in all their seven heads and ten
horns) betwixt that beast in the thirteenth Chap. and that in 12. and 17.
Chapters: For, that beast in the 13th. chap. had ten crowns upon his ten horns:
But that beast in the 12th. and 17th. chap. had no crowns upon his ten horns:
He had seven crowns upon his seven Heads. But that beast in the thirteenth
chapter had no crowns upon his seven heads: Therefore, their real disparities
are sevenfold in their heads, and tenfold in their horns: It may seem therefore
incredible, that it can be possible for all expositors (that I find) to make
their ten horns (notwithstanding the tenfold disparity in their crowns) to be a
tenfold comparity, and their seven heads to be (notwithstanding their sevenfold
disparity in their crowns) a sevenfold parity: And that (which makes it seem
strange beyond admitation) when the least of these disparities (which they
mistake for parities) must, inevitably be found to make the beasts in the said
texts, to be irrefellibly two. Be they (say some) found irrefellible, yet are
they no sundamental truths, nor notions much needful to be known.

The beast opened his mouth in blasphemy to blaspheme; So profane, sloathful
slow-bellys, and evil beasts open their mouths to blaspheme the Scriptures, and
(sleighting their faithful searchers) fall into the condemnation of the Devil:
For, the plainest Scriptures (much less the more implicit, which they least
know, and despise most) profit them nothing, nor desire they to know things
most necessary, that are difficult to be known: For, Difficilia quae pulcra:
Things that are most excellent, and useful to be known, are most difficult to
be discerned, being kept back by the just hand of God (in dark expressions)
purposely from the profanely, blind, and sloathful (or from those chiefly) that
they should not find them out: Nor is the knowledge of prophetic Scriptures
otherwise them most necessary; nor do they import other then things most sacred
of highest concernments: Therefore, mysterious truths (made manifest) may prove
the greatest mercy, that has come to the Christian World in many Centuries of
years, as will evidently appear, when we come to show the great (and that
manifold) utility, and necessity of the knowledge of the prophetic and
symbolical Scriptures.

Thirdly, though (say they) many texts mention the Dragon, yet there was never
any more then one. And why but one? Because all texts, that make mention of
him, retain this appellation: The Dragon.

That a seeming parity of appellation is enough of it self, without other
comparity, to prove anidentity of persons or things, is incomparably absurd:
For, so John the Baptist must be John the Evangelist, because both are called
John; So must this Dragon be Pharaoh, because he also is expressly called: The
Dragon, Ezekiel. 29.3. But,

Secondly, there is no constant parity (to prove an Identity) in their
appellations; nor do all texts retain this Word (The Dragon) where mention is
made of either; not is there the least comparity in Scripture to denote them
one: For, The first (called the Dragon in chapter 12.3, etc.) is called a beast in
chapter 17.3. And the second (called a beast in chapter 11.7.) is called: The Dragon,
chapter 13.2, 4. But with this signal and undeniable note of clear distinction
betwixt both: To wi^, the first Dragon (in chapter 12.3. chapter 17.3.) was in John's
time, bestia ascensa e Mari; A beast risen out of the Sea long before John's
time, Dan. 7.3. For five of his heads were fallen when John wrote Rev. 17.10. But
the second Dragon was, when John wrote venturus Draco, vel bestia ex. Abysso
ascensura, was to ascend out of the bottomless pit long after John wrote the
Apocalypse, chapter 11.7. Thus; As we see no constant, nor the least (either
nominal, or real) parity in Scripture betwixt the first and second, to prove
them one and the same; So we see a superabundant disparity, real, betwixt both,
denoting irrefellibly, that there were two: Many like vulgar, and Epidemick
errors the Reader may note, and, perhaps find refelled in this Treatise; But
these at present, and in this place, may be sufficient; by which it may appear;
How manifold such mistakes are, and frequent to be found in Writers: But the
truly Learned and Religious, will no doubt, willingly relinquish all known
errors of mind, and manners; And to them chiefly I humbly devote my weak
endeavors to manifest both. But I return.

Of the disparities betwixt those three (at first little) horns (the false
Prophet Pagan, Papal, and Epiphanes) we have said sufficient, and clearly fee:
That the whole Vision of the fourth beast in Daniel aptly agrees both with
Pagan and Papal Rome, and with both their false Prophets, but not in the least
with Epiphanes: Howbeit, the Epoche of the little horn, in Dan. 7.25. agrees in
no wise with the false Prophet of Pagan Rome, but with the false Prophet Papal
only: And therefore.

Fifthly, the Echoes of Daniels prophesies did not end in Epiphanes, nor in
Daniels half week of years, nor in Jerusalems destruction, nor in the
desolations of the Primitive Church, by the first Dragon, nor did the
predictions of the Apocalypse here terminate with Pagan and Imperial Rome in
412. For, all these four Reverberations were but types. But,

The antitype of these, and many other types, was the grand Antithesis to the
Gospel Church (Rome Papal, sometimes complex of many Sects) whom Daniels
prophesies (as by a fifth echo) indigitated, and the Apocalypse (mediately by
the adumbrations of Pagan Rome, and immediately without them) predicted: For
Daniel has his Decacerastes, or beast with ten horns: And the Apocalypse has
its beast (Roman and Pagan) with ten horns all uncrowned, Rev. 12.3. chapter 17.3,
12. And,

Secondly, the Apocalypse has its beast (Secular and Papal) with ten horns all
crowned, chapter 13.1.

But (may some say) we are satisfied; That the Apocalypse holds forth one beast
with ten horns all uncrowned, which you say was the secular power of Rome
Pagan; And that it holds forth another beast with ten horns all crowned, which
you say was the secular power of Rome Papal.

We are also satisfied, that Daniels prophecy foretold the first beast of Rome
Pagan, with ten horns uncrowned, and, under him the desolation in the fourth
reverberation. But we are not so fully satisfied: That Daniels prophecy holds
forth that beast with ten horns all crowned, and, under him the grand antitype
desolation in the fifth reverberation, where the first was under Epiphanes.

I answer, that Daniel (in one and the same prophecy) held forth the powers
secular, and spiritual, both of Pagan and Papal Rome, which in the Apocalypse
are more clearly distinguished: For, Daniels prophecy represents a beast with
ten horns, which is alike consistent, and agreeing with both.

Also it represents a little horn, Pseudo-prophetick amongst those ten, which
likewise accords with either, or rightly agrees with both.

Thirdly, It indicates a desolation to be wrought, chiefly, by that little
horn, and this rightly agrees with both Dan. 7. ver. 25. Rev. 13.16, 17.

But it says, that the duration of that desolation (or of that little horn, the
cause of it) should be for three times, and the dividing of a time: And this
agrees (in no wise with Pagan, but) with Papal, Rome only: For, (If you reckon
that Epoche to be three years and an half, or 1260 days literal) it agrees in
no sort with Pagan Rome, whose proper Epoche is above 130 times longer: Or (If
you count those days to be 1260 years) that also is inconsistent with Pagan
Rome, whose proper Epoche was but 460 years, and falls short (by 800 years) of
that duration: But we find it congruent to Papal Rome only, and to her only,
all these twelve Epochaes of 1260 years (as they respect several transactions)
appertain: Therefore Daniels prophesies refer (in the fifth reverberation) to
their grand antitype (Papal Rome) and apparently reach her crowned beast
secular, whose Patriarchs (the Bicorne false Prophets) Epoche (synchronizing
with that beasts, and the second Dragons durations in 1260 years) is consistent
only with Daniels record, and computation, and with those consonant Epochaes in
the Apocalypse, Dan. 7.25. Rev. 12.6, 14. chapter 13.5. etc. And this may, perhaps,
both clearly, and fully refell all those that affirm: That Daniels prophesies
ended at the death of our Savior, or at the destruction of Jerusalem; And
likewise all such as assert, That the computation of the Apocalypse terminated
(with Rome Pagan) in four hundred and ten, or twelve. But,

Secondly, the Apocalypse has an Angel, that lifted up his hand to Heaven, and
swear by him that lives for ever and ever: That time should be no longer: But
(in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound)
the mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared to his servants the
Prophets, Rev. 10.6.

And Daniel has (the type of it) a man clothed in linen, who held up his
right hand, and his left hand, to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for
ever, that it should be for a time, times, and an half, Daniel 12.6, 7. Here we
plainly see, that some prophesies in Daniel, and the Apocalypse are (and that in
the fifth reverberation from Daniel, and in reference to Rome Papal,
Synantiphona, or uttered as it were totidem verbis, in the same words. But,

Time shall be no more: And how, no more? That is, there shall be no more time
of the six Trumpets sounding, nor of the chief prevailing power of the mystery
of iniquity, but only three times, or years, and an half of days annual, or
1260 years, as it was in the type, 1260 days literal: For, In the days of the
Voice of the 7th. Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of iniquity
shall be made manifest, and the mystery of God finished, as he has declared to
his servants the Prophets.

And what was thus declared? It was declared to Daniel; that the duration of
the Proto-type desolation (completed under Epiphanes) was to be three times or
years, and an half, or 1260 days literal: And its more then probable, that the
duration of its ultimate antitype (1260 years) was thereby declared to Daniel
also.

And it was declared (to omit other Prophets) to this prophetic Evangelist,
that the duration of the ultimate defection and desolation under the
Gospel-Churches last, and grand Antithesis was to be (as the Proto-types was so
many days literal) six times seven months of days annual, or 1260 years: So
long were the six trumpets to sound, or (which is all one) the Witnesses were
to prophecy in Sackcloath so long: But in the days of the Voice of the seventh
Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of iniquity shall begin to be
made manifest, and the mystery of God finished etc. where the Reader may
evidently see, that the duratio of the six trumpets sounding, or (which is all
one) the Witnesses Sackcloath prophecy for 1260 years, synchronizeth with the
rest of those twelve Epochaes, and therefore this prophecy (in Rev. 10.7.) is
in the fifth reverberation from its Proto type prediction in Dan. 12.7.

In both which texts, the truth of the transactions and times expressed, is
confirmed by a divine Oath in the name of the living God, which makes them much
more signally correlative as to type, and antitype, and that in the fifth
Echo, therefore, its sufficiently (if not abundantly) manifest, that some
prophesies in Daniel (reiterated as we plainly see in the Apocalypse) reach Rome
Papal (some directly, as in chapter 7.25. and some in a fifth re-ecchoed
performance (as in the texts of Dan. 8.9, 10. etc. and chapter 12.7) and ratisie
those 1260 years of all these twelve Epochaes: For, all days propheticalare
ever (though literal in their Subanti-types) at least years in their ultimate
anti-types, which is evident from Numb. 14.34. Dan. 9.24. Ezech. 4.5, 6. And as
will more irrefellibly appear when we come to treat upon those texts.

As he has declared to his servants the Prophets (says the text) chapter 10.7.
where it is plain, that many things which the Apocalypse predicted, were in
fore-times declared to the Prophets, the servants of God, which they also (as
appears plainly from the said text) declared in their prophesies; wherefore
many, or the most of the Prophets, and not Daniel only (whiles they foretold
things more immediately to be fulfilled) presignified also, thereby, those
things which the Apocalypse predicted: But to show the comparities of Prophetic
prefigurations with texts in the Apocalypse (wherein they seem to concenter in
the antitype) would require a large Volume.

We shall now take a short view of the secular head of Papal Rome with his
comparities and disparities to his types: His mouth (says the text) was as the
mouth of a Lion, so shadowed forth by the King of Babylon, Rev. 13.2. Dan. 7.4.
But he was not that Supreme power, as his disparities plainly show. For,

Secondly, his feet were as the feet of a Bear, and so figured by the King of
Persia, Dan. 7.5. Rev. 13.2. But he was not that power secular, as his
disparities show. For,

Thirdly, he was like a Leopard; So was the Greek Monarch, Dan. 7.5. Rev. 13.2.
And here we plainly see a threefold, and shall, a fourfold consonancy betwixt
those prophesies in Daniel, and this in the Apocalypse, and that in the fifth
reverberation, or performance, if we take our account from those texts of the
eighth Chapter in Daniel, that point out Epiphanes; Or if we count by the
successions of those four beasts in the seventh Chapter.

But the Sea-born beast Papal was not that representative of the Greek Empire,
because of many disparities in both texts.

Nor was he the Dragon or fourth beast in the fourth reverberation from Daniel,
who Prophetically adumbrates (by four beasts of different figures) four
Kingdoms (the Chaldaean, Persian, Greck, and Roman) and (by those four beasts)
he shaddowed forth (their antitype) the representative of Papal Rome in the
fifth reverberation: For, Pagan Rome was the fourth Kingdom, and her head (the
first Dragon) the fourth Monarch: But Papal Rome was the fifth Monarchy, and
her head secular (this Sea-born beast) the fifth Monarch, prophetically
shaddowed forth (in the fifth reverberation) by those four beasts in Daniel,
but, chiefly by the fourth beast of Pagan Rome (the first Dragon) who was the
last, clearest, and sullest type of this seven-headed Hydra of Papal Rome
succeeding those four beasts, but, chiefly the fourth in his seat, power, and
great Authority, and that in the fifth reverberation from Daniel.

This (may some rash inconsiderate Readers say) makes it signally clear; that
this, whom you call the first Dragon (nor was there ever any more then one, nor
ever any second) gave his seat, power, and great authority to the beast, his
successor: we shall therefore further, but briefly re-enquire how, and when the
Dragon (and which of the two) gave his seat and power to the beast, and to
which beast.

What opinions most hold I mind not much, because many writers little mind
how, or what they write: But all reformist Expositors (so far as I find)
affirm, that this beast Papal was the seventh (or I know not what) head of the
Dragon, which should continue (says the text) but a short space; and that
sufficiently contradicts this Tenent, Rev. 17.10. chapter 12.12. But I answer.

The Dragon (says the text) gave him (this beast Papal, who is sufficiently
described before, and will be further afterward) his power, seat, and great
authority to distinguish him from the first Dragon, whose power was taken from
him; And to distinguish him from the second, that gave him his power, and great
authority, which he took from the first, and, chiefly from the representatives
of the Primitive Church, Rev. 13.2, 4. Therefore, that second Dragon raised
Rome Papal (in the fifth reverberation from Daniel) chiefly by raising her
secular head, with his power (the Supremacy therein) given unto him: For,

Secondly, the first Dragon was no free doner, or disposer of his own power,
but had it taken away before could give it, and was taken away himself before
that beast was in being that should receive it; And so the text (we see) faith
expressly, 2 These. 2.6, 7.

So say the best modern Expositors upon that place though they sometimes
contradict themselves and confound the true Series of things, as we have before
briefly hinted: So say the chief Primitive Fathers: That this Dragon (Rome
Pagans representative) Tertul de Resurrect. chapter 24. Idem in Apol. chapter 32. and
ad Sea^l. c. 1. Hicron. ad Algas. Amb. in Thessal. 2. A^g de Civit. Dei ^it.
20.19
was (not to give his power himself, but) to be himself with all his power
taken out of the way; And it might seem most wicked and foolish for any
Expositors to kick against the express Tenure of the sacred text; to contradict
the best modern Writers, witnessing (at least by consequence) what those texts
import, and to oppose the Opinions of the best Primitive Fathers, who, no
doubt, might best understand the right meaning of those Scriptures: For, the
Apostle himself asserts expressly, that they did know the meaning of them: You
know (says he) what withholdeth; He, that now lets will let, until he be
taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.7. And this Relative (He) in the Text could not
possibly refer to any other person political, but only to the first Dragon or
Representative of Pagan and Imperial Rome, who (in John's time) chiefly let,
and did after let or hinder Papal Rome and her head (ut intus existens prohibe^
alienum) from rising up until he was finally taken away (with all his force) by
the second Dragon (the last sublator of his feeble power and dying person) in
four hundred and ten or twelve. For,

Thirdly, Michael and his Angels ( Constantine and his Armies, Michael's
substitutes) took (to the final excision of his seventh head) that first
Dragons power (without asking him any leave) into his own hands; held, possessed
it; so as that Dragon could never regain absolute Supremacy therein: That is:
His place (says the text) was found no more in Heaven.

Theodosius with his two Sons and the two Valentinians partly took away, partly
brake in pieces, the power of his sick, and scarce perfect, eight and last
head. And,

Lastly, The second Dragon (about the year 412) took away the very being of
that first Dragon, drove the Primitive Church, with her Eagles wings, into the
Wilderness; took away her, and their chief power into his own hands, and gave
that power, which he took from them, and they from the first Dragon (to wit,
the Supremacy therein) to the beast secular and Papal: For it had been (res
maxim mir and a, minime credenda) a thing most impossible and incredible for
the first Dragon to have done it: Had he done it, he must have had an Art never
heard on; That could give his Seat and great Authority which he had not; And
this is the mischief: As he had no power to give unto the beast, so, there was
no beast in being to receive it, so long as he existed; which necessarily
implies a double impossibility. But the Dragon gave his great Authority to the
beast: Therefore, that was the second Dragon clearly distinct from the first,
and both, from this beast: And then it must inevitably follow of necessity:
That this beast, and that second Dragon, and the Bicorn false Prophet, were
contemporary, and (as the several texts plainly prove) synchronize in 1260
years, beginning about 412, though that second Dragon was not drawn at first,
to such compliance as afterward: And this (contrary to Doctor Hammonds
rational conclusion, from a mistaken supposition) is signally conspicuous (as
we clearly see) from sundry texts of sacred Scripture, and (as it has appeared
and will more plainly appear) from Church History: I need not, therefore (I
suppose) say to any sober or judicious Reader, that the text plainly says: That
he that (in Paul's time) let, should let (till he were taken out of the way)
the rising up of the Son of perdition; But I may say (in the words of that
Apostle) to the silliest Readers (or at least to such as have any competent
animadvertency and understanding) you know that he that let (in that
Apostles time) the rising up of the body of Apostasy, and its spiritual and
fecular Heads, was the first Dragon or Supreme power of Pagan and Imperial
Rome: you know (from those Prophetic texts and from Church History, fully
witnessing the performances of those Prophesies) that the said first Dragon did
not give (could in no wise possibly give) his power, which he had not) to the
beast Papal not then in being: you know that he (much more all his power was to
be taken out of the way) to make way for that beast: you know also, that the
Dragon gave (Scripture says it, Church History proves it) his great Authority
to the beast: And you know, that Dragon (because the first and all his power
was taken out of the way before as aforesaid) must, of necessity, be the second
Dragon: And thus (actum est de hac controversia) this Controversy is fully
ended, and, That there were two Dragons, irrefellibly concludent. But,

So wedded is the world to wilful errors, that men and Sects (nor are Saints
free from this fault) take little care or pains to come to know these things:
Haec scire (say they) quid prodest? Quid obest nescire? What are we better if
we know these things, or worse if we never know them. They therefore (even many
that are most studious therein) are so indocile to know (though plainly proved,
and though they should be often repeated) these things, or to see their own
Preservations, and chief concerns in the knowledge of them, that their progress
is therein little, their profit less to themselves and others: For, such
slow-bellies, are many, that they cannot imagine what real use can be made of
those things, which will instantly appear to be the things of highest
concernments, and the knowledge of them, and how to use them, the Conservatory
means of all other graces and mercies.

Hagar (her Son ready to dye, she distressed) sat by a Well in the Wilderness,
and saw it not: Little did she think of such support so nigh, till God opened
her eyes and she saw the Well: Her sight of it was a present means to prevent
imminent death and procure life to her and him: But, if present and after-Ages
may see and shun those evils that are worse than death, and reap those benefits
that may be better than l^fe, by the knowledge of those things, I shall briefly
indigitate that, and (with like brevity) conclude the premises. And first;

Most Reformists will needs have the beast secular and Papal to be the
Scarlet-colored beast, chap. 17.3. or (which is an error, if not the same,
not much different) the seventh Head of that red Dragon or Scarlet beast.

This gross error (the grand Remora to the right unfolding of many texts) is a
strong refuge to the Mystery of Iniquity; Nor can the expositions of the best
Writers upon the Apocalypse, and Prophetic Scriptures (till this and many like
mistakes be removed) be otherwise then perplex ravels of intricate consusion:
Therefore, the perfect removal of this mistake (as the readiest way to remove
many) requires my present care. Nor, perhaps, have my pains hither to made the
truth so fully irrefellible as instantly it will appear to be: Can we but find
those seven Heads that were peculiar to the red Dragon or Scarlet-colored
beast, and his eighth Head also which was of those seven; Then we have all his
peculiar number of Heads, and so this business is fully ended: But, five of his
Heads were fallen, before John wrote, as we showed before; And one (his Imperial
Head) existed when John wrote: There Is six of his seven-Heads; And the other is
not yet come (says the text) and when he comes he must continue a short
space: His time was short (for a Kingdom divided cannot stand) because he was a
divided Head; For part of it fell from the Pagans and took part with the
Christians in the time of Constantius and Constantine.

His eighth dying, and scarce perfect Head, was Pagano-arrian in the time of
Constantius the second, Julian, Valens; and went into everlasting perdition
about 412, ver. 11. That is, he, and that first Dragon (under him) then
perished for ever: Here Is all the crowned Heads (for all his Heads had Crowns)
that were peculiar to that first Dragon: Then the Sea-born beast Papal
(assisted by the second Dragon through the false Prophets procurement) ascended
out of the Sea (the Political and Military Deluge, which the second Dragon cast
out of his mouth) having seven successive Heads, chap. 13.1.

But here is the Masterpiece of exquisite absurdity: All Reformist Writers (few
excepted) affirm; That the seventh Head of the Scarlet beast (the first Dragon)
was the secular beast Papal with seven Heads; which is as good sense as to say:
That a part of the body of one man is the entire individuum of another person:
For that Scarlet beast (that had seven Heads, and an eighth also) and the
Sea-born beast Papal, that had seven Heads, were two several, individual, and
clearly distinct persons political.

Secondly, The texts expressly assign unto the first Dragon (as peculiar to him)
eight Heads in all: But their glosses plainly contradict those texts and allow
him but six, making his seventh Head to be the secular beast Papal: They might
be (a man would think) detered sufficiently from adding to or detracting from
the words of the Book of this prophecy by the plagues therein threatened to all
such; But many of them do it (no doubt) not willingly, but for want of due
animadvertency.

Thirdly, That seventh Head of the first Dragon (which those Writers affirm to
be the Sea-born beast) should continue (says the text) but a short space; But
that beast secular was to continue 1260 years, chap. 13.5. which are 100 years
longer than the durations of all Pagan Romes eight Heads ab Urbe condita.

Lastly, The texts expressly distinguish that red Dragon and this beast by their
disparities in their seven Heads (in the one all Crowned, in the other all
uncrowned) and by their ten horns (in the one all crowned, in the other all
uncrowned) and by their far different Epochaes: But these Writers (that
notwithstanding) confound all the texts, and either make both those beasts to
be one and the same, or make the beast Papal to be the seventh Head of that
Pagan Dragon: who can imagine that men of any Reason or Learning could assert
such matchless absurdities: Their chief mistakes are these.

The Dragon (says the text) gave power to the beast: But they say (contrary to
the text) that his sixth Head gave power to his seventh.

Secondly, That seventh Head (say they, contrary to the Scriptures) was the
secular beast Papal.

Thirdly, They mistake the first Dragon (who gave none) for the second, who
gave his power and Authority (the Supremacy therein) to that beast.

Fourthly, They mistake that Scarlet-colored beast, or red Dragon (in chapter
12.3. chapter 17.3.) for the secular beast Papal, chap. 13.1. And therefore,

Fifthly, They mistake the literal City of Pagan and Imperial Rome (that ruled
over the Kings of the Earth, and was called Babylon the Great in the 17th. and
18th. Chapters) for the more spiritual City of Papal Rome (called also Babylon
the Great, and over whom the second Dragon with the Sea-born beast and false
Prophet Papal ruled or presided) in the 11th. and 16th. Chapters: For, these
two Cities are signally distinct by this apparent disparity: The first (Heathen
and Imperial Rome) ruled over the Kings of the Earth; And the Kings of the
Earth ruled in and over Rome Papal: So that the System of the glosses of these
Writers upon these and many other texts is like a large Vial (filled with
mistakes) which they pour forth, in their Teachings and Writing's, upon many
mindless Professors that care not how, or what they hear or read. Because of
Oaths ('it is said) the Land mourns: But the whole world (may we, even weeping,
say) mourns through mistakes in Opinions and Manners: Therefore, her
Inhabitants sit in the shadows of death, surrounded with distresses: But what
damage redounds by these and like mistakes?

The disadvantages (and they great and many) that thereby come upon the
Christian world, and upon all Church-Societies, and Sects, may appear as
follows.

If there was but one Dragon (according to the general supposition) then none
gave power (for the first gave none) to the wounded beast Papal: Then none
raised Papal Rome, nor her secular Head) that beast, according to the
Scriptures: Then the Opinions of the Learned Hammond and others must stand good
against all the world: To wit, that there was no further compute of the
Apocalypse (after 410) except in the Mahumetans: And then the Papists and other
Sects, and perhaps Mahumetans (unless those Authors better prove the contrary)
have no part in the grand Apostasy predicted by Prophets: For, then (as some in
the Apostles times concerning the truth, erred, saying; The Resurrection is
past already, so) all men may much better say: That both the rise and the fall
of the Antichrist (never doubt it, dispute not about it) is past already long
since, even in four hundred and ten or twelve.

Then all discourses concerning any such subject (whether in word or writing)
are mere stories, or at best (as they have been for the most part) but
fruitless, controversal pickeerings (and that perpetually) to no purpose: For
no Reformist, nor the best informed, can make good any Charge or Argument
against the Papists or any other Sects ( Mahumetans or others) as confining
upon the Apostasy of Antichrist, if that was past for ever in four hundred and
ten or twelve. Thus even Protestants (by means of these mistakes) give the
staff in their hands (against themselves) into the hands of Papists, strengthen
Heresies, and weaken the hands of the witnesses of the truth: For, if these
errors in Opinions must stand for truths, then must all Reformists give prime
honor to the Papists, as chief of Churches; And (as they of the Synagogue of
Satan, that said they were Jews, and were not, were made to come and worship at
the feet of Philadelphia, so) If there was but one Dragron (ending as
aforesaid, with all compute of Prophetic Scriptures, about 410) then all
Reformists, and Sects, pretending to be reformed, must come and worship at the
feet of the Papists (as the only Mother, Catholic and true Church) and only
assume Schism, Apostasy and shame to themselves: No weapon of war (formed by
the best Reformist's) can prosper in their hands (against her: she is (Civit as
circummurata) a City walled round, her walls are Brass, which times cannot
break, nor force scale.

Thus, we see, the sacred Scriptures (by means of these mistakes, until they be
removed) are (both by strict and loose Professors) prostituted to the vilest
disuse, are made (Muri abaenei) walls of Brass by Protestants, against
themselves, for the defense of Papists, Heathens, and Heretics to fortify and
confirm their blind and wicked confidence in all ignorance, and evil Manners.
For,

If there was but one Dragon, ending with the whole computation of the
Apocalypse (the Mahumetans excepted) in four hundred and ten (as Dr. Hammond and
others Learnedly labor, but in vain, to end it) nor do the Mahumetans (as they
except them) signify any thing to this purpose; Then the Church of Rome may
say, she sits as Queen, Rules alone, nor was she raised by power of any first
or second Dragon: For, as nothing can exist without some cause of its being; So
it was impossible for Papal Rome (fallen in her Infancy) to be raised to power,
if there was none to raise her up: But God (by his providence) did ordain or
permit this second Dragon (for the first fell before for ever) to raise up
Papal Rome (the place prepared of God to preserve his Church for a space) by
giving his power (the Supremacy therein) to her secular Head, which the
Scripture expressly asserts, where it says: And the Dragon gave, etc.

They therefore, that take in hand to explain these Scriptures, or to prove
Rome Papal (complex of many Sects and Nations) to be the Churches Antithesis,
must observe the right Series of the Mystery of Iniquity, and know when and how
the Apostasy sprang up; As also that there were two Dragons, and which of the
two raised Rome Papal, or the body of Apostasy.

All works or writings against her (till this be first done, or at least in
part discerned) are little worth; scarce so much as engage Rome Papal against
those opposers to small purpose; she may (till then) hold forth her flag of
defiance against (as trivial impugners) all such, and say: The Scriptures
themselves (clearing her from their charge) charge them with Blasphemy, Schism,
Slander, and Apostasy: Her walls must stand inviolable; she invincible.

Thus we see (till these mistakes be removed) no Reformists can undeceive,
possibly, the Papists, or their sub-divisions; nor be themselves rationally
undeceived, or be convinced of their errors in Opinions or manners: Tum vero
barbari barbaros invicem, and Ecclesiam persequentur in aeternum: Then Men,
Saints, and Sects (with feral ire and intricate confusion) must implacably
pursue and persecute each other: For (if these and such obstacles to true peace
multiply or are not removed) then (in Chaos infandum tetus confunditur Orbis)
present and after-ages must ever inherit inextricable Labyrinths of all
dreadful (and they inemergible) miseries: Men (says the text) shall seek
death, and shall not find is, and shall desire to die, and death shall, flee
from them: For, Their torment was as the torment of a Scorpion when he strikes
a man: Mistakes in Opinions and manners were (to those men) the cause of such
torments, worse than death, as, in its due place, will appear from those texts:
But these men's miseries must far exceed theirs, and death it self be much more
desirable than their condition, if these and many like errors in Opinions and
manners be not removed: Thus the evils of these and like mistakes (until they
be removed) are (its evident) both great and many.

But, if these and many such errors are or shall be sufficiently refelled, and
men be thereof clearly convinced; Then Rome Papals walls, and the walls of her
sub-divisions (as the walls of Jericho fell at once flat to the ground) are
become like Cobwebs which the wind scatters: Then torments (greater than the
pains of the stings of Scorpions) may begin to cease from men, and miseries
(worse than death) discontinue: But we shall dissolve (though we have done that
perhaps sufficiently) this Knot of manifold mistakes (in its due place) by
proving a two and twenty quadripartite disparity betwixt the first and second
Dragon; Betwixt both and the Sea-bornbeast Papal; and betwixt all three and the
false Prophet with two horns: Till then, let no Reader trouble himself with
idle excogitations of mind, nor me with many words: For I, perhaps, have given
the judicious Reader full satisfaction at present, and so shall often afterward
till I prosecure those premises in the sequel.

I should not spend time to mention too many (having no mean thoughts of their
own parts) that tell you: The Dragon is only (because so called) the Devil
individual, as some (upon such solid grounds) assert Transubstantiation from
Hoc est corpus: But I commit this Chafe to the wind till afterward.

I was, unavoidably, put upon it (before I could proceed to the following
Epochaes) to remove those mistakes aforesaid. And,

Secondly, to refel their opinions that hold, That all the Prophesies, before
Christ, were finally fulfilled at his death, or at the destruction of
Jerusalem. And,

Thirdly, to remove the mistakes of all Papists, and many Protestants,
affirming: That all Prophesies (both before and after Christ) expired (if not
at the destruction of Jerusalem) at the translating of the Empire in four
hundred and ten or twelve: They except only (and that to as little purpose) the
Mahumetans. For,

If all Prophesies before Christ ended at his death, or at Jcrusalems
destruction; And, if all in the Gospel and in the Apocalypse, expired as
aforesaid in 412; Then, Non erit locus, there cannot possibly be any place for
these twelve ensuing Intervals or Epochaes commencing then, and synchronizing
from that time for 1260 years: Then all these twelve Epochaes, and their
transactions, and the Scriptures themselves that hold them forth, must (like
the five foolish Virgins) stand withour, and not be admitted to express the
mind of the Spirit of truth; yea then the Scripture Canonical must be
dis-membred, and part made as Apocryphal, or (which is worse) perverted to
prefer Heretics and promote errors in opinions and manners; Then the faithful
industry of the best Writers must be but, labor irritus, pains herein taken to
no purpose; Then Papists, Heathens, and Heretics cannot possibly be convinced
of their errors in Opinions and practices, nor any true peace hoped for from
them or any Professors of different persuasions: For these causes of highest
concernments I have taken this pains to break the hardest Rocks of obstacles
(the confident and long-continued mistakes both of Papists and Protestants) and
to prove; That the Prophesies before Christ (even in Genesis) extended beyond
the destruction of Jerusalem: For, the type, Primitive, and Jewish Church, whom
Pharaoh (expressly called the Dragon) persecuted, had the Sun, Moon, and twelve
Stars her Lights, and Guides, and adumbrated prophetically, the Gospel Church
Primitive (who had also the Sun, Moon, and twelve Stars her Lights and Guides,
and was also persecuted by the Anti-evangelical Dragon of Pagan and heretical
Rome) in the Antitype.

I have also (perhaps sufficiently) proved (against the Opinions of all
Papists, and many Protestants) that the prophesies in Daniel reach Rome Papal
and her secular Head, in the fifth Reverberation: wherefore, these mistakes
(impregnable obstacles against Mead and all Reformist Writers) being thus fully
removed; my way is levigated, and my aggress made plain (without any material
obstacle) to treat upon the ensuing Epochaes, which come next to be handled.

The Synchronick Epochaes of the second Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet are
thus held forth.

The second Dragons duration is (in Apocalypse 12.14.) a time, tames, and an
half.

The Sea-born beasts continuance is (in chapter 13.5.) forty two months.

The false Prophet's Epoche is (in Daniel 7.25.) a time, times, and the
dividing of a time.

The times in all those texts are the same, and make a threefold Synchronism of
1260 years, to the three Heads of the threefold Decapolity of the grand
Apostasy; which duration (and therein this second Dragons) is 800 years above
the first Dragons proper Epoche, and that irrefellibly denotes two Dragons. For,

The Epochaes of the first Dragon, and of Primitive Rome, Pagan or otherwise
heretical, were proper or improper.

His and her improper Epoche (ab Urbe Condita) until Rome Imperial was made
tributary to Alaricus in 407, was about 1159 years; Or (until it was taken,
plundered and burnt by Alaricus in 412) about 1164 years: I call this duration
of time; His improper Epoche, because it were improper to count the Chaldaean
or Greek Epochaes (in Scripture predicted) from the first constituting of those
Kingdoms: For, the proper Epochaes of all Empires or Kingdoms (recorded in
Scripture) are chiefly the durations of their Dominions over the Church and
people of God: Howbeit, it concerns us here to take notice of this improper
Epoche of the first Dragon, because the Apocalypse indigitates it chapter 17.10, 11;
where John says, five are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet come, and
mentions his eighth Head also, which was of the seven; The duration of all
which, successively made that improper Epoche aforesaid. But,

Pagan Romes proper Epoche was but about 460 years, beginning when the third
(the Greek) dominion (which Daniel mentions, chapter 7.) began to fall; And when
the Jewish Church (about 56 years before the birth of our blessed Savior) fell
under the jurisdiction of Pagan Rome.

Both these Epochaes (both the proper and improper) of the first Dragon, or of
Rome untranslated, ended about the year four hundred and ten or twelve; Then
his seven Heads, and also the eighth, which was of the seven, finally expired:
For, the rest of the thousand years of this Dragons binding, and that little
season of his relaxation after them, had not (after four hundred and twelve)
any relation either to his proper or improper Epochaes; Because he (more
literally bound, though but in part, for above an hundred years before four
hundred and twelve) was so long in being and never after. And that time (from
the beginning of his being bound to 412) was part (the last part) of both his
Epochaes: But there then remained above eight hundred of his thousand years
after four hundred and twelve, in which eight hundred years time and upwards
that Dragon was not in being, nor ever after: For, that Decacerastick red
Dragon of Rome Pagan, was never in being after four hundred and twelve, nor
ever can, or shall be in future being: Therefore, he was bound for about eight
hundred years, after four hundred and twelve (not literally, but)
metaphorically, or not otherwise then with the chains of eternal death: That
is, the first Dragon (subdued by the power and Authority of the Primitive
Church-representatives) was bound (in part and more literally) by their legal
institutions and civil ordinances, in the time of Constantius, Constantine, and
their successors, till about 412. To wit, for about one hundred and twenty
years, which was all the time he was in being after he began to be bound; but
he was then bound (total, but metaphorically) for above 800 years by a
privation of his being so long, but indeed forever: That is, there was a
cessation from him of his accustomed cruelties in the Christian world for above
eight hundred years after four hundred and ten or twelve, till about the year
twelve hundred and twelve, when he was loosed (not literally, but
metaphorically loosed) for not he, but Simon Earl of Montsord (commissioned
from the Pope and the King of France) re-induced Dioclesians bloody practices,
and persecuted the Church after the manner of the first Dragon: therefore; As
John the Baptist was said to be Elia^; because he came after the similitude of
his zealous comport; So the Dragon is said to be loosed in those bloody
renovators of that first Dragons cruelties: But (having treated upon this
subject at large, in the sequel, where the seeming disparities in the compute
of those thousand years are reconciled, and the confident mis-conceirs of the
contrary minded fully refelled) I need not here insist upon it.

The improper Epoche, therefore, of the first Dragon ( ab Urbe condita, until
his Metropolis was taken, plundered and burnt, and his, then late Empire
translated in 412.) was about 1164 years; And his proper Epoche was but 460
years, ending in 412 also, which proper Epoche (being shorter by eight hundred
years then the proper duration of the second Dragon) demonstrates,
irrefellibly, two Dragons. I proceed to the fourth Epoche.

The daration of the threefold City of the grand Apostasy.
THat the tenfold body of the Churches Antithesis (Rome Papal) was (for matter
and form) threefold, and had three (the foresaid three) heads synchronizing in
1260 years, is (from sundry texts) sufficiently proved: And therefore, that
tenfold City (until it should begin effectually to discontinue) must have, with
them the same Epoche: For, if these three heads of it were to continue 1260
years; Then this City (their threefold body) must (by a necessary, individual
continuity) have the same Epoche. But,

Secondly, their and this Cities durations are (in these two texts) thus
terminated: It is done, Rev. 16.17. There shall be no longer time, chapter 10.6.
These two texts intend a time and thing.

The thing intended is this threefold City: And the great (this great) City was
divided into three parts, etc. chapter 16.19.

The time intended is first: The duration of that City.

Secondly, the Period of that duration,

The duration of it is necessarily implied.

Its Period is, positively expressed. And first,

Its duration is implied from its period in both texts.

Its period at the beginning of the seventh Vial, is thus e^prest: It is done,
chapter 16.

Its period, at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, is thus expressed: There
shall be no longer time chapter 10.

No longer time, that is, the more entire duration of this threefold City, or
Mystery of Iniquity, should be no longer than the sounding of the six Trumpets:
For, the duration of that threefold City (and indeed of all these twelve
Epochaes) is commensurated by the spaces of six Trumpets sounding, and
terminated with the beginning of the sounding of the seventh trumpet: For, when
the sixth Angel was about to end the sounding of his sixth trumpet, then the
Angel of the Covenant swear by him, that lives for ever and ever, that there
should be time no longer: But, in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel,
when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God should be finished, etc.

Should be finished: That is, the City of God (begun to be adorned as a Bride
for her Husband) should then begin to be freed effectually from her former,
too careless, contempt of things sacred, of highest concernments; or from
treading them, as it were, under her feet; And freed also (from the
punishment, and effect of that profaness: to wit, from being trodden under foot
of the Gentiles: And those Gentiles (this threefold City, or Mystery of
Iniquity) should then begin (as they shall be more by degrees daily convinced
of their own wickedness, and folly) to abate their enmity, and embrace Unity of
sound Faith, and Manners.

Secondly, It is done, that is, the duration (the more entire duration) of this
City should be done at the period of the sixth Vial, or at the beginning of the
pouring fourth of the seventh Vial. That is, This City should stand all the
time of the six Vials pouring forth; all the time of the six Trumpets sounding,
and all the time (which is one and the same time, and thing)of the Witnesses
Sackcloth-Prophesie, for 1260 years. For, as we have proved, that the six
Trumpets sounding, and (which is all one) the Witnesses Sackcloth Prophecy run
parallel in the same Epoche: So the six Vials, and this Cities duration,
synchronize with both, which is plain from their temporal periods: For, The
period of this threefold Mystery of iniquity, in the tenth Chapter, is thus
expressed, There shall be time no longer. And its period, in the sixteenth
Chapter, under, or at the beginning of the seventh Vial (as the former was
under, or at the beginning of the seventh Trumpets sounding) is likewise thus
expressed, It is done: And what is done?

The answer is made in the next verse but one, And the great City was divided
into three parts, etc. That is, this threefold City was done, ver. 19. The
scope (and almost the express words) of both texts is the same, showing; That
this threefold City, or Mystery of iniquity, should (at the beginning of the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet, and pouring forth of the seventh Vial) begin,
vigorously, to be made manifest, and the Mystery of God (her Antithesis) to be
completed: that is, The true Church should then begin, more vigorously, and
visibly, to expatiate, and appear to all Sects and Nations: For, those periods
(It is done; Time shall be no more) are terms of expression, that are
synonymous in sense, and are, in both texts, a twofold sacred record, that the
duration (the more entire duration) of this threefold City should be 1260
years, synchronizing with the six Trumpets, with the six Vials, with the
Witnesses Sackcloth-Prophesie, and with all the rest of these twelve Epochaes.

Thirdly, the duration of this threefold City is commensurated (which are also
the Epoche of the death of the Witnesses) by three days, and an half, Rev.
11.9, 11. In which texts, the two former texts are more fully explained, and
the same period of this threefold City the third time repeated: And first,

We see that the two Witnesses were to lie, in that City, dead for three days
and an half, ver. 8, 9. Therefore, the end of those three days and an half,
was the period of the Witnesses death, and of the duration (as will appear) of
that threefold City: For; After three days and an half (says the text) the
Spirit of life from God shall enter into them, ver. 11. Therefore, the end of
those three days and an half, must be the period of their lying dead in that
City, and the period also of that Cities duration: For, The same hour says the
text) the tenth part of that City fell, ver. 13. And fell (not to, but) from
Apostasy in manners, to pursue sincere truth, and peace in Theory, and
practice, or (to use the words of the same text) shall then begin to give Glory
to the God of heaven: that is, Shall then begin to give Glory to God with
greater vigor, and visibility of true obedience then formerly.

And these three days, and an half, of the duration of the death of the
Witnesses in that City; and of that City, till it should begin to fall, as
aforesaid, are also conterminated (as the same period the third time expressed)
with the beginning of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, verse. 13. And the
seventh Angel sounded, etc. Therefore, these three days, and an half (of the
more entire duration of this threefold City, and of the death of the Witnesses
therein) synchronize with the six Vials, the six Trumpets, and the Witnesses
Sackcloth Prophecy in 1260 years: For, those (in this Chapter, twice repeated)
three days, and an half, are the same three times, and an half, chap. 12.14.
the same forty two Months, chap. 12.2. And the same 1260 days in the next
verse, which (being 1260 days annual) are 1260 years. For, the durations of
the death of the Witnesses, and of this threefold City, were pre-signified in
Scripture, both by three days, and an half, artificial (or 42 hours) and by
three days, and an half Annual (or forty two Months) as we shall fully, and
that (so soon as we shall first lay down these twelve Epochaes) instantly show.

The Fifth Epoche is of the Gospel Churches grand revolt.
FIfthly, The Gospel-Churches profligation, and defection seems to retain the
same time: For, We find her in Heaven, holding forth (though at last more
remisly) her primitive integrity of an Heavenly conversation till about 407,
Rev. 12.1. And till then (from about 292) in the Heaven of high Power, and
Authority in the Roman Empire: For, She (casting the first Dragon from his seat
there) sat sole Regent in his Throne of power: Her Eagles exalted both her,
and themselves into that Heaven, ver. 7. to the 12th. But a falling away was to
come; and the Church fell (fell from Heaven, fled into the Wilderness for 1260
days Annual). 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Rev. 12.1, 6, 14. Therefore, the Church fell from
Heaven (though not totally, and finally) in a twofold respect. First, in
reference to her Heaven of high power.

Secondly, In respect to her heavenly conversation: Her fall in conversation
caused her other fall. She fell, in part, from her former Heavenly
conversation: Therefore, She fell (as the effect of that cause) from her Heaven
of high Power, and Authority. Her fall in conversation was Spiritual: Her fall
from Power was temporal. In reference to both, she (according to those texts
aforesaid) stood in Heaven; And, in reference to both, she fell from Heaven:
The manner of her fall from both is plain from her Pattern, or Prophetic type,
Lament. 2.1. How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a Cloud in his
anger, and cast down, from Heaven, to the Earth, the beauty of Israel, etc. So
God covered her (the Anti-type-Church) with a Cloud in his anger, and cast
down, from Heaven to the Earth, the beauty of Gospel- Israel. For, She (like
the Church of Ephesus) left her first love, forsook her first works (works of
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith) and remembered not (scarce yet remembers) from
whence she fell. Thus she fell (first in her conversation) from Heaven:
therefore, God sent the second Dragon with a flaming Sword, who cast her (as
were our first Parents out of Paradise) out of her Heaven of power, and
Authority, and drove her into the Wilderness for 1260 years, chap. 12.1.6.14.
Many Expositors call that falling away in conversation, that grand, and general
revolt of the Gospel Church from Faith, and Obedience: Howbeit, it was in her
true members (though much inwardly) chiefly in outward appearance, and
practice. The gradual aggresses of the Churches defection (from about 340 to
407) we shall show afterward.

The sixth Interval.
THe sixth Epoche (and this, of a different denomination, more fully proves the
former) is of the Churches abode in her place prepared of God, which is twice
recorded in two several texts of the same Chapter. And the Woman fled into the
Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, that they should feed her
there 1260 days; which (being, as we shall instantly, and irrefellibly show,
days Annual) are 1260 years, chap. 12.6.

And there were given to the Woman two Wings of a great Eagle, that she might
flee into the Wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time,
times, and half a time, from the face of the Serpent, ver. 14. The times in
both texts are exactly the same, and make a twisted, or double record: That the
Epoche of the Churches abode in her place prepared of God, was to be 1260 years.

Into the Wilderness: That is, into an obscure, sad, desolate, and distressed
condition, both in temporal, and spiritual respects.

Into her place prepared of God: Having here proved the Epoche by the double
testimony of two texts, we shall refer this place prepared of God, but a little
further, to a fitter place, where we shall show, what this place, prepared of
God, was where the Gospel Church was to be preserved for 1260 years.

The seventh Epoche.
IS of the death of the Witnesses: And when they shall have finished their
testimony (their Primitive testimony in 407, and not their 1260 years Prophecy
in Sackcloth) the beast (says the text) that comes out of the bottomless pit
(the second Dragon) shall overcome, and kill them (shall cast them out of their
primitive power, and capacities (temporal and spiritual) and kill many of them
corporally) And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City,
called spiritually Sodom, etc. That is, their dejected condition shall be
visible, and obvious to the frequent view of those spiritual Gentiles of that
threefold City of Apostasy. And they of the Peoples, and Kindreds, etc. (those
Gentiles aforesaid) shall see their dead bodies (their persecuted, and despised
state) three days, and an half: That is, Three times, and an half, chap.
12.14. Or 1260 days Annual, or years, chap. 13.3. That's the Epoche both of the
death of the Witnesses, and of their Prophesying in Sackcloth: And so,

Their type ( Eliah, and the Prophets of Israel) finished also their (as it
were) primitive testimony against the wickedness of Ahab, and Isreal's
Apostacies: And (when they had finished that primitive testimony) Jezabel,
Ahab, and the false Prophets killed them for 1260 days literal. That is,
Killed many, or the most, and persecuted all for 1260 days: Therefore, they,
that escaped death corporal, fled, with the persecuted Church (as into a
Wilderness) into the secret subterfuges of obscure latency for 1260 days
literal. So long also did her, and their type-surviving Witnesses (as well they
might, and had most just cause) Prophecy (as in Sackcloth) in great obscurity,
and contempt: And just so long was rain literal restrained: to wit, for 1260
days literal.

But (after those flying, persecuted, type-Witnesses had finished those 1260
days of their type-death, and Prophesying ^n Sackcloth) they were not killed;
we find little of that in that grand exemplar, or Pattern.

So when the Gospel-Witnesses (St. Basit, Ambrose, Athanasius, Jerome,
Chrysostom, and others) had finished (not this Sackcloth Prophecy of 1260
years, but) their primitive testimony, about 407, against the fast approaching
defections of the primitive Church; And when she, and her revolting children
repented not; then did the Beast that came out of the bottomless pit (the
second Dragon) kill the Witnesses: And the Sea born-beast, and false
Prophet-Papal, to whom that Dragon gave his power (the Supremacy therein)
prosecuted (though they seemed gentle for the first 805 years) the killing of
them for 1260 (as in the Pattern literal) days Annual. Therefore, they (such as
escaped death corporal) fled with the persecuted Church into the spiritual
Wilderness (into the secret subtersuges of obscure latencies) for 1260 (as in
the type literal days) days Annual: Just so long was rain restrained (in the
type literal, in the Antitype spiritual rain) To wit, for 1260 (as in the
Pattern days literal) Annual days, or years: And therefore, the
Gospel-Witnesses (such as were killed by the death of persecution, but not
corporally, or totally killed) Prophesied (as well they might, and had most
just cause) for 1260 (as in the Pattern literal) days Annual in Sackcloth: th
it is, in great infirmity, affliction, obscurity, and contempt, for 1260 years.

Wherefore, when they had finished (for that's intended in the text) their
primitive testimony about the year four hundred and seven, or ten, then the
second Dragon (somewhat assisted, even at first, by the Beast, and false
Prophet) overcame, and killed them as aforesaid for 1260 yeas: But (after that
Epoche of their 1260 years death, and Prophesying in Sackcloth) they (as their
type were not) are not to be killed: There was no such thing in the Pattern, nor
shall be in the Antitype of it: Nor is there any ground (that I find) for it
in Scripture, but, abundantly sufficient for the contrary: For, we may add to
this (of it self full evidence: That it plainly appears to be a matchless piece
of absurdity: That the Witnesses should Prophecy in Sackcloth 1260 years,
because they should be killed (many killed, and all persecuted) so long by the
Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, who were to continue in power so long: And
then (when the Witnesses should have finished that 1260 years Prophecy, and
the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, should cease to be in full power) the
Beast out of the bottomless pit (scarce in being himself, or not in such full
power) should overcome, and kill them the second time, for 1260 days,
immediately after he (for who else should kill them) had first killed them for
1260 years before: The futility of this absurdity, the Paterns (which are more
then one) sufficiently resell: But that is also fully done in the sequel by
many (perhaps undeniable) demonstrations. From what already appears we plainly
see; that the Epoche (the twice repeated three days, and an half, in the 11th
Chapter) of the death of the Witnesses is 1260 (as in the Pattern of days
literal) of days Annual, or years, and runs exactly parallel with their
Prophesying in Sackcloth succeeding their Primitive testimony about the year
407, and not their Prophesying in Sackcloth 1260 years after it: But (to come
nearer to the matter) we shall (having shown the duration of the death of the
Witnesses) here distinguish.

The death of the Witnesses was (ab extra, vel ab intra) external, or internal.

Their external death is threefold; Corporal, civil, spiritual: Corporal,
chiefly from the Dragon, civil from the beast, spiritual from the false Prophet
in all Papal Sects: To wit: By Papal fulminations, excommunications, rash
censures, slanders, etc. These external deaths, for brevity, I but briefly
hint. But,

Secondly, their death internal is more properly spiritual, because its the
death or decay of spiritual Graces; whiles the lusts of the flesh, of the eyes,
and pride of life seem to live, and judgment, mercy, and faith to dye in the
souls of Saints, and whiles they manifest that internal death of Graces by
outward correspondent fruits, and practices: So the Church of Sardis had a name
that she lived, and was dead: And how dead? None of her Members were killed
(that we read) by any corporal, civil, or spiritual death (as the witnesses
were) externally: But, her death was internal, and, more properly, spiritual:
Her Graces were dead or ready to die: Therefore, their fruits, her works
(differing little, perhaps, in true appearance, from dead works) were not found
perfect, though their doctrine might be so sound, and profession so strict,
that from thence she might be famed, or have a name that she lived, chap. 3.1,
2. For, Hypocrites judge of spiritual life by outward forms, and empty verbal
professions, and not by obedience conform to Gospel-rule.

This inward death of the witnesses (properly spiritual) was presignified,
sometimes, by sleep like death; sometimes by death real and literal: And first,

By sleep like death; we read, That a deep sleep, and an horror of great
darkness (the Sun going down) fell upon Abrabam, Genesis 15.12. Abraham (as a
Prophet) suffered this passive prophecy (as the vision of outward affliction,
and inward darkness, and desertion) which was after fulfilled, literally, upon
his seed after the flesh in literal Egypt, and likewise upon his spiritual seed
in Egypt spiritual, where such an horror of great darkness, and deep sleep
fell upon them, that, the text says expressly, they were dead: And their dead
bodies shall lie in the street of the great City called spiritually, Sodom and
Egypt, etc. they were spiritually dead, because dead in spiritual Egypt, and
the means of their Resurrection from that death was by the Spirit of life from
God entering into them: that is, their Graces were dead; Or sick, dying Graces:
They did not awake unto Righteousness, but slept a sleep like death in sin, and
disobedience: They held forth a Righteousness inconform to Gospel-rule, such as
some Sects, Heathens, and Heretics hold forth; and might dream, that to be
true obedience, scarce thinking upon true Righteousness in practice, which we
shall after show what it is.

Had Abraham not slept, yet, that horror of great darkness, that fell upon
him, had been sufficient to hide all things from his sight, that he could see
little, or nothing, and do as little: But (besides that darkness) a deep sleep
fell upon him, so that he might seem dead in that sleep, buried in darkness;
yet Abraham was not dead all that time: So a lasting Lethargy like death, and a
deep sleep of insensibility, and spiritual security was to fall upon his
spiritual seed (the Gospel Church and her Witnesses) for 1260 years: yet
neither they, nor she could be quite dead all this time, but should retain some
inward, sick, secret(but living) Graces all the time of their lying, as dead in
that threefold City: For,

Secondly, I sleep (says the Church) but my heart waketh, Cant. 5.2. She slept
(after the similitude of her Patriarch Abraham) a deep sleep like death, but
was not dead: The Members of her body, both for action, and understanding
(hands, feet, head) were exceeding drowsy or in a deep sleep, but her heart
awaked: She was not dead, but lived by some weak, sick (but living) inward
Graces.

An inseparable sign of such a deep spiritual sleep, is the difficulty to make
her, or her Members, know that such a Lethargy lies upon them, with a great
impugning unwillingness to be awaked.

Secondly, that inward spiritual death was also prefigured by death literal:
For, the drybones were the whole house of Israel (not so much legal as)
Evangelical; And those bones were dead, Ezekiel. 37.3, 11. For, the Witnesses (the
subordinate heads of the Church) could not be dead, but the Members of the same
body must be much more dead.

Secondly, I might here show, that Jonah, and our blessed Savior presignified
prophetically, not only that outward threefold death aforesaid, but also this
inward and spiritual death of the witnesses: towit, Jonah by a seeming death,
and our Savior by a real death; The durations of both which (three days and an
half artificial, or 42 hours) are exactly conform (as prophetic types) to the
duration of the death of the witnesses: to wit, three days and a half; that is,
three years and a half, or forty two months of days Annual, which are 1260
years, as we shall more irrefellibly show in the sequel.

The Eighth Epoche.
IS of the treading of the Gospel Church, and her witnesses under foot by those
Gentiles (the spiritual Gentiles of this threefold Mystery of Iniquity) whom we
find fitly described in the 8th, and 9th. Verses of the 11th Chapter, to wit,
the Spiritual Ethnickes ( Gentiles in practice, by profession Christians) of
Antichrist sensual, secular, and spiritual: And the Holy City (the
Gospel Church, and her witnesses) shall they (these very Gentiles) tread under
foot for forty two months says the text, chap. 11.2. That is, they shall
persecute, convitiate, rashly censure, and contemn the Gospel Church, and her
witnesses, and her, and their testimony, for forty two months: Here needs no
Daniel to read the sins of the revolted Church, too easy to be read in her
just punishments: And what were the Gospel-Churches chief sins? She, and her
Saints trod under foot (contemned, slighted, neglected, at least too much)
substantial knowledge of the truth, true obedience, and the witnesses of both,
and (perhaps under a blind pretense of minding things plain, and most
necessary) espoused a trivial, shallow, superficial knowledge of the truth,
with like obedience: And where read you this? Her just punishment renders it in
Capital Letters; she (for treading under foot, or not promoting, and advancing,
with due diligence, things most sacred, profitable and honest) was given into
the hands of the Gentiles to be trodden under foot forty two months: And what
those forty two months are, the very next Verse tells you expressly: That they
are 1260 days: to wit, days annual or year, swherefore, the Epoche of the thus
treading under-foot of the Gospel Church, and her witnesses (which also imports
their death, and fully shows both the time, and manner of it) is the same with
the former; All synchronizing.

The Ninth Interval
IS of the Witnesses sackcloth prophecy: And I will give power to my two
Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand, two hundred, and sixty days
clothed in sackcloth. Rev. 11.3. Our blessed Savior and his Disciples
prophesied (as in sackloth) to the legal and Jewish Church (a Rebellious and
gainsaying people) for 1260 days literal, predicted by Daniels half week of
years: He also wept over Jerusalem for the (then chiefly spiritual) desolations
of Zion: we have also shown, that the Prophets in Ahabs time (while Rain was
restrained) prophesied (as Proto-types) in great affliction, and sorrow (as it
were in sackcloth) for 1260 days: So, their Antitype (the Gospel-witnesses)
were to prophecy also in sackcloth (in great sorrow, and affliction) for 1260
days: to wit, days annual, or 1260 years, which the ensuing Epochaes, and
sequel of this Treatise, will also fully show.

The Tenth Epoche is of the six Trumpets sounding.
THe six Trumpets sounding, and the witnesses sackcloth prophecy (though of
different denominations) are the same thing, and the duration of both the same
time: Lift up thy voice (says the Lord to the Prophet) like a Trumpet, show my
people their transgressions, etc. So, six Angels should sound their Trumpets:
that is, the Gospel-witnesses should prophecy six times seven months of days
annual, which make 1260 years: So long they should prophecy in sackcloth: That
is, they should lift up their voices like trumpets (as the Priests of the Lord
did at the siege of Jericho) six times, but with somewhat feeble blasts, and in
much frailty, and without any great visible effect, or event of their sounding
to convince Sects, or convert Heretics: But they should sound their six
Trumpets (prophecy in sackcloth) no longer: For, there should be no longer
time says the text. No longer time of the six trumpets sounding, of the
Witnesses sackcloth prophecy, nor any longer time of the transactions and
durations of all these twelve Epochaes: But then (or very soon after) when the
7th Angel should begin to sound (when the witnesses shall begin to prophesse
with more power in practice) then, the Mystery of God should be finished as he
has declared, etc. that is: His Church should then begin to be adorned as a
Bride, and the Mystery of Iniquity in all Sects (Papal, Mahumetan, and modern)
to be made manifest: They shall proceed no further (says the text) for their
folly shall be made manifest to all men: This Epoche of the six trumpets
(though sufficiently clear at present) is fully proved in the precedent
Epochaes, and ensuing parts of this Treatise.

The Eleventh Epoche.
THe Eleventh Epoche (the same time, and thing with the former for the most
part) is of the pouring out of the six Vials: They were Golden vials, but full
of the Plagues and wrath of God; therefore, they synchronize with the six
trumpets sounding, and with the witnesses sackcloth-prophesie: For, the
witnesses were to smite the Earth with all Plagues as often as they would in
the days of their prophecy, which we find were 1260 days, and prophetically
import (as is, or rather will be made apparent) so many years: Its apparent
therefore, that the witnesses (prophesying for six times seven months of days
annual, or 1260 years in sackloth) were the six Angles that sounded their six
trumpets, and the six Angles that poured forth their golden vials; And, that
their successive prophesies in sackcloth, for six time; seven months of days
annual, were those six golden vials: For, God gave them power to prophecy so
long in sackcloth; And their prophecy by the power of God is, no doubt, a
golden vial, and six golden vials in that sixfold space of time: But six golden
vials full of the Plagues, and wrath of God, contingently, or occasionally,
upon the impenitent, Anti-chrictian world, because of their profane contempt of
their reproofs: For, Corruptis optimi pessima; The best things, by abuse, bring
the worst effects: So the Gospel-witnesses prophesies and reproofs, by the
power of God, are (and that's undeniable) golden vials full of the greatest
mercies to men, by them admonished, but, by abuse, they are (though golden
vials) filled with all the Plagues of the wrath of God.

And how do the Gospel-witnesses, and the Antichristian world fill those
golden vials of the witnesses reproofs with the wrath of God either against
themselves or oothers?

I answer, the Gospel-witnesses fill (which falls out too often) their own vials
with temporal Plagues against themselves: So the Prophet (sent to Bethel) was
some what remiss (but in some circumstance only a man would think) in this duty
of prophecy: Therefore, he filled that golden vial (the word of the Lord in
his own mouth) with a selfdestroying Plague temporal: For, a Lion forthwith met
him, and slew him: So the Gospel-witnesses often fill their golden vials (their
gifts of prophecy) with self-destroying Plagues, when they do that duty with a
cold, careless remisness, when they prophecy in words, and not in works, or
practice themselves what they reprove in others; when they oppose the truth
they should promote; whiles they labor not that their lips may preserve
knowledge, and they prophecy by power from God; whiles they do not that duty,
or do it without sedulity: Thus the Gospelwitnesses fill their golden vials
(the word of prophecy in their own mouths) with self destroying Plagues of the
wrath of God.

Lastly, I will givepower to my two witnesses (Religious Ministers, and
Magistrates) and they shall prophecy: And what is prophecy? The Spirit or
gift of prophecy is (says the text) the testimony of Jesus, or a faithful
witness of sincere truth both in words and works without delays, diminishing,
or defalking (so much as in circumstance) any part of it, which this Prophet
(sent to Bethel) found by sad experience.

This appertains (as their duty) to Ministers to do it in words, and in works
also; And to Magistrates to do it in, works, or practice, and in words also,
though not in words altogether in such manner as it belongs to Ministers.

Prophesia est testimonium (tum verbis tum fact is) verum afferre; non
impugnationem, convitlum, vel cavillationem infer: For, they that prefer
truth-opposing-contradiction, or prefer not the truth conform to Gods command,
prophecy not; or at least, fill that golden Vial (their power, and gifts to
prophecy) with the Plagues, and wrath of God against themselves.

Secondly, others also (perhaps true Saints) fill the golden Vials of the
Gospel-witnesses with self-destroying, temporal Plagues: So a certain Prophet
said to a man in the name of the Lord: Smite me I pray thee: The man (perhaps
in favor to him as a Prophet) refused to smite him, and so filled that golden
Vial (the word of the Lord in the mouth of that Prophet) with a self-destroying
Plague: For, a Lion also forthwith met him, and slew him, 1 Kings 20.35, 36.

Saints sometimes (too often) fill the golden Vials of the witnesses with the
sharpest temporal Plagues against themselves: Often with grievous spiritual
plagues and desertions, which themselves sustain; Often with most deadly plagues
upon all men: Babylon the great ( Rome-Pagan, or rather Rome Christian and
Papal, newly apostate in manners) fell: That is, the Saints (that stood in her,
and that only could fall indeed) fell from their first love, and works, and
some fled out of her: therefore, Her plagues (her Witnesses having finished
their Primitive testimony against her defections) came in one day; Death,
Mourning, Famine, Fire, chap. 18.2, 8. A few sincere Saints in that City stood,
and that City (supported by their standing) stood firm; A few sincere Saints
fell; and Babylon the great fell by their fall; Fell temporally, by their
Spiritual fall in part: their fall, (though but in part) filled the Vials of
her faithful. Witnesses (their reproves, and Prophesies) with the Plagues, and
wrath of God, which they poured forth upon that falling City.

True Saints thus fill the Golden Vials of the Witnesses with Plagues against
themselves, against the Church, of God, against all men; If (whiles they sound
their trumpets) they shut their ears, or are hearers of the word only, not
doers of it, or do it carelessly, or inconform to Gods command; If they forget
judgment, mercy, faith, and mind more the tything of mint and cummin: If they
deny the witnesses their due honor, or due maintenance, or tread them, or their
testimony under their feet by a careless dis-regard, or dilatory neglect of it,
or them.

Thirdly, the Antichristian world fills the golden Vials of the Witnesses with
Plagues, and wrath against themselves, when they design or seek to attempt any
thing against them: Eliah prophesied the death of Ahaziah: Then the Captains of
fifties filled that Vial (by attempting against him) full of Gods wrath against
themselves. For, fire came down from Heaven, and devoured them, and their
fifties, 2 Kings 1. So, if any man will hurt (his Antitype) the Gospel
witnesses, fire proceeds out of their mouths, and devoureth their enemies:
That is, they fill their golden Vials (the word of prophecy in their mouths)
with devouring fire from Heaven to destroy themselves, Rev. 11.5.

Pharaoh and his servants filled the golden Vials (the word of the Lord in the
mouth of Moses) with many selfdestroying Plagues: And the very same also does
the Antichristian world with the Vials of the Witnesses. And first,

Moses turned waters into blood: The Egyptians (by their disobedience) made
them so, Exodus 7.19, 20.

So, the Gospel-witnesses ( Moses and Aaron's Antitypes) turned waters into
blood: The bloodthirsty brought this Plague upon themselves, Rev. 11.6. chapter
16.3, 5, 6.

Secondly, Egypt was Plagued with Frogs, and her Antitype with Frogs also,
Exodus 8.2. Rev. 16.13.

Thirdly, both were Plagued with Boyles and Sores, Exodus 9.10. Rev. 16.7.

Fourthly, Egypt was Plagued with the Plague of Hail; So was her Antitype,
Exodus 9.23, 4. Rev. 8.7.

Fifthly, Egypt was Plagued with Locusts; So was her Antitype, Exodus 10.1415
Rev. 9.3.

Sixthly, Both type Egypt, and her Anti type were Plagued with darkness. Exodus
10.21. Rev. 9.2.

These, and sundry others were those Plagues of the six golden Vials (the word
of the Lord in the mouths of his Witnesses) rebelled against.

Golden Vials: Such the Propesies and reproofs of the witnesses are: filled
with Plagues: Such, impenitent men make them to be: And how do men (the Member
of Antichrist) fill those golden Vials with Plagues against themselves.

I answer, they despise reproof, persecute their reprovers: they value not the
words of the witnesses; read not, regard not their Writings: But (being
reproved) their business is to study Cavils, and contradictions, or find both
without study, or care to understand what they cavil ar, or whom, or for what
they contradict: Thus spiritual Egypt (resolving like Pharaoh and his servants
to work wisely) do very soolishly in filling the golden Vials of the witnesses
with the Plagues and wrath of God against themselves, by persevering in sordid
avarice, and truth-opposing, Saint-persecuting cruelties.

Secondly: Filthy Sodomites (the froth of fluid wit and folly) fill those Vials
of the witnesses with the Plagues and wrath of God (as their type did) against
themselves, by persisting sensual against admonitions to sobriety; slothful
against their exhortations to sedulity; by entertaining their rebukes with
loose laughter, and making a mock of their reproofs: Solutes hi captant hominum
risus: Lavish laughter of folly and ignorance is their food, whereby they fill
their minds with windy levity, their lives with evil manners, those golden
Vials with the wrath of God, and so bring down fire from Heaven upon their own
heads: So type Sodim (mocking her reprovers) perished; So perished her Princes,
and Rulers for not reproving of her.

Thirdly, Antitype, apostate Jerusalem (Professors of blind, zealous, devout
ignorance in all Sects) fill the golden Vials of the VVitnesses with most
deadly Plagues, by resisting them, and by bringing evil reports upon their just
reproofs: So Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses; They hardened the hearts of
Pharaoh's servants, by exalting themselves (the basest men) above Moses, and by
preferring their own illusions above his real worth and works: So their
Anti-types prefer their own formalities before the real works of the true
Witnesses: Hic apprime, hoc optime: This man's work, these men's Writings are
like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver; But the witnesses golden Vials are
Brass; Their words false, their works Counterfeits: Thus they fill (by odious
comparisons, and preferring their own deceits)) those Vials of real Gold, with
the greatest and most deadly Plagues against themselves.

So the ten Spies filled the golden Vials of the Promises of God with fierce
Plagues against themselves, and the people; by bringing evil reports upon the
Land of Promise, and worse upon the word of God, that promised that Land to the
people of Israel: therefore, they all perished instantly by the Plague, and all
Israel from twenty years old upward (about four excepted) perished in the
Wilderness: So, the Antichristian world (and, chiefly, Pharisaical hypocrites)
fill the Vials of the witnesses with the fierce wrath of God against
themselves, by bringing evil reports upon the Prophetic Promises, and word of
Prophecy in sacred Scriptures through a profane careless ignorance of them:
And Ignorance is the Mother of evil reports, and fills (not only their hearts
with malice, but) their mouths with blind misconstructions, blasphemies, and,
at best, with wicked excuses, cavils, slanders against the Gospel-witnesses and
their record: Thus they fill their golden Vials with the most deadly plagues
against themselves: For, they affect a fruitless delibation of divine truth
without depth in Doctrine or due obedience, which (though a small measure of
Knowledge is sufficient to save the humble) serves but to harden their hearts,
to seek or find cavils against solid truth, and sincere obedience: For, the
three evil grounds had not, or afforded not a fruitful depth to growing seeds;
But the good ground only both had, and afforded depth of Earth to the feed of
Grace: And this depth of Earth in men's judgments, and obedience (at least in
their desires, and affections) makes those golden vials of the witnesses the
more the vessels of honor, and fills them with all mercies: But that threefold
want of fruitful depth in Antichrist sensual, secular, and spiritual (at least
in their affections) fills those Vials with all Plagues of the wrath of God:
These have power to smite the Earth with all Plagues as often as they will: That
is, to pour forth the six Vials filled therewith: to wit: For 1260 years in the
days of their Prophecy, Rev. 11.6. That Is the Epoche of these six Vials, of
the witnesses Sackcloth Prophecy of the six trumpets sounding, and of all
these twelve Epochaes: For, There shall be time no longer: But in the days of
the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of
God shall be finished, chap. 10.6, 7. And, when the seventh Angel shall pour
out his Vial, it shall be done, chapter 16.17.

The Mystery of God shall be finished or done, that is, the true Church (as a
City set upon an hill) shall begin to be seen, and embraced by all Sects and
Nations; And the Mystery of Iniquity in all Sects, (Papal, Mahumetan, and
modern) shall begin effectually to be made manifest to themselves and others.

The signal congruity betwixt the seven Vials and 7 trumpets (and that in all
their transactions and in the series and places of their transactions) shows
plainly that both (contrary to the opinion of many that are contrary minded)
run parallel and import (if not all together) for the most part, the same times
and things.

One (and not the least) of the Plagues of those six Vials (and not the Plague
of one particular Vial, but of all the six) is the restraint of spiritual Rain:
The duration of which is the next, and last Epoche we shall here insist upon.

The Twelfth Epoche.
IS of the restraint of spiritual Rain; And (in handling of it) I shall exert
that promised Epitome of the series or the Mystery of Iniqnity, by showing some
of the chief transactions of those twelve Epochaes for 1260 years.

I shall here also show, what that iniquity and those sins are, which shut
Heaven that it should not Rain; And what that obedience to God and right to man
is, that shall open Heaven and bring down plenteous showers of temporal
blessings and spiritual Graces upon all Churches and Nations.

The restraint of Rain, in type was 1260 days; literal Rain, literal days:
This restraint of Rain was of spiritual rain for 1260 days annual: That is,
for 1260 years: That Is the Epoche of the restraint of Rain spiritual, Rev,
11.3, 6.) as 1260 days literal were, in the type, the restraint of literal
Rain, Luke 4.25. James 5.17. These have power to shut Heaven that it Rain not
(says the text) in the days of their Prophecy, chapter 11.6. And what the days
of their Sackcloth-prophesie are, the third verse expressly tells you, that they
were 1260 days: to wit, days annual; that is, there should be a restraint
(as, in the pattern, of literal) of spiritual Rain. (To wit, of spiritual graces
in a great measures) or 1260 years.

No true Grace-figuring-rain fell, in the Pattern, for 1260 days, which shows
the grievous restraint of spiritual Graces (figured by Rain) which should be in
the Antitype for 1260 years: that is, there should be rather a continued
decay, then any vigorous and visible return of frugiferous Graces for 1260
years.

Apostate Israel had water to keep them alive, for 1260 days, but no rain to
refresh the Land: That went daily back, became more barren, nor were the hearts
of the people turned back to obedience till about the end of those 1260 days,
1 Kings 18.17. So (it seems) Gospel revolting Israel was to be preserved, as it
were alive (by some secret, sick Graces) for 1260 years, but not raised to a
fertile life so long, or not until the spirit of life should first raise her
Witnesses, whose three days, and an half of their Spiritual death is (as a
second record of confirmation) the same Epoche with those 1260 years of Rain
restrained: So long the Land of Gospel, revolted Israel (in some sort also
dead) did, or should decay daily inGarces, grew unnatural growing seeds, and
became (terra tota dehiscens) a most barren dry Land, all parched into cracks,
and ClyftsofSchisms, full of errors, and evil manners; And yet a people fondly
pleased with the opinion that they have repented, whiles their hearts
(according to theintent of this Prophecy) are not turned back from the lusts
of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life: which threefold
covetousness is Idolatry, the grand Idols of Antichrist sensual, secular, and
spiritual, and threefold root of all evil.

They (Nor are true Saints free from the same faulr.) turn to a form, not to
the power of godliness; get faces like faces of men; Hair like the Hair of
Women, but retain teeth of Lions, Rev. 9.7, 8.

And what is repentance? If it be not some sound, shallow (carelessly shallow)
Doctrine in a fruitless form, they know not what it is.

They place repentance in the strict pursuit of their own Seers, blind
prescripts.

And why were not the hearts of legal, Apostate. Israel turned back till about
the end of 1260 days? Because they turned their backs upon obedience, and
their faces from repentance all that time: That time was the Interval (the
Epoche) of type- Isreal's grand Apostasy.

And 1260 days annual (or years) are the Anti type duration of the
Gospel-Churches grand defection from faith, and obedience: But this fully
confirms it: to wit, because we find here the same duration of 1260 years to be
the Epoche of the restraint of spiritual Rain (of spiritual Graces figured by
Rain) which necessarily infers (for what can Earth without water bring forth)
the Churches, and her witnesses defection (at least in part) just so long.

Therefore, these 1260 years were to be that time wherein Gospel revolted
Israel (and true Saints, too much) should turn their backs upon obedience, and
faces far from works worthy of repentance; That time wherein self-seducing
Professors retrograde by going forward, and run into perdition whiles they seek
to shun their own ruin.

But they have been busy, as he was, here and there, whom the disguised
Prophet personated: About what In seeking things that belong unto their peace:
to wit, according to the common, careless, blind custom of formal Professors:
But never did they know, little did they ever think, that they were only busy
all that time in turning their backs upon obedience, and faces from repentance:
A man would think (andthey verily believe) that their blind zea lous endeavors
are a perpetual pursuit of true repentance, and things that belong unto their
peace, whiles they thereby turn their backs upon both.

Little did the blind Syrians believe they turned their backs upon Dothan, when
they went forward with their faces wards Samaria: Little did the Pharisees
think they did (by all their devout endeavors) hide the things that belonged
to their peace, from their own eyes: And as little does the Antichristian
world believe they take a wrong course, whiles they (by their proud and profane
contempt of things profitable) put felicity far from them, and exile peace.

They (well content, as the Parisees were with their wonted knowledge) will not
know these things: what profit comes (say they) by knowing of them? This is
not the course (that such Professors take) to obtain the Rain of righteousness,
but the ready way (though they will in no wife see it) to shut Heaven that it
rain not.

Eliah prayed, and endeavored earnestly that the hearts of apostate Israel
might be turned back, which was not done till about the end of those 1260 days
of Rain restrained: Then their hearts were turned back from halting betwixt two
Opinions, and from dead idols to serve the living God: That was done in a
shadow, and so less permanent: But it may seem more then probable, that the
hearts of revolted Gospel- Israel (about the end of those 1260 years restraint
of spiritual Rain) shall begin to turn back from halting (not betwixt two, but)
many opinions to a permanent unity of true faith, and manners; That Antichrist
sensual, secular, and spiritual, may then begin (begin effectually) to return
from the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life to true
Christian sobriety, mercy, and charity: That the Son of perdition (as Judas
convinced hanged himself) shall begin to strangle (with his own hands) his own
barbarrous inhumanities: that sensual Professors shall begin to forsake open
profaneness, secular Professors sordid tenacity, and spiritual false Professors
their blind, senseless prescripts of pride and ignorance, that all (their
errors being made manifest by Gospel Light) may glorify God: Sic
Anti-christus, penitus evictus, exibit; So Antichrist (beirg fully, and
clearly convinced) shall turn true convert.

Then shall his profane heart be turned back; Back from proud contempt of
sacred truth, and neglect of the practice of it: Back from blindness of heart
to heart-enlargements in the light of the truth of the gospel; And turned back
from blaspheming God, and his tabernacle by bringing (as the spies did upon the
Land of Promise) evil reports upon Gospel Truth, and the witnesses of it: Phil.
Morn. de Papat. p. 660.
So many Papists (and Protestants, too much) blaspheme the sacred word of God
saying: Its insufficient, ambiguous, dangerous, deceitful; And formal
Professors please themselves with a careless, trivial, shallow, sound Doctrine,
fondly affecting the stony grounds grand curse for the greatest blessing.

They pretent that the plain Scriptures please them well; that the rest yields
much labor, little profit: profane sloth, pride, covetousness imprint such
blind opinions in the hearts of hypocrites, who (catching as they conceive at
part) loose the profit, of all the Scriptures: wherefore, Campd. Brit. p. 141.
as Bede much complained, that many in his time were contented with a trivial
literature; So, it has been the misery of all times (of those times especially
wherein, Heaven being shut, the Rain of Graces should be most restrained,) that
men, Sects (and Saints, too much) content themselves with a trivial shallow
knowledge of sacred truth: For, the stony ground (of all evil grounds the
worst) had a trivial, shallow superficies of fertile Earth, only it wanted
depth, therefore, its most deceitful, and destructive to it self, and to
thesowers of it: For, its a true saying: Non babet Ars inimicum praeter
ignorantem: And it may be no less truly said, that this careless,
Heaven-shutting, shallow ground of Professors, profanely prond, contentedly
ignorant, or puffed up with their shallow (though perhaps literally sound)
knowledge, are the greatest opposers of profound truth, persecutors of the
Witnesses of it, and the chief matter (as we shall instantly show) of the Son
of perdition properly so called: For, filthy lucre, and pride, constrains them
to cast aside all faithful care and pains in searching after substantial truth:
Therefore, their Doctrine, and their doings are both, but deceits: For, such as
their Doctrine is; such their doings are such as their knowledge, such their
practice: Tali Patella dignum operculum, a careless, blind, shallow,
persecuting obedience best befits their fruitless superficial knowledge; So,
the Pharisees (figured chiefly, by the stony ground, and by whom especially our
Lord was Crucified) had (like these their Antitype) a trivial, superficial
knowledge, with like obedience: Said, but did not, and were the principal part
of the type-Son of perdition.

Search the Scriptures (said our Savior) for they are they that testify of
me: The Pharisees searched the Scriptures (as they thought) di;igently, but
divided them not aright: They divided the word, and their obedience thereunto
by a division (not of right distinction, but) of separation, and, by that
separation, separated themselves from all right to any part of it: They
searched the Scriptures diligently: to wit, such literally, (and those chiefly)
that held forth legal and ceremonial Ordinances; But they searched them not, as
they shadowed forth Christ; nor those Prophesies that clearly testified of him;
or they searched those Scriptures slightly: They had no doubt (as modern
hypocrites have) their thunderbolts of blasphemy against such Scriptures, and
the diligent searchers of them, and could call them perhaps, ambiguous,
dangerous, deceitful; useless allusions, vain Allegories: and the sober
disquisitors of such sacred Oracles they might account curious Quaestors about
trifles, and trivial expenders of wasted pains in searching things im
pertinent, or to little purpose: Therefore was their obedience also (conform to
their knowledge) divided and separated: They diligently observed legal Rites,
and placed their Religion (as their Antitype does in empty forms) in their
observing of them: But the grand duties or great commands (judgment, mercy, and
faith) they separated from the less, and (as least regarded) rejected, Math.
23.23. Luke 11.42.

Wherefore, whiles they divided (separated, rejected) the knowledge of those
Scriptures, that chiefly testified of Christ from those that (literally, as
they took them) testified less of him, they wholly abandoned all benefit that
might redound from both to themselves: And whiles they divided (separated,
rejected) the grand duties of obedience to God (judgment, mercy, and faith to
men) from the less, they cast off all obedience.

So these Professors (their Offspring, and Antitype) that affect a fruitless,
shallow knowledge, and such obedience, search the Scriptures (as they suppose)
diligently, but divide not the word aright: They divide the word, and their
obedience by a division (not of right distinction but) of separation: They
separate the plain from the prophetical (as Saul rent Samuels Mantle) and
thereby separate themselves from all right to any part in either: For, as that
wicked Harlot would have the Child divided; So they well approve (as they
pretend) the plain Scriptures, but reject the rest as useless, qor impertinent;
And so (as she had no part in the living Child) they deprive themselves of all
right to the word of life.

They, therefore (as the Pharisees did) affect, and make a schism in Doctrine,
and obedience; separate and reject the solid, and retain the trivial, which
serves them only to blaspheme, and bring evil reports upon all sound knowledge,
and sincere obedience: And this profaneness may be found to come in the Van of
those sins that shut Heaven.

Heaven shutting profaneness is threefold: Sensual, Earthly, and Devilish.

This threefold profaneness is also threefold: In thought, word, and deed; And
versant in a threefold subject (the highway, thorny, and stony grounds) whose
Fruits are a slothful, worldly, and proud non-vacancy to seek, or submit unto
sound knowledge, and sincere obedience.

This threefold profaneness in thought, is a threefold inward deception of the
Intellect, will, and affections; But, in word, and deed, the same deception
exerted.

The ourward attractives, and objects of this threefold profaneness are three
different forts of divertisements.

The divertisements of sensual profaneness are, sloth and sinful pleasures.

Of secular, or Earthly profaneness, worldly profits.

Of spiritual profaneness, pride, opinion, blind superstition, busy ignorance.

The first non vacat a ventre, andvoluptate; sensual high-way-Professors are
ever so busy in gathering Grapes of Sodom, that they have no leisure to look
toward Zion.

Professors secular are so set upon the world, that they see no benefit, but in
worldly business: Their Grapes grow all on thorns. But,

Professors proud and Pharisaical (the stony ground) are ever most diligent in
dressing the basest Briers of ambition, that bring forth nothing but evil
surmises, rash censures, and all uncharitableness: Only from pride come
contentions and these fires issue forth (as Jothams Parable proved) only, or
chiefly fromthe Briars of pride, and ignorance, which the stony ground
produces: And this profaneness (the devotion of pride) is that principal sin
that shuts Heaven, and the chief cornerstone in the Fabric of the Apostasy of
Antichrist, which comes next to be handled.

CHAP. VII. An Epitome of the Series of this threefold Mystery of lniquity,
wherein some chief Transactions of this Interval of Rain restrained, and of all
the twelve Epochaes (for 1260 years) are briefly handle d.
I Have therefore, insisted the more upon this stony grounds spiritual
profaneness, as the principal Foundation of the Apostasy, and shall therewith,
instantly present the Reader with the structure of it erected, chiefly, upon
this ground: For, I shall here take liberty to insist a little upon this Epoche
of Rain restrained; Because I shall from hence more evidently demonstrate the
Commencements (not only of this, but) of all the twelve Epochaes, and therewith
propose this promised short Epitome of the grand Apostasy: To which also some
necessity, upon the Rea dersa ccount, constrains me: Because such as are
weakest to apprehend, are readiest to ask questions, before they understand the
grounds of their own demands, or know what they ask, and are no less incapable
of conviction from the most rational solutions, which weakness or indisposition
is double, for want of some short and perspicuous Map of the Series of things
to be first conceived: Wherefore; we shall, first.

Distinguish Antichrist sensual, secular, and spiritual, and show which of the
three is chiefly that Son of perdition intended by the Apostle, 2 These. 2.3.

Secondly, we shall show when, and in what manner all three came.

Thirdly, whereas the Bicorn-beast came up out of the Earth; we shall further
show what Earth brought him forth.

Fourthly, we shall show how, and when that Pseudoprophetick-beast laid his
Foundation of deceit, and began to build thereon, the body of Apostasy.

Fifthly, how, and when he (to that intent) took away from the primitive Church
her power, and, Church Priviledges.

Sixthly, we shall show his progress in building upon that forged Foundation.

Seventhly, we shall show, how the threefold man of sin is bound (as in a
threefold chain of darkness) by a threefold inconviction (of sin, of
righteousness, of judgment) whereby they cannot discern those sins that shut
Heaven, nor that righteousness which should open it: Therefore, we shall show
what those sins chiefly, are that shut Heaven. And,

Lastly, what that righteousness to men, and true obedience to God is, that
shall open Heaven, and be the means (the only means under God) to bring down
showers of temporal blessings, and divine Graces upon all Church-Societies,
Sects, and Nations. And first, we shall distinguish Antichrist sensual,
secular and spiritual.

Sensual Anti christ (or his first appearance in power) was the second Dragons
military Forces, when he came in the Van of them, invaded the Christian world,
and made Rome Imperial tributary, about the year 407: For, that Flood filled
the Christian world with Heathenism, gross Herefies, and all sensual
profaneness, which body sensual, and Heretical (conjunct with such as
themselves were in those Nations they subdued) then created, and has from that
time continued Antichrist sensual,

Secondly, secular Antichrist (rallyed under his Head, the Decapolit-beast,
not Pagan, but Papal) were the more worldly-minded Professors, and powers of
the ten Nations of Rome Papal, who (falling more fully from Faith and obedience
about or after the year 407) at first constituted, and have ever since in their
like successors, continued Anti christ secular: And these (more strict, and
orthodox, but) covetous Professors in all Sects, are the moresecular part of
the body of Apostasy.

Thirdly, Spiritual Antichrist (rallyed under his proper Head the false
Prophet, or Bicorn beast Papal) was the proud, factious, blind, busy
Professors (most strictly formal who (falling more fully from faith (faith of
veracity) about or a little after 407) at first constituted, and their
successors continued, Antichrist spiritual: And these (somewhat Orthodox, but
proud and Factious) are, in all Sects, the more spiritual part of the body of
Apostasy. But,

Secondly, all three will be much more clearly distinct by our further showing
when, and in what manner all three came: And first.

Antichrist sensual (or his Supreme power) was (about the year 407) an
Alienigena of the Northern Nations, without the pale of Rome Imperial: But,
after he had invaded and (as it were) vanquished the Roman Empire, he became
(in short process of time) a proselyte in the body of apostasy, being drawn
unto it by the Bicorn-Pseudo-prophetick-beast, that deceived those that dwelt
upon the earth by means of those miracles, which he had power to do, etc. Rev.
13. 14, For, that bicorn Beast won Antichrist sensual, and his floud-like
armies, and Alie's (originally Heathens, and Arrians) to a kind of
Pseudo-christianity in the body of Apostasy, wherein he, and his successors (or
the major part of his political body) held, or might hold all the proprieties
of sensual Antichrist under a loose, careless, trivial, fruitless profession
of Christ for 1260 years: The Mahumetans carried on his more literal, and loose
Christians his more spiritual progress. But,

Antichrist secular, and spiritual (who, or whose superintendents are more
properly that Son of perdition of whom the Apostle speaks) were Indigenae in
the Roman Empire, and are (most properly) that matter, or body of the Apostasy.

Having thus far described and distinguished all three, we shall (as we have
already showed when) further enquire in what manner Antichrist sensual, came.
And secondly, when, and in what manner Antichrist secular, and spiritual, (the
more proper body of the son of perdition) first came. And first,

Antichrist sensual (under the conduct of his proper head, the second Dragon)
came, torrenti similis, like an (all overturning) deluge about the year 407.
And the Serpent (says the text) cast waters out of his mouth as a flood, after
the Woman, that be might cause her to be carried away of the flood, Rev. 12.15.
But, by that flood of Military Forces, he could not so carry her away as to
destroy her (for that was his intent as the text imports, and his practice
proved) but he caused her to flee into the Wilderness for 1260 years, ver.
6.14. After her flight, he went and made war with the remnant of her seed, ver.
6. And when her Witnesses had finished their primitive Testimony (about the
year 407) he overcame, and killed them, chap. 11.7. He then also finally slew
the first Dragon (that had invited him for a refuge) by the conque^ing Swordof
his floud-like Armies; translated his (or rather the Christian Princes)
Decapolit-Empire, and seated himself in the major part of it, till he gave his
power, and authority (the Supremacy therein) to the (by him first wounded)
Beast Deca-diademick Papal, chapter 13.7, 4.

Thus we see the coming of Antichrist sensual, was with all visible, and open
violence, and in a Profession of literal Heathenism, and gross Heresies;
therefore, he did not, nor could come (secret, and undiscerned as the Son of
perdition did) with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness: For, he was so far
from coming with all deceiveableness of a nonappearance, that he came (as
Sodom, not ashamed, disclosed her sins) openly manifest, and apparent:
therefore, the Church saw him openly (could not but see him) and fled from his
face into the Wilderness for 1260. years, Verse 6.14. Sundry texts so expressly
assert the Series of this second Dragon, and of (the then chief part of the
body of Antichrist sensual) his floods of visibly profane, and most wicked
men, and manners, that it seems impossible to be doubted, or contadicted: And
sundry faithful Church-Histories, uncontroulably, determine (though by
undeniable collection, and consequence) the time, and manner of his coming as
aforesaid, and will further appear. But,

Secondly, Antichrist secular, and spiritual (the more proper body of the
Apostasy, and son of perdition) came about the year 412. also (under the
conducts of the Sea-born, and Bicorn beasts Papal) with all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness; whereby they least appeared, what they were indeed when they
came 2 These. 2.10. Rev. 13.13, 14.

But this threefold distinction (as also how, and when each came at first) will
be much more clear, by showing what earth brought forth the bicorn false
Prophet. And therefore.

And I saw another beast (says the text) come out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a Lamb, etc. chapter 13.11.

Out of the earth: Non omnis fert omnia Tellus: The false Prophet Bicorn, and
Papal, grew not out of every ground: The Highway least honored him; he it as
little; therefore, gross Heresies, and open profaneness, (fruits of the
Highway ground, which neither could hide him, nor be hid from others) he (at
fitst at least) affected not; nor was that his native soil that brought him
forth: But the thorny and stony grounds (the truer. Parents of all deceits)
were the producers of him: Those Professors (especially the stony ground) gave
him his first being, and their professions furnished him with all deceits: For,
the stony ground deceives (not some single persons, but) the whole body of the
Apostasy of Antichrist; that is, this Rocky ground (Professors lightly
over-lay'd with a trivial, and superficial earth of shallow knowledge, and
obedience) deceives its painful Sowers, and all that see it: It were fondness
(they think) to say: At quando Messis? when they see it send forth seeds of
Grace so fast: But it forthwith retracts its fertility, and, like a Furnace,
consumes that seed it cherished before, and is most cruel in killing the
Witnesses of the truth: For, the blind and ambitious Offspring of the stony
ground, brings, of all evil Reports, the worst against all good men and
Manners; because blind Vipers, of all. Serpents, bite forest, and they, of all
other, are most deadly. And,

Secondly, It deceives themselves most: If we (say they) have Grace like a
grain of Mustard Seed, we need no more; A little is enough, the least
sufficient. They are much deceived, though they, in part, say the truth: For,
Grace like a grain of Mustard Seed is sufficient for the fimplest, and weakest
sincere Professor: But a careless, contented, proud knowledge (though it be
never so great) is quite contraryto true Grace, which is ever growing: Sincere
Professors grow daily in grace, and in the knowleage of our Lord Christ: But a
careless, contented, shallow knowledge continually resists the Grace of God, is
ever busy in bringing evil reports upon it, and watches to work the ruin of
the Witnesses of it: This is not (that which hypocrites take it to be) the
grace of God either like a grain of Mustard Seed, or in any measure: Nor did
our Savior say, that the Kingdom of God was like a grain of Mustard Seed,
standing at a stay; but like a grain of Mustard Seed, which (though a small
seed) grows as it were, into a Tree.

The Son of perdition should come with all deceiveableness: And this spiritual
profaneness of a contented, shallow, literally sound knowledge, with like
obedience, was the way of that son of perdition: Therefore; He did not, could
not come as an Arrian, or Mahumetan, or as Antichrist sensual came: There was
nothing so great deceievableness in such gross Heresies, and open profaneness,
which appertain (as more manifest) to Antichrist sensual, and not so properly,
to this secular, and Spiritual, son of Perdition, who should come, and came
about the year 407 (not with open, manifest, or gross Heresies, and manners
conform, but) with all deceiveableness of appearance of truth in knowledge,
obedience, Doctrine, profession, Miracles, and pretenses to be the true
Catholic Church: These are the Angelical colors of deceiveableness, under
which he (and chiefly his Super-intendents) works (secure, and as it were
unseen) all works of spiritual wickedness, and under which he came: Of all
these we shall speak briefly, and in some order, but leave their Miracles to
their proper place: And first, of the deceiveableness of their pretense to be
the Catholic. Church.

It was the Apostasy (over which the Super-intendents this Man of sin presided)
that seemed Catholic, or universal; And that body of Apostasy was the
Antithesis to the true Catholic Church: Herein they deeply deceived those that
dwelt upon the earth, and were themselves deceived.

The text says, A falling away must come, 2 These. 03. That is, there should be
a grand and general revolt of the Gospel Church from Faith, and obedience, say
some Expositors: They are so many, and common, we need not quote them: But
there could not be a general revolt of Saints from all inward Faith, and from,
at least, some outward, weak, and scarce-visible obedience: Such therefore,
must be excepted: But, otherwise, the Apostasy might seem general: We shall
search the truth of it in the Types, and in their Antitype. And first,

The Apostasy of Israel under the Pharisees might seem general, and the
Pharisees might pretend (by the generality) to be (with their followers) the
true Catholic Church.

Secondly, The Apostasy of Israel under Ahab might pretend (by the generality)
to be the Catholick-Church.

Thirdly, The Apostasy of Israel in the Wilderness (when the perfidious Spies
searched the Land of Promise) might pretend (by the generality) to be the
Catholic Church: For, all Israel, to a man (about four excepted) fell from
Faith, and obedience: They all observed, literally, legal Ordinances (so far as
we find) well enough, but rejected the Prophetical traditions, that promised
them the Land of Promise: They fell from Faith in the Promises, from Faith of
veracity, and from obedience: All fell away except as aforesaid: All rebelled
against God, against Moses, and Aaren, and would have stoned the two faithful
Witnesses that were sent, Numb, 14.9, 10, 11.

Therefore the ten Spies (porters of evil reports) dyed immediately by the
Plague, and all Israel, whom they had infected with the Pestilence of that
Apostasy (all to a man from twenty years upwards, two excepted) dyed in the
wilderness, ver. 29.

And all that sad Prophetic story is told, (as it were mutato nomine) of their
Antitype (the body of Apostasy) who (by their generality) pretend to be the
Church Catholic, who cast away (look not after) the Promises in the Prophetic
Scriptures, nor after substantial truth, and obedience; but basely espouse a
trivial, superficial, shallow (though somewhat literally sound) knowledge, with
obedience conform, which is the productor of evil reports, blasphemies,
persecutions, and the pathway that the son of perdition came, when he came
with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness about the year 412, as will
instantly appear: For, this way is deceiveableness it self (most deceitful) and
that sin, chiesly, that shuts Heaven, whiles they, and their accomplices conceive
it to be the only Key to open it: This was the way of his coming about the year
four hundred and seven, ten or twelve; let us turn, therefore, our eyes to
about that time, to see more clearly, both the time, way, and manner of his
coming.

St. Hierom's Record (and he is the fittest testator here) best occurreth his
commencement at such a time, and in such a manner as the Apostle predicted, and
I here have briefly described: Of him Erasmus (as Clerks Church History
witnesses) thus writes: Quis doces aptius, quis delectas urbanus: St. Jerome
was (in Erasmus esteem, as it might appear) the best Teacher, and most
delightful writer of all the Fathers: He also lived, and was at Rome in that
very juncture of time, when the Christian world was turning upon the hinge of
Apostasy, and commencing that grand revolt, which ^he Apostle speaks of:
Therefore, his Authority (the best of any) may here stand good.

But he (about the year 406, as we shall show) called Hieron. ad Marcoll V: du
am. Idem contra Jov^n. lib. L.
Rome-Christian (the Meiropolis of the then revolting world) a receptacle of
Devils, and fallen Babylon: And St. Jerome sure (a most vigilant Father of the
Church, and a sober Writer) would not have called Rome-Christian
(then-reviloing) fallen, if he had not seen good reason, or rather real truth for
it; that she was then fallen, or in falling: But he gave sufficient reasons; and
those reasons, we shall afterward abundantly show to be real truths: For, it
follows *When I livea (says he) in Babylon, an inhatitant of the purple whore,
after the Roman Laws, I would have written something of the holy Ghost, and
have dedicated the Treatise to the Bishop of that City: And behold that
seething pot, which was seen in the Prophet Jeremy, looking out of the North,
Hieron in Pref. lib. Did. De Spirit. Sarct.
begins already to buil, and the Senate of Pharisees cried out at me all at
once: Neither was there so simple a Scribe in all that ignorant Rabble, which
conspired not against me: wherefore, I am now (as it were out of Captivity)
neturned to Jerusalem, etc.

Tempora mutanfur: A sudden change into a strange Antithesis: Rome (of late,
the City of Righteousness) revolted, as in a moment, to be the Head of the
Mystery of Iniquity; and her Professors (once fruitful in all good works) were
turned Pharisces: And the Senate (says he) of Pharisces cried out at me all at
once; neither was there so simple a Scribe in all that ignorant Rabble, that
conspired not against me: Against whom? Against St. Jerome, whom the Papists
themselves acknowledge to be a Reverend Father of the Church.

Ah persidious people of the City of Apostasy! How soon is the Metropolis her
self of the Primitive Church become unstable as waters, and the once firm sear
of her faithful Witnesses, revolted from Faith and manners: For, the manners of
that upstart, proud, Catholick-Church pretending Apostasy were (mores
Iniquissimi) most inhumane (above Heathens insolences) even to St. Jerome, one
of the ablest, and most worthy Fathers of the Church, who, apparently had more
serious and real worth, and solid depth of good ground in him, then all the
petty, pibble Quarry of that proud Senate of Pharisees had.

And this antitype (Church-Catholick pretending) Apostasy (when she but began
to put forth her rebellious head, and first opened her blasphemous mouth
against the faithful Witnesses of the truth) had (as much as all her Types had)
deceitful grounds sufficient to pretend to a Church-Catholick, and might, and
probably did thus plead: Why, Jerome, do you coms (by your Dedications) to
dictate to us, as if we needed your instructions in the tenants of the
Homousian Faith? Had we needed your help, we had sent for you: And what need
(do you think) can the Supreme Representatives of the Catholick-Church here,
have of your help, a single, and obscure person? And will you insult alone over
the Catholick-Church, tax ber with covetousness, rash censures, want of
Charity, Oppression, Apostasy, and we know not what? Is this your Christian
meckness, and submission? Cannot the City live in peace for you, nor the Church
in quiet? We all (all here as one man) disdain your daring boldness, and detest
your pride: And the Senate of Pharisees (said Jerome) cried out at me all at
once, etc.

The Apostasy (the truth-opposing Apostasy) was, or then seemed Catholic, and
the true Catholick-Church fled (or was then flying) away into the Wilderness.

That wicked apostasy (even in her Infancy) had aspired to the false title of
the true Catholick-Church, whom she most persecuted, and conspired against her
most faithful Witnesses: And that (if the Records of many, besides Jeroms, may
be believed) in the Metropolis of the true Primitive (but then revolting)
Church.

This Apostasy, therefore (as her Types were) seemed general, or Catholic, and
did deeply deceive her self, and those that dwelt upon the Earth, with the
falsely arrogated or stolen title of the true Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

St. Jerome was no base Porter of evil reports, no morose, ^ash, t^^ie accuser,
but the most faithful of all the Fathers (at least then living) to reprove,
exhort, correct, rebuke, instruct: Et quis docet aptius: None taught with more
sincere and true Christian candor.

But relapsing Rome (thus reproved plainly by him) paid dear for her Apostasy,
and obstinate impenitence: For, about the very next year (and that fully
confirms the truth of his reprooss, and the equity of his just complaints) was
Rome besieged, made tributary, and the body of her Christian Empire began to be
translated: And, about five: years after, the City (the second time besieged)
was taken, plundered, burnt, and almost totally depopulated by the Plague,
Sword, Famine, Fire: Then might that miserable City call on Jerome, and cry,
Solon, Solon: Then was the first, and best head of the Sea born beast secular,
and Papal, wounded (as it were) unto death, upon the day of his Birth, or so
soon as he was brought forth: And then Rome Papal, or the tenfold body of
Apostasy (persisting still obstinate, and impenitent) was, with her revolting
head, or Metropolis (the Ruins of Rome literal) given up (by a most just
judgment) to persevere in that grand, blind, Apostasy, and Rebellion against
God for 1260 years. In which Epoche, Heaven should be shat, that it should not
Rain (at least that promised Rain of special mercies, and divine Graces) and
yet be open all that time to send down (to pour forth) the six Vials (full of
the Plagues, and wrath of God) upon the obstinate, impenitent, Antichristian
world: And this grand inundation of dreadful evils (temporal, and spiritual)
flowed (as from its proper fountain) from the Churches too free contributing to
the general Apostasy, by falling (some wholly, some in part) from Faith, and
manners, to affect a careless, shallow, fruitless knowledge with obedience
comform.

From faith and manners: That is, not from Faith of Doctrine, though she fell
from that (by degrees) in part: That was (in the beginning of the Apostasy)
somewhat competently sound, but profanely, and carelessly shallow, chiefly
because it wanted right, and charitable application.

But from Faith and obedience; that is, in her true members (though that but in
part) from her, and their first Faith of veracity, and obedience conform to
Gospel rule: For, sound Doctrine is (vas continens) a fit Vessel to hold forth
sincere obedience, either in a full, or a more remiss measure; And as fit (by
the abuse of it) to carry on that grand defection aforesaid. And when began
this grand Apostrophe, or diversion of the Gospel Church from Faith, and
obedience?

St. Jerome gives you an infallible character (a most sure mark) of the time of
this revolt, expressly, in these words: And behold, that Seething-pot, which was
seen in the Prophet Jeremy looking out of the North, begins already to boil:
That is, the fire of affliction from the Natitions of the North (the Goths,
Scythians, Francks, and sundry others) began to make the Pot of Apostasy (the
falling Professors of the revolting Church) boil in affliction, that their
filthy profaneness (their careless contempt of solid truth and sincere
obedience) might boil out.

But it did then but begin to boil (begins says he already to boil) for it
had not then reached Rome, the Metropolis, or middle part of that Pot: This
complaint, therefore and that Apostasy, or the nearest proximity to it (as is
then appeared to St. Jerome) might be, or begin about a year before she was made
tributary in 407, or about six years before she was taken, plundered, and burnt
by Alaricus in 412. For then that fire of affliction made that Pot boil in the
middle: The full conclusion, and clear inserence is this: That Apostasy, or
nearest proximity thereto (of, and for which St. Jerome so grievously, and most
justly complained) might appear to him to begin, or be apparent about the year
406. For, the next year was Rome besieged, and paid tribute the next year
after: Then that Pot did more then begin to boil; And, about four hundred, and
four, it did not begin: For, Oros. Paul. Diat. Prosp. Cland.
then Stillico subdued Radigusus, killed and took all his Army, consisting of
two hundred thousand; Baron. Annal.
He also, about that year, beat Alaricus two, or three times, and drove him
into Pannonia: Then the fire of affliction scorched sore those barbarous
Nations, and the Pot of which Jerome spoke, was scarce touched, or little
afflicted therewith: Therefore, that grand degeneracy, of which Jerome thus
complained, must appear to him to be, or begin about the year 406, when the Pot
of Apostasy began to boil, and when the Powers of Rome-Christian, and Imperial,
and of the Primitive Church began to be translated into the succeeding Kingdoms
of the second Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet (as to the far larger part of
that Power) for 1260 years.

Howbeit, I see no necessity, that we should bind the ingress of this Apostasy,
or the Commencements of the other Epochaes (by a strict-limitation) to any one
certain, or fixed year: But they all (brought forth as it were together) began
(circa haec tempora) much about those times: To wit, (more apparently and
especially) about the years four, hundred and seven, ten, or twelve.

But (may some say) St. Jerome's testimony (and you produce no other) is too
weak to sustain the truth of the Commencement of the Apostasy of Antichrist,
so far as to show how, and when it began.

I Answer: I shall add the ample witness of sacred Writ, of many Writers, and
of some Councels, and Fathers to his testimonies, and so make a twisted cord or
a manifold Record, not, perhaps, easy to be broken.

St Jerome then lived, in that very time, wherein those sacred Prophesies
(pointing forth Primitive Romes fall under the Figure of Babylon) were
fulfilled; saw, and might observe the fulfilling of them: He, therefore had
those advantages (above all the Fathers) that might render him the fittest
expounder of them: For, Chrysostom dyed at the beginning of their fulfilling:
St. Ambrose dyed in, or soon after the fulfilling of them: St. Jerome only was
an Eyewitness of their fulfilling, and lived after about 13. years: For, then
St. Augustine was scarce grown to the repute of a Father, nor so fit to take
notice of those transactions: He survived St. Jerome about fifteen years, was a
powerful impugner of Primitive Sects, and so far prevailed, that many owned the
Orthodox Faith, and embraced the unity of (then revolted) Papal Rome, whose
Faith was then (excepting as aforesaid) but little heterodox: That Church (not
withstanding his high deserts, and great pains) persecuted and excommunicated
him until his dying day, as we shall instantly show, partly by his own
complaints partly from the Authority of a Cloud of faithful Witnesses, and
expressly from the testimony of Boniface the second. We shall therefore first
see how St. Jerome (as the most competent for it) paraphraseth upon those
prophetic Scriptures, that foretold the time, and manner of the ingress of the
grand Apostasy. And first, the text faith, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Apocal.
18.2.

And St. Jerome applies those very words to Imperial Rome (in Name Christian,
not much less in outward Profession, and Doctrine) in that very juncture of
time, when the grand defection first commenced: called her then expressly (as
the text also then did) fallen Babylon.

We find this assertion (It is fallen) Reduplicated in the text; And not
improperly: For, Rome Imperial, and (more in name then thing) Christian, then
fell in a double (to wit, both Temporal and Spiritual) respect. And first.

She fell temporally (about the year four hundred and ten, or twelve) as a
great Millstone cast into the Sea, chapter 18.21. And a Millstone so cast is seen
no more for ever: The whole Chapter is an entire description of her twofold
fall, and plainly shows, that the terminus a quo of her temporal fall had no
terminus ad quem, and, in that respect, should be eternal.

Here Doctor Hammonds Paraphrases may supply the place of St. Jeroms: Noting
(says Hammond upon the 14th. and 21th. Verses) that Rome shall never be the
barbourer of Heathen Idols (her former Idols) or the seat of the Empire any
more.

The same says Morney, and many others, consubscribing with Jerome, to those
express texts of sacred Scripture: Thus we see, that the temporal fall (with
the time of it) of Rome Imperial (then partly Pagan, partly Orthodox, and
partly heretical) is signally apparent from sacred Scriptures, and from the
testimonies of the fittest unfolders of them.

It Is true (may some say) Honorius (who dyed about the year 427) never, or
scarce at any time came to Rome after 407, but left that City to the Bishop
thereof, to the day of his death: But Valentinian the third Reigned after
Houortus for about thirty years: Therefore Rome did not fall forever in 410,
nor so fall temporally, but that it recovered (contrary to Jeroms, Hammonds,
Morneyes, and many others testimonies, and contrary to the Records of sacred
Scripture, upon which chiefly they ground their assertions) to be the seat of
the Empire, for some time after four hundred and ten or twelve.

I answer, whether Valentinian resided constantly at Ravenna or came sometimes
to Rome, I exactly observe not in History: But Morney, and many other Authors
affirm, that Ravenna was (after 412) the place of residence to the Supreme
Powers secular in Italy: To wit, to those few following (and but reputed, or so
styled) Emperors; To the Kings of the Goths, and of the Heruli, and to the
Exarchs of Ravenna.

If Ravenna was Valentinians place of residence, or he sometimes (but a
stranger) at Rome; Then was Rome no more the seat of the Empire under him. But,
Secondly, suppose Valentinian had resided at Rome all the time of his Reign,
yet had not Rome, therefore been the seat of the Empire, but, at best, but the
Metropolis of the Kingdom of Italy: For, the Nations of the Empire were rent
from her; And Constantinople was then the Supreme Imperial seat of the
remaining Nations.

Thirdly, Were it, that the Nations were not then rent away from Rome, and
admit Valentinian had reigned in her all his time; yet his Government had been
little more then titular; because Leo Magnus (then Bishop of Rome) ruled Rome,
and all that the Emperor should rule, after the Law of his own arbitrary will:
For, Rome was then no more Imperial, but Papal, and Pope Fascic. Tom page 51.
Leo was of such repute, that what he spoke was so approved, that it was not
lawful for any (no, not for the Emperor) to dissent in the least thing:
Therefore, what ever Valentinian did, or could say or do, it signified nothing
without the condesent of Leo Magnus, that ruled (as it were alone) both the
City, and Country, and might regulate Valentinian himself, as being but one
horn of the wounded, (and then scarce healed, but after Decadiademick) Beast
Papal: For, Leo Magnus was Anti christ's Eliah for false miracles, and as it
were the Pseudo prophetic mouth in his time, of the Bicorn beast, that
deceived those that dwelt upon the Earth, by means of those miracles which were
given him to do, etc. For,

Fourthly, Attila and his Armies (that- Flagellum Del, and scourge of the
world) marched toward trembling Rome to reduce herinto ashes: Then the two (if
I may so call them) Emperors of the East and West (conjunct, or both together)
durst not look upon his Army. Maffae. 12. p. 164. Gench. Bergom.
But Leo alone went forth to meet him, treated with him, and terrified the said
Attila with an apparition of a Clergyman, shaking a two-edged sword at him,
and threatening to destroy him, and his Armies, if he condescended not to Pope
Leoes demands: Attila, affrighted, forthwith retired with his Army; And so Leo
saved Rome and all Italy from the sword.

So when Genserious spoiled Rome, purposing to have burnt it, there was no
Emperor to interrupt his Armies; ^o, scarce so much as the name of a King to
oppose him; But the same Massaeus p. 164. Gench. p. 608,
Leo prevailed with him to spare the City: Her Bishop ruled in, and over her:
Rome was never any more Imperial; no, scarce regal; but Papal: Never Imperial,
but in name for a little time; ever in deed Papal after 412. Therefore, Rome
(after 4.2) was no more the seat of the Empire, but subject to the Bishop
thereof, and both he, and it (for a long time) were subject to Ravenna even
then, when but an Exarchate of the Greek Empire.

The nine Emperors after Valentinian, were but Augustuli (not worth the
naming) therefore I omit them: And Valentinian (though he reigned much longer
than they all) may be reckoned one of them: They all bare little Rule; Leo, at
that time, Ruled Rome and all Italy; and therefore, its signally apparent from
the performances of those Prophesies (in the 17 and 18 Chapters) as we find
them faithfully recorded in History; That Rome Primitive, but Apostate in
manners (often adumbrated by Babylon in those Chapters) fell temporally about the
years four hundred and ten or twelve, according to the manifold predictions of
those Scriptures, and the Glosses and Paraphrases of the fittest and ablest
expounders of them: that is, that Rome fell (like a great Millstone cast into
the Sea;) finally, about 412. from all power as Pagan and from ever being any
more the Supreme Seat, either of the Heathen or Christian Empire. And

Secondly, Her Apostasy or Spiritual fall, and the time of it, is no less
apparent: First from Scripture. Babylon (says the Text) is fallen, not fallen
only Temporally as aforesaid, but) Spiritually Fallen also: For it follows. And
is become the habitation of Devils, the hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage
of every unclean and hateful bird, verse. 2.

This Apostasy, and that temporal fall (as the cause and effect) are so
contexed in those Texts, that they cannot possibly, but be contemporal as
aforesaid, which also the testimony of a Cloud of Writers witnesses:
Therefore, that Apostasy began (must needs begin) much about the time when Rome
fell temporally about the years four hundred and seven, ten or twelve.

Did the Pagan and heretical parts, only, thus fall? I answer, They that never
stood, never fell: Prosternatus humo non habet unde cadat: They did not, could
not, so fall, Spiritually, as to be chiefly (if at all) intended in those
Texts: But the Faith of the Church of Rome was once famous throughout the
world, Romans 1.8. And, she (not like Sardis, famous for a name that she lived)
lived famous for utility in all good works according to Gospel-Rule: But a
falling away was to come; and Rome (the Metropolite-head) with her body (some
few, no doubt, excepted) then fell or began to fall from the utility of the
Orthodox Faith, though not much at first from the Doctrine of it. This faith of
inutility (or the practice of that Apostasy) is most in use almost every where.
This Apostasy was then (when those Primitive Apostates began to fall
Temporally) so grand and general; That the Spirit of God uses a grandeur of
words to express the greatness of it. His words (in the Evangelist) are these:
And after these things, I saw another Angel come down from Heaven, and the
Earth was lightened with his Glory: And he cried, mightily, with a strong voice,
saying; Babylon the great is fallen is fallen, (not only Temporally by a final
excision from ever being, as formerly, Pagan or Imperial, but) Spiritually
fallen also and become the habitation of Devils, etc. That is, not fallen much
from sound Doctrine, but sincere obedience; not from Orthodox Faith, but from
Faith of veracity or fidelity; not from a form of Godliness, but from the power
of it: And so far fallen as to persecute and conspire against (as it were by
common consent) the witnesses of solid Truth, and practisers of it.

This Spiritual Apostasy or falling away, is also fully confirmed by (as the
effect of that cause) not only the Temporal fall of the Empire, but the flight
of the Gospel Church at the same time: For, such Spiritual, grand and general
revolts in Types, were usually acom-companyed (as their effects) with the
flying of the Persecuted Saints (the supports of those places) and with the
final excision, translating, or destruction of those places.

But we shall see what Expositors say and how they further show the completion
(contrary to the tenants of many modern Opinionists and some sober Writers) of
those Texts in that very juncture of time. It Is Salvians complaint Dr. Ham. in
Apocal. 17. note F.
(says Doctor Hammond) every where throughout his Book De Providentia; That
the Impieties of the Christians were so great, and particularly those
abominable Commissions and Customary practices of all unnatural uncleanness
(which have ever been constantly, the destroying (not only of the Canaanites,
but) of the Jews and Christians) that it was Gods will they should be thus
punished by the Barbarians, who (being Christians, though Arrians) were much
more tolerable then these, who (though not Arrians) were (many of them) very
abominable livers; where note. That not the Heathens nor the Heretics in Rome,
but the Christians (for the most part Orthodox, but Apostate in manners) were
the chief cause of Salvians complaint.

Id. in Chapter 16.19.
Doctor Hammond divides that great City (as it was indeed divided) into three
parts: To wit, into Heathens, Heretics, and Orthodox, which last had the
Supreme power and pre-eminence, and (having done this) he labors hard (as he
that would wash a Black-amore white) to free the third part (the Orthodox) from
this Signal revolt sounded forth (as by a Trumpet) by the strong voice of a
mighty Angel; And would make the other two parts (the Heathens and Heretics
that were not, or were less (if at all) capable of it) the matter of this
stupendous revolt, causing such astonishment and destruction; for he seeks to
transfer Jeroms record against those real (though for the most part Orthodox)
revolters, against and upon those Heathens and Heretics, who properly, could
not be said to fall then, because they either fell, or rather never stood,
before: And (while he seeks to do this) he himself quotes Salvian, whose record
seems quite contrary: For, he expressly justifies those Barbarian-Arrians, (the
worst Heretics) as much more tolerable than those Christians in Rome, who
(though not. Arians, but more Orthodox) were abominable Livers.

Having thus far seen Salvians witness, and Doctor Hammonds also, (partly
against himself) we shall now further examine Saint Jeroms express testimonies
of those times. When I lived (says he) in Babylon, an Inhabitant of that
Purple whore, I would have written something of the Holy Ghost and have
dedicated the Treatise to the Bishop of that City.

Of what City? Of Rome Christian sure, even then when most generally Orthodox,
but Apostate in manners, and whom St. Jerome and the sacred Text, calls (and
therefore calls) fallen Babylon, and the purple whore: For, Rome was never
before so generally Orthodox as then; nor the Orthodox therein ever before, so
depraved in manners as at that time: As at that time, when Imperial Rome fell
for ever, as the Prophetic Evangelist predicted, and the Primitive Fathers
(the fittest unfolders of those Texts) partly saw and bare faithful Record: And
at that time immediately before or at the ingress (when Rome Papal commenced)
of the grand Apostasy.

And who was then Bishop of Rome? Innocent the first was then Bishop (not of
the Heathens or gross Heretics therein, but) of the reputed, most Orthodox,
but Apostate in manners: For he must needs be then Bishop thereof (by consent
of all Writers of Annals) about the years four hundred and five or six, when
Jerome would have dedicated his Treatise to him. For,

Secondly, The Pot (says Jerome) that was seen in the North, spoken of by the
Prophet Jeremy, begins already to boil: But such a boiling Pot of affliction
was never seen by Pagan or Imperial Rome, or by the Primitive Church till about
the years four hundred and seven, ten, or twelve, when the Apostasy of Imperial
Rome (then full) caused her fall, and when the Papal Apostasy began: And then
Innocent, at that very time, began to rule the revolting Church, which (neither
in all the ten Pagan, or the eleventh Pagano-Arrian persecutions) was forced to
betake her self to flight before this Pot of the grand Apostasy began to boil
in afflictions from the flaming Sword of the second Dragon.

That Pot of tribulation was to continue boiling, from that time aforesaid,
(but in the first eight Centuries more mildly) for 1260 years, Chapter 12.7.14.

Thirdly. The Pot (says he) that was seen in the North, spoken of by the
Prophet Jeremy begins already to boil: This not only imports the final
excision of Rome Pagan, the translating of the Roman Empire, and profligation
of the Primitive Church; but also an ingress of the Gospel Church into another
servitude for 1260 years: for so the boiling Pot in the Pattern shadowed forth
the Jewish Captivity in Type Babylon, as a Figure of this under Papal Rome: And
so Saint Jerome here appositely applies it, as to her proper Antitype expressly
called also (both by him and by the sacred Text) Babylon. Jeremiah 1.14.15.
Apocal. 16.19.

The duration also of this boiling Pot, and the further description of it is
expressed in Chapter 11.2.3. Chapter 12.6.14. and in sundry other Texts, all holding
forth (...) time aforesaid.

Fourthly, And the Senate of Pharisees, (says Jerome) cried out, etc.

Jam nova Progenies: Here Is a new Progeny, the offspring of the Pharisees
(their Antitype Synagone of proud, factious, censorious, Christ-crucifieing
professors) newly sprung up in the place of the late meek, sober, charitable
professors of the Primitive Church.

Fifthly, Wherefore (says Jerome) I am now (as it were out of Captivity)
returned to Jerusalem.

This denotes; That the Pharisees of falling Rome were the first fruits or
praecursive part, of the Son of Perdition, that then came to lead the Gospel
Church and Saints into the last, greatest, and most grievous Captivity under
the Antichrist, predicted by Prophets and Apostles.

Sixthly: And I saw another Angel (says the Text,) And he cried mightily with
a strong voice, saying Babylon the great is fallen is fallen; Fallen temporally
from all (at least all grounded) hopes to be the Imperial City, or holy City,
or head City of the Gospel Church: And fallen spiritually, to be a Senate of
proud Pharisees, a Synagogue of Censorious Hypocrites, seat of the Mystery of
iniquity, Mother of the Son of perdition and the Spiritual Metropolis of the
body of Antichrist. But here we might enquire who, possibly, this Angel might
be, that cried thus mightily with a strong voice.

I answer, The seven Stars were seven Angels or overseers of the seven Churches
of Asia, Chapter 1.20. Therefore, This Angel might be (for he could be no imaginary
or Chimaera-Angel that cried mightily and was never heard; and filled the Earth
with his Glory and yet was never seen) some overseer of, at least, some part of
the Gospel Church: And, if so, why not Saint Jerome? For never any Angel or
Overseer of the Primitive Church (after the Apostles times) cried so mightily
with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, etc. But both Papists
and Protestants (and both unawares) plainly import (in the delineation of his
person) that Saint Jerome was indeed, this Angel: For (as both draw Gregory's
Picture with a Dove at his Ear) both make Jeronies Effigies with a Lion at his
Foot, which is a plain-speaking Hieroglyphick, that truly expounds the Text:
For it evidently imports; That, as the Lion is King of the beasts, so Jerome was
the Prince or chief of all the Primitive Fathers, For.

Secondly, The Text says, An Angel having great power, cried mightily with a
strong voice, Chapter 18, 1, 2. And this device (Saint Jeroms Picture or Emblem
thus drawn as aforesaid, by Papists and Protestants,) imports; That the voice
of Saint Jeroms Pen was a strong voice like the roaring of a Lion.

Thirdly, That, which that mighty Angel cried with a strong voice, was this,
Babylon the great is fallen, etc. And that which Saint Jerome cried with a
strong voice (which denotes him undeniably, to be the same Angel) was the very
same thing in the same words: To wit, Babylon the great is fallen, etc. No man
ever cried so mightily, with a strong voice, as Jerome did, against the grand
Apostasy at the very beginning of it: Therefore Saint Jerome is most likely to
be this Angel, that cried thus mightily with a strong voice; Babylon (to wit,
Rome Imperial, Babylons penultimate Antitype) is fallen, etc. And, therefore
the Authority of Jerome alone (much more joined with the witness of sacred Writ
and of many Writers) is more then sufficient to confirm the Truth of the time
when Primitive Apostate Rome fell, and when the Papal Apostasy commenced. The
same is also superabundant to prove that the City (called Babylon in the
seventeenth and eighteenth Chapters) was Rome Imperial Apostate in manners:
And, thereby to refell their opinions that (seeming to make it their study how
to add to or diminish from the words of the book of sacred vision) assert the
contrary: It may serve also to undeceive many sober Writers that hold the same
errors, and so to be a Key to open those (Arcana Theologiae) mysterious sacred
Truths that contain the richest treasures of the greatest mercies to present
and after ages: For, as one Ring wanting or misplaced in a Watch makes the
whole Watch be of no use; so one (much more many Texts) misunderstood may make
the whole Prophetic Scripture (or at least part of it) to be of disuse (as a
book fast sealed) and must needs confound the true meaning of many Texts. But

If Saint Jerome was (as both Papists and Protestants (though implicit to them)
thus import) that Angel of great power: Then that Angel (or however Saint
Jerome) cried mightily with a strong voice, saying (not only that Babylon the
great was fallen, but) that Rome Primitive (then commencing Papal and Apostate)
was that falling City, that then fell from faith and manners; He had the Record
of the fittest Primitive Fathers (as well as reason and sacred Scriptures)
co-asserting what he so cried with a strong voice: And this irrefellibly
refells those confident Opinions of very many fond Opinionists and of some
sober Professors, who affirm, that the great City (called Babylon and said to
fall in the 17 and 18 Chapters) was (at her final dissolution) Papal Rome only,
whose five first heads (the Scripture says it) fell before John wrote, above
four hundred years before Papal Rome was in being; but I leave such shameful
inconsequences to the sober Reader: But that falling City, in the 17. and 18.
Chapters (which those Opinionists imagine to be Papal Rome) was the literal
City of Rome of Imperial ( Pagan egressive, Papal ingressive) She (as
egressive) was Pagan and Imperial, from which she then fell for ever: She (as
ingressive) was but the Spiritual Metropolis of Papal and Apostate Rome, to
which she then fell: For Papal Rome only went on (though at first with more
mildness and less violence) in the same Apostasy, for which Primitive Rome
fell; Pagan and Imperial Rome (that Apostasy of the more Orthodox was the cause
of it) then fell for ever. And Papal, Decapolite- Rome then rose up (by that
sall of her said forerunner) in that Apostasy.

Seventhly, I would have written (says Jerome) something of the Holy Ghost, and
have dedicated the Treatise to the Bishop of that City.

Jerome (it seems) did not disdain either the Title or Office of a Bishop, but
the abuse of that Office in any person: He would have dedicated his Book to the
Bishop of that City, but found no acceptance from him or his associates. For,

Eighthly: And the Senate of Pharisees, (says he) cried out at me all at once,
etc. This shows the excessive insolence (in the very ingress of it) of the
grand Apostasy, who (most pretending to advance Learning and Religion) were so
far from both that Saint Jeroms book found no acceptance from any of them; what
book could be better penned by man, at that time, then Saint Jeroms was, or be
more necessary then that of his upon the Holy Ghost, against Arrianisme, that
then threatened to swallow up the Church of Christ, the Christian Empire; and,
indeed, all true Learning and Religion: But so far was he or it from finding
due acceptance, that he found, perhaps, not one man amongst them that would
take the pains to read it or that (through cursory reading of it) could
understand it: Such might answer him in scorn, That his book was too high for
their low capacitys to comprehend. They were (no doubt) too wise to read it,
too learned to understand it: Such Learned Non-intelligists now are many: Or
they had (they might imagine) better books of their own making, or made by
orhers to better uses (besides much business of highest concernment) wherein
they busied themselves (no doubt) to as good purposes as they that take in hand
to tresure up thewind.

Suppose a man (I but suppose it) in these last times of that Apostasy, should
write a Treatise effectual to refell errors, to reform manners, to compose
those divisions in and against the Church that threaten (like leakes in a
weather beaten ship) to sink her and to take peace from the Earth; I doubt not
but the Author (were any such) must expect the same or somewhat like, measure
from the modern Apostasy that Saint Jerome found from their Forefathers; scarce
find a man amongst them (such proud in animadvertency ever attends Apostasy)
that would take the pains to read it, many to condemn it unread, or before (by
their cursory reading of it) they could understand it: They have also their
supposed necessary business (in their Opinions) of greatest importance. To wit
(besides secular divertisments) their serious duties (as the Pharisees had) of
formal devotion (for such is the strictest unfruitful profession and soundest
doctrine that deceives by busy misdoing) this they count to be a far more
Heavenly and powerful means to salvation, then the knowledge of the truth
indeed, and the practice of it. But as all the Apostasy (at the beginning of
it) espoused a scornful and sloathful inadvertency: So some (I hope) of the
same Apostasy (now near the dissolution of it) do or may begin to mind things
most conducing to Gods Glory and a general good to all Ages and Nations. But

The Senate of Pharisees cried, etc. We shall briefly, enquire what and for
what they cried out against Saint Jerome, that so we may better perceive what
Apostasy is, and what the sins of it are: So a thorough reformation in practice
(the main-one-thing needful among men, Saints and professors) may be
effectually procured; or at least, the way to remove the evil manners of the
Apostasy of Antichrist (by their being known) may be levigated and prepared. And

First, The matter of their cry and the manner of it might be this: You, Jerome
(we observe) are ever too Censorius, (not that he was so, but themselves were
such) and we utterly condemn (and that is most common with Hypocrites) your
confidence in that you durst, dedicate your book to the Apostolic Bishop of
the Catholic Church, as if you could add the least necessary notion to his
fullness, nor need you be so bold, because the Book is not yours; you can give
no account of it: Not but that Jerome could do it, but brutish inadvertists
arerediest to require satisfaction and least capable to receive it from the
most rational solutions: We dislike (might they say) those way esand courses
you take, as Mendicant and begging ways: Not that Jeroms ways and courses
were such, but the basest of men cast, usually, the vilest imputation (as Nabal
upon David) upon men of greatest piety and parts: We (might they say) are so
busy, and our business of such serious concernments (none are more busy then
the most blind) that we have no time to regard what Jerome says or writes: We
mind (might they say) religious matters more necessary to salvation, then Jerome
new coined notions are: Not but that Jeroms notions were most necessary to
salvation, but the Rabble of Revolting inadvertists think nothing so needful to
salvation as their own empty brainsick conccits: Nor must Jerome (might they
cry) command our Purses, or we charge our selves to promote his useless
Editions: Not but that Jeroms Works were more worth then all the money in their
Purses, but blind Apostates and Hypocrites prefer their money above the due
advancement of Learning or Religion, nor can they, through covetousness (nor
scarce true Saints) be drawn to perfect any good work: Were Jeroms works
(might they say) of such worth, he need not want friends to further him, nor
countenance to carry on his work: All, from the least to the greatest, would
largely recompense him and promote it: This is the fond conceit of foolish
Opinionists that are least forward to do it themselves: For, Virtus vix
laudatur and alget. Virtue seldom finds much furtherance (the Apostasy so
prevails even them) from those that are virtuous, much less from Inadvertists
and Hypocrites; Jerome himself found a great Cry, little friendship from the
Senate of Pharisees. And

Lastly, The whole Senate of Pharisees might cry out against Saint Jerome, all
at once; That he deserved death, for his frequent Blasphemies against the
Catholic Church and Saints: For, such blind Apostates count the true records
and faithful reproofs of the Gospel Witnesses to be blasphemies deserving
death: Such Barbarous, blind and wicked determinations ever attend the ignorant
Rabble of Apostates and Hypocrites: So, such advance Learning and Religion, or
at least neglect both; such rewards, the most Learned and Religious, must
receive at their hands. So much of the matter of their Cry, and manner of it:
We shall now enquire what the cause of their Cry and the intent of it might be.
And so,

Secondly, An Eager may be heard three or four Miles off before it comes to the
place where a man hears it, and its intent seems to be to overturn (as in a
Deluge) all before it; So this general Cry, in Jeroms time, was a palpable sign
of the fast approaches of the Apostasy of Antichrist to overwhelm (as by a
flood) the Gospel Church and her witnesses.

The Cause of that Cry was (on the revolted parties part,) Pride, Envy,
Vainglory, which cause, they cast upon the Gospel witnesses, as if they only
were guilty of it: And so the Type-pharisees in our Saviors time, cried out at
him; Crucify him, crucify him, and made this the false cause of their furious
Cry: That Christ was proud, a self-exalter, and a blasphemous vain boaster:
Real pride in the Pharisees, which they falsely pretended to be in our Savior,
was the cause of their Cry, and of his Condemnation.

Corah's company cried out against Moses; And what was the cause of their Cry?
They imputed Pride (which was real in themselves) to him that was the meekest
man on Earth; you take (said they) too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

Smite him on the month, was the high Priests Cry against Paul; what was the
cause of it? Paul (in the Opinion of the High Priest) was a proud
self-justifier: He justified and praised himself before all the people: I have
lived (said he) in all good conscience before God until this day: That is
(from the day of his conversion) he did exercise himself to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men, Acts 21.1. Chapter 24.16.
Had the High Priest said it, it had been vain boasting, because a lie; but in
Paul it was no lie, and therefore no boasting; but a necessary and
indispensible duty in him: For, every true Saint or witness of the truth must
justify himself according to sobriety; because, they that would justify the
testimony of Jesus (both in words and works) which they hold forth, must
justify (notwithstanding the loud Cries of Apostates and Hypocrites)
themselves as the testators and subordinate fountains of that testimony; Tum
vero exoritur clamor: Then the whole Senate of Pharisees and Apostates cry out
against them (as they did against Christ and against Saint Jerome) all at once;
That they are vain boasters, blasphemers, and proud self justifying
Hypocrites; and what need they any more witness then that out of their own
mouths? The Gospel witnesses, we read, were to be killed (as well by the
Bicorn beasts Accomplices, as by the Heretical beast and his adherents out of the
bottomless Pit) and this has been and is constantly, the cause of their
killing from the hands of Lamb-like Hypocrites: To wit, (on the witnesses part)
their abilities and fidelity of their testimony: And (on those inadvertists and
Apostates parts) pride and fordid, self-exalting-insufficiency, which (being
folly guilty of it) they seek to put from themselves and impute it to the
witnesses of the Truth: Therefore the faithful witnesses (as their calling to
be witnesses of the Truth compells them, and as its their duty to God,
unavoidable) seek to free themselves from their false Charges, justify (as is
most just) themselves and their own words and works: Hereupon the whole
ignorant Rabble of revolting inadvertists redouble their Cry against them all
at once, as proud-vain-boasters, selfexalters, insufficient; And this wicked
Calumny is the chief staff Antichrist has to stay himself upon, his principal
armor wherein he trusts: wherefore, his Accomplices have commonly, such abused
sayings as these in their mouths: Propria laus de te sordet in ore tuo: Let not
thine own Lips praise thee, etc. If they can but make such misapplyed sayings
the matter of their Cry against the Gospel witnesses, they think they have
overcome them sufficiently, killed them with their own weapons, and proved
them, out of their own mouths, to be proud, blasphemous, vain-boasters and
Hypocrites; what need we any more said the Pharisees? This Cry of condemnation
and proness to condemn argues the damnable pride of Apostates and Hypocrites,
and is (without all controversy) the true and infallible Character of them.
Who art thou (says the Apostle) that judge another? That is, who art thou
that judge (art prone to judge) another rashly, falsely, or uncharitably but
a whited wall, a member of the man of sin, and a Son of perdition: For the
Interrogation imports a positive assertion, all soundness of Doctrine, zeal,
and strictness of profession notwithstanding.

Lastly, Nor was there (says Jerome) so simple and mean a Scribe in all that
ignorant Rabble, that conspired not against me. Most unhappy must those men and
times be, when the blind and barbarous Apostasy from faith and manners is so
general, that scarce one man amongst the (at least most seeming) learned and
religious can be found to be so much animadversive as to be capable to read and
understand (as Jeroms was) a Treatise penned to good purpose, but shall rather
(by cursed speaking) oppose the faithful composer of it, or at least, grossly
neglect both him and it. Neither was there (says Jerome) so simple and mean a
Scribe, in all that ignorant Rabble, that conspired not against me. And they,
soon after, conspired against Saint Augustine, against Orthodox Councils, and
against the Gospel Church, as will instantly appear.

We have thus far shown that Romes temporal fall was final as aforesaid; and
that her spiritual fall (some few excepted) might seem total, which shows that
the Apostasy (after the Pattern of her foresaid Types) was or might seem,
general.

Secondly, We have shown the Terminus ad quem of Rome Primitive and Apostate;
as also the Terminus a quo, or commencement of Rome Decapolite and Papal, which
is also the beginning of all these twelve Epochaes: For as no man can build a
firm house upon a false foundation; so I (if I intend to give some short Series
of the Transactions of these twelve Epochaes) must of necessity, seek to lay
(first and above all) a sure foundation in stating rightly the Commencements of
them.

Lastly, I have labored to show in part, what the matter of the Apostasy was,
and what the sins of it were in the beginning of it: And (having done this,) I
shall proceed to show,

Fourthly, How and when the Bicorn Beast laid his foundation of deceit, and
began to build thereon the body of Apostasy.

That the Son of Perdition (the superintendent of that body of Apostasy) came,
and the time of his coming, we have shown sufficiently: But which way came this
Prince of that Apostasy? How did he lead on the Van of that revolted body? What
was the way of deceiveableness wherein he went? What Doctrine for foundation,
did he first lay? What was his practice and profession in that juncture of time
from 404 to about 412 and some time after?

If we consult Saint Jerome here, He is silent: He has nothing (or not much) to
say against the doctrine of the Senate of Pharisees. Their doctrine was not
Arrian, but Homousian; not grossly Heretical, but, for the most part, Orthodox:
Otherwise they, and their superintendent could not so well deceive those that
dwelt upon the Earth: But, That man of sin came (exactly as the Apostle
foretold) with all deceiveableness: And so his doctrine was a contented,
careless, shallow (but for most part sound) doctrine (perverted by a
censorious, uncharitable application) which is most deceitful: For, Deceit
(fortified from truth it self, mis-applyed) is most deceitful, and most
properly the deceit of the false Prophet Bicorne: For, as the greatest
knowledge (that profanely stints it self in its growth, or grows fruitless
for want of right application) is a deficient, trivial knowledge, and the stony
ground's shallow superficies which is most deceitful: So the soundest doctrine
(that serves to shelter and support Pharisaical pride, filthy avarice, and
perfidious fraud) is but (corruption optimi pessima) the most perverse
prevarication of Hypocrifie, whereby the Bicorne beast most deceives, and his
deceived: And this Pillar of smoke and foundation of deceits served him best,
at first, for a substructure to build the body of Apostasy upon.

Cyprian Epist. 7.
He shall teach (says Saint Cyprian) infidelity under a show of faith, the
night for the day, destruction for salvation, and AntiChrist under the name of
Christ.

He shall come (says the Apostle) with all deceivableness of unrightecusness.
And shall deceive, says our Savior (were it possible) the very Elect. This
way of deepest deceits was (like the way of a Serpent upon a stone) the secret
way (not of Antichrist sensual, but) of Secular, and Spiritual Antichrist, more
properly called the son of perdition: For, Antichrist sensual, and his
accomplices, came ( Sodom-like) with little deceitfulness of appearance in
doctrine, or profession; cared not for it in either, because they then desired
not (and now desire not much) to hide their sins: But contrarily,
all-deceiveableness of false appearances in sound doctrine with uncharitable
application; in verbal formalities of strict profession, and in
seeming-serious, fictions of false miracles, was the only, or chief way,
wherein the son of perdition (conform to the Testimonies of those sacred Texts)
came, or could come.

Howbeit, His white vail of deceits was somewhat spotted (even from his Cradle,
or first commencement) with some black spots of unsound doctrine, which made
him (even then) less deceivable to the more discerning, and more visible to the
simple. For,

Liberius (Bishop of Rome about the year 360) was an Arrian, Baron. an. 365.
Maffaeus
and a professed adversary to Athanasius: But he was Bishop of Rome about forty
years before the superintendent of the son of perdition was advanced to preside
supreme in the body of Apostasy.

Pope Anastasius the second, Anastas. Biblioth. in Pontiff. Volat. Gratian.
about the year 490 (holding the Heresy of Acatius) dyed the same death that
Arrius did. But,

Cyricius sought to bring in the prohibition of Priests marriages about the year
400: Platin. Caranz. fol. 90. Bergom. Phil. Morn. Hist. de Papal. circa an. 390.
But this doctrine of Devils (as the Apostle calls it) sprung not up, to
purpose, till after some Centuries of years.

A thing not to be forgot (says Morney upon this occasion) that corruption of
doctrine, as well as of discipline should meet, and march together. For,

Secondly, The President over the Apostasy (even in his, and her Infancy) did
not only innovate something in doctrine, but did much invade the rights of the
Primitive Church in point of Discipline. Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 5. Chapter 10. Socrat.
7. Chapter 11.
His encroachments herein, came with such commanding violence, that Orthodox
Councels could not heal her seeming mortal wounds made thereby: For, He took
away her power of the Keys, and Church Priviledges, by rescuing, and restoring
excommunicate Appellants to him, as he pleased, and arrogated all her rights
unto himself: Wherefore (these bulworks thus broken down, and the Churches
defenses falling on all sides) she was soon (by this means) trodden under foot
of those Gentiles for 1260 years, Revel. 11.2.3. And a flood of (at first
somewhat refined) errors, formal ignorance, filthy (but deceitful) manners
began to overspread (by the same means, and at the same time) the face of the
Christian World. We see, therefore, some beginings of unsound doctrine were in
the ingress of the Apostasy: But the breaches in Church Discipline (the defense
both of doctrine, and manners, and support of the Church) seemed (even then)
irreparable. And

Thirdly, Sundry superstitions (the least suspected seeds of the greatest
Heresies) were liberally sown about the beginning of the Apostasy.

Damasus (instead of Psalms) caused songs to be sung in the Church; Abolished,
the Bible-Translation by the Septuagint: Contrary to which the Council of
Laodicea Decreed Can. 69.

Innocent (about the year 406) Decreed: Caranz. fol. 115.
That all Persous should kiss the Pax.

Leo (about the year 442) brought in Auricular confession: Geneb. 558. Caranz.
143.
Decreed that reverence should be given to the Images, of Saints upon the
penalty of a curse.

Thus we see, That the Doctrine of the body of Apostasy (when the Bicorn beast
first began to build it) was, for the most part sound, but somewhat corrupt,
and (which is Antichrists undeniable Character) carelessly shallow.

Secondly, That he brake down the Primitive Churches wall of Discipline to make
his ingress the more easy, that he might ruinate her, and erect his Apostasy
in her place.

Thirdly, That he loaded her, and fortified his own City of confusion with
sundry superstitions, which grew up after into dangerous Heresies: Thus he
came, and this was the manner of his coming, when he first came to build the
body of Apostasy. But

Fourthly, The great business (from about 400, and for a long time after) was
about Supremacy, and to lay a firm foundation for his threefold Decapolity:
Wise builders seek a sure Rock; so these ( Fatui Structores foolish
master builders) must pretend to find a Rock, when they laid their foundation
upon the sand.

But where must they find this unfound Rock? In the Scriptures, and the Nicene
Council.

In the Scriptures they find Tu es Petrus, And upon this Rock, etc. There they
find Peter to be the Rock, and the Pope (his pretended successor) to be the
foundation of the Church.

This Fundamental Heresy (for so it may well be) was so closely followed, and
so subtly handled upon Scripture account, in that juncture of time, that it
had almost deceived, as I showed before, some chief Fathers of the Primitive
church: Crediderunt Hieronymus, Osiard. p. 473.
and Augustinus Ecclesiam super Petrum fundatam: Sed, retractantes ambo,
dixerunt; Super Fetram Christum, quem Petrus agnovit: Both Jerome, and Augustine
were brought to believe that the Church was built upon Peter; But they both,
retracting, said, upon Christ, the Rock, whom Peter acknowledged.

The rest of the Doctrine of the Apostasy (when it began to prevail apparently
about the year 407) was sufficiently supersicial, and shallow (but most of it
literally, and fundamentally sound) and so much the more fit to deceive,
conform to that coming of the Son of Perdition, whom the Apostle foretold
saying; whose coming is with all deceivableness, etc.

Secondly, That deceitful, fruitless knowledge brought forth like obedience:
Not good works, but evil reports upon all that was good, and wicked practices
against the best men, which Saint Jorom, Saint Augustine, and sundry others
(from their ownsad experience) sufficiently witnessed.

But Saint Jerome calls that new created Corporation of Apostasy; The Rabble of
Ignorance: Neither was there (says he) so simple a Scribe in all that ignorant
Rabble, etc. Sure Saint Jerome here overshoots himself: For, how could Rome
(then revolting) be a Rabble of ignorance, seeing her Doctrine was then, for
the most part (though trivial, and shallow) sound, and (besides some sincere
professors in her) she had, no doubt, her learned Clerks famed for Religion.

Saint Jerome, doubtless, was serious, but not censorious, not rash in calling
the body of that Apostasy; A conspiracy, or a Rabble of pride and ignorance:
For, they that want (as they he complained of appeared to do) right, and
Charitable application in practice (though they should have all knowledge, or
be never so learned) are proud (as the Apostle speaks) knowing nothing: Such
consent not (though they should in words) at least in works, to the Pattern of
sound Doctrine, and are, therefore, trivial, and shallow both in Doctrine and
Obedience.

And that such superficial Proficients (the best of them) know nothing, appears
also expressly in the words of the Apostle: 1 Corinthians. 13.2. Though I understand
all knowledge, and have all Faith, and have no Charity, I am nothing.

Am nothing: Ex nihilo fit nihil: Little knowledge is he like to have, that is
nothing, though he know never so much: He Is nothing that has not Charity: That
is, He has no knowledge, and as little obedience: Both are false, both but
deceits, if his words, and works are without right, and Charitable
application; That Is the depth of good ground, without which, the deepest Earth
is shallow, and the greatest knowledge, and gifts, the greatest deceits: What
wonder then, if sacred Scripture says: Such men know nothing, or are nothing?
And what wrong did Saint Jerome do to the Senate of Pharisees, whom (because he
had sadly experienced them to be such men) he asserted to be; A Rabble of Pride
and Ignorance; seeing the Scripture it self says: Such men are proud, knowing
nothing.

And, If the greatest knowledge, and gifts of such Professors is but
Pseudosophia (the wisdom of folly, or deceit of fools) then how great is the
deceit, and folly of the wisest, and most knowing men, that wants (or seeks not
after) a meek, sober, right, and Charitable application of what they do know
and practice?

It were better, therefore, and their Christian duty to seek depth of Earth at
the hand of the giver of every perfect gift, to become good ground (richly
furnished with a frame of right application) to get a meek candor of Christian
integrity, and right practicing Charity: The labors also of such men in sacred
Scripture are not usually contemptible, nor they so proud, and consident;
However the failings of such may be better born with.

But the Senate of Pharisees (of whom Saint Jerome so greatly complained) was
(at the ingress of the Apostasy) far from such a frame of Spirit, as appears
from their own practices, according to Saint Jeroms and many others testimonies
aforesaid, and as we shall instantly, further show: Therefore Jerome was not
much wrong (or rather judged very right) when he called that Senate (not of
true Seers, but of wicked Spies of evil reports) A Rabble of Pride, and
Ignorance.

Et quis docet aptius, who has more fitly taught us the time of the ingress of
the Apostasy, with the manner of it: To wit (exactly as the Apostle, expressly
foretold) in all deceiveableness of unrighteousness: That is, in a fruitless,
trivial, deceitful, Saint-persecuting, truth-opposing (but somewhat literally
sound) profession, doctrine, and obedience, etc.

God, sure would so have it: That this vigilant Watchman should (by his special
Providence, and appointment) stand at the door of the Church of Christ, and
signisie to her faithful shepherds the certain time when the Wolf brake in
upon her, with the manner of his ingress; that such as should be industrious,
and faithful in their Charge, should not need to be overmuch encumbered in
finding out that instant time of his entering in, and the manner of it; which
also further (and that fully) confirms the first termini (or commencements) of
all these twelve Epochaes. Thus much of the manner, and time of his ingress:
His progress with the manner of it, now invites our Eye a little space.

The False Prophets progress in pulling down the Primitive Church (her Power,
and Privileges) to build therewith, his Apostasy in her place.
THe False Prophet (the Bicorn superintendent of this Decapolite body, which he
was then about to build) having laid his foundation of deceit, and made this
misapplyed Text (Tues Petrus) his chief Pillar in it, proceeded to build upon
it: And which way goes he to work in Building upon this Foundation?

Diruit, aedificat: He destroyed, and built: Destroyed Primitive Church
Privileges; Built his own Supremacy: Beat down Zion, Built Babel: And how was
this done? He destroyed the then almost decayed Unity of the Church, by
Schism: And how may this plainly appear?

Innocent, Zosimus, Boniface, and Caelestin (these four first builders of the
Decapolity of Apostasy) claimed Supremacy in, and over all Churches, and
Councils: The three last sent their Legates to the sixth Council of Carthage,
and ordered them there, to require of that Council the Rights of the Bishop of
Rome. To wit, The Right of power to command, granted (as they pretended) by the
Nicene Council: August. Epist. 47. Epist. Council. sext. Afric. ad Bonifac. Tom.
1. Council. page 519. Socrat. lib. 7.11. Epist. Council. 6. Carth. ad Caelest.
That Council, therefore, of Carthage sent Messengers with Letters to the
Bishops of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, to send the Acts of the
Nicene Council fast sealed up: The Copies came, the Council examined them, and
found no such Canon there, as the first four superintendents of the Apostasy
falsely pretended, but rather the contrary: And so were all these first four
fabers (or master builders) of the mystery of iniquity, found Liars, and were
so proved to be by the certain experience, and authority of an Orthodox
Council, wherein Aurelius was President, and Saint Augustine himself an active
member of it.

Boniface, Hist. Magdeburg. Cen. 6. chapter 10.
Nevertheless (because that Council would not receive their new found
foundation of usurping pride, neither upon Scripture account, from their Tu es
Petrus, by them perverted: Nor from the Nicene Council, which it never decreed)
excommunicated that Council, and therein Augustine himself, and all the
Churches of Africa.

But Boniface the Second (about 115 years after) absolved those Churches upon
their humble submission: Epist. Bonif. 2. ad Eulal. Thessal. Episcop. Et in
Edit. Gregor. 13. chapter 7.
His words are these, Aurelius Bishop of Carthage ( that presided in the sixth
Council of Carthage) with his Colleagues (227 Fathers of Africa) and amongst
them, Augustine himself) began (by the instigation of the Devil in the time of
our Predecessors, Boniface, and Caelestin) to exalt themselves against the
Church of Rome: But Eulalius, now Bishop of Carthage (seeing himself, through
the sin of Aurelius, to stand separated from the ommunion of the Roman Church)
has repented him thereof, entreating to be received to Peace, and Communion
with her, etc. It is therefore, abundantly evident (by the testimony of their
own Writers, and by the authority of this Bishop, who upon their humble
submission, absolved those Churches) that the Spiritual representatives of the
Church of Rome excommunicated that sixth Council of Carthage, and Augustine
therein, and consequently the Churches of Africa represented in that Council;
And (by a Synechdoche partis) they thereby excommunicated the whole Primitive
Church, divesting her of her Church power, and privileges, which that sixth
Council sought to maintain: And so the Church of Rome (by that insolent
excision of the Primitive Churches faithful witnesses) made her self,
manifestly, a Sect from the true Church: For, in that she excommunicated them,
she cut her self off from them, and from the body of the Primitive Church, whom
they did represent, and, in her right, officiate, for

The ground of this Papal Protoschisme from the (then falling, or but new
fallen) Primitive Church, was that foundation, which the Bicorn beast found in
his misapplyed Tu es Petrus, as well as he also did in the Nicene Council: For
(this foundation being first laid, when he first began to build the Corporation
of Apostasy about the year four hundred, and twelve) he proceeded next, to go
this way to work: To wit, (ut diruat Ecclesiam) to destroy the feeble (and
perhaps then flying) Primitive Church by excommunicating her faithful Martyrs,
and maintainers of her just rights, and privileges; By blaspheming her, and
them (the Tabernacle of God in Heaven) by bringing evil reports upon such as
sought most to support her, and by persecuting, serveral ways, both her and
them: August. Epist. 261. ad Caelestin. Edit. Plantin. Phil. Morn. Hist. de
Papat. circa An. 426.
Of this Saint Augustine himself grievously complained: We are threatened (faith
he) with a Posse Comitatus, and Force of arms, to put the sentence of the
Apostolic Sea in execution, and so shall we (poor Christians) stand in greater
fear of a Catholic Bishop, then the Heretics themselves do of a Catholic
Emperor, etc. Jerome complained of the Conspiracy of the Apostasy; But
Augustine here complains of their force of arms, and violence, by them (even
in the infancy of that Apostasy) threatened against St. Augustine, against the
Churches of Africa, and (by consequence) against the whole Primitive Church.

And all these Persecutions, Excommunications, causeless Conspiracies,
threatenings, and at least, offers, or attempts of violence were done (under an
outward vail of deceit) in a superficial, trivial, shallow (but somewhat
literally sound) doctrine, destitute of right application from any principle of
Charity, or right understanding.

For, Here I may hint (which I shall after handle at large) this threefold
clear Character of, and signal distinction betwixt, the false Prophets sensual,
fecular, and spiritual.

Doctrine, grossly corrupt, with manners conform, are the Image, and
superscription of the sensual false Prophet, and his followers: He Is a
Political false Prophet, and they false professors, because their faith (in its
outward form of words) is grossly false, or their practice visibly profane. But,

The false Prophet secular is (no single person but) a Political false Prophet
also, and his followers false professors (not because their doctrine of Faith
is false, though that may be, in many things, unsound, but) because their
Charity (through Covetousness) is false, and their practices, and applications
(from the same extract) corrupt and false as in the Pharisees.

Thirdly: The False Prophet Spiritual, is a Political false Prophet, and his
followers false Professors (not because their Faith, in its literal form of
words, is false, though that may be much unsound, but) because their Charity
(extracted from censorious pride) is false, and their practices, and
applications (from the same spring) most corrupt, as in the Pharisees also: For
the Pharisees held forth (as a Figure of him) the Bicorn beast, or his two
horns, versant about pride, and covetousness: And, as we say: Omnia,
s^ingratum dixeris; So we may say: All their Religion, devotions, duties, and
obedience are most false, if their Charity, and applications (though their
doctrine be never so sound) be corrupt, and false as aforesaid.

This Triplicit Monster (the sensual, secular and spiritual Antithesis to
Gospel truth, and the witnesses of it, thus described) is the three headed
Cerberus, that barks forth (day, and night) all evil reports, rash slanders,
and cavils, against them, and it: For, The very Heathens might have some
glimpse of those three (sensual, secular, and spiritual) lusts (the three
yelling mouths of this infernal Beast) and did most fitly figure them by that
feigned monster.

But the yells of those two last (from principles of pride, and avarice) are
(by far) the fellest, and most loud: Therefore, The Senate of Pharisees (not
the Heathens, or gross Heretics) in Rome cried out against Jerome all at once.
Therefore, The Pharisees (and not the Publicanes) cried out against Christ.
For, Sooner may men silence dogs, then those men from cursed speaking before
they know what, for what, or against whom they speak: For, The two last (led by
the most greedy, and pernicious lusts of pride, and covetousness) are the
cruellest cursed speakers, violently carried on with canine appetites, to
derogate from the best deserving (ut inde diruant) that, thereby, they may
destroy them: For, The superintendents of the two last are the two Horns of
that Bicorn beast, Revel. 13.11. The two representatives Spiritual of the Son
of Perdition, that (under the Lamblike Forms of Religious Zeal in doctrine,
and profession, void of Charity, and right application) cried down Christ
Mystical, as the Type Pharisees cried down Christ personal: And cried down the
Primitive Church, with all her rights, power, and privileges, as the Senate of
Pharisees, as he calls them, cried down Saint Jerome all at once: For, That
Lamblike, Bicorn Beast spoke (says the Text) as a Dragon: These are the means
(those very means) whereby that Bicorn Pseudoprophetick beast (diruit
Ecclesiam) pulled down the Primitive Church: He spoke as a Dragon, cried down
the true Church, the truth of the Gospel, the faithful witnesses of both (as
the first Dragon did) day, and night, and that, with many Cerberous mouths,
all at once: Thus he pulled down the Primitive Church, alienated her rights,
destroyed her proprieties.

Diruit, aedificavit: He destroyed, and built: Of his Diruit we have, briefly
done; Or what, and how this Bicorn False Prophet pulled down what opposed, we
have, briefly hinted from the testimonies of Saint Jerome, Augustine, Boniface
the second, and from the sixth Council of Carthage, which is most evident in
the Letter of that Council to Caelestin, and in the Canons of that Council: His
aedificavit, or what he built in the place of what he pulled down, we shall
handle with like succinctness.

The False Prophets further proceeding in building the body of Apostasy, having
first pulled down what opposed.
HE, in the next place, went about to build, wherein his main care was to keep
his new found foundation (his perverted Tu es Petrus) with all diligence:
Gelas. in Epist. ad Dardanos.
For, (The Council of Chalcedon, having, about the year 450, much invalidated
his claim of Supremacy, from the Nicene Council) Gelasius, about the year four
hundred, and ninety two, alleged not for himself either the Nicene Council, or
the ancient observation of the Church, but held himself fast to his Tu es
Petrus: This goes not (says he) by any Synodal Constitutions, but by the very
voice of the Gospel: Tu es Petrus.

Upon the Rock (Christ whom Peter confessed) did Christ (that faithful Faber,
and true witness) build his Church: And the false Prophet Bicorn (his
Anti-faber) built her Antithesis (the Tower of Babel) upon this Chimaera Rock
of his misapplyed Tu es Petrus: He spent much time in pulling down what opposed
before he could go fast forward in his building.

The First Nation, Hist. Gallic.
that conferred her self (as part of it) to the False Prophets intended
Fabric, was France under Clovis (the first Christian King thereof) about the
year 485. Justinian (about the year 533) in his Letter to John the second, Lib.
8. de sum. Trinit.
submitted, and united to his holiness all the Bishops of the East: The East
Empire, which Justinian (as his Letter witnesses) submitted, and united to the Sea of Rome contained these Nations, that were before Provinces of Pagan Rome:
To wit, First Greece, and Thrace. Secondly, Natolia. Thirdly, Syria, and
Palestina. Fourthly, Egypt. Fifthly, Mauritania. But the two last had
submitted before to Boniface the second, as we showed before: These five (at
first Provinces under Pagan Rome, after Kingdoms in Rome Papal) with France
aforesaid, made six Nations of the false Prophets Decapolity. Gench. page 652.
Richaredus, King of Spain, honored this grand Seignor, and his supposed,
sacred Papal City, by adding his Kingdom (as a seventh part of it) to his (soon
after) Decarch-superintendency, about the year 586.

This grand Master builder took great care (in the time of Gregory the great,
Idem p. 661.
and about the year 590) of the British Isles, to bring them (as an eight part
of it) into the building of his beloved City.

Germany (the ninth part of this Decapolity) came in by parcels: Part,
probably, might come in with Clovis an. 485, whose Offspring, and people of
his Kingdom were Germans in Franconia, which we find not Conquered from him.

Part the Burgundians might bring in about the year 416, who were, about that
time, Germans, and turned Christians.

Part the Lumbards brought in about the year 570, Ibid. 661.
and 607.

Bavaria, and Austria brought in their large parts about the year 615.

Thus the second Dragon gave, by degrees, his Seat and great authority to the
Ten-crowned Beast Papal, by submitting his Nations to this Bicorn Builder, (
who had power to deceive those Nations by means of his Miracles, Chapter 13.14.) to
become the matter of his ten fold Polity, which his industrious hand was then
contriving.

Lumbardy and Scotland (both Kingdom) I leave to the Readers liberty.

Lastly, Italy was the tenth Nation, which the False Prophet edified (upon his
Tu es Petrus) in this ten fold Tripolity: His operating hand was first upon it,
and last in framing of it to his absolute purpose: He (to that end) supplanted
the Kings of the Lumbards in Italy; Phil. Morn. Hist. de. Papat. p. 137
Conspired against, and by conspiracy, slew the Exarches, and Officers of the
Greek Empire residing in Italy.

Here (says Baronius) was an end of the Dukes, and Governors whom the
Emperor was wont to send to command in Rome, Baron An. an. 726.
and places adjacent: And here we end our brief discovery, how the Bicorn beast
built up the Papal Decapolity out of the matter of the Apostasy.

I approve not that common Opinion of many Expositors, that find ten petty
Kingdoms (and those to no purpose) in Europe: They (placing them chiefly
betwixt the Rheyne and Danubius) thus name them: Alemanni, Ostrogothi,
Visogothi, Hunni, Saxoni, Suevi, Alani, Vandali, Burgundiones, Franci; most of
which were petty (if I may so call them) Kingdoms of no continuance: And so (as
if Caesar's Effigies upon his Coin could be greater then his person, or the Mapp
of a Country larger then the Country it self) the Nations of the
Prototype-Monarchies (Chaldaean, Persian, Greek, Roman,) must be far greater
then the ten Nations of their Antitype ( Rome Papal) whom they did but
prefigure or shadow forth. Their tenent (so trivial) I reckon not worth
refuting: But the ten Nations aforesaid were large Provinces under Pagan Rome;
after under Rome Orthodox: And Lastly, were ten large Kingdoms in Papal and
Decapolite Rome: That is, they were all, at least, freed from the bondage and
power of Rome Imperial. The Supreme secular powers of those ten Nations were
the ten crowned horns of the Sea-born beast, chapter 13.1. Here the Reader may
observe, That three distinct powers secular are represented, in the Apocalypse,
by three different and distinct beast.

The first is (Bestia december habens cornua sine coronis) a Beast with ten Horns
uncrowned.

The second is (Bestia december armata Cornibus coronatis) a Beast with ten Horns
crowned.

The third is (Bestia Gentium Regna transferens, vel bestia intermedia) the
beast that Translated the Kingdoms of the falling Empire.

The first with ten Horns uncrowned was the first Dragon or the powers secular
of Pagan Rome, whose five first heads were fallen before our blessed Savior
was born (five are fallen says the Text, chapter 17.10.) He let and should let
the rising up of Papal Rome, till he was taken out of the way: Him the 12, 17
and 18 Chapters, as also Thessal. 2.7. hold forth.

The second Beast, with ten Horns crowned, was this Seaborn-beast, Secular, and
Papal, or the Secular powers of those ten Nations aforesaid, whom the false
Prophet deceived into a Papal-Decapolity by means of his false Miracles which
he had power to do, chapter 13.14. The five first heads of the this ten-crowned
beast were so far from being fallen before Christ was born, that neither was
that beast nor any one of his heads in being for above four hundred years after
the birth of our Savior: This Beast these Texts hold forth, chapter 13.1, 2, 3.
etc. chapter 16.13.

The third Beast (Bestia Regna transferens) was the second Dragon, who took
away him (the first Dragon) that let the rising up of Papal Rome, and gave
(added) his power and great Authority (the Nations which he took from him) to
her crowned Beast secular, being induced thereunto by the deceit and
procurement of the Bicorn beast as we have shown immediately before: This
intermediate Beast or second Dragon these Texts hold forth, chapter 11.7. chapter
13.2.4. chapter 16.13.

In these things (I confess) and many other, I do (as a duty to be done of
necessity) stear my course contrary to the Currents of all (at least all
modern) Writers, whereby I am incident to incur the displeasure of many:
Howbeit, it seems to me no small fault of injustice and ingratitude in those
that (being by long assuetude, cemented to their errors, wherein all Writers,
perhaps, have misled the way) cannot be content to be inconsentient to the
truth themselves, but are apt to conceive a prejudicious amaritude (and that
before they read or know what they write) against those that would (by
undeniable eviction of reason) convince them of their errors and manifest to
them (nolentibus, volentibus) not only the great dangers, but the grossness of
their mistakes.

The Premises aforesaid may at present, fully refel many that (pretending to
unfold them) pour forth confusion as a flood, upon sacred Scriptures and make
them much more obscure and dark by their confident false glosses and
Expositions: They may serve also to undeceive many sincere, but seduced
professors, and sober Writers that are led away with the same errors. But I
return.

The superindents of the False Prophet Pagan (the Roman Emperors, who were
summi Pontifices) fell rather short of this expansive superintendency, over
which the false Prophet Papal presided.

And what was the means by which he built this tenfold City?

He comes (says the Text) withal deceiveableness, etc. That is, He deceived
those that dwelt upon the Earth (those Nations chiefly, aforesaid) by means of
those Miracles, which he had power to do in the sight of the beast: Of which
miracles I have hinted something before, but shall insist upon them more fully
afterward.

Secondly, He laid his forged (or at least falsely applied) Foundation, by
deceit in Doctrine: He perverted the Text to cause them that dwelt upon the
Earth to believe (contrary to truth, and the true Faith) That Peter was the
foundation of the Church, that the Pope (his supposed successor) was the same
by succession, sole Apostolick-Bishop, Primate over all Churches, and Supreme
over all Kings and Councils.

Those that dwelt upon the Earth (those thus deceived ten Nations chiefly)
There Is the matter of this tenfold Cities building.

He deceived them: There Is the means (his pretended message, doctrine of
deceit, and false miracles) by which he built it.

His Doctrine was a shallow, fruitless (but somewhat literally sound) Doctrine,
destitute of right, and charitable application: And such means is fittest to
make way for lying miracles, and both these the most effectual means (eruere
Ecclesiam, and aedificare mysterium iniquitatis) to destroy the Church, and
Saints, all solid knowledge of the truth, and true obedience, by slanders, evil
reports, and wicked contrivances against all that is good: For, That Is proper,
especially, to such profane, affected, shallow knowledge, and obedience.

Therefore, The son of perdition was not to come, in the Van of Apostasy, with
gross Heresy, and open scandalous practices like the Arrians, or Mahumetans:
This is not the way of his coming, nor could he come this way: This is, via non
satis deceptiva: There Is not deceit enough in such open enormities to deceive
the Nations: This had been the way to deceive none, and to be seen of all.

Had he come this way (not of deceit, but apparent wickedness) he had not laid
his foundation of fraud in his misapplyed Tu es Petrus, had not had power to
pull down the Primitive Church, nor to assume her proprieties, and privileges
to himself to build his Apostasy, therewith, in her place: Nor could he have
drawn the Nations ( those that dwelt upon the Earth, says the Text) nor the
Primitive Church her self to be the Burgers of his new built City, had he come
with open hostility, profaneness, and gross Heresies: This had been the way to
affright her, and them; and to make both fly from his presence as the Church
then also did from the face of the Serpent or second Dragon, chapter 12.14.

For, Such professed hostility, open profaneness, and gross Herefie best befits
the Pseudoprophetick superintendent of Antichrist sensual (seated in Spiritual
Sodom) and her head, that Dragon, who (about the year 407) came (not, like this
Bicorn Lamb-like builder, with all deceivableness, but) with open violence,
armies of gross Heretics (Heathens, and Arrians) to kill the Church, and her
witnesses, or to cause her (says the Text) to be carried away of the flood. To
wit, By that flood of Military Forces ( verse. 15.) wherewith he vanquished Rome
Imperial: That so neither she, nor any part of her (being quite carried away)
might be ever seen any more. Therefore, He did not deceive, and draw her by
fraud, but by force drove her to fly with two wings of a great Eagle (as into
her subterfuge) into this Tripolity of deceit, which the false Prophets hands
had constituted (or was in constituting of it) of ten Nations: For, That City
of deceit, and persecution (but of her preservation from corporal, and total
destruction by that second Dragon) the Text calls: Her place prepared of God,
chapter 21.6. And the woman fled into the wilderness; where she has a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her there 1260 days: The same place,
and the same time is set down the second time in the same Chapter, verse. 14.
For,

Though the False Prophet (by Gods permission) built this ten-fold City of
Apostasy, yet it was a place prepared of God for the purpofe aforesaid: To wit,
To preserve his Church (not from all persecution, but) from a total destruction
by the rage of the second Dragon, from whose face the Church then fled for 1260
years. ver. 14. For the false Prophet built that City (a City both of
affliction, and refuge to the flying Church) But God gave him power (all power)
into his hands to crect that Decalabyrinth of error: Whose coming is with all
power (says the Apostle) 2 These. 2.9. He shall wear out (well nigh wear out)
the Saints of the most high, and think to change times, and Laws, and they
shall be given into his hands, (the Laws of power, or all power, as it were by
a Law, shall be given into his hand) for three times and an half, or 1260 years
to be a refuge, as well as a scourge to the Church so long, Dan. 7.25. For, as
God prepared a Fish, and that Fish to be a place for flying Jonah (not as a
Tomb to interre him in lasting oblivion, but) as a Womb to preserve him for a
future birth to a better life: So God prepared Rome Papal with her Sects for
his flying Church, as a womb to preserve her from perishing, and for a future
production of her to a far better reviction: And the Woman fled into the
wilderness into her place prepared of God, where she is nourished, for 1260
days, from the face of the Serpent, Apocal. 12.6.14. The time, in Type, and
Antitype, and how God prepared Rome Papal with her Sects, to be a place to
preserve his Church, for 1260 years, from perishing by the second Dragon, we
shall show afterward.

And therefore, Male creditur Hosti; Its dangerous trusting to Turks, and
Mahumetants (the main continued stem and Offspring of this second Dragon) For
(though they pretend to some slavish allowance of liberty to Christians, and
Sects; for which some Sects and wicked professors wish them before Papists, and
indeed, above others more Orthodox) it may be, undoubtedly expected; That (had
they the power absolute in their own hands, over all Christians) they would
Massacre all (as they did formerly in Spain) for the very name of Christ: For,
so their like Pagano-arrian predecessors (at the ingress of this second Dragon
about 407) came with flood-like armies, and with full purposes to destroy
utterly, the Gospel Church. But,

The false Prophet came with all deceivableness; Laid his foundation of deceit,
pulled down Church privileges, and built his Decapolite state of Apostasy
under a strict, and specious pretense of the Catholic, and Apostolic Faith,
confirmed by many dreadful false Miracles, and in show of all meekness, as
being the servant of the servants of God, and the tender Father of all the
Fathers of the Church; when all was nothing, but a strongly deluding fraud, in
a superficial, affected, shallow knowledge, and profession, fruitful only in
persecution, and in bringing evil reports upon the best men then living. A
knowledge and profession casting the imputation of innovations upon their
ancient, Catholic, and most solid Truths, as in the examples of the sixth
Council of Carthage, Saint Basil, Jerome, Augustine and others: And calling
their own Innovations, Ancient, and Catholic Truths, and Customs.

So Innocent the first did about his pretended ancient right of Supremacy in
his Epistles to the Bishop of Roan, Epist. 92. apud August.
Augustine, and others. You have (says he to Saint Augustine) had due regard
of the Apostolic honor: I say of him who has the care and charge of all
Churches, in asking advice of him in these perplexities, and intricate causes;
following therein, the ancient Canon, which you know, as well as my self, to
have ever been observed in all the world: And yet Augustine, and the sixth
Council of Carthage clearly proved this his pretense of an ancient, and
Catholic practice in all the world, to be a notorious, and remarkable lie in
those four first Fabers of the Apostasy: To wit, Innocent, Zosimus, Boniface,
and Caelestin: For, The Son of perdition (in all his Sects, and Offspring)
seeks (seeks diligently) to suppress solid truth, and sincere obedience by
casting the lying Imputation of innovation upon it, and to prefer a shallow,
fruitless knowledge in a proud, careless, covetous practive, as ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic: Thus he cast down the power of the Primitive Church,
and built his Apostasy in her place: That is, the Bicorn Seer, by deceit (by
all possible deceivableness) built this City: And as the bands of the blinded
Syrians (sent to Dothan) came (instead of it) to Samaria; so these ten Nations,
with the Dragons floodlike armies (or they that dwelt upon the Earth says the
Text) and with them the Primitive Sects and dissenters, blinded by this
Architectors words, and works (words of deceit, works of false miracles) came,
or rather, as it were fled (as the afflicted, pursued, Primitive Church also
did) into this tenfold City of deceit: The Church fled into it out of
necessity, and constraint; but the rest flowed to it (so glorious were its
buildings, and its builders strong delusions) instead of Zion, and as to the
true Catholic Church.

In this Decapolity of deceit (especially in the time of the building of it)
did they that dwelt upon the Earth, and the Dragons floods, concenter in a
deceitful unity, and they, and all Sects (as the different Species in the Ark)
rested in her, somewhat peaceable for a short space. And thus much of the Son
of perdition, his coming with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, when he
first laid his foundation of deceit, pulled down Primitive Church Priviledges,
and built his Decharcy of the Apostasy from about 407 to about 620. We shall
now show his further proceedings after 620.

The False Prophet's further Progress in supporting (but with a much more
remiss hand) his new built City of Apostasy.
HE (his work by him thus finished about the year 620) did not lay aside, but
less regarded, his first (but fitter) instruments of deceit, whereby he built
that City: Therefore it fell to many decays for want of his wonted care, and
soon became (as it were equally) divided betwixt Christians and Mahumetans:
For, The false Prophet (remitting his usual, stricter reigns of government)
began to indulge himself (more then before) to sensual delights; would often
wallow in the filthy styes of Spiritual Sodom; often accompany himself with the
beast in secular covetousness, often with the Dragon in voluptuous pleasures: Nor
did he so cast aside Secular and Spiritual wickedness, but superadded sensual
filthiness to both: In a word, he (stearing a most irregular course) ran the
hazard to destroy his new erected Decaprincipality, continuing, and proceeding
still worse till about the year 1210. Nor did he then reclaim himself, but
rather disclaimed to be some shelter (as formerly) to the Gospel Church, nor
did he so much defend her, as before, from the second Dragons fury, but loosed
the (till then, for about 1000 years bound) first Dragon upon her: That is, he
acted the Dragons part himself by persecuting her members after the manner of
Dioclesian: For he and (by his procurement) the King of France Commissioned
Simon Earl of Montford to perpetrate most horrid Massacres upon her: Then also
that loosed Dragon (or not long after) sent abroad his bloody Inquisition,
breathing forth slaughter both to Papists and Protestants that had but so much
as the least appearance of honesty or religion: Howbeit, the (thus afflicted)
Church found some small shelter from Religious Kings, Nobles and Emperors: And
the Gibelin Faction afforded her some succor. But she continued (thus trodden
under the loosed Dragons feet, and driven by fierce storms and tempests) till
about the year 1417.

Next (and not without great need) came in the Locusts, a relief to the Church
ready to perish by the rage of the loosed Dragon, Apocal. 9.1. to the 12 ver.
But here may Elephants swim, or rather these Texts seem fathomless: Here
difficulties, with double files, stand prepared to stop my progress: Therefore
I must (of necessity) first unty many Gordian knots seeming indissoluble:
Because these Locusts seem to be Reformists most deceitfully formal, some
refuge to the Church, and so, most difficult to be discerned (though most
contrary to them) from true Saints; men somewhat reformed in Doctrine, nothing
in manners, but affecting manners more confining upon the deceiveableness of
Spiritual wickedness then the usual practices, perhaps, of former Hypocrites:
But we shall first see what sacred Writ says of them: And Smoke (says the
Text) ascended out of the bottomless pit, and out of the Smoke came Locusts:
This shows them to be the Offspring of those, that hold forth only formal,
smoaky pretenses of seeming-Religious deceits.

Secondly, And smoke ascended out of the bottomless pit, etc. This also shows
them to be the products of the bottomless pit, whose duties, devotions,
knowledge, faith, formal reformations, and fruitless obedience are bottomless,
or have no bottom: That is, are without fidelity or veracity: For veracity is
the reality of truth, the bottom of all gifts and graces, without which they
are inconform to Gospel rule, and but formal smoaky deceits: Therefore,
Reformation (all reformation) in Doctrine, and not in Manners; in Profession,
and not in Practice; in Practice, but not conform to Gospel Rule, is bottomless
reformation; no reformation indeed, but real deceits.

These Locusts seem (the rather because said to ascend out of the bottomless
pit) to be the successors of the Gibelin Faction, which and whose like
Predecessors (s;ubservient to the secular horn of the Bicorn beast) had
regulated his temporal principality and spiritual superintendency with more
seeming sober moderation and discretion of deceit (during the time of his
Spiritual horns extravagant and ambitious exorbitances) for about 800 years.

In these Locusts (at least near their latter end) Antichrist seems to end (as
he began at first) with all (or as it were double) deceivableness: For, they
had faces like the faces of men (seeming sound doctrine and profession) but
neither so, in deed; but deceits, ver. 7.

Secondly, They had hair as the hair of Women (a right ordered, and right
ordering discipline in appearance) but that was nothing so but deceit, ver. 8.

Thirdly, They had Crowns like Gold (like Crowns of righteousness, and true
obedience) but they were not such, but deceits, ver. 7. For they had (O
truculent cruelties of detracting covetousness!) teeth of Lions. ver. 8. They,
strictly in a blind profession, professed Christ, and pursued Covetousness
eagerly.

Fourthly, their shapes were like horses prepared to battle, ver. 7. And yet
their shapes were partly like men, partly like women, and partly like unto
Lions, as we showed before: Therefore, The Aggregate of their politic body was
(Chimaera multiformis) a manifold monster of mysterious deceit.

But their shapes (their principal shapes) were like horses prepared to battle:
They were all (more, or less) bent (as in a military order) against those that
had not the seal of God in their foreheads: All rallyed (as in several
Regiments) in sundry factions against them.

But they were commanded not to hurt the Grass, nor any green thing, nor any
Tree, ver. 4. That is, not the servants of God, that had his seal in their
foreheads; whose doctrine they partly espoused, whose persons and professions
(though they followed not their manners) they defended: For, That was, as it
were, a command from God not to hurt, but defend them, because they (much alike
outwardly) embraced the same common faith, and profession: Therefore, They (by
an implicit command of a much like common profession) were commanded not to
hurt these, but only those men that had not the seal of God in their foreheads.

Not these: Not the servants of God, not the true Church: That is, Her, and
their hurt, which they should receive from those Locusts, should be
over-ballanced by greater benefits, and defenses: But they were commanded to
torment those that had not the seal of God, for five months, ver. 5. That is,
to torment those Saint-persecuting Papists, that had tormented the servants of
God.

The pattern in the prototype (the Locusts which God sent upon the Land of
Egypt) plainly shows the manner of their coming, and the end of their message,
which was to torment those persecutors, and somewhat to defend persecuted
Saints.

From hence rises a perplex knot of deceit to those Locusts, and others: They
think that because they torment and oppose Papists, or seek (perhaps to very
little purpose) by their teachings, and writings, to evert or refel their
tenants, therefore they are Saints, their works sincere, doctrine sound: They
have no affinity (they think) with the son of perdition; his deeds of darkness
lie far from their doors: Whereas this was the grand deceit of their
predecessors (the Papists) when they first erected the Apostasy: They (because
they refelled, converted, and partly compelled the Arrians, and other Sects to
the unity of the deceit of that City) gave their own deceitful slandering,
shallow doctrine and obedience, the titles of true, ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic, and reputed them selves, and were, undoubtedly reputed the true
Church: Herein those Papists were, and these Locusts are much deceived: For,
the Orthodox Papists of the rising Apostasy (no less sound in doctrine then
modern Locusts) were against the Arrians, and other gross Heretics, and many
of them might not be sensual professors: yet Salvian says; That (because of
their evil lives) even the Arrians were more tolerable; And Saint Jerome, and
sacred writ it self, applies to them all those attributes in the 17 and 18
Chapters, that are, chiefly due to the son of perdition; not because their
doctrine was false, but their manners corrupt; nor because their manners were
sensual (though such were the fruits of some) but because their Apostasy in
manners consisted in secular, and spiritual wickedness, whiles they served but
to resist the truth, and to exclaim, and conspire against the faithfullest
witnesses of it, or, at least, to neglect both them, and it. This is the
reformation of Pharisees, and Hypocrites, which they cry up, but they never
seek sincere obedience conform to Gospel rule.

Such formalists, or hypocrites (be their doctrine never so sound, or their
professions strict) are the head of the body of Apostasy, and the highest
Pinnacles upon the Towers in that Tripolity of deceit. And therefore,

From hence springs a second deceit (not much unlike the former) of the
Locusts: They cast usually, the grievous imputation of Antichrist, solely upon
that Ancient Sect of the Papists, or upon the literal City of Rome alone, and
will not (no not be taught it) so much as touch that burden (though they have
no less reason to bear it) with their little finger; but lay it solely, upon
that Sect, or City, or the superintendent of it; whereas the Apostasy of
Antichrist is common to all revolted professors, that follow the lusts of the
flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life: For, the Apostle did not tax
the defection of Demas with turning aside to any one Sect, or Heresy, but with
secular covetousness: He has (says he) forsaken us, and embraced (not this,
or that Sect, or Heresy, but) this present evil world: Sensual, secular, and
spiritual wickedness is the chief visible form of the Apostasy, which gives
being to it: But the different false opinions, and deceitful professions
therein are but (forma figurae) the Protean colors, and outward cloathings
upon the several members of the same Apostasy, which makes the many different
divisions thereof the more distinguishable: For, if we fill an hundred glasses
(of so many different colors) with the same liquor, or matter; each glass
renders the same liquor of a different color; whereas indeed, there is no
difference in the matter, but in the color of those Glasses, that contain it:
so all formal professors in the body of the Apostasy of Antichrist, differ not
so much in deed, as in color: There Is the same sensual, secular, and spiritual
wickedness in all, except that, in many, some one of those three lusts may be
most predominant: And their outward different forms, or professions make no
more real reformation, or alteration of that threefold matter of iniquity, then
the different colors of those Glasses alter the matter contained in them:
Therefore, these Locusts, or formal professors, that would seem much reformed
from Papists in doctrine, discipline, and obedience (having attained faces like
the faces of men, hair like the hair of women, and Crowns like Gold) remain
Papists in manners, or out strip them for pride, and covetousness: And such
have no plea, or privilege, but abundant disadvantage thereby, because their
hearts are, thereby, much more deceived, blinded, and hardened against true
faith, discipline, and manners, and are made more adverse to truth, and averse
from peace. But we shall come nearer home to the matter.

Try all things (says the Text) and we (at this time) shall try the Spirit of
truth and the Spirit of error (of Christ and Antichrist) and show what the
works and practices of Primitive Saints were, what they have been since and
wherein they differ (or rather shall differ) from deceiveableness of
unrighteousness, or the Locusts Gold like Crowns of deceits; That so Saints and
Sects may not ever swell with intermutual strife, wander in wildernesses of
obscure aberrations, and grabble in darkness, to the continual dishonor of
God, the extreme hazard of the true Church, and ineffable infelicity of all
Nations.

That we may more assuredly know who these Locusts were, and what their Crowns
of deceit are, we shall enquire when they rose up: And the fifth Angel sounded.
verse. 1. And we find them rising up in the time of the fifth Trumpets sounding,
which was the penultimate dispensation of the Apostasy of Antichrist; For that
time was to be the last interval save one, of the Son of perditions duration;
because when the seventh Angel shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should
be finished, chapter 10.7. The time therefore of these Locusts coming, was to be
near the end of the Epoche of the Apostasy of Antichrist: For the Locusts and
plague of Darkness came, in Type, together, and were the last plagues, but one,
when they came, Exodus 10. And so these Antitype-Locusts and Darkness came
together, and were to be (so exact are Prophetic Types with their Antitypes)
the last Plagues, but one, in the Epoche of the grand Apostasy, Chapter 9.1, 2. chapter
16.10.

Therefore these Locusts (coming near the end of the Apostasy) could not be the
Saracens that came near the beginning of it; nor be (as many Expositors would
have them) Monks, Friars or Jesuits, who were far from being (as these were
to be) some refuge to the Church; Nor do I think any man can imagine they could
be the true Church: Wherefore, if they could not, possibly, be the Saracens,
nor Monks and Friars, nor, possibly, be the true Church; Then I conceive; with
submission (at least unless any can give a better account of them) they were
(if I may so say) a Semi-Papal body of Apostasy, (Formalists in Profession,
Papists in Practice) that sprung up about the year, 1417. when the fifth Angel
might begin to sound; And that they might have some footing or beginning in
those Victorious Taborites, whose Victories had been more happy, had they not
fought against their Superiors: Howbeit, they were to be some relief to the
Church; and many amongst them (though perhaps not of them) might chiefly intend
that, though the most might do it for seditious and selfends. For,

I partly showed before; That there is Antichristus adjuvans, and Antichristus
destruens; Antichrist (in some respects) helping the Church; And Antichrist
seeking to destroy her. And

First, Antichrist seeking to destroy her: And the Dragon (the second Dragon)
cast out of his mouth waters, as a flood, after the woman, that he might cause
her to be carried away of the flood, Chap. 12.15. That is, that he might
destroy her. For gross Heretics, (such as the Arrians then were, and the
Mahumetans are) and all sensual, carelesly-ignorants, and
loosly-inanimadversive Professors constitute Antichrist sensual, and their
design is (had they power to do it) to destroy, utterly, the Church and Saints.
But,

Secondly, There is Antichristus aliquando adjuvans; Antichrist (sometimes, and
for self ends) helping the Church: And the Earth (says the Text) helped the
Woman, etc. Ver. 16. That is; The Earth (men minding Earthly things) and her
son (the Bicorn-Beast) whom she brought forth; She (I say) andher son (the
Papal Apostasy then new sprung up) affecting, for the said ends a fruitless,
formal (though somewhat literally sound) Doctrine and Profession, helped the
Woman, and swallowed up the flood which the second Dragon cast out of his mouth
to destroy her: That is; She helped her by converting (through deceit) his
Nations and Military Forces to the unity of the Church of Rome. And he
deceives (says the Text) those that dwell upon the Earth, by means of those
miracles, which he had power to do, etc. Chap. 13.14.

And these Locusts, no doubt, were a new Progeny and a principal part of
Antichirst adjuvant, that helped the Church (as the Earth had done against the
Floods of the second) against the swelling Floods of the loosed Dragon: To wit;
Against those Church-persecuting Papists, that revolted from being some shelter
to her, as formerly, to work (by all ways and means) to destroy her: They
helped her (I say) not (as their Predecessors did the second Serpent's) by
swallowing up this Food of the loosed Dragon, nor by killing his Military
Forces; But they (being commanded not to kill them) tormented (says the Text)
those men (to wit; those Church-persecuting Papists) that had not the seal of
God in their foreheads, for five months, which are one hundred and fifty
years: That is; They tormented those true-Church-destroyers by abating their
power, by alienating their proprieties, and assuming to themselves their
Church-Revenues; And so the Text says expressly; And to them it was given that
they should not kill them, but that they should torment them five Months,
Chap. 9.5. And if they did thus bend the Forces of their Superficial,
Fruitless, Formal (though their Doctrine was somewhat Literally sound)
Knowledge and Profession against the true Church and Saint-Persecuting Papists,
it was the best service they could do (for want of better) to the true Church
and Saints, then ready to perish by the unbridled rage of the loosed Dragon.

Nay (say some) these Locusts were the Saracens: And this Opinion seems part of
their Smoke: For when (I pray) did their Apollyon ever see the Mahumet-Saracens
so much favor true Saints? How came they so quick-sighted to see the Seal of
God in their foreheads? who bound them (as these Locusts were) by a Law, that
they should not hurt (any green thing) the servants of God? when were they
commanded (by any command either express or implicit) to spare or protect true
Saints, and to torment the Papists, their persecutors?

Boniface (we read) received them into pay to invade Sicily, Du. Pleff. Hist.
de Papat. page 432.
to war against Christians, and by that means, against Saints: But when did
Saints and Saracens so comply? Such Doctrine may well serve to teach Christians
to fall in love with Mahumetans and turn Turks: And how should a proud,
trivial, contented knowledge (joined with a covetous blind Profession) bear
better light?

But many men Learned and Religious (say these Locusts) are of our Opinions (as
in many other things) that those Mahomet-Saracens were these Locusts: More's
the misery and the greater pity, that such men (either Learned or Religious)
should so mislead or be misled: Or it may, at least, serve to show (as a means
to humble them the more) the instability and weakness of some able and sincere
witnesses of the truth.

Here we may mark, with admiration, how appositely the wise and Almighty hand
frames Similitudes in Sacred Scripture: For, what Creature did God ever make
that loves (like the Locusts) to live in dark Clifts, and Smoke ascending from
Subterranean fires, in which places I have seen them (like Bees about to swarm)
in great abundance? And what Professors love to live in the Smoke of a
fruitless blind zeal, formal Worship and a Superficial (though somewhat sound)
Doctrine than these Locusts do?

Smoke is insufferable to all Creatures living except to Locusts: Nor can any
men (in the least, Moral or ingenuous) endure a smoaky, empty, ignorant, proud,
barren Profession, but only Locusts and Hypocrites.

The Vulgar observation (though that may be true) that these Creatures live but
five months in the open fields, Plin. 11.29.
I voluntarily omit: But these Locusts, in the Text, were to torment men (says
the Text expressly) for five months, Verse. 5. And they had power to hurt them
(says the second Text) for five months, Verse. 10.

Five months (counting a day for a year) make just one hundred and fifty
years: And these Locusts (if we count from about 1417) when they, most
probably, might begin, to about 1567) continued in chief power to torment the
Saint-persecuting Papists, for five months of days Annual or about 150 years:
For, Zisca (always Victor) Signally beat the Imperial Armies in eleven battles
about the year 1417. And, after his death, Procopius and his Confederates beat
them in two Battles about the year 1424. But what are they or their Armies to
these Locusts?

It Is said, Castra sequentes vix pietas sequitur: Little Religion attends
Arms: Howbeit, Procopius and Zisca (their Leaders) might be men of much valor
and piety, but the major part of their Armies (as will appear) seemed to have
some Lions teeth like these Locusts.

After those battles, these (if I may so call them) Modern Formalists (though
many true Saints might be amongst them) expatiated and prevailed against the
Papists till about 1567. Nor were they (all that time) a small assistence to
the servants of God (nor to some Kings) that had the Seal of God in their
foreheads, to further their Reformation in Doctrine and defend their lives: But
we shall further take the truest survey of them from several Texts of sacred
Scripture.

And the sound of their wings (says the Text) was as the sound of Charets of
many Horses running to Battle, Verse. 9.

And why comes this account of them from the Pen of the Prophetic Evangelist?
Because they sometimes subdued their enemies with the sound of their wings
only: For Ziscae's Armies beat their enemies in eleven battles, more by the
sound of their wings, then force of Arms; more by the noise or report of their
coming, then by their power; which fully ratifies the truth of the Prophecy in
reference to those so much feared assailants. But

Secondly, After Zisca's death, Sigismund the Emperor, invaded Bohemia with a
threefold Army: The first was of Saxons and other Cities; Aeneas Silvins (Papa
Pius 2.) in Hist. Bohe. chapter 48. Dupless. Hist. de Papat. page 555.
The Second of Fanconians, led by the Marquess of Brandenburg; The third was
levied of Rhenenses, Bavarians, and Swevians led by Otho, Archbishop of
Trevers: All these three mighty Armies met at Misna: But the next day, they all
(not seeing any Enemy, but hearing the report of Procopius his coming) fled to
Thacovia, leaving a great prey and their Arms behind them.

Thirdly, (this threefold Army thus defeated, with the sound of the wings of
their enemies only; Sigismund raised a far greater Army of forty thousand
Horse, besides Foot, Aeneas Sil chapter 48, 49. Fox Martyr. Lampad. Hist. Mellif.
and invades Bohemia. But was put to flight, and his whole Army ran, in a
confused and amazed fright, though they saw none of those winged Locusts pursue
them: Res crat imperiosa sonitus Alarm: The sound of their wings (the noise or
report of their coming) made that mighty Army fly confused, whiles the Emperor
could not (by his Command) cause them to rally.

Ages cannot parallel such presidents, nor the World since the first Creation.
The Host of Syria heard a noise of Charets and Horses, and, that one time, fled
affrighted (though they saw no man) from the walls of Samaria: But these mighty
Armies fled many times (not from a noise of terror from the Lord of Hosts,
but) from the noise (or report of the coming) of a few weak men, though they
saw no man: And these many Presidents (of such Stupendous strangeness) prove
irrefellibly, that those Formal Reformists were (at least the Victorious part
of) those Locusts, that then vanquished their and the Churches Enemies with the
sound of their wings only: For, if ever Armies were put to flight by the sound
of the wings of their Enemies; Then were these thirteen Puissant and Imperial
Armies so put to flight.

If ever any (since men were on Earth) subdu'de their Enemies with the sound of
their wings, then those Victorious Taborites were (therefore they could
possibly be none but they) the only Armies that so subdu'de them; And (by so
subduing of them) did, indubitably fulfill this Prophecy in the performance of
it: And the sound of their wings was like the sound of Charets of many Horses
running to battle.

Secondly, And they had a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless
pit, whose name in the Hebrew Tongue is Abaddon, but, in the Greek Tongue, has
his name Appollyon, Verse 11.

And they had a King: And what King? Sure not Sigismund that could not rule
them; nor any Earthly Man or King: Their King was a Spiritual King, no Earthly
Potentate: His name in Greek was Apollyon and he, Graeculus esuriens, an hungry
Greek: Covetousness and Spiritual Pride in them was King over them, that
(contrary to Gods Command) ruled in their mortal bodies; And, so ruling over
them, was their King. For what King had the Type-Locusts (that commanded them
to devour the Fruits of Egypt) but their own eager and unsatiable appetites;
And these (their Antitype) must of necessity, hold a just Symmetry or due
proportion with them, the Type of these: Nor could the Devil be the King of
these more then of other wicked men; For, he is the General King, that rules in
the hearts of all the children of disobedience: Therefore, Let none tax Zisca,
or Procopius (they might be persons of great Worth and Piety) not Jerome of
Prague, nor John Hus, nor any other persecuted Saints (that were occasions of
their coming) as Kings over them: For, Moses himself was a means of the coming
of the Type-Locusts, but not their King: So the persecuted Church and Saints
were the occasion of these Locusts coming but no King over them; But
Covetousness and Pride, conjunct, was their King: For the Locusts were only
Formal Professors, Reformed from Papists to a somewhat sound Doctrine, and many
of them perhaps, to strict Profession, but remained Papists in manners, or
rather outstript them for Pride and Covetousness: For Covetousness, the Root of
all evils: For Pride, the chief cause of all Coutentions: And this double
iniquity or combined wickedness (Pride and Covetousness) was ('it is most like)
the Locusts King: And they had a King over them, etc. For,

Thirdly, Their teeth, (says the Text) were as the teeth of Lions, Verse. 7.
This further shows what the Locusts King was: To wit, Their Lion-like rapacity
and greedy avarice; And shows their parity therein, to those Saint-persecuting
Papists, whom (with like retaliation) they were sent to persecute: Peccato par
poena: The Papists oppressed the poor, and those servants of God that had his
Seal in their foreheads, as it were with teeth of Lions: Therefore God sent
those Locusts to oppress, and suppress those Saint-persecuting Papists (that
had not the Seal of God in their foreheads) as it were with teeth of Lions:
Theod.a Niem. chapter 36, 37. Morn. Hist. de Papat. p. 527.
For the Papists (as it might appear) were not only cruel to the servants of
God, that thus had his Seal inserted, but uncharitable also and merciless to
the poor, which their own Writers witness even of their Spiritual persons.

They are always careful (says Theodoret a Niem) to advance their Kindred,
Nephews, etc. are seldom seen any poor: And, if perhaps, any poor body beg an
alms of them, they presently turn away their eyes; And, if perhaps, extreme
want urge him to ask the second time, they threaten him.

He (speaking of Urban the sixth, Innocent the seventh, Boniface the ninth, and
Gregory the twelfth) says, that these four gave no alms, which (says he) is a
sign of damnation, and (though a fault in all, yet) worst in them, because no
man can be saved withont charity: And this he wrote being Notary of the
Apostolic Letters in 1408. and Secretary, successively, to Urban, Boniface,
Innocent, Gregory, and Alexander.

And Locusts are no less cruel and uncharitable than the Papists: The Papists
may plainly see their own sins in those punishments, which God inflicted upon
them by their hands: Both are alike (the Locusts and the Papists) in their
practices: Both are cruel, both extremely covetous; The charity of both is but
a verbal pretense, and in neither real: Both have the same sign, (as the Author
says) of damnation in giving no alms, (or Alms inconsiderate) to the poor:
Both have much alike (or the Locusts the longer of the two) teeth of Lions: And
their teeth (says the Text) were like the teeth of Lions.

I have often observed, with much admiration, that many strict Professors are
extreme covetous and could not (upon due consideration) but imagine they might
either be Locusts crept into strict Forms, or else true Saints corrupted by the
evil and cruel examples of their covetous conversations: Covetousness (a shame
to Heathens) is most uncomly in Christians, and most destructive in
Church-Societies, like Achan in the Host of Israel.

Fourthly, they had power (says the Text) to vex men five months: That is the
time of their chief power to vex or torment those men that had not the Seal of
God in their foreheads, but not the full time of their continuance: Therefore,
we may distinguish those Locusts into penultimate and ultimate; pristine and
present.

Those Pristine (or first appearing) Locusts had (for five months (or 150
years) wings (ran with wingedspeed) to take away the power and maintenance of
the Papal Clergy in many Nations: But some of the Modern Locusts (their
successors) are no less willing (had they wings to do it) to take away the
maintenance of the most Reformed Ministry: But, as many of the first were,
doubtless, defenders of good men and ordained of God so to be; So I dare not
deny; That some of the last may be, at least, docible and ductile to found
Faith and good Manners.

To be short: As it is apparent to me, that the Mahomet Saracens were far enough
from being any part of these Locusts, So, If any shall render a more rational
account of them, and make them appear to be any other people or Professors, I
shall readily relinquish my own Opinion and receive theirs; Till then; Their
manifold deceivableness in their hair, Crowns, Faces (Discipline, Doctrine,
Profession, Practice) and their Offices and Functions for the Servants of God
and against the unsealed in their foreheads, must confirm me in this Tenent;
That some of them aforesaid were the first fruits of those Locusts, that, for
filthy lucre, took up stricter Forms to devour Church-Revenues: Of whom and for
which, Sleiden. Lanquet.
the German Emperors sometimes complained; See Sleiden, and Lanquet, etc.
circa An. 1538.

And both Luther and Calvin (which so far shows the integrity of them and
their true followers) testified sharply against the Litigious pride and silthy
avarice of those Professors, that, thereby (pretending to be Members of them)
brought much infamy and disturbance upon their Church-Societies: For this is
certain; That the Locusts (Formal, Smoky, Proud, Professors) are (for silthy
lucre) readiest to creep into the truest Churches and (by their covetous
conversations) to corrupt them and turn them (if possible) into Dens of
Thieves. It shows also that the devoutest Professors (though their Doctrine be
never so sound) import not any thing, if they remain Papists in Manners or
outstrip them for Pride and Covetousness.

And, here, remarkable were the mercies of God and the Wisdom of his
Providence: For many sincere Professors were (as men hid among them, and as
Eliah was kept from death by greedy Ravens) preserved, from horrid Massacres,
by these Modern Formalists. But

I must not here omit some Readers of great repute, that say, I make (and that
they read it in this Treatise) John Hus, Jerome of Prague, Luther, Calvin, and
all Reformists to be the Locusts: Nor must I hate, but plainly reprove these
men: It Is a duty indispensive; I dare not but do it; These men reckon
themselves, and are reputed, long Students and great Proficients in the
Prophetic Scriptures: Sure then, they make themselves, at least seem to be
very unjust Stewards of those Sacred Mysteries. The unjust Steward (calling his
Lords Debtors to account) asked the first what he owed: He answered, An hundred
measures of Oil: Take thy Pen quickly (says he) and write in thy Bill fifty: I
doubt not but that might be read in his Bill (if he wrote it) because it was
written: But these could read that in my Treatise which was never written!
here, nor (I think ever thought on by any; That which many Learned Doctors and
Knights (that read it all) could never read or find in it, as their own
Hand-writings fully witness: But these Readers are, themselves not thoroughly
consentient to sound Doctrine and (finding in this Treatise, their Chima'ra's
and Illusions cast down, like Dagon when he lost his head) sought (1 conceive)
a feeble revenge by raising these slanders, and taught others (as Sappho taught
his Birds to speak) to proclaim in City and Country, that I make all Reformists
to be the Locusts, to my unspeakable and most causeless detriment.

Nor is this (I think) the sole cause; Careless inadvertency might be some
cause of their mistakes: For inconsiderate rashness is the first fruit of
uncharitableness, as due and diligent animadvertency is of charity; And the
want of both in these Readers might cause their rash mistakess: For many things
(much alike) are, often, most contrary; As the Parelia or Mock-Suns in watery
Clouds or Ponds, seem as fair as the Sun it self; but are no true Suns; So
these Locusts are Parelia Sanctorum, Mock-Saints, and may seem as fair (in all
outward Formalities) as the Saints themselves, and yet are no more true Saints
than those Mock-Suns are true Suns: It were therefore extreme foolishness in
any to charge me that I make those Mock-Suns to be true Suns, or the true Sun
to be no more or better then one of them; So it is no less fondness for any
careless, cursory (and therefore, uncharitable) it caders to charge me that I
make true Saints to be those Mock-Saints, or Saint-like Locusts from whom (we
shall find) they differ as far as light from Darkness, when we come to examine
what the Locusts Crowns, as it were like Gold, are; what their Sun-darkening
Smoke of deceit is; and wherein both differ from that sincere practice and
Profession, which is (or rather should be) the Righteousness of true Reformists
and Saints.

The Subject I now insist upon, is to show what evil Manners are, that men may
avoid them; And inanimadvertency is the foundation of all evil Manners, and
principal cause, indeed, of all the miserable Divisions amongst us: We shall
therefore spend no more time about those trivial Readers, but proceed: As
Christ nevertheless, looked upon Peter and brought him to repentance; So I may,
in love to them, look a little back upon them, but not digress from the design
of this Treatise.

THe Primitive Fathers and Profeffors made mention of the man of Sin, or Son of
Perdition (according to the Text) under the Notion, or by the name of Apostasy
or Refuga.

Lambert. Danae. de Antic. chapter 5 August. lib. 20. de Civit. Dei chapter 19.
Apostasy is a falling away from heavenly mindedness to inanimadvertency, or to
mind Earthly things: Some Sects are the Subdivisions of the Grand Apostasy, or
of the Antichrist predicted by Prophets and Apostles: Such Sects, nevertheless,
come nearest to true Churches, that (holding forth sound Doctrine) are sound
most fruitful in the practice of good Manners.

Sects are either more General, or more Special.

Sects more Special are Societies of Professors fallen from sound Doctrine or
good Manners, and separated from Churches more sound then themselves.

The more General Sect, are such Professors in all Sects and Churches as are
fallen (though not from sound Doctrine) from the practice of good Manners:
Doctor Colet calls this Sect; The Sect of evil Manners.

Many Saints (at least men somewhat Moral and Ingenuous) may be found in many
Sects, who are the supports of them, and are usually least regarded, and most
persecuted in and by those Sects: For Locusts are apt to creep into, and
corrupt (through Inadvertency, Pride, Ignorance and avarice) all Sects, and
even the truest and best Church-Societies; Cause Dissentions in them, oppose
diligence and fidelity, and endanger to destroy them: Therefore it is not my
design, in this Treatise, to fall foul (as Weather-beaten Ships at Sea) upon
any Sects or Church-Societies, but, in love, to reprove them plainly, and to
manifest to them their manifold, gross, and dangerous mistakes in Opinions and
Manners, of which their inconviction, (though they little mind it) is their
greatest misery they do, or can sustain on Earth.) To that end, I shall
(beginning at the Foundations of both) endeavor to distinguish the true Church
and Saints from false Professors in all Sects and Churches: And first.

The Rock whereon the true Church is built is Christ alone; Sunt caetera
Arenae: All other Formal, fruitless, Christ-pretending Professions are but
Sands of deceit or Smoke, whereon the Apostasy of Antichrist and all false
Practices are built.

The first Superstructure upon the true Rock is Animadvertency: For Faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by Animadvertency to hear. He hears to very little
purpose, that minds not much what or how he hears. For

Secondly, the first Superstructure upon the sandy Foundation of the Apostasy
of Antichrist is inanimadvertency or a careless unmindfulness, To hear
profitably, or, To do what they hear.

Animadvertency (the first Superstructure upon the sure Rock) is threefold (a
mindfulness to hear, to expect, and to practice what is heard and read, and
brings forth a threefold operative Grace, Faith, Hope, and Charity, though true
Animadvertency (and more accepted of God) is a fruit of that threefold Grace.

Inanimadvertency (the first Superstructure upon Sandy Foundations) is
threefold) Non animadversive, Semi-animadversive, Mis-animadversive) and brings
a threefold effect contrary to Faith, Hope, and Charity; To wit, Perfidy,
false confidence, and rash and censorious uncharitableness: This threefold
inadvertency (opposite to true Repentance) is the threefold Substructure of
Antichrist Sensual, Secular and Spiritual.

And first, Non-animadvertency is the Substructure of Antichrist sensual, or of
such Professors as mind nothing (orlittle else) but loose Profaneness: Such
were the men of the Old World: They knew nothing (says the Text) till the
Flood came, etc. And no marvel; For how should thew know any thing, that minded
nothing: Non-advertists are very Beasts, both have hearts alike to mind
nothing; Therefore both perished alike in the Flood: These slothful Citizens of
Spiritual Sodom regard not to read the Scriptures that testify of Christ, or
Books that unfold the meaning of them: Or they read both, but mind not (through
sensual levity and folly) to understand what they read: Such were the Men and
Swine of Gadara: They cared not to know Christ (the living truth) and these
care as little to know what truth in practice is; So far are they from that,
that they mind not so much as the proper objects of right-producing
Animadvertency, or the Principles of the practice of good manners; which
Principles (because little minded by most Professors through almost a general
inanimadvertency) we shall insert in the sequel: Such Non-advertists are the
Owls of Ignorance, unclean and hateful Birds, that hate the light, and would
(were it in their power) utterly extinguish it, and destroy the Witnesses of
it: For, truth in Doctrine and Manners is directly contrary to the brutish
ignorance of Non-advertists; Therefore they oppose both by a direct opposition:
Yet these seek shelter for their sins of bestial ignorance under some careless
Formalities, or in some corner of the Court that was cast out and given to the
Gentiles; and receive the Seed of Grace like the High-way-ground; let it lie
where it is scattered, till it is lost, but it takes no Root there as it did in
the Thorny and Stony grounds.

Secondly, Semi-advertency is the Substructure of secular Apostasy, or of men
minding Earthly things: These Professors (for such as the cause is, such is the
effect) Worship God by halves, do good Works by halves, are half-Christians in
show, in deed Heathens; And (though Spiritual Egypt owns them) are much like
those Samaritans that succeeded captive Israel in their vacant Habitations:
They worshipped the Lord, and worshipped their Idols also: And these Locusts
are such Semi-advertists; seem to serve God by halves, but, in deed,
covetousness (which is Idolatry) altogether: They were Men and Women in
appearance, Lions in practice, winged. Horses in pursuit of their practices;
For, Semi-advertists assume several shapes, according to which their evil
manners differ: Under these men (if I may so call them) not only good men, but
good works suffer Martyrdom: They spin many threads of good works, and go on for
a space; But their Lions teeth of avarice (before these good works be finished)
bite in pieces those threads, and lay those good works a bleeding: All their
good works are Opera refuga, works of Apostasy: They begin many and perfect
none: For Thorns sprang up in the Thorny-ground and choked the good Seed; And
these are that Thorney-ground wherein Cavils, Slanders, Quarrels,
Missuppositions, Pretenses, Excuses and Busy neglect of the best things
springs up and (through Pride and Covetousness) choke every good Work before
it be finished.

Pilate was guilty of this sin, so was Saul: Both did very much, and then
turned Apostates in not perfecting what they had begun: True Saints are often
guilty of these sins, and pay dear for their Semi-advertencies and half
performances: For Moses omitted to circumcise his son, therefore God met him
and would have killed him; It Is like he lay sick near unto death. So the
Prophet, sent to Bethel, had performed (within a very little) all the task that
God sent him to do: But a Lion met him and slew him, because he left part (a
very little part) of his work undone: Little do many true Saints imagine, that
the cause of their losses, languishing sicknesses, and, often, untimely deaths,
is, their Semi-advertency, causing careless, half-performances and keeping them
back from perfecting any good work: Such Saints can scarce be discerned, by
theirs Works, from Locusts and Hypocrites.

Semi-advertency is so much worse then Non-advertency, as Apostasy is worse
than Profaneness, or as, To know and profess the truth, and oppose it, is worse
than bare ignorance.

Balaam was much guilty of this sin of Semi-advertency, half mindful of Gods
command, and half unmindful: Therefore (drawn by the strong Cords of
Covetousness) he came, at last, to act directly coutrary to Gods command: But
an Angel stood in his way to kill him, and he was slain, at last, for the same
sin: But Modern Semi-advertists (his and his followers Antitypes) are apt to
stand (contrary to that Angel) in the way against the truth to stop the
progress of it, and destroy such as do assert it: For Covetousness (adjoined to
Semi-advertency) is soon filled with Canine anger against all truth, and
chiefly against the practisers of it; and readily complyes with all such (as
seem Religious) that are most ready to slander and asperse them and it; So the
Senate of Pharisees consented (as one) to the sentence of the High Priest
against Christ,

Semi-advertists extend, at first, some trivial half performed help to the
truth and the witnesses of it, but after oppose it, and desert or destroy them:
They hear, read, and pray by halves, or so far as to get a Form of Religion,
but not the power of it; begin many good works, finish none, do half, leave
half undone; are half hot, half cold, which God abhors.

Judas (when the seventy forsook Christ) did not forsake him, nor was found
blame worthy, by the Apostles, for about 1260. days; But then (through
Semi-advertency caused by Covetousness) turned Traitor: what Family or Church
could be more pure than that whereof Christ was Head? What Doctrine more
perfect than that he taught? Yet that Locust lurk't even there: Semi-advertists
sow pregnant Seeds of perfidious Prodition, Schism and Apostasy even in the
best Church-Societies, and endanger to destroy them.

Thirdly, Mis-animadvertency (the fruit of Charity-wanting Pride, and parent of
the greatest ignorance) is the principal ground of the Spiritual Apostasy,
whose Professors (like the Pharisees) take the greatest pains to least purpose;
pray, hear and read (not by halves, but) amiss; and misapply (through
uncharitableness) all their Devotions, Doctrine, Gifts and Parts, to deprave
the Truth and destroy the witnesses of it: These search the Scriptures and such
Books as unfold the meaning of them, and find in both (so blind and perverse is
wicked uncharitableness) that which was never written in either: So the
Pharisees searched the Scriptures with much uncharitable, blind,
truth-misapplying sedulity, and found there that our blessed Savior should dye
as a blasphemer, which was never written: And those Readers aforesaid might
read (through cursory haste, and uncharitable misapplication) my Treatise and
find therein, that I made Luther, Calvin, and all Reformists to be the Locusts,
which was not written.

Misadvertists are readiest to cast their blind bolts of precipitate rashness
against Truth in Doctrine and Practice, and the assertors of both: The Stony
ground owns them, and they receive the seed of Grace like it: They aspire to
the most specious pretenses, and seek tegment and shelter in the fairest
corners of the Court that was cast out and given to the Gentiles.

Herin lies the Spirit and life of the Apostasy of Antichrist; That men mind
not, half mind, or mind amiss those proper objects of due animadvertency, that
are Principia praecognoscenda, the Principles and Grounds of all obedience to
God and right to men.

Improbus non animadvertit ut intelligat: A wicked man (says the Text) minds
not, or regards not that he may understand, Prove. 29.7. Therefore,
Nonadvertists must needs be desperately wicked, because they know not, nor mind
to know, what the Grounds of doing right or wrong are.

Therefore, Semiadvertists must be more wicked because they mind but by halves,
and so to less and worse purpose then they that mind nothing: For, those ten
Semiadvertist-Spies (sent to search the land of promise) gave in part, a good
report, but otherwise an evil report of it, and of the promise of God; which
brought swift destruction upon themselves, and caused that all Israel (four
excepted) were destroyed; Whereas Nonadvertists (that as bruit Beasts mind
nothing) cannot be so guilty of bringing evil reports upon that which is good,
or of causing such general calamity and destruction in States and Churches.

Lastly, Misadvertists must be most wicked, because they (above all Professors)
are most fruitful in evil reports: They search the Scriptures and such Books as
unfold them and find in both (as the Pharisees did) what was never written in
either: You (says our Savior) are of your Father the Devil, and the works of
your Father you will do: Lying Derogation, and worth and Truth-Detraction; in
careless and uncharitable Misadvertists (especially in such as most desire to
seem Religious) is ex digito Daemonis opus, a more peculiar work wrought by the
very singer of the Devil in the hearts and mouths of Hypocrites.

This threefold inanimadvertency or carelessness to know what Truth is, in
practice as well as in Doctrine, is almost general, and seems to overspread the
Earth as Waters cover the Sea: To know the truth of it; and the dangers of it,
if it be true, and how to prevent those dangers is a duty universal, incumbent
upon all and of the highest, and most necessary concernment to all.

The Prototype Apostasy of the Old World was almost universal: Noah Preached an
hundred and twenty years, and we read not of one man (more then his own family)
that was brought, thereby, to due Animadtency, the ground of true Repentance: I
am, therefore very much afraid, that the grand Apostasy is more general then
men and Saints imagine it to be; I need not name those Texts that denote the
Antitype: In that World (as well as in this) there wanted not (no doubt) many
Learned men, reputed Religious, if not Famous both for Learning and Religion,
and yet the Text says (so universal was the inanimadvertency of that
Type-Apostacy) they knew nothing till the Flood came, etc. This, therefore (to
foresee and shun the dangers of such an epidemick sin, and that sin it self of
careless disregard, that is the cause of all ignorance and impenitence) is Opus
opere dignum, a work worth all acceptance (as the Apostle speaks in another
case)and of absolute necessity to be set about, with all diligence, by all: For
it is least safe to rely upon Smoke in the mouth of the bottomless pit, or upon
the Locusts Crowns of Deceit; And the righteousness of true Saints (too guilty
of this sin of the grand inadvertency and Apostasy) is (like the Oil in the
wise Virgins Lamps) but enough (if That) for themselves only.

The finding out of the Gunpowder-plot was a most happy discovery; But this
discovery (to prevent the most Dreadful and Epidemick Dangers) is of far
greater concernment then to foresee and prevent the conflagration of the
greatest City or the total destruction of any Nation; and admits not a minute
of delay by any that is at all animadversive: We shall, a little further examine
the generality of the grand Apostasy.

St. Jerome was a man of a serene mind and quick sight, and seemed to be a
second Jeremiah: For, as Jeremiah wrote the History of the sad calamities of
captive Israel; So St. Hierom wrote the beginning of the History of Gospel
revolted Israel with like Lamentations: And as Jeremiah shadowed Type- Iraels
bondage by a boiling Pot, looking out of the North; So St. Jerome represented
Gospel- Isreal's thraldom and Apostasy by a boiling Pot, looking out of the
North also: That the boiling Pot in Jeremiah was all the Remnant of the whole
house of Israel, plainly appears from the Text: Then the Lord said (says the
Text) Out of the North an evil shall break forth upon all the Inhabitants of
the Land, Chap. 1.14. And that St. Jerome's Pot of Apostasy (the whole
Gospel Church and Saints) was (if conform to her Prototype or Pattern) general
(of Formal Professors a toto, of Saints a tanto) cannot be denied.

And that boiling Pot of deadly broth (which the Prophet healed) did, no doubt,
prefigure the general Apostasy grievous miseries and evil manners of all Israel
in Type and Antitype: There was not one drop of Broth in that Pot that was not
deadly bitter and unwholesome, because the bitter fruits of inanimadvertency
(mistaken wild Gourds for good Pot Herbs) were put into it: Careless
inadvertency and inconformity in practice, to Gospel Rule are the Colocynthes
that imbitter and poison all good works of Men, Sects, and Saints in the body
of Apostasy: Nor does long boiling make them better, but their manners more
bitter: The Broth was never the better for long boiling till the Prophet healed
it, and then there was no more death nor hurt in the Pot: And the healing of
this Pot of the Grand Antitype Apostasy (if we can but hint that) will,
doubtless be the healing of the sad, bleeding Divisions and evil Manners of all
Church-Societies, Sects and Nations.

And why is there such need now of the Balm of Gilead? Because the waters of
strife in the boiling Pot, beat like Billows one against another, and the
general practice seems but a continued dashing of divided Sect and
Church-Societies, whiles the Locusts Formal Smoke is magnified, and their
Crowns of Deceit most admired and mistaken for true practice: For Jerubaal made
a golden Ephod, and placed it in Ephrah; And all Israel says the Text (that
Apostasy was likewise general) went a whoring after it, which caused the ruin
of Jerubaals Family: So all Professors, and, I might say, almost all Saints
(pudet posse dici, non posse refelli) run a whoring after the Locusts Crowns,
as it were like Gold; and mistake them for true Righteousness; which general
Apostasy has (the more because least perceived) procured many general
calamities and threatens more (if not inevitable destruction) to those that
persist therein.

And I saw (says the Text) when the Lamb opened one of the Seals, and I heard
as it were, the voice of thunder, one of the four Beasts saying; come and see,
Chap. 6.1. And when he had opened the second Seal, I heard the second Beast
say; come and see, Verf. 3. And when be had opened the third Seal, I heard the
third Beast say; come and see, Verse. 5. And so the fourth Beast, Verse. 7. And
what was the cause of this fourfold Call, like thunder?

There was need of it then, and now more: Men were ever inadversive, and most
men now mind nothing. Come and see: What shall we see? might slothful
Professors say: The Prophetic Scriptures (so blasphemous are blind Hypocrites)
show nothing to any: and what can be gathered from them are but conjectures: we
search those Scriptures that show us the plain way to salvation; but have no
leisure to mind useless and uncertain Notions: Thus these filthy Heathens tread
under their feet the knowledge of those things that are most sacred and of
highest concernments to them and to all Natitions; nor do such mind at all,
things necessary to their own salvation, but forsake the means of their own
safeties: For, whiles they thus contemn the Prophetic Scriptures and despise
their loud calls like thunder, they reject the plain, and have no profit by
either.

This fourfold call (Come and see) was a call to animadvertency, that men might
hear, and hearing, obey: There were never more hearers then now, nor fewer that
hear: Many hear to no purpose, few hear indeed: Many attend diligently to Lo
here, and lo there; few hearken to those sacred calls of God that call to
animadvertency: and what are the fruits of their fruitless hearing? Faith comes
by hearing, says the Text; but by their hearing comes strife: Effectual
hearing is like the small Rain that distilleth upon the tender Grass and makes
it grow, but these, by hearing, grow worse: Fruitful hearing renders men
animadversive to act conform to Gospel Rule, but Formal Professors, by hearing,
become more mindless, mind either nothing or what is evil: Violence, therefore,
(as it was once filled therewith before) fills the Earth: For, what is the
(almost universal) practice of men and Professors but a coaltern colluctation
(like swelling Waves of the Sea) of Sects against Sects and of one
Church-Society against another, whiles Formal Smoke Usurps the place of pure
Religion, and the Locusts Crowns are cried up for true Christian practice. Nor
better fruits can they bear, that mind not to know Truth from Error; that mind
not, or mind by halves, or mind amiss: Paul was minded to know nothing (nothing
in comparison to him) but Christ and him crucified; But men and Professors seem
minded now to know nothing absolutely: This threefold inanimadvertency (the
threefold foundation of the Apostasy of Antichrist and of all evil manners) is,
we see (as an epidemick sleep) almost universal.

Abraham slept a deep sleep and an horror of great darkness fell upon him: And
Men, Saints and Sects now sleep (like that Prophetick-adumbration) a deep sleep
also, but do not so much as dream, that such a general, deadly Lethargy and
darkness of inadvertency and Apostasy lies upon them: There is, therefore, now
transcendent need of a four fold Call to animadvertency that men Sects and
Saints (as Christ called Lazarus out of his Grave) may thereby live and
manifest their life by their ready minding of those things wherein their own
safeties and highest concernments chiefly consists.

Elisha asked and obtained of Eliah that a double portion of his Spirit (there
was need of that then) might be upon himself: And it has been and is my daily
prayer for all Religious Ministers and Magistrates, that a double portion of
the Spirit of God (never was more need) may rest upon them, that, thereby, they
may have a double proportion of power to call unto Animadvertency and say (like
thunder) come and see, That so all Sects, Saints and Heterodox Professors may
come and see what the Locusts Crowns, like Gold, are, and what true
Righteousness in practice (contrary thereunto) is, what their Smoke of Formal
Profession is, and what pure and undefiled Religon (contrary thereunto) ought
to be, which come next to be handled.

Fifthly: And there arose a Smoke, and out of the Smoke came Locusts, Chap.
9.2, 3. And on their heads were as it were Crowns like Gold, Ver. 7.

[ And on theirheads,] etc. Here Is deceptio coronata, crowned deceit: Deceit
has its Exaltation in these grand deceivers of themselves and others.

The right solution of this Question [ What is Truth] may seem to be the sum
of satisfaction to all Sects, people and Professors: And the diligent
disquisition of it (that all might know what Truth in Opinion and practice is)
is the sum of the design of this Treatise: But here it seems (not needful
only but) of necessity and our prime duty to endeavor to discover unto all
what the truth of those Gold-like Crowns of the Locusts is, or (if there be no
truth in them) what their deceits are.

The deceits of the Locusts are in Form and profession. And,

Secondly, In Practice and Power.

Their deceits in Form and Profession are shadowed forth by their concomitant
Smoke.

Their Deceits in Practice and Power are presignified by their Crowns as it
were like Gold. And first,

Their deceits, in Form and Profession, are shadowed forth by Smoke: For, All
Profession (all Zeal, Prayer, Prophecy) without practice, is but Smoke, whose
bottom is no where: True practice is the bottom of true Profession, and the
substance, whereof that is but the shadow: To seem, and not be Religious, is
but groundless appearance and deceit, and all gifts (be they never so great)
give no bottom to a fruitless Profession: Though I speak with tongues of Men
and Angels, (says the Apostle) and though I have the gift of Prophecy and
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and though I have all Faith and
have no Charity, I am nothings 1 Cor. 13. If Paul (having all these) had been
nothing without Charity; Then all these and all strict Profession and gifts of
Prayer and Prophecy (without practice-producing Charity) are, at best, but
Smoke: What that product is, and what produces it, claims our more serious
care to enquire, in this place.

Faith, Hope and Charity (the first fruits of attentive animadvertency) are
(subordinate to Christ) that threefold Tree of Life that bears the true fruits
of all obedience to God, and good manners toward men: That Tree (during the
time of the grand Apostasy) seems like that Tree in Daniel, that was hewn down
and had its branches cut off, and its fruit scattered, but it shall bear twelve
manner of fruits, says the Text, Dan. 4.14. Revel. 22.2. We shall show here
the Series of it, and so proceed.

Faith is the Root, Hope the Stem, Charity is the Branches that bear and extend
the fruit of it.

Faith, is Faith, Hope and Charity impressive, as the threefold life of the
Tree is in the Root.

Hope is Faith, Hope and Charity intensive, as the threefold life of the Tree
is in the Stem also.

Charity is Faith, Hope and Charity expressive as the threefold life of the
Tree is, likewise, in its Branches. And first,

True Faith is Faith, Hope and Charity impressive; For, Faith, without Hope and
Charity, is but a false pretense.

Hope is Faith, Hope and Charity intensive; For, Hope without Faith and Charity
is but Smoke.

Charity is Faith, Hope and Charity expressive; For, Charity without Faith and
Hope, is but (like Locusts Crowns) a Crown of deceit.

Faith works in Hope, by Charity.

Hope works from Faith, by Charity.

Charity works from Faith and Hope.

The fruit of this threefold Tree is true Christian practice.

We have shown what the deceits of the Locusts are in Profession: we shall now
show what their deceits are in Practice.

Secondly, As the deceits of the Locusts in Profession are figured by Smoke;
So their deceits in Practice are shadowed forth by the false appearances of
Crowns like Gold: Crowns of Gold, in Scripture, are Hieroglyfick-intimations of
Equity, and Emblems of Righteousness; But the Crowns of the Locusts are
deceptious appearnces of truerighteousness and most contrary to it.

And what is most like Gold, and most contrary to it? Nothing is more like it,
and less the same, then Straw: The Locust^ liberality (though it look like
Gold) is Chaff or St^^w for levity, and withal, so dilatory, that it tends to
destroy those that receive the deceitful benefit of their seeming good works:
Their Crowns are made of Gold-like Straw, which many besides them, mistake for
pure Gold. But because, Contraria, juxtase posita, maxim clucescunt,
contraries appear clearest by being set together) we shall here handle the
Locusts deceits in practice, and true Christian practice; and (that the
difference betwixt both, may better appear) compare both together.

The Righteousness of Locusts (as is the Righteousness of all Hypocrites) is
clipped, dilatory, or accompanied with censorious insolence, or performed by
halves, or however, inconform to Gospel-Rule. But true Righteousness in
practice is not dilatory, defalked or performed by halves, or inconform to
Gospel-Rule: For, The Kingdom of God must be a Kingdom of Righteousness, and
the Streets of the holy City shall be (not Gold-like-Straw, but) pure Gold,
Revel. 21.18. That is, All the ways and works of her inhabitants, shall be
right in practice, conform to Gospel Rule: And wherein consists this conformity?

Truth in practice is a Quadruplex conformity, and (containing these gradual
parts) is Incomplex. Complex. Triplex. Quadruplex.


Truth Incomplex (Derivative) is a Conformity; Alste. Metaph.
Est conformitas rei cum principiis a quibus orta est, vel, est ipsius rei
veritas: A Conformity in itself with its own Principles.

Complex Truth is a Conformity; Swarez. Metaph.
Est Conformitas (says Swarez) judicii cum rebus, unde provenit, ut res ita
vere dicantur sicut judicatae; It Is a conformity of the judgment with things,
whereby they are rightly called as they are judged to be.

Verit as triplex (Truth triplicit) is a threefold Conformity, and more
comprehensive then the two former; it comprehends Incomplex and Complex Truths
(Conformity of things in themselves, and of the judgment with things) and is
itself a conformity also of the will with both: And, therefore, in truth
Triplicit is first, Truth simplex, which is the first Principle of true
Practice, and the Extrinse Subject of true Righteousness, The mind of man is
the intrinsic, And

Secondly, Therein is Complex-Truth (conformit as intellectus cum rebus) a
conformity of the judgment with things, wherein practice-producing
animadvertency must of necessity, be first versant: For, De ignotis nulla
agendi ratio; There can be no right of Action, where there is no right
understanding of the Incomplex Principles of true Righteousness, or of things
to be done. And

Thirdly, Truth Triplicit comprehends a third Conformity; Est conformitas (non
solum rei in se, and, cum re, intellectus, sed) voluntatis etiam cum rebus
agendis; It Is a conformity of the Will, as well as of the Understandng, with
causes or things to be understood, willed and done, whereby they are willed as
they are rightly understood: This is that Truth in the inward part, which God
loves; ( Thou love truth in the inward part, Psalm. 51.9. because (not only
the intellect, but) the Will is, therein, conform to Gospel-Rule and Gods
command: But God works to will and to do; Not only to will, but to do. And
therefore

Fourthly, True Righteousness, or truth in practice, is Quadruplex; And this is
most comprehensive; It comprehends Truth Incomplex, Complex and Triplex: And is
itself (above all these) a Conformity: Est conformitas (non tantum intellect us
and voluntatis, sed and) Acticnis cum rebus agendis; It Is a conformity (not of
judgment and Will only, but) of Works with the Incomplex Principles of true
practice or extrinsick subjects of true Righteousness.

The Extrinse Subject of true Practice, or first considerations of due
Animadvertency to do right, are these: A Quo, Quid, Cui, Quantum, Quoties; To
which we may add Quomodo; Though that (comprehending, in some sort, the five
former) is often interserted in the handling of them. And first,

A Quo, That is, Such as seek to be sincere must consider (and how far it
concerns themselves) who are most fit to hold forth Judgment, Merey, Faith:
For all (though all must endeavor it) are not alike able to do it.

Secondly, Quid, what recompenses (Poenam vel praemium) are right to retribute.

Thirdly, Cui: To whom punishments, and to whom therewards of well doing, are
due.

Fourhly, Quantum; How much punishment or reward: For, Peccata non sunt
aequalia: Offenses are not alike, nor good Works or desers equal.

Fifthly, Quoties; How often Judgment, Mercy and Faith must be held forth to the
same Men, Saints, Sects, or dissenting Brethren.

David had respect to all the Commadements of God, And all, that respect his
Commands, to Practice right, must have due respect, at least, to these five or
six (principia praecognoscenda) Principles of Incomplex Truth: Therefore true
Righteousness in practice comprehends first, Truth Incomplex; for without that,
there can be no Truth Complex, because there can be no conformity of the
Intellect with those outward Principles of true practice, if they are not
known; For, Complex Truth (Haec mensura rei est in mente vel Ore loquentis) is
the true measure of things in the mind or mouth of man: But Incomplex-truth
(est mensura rei in se) is the measure of every thing in itself; wherefore,
where no such thing is, or (if in being) is not known, there can be no
Complex-truth or know ledge so much as of any outward Object or Ground of true
Righteousuess. And therefore

Secondly, True Righteousness comprehends Complex-truth, because it is a
conformity also of the Will; And there can be no conformity of the Will with
the Intellect without Complex-truth; Because the mind of man can never will
that rightly, which it does not first truly understand.

Thirdly, True Righteousness in practice comprehends also veritatem triplicem,
a threefold Truth; because it is a conformity of Action with a right
informed-will and intellect: For, Actions can never be right in practice,
unless the Will that works them, and the Intellect that guides the Will be
conform to (principia veritatis praecognoscenda) those Incomplex principles of
truth in practice, that are the first outward matter of true Righteousness: And
therefore

Fourthly, Truth in practice is Quadruplex; Or a conformity of Actions with a
right-informed Will and Understanding: That is, A conformity of all three,
(Will, Understanding and Actions) with the Incomplex Principles of Truth in
Practice.

Thus we see that true Christian Practice must be (of necessity unavoidable) a
Quadruplex conformity and, therefore, not be (like Locusts Crowns) Works of
deceit and sloth, but a System of Animadvertency versant in more Noble Actions
of Berean sedulity and fidelity: In which true practice (though it be a work,
by the best Professors, of arduous acquisition) even the conformity of the
Intellect with the Incomplex Principles of Practick-truth is the gift of God to
such as ask it as they ought: For God is the giver of Wisdom to such as rightly
seek it, And every good and perfect gift comes down from God: But Truth
Triplex and Quadruplex (or the conformity of Will and Works with the said first
Grounds of true Righteousness is, more especially, the work of God, who works
to will and to do. This is that Gold (or the more visible manifestation of it)
which God exhorts the Church of Laodicea to buy of him to make her rich; That
Gold, whereof the rich Crowns of all true Saints (as they are visible to men)
are (or rather shall be) made; And shall be that pure Gold, that shall pave the
Streets of the holy City, Revel. 21.18. But

The Locusts have upon their heads as it were Crowns like Gold: As it were like
(in Deceit and appearance and, in deed, most unlike) unto true Righteousness:
For, Their Righteousness of deceit is either dilatory, or defalked, or
insolent, or rashly censorious, or otherwise inconform to the right Principles
of Truth in Practice: And, therefore, it is (though it look like Gold) light as
Straw, if laid in the Balance.

This Straw-like levity of Love and Works (which we find in the Locusts) has
ever been the swift Subversion and perdition of all persons and places (true
Saints scarce excepted) that have perished upon Earth.

Belshazzar was laid in the Balance and found wanting: How wanting?

His, his Princes and Kingdoms, Judgments and Works were found wanting in
weight: Therefore, he lost his life, And his Kingdom was translated that very
night.

Eli (a true, but too careless servant of God) was laid in the Balance and
found wanting: And how did Elie's good Works want weight? His sons ran into a
slander and he stayed them not: His reproof seemed fit from a Father, for such
Offenders, but it wanted weight, was too mild; Such sins deserved more sharp
rebuke and severer Discipline: Therefore God cut him off and all his Offspring
not leaving one alive: But true Saints themselves (in these times) think it no
such great sin to be wanting in all good Works; Either their Promises want
performance, or their Profession wants practice, or their Practice is wanting
in conformity to the Incomplex Principles of Truth in Practice: Nor will they
be reproved, nor reprove others; except perhaps, as Eli did. They (like him)
stay very few (by the reproving of them) from running into slanders, They
evidence not clearly what Truth is, nor discover sin, but earnestly declaim
against it, and are, very much ignorant of it: They convince not Dissenters,
convert not the Diffident, reclaim not the Disobedient, stay none, or very few,
and they themselves will scarce be stayed (by just reproofs) from running into
Errors in Faith and Manners; That is little their study or care. Their Studies
are versant about things of much higher concernment, and they mind more serious
matters: Such levity of Love and Works and Inconformity in practice to
Gospel-Rule is (or next to it) the smoke of the Locusts.

Babels penultimate Antitype ( Rome partly Heretical, but chiefly as Orthodox
Apostate in Manners) was laid in the Balance and found wanting (wantinng in
the weight of her former graces, in the worth of her first works) She fell from
being most fruitful in well doing to be a Cage of every hateful Bird;
Therefore, Her plagues came in one day; Death, Mourning, Famine, Fire, etc. I
might produce many Presidents; As the fall of Pharaoh's servants, Sodom,
Jerusalem; And indeed, all places and persons that have perished, have had this
levity of Judgment, and works, the cause of their perdition: Therefore, It
requires our speedy disquisition to find out what this dangerous levity (that
brings such swift destruction) is, that we may (with all diligent care) avoid
it, and find out that substantial Gold of sound Judgment and sincere
Obedience, which shall be (subordinate to Christ the Rock of safety to Ages,
and support of all Princes (and people.

Levity in love and Works is Sensual, Earthly, and Devilish. And first, Sensual.

Sensual Professors (filthy Sodomites) make substantial Truth, sober Advice,
and sincere Obedience, matters of extreme Laughter; So Lot seemed to his Sons
in Law as one that mocked, or made sport; And this makes all their sins so far
incorrigible: These Professors (though they scarce can be so called) can
condemn any man (O horrendum, bestiale!) before they hear him, any Book before
they read it; and the Grounds of their such solid Judgments is their trivial
Levity of lavish petulancy.

Sodom ('it is not said she gave no Alms) strengthened not, by giving, the hands
of the poor; And her Antitype (Such Sodomites) do the same; give, perhaps, but
(by giving) strengthen not the needy.

These men grow daily (as they grow in years) not in Grace but Wit; And that
Wit is only extreme Folly: These wild Beasts are but senseless Risibilists, and
their Judgments and Works so light, that they are not worth the weighing of
them; But God will lay them and their works (as he did revelling Belshazzar) in
his balance.

Secondly, The Judgments and works of Earthlyminded Professors (seeming more
solid) are much lighter: Their levity is less seen and longer before it be
discerned; So Pilate heard and examined (seemed duly to examine) our blessed
Savior, found no fault in him, and then (through Earthly Interests) condem'nd
him to be put to death; whereas filthy Sodomites (professors sensual) are not
fit nor able to examine any man, searce with any appearance of Sedulity: Their
volatile petulancy and levity of folly permits them not to be so serious or
industrious; Or (if they have so much sobriety as to examine any man and find
him faultless) they are not, usually so wicked (with Pilate and secular
Professors) as to condemn him: For, it is not so much Sensual as Covetous and
Earthly Interests that tend to condemn the Truth in deed, and the witnesses
thereof to Death: Their Doom (the Sentence of Men Earthly-minded) falls (far
above the bolts of filthy Sodomites) heavier upon the Truth, and the Witnesses
of it at last, though they seem greatly to favor both at first.

For, their levity of Love and Works (being less seen) is longer before it be
discerned: So Judas was Earthly-minded ( a thief, says the Text) long before
he was found out, nor was he perceived by the Apostles for about 1260. days
but then that Type-Son of Perdition, and the Mystery of Iniquity in him was
revealed; His love to the Truth, Loyalty to his Master, Charity to men, and
care of the poor was laid in the Balance and found wanting.

The Levity of the love of Earthly-minded Professors is discovered by the
outward indices: Angustum pectus, parca manus; Narrow hearts, hands not
enlarged: Their rewards are ever inconform to the works of the well deserving,
or dilatory to destroy them; Their grand pretense for their so doing, is their
great business both Secular and Sacred: So Ahab (a Type of Antichrist) was
busy ( here and there, says the Prophet) and by means of that business,
minded not the command of God, lost his Kingdom thereby, and destroyed himself
and his family for ever.

So Secular Antichrist ( Ahabs Antitype) is not ashamed (no more then Ahab was)
to make the pretense of much business his plea against Obedience: For Earthly
minds (full of worldly business) exclude the testimony of the Truth (at least
in Works) and all due regard to the witnesses of it. Therefore Men
Earthly-minded (Secular Antichrist) may be well known by their accumulating
such business as arms them with sufficient excuses against the practice of good
manners: Their business is either Secular for Earthly Interests, or seeming
sacred for secular ends: Therefore, There Is no weight in all their good Works
of which the best are strangled with a strait hand, and (being laid in the
Balance) are found light like the Crowns of the Locusts. But

Thirdly, The levity of Professors proud and Pharisaical (being most light) is
more traductive and devilish; Therefore, they can censure (not as Sodomites,
but as it were in sobriety) before they see cause, condemn before they know
whom or for what: They can readily say (with Apostate Julian) Legi, Cognovi,
Damnavi: Legi: Here Is some labor (lost labor, the worst labor) Cognovi,
Here Is some profit (a man would think) of their pains (pains to no purpose,
pains without profit) Damnavi, Here Is the cursed, truthcondemning fruit of
proud Professors, the fruit of all their pains in reading, the result of all
their acquisitions; They only dream they know (as some Prophets did) and
discern nothing: Therefore (as Balaam could not be stoptin his course to curse
Israel) these cannot be stayed by any course, from rash-censuring: The
Cataracts of rash condemnation fall (not to be, by any force repelled) from the
high praecipices of Pride and Ignorance, and are the infallible Characters of
Locusts and Hypocrites: They are ever most busy, and their business is about
(they think) things sacred, but serves only to deceive and be deceived: In a
word; Their good works are so light that, in substance, they are but words, of
which none are good, but in appearance and deceit.

The levity of the Righteousness of the Locusts and others, consists in their
Inadvertency or want of care to conceive and observe those Principles
aforesaid, of Incomplex-truth (A Quo, Quid, Cui, Quantum, Quoties) whose
necessary considerations (being but hinted before) here fall under our further
examination. And First.

A Quo, Or from whom what Truth in practice should chiefly proceed: Silver and
God (said Peter) have I none, such as I have, I give: Rise up and walk, Acts 3.
From such as have no Silver nor Gold, neither is due, Nor must we expect that
such as have no Spiritual use of any Limb themselves should afford the means to
make others walk in right Obedience to God and good Works to men: No man
(though many pretend it) gives that to another, which himself has not to give:
But it is a duty universal, from all, to do good to all, which that they may do,
they must first have, or seek to have, the gift of so doing from the hand of
God. But Locusts conceive not themselves greatly concerned in the discharge of
any such duty: Quid hoc ad nos? what is this (say they) to us? They are
otherwise busy in serving God, and their best service is but some blind,
careless fragment of Obedience, void of conformity: This Righteousness is no
Fruit of the true Vine, but the wild Grapes of desperate Deceits; An Agrest
Righteousness growing upon every Hedge (Heathens, or Heretics) For many Turks,
and Papists (as well as Locusts) think it sufficient to declaim in general,
against sin, and (out of a strict, blind zeal) to call for, and excite unto
Repentance, but in particular show not, nor know what sin is, nor what true
Repentance means: But (as it is the property of all blind Hypocrites) it is
their Practice to seem to impugn, with violence in their Doctrine (and so they
should do) sensual Profaneness; but never lift up their little finger against
Secular and Spiritual wickedness, which (closly veiled under strict Forms) they
mistake for the power of godliness, and count that to be the richest piece in
their Crowns of Righteousness: Wherefore (having as it were Crowns like gold)
they think it least belongs to them of any to labor to get Crowns of Gold, or
to distinguish betwixt Truth and Deceit: Truth therefore in practice is no part
of their Quid, nor do they make the practice thereof (being ignorant of it) any
duty from them. But

Secondly, Quid; The Quid, or what True Saints should ask of God and give to
men, is gold: I counsel thee (says Christ) to buy of me gold, that thou may
be rich, and White Raiment that thou may be clothed, Rev. 3.18. To wit; The
gift or power to practice such works as are not found (like the Crowns of
Locusts) wanting in weight; that are not dilatory, nor defalked, nor done with
unwilling minds, but conform to the Incomplex Principles of Truth in Practice:
But the Locusts Quid is Gold like Straw of deceit, good Works delayed, done by
halves, or with an unwilling mind, or mixed with insolence or morosity, or
otherwise, inconform to the Principles of Truth in practice.

I counsel thee to buy of me gold, etc.] And must men buy the free gifts of
God? God is bountiful, but men must buy every good and perfect gift of him:
Such gifts are seldom purchased without much pains and cost; So the man, that
found a Treasure in a field, sold all that he had, and bought that field,
Matthew. 13.44. But Locusts love money too well, and are too lazy to purchase
such gifts with much pains or charge. But

I could wish (to counsel them unworthy) that all true Saints and Sackcloth
witnesses, would give due attention to the counsel of God, and buy of him Gold
that they may be rich, and white Raiment to be better clothed for shame; and
not be (like Laodiceans) extreme poor and naked: And I could wish that Locusts
and Hypocrites (whough! they are busy, and mind matters of an hundred times
higher concernment) would do the same: But their smoaky service to God is
sufficient (the chief good) they think, and count their Crowns of desperate
deceit to be the most inestimable Treasure: Such Treasure, such Service is the
Locusts Quid.

Thirdly, Their Cui: They little care whom they hurt, and mind not much to
profit any: They are often kind to their kin, which kindness seldom falls due
till after death: They have, however, gifts to gratify the rich, and rewards
for some of their own Societies.

And they that dwell upon the Earth shall send Gifts one to another, Apoc.
11.10. These gifts were no good Works, nor this kindness Charity, but a
commutual, corrupt gratifying of the most wicked members of the body of
Apostasy.

One to another: This is Philautia, self-ended Charity, and the kindness of
Hypocrites: To those of the same Stock, Kin, Sect; The Pharisees did so: But
true Charity opens her hand wide to the poor in want; to good and bad, to
strangers in distress, to Professors of contrary Opinions, but, especially, to
the well-deserving.

Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21. And is
doing good the way to vanquish? or good Works weapons to overcome?

I answer; Good Works are the best weapons to overcome Sects and dissenting
brethren: Overcome, therefore, their Errors in Doctrine by undeniable
dilucidations of sacred Truth; Overcome their Manners by manners contrary (by
kindness, mercy and goodness) send thy gifts even to Locusts and Hypocrites
(not, as they that dwelt upon the Earth did, to encourage one another in doing
evil, but) to win them with good, to unity of Faith and true Obedience: Let thy
kindness convince their uncharitableness; Thy Mansuetude their merciless
inhumanities; Abandon Rigor, banish cruelties; Be not overcome with evil, but
overcome evil with good, as the best way to win thy worst Enemies, and the most
effectual means to convince and convert Infidels, Sects, and dissenting
Brethren.

The wise and ancient Councillors, that stood before King Solomon, gave some
such Counsel to his son: For, This way, of overooming evil with good (the
Errors and evil Manners of Enemies, Sects, and Dissenters) is Flixweed.
Sophia-Chirurgorum, the Balsame of Wisdom to heal the bleeding wounds of the
Gospel Church and Christian-States; whereas the contrary Counsel of the young,
rash, heady Councillors procured the final Rent and Revolt of the ten Tribes:
And the like contrary Counsels cause and continue like, sad Rents and Divisions
in the Church of God. I shall here but briefly solve two Questions, and so
proceed. First,

Whether the superfluities of Nabals Feast were more due to his Sheep-shearers
than to David? That Feast, in Nabals judgment (and he was a Fool) was due to
his Sheep-shearers, and no part of it to David that defended his Flocks, and
his servants that kept them: So Locusts and Hypocrites judge nothing due to
faithful Shepherds that feed Christ's Flocks by sound Doctrine, and, chiefly by
good example: For Truth-practising Ministers are the best Preachers, though
their gift of Vocal Prophecy were very weak and mean: But any Sycophant and
pretender (not true Proficients) is the Locust's Cui, to whom (in their
account) the rewards of the well deserving are due.

The second Question is this: Whether that Ointment wherewith Mary anointed our
Savior's feet, was due to him or to the poor, Joh. 12.3. It was the judgment
of Judas, that it should have been sold, and the price given to the poor: So,
Locusts and Hypocrites are of the same judgment with Judas, that no recompense
is due to the best deserving, but take as great care, as he did, of the poor.

The poor (though that be usually, far from them) ought to be sufficiently
provided for; But the well-deserving have most right to just rewards: The time
(says the Text) is come that thoushouldest give reward to thy servants the
Prophets, and to those that fear thy Name, small and great, Revel. 11.18.

These, and what is profitable and honest (to promote and practice it with
fidelity) should be (a duty chiefly incumbent upon Magistrates) each true
Curistians principal Quibus or Cui: But the Locusts Cui is the proud Hypocrite,
whose practice is Formal Smoke and Deceit: They are ever great pretenders
(like Judas) for the poor, and the poor receive least from them.

Fourthly, Their Quantum holds no proportion with the Principles of Truth in
Practice nor conformity with equity: And what is the Quantum of the Locusts
liberality?

It Is usually (seldom other) thin and withered, like the Corn of Egypt, when
seven years drought had dried the Land; And sometimes (less usual) it is more
large than the true Christian's Quantum needs to be: For, the true Christians
Quantum is quantum sufficit; But the Locusts Quantum is quantum destruit vel
desicit, aut dando parca manu vel cunctando: The true Christians Quantum of
pains or charge is (provided that may stand with other Incomplex Principles of
Right) so much as may perfect every good work, and recompense the doers of it:
For he is not bound to extend sufficient to the poor, or to perfect (actually
in his own person) every good Work, that has not sufficient to sustain
himself: But the Locusts Quantum (wanting weight) falls short of perfecting
good works and damnifies or destroys the doers of them; Or else it is the
deceitful bounty of liberal Donations (lost by delays) that, therefore,
destroys both, with greater deceivableness of unrighteousness; So it was
foretold of the false Prophet (the Son of perdition) that he should wear out
the Saints of the most High; not so much, perhaps, by retributing sparing
recompenses, as by delaying large Donations, till they lose their benefit, and
thereby destroy the receivers of them.

The Question is not, therefore, how much pains or charge for measure or
magnitude, but how much for sufficiency, is expended (and how opportunely) to
relieve the poor, to recompense desert, to advance good works, as we see in the
good Samaritan, and in Elishaes supplies of Oil to the Widow in want: For, the
Locusts Quantum may be as large as Solomon's Donations to King Hiram, who gave
him twenty Cities; Or as Herod's expenses, who rebuilt (at least repaired) the
Temple of God; Or as the Pharisees Alms, when they caused Trumpets to sound
before the loaded bearers of their liberal bounty: Such bounty (though it seem
large and liberal) it not the true Christians Quantum, which must be the
product of due animadvertency, and have diligent respect to all the Principles
of Right in practice: But Herod rebuilt the Temple of God, and sought to kill
Christ, the living Temple, who should have been the principal Cui of his love
and liberality: So the Pharisees gave large Alms, in appearance, to the poor,
and they themselves devoured poor Widows Houses, who should have been the Cui
of their Mercy and compassion: Such bounty, such liberality is the Locusts
Quantum.

The Jews (when an Horse or Ox fell into a Pit or Ditch) did not use idle
praise, or empty pity; But the Quantum or proportion of their pains was so much
as served to pull him forth; So the Quantum of Relief, which men should extend
to the poor, Fatherless, or to strangers in distress should be so much as may
serve (if possible) to draw them out of the Pit of their present wants and
distresses; Otherwise they show less mercy to men, and, perhaps to Saints, then
the Jews themselves did to their Beasts: But the Inadvertency of men is so
general, so great the grand Apostasy, that if any good work, or the doer of it,
fall into a Ditch, there may it stick, there may he stay; Locusts will not, nor
scarce will true Saints, take due pains to pull forth him or it. But

Locusts (in part like men, in part like beasts, as the Text shows) practice,
commonly, by pieces and half performance; Wherefore (as lying Ananias kept back
part of the price of his possession, so) they commonly, keep back part of the
rewards due to the well-deserving, detain part of that Testimony which should
be given of them: Therefore, They witness not the truth, or witness it
partially or falsely in another praise, proportion recompenses with like
partiality; And, as Gehazi hid two Talents (taken by sinister deceit) to enrich
himself, so they (no less greedy) surreptitiously derogate part of the praise
and rewards of the faithful witnesses to advance themselves, or advantage their
own Designs by such thievish depredations. But

The due and full Quantum of pains and charge (necessary to perfect any
goodwork, requisite to commensurate the works of the well-deserving is (as (it
was the judgment of Judas) in their judgments, lost labor, waste expense,
pains and charge cast away: In a word, Their Alms and equity are usually
(Calabri xenia) Gifts and Rewards so trivial that they trouble, or so dilatory
and desalked that they destroy the Receivers of them.

Fifthly, Quoties, Or how often men must practice, toward all, truth conform to
its Incomplex Principles.

But here we should first, further enquire, what those Incomplex Truths (that
are the Original matter of all equity in practice) are.

I answer; They are, Cuique suum in se, or that meum and tuum, in itself, that
is due from every man, to God and man. For Example.

Elipl^az and his two friends spoke not of God the thing that was right like
his servant Job: There Is Res recta, de Deo, dicenda.

Secondly, David deserved (both in word and deed) well at the hand of Nabal:
There was (Res rect a dicenda and agenda) that Incomplex-right, or due debt,
which should have been both spoken of, and done to David, but both omitted.

Thou shall not muzle the mouth of thine Ox, etc. There Is (Res rect a agenda
agentibus) the thing which is right, or the due debt to the industrious.

Do good to all, Gal. 6.2. That is; Do unto all men, good conform to the
Incomplex-grounds of doing good, at least let that be really intended: There Is
(Res rect a agenda universis) the thing which is right or the Debt due to every
man: we shall touch these briefly. And first,

The indignation of God was kindled against Eliphaz and his two friends: why?
Because they spoke not the thing that was right of God, nor of his servant Job:
And why did they not speak the thing that was right?

Because it was Incomplex of itself (or a Debt due, but unknown to them) and
they, possibly, did not strive nor faithfully endeavor to make it complex:
That is; Did not labor (with due industry) to know the thing that was right,
without which they could never speak it: And this is the Epidemick Deceit
(though most prevalent in Locusts and Hypocrites) of men, and, too much, of men
Learned and Religious; They labor not (at least not so much as they ought) to
make the thing, that is right in itself, complex or to come to the right and
full knowledge of it, but busy themselves (and that in the first place) about
many words of impugnation against the thing that is right: Thus (by this
rashness) they render themselves more unrighteous then mere Heathens, and
kindle the indignation of God (to their swift destruction) against themselves.

Secondly, The indignation of God was kindled against Eliphaz and his two
friends: And why against them?

Not only because they made not the thing that was right (though for that in
the first place) complex, but because they made it not triplex, or wrought not
a conformity formity of the Will and Affections to the thing that was right,
which they could never practice without making it first complex: For, Ignoti
nulla cupido; No man can attain the love of the truth, or make a conformity of
his Will and affections to the thing that is right, if he first make it not
complex, or (through covetous or careless inadvertency) care not to come to the
knowledge of it: And this is condemnation; That light is come into the word,
and men love darkness.

Love darkness]: That is, Love slothful inadvertency, For men-inadversive are
men of dark minds, not differing much (if any thing) from beasts: Therefore;
That so great (the greatest) Remora to all Righteousness and true practice
might be removed, we briefly hinted before the order of the working of those
three Fundamental Operative Graces, that work due animadvertency, and are
wrought by some (but more remiss) degree of it.

These three Operative Graces ( Faith, Hope and Love) are all three (as we
showed) in each; and each, without all three, is nothing: All three (wrought by
animadvertency) work it; and by it, reciprocally, with greater power: Therefore
it must be, radically, a part in, and the Operative Power of, all three. For,

Faith works by Love: That is; by Animadvertency; For men mind what they love,
and love what they chiefly mind: Love and Animadvertency, in this sense, seem
Synonymous, and it to be the Operative Virtue in Love or Charity.

Faith works by Love or Animadvertency, first, Humility; For God gives Grace
(a greater degree of it) to the humble; But Locusts and Hypocrites are too
proud to practice right conform to Gospel-Rule; cannot (like Cain) submit to be
their Brothers Keepers, nor admit of animadvertency, but censure before they
consider, and condemn before they examine the Incomplex grounds of their so
doing.

Secondly, Faith is mindful to work a care to consider that right that is due
to God and man; Not like that of Pilate (who asking what Truth was) went forth
without due pursuit of that necessary Disquisition; But true Faith works
(should, at least work) a full and perfect enquiry after that which is right to
every man until it amount to a true conformity of the understanding to that
right.

Thirdly, True Faith works a real Conformity of the Will to Right known (not
like Agrippa's half willingness, but) to do it without delays or defalking.
But,

Secondly, David deserved great praise and good recompense (but found neither)
from Nabal: And why did not Nabal both say and do the thing that was right?

Because Nabal did not care to make that incomplex-right, complex, or to come
to the knowledge of it; at least, not to conform his Will and Affections
thereunto: Therefore was Nabals practice and comport, most wicked and foolish:
And so must their practices needs be, that are profanely careless, like Nabal,
to take pains to make that which is right, complex; and complex-right, triplex;
and triplex truth Quadruplex; or to conform their Wills and Actions (as well as
their understandings) to that which is right: Ratio est una, eademque: There Is
the same necessity and series to be observed in doing right to the industrious,
to the well-deserving, and in all practice of true Righteousness.

Therefore, The Locusts practices (wanting this care) are confusion and every
evil work; They are too proud or worldly, to take pains to know what true
Christian practice means; Too busy about serious impertinences to go about
it; Too slothful and careless to make themselves capable of knowing or doing of
it.

We come now to show; What the true Christians Quoties is; Or how often good
works (wrought, in some measure, in a right frame of a Quadruplex conformity,
for otherwise they can never be good) must be done to the same man (man of
Merit, or in Misery) and to every man: To which I answer.

How often shall my Brother sin against me (said Peter to our blessed Savior)
till seven times? Jesus said unto him; I say not until seven times, but until
seventy seven times, Mat. 18.21. Every true Christian must forgive his
offending brother seventy seven times: That is: As often as he humbles himself:
So often he must forgive, and give (if need require) as often as he forgiveth: He
must exert relief to the poor, rewards to men of deserts, succor to strangers,
Caesar's due, and suum cuique and that conform to that Quadruplicity aforesaid:
The Quoties of these duties is seventy seven times, or as often as due or need
requires: For otherwise he lies to-God, denies to be his Brothers keeper,
forgives not his Brother, nor is in charity with him. We come now to the
Locusts Quoties.

Locusts have no Quoties: That is; Their good works have none: For, As its
impossible for that, which was never spoken to be repeated; So it is not
possible for Hypocrites (that never in deed, did one good work) to have any
Quoties in the doing of them: They are otherwise busy to make themselves like
men in face, in hair like women: That is; To be ( Non veraci effigy, as
Augustine says, sed fallaci imagine, Christiani) Christians in Form, and
Profession; in Practice, nothing; Not Christians, most contrary to
Christianity: But they bring forth many seeming-good fruits; but seldom twice
to the same man: They relieve the poor, but strengthen not their hands by
relieving of them; Reward those that do well, but not adaequate to their
deserts; Recompense the industrious, but not according to their works; They do
good, perhaps to all, but not conform to Gospel-rule, or without conformity;
And these Dilatory, or defalked fragments of seeming good works they seldom
exert twice to the same man: But (if any man's need or equity requires their
doing good the second or third times, and he desire it at their hands) they
either answer him as Baal did his servants, or stand ready armed against that
man with aspersions, and (without mercy or remorse) sting him with all manner
of slanders, lying imputations, murmurings and morosities, that so they may
have some, seeming-just grounds to decline their further pursuit of every good
work.

There is an Herb called Herba Paris or One-berry, and it bears but one Berry
(but one in a year) And these Locusts love to hold some parity with Herba
Paris, to bear but one fraction of a good (or seeming good) work to the same
man: They seldom exceed once in doing of it: Or (if they exceed once, yet)
their Quoties never comes to compare with the true Christian's Quoties, who
must have due regard to every incomplex-right; A Quo, Quid, Cui, Quantum,
Quoties. And

Lastly, Quomodo, or how true practice must be performed: This Principle
comprehends the five former, But we shall here add something more peculiar to
it to clear the former more fully, because there is the most need of it
imaginable: For (as the Augean Stables were said to be so full of dirt, that it
seemed impossible to cleanse them without letting the River Alpheus into them)
so the System of the Practice, even of Saints is so silled with filth of evil
Manners, that it seems a Hercules-labour to cleanse and wash it forth: The work
is difficult, but must be done; we shall, therefore, set about it by Gods
assistance, And first,

Insulting Pride destroys true Practice, because it destroys animadvertency,
the ground of it: Let therefore, every true Christian be sincerely affable and
friendly to all; Not insolent to the Poor, whom he relieves; not void of due
regard to the Rich.

Moses, from Mount Pisgah, saw a large part of the Land of Promise; But Pride
is the Mount of Ignorance and evil Manners, whence Formal Professors (and
Saints too) overlook good works, and therefore, tread them under foot: For
their punishment bears the express Signature of their sins: They were given
into the hands of proud Heathens to be trodden under foot for 1260. days
Annual, because they (not with unlike Pride) trod under foot (profainly
contemned) all that time, the Practice of good manners, and made them the least
matters of their due care.

All men must study with greatest care (chiefly in these times) to be peaceable
as the Apostle gave charge; But then they must not be, reciprocally, proud, for
only through Pride come contentions, Prove. 13.10. And the many Animosities;
Schisms, and Divisions in Churches and States seem to be the Branches of that
cursed Bryer, whence the fire of strife, to devour each other, issues forth:
Men, therefore, that hope to find peace with God and Man, must be very careful
to cast this Quomodo of Pride far from their Christian practice.

Hear now, ye Rebels (said Moses) must we fetch you water out of this Rock?
Numb. 20.10. What a Storm is here of unbridled passion in the mouth of Moses,
the meekest man on earth? The sin, no doubt, was greatest in those that gave
the provocation, too great in Moses, and might, doubtless, humble him much, and
be an exemplary means to humble true Saints in all future Ages, by showing them
that they may, sometimes, have like passions as Moses and Eliah had: But this
insolent comport procured not, to Moses, peace with God or Man; But the anger
of the Lord was kindled against him, and he (by shortning his life) cut him off
from entering into the Land of Promise.

Contumacious Pride is the Floodgate of froward manners and makes a man much
worse then an unbridled beast: Nebuchadnezzar was turned, as it were, into a
beast, the very same hour wherein he made himself a beast by swelling Pride:
Pride is no part of the Quomodo of true Christian practice.

Secondly, Avarice also destroys Animadvertency, from whence truth in practice
proceeds: For, Due Adnimadvertency informs the Intellect, and a well-informed
Intellect reforms the Will; But, where these are wanting, there can be no Will
to do right conform to Gospel-Rule, and, consequently, no true Christian
practice: The practice therefore, of worldly Professors (wanting) conformity of
the Will) is done (if at all) either by halves or grudgingly and with an
unwilling mind: Therefore; They, readily receive lies, and Liars, that pretend
to be religious, gladly, that they may help them, (as Balaam helped Balack, what
he could, to curse Israel) to asperse the pious and traduce the well-deserving;
That so they may seem to have just cause to decline their furthering of them,
and to shun all occasions to perform or perfect any good work: Covetousness is,
Calcar acutum, a most sharp Spur to cursed-speaking in the hearts of Locusts
and Hypocrites.

Where the Will (for want of Complex-truth) is not well informed and is kept
back, by covetousness, from that care, there the practice is repining and
grudging unwillingness, reflecting opprobrious obloquy and lying imputations.

The Herd of Swine (Christ permitting the Devils to possess them) perish't in
the Sea: And why did our blessed Savior inflict a punishment of such evil upon
Swine, whom he, himself, had created good? Many Creatures were made for
slaughter, and Swine serve for no other use: But Christ made the best use of
the most useleless Creature, and that (their life being altogether
unprofitable) in their death: For that signal destruction of those Swine stands
(like Lot's Wife) a lasting Monument and Memorandum, to be a necessary caveat
and admonition to all Men, Saints, and Sects, in after Ages, that they make, by
no means, Swinish repining, greedy murmuring, and grudging unwillingness, the
Quomodo of their Christian practice: This is the Locusts Quomodo, and practice
of Swine.

Thirdly, Let all true Saints and sincere Professors use no Leaven of Lies and
Deceit in their Quomodo or manner of their practice: The Prophet, that lived in
Bethel, relieved his brother (a true Prophet) with a meal, and destroyed him
with a lie? Liars (though true Saints are too often guilty of this sin) slay
their brother, but are in most danger to destroy themselves.

The Pharisees sometimes entertained our Savior, and through lies (at last)
put him to death: Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees (saying and not doing;
Slanders and detractions joined with trivial helps) that it be no part of thy
Quomodo in thy Christian practice.

Nor was that the least evil in the Leaven of the Pharisees, when they charged
our Savior, that he wrought the works he did, by Beelzebub; which false charge
was near unto that unpardonable sin: Nor is that sin now (or what seems
something like it) a stranger in Israel, though the objects of it are
infinitely more unworthy: Howbeit, Christ imputes it (though done to another)
as done unto himself.

I may (and must as a duty to God and Man) best affirm it, that have found it
by experience: Very many impute to me, that I am not the Author of this Book,
but it must be done (say they) by some other more able.

This Leaven is a deadly mixture to destroy both me and mine, and those most
that raise this false charge: I must not let so great a sin (a dangerous Lie of
vile ingratitude) lie upon my brother, but reprove him or them plainly; that he
or they (in sincere obedience to God) may better bridle their tongues, least
their Religion be in vain.

I wonder much that some saints (if such be Saints) are not more careful to
keep themselves far from a false matter; For I never found from any (though
they seemed somewhat) scarce so much as the least contribution to the matter of
it; And (the truth is) I scarce ever found any so well furnished to be so
bountiful; Nor can any claim, but my self only (under God) the doing of it: My
damage therefore, and causeless wrong from those that raise this injurious
imputation, and their busy ingratitude, is very great.

I am damnified also much, and the Truth much more, by many that falsely charge
me with false dealing with the Protestant party in asserting, that sundry Texts
in the seventeenth and eighteenth Chapters of the Apocalypse hold forth properly
(as the Primitive Fathers, and sundry Modern Protestant Writers affirm)
Imperial Pagan, and also Christian Rome, Primitive, but Apostate in Manners
(which that they do, I suppose, is fully proved in sundry precedent places of
this Treatise) and not Papal Rome otherwise than by a Prophetic Adumbration:
But they (careless to read it, or not careful to understand what they read)
impute to me this (perhaps irrefellible) Truth, as a most dangerous Tenent,
tending to strengthen the Papists; whereas the contrary Opinion (so blind are
Nonadvertists) does rather really confirm them in all their Errors: I suppose
some of those, that thus far, perhaps, oppose the Truth, are persons of great
worth and piety, and my friends; I have therefore, often desired sundry of them
to lay down, briefly their further Grounds of their contrary Opinions, and I
shall give (by Gods assistance) full satisfaction to them and others: But they
(pursuing, notwithstanding, their false charge against me to my causeless
ruin) decline to do it.

Concerning all such as dare to be too bold to taste the forbidden fruits of the
Father of Lies, I briefly conclude: If any man so far own the Leaven of commixt
falsehood, as to do good in part to any (like that Prophet of Bethel) and
destroy him by a Lie; Or (like the Pharisees) to rob and ruin any by Lies of
base ingratitude; I say to such, only as Michael did; The Lord rebuke thee:
For, such Instruments of wickedness and weapons of cruelty, are far from being
any part of the true Christian's Quomodo. Nor is,

Lastly, Negligence: Busy neglect leaves all good works either not begun, or
done but by halves: Thy servant: (said Ahab, a Figure of Antichrist) was busy,
etc. And the man (to me committed to keep) is gone: God never committed formal
Smoke nor Locusts Crowns to the keeping of Saints; But Obedience, or true
Christian practice, in a Quadruplex conformity, is res commissa, that thing
which God commits to the care of all Saints and sincere Professors: But Formal
Professors, and (I am ashamed to say it) Saints also, are very busy about
Smoke and Gold-like Works of Straw-like Levity, or, at best, about good Works
(half, perhaps, performed, never perfected) but mind not, tread underfoot (so
general is the Grand Apostasy) the thing which God commits to their charge:
This busy neglect, or half-performed practice, was the loss of Ahab's life,
and of his family and people: Saul, Pilate, Judas, were guilty of the same half
practice, which very many (almost all men) miserably mistake for true
Righteousness; But its most abominable in Gods sight, and by him compared to
Witchcraft, and Rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.23.

The reason (I conceive) why Men, Saints, and Sects, so much mistake
Semipersormance for true practice is their common false Opinion, that a Form of
godliness (a Fomal Smoaky Profession) is the power of godliness and the duties
contained in the first Table; But the power of godliness (Truth in practice, or
the fruit of Faith, Hope, and Charity, conform to Gospel-Rule) they reckon to
be but Moral duties of the second Table, not (or not much) worth their minding:
Therefore, They tread under foot (and no marvel) all true Obedience to God, and
good Manners toward Men, or perform such duties negligently, or but by halves;
And (for that very cause) they themselves were given to the Gentiles to be
trodden under foot for 1260. years, Chap. 11.1, 2.

To be short: It was John's Doctrine to the Pharisees; That they should bring
forth fruits meet for repentance, or answerable to amendment of life, Math.
3.8. But good Works done negligently or by halves, are, in no wise, answerable
to amendment of life: But such works as are worthy of Repentance, pleasing to
God, and profitable to men, must be wrought in a Quadruplex conformity, without
any Quomodo of Pride, Avarice, Lies or negligence.

Here I may add a word of the Excellency and necessity of this
Quadruplex-right, and of the real want of it.

Should I (said the Vine) forsake my Wine which cheareth God and man: That is;
men of high and low degree: But this Righteousness is both Bread to strengthen,
and Wine to cheer the hearts of such Gods and Men; And it, only, is
well-pleasing to the living God: For, This Righteousness is the fruit of the
true Vine, and effect of Justification by Faith: It Is (panis vitoe, sub Christo
vita, universis, vel Agni convivium) that promised-refection of the Lambs
Supper, or Antitypefeast, wherein men and Saints shall (by sincere and genuine
obedience to God) begin to be freed from Schism and Divisions, and servile
Bondage to the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life,
Rev. 14.1.

Secondly, Nor shall it cheer such Gods and Men as Bread, Wine, or as a Feast,
but (as Music from Heaven) raise their Hearts to Heaven by its Harmony.

And I heard the voice of Harpers harping, Apoc. 14.2. Their Harps are called
the Harps of God, Chap. 15.2. What these Harps of God are, is well worth our
enquiry, and perhaps, not hard to find: We shall show negatively, what they are
not; and positively, what they are; And both are briefly held forth in this
halfverse, -- Non musica Chordula, sed Cor: The Harps of Men, are no Harps of
God; but the heart of man, framed by the hand of God in this
Quadruplex-Righteousness, is the Harp of God.

These Harpers appear in both Texts, to be those first fruits, redeemed from
the Earth, and from among men, Chap. 14.3, 4. That is, The first fruits (after
the Grand Apostasy) visibly redeemed from Antichristian blindness and
Barbarities [Modo tollite mores Barbarorum] This work seems to be [The work]
because these manners are the Colocynthes or Death in all men (and in Saints
chiefly) from which their Redemption or deliverance is, a Resurrection from
Death to Life: These are the first Fruits (says the Text) redeemed (visibly
and vigorously redeemed, after the grand Apostasy) from the earth, Ver. 3.4.
For, we find others in Scripture (before the Apostasy, and in the Primitive
times) called The first fruits, clearly distinct (as is evident) from these,
who were to be the first fruits (as they were before it) after that grand
Apostasy: Therefore; The great utility of these Harps (This Righteousness
though slighted by Heathens and Hypocrites, Chap. 11, 2. fully appears from
these Texts: For, They expressly show it to be a Redemption (a visible
Redemption) from death: And reason it self shows the same utility and necessity
of it to destroy dead works, to convince and unite dissenting Brethren, to
refel errors, and to make Men, Saints, States, and Churches flourish in
Temporal and Spiritual felicity; Which Mercies of the largest Magnitude must
needs amount to a Redemption from death: Righteousness (says the Text)
delivers from death: But the want of this Righteousness is as Death to those
that want it, and their usual (both Temporal and Spiritual) overthrow.

Vespasian asked Apallonius, what was Nero's overthrow? Nero (said he) could
touch and tune the Harp well, but would sometimes screw up the Pins too high,
sometimes too low: And this ill-tuned Harp (a Heart tuned too high or too low,
like the Harp of Nero) is the almost Epidemick overthrow: They thereby,
usually, perish that have it, and are the cause that others perish.

I shall but present this perfect pattern of a wel-tuned Harp: The man, wounded
by Thieves, wanted help: There was (res rect a in se) right in itself: The good
Samaritan (the best Harper) considering that Incomplex-right, made it Complex,
took care to know it, and to conform his Will, and work to that known right:
They that are so busse as to pass by that which is right to others, or take no
due notice of it, have not the Harps of David, but Nabals voice; Folly, is with
them, be they never so wise or Learned: But,

God would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. God therefore (as the greatest meroy to fallen Man, and Saints
revolted) has promised to call, raise, and draw them by the delicious harmony
of the Harps of God; that so they (hearing his call) may come to the knowledge
of the truth and be saved: For, Truth is the Door of Life, and Knowledge the
Key to open it.

Knowledge of the Truth is twofold.

In Theory.

In Practice.

Theorical knowledge (chiefly from Scripture as its Fountain) is the knowledge
of sound Doctrine.

Practick Knowledge is the Knowledge of that which is right in it self, and due
to be done to every man.

The first is opposite to Heresy.

The second opposes Heathenism and Hypocrisy.

The first serves to acquire a Form of Godliness.

The second conduces to procure the practice and power of it.

The first is the Extrinse ground of Faith.

The second is the fruit and proof of Faith, and the immediate Foundation of
all good manners.

The Object of the first is, (Janua Doctrinae) Truth in Doctrine.

The Object of the second is (Janua justitiae) Truth in practice,: Both are the
Key or Means to Men, Saints, and Sects, to come to the Door of Life, that they
may be saved; without both, can none come.

They that read not the Scriptures, nor hear them read, or seek not diligently,
to understand them by reading such Books, or hearing such Teachers as fitly
unfold them, come not to the knowledge of the Truth: Therefore, such slothful
Professors that would be saved by a Faith Implicit, or wanting practice, come
not to the Door of Truth that they may be saved: For, God would have all men to
be saved by a Regular means in a rational way, and come to the knowledge of the
Truth (truth in Doctrine, Truth in Practice) without which they cannot be saved.

He that will come to the knowledge of the Truth, must try all things: Try all
things, says the Text, 1 These. 5.21. Jacob wrastled with God, by prayer, all
night (not without much corporal labor) prevailed and obtained the blessing:
So they, that would come to the knowledge of the truth, must (not only wrestle
with God by Prayer, but) expect to take serious pains in trying all things,
that they may find that which is pleasing to God and profitable to men; Which
Beroean-disquisition is the greatest pleasure to such as are sincere, but a
burden to base minds, Heathens and Hypocrites: Therefore; Few find the
strait-Gate (the door of Life) by coming to the knowledge of the Truth, because
they wrestle not (like Jacob) with God by Prayer, nor take the pains to try all
things:

But (If Prayer, without Pains, will procure it) many will not want this
blessing; But, De Caelo, ignavis precibus, Deus ipse repugnat, God resists the
slothful, though they make many prayers: Hence we may demand why such Sects (
Jews, Papists, Turks, etc.) and many Formal Professors so long abide in their
blind Schisms and fruitless Formalities?

The Answer is almost as Obvious as the demand easy: They count it Sacrilege
to try their own Tenants: Filthy Heathens hold it the highest Profaneness (and
so do Formalists and Hypocrites) to examine what themselves mis-suppose to be
true Religion: But Sola nobilitas, est unica virtus; Virtus consist it in
action; Actio virtutis est disquisitio veritatis, None are noble but who try
all things to find the Truth: There Is no Nobility but what is faithfully and
soberly disquisitive.

A second Answer to the same demand may be this: Therefore, Sects, Saints and
Nations are so far from agreeing, and so ready to make and maintain Divisions;
Because these Harpers (that, by their exemplary practice, shall appease their
Rage) scarce yet appear to be the presidents (those predicted first fruits) for
others to follow.

Samuel's sons (the Text says not, they knew not the Law, but) walked not in
his ways, turned aside after lucre, took bribes, perverted judgment; They gave
no good examples for others to follow: Samuel was sufficient to teach his sons
the knowledge of the Truth in the Doctrine of Faith and manners; but they were
so wicked, that they would not learn to know that particular Truth that attends
upon practice, for which cause they were cast out, and their Government
translated: For men may (and many do) attain to the knowledge of the Truth in
the Doctrine of Faith and Manners, and may add the greatest Gifts and Parts to
the strictest Profession and soundest Doctrine, and yet never come to the
knowledge of the Truth to be saved, but remain (as Eli's sons did) men of
Belial, and most wicked, if they seek not to come to the knowledge of the Truth
(that particular Truth) that attends upon practice, That is, If they do not
duly consider that right and mercy that is due to be done (and that they may do
it) to every man: For the doers only, of the truth in practice, and not the
sayers, hearers or knowers of the Truth in Doctrine, are justified and accepted
in Gods sight: But it is the common practice of many strict Professors (of
Locusts and Hypocrites, especially) and too much of true Saints, to take
competent pains to come to the knowledge of the Truth in the Doctrine of Faith;
But to the knowledge of the Truth in practice, they come not, or scarce come:
They have hired Farms, or are busy in seeking, perhaps, to come to the
knowledge of the Truth in the Doctrine of Faith without regard to the knowledge
of it in practice, whereby they may be saved, and by which, true conviction and
peace may be procured to all people.

Lastly, Supercilious Pride surpasses all other means that most oppose the
peace of Men, Sects and Nations: Who is David (says Nabal) who is the Son of
Jesse? Nabals folly might further thus plead: I profess ingenuously, I could
never yet observe the deserts of this David; What Is his merit or worth if well
examined? I am not now to learn what he can teach; Nor are his, supposed
sacred, Notions of necessary use, at least not new to me: Once I read but five
lines of his learned work, and was so weary (it was so ill composed, and to
little purpose) I could read no more: He observes no Method, and is too tedious
in all he writes; I could have contracted his matter, to better purpose, in the
tenth part of his words: But why sends David upon such a a day as this, which,
he knows to be a busy day? He should have first sat down and cast up the cost
of keeping so many men (so all wise men do) and not send to me to maintain
them: I was ever bountiful (it is well known) to the well-deserving; But who is
David? who is this Son of Jesse? Sic bacchantur Moriones: Thus proud Professors
(folly's Offspring) swell (with brutish insolence) against the knowledge of
the Truth in Practice, and those by whose examples they might come to the
knowledge of it: Virtutis hoec merces, meriti hoc praemium: Thus proud
Professors cast down Peace and Truth by their folly, as the foolish woman
pulled down her house with her hands: This is not that Peace-producing harmony
of those Harps, that are the Harps of God. But,

Because two contrary Paterus (set together) must needs make each other more
elucid and apparent, I shall, in such sort, set two; by comparing the good
Samaritans perfect pattern with those evil-examples of that Priest and Levite,
that (passing by) came not to the knowledge of the Truth in practice.

A certain Priest (says the Text) saw the man wounded, and passed by; A Levite
likewise looked on him, and passed by on the other side, Luke 10.30

The Text charge neither as nescient, or not knowing the Scriptures; Both
might come to a large measure of the knowledge of the Truth in the Doctrine of
Faith and Manners, but took no notice of, considered not, that which is right
in it self, and due to be done to the wounded man; They passed by Truth in
practice: What profit, to what purpose, is it, for formal Professors to attain
a large measure of the knowledge of the Truth in the Doctrine of Faith and
Manners (to attain all Faith, all Knowledge) if they pass by obedience to God,
mercy and equity to Men? For it was the Trade (not of that Priest and Levite
alone, but) of the whole Tribe of Pharisees and Apostate Jews (by whom our Lord
was crucified) to say, and not do; to assert the Truth in Doctrine, and pass by
the practice of it: And so their Antitype (Locusts and Hypocrites, by whom our
Lord is, more spiritually, crucified in his Mystical Body) make it their chief
business to come, perhaps, to the knowledge of the Truth in Doctrine, that they
may (the better by that means) pass by the practice of it: For, the Pharisees
searched the Scriptures that testified of Christ, that they might find
testimony in them against him to put him to death: Death they found due to
Blasphemers; This Doctrine was true; And this, misapplyed to Christ, was
enough, they needed no more, to put him to death.

Omnia sunt hominu, tenui pendentia filo.

Surely the lives of Men and Saints, and the lives of Princes depend upon a
very slender thread, if one Text of Scripture, misapplyed by blind Hypocrites,
be sufficient to make them to pass by all Equity to Men, and Loyalty to
Princes: Certainly, such Professors (be their Doctrine never so sound, their
Professions most strict) most deserve effectual refutation and rebuke: For
misapplied sound Doctrine is the Doctrine of Devils, that very Doctrine which
the Devil delivered, when he tempted our blessed Savior; and the very same
Doctine, which the blaspheming Pharisees practiced when they put him to death:
And this way of blasphemy (by which the son of perdition slayes the witnesses
of the Truth) draws so near (though in these times of the grand Misadvertency
almost Universal) to that sin unpardonable, that it is a desperate misaffection
of the Will, more than a mistake of the Intellect.

I know (said Christ) the blasphemy of them, who say they are Jews, and are
not, but are the Synagogue of Satan, Revel. 2.9. where we clearly see, that, to
boast of a lie, is blasphemy; And such blasphemers are most contrary to those
Harpers that have the Harps of God: We shall, therefore, handle both briefly
together, that both may more clearly appear: And first,

Such blasphemers are so far boasters as to become rash Judges of other meus
persons and actions, of which and whom they are least able to judge. But,

Secondly; Such blasphemers misapply (by sacrilegious and most wicked
uncharitableness) the same Text, that the Pharisees did against our blessed
Savior, and sundry others against the witnesses of the Truth, whereby they
ruinate their Estates, and destroy their lives: Such rewards must the best
deserving find almost from all hands: Unhappy Saints of the living God! unhappy
witnesses of his Truth! In this, unhappy; That any envious, ignorant, and
unworthy Hypocrite needs but falsely charge them (for their faithful Testimony)
with boasting or blasphemy, and the business is done to their utter undoing:
What need we any more, said the Pharisees?

But we shall here labor to remove the common mistake that is the principal
cause of that boasting and blasphemy, that brings the greatest mischief to
mankind, and especially to the witnesses of the Truth. And first, Though I
would desire (says the Apostle) to glory, I shall not be a fool; for I will
say the truth, 2 Cor. 12.6. Whence it is undeniably manifest, That he that
speaks or writes the Truth (but then most, when it makes for Gods glory, or a
general good) is no fool, nor a boaster (though he seem to fools and Hypocrites
so to be) but a faithful witness of the Truth; and does, therein, but discharge
charge his inevitable and indispensible duty to God and Man: But it is the
common Opinion of Depravers and Hypocrites, that to speak or write any thing
true or false (if it but reflect to the praise of him that speaks or writes it)
is boasting or vainglory: Then all the Prophets, Apostles, Saints and Martyrs
must needs be boasters and blasphemers.

This was the mistake of Korah and his 250 conspiring Princes, that told Moses
and Aaron, They took too much upon them, were proud; but were, themselves,
signally proved to be sinners against their own souls, Rebels in Gods sight,
Exodus 16.38. Chapter 17.10.

This was the mistake of Aaron and Miriam when they said; Has the Lord,
indeed, spoken by Moses? Has he not spoken also by us? Numb. 12.2. They
imputed pride and self-exalting to Moses, the meekest man upon the face of the
earth: Thus we see, that the most faithful Prophets and Martyrs (such is the
envious pride even in many Saints) have been and may be grossly misled (by this
almost universal mistake), To judge the meekest and most innocent to be
self-exalters and vain-boasters, only because they are faithful to bear witness
to the Truth.

This was the grand mistake of that Learned and devout Council, by whom our
Lord was crucisied: He (as he must inevitably do) spoke the truth; And the
Truth cannot but dignifie the doers and sayers of it with the title and due
praise of being the Oracles of God: But that blind (but knowing, pust up)
Senate of Pharisees and Hypocrites misconceived, That the Truth which he spoke,
was boasting, vainglory, and blasphemy; And therefore, they all (unanimously,
and with one consent) cried out, Crucify him, crucify him.

The Witnesses were to be killed, and the holy City (the Church of God)
persecuted and trodden under foot in the Antitype-place, where our Lord was
crucified: To wit, by such censorious, blind professors as the Pharisees were,
Rev. 11.2, 8. And this slanderous imputation and mis-supposition (that they are
boasters, blasphemers, and men that take too much upon them) is the chief or
almost only and universal cause or instrument of their being so killed,
persecuted, and trodden under foot: Nor are true Saints (as we showed before)
free from this frenzy of heady and censorious rashness.

Elisha discovered the King of Syria's Counsel and design, several times to the
King of Israel; whereby the King of Israel saved himself, not once; nor twice,
King. 6.10. Such discoveries were signal advantages and deliverances to the
King and people of Israel: Nor could I but (in love to my Country, and in
fidelity to the Church) make this discovery of the chief cause of the killing
of her Witnesses; That so Ministers and Magistrates (as the Church of Ephesus
tried those that said they were Apostles, and were not) may try those
Truth-misapplving Blasphemers, that charge her Witnesses falsely with boasting;
And (finding them to be the seditious Synagogue of Satan) may rebuke them
sharply; So may they save themselves and the Church (not once or twice) from
such distress, as fell upon the Jews for the very same sin; To wit, because
their Rulers did not duly reprove and rebuke those Christ-crucifying
blasphemers, that charged him with blasphemy: So may the rain of Righteousness
(after 1260 years restraint) fall in plentious showers upon all Nations; So
peace and prosperity may spring up to all Princes and people; So may Ministers
and Magistrates (they being faithful in the discharge of this duty) save the
Witnesses of the Truth, and, perhaps, themselves from the bloody irruptions of
merciless cruelties in the mouths of depravers and Hypocrites, that falsely
accuse them (as the first Dragon did Primitive Saints) day and night as
boasters, as blasphemers, or as persons unworthy, and the worst of evil doers;
whereby the defenses of States and Churches, and the healers of their breaches,
are broken down by the basest of men: These derogating Hypocrites, and those
Harpers that have the Harps of God, are most contrary, by whose contrariety
(predicted) those first fruits of true obedience to God, and good works to men,
will more easily appear.

These Harpers (says the Text) sung, as it were, a new song, which no man
could learn, but those 144000 first fruits, verse. 2, 3, 4. Chapter 15.2. Therefore
these Harpers must be (as those Texts plainly import) the same 144000 that had
the Name of God written in their foreheads, or, at least, the Teachers of them.
But,

We must here distinguish betwixt these 144000 having the Name of God written
in their foreheads, and those 144000, in the seventh Chapter, that were sealed
with the seal of God in their foreheads; and betwixt both, and those that have
not the seal of God in their foreheads, Chap. 9.4. And first,

We shall distinguish betwixt these 144000 having the Name of God written in
their foreheads, and those 144000, in the seventh Chapter, that were sealed
with the seal of God in their foreheads.

These sealed 144000, were sealed under the sixth Seal, Chap. 6.12. Chap. 7.4.
But these 144000 ( Chap. 14.) having the Name of God written in their
foreheads, were to stand with the Lamb upon mount Sion under the seventh
Trumpet, Chap. 10.7. Chap. 11.19. Chap. 13.18. Chap. 14.1. Therefore, these
144000, conscript in the fourteenth Chapter, are not the same Gospel Church in
the same respects to times and things (though otherw se the same), with-those
144000 sealed servants of God in the seventh Chapter: For the seven Seals (as
most Writers, and I with them, agree) had respect to the Transactions of
literal and Imperial Rome, and showed the state of the Church under that power:
But the seven Trumpets and Vials have respect to Papal Rome, and (running
parallel in the same Synchronism) show the state of the Church under that power.

The opening of the sixth Seal, shows the fall of the sixth head of the
ten-fold body of Heathen Rome, and the fall of the Pagan Power under that head,
which is more fully expressed in Chap. 12, to the 14. verse. The final excision of
Imperial and apostate Rome, is held forth under the seventh Seal, Chap. 8.5.
And this Prophecy is more amply unfolded in the eighteenth Chapter. But,

The fall of Papal Rome, or of the grand Apostasy, is predicted to be under the
seventh Trumpet, and seventh Vial, Chapter 10.7. Chapter 11.11, 15. Chapter 16.17. Then
the couscript-Church (it seems) should be manifest, as the Texts show.

Also the Texts, in the seventh Chapter, from the ninth verse to the end, and
the manifold Prophetick-Promises in those Texts, refer to the conscript-Church,
Chap. 14. Chap. 21. Chap. 22. rather than to the sealed-Church, or not to her
until (after many Centuries of years) her Offspring should have the name of
God written in their foreheads; Thus their disparities further appear.

Those 144000, in the seventh Chapter, sealed with the Seal of God; And these
144000 having the Name of God written in their foreheads, are both the Church
of God, but in different respects and times: For those 144000, in the seventh
Chapter, were the Gospel Church sealed and numbered in the same Chapter,
measured in the eleventh Chapter; Fed and defended in the Wilderness for 1260
years from the rage of the second Dragon, Chap. 12.6, 14. contemporal with (her
Antithesis) those Saint-persecuting, Truth-pretending Professors that had not
the Seal of God in their foreheads, Chap. 9.4; And brought from wallowing in
blood under the bloody feet of the Roman red Dragon, Chap. 12.10. Chap. 18.20.
For these 144000 in the seventh Chapter, were sealed and numbered immediately
after the fall of the first Dragon, Chapter 7.3. But these 144000 having the
Name of God written in their foreheads, Chap. 14. were to stand upon (lasting
foundations of true Faith and good Manners) Mount Zion; not immediately after
the fall of the power of Rome Imperial, but immediately after the fall of Papal
Rome, Rev. 11.13, 15. Chap. 15.2. Chap. 10.7. Chap. 13.18. Chap. 14.1. But,
because these Texts contain the Myrrh of Ages to heal all Nations, and the
best Writers fall short in unfolding of them, I shall endeavor to show,
briefly, what their use and meaning is: Wherefore, we shall distinguish (by
their respective works or fruits they bring forth) betwixt the sealed and
Conscript-Churches; and betwixt both and those that have not the Seal of God,
nor his Name in their foreheads. And first,

The works of the flesh are manifest, etc. Gal. 5.19. Such works are not sealed
works nor deceitful; God sets no Seal to the doers of them, verse. 21. nor are
they much deceitful; For there is no great deceit or Mystery in the more proper
works of the flesh, which are manifest: Of these I have written at large
before, and therefore need not now insist upon them. But,

Secondly; The practice of Truth-pretending Formalists is Justitia insigillata
and deceptiva, an unsealed, half-performed righteousness of deceit.

It was commanded them (says the Text) that they should not burt the Grass,
neither any green thing, nor any Tree, but only those Men, which have not the
Seal of God in their forebeads, Chapter 9.4. That is; The Locasts (as it were by a
command from God, ver. 5.) should torment Truth-pretending, Church-persecuting
Papists (that had not the Seal of God in their foreheads) with like
retaliation, as they had persecuted and tormented the Saints of God, that had
his Seal in their foreheads: Nor had these Locusts themselves his Seal, as
neither Type- Egypt, nor the Locusts that tormented her had the Seal of the
Covenant; and the practice of those Papists, and these Locusts that tormented
them (being both alike unsealed) was a persecuting practice, and a
righteousuess not sealed, but deceitful, showing that the doers of such rash
violence have not the Seal of God: Fiat tamen justitia; Right must be done to
evildoers, and not withheld from the well-deserving; To omit either, or do
both negligently, is not the least pe secution, as we have seen in Eli and
others: Such persecution (on the right hand or left) is (though almost
universally practiced by such as are sealed) the practice, properly, of those
that have not the Seal of God in their oreheads

Thirdly; The practice of those 144000, that were sealed with the Seal of God,
is Justitia sigillata and vera, sedvix-manifesta; true righteousness (through
much weakness and many deficiencies) not clearly manifest.

These 144000 were not the aggregate of the whole Gospel Church, but a select
part of it, excluding the outward Court that was cast out and given to the
Gentiles, Chap. 11.2. For, the son of perdition was to sit as God in the Temple
of God, yet was not sealed, or accepted of Him, as a select member of his
Church, 2 These. 2.4.

The Seal of God is inward or outward; 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God
stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows who are his: And, Let every
one that names the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

The Lord knows who are his There Is the inward and invisible Seal: And let
him, that names the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity: There Is the outward
and more visible Seal of God in the foreheads of his Saints, wherewith these
144000 were sealed.

Primitive Saints were wont to show their Faith by their Works, Jam. 2.18. And
so these 144000 (especially at first) did for a long time: But they (though
sealed with the Seal of God) were not like the Church of Thyatira, of whom this
record is given of God; I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith,
and thy patitience, and thy works, and the last to be more than the first, Rev.
2.19. But the works of these 144000 were more and more perfect, at first than
at last: For the Seal of God in their foreheads, (though it might suffer some
decay at the grand Apostasy about or before 412) continued, competently,
visible near a thousand years: Tum vetus ipsa dies extenuabat opus: Then the
impression of the Seal of God in their foreheads was much defaced, and their
departing from iniquity less apparent: Wherefore God loosed the first Dragon
out of the bottomless Pit (after he had been bound about 1000 years) upon the
Gospel Church, fallen from her first Love and Works; But God has since greatly
multiplied (as he did the Type-fallen-Womans) her sorrows; not by her bearing
many Children, but by suffering (for her sins) her Children to wound her with
many Darts of afflicting Calamities, and to rend her into Schisms and
Subdivisions; which Balm can scarce heal, nor any Art bind up: Were any of her
sons so dutiful to her, so faithful for her, as to tell her, and declare unto
her, her deplorable and desperate condition; 'twere in vain, she minds it not,
but lies as it were insensible, upon her sleepy Pillow; seems to have given her
self up to inanimadvertency and forgetfulness; begins many good works, forgets
to finish them; Torpor corpus totum tenuit, sopor animam: A desperate
insensibility has seized upon the Members of her Body, and a deep sleep on her
Senses: She is, Quasi Ecclesia moritura, non mortua; as a dying Church, only
not dead: But God shall wipe away all tears from her eyes, Chapter 7.17. Chapter 21.4.
He has promised it, and will perform it, which must be done (if ever it be
done) by his writing the Name of God in the foreheads of his servants, her
sons; So may she be revived in her Offspring. For,

Fourthly; These 144000, in the 14th Chapter, are the same Gospel Church
redeemed, as it were, from death; Redeemed from the Earth, says the Text, ver.
3. Both are the same Church, but in different respects and times: For, the
144000, in the 7th Chapter to the 9th verse. were the Church of God fed in the
wilderness for 1260 years, Chapter 12.6, 14. But these 144000 shall be the same
Gospel Church fixed upon Mount Zion, Chapter 14.1. That 144000, in the 7th Chapter,
was Ecclesia sigillata, the sealed Church of God; But these 144000 shall be
Ecclesia conscripta, the same Gospel Church, having the Name of God written in
her forehead.

That sealed Church triumphed over Primitive Apostate Rome, Chapter 18.20. Chapter 19.
to the 7th verse. This conscript-Church (the same Church in succeeding times)
should triumph over Papal Rome, Chapter 15.2, 3, 4.

Therefore, Both differ much in distance of time; For that 144000, in the 7th
Chapter, were sealed long before these 144000, in the 14th Chapter, should have
the Name of God written in their foreheads. And

Lastly; They differ much (though both the same Church in preceding and
succeeding times) in respect to things: For, Those 144000 in the 7th Chapter
(sealed above 1200 years before the Name of God should be written in the
foreheads of these, their successors) were not (though so long before them)
called, The First Fruits; But these 144000, in the 14th Chapter (though so long
after those former) are called, The first fruits, redeemed from the earth, and
from among men, verse. 3.4. Therefore it requires necessarily our serious
disquisition to examine, For what causes these (the conscript Church) are
called, The first fruits so long after those in the 7th Chapter, were sealed.

I answer; Their Title teaches us the causes of their being so called: They
are called, The first fruits, (it seems) because they are to be the first after
(the grand Apostasy) that shall bring forth fruits of more visible and
conspicuous Obedience to God, and good Works to Men: And the 144000, in the 7th
Chapter to the 9th verse. (the Church sealed), were (for different or contrary
causes) not called; The first fruits: To wit; Because they (during the time of
the grand Apostasy) 'did not bring forth fruits of such visible obedience to
God, nor good works so apparent to Men: For, such as the Tree is, such is the
Fruit; but that Numerus sigillatus was the sealed Church; And such must her
fruits be (sealed works) of necessity: For a Book or Letter sealed is scarce at
all legible; And such is the love and works of that sealed Church: There Is
little exemplariness in her practice for others to follow: Her works (so weak
are they, so overgrown with Weeds of evil Manners) are scarce at all manifest:
But the fruits of these first fruits cannot but be manifest; must of necessity,
be signally manifest; because they shall have the Name of God written in their
foreheads; And their works (wrought in a quadruplex conformity, after the
Pattern of the good Samaritan, their grand Exemplar) shall be that Name of God
written in their foreheads, exemplary and legible to all Ages and Nations.

I do not absolutely state the Epoche of the sealed Church at the Commencement
of the 1000 years, about the beginning of the reign of Constantius the first;
For, they are said to come out of great tribulations, which is more truly
intended of their Conscript Antitype, verse. 14. Howbeit, They did then begin to
come out of those tribulations, when the first Dragon began to fall; Therefore,
Their Epoche of being sealed might seem to begin then: But if they begun to be
sealed (as it is likely they might) at the beginning of the fall of the first
Dragon; Then they were, at first, that Woman in Heaven, clothed with the Sun,
etc. Chapter 12.1; And the same Church that triumphed over that false-accusing,
first Dragon in these words: Now is come salvation, and strength and the
Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: For the accuser of our
brethren is scast down: verse. 10.

From that time, her Graces decayed till after 400, when she fell from Heaven,
and fled into the wilderness, verse. 1, 6, 14. After that time she retained a
great part (though ftill decaying) of her Primitive integrity for above 800
years; Then her Graces grew still weaker, till they were almost wasted, and
near quite spent. For

Abraham put Bread, and a bottle of Water upon Hagars shoulder, and sent her
away with her son: She wandered in the Wilderness till the water was spent, and
the Child ready to perish, for whom she lifted up her voice and wept; But God
opened her eyes to see a Well of Water, and she gave the Lad drink, and he
revived. So the Righteousness and Graces of the sealed Church, are like Hagars
bottle of Water; She also has wandered in the Wilderness above 1200 years,
till her bottle is almost spent: Well may her Children and she (both ready to
perish) sit down and weep: But the Name of God (written in her and their
foreheads) shall be a Fountain of living Waters to revive both her and them:
For it is not an empty crackling of Thorns in a formal profession, nor the vain
blaze of foolish Virgins half-performances, nor litigious contradiction, nor
bold confidence in blind obedience, nor the stony-grounds shallow superficies
of found Doctrine, and practice like it, nor Lo here, nor Lo there, nor the
Witnesses, weak (and that also now expiting) Sackcloth-Prophesie, that can
support the Gospel Church, whiles she herself is shivered into Schisms and
Subdivisions; brought to the brink of the Grave; and her Righteousness, that
should sustain her, almost spent: Wherefore, A necessity (a necessity urgent
and indispensible) even comples the Gospel Church, and all Ministers and
Magistrates, to ask of God to open their eyes, that they may see the
life-redeeming River of apparent Righteousness; and do, as Hagar and her son
did, Drink, and not dye: That is; That they may find what that sacred Name of
God, in the foreheads of his servants, shall be, and seek to have it fairly
transcribed in their own, that so they may be a part of those first fruits
redeemed from the Earth, verse. 3, 4. We must, therefore, give all diligence to
make this sacred Name of God sure to our selves; to know what that
life-redeeming Righteousness is, and how to work it; But how shall we know how
to work it without a pattern? A pattern (a perfect Pattern) is and has been
long wanting upon Earth; where then shall we find it? We must seek the Pattern
in the Mount.

And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood upon Mount Sion, and with him an hundred
forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Name written in their foreheads,
Chap. 14.1. There Is the pattern in the Mount, and he that holds it forth; The
Name of God written, and the Writer of it.

That Lamb was a light to the sealed-Church, at least for about a thousand
years, Chapter 20.4. But to the Conscript-Church, he shall be a Temple in her, a
Pattern to her (not for a thousand years, but) unto all ensuing Ages; Not by
any corporal presence, but by the abundance of the Graces of his Spirit.

When he was Corporally present on Earth, he was called (in scorn by the
Pharisees) a Samaritan, and was indeed, that good Samaritan; that left the best
Pattern, upon Scripture Record, of perfect Righteousness, to all posterity, And
first,

Jesus said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among
Thieves, which stripped him of his Raiment, and wounded him, and departed,
leaving him half dead. And by chance there came down a certain Priest that way,
and when he saw him, he passed by. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the
place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain
Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: And when he saw him, he bad
compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in Oil and
Wine, and set him on his own Beast, brought him to an Inn, and took care of
him, and said to the Host, Take care of him, etc. Luke 10.30, to 38.

[ Saw him] Not only the man, but that which was right in it self, and due to
be done: For the Priest and Levite (passing by) saw him, but would not see to
do what was right: Their seeing him signified nothing. So the Children of the
Son of perdition see their neighbor; So the sealed and true Saints commonly
see their Brother. Their seeing signifies little: Inanimadvertency (next to
Avarice, if not before it) is the root of all evil in the body of the Apostasy
of Antichrist.

But the wounded Man wanted speedy help: There was Veritas incomplexa, or res
recta in se, that which was right in it self and due to be done: The good
Samaritan (so soon as he saw him) made that incomplextruth) complex; saw and
considered what he had need of: They that see and consider not, see without
Eyes; Their Eye is evil; They see nothing, and can never do that which is
right: For how can they do what they approve not; or approve what they know
not: This seems to be (through shameful inadvertency) the common bestial
custom, well nigh, of all men, and the practice almost (so universal is the
grand Apostasy) of all Professors: Men see, hear, and read, and mind nothing,
to make it (nor scarce that) more than Complex. But,

Secondly; The good Samaritan did not only make that Incomplex-truth, or right
in it self, Complex by taking care to know it; but made it Triplex, had his
Harp ready tuued to a conformity of will to do that right which he knew due to
be done: He that takes care to know what is right to be done to other men (and
that is every man's first duty in Christian practice) but takes no care to
conform his will to do it as it should be done, doubles his iniquity, and his
own just punishment: For, he that knows his Masters will, and does it not,
shall be beaten with many stripes; Nor can such be said to be doers of the will
of God, as do it without diligence, but by halves, or with unwilling minds, or
without conformity of works to his will: Such works (though commonly practiced
by sealed Saints) are no part of their practice which they should persorm; And
such Professors seem so far from being those first fruits, that they appear not
to be any part of the sealed servants of God. But,

Thirdly; The good Samaritan did not only make that Incomplex-truth complex, by
a conformity of the Intellect to that which was right in it self; Nor did he
only make that Complex-truth triplex, by a conformity of will to that known
right; but he made it Quadruplex, by a conformity of works to a right informed
Will and Intellect; He readily set about (without delays) the discharge of
that duty to God and Man: Nor did he alledg the difficulty of the man's recovery
to retard his duty; The passers-by might pretend that; And that is ost pretended
by Hypocrites, to pass by the works of Mercy and Equity: Want of care toward
others in their extremities is the cause that many are cast away, undone in
their Estates, destroyed in their sicknesses: Such Professors (be they never so
strict) stand not with the Lamb upon Mount Sion, nor seem, indeed, to be his
Disciples: For, The good Samaritan pretended no impossibility of the man's
recovery to decline his duty, much less did he wound that wounded man afresh
with false aspersions; did not tell him, his covetousness, in traveling to get
ill-got gain, was the cause of his calamity; Nor retort to him in scorn, That,
had he kept honest men's company, he had not fallen into the hands of Thieves; Nor
did he say, such Sad distresses were evident signs he was a wicked man: To
deride men in distress is high profaneness; but to rail upon those, to whom
they should do right, is most unchristian and inhumane: But most pretenders, in
these times, and many (I hope I may call them so) sealed servants of God, make
it no great matter (that so they may decline their duty of doing right or
showing mercy) to rail upon such; so desperately depraved are their Manners!
And they dare invade other men's rights so far as to become Judges of their
persons and actions, whom they know not, and which they do not understand.

Fourthly; Had the good Samaritan delayed the man half-dead, he had died, no
doubt, outright, and he himself had past by (as that Priest and Levite did) his
duty of doing right, or showing mercy: Right long delayed, is usually lost
thereby, or comes (like the repentance of Judas) when its too late: Let none,
therefore, be hearers of the Word, or knowers of the will of God only,
deceiving themselves, but doers of it without delays or defalcation. The good
Samaritan (to that end) had his Harp well tuned; His heart was not surfeited or
overcharged with the cares and business of Antichrist, that continually resist
true obedience to God, and right to men: But unsealed Locusts and Hypocrites
have their hearts and hands ever overcharged with abundance of business, that
they can never mind good works worth the Name of good: They therefore, are ever
ready to say with Ahab (who was an express Figure of Antichrist) Thy servants
were busy, (very busy) here and there, that we forgot obedience, could not
remember to show mercy, or mind to do right in a forefold conformity: These are
not Harpers haviing the Harps of God, but loaded Camels that can never pass
through the Eyes of Needles; Are always fitted and prepared (like that Priest
and Levite) to pass by all obedience to God, right and mercy to Men. And the
sealed servants of God may very well make (in a great measure) the same excuse
and say, Thy servants are ever so busy (minding Earthly things, or having our
hearts devoutly set upon serious Formalities) that we have not leisure to look
after the life of Religion, and power of Godliness, practiced in a fourfold
conformity; Nor did we ever imagine that any such practice (though now we
perceive it) had been in being: Mercy and Right we mind not; or we mind such
duties but as Moral Works, not worth the minding: These (though the sealed
servants of God) take not (or very little) the example of their Practice from
the Pattern of the Lamb upon Mount Sion, but (so prevalent is the Power of the
grand Apostasy even in Saints) from the customs and manners of men: But this
Chorus incontaminatus, or conscript-number, must make the works of the Lamb
(not the manners of men) the Pattern of their Christian practice, which above
all things calls for our further consideration.

Fifthly; We find not that the good Samaritan did summon near neighbors to
make a Rate to relieve the wounded man, and so let him (whiles they through
covetousness could not agree) be lost, but defrayed the whole charge himself:
but the sealed servants of God differ far from his practice, and either omit
good Works, or must have perhaps, an hundred to co-adjoyn in Copartnership to
perform half a good work, at three halfpence charge; And unless many do join,
will not have (no by no means) any hand in it: Such as thus learn Christ, show
not themselves, by their practice, to be the sealed servants of God, much less
to have his Name written in their foreheads: But the good Samaritan manifestly
condemned such multipartite practice of shriveled and sordid tenacity, by his
own example: He (not seeking assistance from others, where it needed not)
expended the whole charge himself, in doing that good work to the wounded man,
completed a perfect Pattern in a quadruplex-conformity.

Sixthly; He took care of him (says the Text) and said to the Host; Take care
of him. Care is, to all good works, the Girdle of Truth, without which they are
neither true nor good: Had not the good Samaritan (though he had done all he
did besides) taken care of him, he had wholly omitted his Christian duty: For,
as Faith without Charity, is dead; so Charity without care is dead; A true
christian care to do good is the edge of Charity and the life of it.

It Is the grand misery and mistake of Men and Saints, to do, perhaps, many good
works carelessly, whereby they become (not good works but) deceits: Such works
(though commonly practiced by sealed or Wilderness-Saints) are far from that
practice which they should perform; but are the proper works of the members of
of Antichrist and the Characters of them: By those Characters, therefore, we
shall discover who are (or appear to be) careless Professors, and who are
careful in the practice of Christianity. And first,

They that are careless to collect and consider the incomplex-principles of
right in it self, are careless in their conversations, and cannot come to the
knowledge of the Truth in Practice: These Incomplex-principles (rightly
collected) are the Basis and Grounds of all Mercy and Equity to Men; And that
which the Scriptures, and we commonly, call, The cause of any man (Plantiff or
Defendent) stated: Neither does the cause of the Widow (says the Text) come
unto them, Isa. 1.23. That is, They do not collect nor consider the
Incomplex-principles, aforesaid, of Mercy and Equity: Such Professors, Judges,
or Magistrates (it matters not what their Church-Society, Sect, or their repute
for Learning, Strictness or Religion is) are corrupt and unjust Professors, and
(at least in appearance) Members of Antichrist: But we shall illustrate the
Premises, for the Reader's better understanding, by one or two Examples. And
first.

A Prophet's poor Widow made her address to Elisha, and (stating her own cause
her self) thus laid down the principles of Right in it self, necessary and due
to be satisfied unto her; Thy servant, my Husband (said she) is dead, 2 King.
4.1. There Is the Cui (a desolate Widow) to whom mercy and equity was due to be
done.

A second Incomplex-right in it self was, A quo, or from whom (which is employed
in the same words of the poor Widow) To wit, Prophet, who was principally
concerned, and bound both by the Levitical Law, and by the royal Law of Love,
to make her Incomplex-condition, Complex, or to take notice of it, and duly
consider it, Levit. 25.35. to the end: Deuteronomy. 15.8, 11.

A third Incomplex-right is expressed in these words; Thou know that thy
servant (that Widow's late Husband) did fear the Lord: That was a further
tie(though he must do right and show mercy to all men) to the Prophet, to make
her condition Complex, or to have full knowledge of it.

A fourth Principium praecognoscendum, or truth in it self, which the Prophet
was bound to know, is expressed in these words; And the Creditor is come to take
unto him my two sons to be bondmen.

These Principia praecognoscenda, or Truths in themselves (thus laid down)
were the Cause of the poor Widow stated before the Prophet; And they that are
not truly careful and diligent to know and rightly apprehend the causes of
Plantiffs or Defendents (stated by word or writing) are unjust Judges, corrupt
Magistrates, careless Christians, and make themselves (at least appear to be)
the Members of Antichrist: The cause of the Poor, of the Widow, of the
Fatherless, and of strangers in distress, comes not before those careless
Christians, nor can they discharge any duty of Mercy or Equity to men.

But the Prophet did not tell the poor Widow, she was a trouble to him, or that
he was busy about matters of much higher concernment, nor did he bid her come
two months hence and talk with him; Nor tell her (to encourage her) he would
move it to friends at his best leisure (as many Professors commonly do) and at
last, perhaps, revolt from all he had promised to little purpose, and she
expected: But he immediately bid her borrow many Vessels, and pour Oil, out of a
Vial she had, into those Vessels, and (filling them with Oil) sell so much as
would pay her Creditors, and live her self upon the rest. Thus the Prophet took
effectual care to make the poor Widows Incomplex cause Complex, or to take full
cognizance of it.

Secondly: He took care to make her Complex (or by him known) cause, Triplex,
by conforming his will (that he might relieve her) to his right informed
intellect.

Thirdly; He took care to conform his works to his right-informed will and
intellect, wherein he had due respect to another, incomplex-right, To wit,
Quantum: The fruit of his charitable care was not a fragment or piece of a good
work, nor an half-performance, but a plenary supply of full relief to all her
wants with due respect to all Principles of Right in it self: Such works only
are Christian, and shall be the practice of that incontaminate company of
conscript Harpers, that shall be found without fault in Gods sight.

We shall show a contrary Pattern in Pilat's careless practice; Pilate was
careful to do right by halves, or but half careful: Christ's Cause came under
his disquisition.

The first incomplex Truth, in his Cause, was, that he was blameless, or
without fault: Pilate made that Truth in it self, half-complex, or took half
cognizance of it: For he (having examined him) said thrice, I fina in him no
failt. John 18.38, Chapter 19.4. Luke 23.4. He was willing to release him, but not
effectually careful to do it: For (overpowered by his adversaries
importunities) he gave sentence to put him to death: So, all Laodicean (half
hot, half cold; half careless, half careful) Spurious Professors (though never
so strict, devout, or zealous) will but talk, trisle, cavil, delay; promise,
not perform; practice by halves, falsify, forget, or before they begin, be
weary of well doing, and thereby wear out the Saints of the most high, and
destroy his faithfullest Witnesses, as Pilate (by like practices) caused Christ
to be put to death: For, All Professors, Judges, and Magistrates (half-careful
only to collect and consider the Systems of Incomplex-causes) cannot expect to
exceed Pilat's unjust practice, by whom our Lord was crucified.

Had Pilate been faithfully careful to do right, he had not regarded the Jews
favor, nor been (by any business or other means) drawn or deterred from doing
of it.

A second Incomplex-Truth in Christ's Cause, was; That the Scribes and Elders
(as Judas had betrayed him to them through covetousness) had delivered him into
Pilates hands out of envy; who was but half-careful to make this Truth it self,
Complex, or to know it: He knew (says the Text) that for envy they had
delivered him, Mat. 27.18. But his care to know the cause of Christ was but by
halves. For,

To this end (said our blessed Savior) was I born, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth, John 18.37, 38. This
is the final cause and supreme end, for which Christ was Incarnate, Man
created, Saints regenerated; That they should bear witness to the Truth in
Words and Works; Not in words only, as the leaves of a fruitless Tree, but in
works also, as the Fruits: All hearing, reading, preaching, praying are but
subordinate duties to this supreme end: That they should let their works
(wrought in a foursold conformity) so shine before men, that they (seeing them)
may glorisie God, must be every man's chief christian care.

But Pilate (though much more careful than many strict and Orthodox Professors
are) was scarce so much as half-careful to make Christ's Cause and this Truth in
it self, Complex or known to himself: What is Truth (said Pilate) and, when he
had so said, he (staid not for an answer, but) went out again to the Jews, and
said unto them; I find in him no fault at all, John 18.38.

What is Truth?] A cursory careless Question of regardless Pilate! Si licet
exemplis in parvo grandibus uti, If we may (by the Pattern of one man) manifest
the practice of many; If we may (by the example of one Heathen) express the
Manners, almost, of all Modern Christians; Then this is their manner of
advancing Virtue, and the way of their seeking the Truth: Sic virtutis Alumni
sumus, sic Veritatem quaerimus! Men and many Saints are now (as Pilate was)
more cursory, swister than Asahel in running: Does the cause of the Widow, of
the Fatherless, of the stranger come before them? They can run by it, or glide
over it, and take no notice of it: Is any thing spoken to them? They can run
over it by a rash answer before they hear it: Is any work in writing (requisite
to refel errors, to reform manners) offered to them? They can run by it, or
run over it (by a cursory reading) and never understand it: Is any man fallen
amongst Thieves and wounded like the Wayfaring man? They can run by him and
never mind him: Is any thing, that is right in it self, laid before them? They
can run by it, and take no notice of it: What may I say of such men, of such
Saints, but this? Their feet are swift (too swift) to shed blood: These are not
the works of the good Samaritan; This is the practice of Pilate.

Pilate examined Christ once with some seeming meekness, and sobriety: Thrice
did he justify him as a man in whom he had found no fault: Once he washed his
hands in water before the multitude, to signify his guiltlessness of his
innocent blood: Five times did he refist the rash violence of that blind
zealous Council: What Professor now, or, perhaps, what Saint, would take that
care and pains (that Pilate took for Christ) for the most innocent man
manifestly injured?

Pilate took care (for the Pharisees did not) not to credit Christ's
false-accusers, and found them Liars; but Professors now (and, I am afraid, I
may say, many sealed Saints) take little or no care how they credit false
accusers, according to Scripture-Rule, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17, 18, 19. But they, by
believing their lies (they seeming to them devout and zealous) justify the
wicked, and condemn the most innocent; wherefore eveu Pilate (by whose wicked
Sentence Christ was condemned and crucified) shall rise up in judgment and
condemn many careless Modern Professors and Saints.

But the good Samaritan was faithfully careful to do all good works in a
fourfold-conformity: He took care for him (says the Text) and said to the
Host, Take care of him. Go and do likewise, said Christ to all Saints and
Professors in all Ages and Nations.

Lastly, Had the good Samaritan poured Wine and Oil into the wounds of the
Way-fairing man, had he bound up his Wounds; had he also given him Money for
his relief with a liberal hand, and had so left him; He had, no doubt, perished
in the place, and had been re-exposed to Robbers to kill him outright for that
money (for all times aftord many Thieves, sew Samaritans) Such careless care
and helpless half-help had not exceeded the Righteousness and Mercy of Locusts
and Hypocrites; And such pains and expenses had but been the price (the
blackest Simony) of exemption from performing good Works: For, Simon the
Sorcerer, sought to purchase the gifts of the Holy Ghost with money; But
double-minded men deceive themselves, and deceive others with far more depraved
Simony, in seeking to purchase, by careless half-performances (not the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, but) their exemption from them, or from bringing forth the
fruits of them.

The Man of Sin is a man of mistakes and deceits; His coming and continuance
was with all deceivableness; But this is the Masterpiece of deceit (Saints
scarce excepted) in that son of perdition, That his Members mistake the
purchase of their exemption from good Manner, by half-performances, for true
Christian-practice.

False sincerity (the Parent of half-performances) is the Fountain of Deceits
in the Apostasy of Antichrist, and is, it self, a deficiency in the knowledge of
that Incomplex-truth of degree or quantity, and in conforming the Will to the
knowledge of it: Love thou me (said Christ to Peter) more than these? That is;
Than these Earthly or Wordly things: Covetous Professors deceive themselves,
but can never be sincere, nor their practice more than half-performances.

Peter, love thou me (said Christ)? Peter replied, Lord, thou know that I
love thee. Feed my sheep, said Christ. And so he said thrice. Covetous
professors can never be sincere, nor fit to feed Christ's sheep: For,
Covetousness is quite contrary to sincerity, which is the Superlative degree in
the quantity of love, pains, and expenses to promote the Truth in Doctrine and
Practice: Had Peter loved the things of this life as much as the living God, or
as much as his Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, he had not been sincere,
but an Hypocrite in his heart, and his Religious actions had been but
Hypocritical half-performances.

Half-performances (or a constant falling short of the quantity of love, care,
pains, or expenses to practice good works) are the fruits and infallible
Characters of Hypocrites, and do denote, in incult, barren Wilderness-Saints
(that commonly perform such works) great want of sincerity.

Sincerity is a sufficient care, pains, and expense to perform good works in a
fourfold conformity, and such practice is the express command of God, Deuteronomy.
15.7, 8. Thou shall open thine hand wide to thy poor brother, and shall surely
lend him sufficie^nt for his need: Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart
shall not be grieved, verse. 10.

Shall surely lend him sufficient] Sufficient care, pains and charge is the
substance of sincerity, and the due measure of Right and Mercy, as we showed in
the foresaid examples of Elisha and the good Samaritan: But Quantum deficit,
deficient care, pains, and charge, is the false measure of Impostors in the
Apostasy of Antichrist; And the fruit of it, the deceitful price of exemption
from the practice of good Manners: Almost all Professors, and many Saints, much
deceive themselves by being of this or that Sect, or Church-Society, and, by
being therein vainly consident; whereas a Sect signifies nothing; But sincerity
is the substance of true obedience.

Saul (so desperately deceitful are half-performances) paid a large price of
exemption from obedience to God, and doing good to himself, his Country and
Family: He went, saw, and overcame Amaleck as God commanded, brought away their
best Catcle, etc. Who could (nor could he himself) imagine that more to please
God could be done that service? Nor scarce could Samuel beat him out of the
strong confidence of that misbelief, But Samuel told him, that all that large
price of exemption (for it seemed to exceed an half-performance) from true
obedience, was as Witchcraft and Rebellion.

Why as Witchcraft? Because half-performances deceive unsealed Hypocrites more
than Witchcraft, and would deceive (were it possible) the very Elect: But the
practice of the good Samaritan is a perfect Pattern in a fourfold conformity for
all Men and Nations to follow, having due respect to all the Principles of
right in it self: A Quo, Quid, Cui, Quantum, Quoties, etc. And such Works (and
they only) are the sacred Harmony of the Harps of God.

And I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood upon Mount Sion, etc.] We shall (and so
conclude the first Part of this Treatise) further enquire; First,

Who that Lamb is.

Secondly, What is here meant by Mount Sion.

Thirdly, Who those Harpers shall be.

Fourthly, Why they are called the first fruits.

Fifthly, What is meant by those Harps of God.

And first,

That the Lamb on Mount Sion shall be Christ, is not doubted (I suppose) nor
denied by any: Not that Christ shall then stand, corporally, in his
Hypostatical person there, or any where else upon Earth (either for 1000 years,
or more, or less time) when these 144000 shall attend him; But, by the Lamb, in
this Text, is meant Christ's Substitutes (his revived Witnesses, Religious
Ministers and Magistrates) raised from the sleep of Spiritual Death to the Life
of Animadvertency, and to mind to do right and show mercy (after the Pattern of
the good Samaritan) in a fourfold Conformity, which only is Christian true
practice: For, As Michael and his Angels are said to fight with the first
Dragon, And to bind him, etc. Chapter 12.7. Chapter 20.2. It was Michael's Delegates
and Substitutes ( Constantin with his Armies and Officers) that fought (and not
Michael personally and literally) on Earth; So the Lamb, in the Text, upon
Mount Sion, shall be his Witnesses and Representatives (Religious Kings and
Ministers) standing firm (as upon Mount Sion) upon lasting Principles of sound
Faith and good Manners: Nor was it God and Christ literally (but the said
Substitutes with their Successors) that reigned on Earth, when the 1000 years
began, Chapter 12.10. Nor shall God and the Lamb literally (but their
Representatives) be the Temple in the conscript-City of God, Chapter 21.22.

Secondly, We shall further enquire who this conscript-number (that shall
accompany the Lamb) shall be, and see wherein they differ from Locusts and
Hypocrites. And first, They clearly appear to be the Gospel Church (after lier
Wilderness-Pilgrimage) brought to, and built upon immovable Foundatious of
Truth and Peace: For two Texts, in one and the same Chapter, expressly tell us,
That the Woman fled into the Wilderness, and was to remain there at least 1260
days (days annual) which are 1260 years, Chapter 12.6, 14. And (the duration of
that Desert-condition by her finished) we find her (immediately, or very soon
after) firmly seated upon Mount Sion: And it is well known to all, that know
any thing, that Mount Sion was never in the Wilderness. Chapter 11.11, 13, 15. Chapter
13.18 Chapter 14.1.

That Mount was the Type-Seat of true Worship; This the Antitype: That for a
time; This till time be no more: That was literal; This shall be Spiritual: To
wit, Lasting and inviolable Principles of true Faith and good Manners, whereon
the Gospel Church (firmly built) shall perform true obedience to God, and good
Works to Men in a fourfold conformity.

Therefore, Locusts and Hypocrites can be none of this couscript-company; their
Harps of pride, strife, and ignorance (if such Instruments can be called Harps)
sound forth rash and foolish questions, cavils and impugnations against that
which is right; Their works (and true Saints, too off, practice the same) are
torn Sacrifices, clypt fragments, half-performances, good beginnings never
finished, works of negligence, and careless forgetfulness, or wicked exemptions
from good works: They scatter some fragments (the worst Simony) to be rid of
doing good, whiles they relieve the poor, reward the well-deserving, but
strengthen not their hands (as Sodom did not) by relieving or rewarding of
them: Their works (not performed in a fourfold couformity) are contrary to the
Pattern in the Mount, and the practice of the good Samaritan; Therefore (being
laid in the balance) they are ever found wanting.

This company (having the Name of God in their foreheads) may be called, Coetus
Virgineus, vel Chorus incontaminatus, the Virgin or undefiled company; These
were not defiled with women (says the Text) for they were Virgins, verse. 4.
They seem to differ from the Profuga or sealed Church, only, as Christ,
transfigured in the Mount, differed from what he was before: Christ in the
Mount, was not another man, but a Man (the same Christ) of another manner; So
these 144000, conscript in the Mount, shall be the same Gospel Church, that was
sealed before, that fled into the Wilderness, and was fed there for 1260 years;
Not, for matter, another Church, but a Church of other manners, transfigured as
it were, in the Mount of God, and not floating (as the Ark in the flood) upon
unstable waters; not driven to and fro with every wind of false Doctrine and
different Opinion; not broken by proad Billows of swelling Schisms and
Subdivisions, but shall be immovably fixed (like the Ark at last) upon a sure
Rock which can never be shaken.

Many rich, Prophetick-promises to the Gospel Church are held forth in the 7th
Chapter from the ninth verse to the end; But those manifold promises of the
richest mercies seem to be made, chiefly to the conscript-Church; and were not
so fully fulfilled to the sealed servants of God in that Chapter; For, after
the sealing of them, the Text says; After this I beheld, and lo, a great
multitude, etc. verse. 9. For, as God did not begin to smite Egypt with the
Plagues of Excision, till his people were first sealed, in the Fronts or
Door-posts of their habitations, with the blood of the Lamb, Exodus, 12. So these
(their penultimate Antitype) were first sealed in their foreheads before God
smote Imperial and Apostate Rome about the beginning of the fifth Century: But,
as his Prototype sealed servants (the people of Israel) finished forty two
journeys in the literal Wilderness; So these sealed servants of God in the 7th
Chapter, were to fulfill forty two months Prophetical (1260 years) in the
Spiritual Wilderness, before they should stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion,
Chapter 11.2. Chapter 12, 6.14. Chapter 13.5.

That Type-Wilderness was the place of provocation, wherein those (in a figure
sealed) servants of God (erring in their hearts, and not knowing the ways of
God) provoked him to anger, and they all perished in that place for their
provocations; That Type-Desert was a literal, local, barren part of the World:
But this Antitype-wilderness is less literal, more spiritual, no less barren in
good works, and is (in the Aggregate of it) the whole World: For, the
Prototype, Apostate-Church was driven out of Paradise into the barren World,
that brought forth (as a curse laid upon it) Briars and Thorns: And the
Antitype revolted Woman (the Gospel Church) fled from Heaven (her Primitive
stations) and was driven thence into the Wilderness (this wicked World) where
evil Beasts (Heathens, Heretics, and proud and blind Hypocrites) in habit, and
which is an inextricable Labyrinth of investigable intanglements, and ways all
overgrown with Briers and Thorns of the Cares and Pride of this life; A place
where the sealed servants of God habituate themselves to err in their hearts,
and to be ignorant of his ways with all confidence, and continually provoke him
to anger. But,

The Gospel Church was not to continue scatrered over all this Spiritual
Wilderness, but to be more strictly confined for 1260 years, to her more
pecular place there, prepared of God.

The p^^ce prepared in the literal Wilderness, was Egypt, as we shall, in the
sequel, fully show.

Another Prophetick-place prepared of God (and that more Mystical) was the
Apostate body of Israel, or they in their journeys and places of their pitc^^ng
their Tents; For all Israel above twenty years old (about four excepted) fell
away (when the faithless Spies brought evil reports upon the Land of Promise)
from Faith and Obedience: That Apostate body was a place prepared of God to
preserve his truly sealed servants: So the Papal-Apostacy, and her subdivisions
(such at least as held the Homousian Faith) were the Antitypeplace prepared of
God to preserve his truly sealed servants for 1260 years.

But these 144000, upon Mount Sion, shall not need any place prepared in the
Wilderness, to preserve them, because they themselves shall not be there; Nor
shall they need a body of Death (the body of the Apostasy of Antichrist) to
preserve (as the Fish did Jonah) their lives from death; But they shall have
the Name of God written in their foreheads; And that name (true practice in a
fourfold conformity) shall be a strong Tower to desend them from all
distresses: Nor shall that Name of God (the vivid practice of the power of
Godliness) be an Anchor in a storm, but an impreguable Rock, above all Seas,
which storms can never reach.

Paul's Ship, wherein he sailed, was long driven to and fro; dash't with
impetuous storms, at last split in pieces; The passengers got its brokenboards
to bring them to shore; And the Profuga, Gospel Church, that fled from the
Serpent for 1260 years, has been long driven (too much like Paul's ship) to and
fro, broken with violent storms, and is now ready (by dashing billows of
dissenting brethren) to split inpieces.

But these 144000 upon Mount Sion shall not need to fear Sea-storms of
tribulations, or persecutions, because there shall be no more Sea, says the
Text, Chapter 21.1.

No more Sea] That is, No more coaltern persecutions betwixt Professors of
different persuasions, nor tempestuous dashings of civil Divisions, nor any
more distresses (as formerly) for faithless disobedience: So the whole World,
in time of the flood, was a stormy-Sea, wherein the Ark (the Prototype-Church)
was driven; But, when it rested on Ararat, there was no more Sea of dashing
billows against that weather-beaten Type; And so the sealed, Wilderness-Church,
has been driven to and fro (though her first 800 years were more favorable)
for about 1260 years, as in a troubled Sea; But, when she shall arrive upon
Mount Sion, there shall be no more Sea: Righteousness delivers from death;
But her righteousness of a fourfold conformity (which only is the fruit of
true Faith) shall deliver her from all future Sea-storms and Shipwracks.

But this righteousness is much more difficult to be done, than the
righteousness of formal Professors, and far different from the promiscuous,
clypt, and defalked righteousness of such true Saints, whose Harps are ever out
of tune. For,

Formalists and Hypocrites (nor are true Saints free from this fault) really
imagine, that the way to work true Gospel-righteousness is obvious to any;
Every man (they think) may do it without much direction for any difficulty
therein: The ground of this, almost general, misconceit is this; They mistake
the deceiveableness of unrighteousness for the Righteousness of Saints, and the
Gold-like Crowns of Locusts for the Name of the living God written in the
foreheads of his servants; And this righteousness (mistaken for true) is most
easy to be done by the most indocible: Its most easy for men to pretend
Religion, and practice none; To profess to witness the Truth and testify lies
in words and works; or to witness it in both with those delays, and such
slackness or partiality, that it profits none; To take much care to come to the
knowledge of the Truth in the Doctrine of Faith and Manners, and be deceived,
but not to come to the knowledge of the Truth in practice, that they may be
saved: This is Doctrina dedocenda. Doctrine to be learned at least to better
ends.

To pass heady censures, and practice actions of precipitate rashness, which
even Heathens abhor, is (as bestial) abhorred of God: Our Law (said an Heathen)
condemns no man unheard; But corrupt, careless, true Christians, can, and
commonly do, condemn (Indicta causa, inaudito viro) any man or thing unseen and
unheard: But no Law, Literature, nor Religion, nor strict Profession, nor sound
Doctrine; No Gifts nor Parts can bind or debar unsealed evil-Beasts from this
barbarous frenzy, which the Laws, even of wicked Heathens, allow not; and which
makes men more brutish than the worst Heathens: This desperate wickedness of
barbarous folly (so easy it is to be learned) is little less frequent, nor
less esteemed for true Righteousness, than it was by the Pharisees, who (by
this temerity of blind Hypocrisy) condemned and crucified the King of
Righteousness.

But the Righteousness of this Chorus Virgineus (contrary to the Crowns of
Locusts, deceits of Hypocrites, and the dangerous diversious of corrupt,
careless, true Christians) shall be (as the Text infers) every way conform to
that which is right: Therefore it must be (for difficilia quae pulcra) far more
difficult to be attained and practiced.

These were not defiled with women (says the Text) for they are Virgins: That
is; They shall not pollute themselves with the false Doctrines and foolish
Opinions of Erroneous Professors, nor espouse their works: Their works shall
not be (like the fruits of Formalists) withered for want of Rain, nor blasted
with the Wind, but be good and perfect fruits of a foursold conformity,
well-pleasing to God, and profitable to Man; For, so their site, position, and
number import: We find them not wandering in the Wilderness, nor sitting under
shadows of Death, as they did before, when the Woman fled into the Wilderness,
and her Witnesses were killed for 1260 years, Revel. 12.6, 14. Chapter 11.7, 9, 11.
But we find them situate and built (standing no doubt, after the Pattern of the
Lamb) upon Mount Sion, where Solomon's Temple was built, and so the Antitype of
it, Chapter 14.1. For,

We find their number to be 144000, Chapter 14.1, 3. And the quadrate dimensions of
Solomon's Temple were 144000 Cubits, thus cast up.

Its length (60 Cubits) multiplied by its breadth (20 Cubits) makes its product
1200 Cubits, which multiplied by 30 Cubits (the height of it) makes 36000
Cubits, whose square is 144000 Cubits; And we find this sacred company to be
144000, and to stand upon Mount Sion: That is, To be the Antitype of Solomon's
Temple, or the true Gospel Church returned out of the Wilderness and turned
back to obedience: That is, To have the Name of the Father of the Lamb written
in their foreheads: which necessarily infers, That this Caetus Virgineus must
needs be, Chorus Agni, the Church of Christ: That is, The City of God rebuilt
upon Mount Sion: To wit; upon inviolable Principles of Truth in Faith and
Manners. For,

Secondly, Both their number and position imports a Quadruplex-conformity in
practice: For this City (says the Text) lies apiece in 12000 furlongs,
Chapter 21.16. Its Quadrate Dimensions (it is so easy and evident, that it needs no
casting up) are 144000 furlongs; which principally imports, That the
Righteousness of this Chorus incontaminatus should be of a
Quadruplex-conformity, or every way conform to that which is Right in it self;
A righteousness of arduous industry and acquisition, directly contrary to the
Goldlike-Crowns and deceits of Locusts and Hypocrites.

Thirdly, The Name of God shall be in the foreheads of his servants (the
inhabitants of this holy City) says the Text, Chap. 22.4. And his Name shall
be written in the foreheads of these 144000, Chapter 14.1. Therefore, these 144000
shall be that City of God. I omit, for brevity, many other comparityes betwixt
this conscript 144000, Chapter 14. and the holy City, Chapter 21.

The Position of the Prototype twelve Tribes about the Tabernacle was in a
fourfold figure; And their Antitype, this 144000 (Chapter 14.) are of a square
number; And the holy City, Chapter 21. is to be both of a quadrate number and
figure; And this fourfold congruity betwixt both (in their number, in the Name
of God, in the place of that Name, and in their quadrate position) signally
proves that these 144000 (Chapter 14.) shall be the same City of God, Chapter 21. And
likewise that the practice of that quadrate polity (for such as the Tree is,
such is the Fruit) shall be a righteousness of a quadruplex or fourfold
conformity, which only (or what tends thereunto) is substantial and true
Righteousness; All other is but deceits.

We have already shown who that Lamb upon Mount Sion, shall be.

Secondly, Who these conscript first fruits, that shall attend him, are to be.
And,

Thirdly, We shall further enquire, why this conscriptcompany is called, The
first fruits redeemed, etc. Or from what, and for what they shall be so
redeemed? And first from what they shall be redeemed; To which I answer: They
shall be redeemed from doing the works of Heathens and Hypocrites, that are
contrary to Gospel-rule; And from those obscure, commixt works of proud,
careless, true Christians, that are inconform to Christ's Commands, and render
them (though true Saints) doubtful to themselves and others whether they be
such or not.

Secondly, We shall enquire; for what they should be thus redeemed? The Text,
expressly answers this demand in these words: These are the first fruits: That
is, They should be thus redeemed to be the first fruits, or foregoing examples
for all Ages to follow: To wit; To draw the Nations (both Heathens, Sects, and
Saints) to practice good works, conform to that which is right in it self: For
the works of Hypocrites have no power to draw others to practice sincere
obedience, because they (by their works) give not, nor can give any good
examples for Papists, Jews, or Turks to follow. Nor can careless, true
Christians, corrupt in Manners, draw others, nor be drawn without those
first fruits, for them to run after their examples: Therefore, All Sects and
Nations (without these first fruits, and the Lamb for their Pattern) must remain
(statu quo prius) ever unconverted, never truly united; but be as they are and
long have been; Or be (if that be possible) worse than ever they were: Sic
subito deterrima, deteriora si sint, sequentur Saecula: For, corrupt, careless,
slothful, true Christians cannot run, nor draw others to run the ways of Gods
Commands: They (though their Doctrine were most sound, they strict, and devour,
their gists great and many) have more need to be drawn, than power to draw
others by their examples: Their drawing is rather a drawing back of themselves,
and a withholding of others from pressing forwards: For, the proud, covetous,
careless, conversations of such true Saints have no attractive force to good,
draw forceably to evil: Their slothful pains of careless Levity, Pride and
Avarice are usually fond, and rash impugnations of censorious ignorance against
the practice of that which is right: Therefore the secret and scarce discerned
Graces of such true Saints are too feeble to draw others by solid Doctrine or
depth of Knowledge which they never seek after; Or by good examples, which they
never give: These are no attractive first fruits, though they may (in due time)
be drawn by them, But

The Righteousness of these first fruits shall be (opposite to the works of
darkness) Justitia manifesta, works of Light, made thereby manifest, and (for
that cause) forceable to draw: he Nations (Men, Sects and Saints) to God, and
to bind the attentive ears of all to hearken and obey by its delicious harmony.

Nor shall that sacred company serve for Paterns of practice to posterity, but
be Gnomon judicij vel Norma judicandi, the Rule of Right Judgment to all
Saints, Sects, and Professors that pretend to extraordinary gifts of the Spirit
of God, and to be endowed with power from above, above their brethren of
present or former times: Such may try and judge themselves, and discern and be
discerned by others (in a very large measure) whether they be led by the spirit
of delusion, or by the Spirit of Truth and Sobriety: For, The Gospel Church was
to be in the Wilderness (veiled in great obscurity, involved in great
distresses, and decaying daily in Graces) for 1260 years, and until these
first fruits (her Offspring) should begin to stand upon Mount Sion: Therefore,
all Sects and Professors, that pretend to be endowed, extraordinarily, with
Gifts and Power from above before this time expire, appear, inevitably, and may
appear to themselves (by undeniable Record of Sacred Scripture) to be, so far
Impostors, and Seducers of others: For (if the first fruits are, in future, to
come, then) these pretenders (incult, and careless of true Christian practice)
cannot be the first fruits for others to follow: Such Professors cry up (with
vain acclamations) old Errors and Deceits, for new Lights; and are, so far,
found liars. We shall now enquire,

Fourthly, What is here meant by Mount Sion in the Text? Its Type had its
higher and lower parts: Its higher part contained Moriab, Sion and Calvary: On
Moriab stood the Temple; On Sion was the Tower and City of David; On Calvary
was Christ crucified: Jerusalem was built on the lower part of it: The upper
and lower parts had the denomination (from its highest part) of Mount Sion.

Sion and Sinai are Synantitheses, or directly contrary; So was the Wilderness
and the Land of Promise. As Jerusalem was the Metropolis of the Land of
promise, and Sion the chief place of note therein; So Sinai was the Head and
Symbol of the barren Wilderness: Their disparities appear thus expressly from
the Text.

Tell me (says the Apostle) Do ye not hear the Law? for is written, That
Abraliam bad two sons, the one by the Bond-Maid, the other by a Freewoman:
which things are an Allegory; For these are the two Covenants: The one from
Mount Sinai, which is Hagar, and engenders to bondage: But he of the
Freewoman was by Promise: And Jerusalem above (the Mother of us all) is free.

The Mother of us all] That is, of all Sarah's Seed, the sens of promise:
Wherefore Sion and Sinai (as Types) differed, as Hagar and Sarah; as the two
Covenants, as Grace and the Law, Life and Death, Bondage and Freedom.

Type- Sion was a threefold foundation (the substructure of the Temple, of the
City of God, of the City of David) Thither the twelve Tribes came to keep the
Passover: Therefore, Type- Sion was a Figure of the Foundation of the Church of
God, and a literal place; But Spiritual- Sion (no literal place) shall be the
Antitype-foundation of the Gospel Church: For the Lamb, and with him 144000,
having his Fathers Name written in their foreheads, shall stand there, Chapter 14.1.

The Foundation of the Church of God is transcendent.

Secondly, Derivative.

The Transcendent Substructure is, Deus in Christo pacatus, God reconciled in
Christ: This Foundation (the Rock and Pillar of Truth from eternity) stands for
ever.

The Derivative Foundation of the Gospel Church is the knowledge and love of
the Truth, or a fruitful Faith in the Promises of God through Christ: Christ
said to his Disciples, But who say ye that I am? Peter said, Thou art Christ
the Son of the living God. Jesus answered; Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church, Matthew. 16.15. This Derivative foundation of the
Gospel Church was the Faith which Peter confessed; and it had respect to and
was built upon that first and transcendent Foundation: This Derivative
Foundation (a living and fruitful Faith) shall be that Mount Sion, (Chapter 14.)
where those conscript 144000 (the Antitype of Solomon's Temple) shall stand, and
whereon the City of God shall be built, Chap. 21.2. The Prophetick-promises are
express, and the Texts full and clear that prove it; which notwithstanding,
many may object and say, That this Foundation was laid long before.

The Assertion I confess, and grant that this foundation was laid long before,
even in the Primitive times: But a falling away was to come, and a departing
from the Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1 Timothy 4.1. For the Church (at least in a very
large measure) forsook the Rock of her safety (the Foundation of her standing)
fell from Heaven (where she stood) and fled into the Wilderness for 1260 years,
Revel. 12.1, 6, 14. So the Prototype-Church ( Jacobs family) fell away,
departed out of the Land of Promise, fled into the Wilderness, and into her
place there prepared of God: To wit, Egypt (the most barren place in that
Wilderness, were it not miraculously prepared of God, and as it were in the
middle of it) and returning thence, through part of the Wilderness, turned
aside there also; They were then far remote, and long removed from the
Type-foundation ( Sion literal) where Abraham would have offered his son,
Melchizedeck was King of Righteousness, and where the Lord was twice seen in
abundant Grace and Mercy.

So their Antitype (the Gospel Church) was long removed (as aforesaid) into the
Spiritual Wilderness, from the foundation of her standing: But as many of the
captives carried to Babylon, were mindful of Sion, and would not forget
Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.5, 6. So some of the fallen servants of God in the
Gospel Church, have had some weak desires of Sions welfare, and are somewhat
(though very little) mindful of their first foundation: But (may some say) this
foundation (Faith in the Promises) stands still firm.

I Answer, Sion stood (after the City and Temple, built upon it, were turned to
ashes) but it was left desolate, the living were departed, the dead only and
the slain were left there, as the Lamentatious declare at large.

And so the Faith of the Antitype revolted-Church, in the Spiritual Wilderness,
was, and is a desolate Faith, a Faith fruitless (or far from being fruitful) in
the practice of good Manners, and, at least, drawing near to a dead Faith; and
therefore no way fit to be the Foundation of the Gospel Church adorned to be
the Lambs Bride, Chapter 21.9.

But Antiype- Sion shall be a fruitful Foundation, a living Faith, giving life
to the City of God that shall be built thereon: For, Such as the Tree is, such
is the Fruit; and such as this Foundation, shall be the Superstructure upon it:
But these 144000 (the Antitype of Solomon's Temple built thereon) shall be
undefiled and withour fault, says the Text, verse. 4.5. That is, Their
Righteousness shall be so perfect in a fourfold conformity (but there is no man
that sins not, I Kings 8.4, 6:) that it shall be a sweet Savor and a
Sacrifice well-pleasing to God: But the Faith of the Gospel, Wilderness-Church
is (as was that of her Prototype) a barren faith, affording very little fruit
to Gods glory, or the good of men. The Wituesses (we read) were to be killed;
And this faith is much after the manner of the Carcasses of those killed
Witnesses; And, indeed, their Carcasses was such a Faith (a dead or dying
faith) having some small, insensible, and almost unperceivable true life: For,
Faith without Works (says the Apostle) is dead, a Carcass of Christian
Profession without power, James 2.17, 20. And such a Carcass of the killed
Witnesses (or somewhat like it) the Spiritual Gentiles kept unburied to be a
foundation to build the Apostasy of Antichrist upon, and it is the Pillars of it
to support it: Nor are inanimadversive, clypt, inconform half-performances any
fruits of a living, but the deceits of a dead faith: Such a faith, Such a
fruitless foundation is Sinai, not Mount Sion, and most unfit to be the
Substructure of the Church of the living God; Nor can it procure his favor,
but his anger or enmity, for so Issid.
Sinai signifies. Therefore was God angry forty years with the Type,
Wilderness-Church, and swore in his wrath that they should not enter into his
rest: So the Antitype-Wilderness is the place or dispensation of Gods heavy
anger and sore displeasure even against his own Church and People; because
(says he of the Figure of these) they do always err in their hearts, and have
not known my ways, Heb. 3.10.

Do always err, etc. Their Antitype also err always, because they are ever
inanimadversive, and mind not (or mind not much) what they say or do. One said
of the troubled Sea, Nibil bio nisi Pontus, and Ether; So may we say of the
dead faith of this Spiritual, dreadful Wilderness; There is nothing there but
errors in men's imaginations, and little else in the hearts and hands of Saints:
For the fruits of a dying or desert-faith are (through brutish inadvertency)
erring imaginations, ignorant animosities, Schisms, deceits in Opinions, and
mistakes in Manners. A dead faith (the foundation of the Apostasy of
Antichrist) is threefold, or subsists of three parts.

First, Inanimadvertency.

Secondly, Ignorance, or erroneous knowledge, which the Apostle calls, Science,
falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20. From these two proceeds the love of a Lie. And
these three constitute a fruitless dead faith. And

Secondly, Antitype- Sion (or a fruitful living Faith, the Derivative
Foundation of the Church of God) is also threefold, or subsists of three parts.

First, Animadvertency.

Secondly, true Knowledge; and from these two proceeds Love, the life of a
fruitful living Faith: For Knowledge comes by animadvertency, and from both
springs Love, the life of Faith.

And I looked, and lo, etc. Animadvertency is the Root of Faith; Knowledge the
Eye of it; Love is the Life thereof: But a dead faith Acts, and looks not;
Censures, and sees not; Reads, and minds not, or (with an evil Eye) minds
amiss, mistakes pieces and fragments of good Works for perfect Obedience, and
deceits for Truth: no better fruits must they expect that make a dead faith the
foundation of their-Works, and the substructure of the Church of God.

Break off thy sins (said Daniel) by righteousness, and thine iniquities, by
showing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lenthening of thy tranquillity:
Nebuchadnezzar, no doubt, did as Daniel directed: But it is not a careless,
clypt Righteousness of a dead faith, nor half-performed mercy to the poor, that
can secure Professors, Salnts, States, or Churches from dreadful Calamities: He
was driven (as a man without Rule or Reason) from amongst men, and his dwelling
was (as in a Wilderness) with the Beasts of the field, till twice 1260 days
past over him: His Faith was a Wilderness dead Faith, bringing fruits forth by
halves.

The dreadful evils of the barren Desert ( Literal and Spiritual) and the
contrary benefits and blessings of Sion (in Type and Antitype) may briefly
appear from the fastings of Moses, Eliah, and Christ, forty days in the
wilderness: The time was above forty days, and perhaps, about 42 days, conform
to 42 months Propbetical, which was the time that the Gospel Church should
fulfill in her place in the Spiritual Wilderness, Chap. 12.6, 14. Chapter 13.5. For
Christ had finished 40 days fasting before the Devil began to assail him with
his fiercest temptations, Matthew. 4.2. So Eliah took one days journey into the
Wilderness, and was miraculously fed there before he fasted 40 days, 1 King.
19.4. And Moses fasted 40 days and 40 nights, before God gave him the Tables of
the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.11. Forty days and forty nights ( rotunditatis gratia, or
as a round number) are expressed, but the whole time of the fastings of all the
three appears to be longer: That time was an abbreviated adumbration of the
Gospel-Churches continuance in the Antitype-wilderness; and what they did or
suffered, in that time there, prefigured, Prophetically, the state of the
Profuga-Church. And first.

Moses fasted, two several times, 40 days; and when he had finished his first
40 days in Horeb, he found Israel (more degenerate in Manners and Opinions than
they had been before) worshipping a Calf, Deuteronomy. 9.12. So the Gospel Church and
Professors (having now near finished their Wilderness-Pilgrimage) are so far
from being nearer to Mount Sion, that they are much more erring in their
hearts, and ignorant of the ways of God; More abundant in mistaking evil
Manners for good Works, and more blindly Superstitious in Worshipping (as Israel
did a Calf) the works of their own hands.

The works of their hands, Revel. 9.20. And what are those works? I Answer, All
careless, deficient, longdelayed, or half-performed works of mercy and equity,
are (though wrought by Saints) the works of men's hands, which God abhors: Such
much more are the works of all Saints and Professors that mistake (their Cui)
persons or things whom they misintend to right or promote.

We are debtors (says the Apostle) not to the flesh to live thereafter, Romans
8.12. But this is the misery of Modern times, that all men (and Saints for the
most part) mistake their Creditors, and mind not to whom they themselves are
Debtors: For the miserable, Wilderness-Christians are all Debtors, and owe
almost all they have to themselves; little or nothing to their neighbors, to
whom, what is part of their due they pay (as the Pharisees did) to their own
Proselytes, Kin, Friends, or Members of their own Societies; But to things
profitable and honest, and to the pursuers of such things, they find nothing
(or the least part) due, and accordingly repay them: These are Debtors (be they
never so Spiritual) to the flesh, and these their fruits (the works of their
own wicked hands) are worshipped almost by all, as Israel (when Moses had
finished his 40 days fasting) were found worshipping a Calf.

No less wicked are the Works of the hands of Hypocrites, that make the
Witnesses the Cui of their condemnation, and false accusers, forgers of lies
(through their indulgent, or not diligent examining of them) their Cui of
Credit and Reputation: For this cause multitudes of blind, zealous, careless
Professors readily give credit to, and capitulate with the greatest Impostors
against the injured most innocent: This practice is the power of the Prince of
darkness in the Mystery of iniquity, whereby he crucifies Christ Mystical, and
kills his Witnesses in the Spiritual wilderness.

Secondly, Eliah wandered, and fasted forty days in the dreadful Wilderness;
and (when he had finished that sore travel) he was so sar from Mount Sion, that
he was got to Horeb, quite contrary to it; So the Gospel-wandring Saints and
Professors (having almost finished their much more sore travel in a far more
troublesome Wilderness) are so far from drawing near to Mount Sion, that they
are come to Horeh; So horrible are the mistakes and deceits of these men and
times. But how and when did Eliah begin his Eremitetiavel.

I Answer, He fled for his life from Jezabel, as his Antitype (the
Gospel Church) fled from the second Dragon, but, indeed, at first, from both
combined, Chapter 12.6, 14. He came to Beersheba, where he left his servant; There
and then he began his Prophetick-Pilgrimage: For he traveled thence one days
journey into the Wilderness; lay down and slept under a Juniper-Tree: There, an
Angel (touching him) awaked him, and bid him eat and drink: He lay down again,
and the Angel (touching him the second time) bid him eat and drink: So Christ
commanded his Disciples to watch and pray, and, coming the first time, found
them asleep; So did he three times, and said, Now sleep on. Eliah so sleeping,
and the Disciples sleeping three times as aforesaid, Prophetically prefigured
the sleepy disposition of the Gospel Church and Saints in the Spiritual
Wilderness. And what is sleep?

Sleep is a Mirror of false Idea's, wherein all the Imaginations of men are
vain Visions, and the things and actions which they dream they see, or do, are
not in the least, the same; not seen, nor done indeed: So the
Antitype-Hermitage of the Gospel-Churches aberrations is a large Valley of vain
Vision, where Saints and Professors wander in darkness, and live (if such may
be said to live) in a deep Lethargy of forgefulness; forget the manner how to
show Mercy, keep Faith, or practice Right; But dream they see what indeed they
see not, and do what, in deed, they do not; mistaking morose, long-delay'd,
half-performed good-works (the Imposturous deceits of Antichrist) for true
Christian practice: But, Sion signifies (not a sleepy Couch, but) a
Watchtower, and shall afford a clear Prospect; where Men and Saints (awaked
from sleep, revived from death) shall see a far off, right Idea's, real
Substances, and practice according to Right Representations.

Thirdly, Christ was led of the-Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of the
Devil; There he fasted forty days, and forty nights; Then, and not till then,
did the Devil fiercely assault him with his fiery Darts: which shows that the
Gospel Church and Saints should fustain the forest brunts, and sharpest
assaults of dangerous trials and temptations about the end of her and their
Wilderness-Pilgrimage.

Satan's first inducement was to sensuality: Most Men, and most Professors fall
into, and fall by, this temptation of the Devil; And many, without his
tempting, can be drawn away of their own lusts and enticed: But Christ was far
from being brought to practice this Pollution, or being otherwise drawn or
enticed.

Secondly, The Devil (taking him into an high Mountain) tempted him to worldly
covetousness, Luke 4.5. This is the deplorable state, and desperate condition
of Saints and Professors in the Spiritual Wilderness; That they are, there,
always subject to be haled by the hands of the Devil, to be tempted by him to
their own destruction.

Lastly, The Devil (tempting him to Spiritual Pride) set him upon a Pinnacle of
the Temple: The Temple was built upon Mount Moriah, that was part of Sion;
There the Devil departed; There Christ overcame the Devil; To intimate to all
Ages, That when the Gospel Church and Saints shall arrive unto, and be built
upon Mount Sion, (to wit, upon the lasting Foundation of a fruitful and living
Faith) then the fiery Darts of the Devil shall be spent; Then shall she be ever
Victrix, and they overcome the Devil. For,

Secondly, The Prototype-Desert was, as it were, more peculiarly under the
Devils jurisdiction: There he tempted our blessed Savior; There Type- Israel
tempted and provoked God to wrath: Such is the Antitype and Spiritual
Wilderness, much more; For that is the place where the seven Vials full of the
plagues and wrath of God, were to be poured forth, for above 1260 years upon
Gospel Apostate- Israel, for her continual provocations, Rev. 15.1. Chapter 16.1.

But God chose Mount Sion which he loved; For, in Salem is his Tabernacle, his
dwelling place in Sion, Psalm. 76.2. Psalm. 78.68. That is, God chose, loved, and
dwelt in literal Sion by a Prophetick-Adumbration; but shall choose, love and
dwell (unto all after-Ages) in Spiritual Sion by a much more manifest, and real
love, power, and presence, Revel. 14.1. Chapter 21.3. Chapter 22.3, 4. Because,

Thirdly, From Horeh (part of Sinai) was Sin (from the Law there given) made
exceeding sinful: But in Moriah (part of Sion) did the Lamb of God (by the
Sacrifice of himself) take away the sins of the World: But the efficacy of the
satisfaction of that Sacrifice shall be principally illustrated and manisested
to all Ages, in Spiritual Sion, where the Conscript-Church is called, The
first fruits redeemed unto God, and to the Lamb, Chapter 14.1, 3. Where its
manifest from these express Texts, that the Hermite-Churche's arrival in
Spiritual Sion is (contrary to the careless inadvertency of formal true Saints
and Professors) accounted, (and so called) matter of Redemption.

Redemption (the price and fruit of Christ's Blood) was wrought in Sion; He
first brought it forth, planted it there; Thence it was disseminated into many
Nations, where it brought forth its first fruits: That Primitive dispensation
was the Gospel-Churches Spting, succeeded by a short Summer; For both expired
soon after the year 400: Then a sharp Winter, and a dark Night began to
surprise that Royal Plant, wherein it continued in much like condition to that
Tree in Daniel (and, indeed, was shadowed by it) that was hew'n down, had its
Branches cut, its Leaves shaken off, its Fruits scattered, till seven times
past over it, as they shall over this, Dan. 4.16. Revel. 10.7. Chapter 11.15. This
Royal Plant (those Times and that Winter of Tempests over-past) shall be (by
the Lamb) replanted (not as at first in literal Sion, but) in Sion Spiritual,
and shall again bring forth the first fruits, redeemed from the Earth to God
and to the Lamb, Chapter 14.1, 3, 4.

Fourthly, Both the Legal and Gospel-Churches, in the Literal and Spiritual
Wildernesses, provoked the most High, Psalm. 78.17. Then, was his wrath kindled
against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance: Therefore he
consumed their days in vanity, and their years in trouble, Verse. 33. Psalm.
80.40.

Consumed their days in vanity, etc. How in vanity? The true Gospel-witnesses
had power to Prophecy 1260 years in Sackcloth, Verse. 3. And what was the power
of that Prophecy? They had, thereby power to shut Heaven that it should not
rain in the days of their Prophecy, and to smite the Earth with all Plagues,
Verse. 6. that is, Power to render the Antichristian World inexcusable, to make
their sins exceeding sinful, their plagues insusserable: At quando Messis? What
Reformation of mistakes in Manners? What information against Errors in
Opinions? where are the first fruits? And what is more vain? Therefore God
listed up his hand against his inheritance to overthrow them in the Wilderness,
consumed their days in vanity, their years in trouble, Rev. 11.2, 7. Chapter
12.15, 17. But God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes in Spiritual Sion,
Chapter 7.17. Chapter 21.4. rectified their Judgments, reform their Manners, and render
them undefiled, and without fault in his sight, Chapter 14. But.

Fifthly, Great was the cause when God complained of his own people in the
Desert; That they provoked him to swear in his wrath, that they should not
enter into his rest: And what was the cause of such great wrath? Because (says
he); they always erred in their hearts, and have not known my ways.

They always erred, etc.] Et quid error mentis? what is an error of the Heart,
or rather what, and how many are the Errors of the Hearts of Professors (Saints
not excepted) in the Spiritual Wilderuess?

Had they utterance (and indeed they have that) they might auswer for
themselves, and say, My Name is Legion, for we are many; So many are the Errors
of the Hearts of men, that they are (as also their Prophetic Type predicted)
continual and universal, scarce admitting any limitation; So, God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the Earth (toward the end of the Old World) and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was evil continually, Genesis
6.5. The limitation or exception was only of one or two men, ver. 8.

So all Israel (in the Type-Wilderness, two or four only excepted) had
corrupted their ways, were fallen away from Faith and Obedience, And so Gospel-
Israel (especially toward the end of her Wilderness aberration) has so
corrupted her ways, that scarce may Faith be found: And they (very few
excepted) always err, not caring to know the ways of God. And wherein are all
the imaginations of their hearts thus only evil continually?

It Is a continual Error in the Hearts of Men and Saints, to imagine that a
careless, shallow, trivial knowledge, and like practice is sufficient to please
God, and purchase their own salvation; This was the delusion of Laodicea, and
is the deceit of Locusts and Hypocrites: Therefore, Their practice (conform to
that knowledge) is ever half-performances; Good Works, perhaps, well begun, but
desisted from before they be finished.

Bid (we noted before) complained that Christians, in his time, were contented
with a trivial literature: His complaint then is not now without cause, and
it is the fault of many that the Female Sex suffers most under the burden of
this Misery: By this means many Men and Women are, at best, like those silly
Women, that were ever laboring, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth: These may be ready to hear (like Herod) gladly, and to read Books that
unfold the Scriptures, but cannot understand what they hear or read for want of
due literature, whereby they may understand: But this kind of incult Christians
are usually (through for did illiterature and beastial ignorance) the railing
Frogs of croaking convitiations against men of parts and deserts; For Art and
Desert has no adversary like unto ignorance: Nor is careless, contented
ignorance, the Mother of Devotion, but Parent of Divisions and the Fountain of
Factions and Schisms in States and Churches, that divides and destroys both.

But Bede's complaint (in his time grievous) has now got another complaint
more grievous than it self, which is this: Most men, that have gained a
competent Literature, and many that have attained a large measure of Learning,
abuse those gifts, to advance Avarice, Ignorance, and evil Manners, and make
themselves, thereby, much worse, and more wicked than any careless incult and
illiterate Professors are, and (having less cause) are more confident, than the
most ignorant: This careless, contented ignorance and vain confidence, is a
continual Error in the Hearts of those Men, and many Saints; Their fruits are
usually but the deceitful works of half-performances; for which the plagues of
the wrath of God are poured forth upon them, as they were upon Hered, Saul,
Judas, for like contented, shallow knowledge, and half-practices. And

Secondly, It Is an Error in the Hearts of men to imagine, That the Witnesses
Sackcloth-Prophesie can procure that promised, vigorous Repentance, which
Prophets and Apostles predicted: It may and does often work a weak, barren,
scarce-visible, Wilderness, true Faith and Repentance, whereby many are saved,
but it is too weak to bring forth those generous fruits of the Conscript
first fruits in a fourfold consormity to the perfect and durable good of men,
and to Gods glory in all ensuing Ages: For the Winesses were to Prophecy 1260
years in Sackcloth, and, thereby, to smite the Earth with all manner of
Plagues, Rev. 11.3, 6. But they that were not killed by those Plagues (says
the Text expressly) yet repented not, Chapter 9.18. And that Particle of time [yet]
is the period of the six Trumpets sounding, and conterminates the Witnesses
1260 years Sackcloth-Prophesie. And therefore

Thirdly, They much Err in their Hearts that imagine that the Ministry under
which they live, or the strictness of the Sect or Church of which they are
Members, or that their own Zeal and Devotion, can exempt them from the Plagues
and Wrath of God, which he pours forth upon such Semiadvertists and
half-performists; For, then had Herod, Saul, and Judas been free from such
Plagues, because the greatest Prophets were their Guides and Teachers: And the
Pharisees, and the Church of the Jews might have been exempted from the final
excision of them, and that Nation; because they were the peculiar People and
Church of God, and the Pharisees, the devoutest and most Orthodox of all Sects:
Thus we see; that Type and Antitype, Apostate- Israel in the Literal and
Spiritual Wilderness, erred, do always err; in their hearts, and know not,
ineed, (for such works are far from them) the ways of God, nor are Saints
themselves, there, exempted from the same vail of universal darkness, that
overspreads all Nations: For, There is a Cloud of darkness, that covers all
people, as barrenness the Wilderness, or waters cover the Sea, Isa. 25.7. But
that darkness of ignorance was to be more prevalent during the time of the
Gospel-Churches abode in her place prepared in the Spiritual Wilderness, but
most effectual, immediately, before or after the period of that duration.

This Cloud of darkness was signally shadowed forth by that borrour of great
darkness and deep sleep that fell upon Abraham, Genesis 15.12; which Prophecy was
fulfilled in his Literal and Spiritual Seed in the Type and
Antitype-Wilderness: But, That the right-Series of the Mystery of God, and of
the Mystery of Iniquity may plainly appear, and what the power of Religion is,
may be more evident, we shall (with some diligence) further enquire, First,
what the Wilderness (Literal and Spiritual) was.

Secondly, What the place prepared of God was in both.

Thirdly, We shall prove that place to be the Theater or proper Seat of the
Apostasy of Antichrist.

Fourthly, We shall show what that Apostasy is. And

Lastly, We shall show, that, Antitype- Sion shall be the derivative Foundation
of the Churches deliverance and redemption from the grand Apostasy. And first,

We need not describe the Desert wherein Egypt stands, that is done already
sufficiently for this purpose; and we shall but hint it here; But Egypt was the
place (or one place) therein prepared of God to preserve his Church in a
Figure; It was chiefly a Figure of its Antitype in the space of its seven years
Famine; It was part of the Wilderness, and (of it self) more barren than any
part of it; for, in seven years, when the River did not overflow, it brought
forth nothing: But it was a place miraculously prepared of God, by a more
general Providence, through the River's yearly overflowing it: And it was, more
remarkably prepared by a special Providence of God, in sending Joseph thither
to foresee and prevent the miserable calamities of its seven years native
barrenness.

Spiritual Egypt (the subject of the secular and Spiritual-Apostacy) was the
place prepared of God to preserve the Gospel Church for 1260 years in the
Antitype-Wilderness, Rev. 12.6, 14. Chapter 11.8. And therefore

Thirdly, Literal and Spiritual- Egypt were the Theaters or proper places of
the Type and Antitype-Apostasies. And

Fourthly, We shall show what the grand Apostasy is, and first,

In a Figure; The Patriarks sold their brother into Egypt, and God sold them
into the same place: They fell away from faith and love: From faith to their
own Father, from love to him, and their own brother, from care of both. And the
Apostasy of the Gospel Church is exactly the same: She and her Members fell (in
a very great measure) from faith and obedience; from faith to men; from love to
their brethren, and thereby from obedience to God: The fruits of Egypt in the
famine, were ill-favored and withered fruits; Such are the fruits of Saints
and Professors in the Spiritual Wilderness, their good works are Dwarf-manners,
half-performances; They sell their brethren for lucre, without showing mercy,
or doing right; They err in their hearts, and are ignorant of the ways of God:
They mind not (or very little) what they are.

The grand Apostasy is twofold.

The first; And

The second; Such was it in the Types thereof.

Type- Egypt's Apostasy was twofold: She at first, savoured Israel, was a
nursing Mother to the Profuga.-Church, but fell away to afflict and persecute
that people; That was her first Apostasy. But

Secondly, She often repented (as Hypocrites do) to no purpose; and then pursud
Israel into the Red Sea to slay them all by a total excision, and they all,
that pursued them, perished themselves in that Sea; This was Egypts second and
last Apostasy.

Secondly; The Old World revolted from its Primitive Integrity: Therefore God
appointed Noah (a Preacher of Righteousness, a Figure of the Witnesses
Prophesying in Sackcloth) to forewarn the World for 120 years: That might be
the principal time of its first Type-Apostasie; But (all that time spent) they
repented not, and the fear of God was reduced to some few in a single family:
That diminution of the fear of God, and increase of impenitence, after so long
admonition, was a second Apostasy: Then the flood came (as an universal Sea)
and destroyed the World.

Thirdly, Baals Prophets and Consederate- Israel fell away to worship Baal for
1260 days: That was the chief time of their first Apostasy: But, after that,
Satan became a lying Spirit in the mouths of all the surviving Prophets; That
was their second Apostasy; Then the total excision of all those Prophets soon
after followed.

Thirdly, Judas (a man of half-performances, and a Figure of the Apostasy of
Antichrist) is expressly called The son of perdition, John 17.12. And the
Antichrist (I say not sensual, but Secular and Spiritual) is called also, The
Son of perdition, 2 These. 2.3. That Type-son of perdition, Judas, apostatized
twice; and first, he was (or seemed to be) a chosen Vessel: Christ chose him to
be a Disciple, Luke 6.13. But he fell away to be a Thief and a Hypocrite, and
so continued for about 1260 days ( Daniels half week of years, Dan. 9.27.) and
was all that time undiscovered, or not known to the Apostles to be an
Hypocrite: That time was the duration of his first Apostasy: But then

Secondly, Satan entered into Judas; That was his second Apostasy; He then,
immediately betrayed his Master, and hasted to hang himself. This second
Apostasy was a falling away (Non a bono ad malum, sed a malo ad pessimum) not
from seeming good to real evil (so he had fallen before for 1260 days) but from
real evil to most desperate wickedness, from seeming fidelity to real perfidy:
So his Antitype (the son of perdition) was to Apostatize twice: His first
revolt was from Primitive Faith and Love: That desertion was to continue entire
1260 years.

His second Apostasy is, or shall be, a falling away (a malo in deterrimum)
from evil to all excessive wickedness, perfidy, and iniquity, which the Apostle
thus predicted; This know, that in the last days, perilous times shall come;
for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, without natural affection, false accusers, traitors, etc. This is
(Apostasia novissima and pessima) the last and worst Apostasy: Therefore it is
that we find such a prodigious and sudden mutation of men's manners: They had
sometimes (yea lately) some mansuetude, some love, some seeming good; Now
nothing but deceit; They incline their ears to liars and Hypocrites, hearken
unto lies, become false accusers, and traitors, as if Satan, with seven
Spirits, were re-entred into Judas: and indeed; As Satan entered into Baal's
Servants, and into Judas also, and thereby initiated his and their second and
last Apostasy; So we find it expressly said; That Spirits of Devils shall
seduce the Antitype-Apostasie, and (after 1260 years, the time of its first
revolt) actuate the impenitent part of that Apostate body (as the Devil did the
Swine of Gadara) into the Sea of perdition, Revel. 11.13, 18. Chapter 16.19. That
time is or shall be (Perditissimorum morum tempus pessimum) the most depraved
time of sinister prevarication, wherein men and manners are most degenerate
from being, or doing good: Their half performances are broken into fractions,
and yet they retain a Form, etc. Religion is made (almost universally) a Cloak
for Ignorance and Iniquity.

The first Apostasy of Antichrist was like green Tares that incumber growing
Corn; The second Apostasy is compared to a ripe Harvest, wherein the evil
fruits of the Mystery of Iniquity are fully ripe, Rev. 14.15, 18. We return.

The place prepared in the Antitype Wilderness is (vas continens) the proper
Subject and Theater of the grand Apostasy, and of the Plagues that attend it:
But Spiritual Sion shall be the Theater or derivative foundation of the
Churches reversion and repentance, the receptacle of all the Mercies of the
Promises of God, and the Fountain of those healing Waters of Life to all
Nations, Ezekiel. 47. to the 13th. Rev. 22.2, 3.

The grand Apostasy is only blindness of mind, and barrenness in manners,
affected and espoused by Men, Saints, and Professors: And this Apostasy (with
little limitation) is almost universal, as barrenness in the seven years
famine, overspread the Land of Egypt, and only shrubs and fruitless sands
covered the face of the Wilderness: But it must be then universal, when the
smoke of the bottomless-pit darkened the light of the Sun, and the light of the
Air, Chap. 9.2. Then universal darkness (and more near the end of the Churches
Eremite-Pilgrimage) did, and does cover all people. But

In Antitype- Sion (the promised Jerusalem) there shall be no more
Sun-darkening smoke of refined deceits; Nor shall any clouds of universal
darkness cover any more all people, nor any Vail of Ignorance overspread all
Nations: For, In that Mountain, will God destroy the face of the covering cast
over all people, and the Vail that is spread over all Nations, Isa. 25.7. He
has promised it, and will certainly and speedily persorm it; Nor shall any
Cloud then guide the Church by day, nor any Pillar of fire by night: But the
glory of God shall enlighten it, and the Lamb shall be the light thereof, Chap.
21.23. To be short; Antitype- Sion and the Gospel Church built upon it, shall
be the persection of beauty, and pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass, Psalm.
50.2. Rev. 15.12. Chapter 21.21. There the beauty and harmony of Truth (both in
Doctrine and Practice) shall be plainly and powerfully illustrated to all ages:
And this is Sion whom no man seeks after, Jer. 30.17. We shall now further
enquire.

Fifthly, What those Harps of God are? Chapter 15.2. I answer, They are called; The
Harpes of God; and therefore cannot be made by the Art of Man, but must be
Harps framed by Gods hand, to found sorth (to the good of all) his praise and
glory: That is; They shall be the hearts of Men and Saints turned backwards:
How long (said Elijah) halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow
him: but if Baal, follow him: and they answered not a word, 1 King. 18.21.

And they answered him not a word] why not? Decause their hearts were no Harps
of God, nor then turned backward: But hear me, Lord (said Eliah) and let this
people know, that thou art the Lord God, and that thou have turned their heart
back again. Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt-Sacrifice,
and the Wood, and the Stones, etc. Verse. 37, 38. And when all the people saw
it, they fell on their faces; and they said, The Lord, he is the God, the Lord,
he is the God, verse. 39.

The Lord, be is the God] And whence was this great acknowledgment of the truth
to Gods glory? The hearts of the people were become the Harps of God, and were
turned backward: That was done in a Type, and (being more in word than in
works) continued but for a time: But these Harps of God shall be the Hearts of
Men and Saints turned back, and turning others back from blind Sacrifice to
sincere obedience; Not in word, but in deed; Nor for a time, but to eternity:
Harps that (by good works wrought in a fourfold conformity) shall greatly
sound forth Gods glory, and procure the general good of after-ages. For

Secondly, Eliah (we read) repaired an Altar of the Lord that was broken down,
ver. 30. And took twelve stones according to the number of the Tribes of the
Sons of Jacob, etc. rebuilt it, and offered upon it: This was not written for
nothing, that Eliah did thus: But be repaired the Altar of the Lord] God
accepts no Sacrifices, but what are offered upon his own Altars: He took twelve
stones, according to the number of the twelve Tribes. Twelve is a quadrate
number, and the Root or Basis of twelve times twelve thousand, or 144000, that
adumbrate the Gospel Church, Chapter 14.1. Chapter 21.16. which principally denotes a
quadri-formity, or a fourfold conformity in the practices of all truly reformed
Saints, or rightly repaired Altars of God; who are far from those Formalists
and Hypocrites of blind inanimadvertency, that mind not, in their practices of
good manners, to conform their intellects to that which is right in itself, or
to come to the knowledge of the truth in practice that they may be saved; Nor
care to conform their wills to their right-informed intellects, nor their works
to both: These are the Baalitish Altars of blind obedience, such Altars God
abhors, hates such Sacrifices: But these Harps of God shall be the repaired
Altars of the Lord prepared by his hand to practice right in a fourfold
conformity: Such Altars only God accepts, with such Sacrifices only is be
well-pleased. For

The only Original Altar (transcendent and above all) is Christ: But, the Harps
of God (the hearts of men and Saints, purified by Faith, and made conform to
Christ) are derivative Altars, which God accepts in him: And with their works
(wrought in a fourfold conformity) is he well-pleased: For, God affects not
Fables, nor Figleaves of deceits (fragments or half-performances) but
substantial Righteousness wrought in a fourfold conformity, which only is
Christian and true Righteousness.

Lastly, Elijah (when the people halted between two Opinions) brought them to
be of one mind; And turned back their hearts, that, with one mouth, they gave
glory to the God of Heaven: So shall their Antitype do, Rev. 14.7. We shall
here further show, First,

From what the hearts of Men and Saints shall be turned back?

Secondly, To what they shall be turned?

Thirdly, What their exceeding great danger is, if their hearts be not turned
back?

Lastly, What their inestimable benefits and safeties shall be by having their
hearts turned back again? And first,

From what the hearts of Men and Saints shall be turned back? I answer, They
shall be turned back from the practice of those sins of which they have not yet
repented: And the rest of the men (says the Text) which were not killed by
these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should
not worship Devils, and Idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of
wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk. Neither repented they of their
Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of their Fornication, nor of their Theft,
Rev. 9.20, 21.

Yet repented not This Particle of time (yet) is the period of the six Trumpets
sounding, and terminates the 1260 years of the Witnesses Sackcloth-Prophesie.

Noah preached 120 years to the Old World, and not a man (that we find) more
than of his own Family, repented at the period of that time; And the Witnesses
Prophesied 1260 years, and men, yet repented not.

Many repented, no doubt, by a feeble, secret, and almost unperceivable, true
repentance, whereby they were saved; but not according to that repentance
promised to the Gospel Church, whereby God might be effectually glorified; And
the rest of the men yet repented not, says the Text.

The Caldeans praised Gods of Gold, and of Silver, of Brass, of Iron, of Wood,
and of Stone, Dan. 5.4. The words, in Type and Antitype, are literally, almost
the same, ver. 23. Rev. 9.20. We shall examine what some of these sins are;
that so the Christian World (for praevisi mali mollior ictus) may foresee and
shun the punishments that must fall for those sins.

The first sin, in the Antitype, is Idolatry: They worshipped Devils, and Idols
of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and of Wood, which neither can see,
etc.

In the Type they were literal Idols, but these, in the Antitype, must be more
Spiritual; because the City of the Antitype-apostasie is said to be a Spiritual
City, Rev. 11.8.

Literal Idols are more congruous to sensual Antichrist, whose sins are more
sensual and literal; But the Idols of Secular and Spiritual Antichrist (that
denominate that City Spiritual) must be more Spiritual Idols.

Some Sects have in them, true Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, and some
(nor do I exclude the Roman nor Greek Churches from being Sects) have (instead
of such witnesses) their Idols of gold, or of silver, or of stone, or of wood:
that is; Men of greater or meaner capacities, and parts to be their blind
Seers. The man Micab took a straggling young Levite to be to him a Father and a
Priest in a way of Idol-worship: So any man (more stupid than Wood or Stone)
will serve some Sects well enough; to be to them a Father and a Priest, or,
indeed, the very Idol of their ignorant admiration: That straggling Levite was
no Ordinance of God in Micab's house; But the man Mitah made him an Idol of
Wood with his own hands, verse. 12.

The words run thus: And the rest of the men which were not killed by these
Plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship Devils and Idols, etc.

That they should not worship Devils. This further shows what the works of
their own hands, and what those Idols are; To wit, deceits; The Serpent (said
Eve) beguiled me: The Devil was a liar and a deceiver from the beginning: And
Men and Professors of these times are greatly pleased in deceiving and being
deceived with the works of their own hands: Their works of Mercy and Justice
(to omit their mistakes in Opinions) are inconform, or but half performances,
and those usually so long delayed, that they damnifie or undo (by fruitless
attendences) the receivers of them: That is; Men, in these times, are
marvelously delighted in deceiving themselves, whiles they imagine themselves
(like Laodicea) to be rich in good works, and do none, but beguile and deceive
themselves, with works inconform, or long delayed half-performances, like
Readiness half-service: They that so worship God, worship, in deed, devils.

The following sins of the impenitent Apostasy (and perhaps of Saints) are
these; Neither repented they of their Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of
their Fornications, nor of their Thefts, verse. 21.

Neither repented they of their Murders. Murders literal were sins of the
Type-Apostasie, and are the sins of Antichrist sensual; But they are more
Spiritual in the Antitype-Mystery of iniquity: Thou have slain (said Nathan to
David) Uriah the Hittite with the Sword of the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12.9.
David did not slay Uriah, nor did Joab flay him, the children of Ammon slew
Uriah; But it was done by David's order and direction to Joab: This was
Spiritual or Mystical Murder, more wicked and deceitful than literal Murder can
be.

Were Nathan now living, he might say to many (if not almost to every man)
something that is like to what he said to David: To some he might say; Thou
have slain (as Cain did) thy brother and thy self by the sword of careless
disregard of his and thy sasety.

To another he might say: Thou have slain (as David did) thy fast friend by the
sword of deceitful dealing.

He might say to very many; Ye have slain the poor with the sword of sordid
tenacity; And, not to a few: Ye have slain the well-deserving with the sword of
inconform rewards.

To some he might say; Ye have slain the injured, and oppressed, by the sword
of long delays, letting them perish or be undone before you went about to
right or relieve them.

He might say to very many; Ye have slain the Witnesses of the Truth by the
sword of slanderous Tongues in the mouths of men of Beliel, their false
accusers: Thus was Christ (that Faithful and True Witness) slain; And by this
means are the Gospel-Witnesses, and the most injured innocent, killed: Pilate
found no fault in Christ, and the Pharisees found no fault in his false
accusers: Very many (and they seeming Religious) resolve, with Pilate, to right
the injured, to relieve the oppressed; But then run to their adversaires and
false accusers, and (like the Pharisees) find no fault in them, for want of due
examination according to Scripture-Rule, Deuteronomy. 19.18. Therefore they justify
their adversaries and false accusers, and (through their forgeries) delay, or
condemn, and ruinate those that are wronged, and the most faithful Witnesses of
the Truth: Thus are Waters turned into Wormwood, Judgment into Gall, Revel.
8.11. This common practice (the practice too often of Saints) plainly discovers a
pusilanimous and feeble levity of mind, or want of judgment in them that follow
it: They pretend, and perhaps, suppose those depravers are Conscientious and
Religious; So the Pharisees thought of themselves, whereas there was but one or
two Wise and Religious men, in deed, in all that Council, by whom our Lord was
crucified, though it might consist of hundreds, all famous for the repute of
Wisdom and strict Religion: For the generality of seeming, strict, and zealous
Professors (if Types must co-indent with their Antitypes) are (like their Types
the Pharisees) neither Wise nor Religious; Few there are like Pilate, that will
not co-incide and capitulate with false accusers; Scarce any like Nicodemus,
that would not consent to the foolish and wicked determinations of that
hypocritical and blind Council: For, As many are called, and few chosen; and,
as many shall strive, and few enter in at the strait Gate; So the seeming
religious and blindly devout are many; But they that are Religious indeed, are
few, and least appear to be what they are.

Lastly, Nathan might now say to several: Thou have slain thy self and thine
with the sword of secular business, Thy servant (said Ahab as the Prophet
implied) was busy here and there, that he let the man go committed to him to
keep: Therefore (said the Lord) shall thy life go for his life, and thy people
for his people: Ahab lost his own life, the life of all his Family and
Posterity, and lost all the people of Israel by a busy catching at some
secular shadow of his own covetous conceit; So, many Professors (and too many
Saints) are so busy about Secular Affairs, that they let go obedience; So
busy for self ends, that they let go Right and Mercy to men, forget both; So
busy about outward Forms, that they let go the Life and Power of Religion, and
thus, miserably slay themselves and others by the sword of Secular and
Spiritual business: This is Spiritual murder, from which the hearts of Men and
Saints are not, but must be turned back.

Thirdly, Nor of their Sorseries. And (to omit the literal, which are many)
what are Spiritual Sorceries? Balaam was partly careful to make the living God
the Oracle of his Counsels, and director of his Actions; was, or seemed to be,
very strict to speak and do only what God commanded, Numb. 22, 38. Chapter 23.12,
26. But he was covetous, and his practices partial, or but in part; And such
services to God joined with covetousness; Also all half performances, and
commixt worshippings of God and Baal; Christ and Belial, or of God and Mammon;
and all haltings betwixt two contrary Practices or Opinions, are Spiritual
Sorceries, and are expressly compared to Witchcraft and Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.22,
23. Because the best works of such Professors, are mixed, Heterogene, or
Lincy-Woolsy, works of deceits, and wicked exemptions from sincere practice and
true obedience.

Fourthly, Nor of their Fornications. Literal Fornications, in sensual
Antichrist are many; But the Fornications of the Mystery of Iniquity (and these
intended in the Text are the same) are more Spiritual; And what are they?

When few or many join in outward-worship, or in any Church-Society to act
Spiritual-filthiness, That Is Spiritual fornication: That is; when such come
together not for the better, but for the worse; Not to be more fruitful, but
more barren in good works; when they meet together (not to edify, but) to
increase strise and ignorance; This and such like conjoynt-practices are
Spiritual fornication.

It is an absurdity in the very (...), Evoco.
name of a true Church; That God should call any people out of the world to
practice covetousness; Or to become Vines bringing forth (if any) fruits for
themselves, for their Proselytes, Co-associates; nothing for others, nor to
further any thing that is profitable or honest: But the Conscript-Church shall
not be defiled with Women, for they are Virgins, Chapter 14.4. That is; Her sacred
company shall abhor the pollutions of this Spiritual filthiness, and be
redeemed, from the Earth, and among men, to God and the Lamb, ver. 3, 4. But
it is contrary to the Nature of a true Church; That she should be called or
redeemed of God from the Earth to follow Earthly things; Or that she should be
redeemed from among men to mind nothing, or to omit good manners, and be
ignorant of them: Such co-adjoynings, as produce these or such like ends, are
Spiritual fornications, and far from the ends of that conscript, incontaminate
Company: But there is no Church (till those first fruits appear) can be free
from gross pollutions of Spiritual fornication, because they have not their
hearts turned back, they yet repented not (says the Text) of their murders,
nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications. Nor,

Fifthly, Of their Thefts And what are they? To diminish or derogate from the
due wo^th or works of any man is Spiritual thievery: Such are all
half-performances, like that of the unjust Steward's, who set down but fifty
measures of Oil, where an hunred were due: And therefore

All witnessing of the truth in words and works (as Pilate did) by halves,
seconded by recidivations or oppositions, are Spiritual thievery, and murderous
thefts, as that in Pilate was.

All careless or willful derogations from the true meaning of the Scriptures,
or from the truth in the Writings of those that rightly unfold them, are
spiritual thievery, and such detractors have all plagues, that can be possible,
denounced against them, Revel. 22.19. And therefore,

To affirm, that no right collection can be made, nor clear conclusion drawn
from Prophetick-Scriptures, is Sacrilegious and Blaspemous Theft, as I shall
further show, in the second pare, in answer to that mistaken Assertion;
Scriptura symbolica non est argumentativa.

Blind Hypocrites will, by no means, believe, that inanimadversive men, that
mind not (hear not, read not) the incomplex Principles of right in itself (and
that is the shame and folly of beastial Professors, be they never so literate or
seeming Religious) must needs be wicked men; But their practice is a continual
derogation from the truth, and their works, at best, but works of darkness and
ignorance, wrought without any Rule of Reason; And therefore must be Spiritual
theft of necessity. For

Thirdly, Ut jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones; Theft is the proper
work of darkness; And Spiritual Theft delights most therein; It often makes the
Truth itself to be a mysterious means to practice Murder, and promote
Robberies; So Doeg (by speaking the truth when he should not, and by not
speaking the whole truth) robbed David of his due repute with Saul, and robbed
the Priests of the Lord of their lives.

A theft like unto this (but much worse) is when Men and Saints (as they
commonly do) raise slanders from shadows, and say; They hear such and such evil
reports from the mouths of other men; That many affirm the same, etc. But
never name who those speakers are, conceal those slanderers, or rather feign
such to be, whereas, in deed, there were never any such speakers, nor such
things spoken; Or, at least, they make it not appear; and De non apparentibus,
and non existentibus eadem ratio: Things that appear not to be, are not in
being in the Eye of Reason and Judgment of Equity: This way of wounding men, is
a most wicked way of lying defamation: Such fictitious slanders did Doeg never
produce against David, or the Priests of the Lord: These (Speluncarum mendacia)
Thefts least perceived (whereby many are robbed of their Lives, ruinated in
their Estates) come out of dark Dens; But, indeed those reporters themselves
(where the first pretended speakers are not produced) are those Robbers and
Thieves that slay others by the Sword of their slanderous tongues.

Ad fabulas credendas facilitas, An easiness to believe lies, or a disposition
apt to derogate (rash censoriousness) is a thievish disposition, and denotes
that such depravers are Spiritual Thieves: Such surreptitious Professors (where
they prevail), are the excision of Mercy and Equity, and supplant all good
Manners, because they steal away the hearts of the Ministers of Justice (as
Absalom did the hearts of Israet) and make them basely subservient to
Sycophants, and to receive and believe lies.

It Is the most deplorable demonstration of base degenerosity in Men, and
chiefly in Magistrates, to suffer themselves to be made miserable preys (so
they seem strict and religious) to Depravers and Hypocrites: Nor was there
(said Jerome) so simple and mean a Scribe that conspired not, etc. But now, we
may rather say; There is no such sordid Pickthank or ignorant depraver, no such
treacherous Ziba, or slavish servant, nor a Lad so silly or illiterate, that is
not sufficiently able to carry away an hundred Captives, and to alienate
(through lying defamations) their Judgments and Affections far from doing right
or showing mercy. And therefore,

Thou shall not run with a multitude to do evil: For he that runs with a
multitude of evil men, is a member of that multitude; So Men and Ministers of
Justice (that suffer themselves to be, in such sort, basely stolen away by
Spiritual Thieves) make, by that means, themselves Thieves.

These (now more than ever increasing) worshippings of Idols, and these
Spiritual Murders and Sorceryes, and Fornications, and Thefts, are the sins of
which Men and Saints have not yet repented; And from which their hearts and
hands must be turned back. But,

Secondly, To what must they be turned? I answer; The Conscript first fruits
shall (as Elijah and John did in Types) Turn the hearts of the Fathers to their
Children, the hearts of Children to their Fathers, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the Just (that is, to do right, and show mercy in a fourfold
conformity) lest God come and smite the Earth with a curse, Malach, 4.6. Luke
1.16, 17. And

Thirdly, What is that curse? or, what are the dangers, if the hearts of Men
and Saints are not turned back from those (now more than ever swelling) sins?

I answer; The Old World hearkened not to Noah's Sackcloth-Prophesie, but
remained inanimadversive, minded nothing, and knew nothing (till the Flood
came) says the Text: Therefore God smote the Earth with a curse, destroyed the
World.

Apostate- Israel hearkened not to Elijah's, and the Prophets
Sackcloth-Prophesie for 1260 days, and the restraint of Rain continued so long:
Had it continued longer, it had cut off Man and Beast; So the
Antitype-Apostasie hearkened not to the Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth for
1260 years, They yet repented not, says the Text: Therefore, The neglected,
and not regarded Witnesses smote the Earth with all plagues, and with (the
plague of all plagues) the restraint of the Rain of Spiritual Graces in the
days of the 1260 years of their Sackcloth-Prophesie; Wherefore, Should not
their hearts be turned back at last, nothing could be expected, but that the
curse threatened should devour the Earth: Therefore has the curse devoured the
Earth, says the Text, Isa. 24.6. The Earth shall reel to and fro like a
drunkard, the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; It shall fall and
not rise again, verse. 9.

Lastly, Babylon the great came in remembrance before God to give unto her the
Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his wrath, Chapter 16.19. The Old Apostate
World was drowned with water; But the Antitype-Apostasie shall be drunk with
the Wine of the fierceness of the wrath of God, Jerem. 25.15, 27, etc.

The Wine of the fierceness of bis wrath.] This is an expression that (a man
would think) could scarcely be expressed, and the plague, thereby threatened, is
the plague of all plagues: From all the plagues, wherewith the
Sackcloth-Wituesses smote the Earth, and principally from this Plague (may all
Men and Saints have great cause to say) good Lord deliver us. Thus we see the
dangers are most dreadful and superabundant, if the hearts of Men and Saints
are not turned back from the sins aforesaid: But, they may say, we see the
dangers sufficiently, and that the Plagues are (like the curse laid upon Cain)
greater than we can, possibly, bear; But, where is our safety? wherein consists
our remedy? I answer,

Fourthly, The safeties of Men and Saints consist in having their hearts turned
back from those sins aforesaid, in getting (like those Harpers) the Harps of
God, in learning their Song, not in deceit, but in deed, and in flying from
Sinai to Mount Sion, as Lot to Zoar: For those Harpers shall be the
first fruits redeemed from the Earth, and from among men, Chapter 14.3, 4. to wit;
from those sius aforesaid, and from those dreadful Plagues they produce; For
they shall not be defiled with Women, verse. 4. and therefore shall not worship
Idols, nor act Spiritual Fornications: Their worship shall be according to the
sincerity of the simplicity in Christ, and the practice of it wrought in a
fore-fold conformity of Truth, contrary to the prevaricatory multiplicity of
Antichrist in deceitful pretenses, delays, and half-performances: Such shall be
the fruits of those first fruits in Antitype- Ston, where safeties shall clothe
the conscript-Church, as dangers compassed her about before in the
Spiritual-Wilderness: There shall, in no wise, enter any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination or makes a lie, Chapter 21.27. There shall
be no faithless dealers, nor false accusers; Therefore there shall be no more
curse, Chapter 22.3. There, a River of Water of Life shall refresh the City of God,
and the Tree of Life shall afford food for her Inhabitants; And the leaves of
that Tree shall be to heal the Nations: That is, To turn their hearts back,
that so they may be safe, Chapter 22.1, 2. Turn us again, O God, and we shall be
saved, Psalm. 80.3. Turn us again, O God of Hosts, and we shall be saved, verse.
7. Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, and we shall be saved, verse. 19. This
petition (we see) is three times expressed in the same Psalm; And this assertion
(we shall be saved) is thrice annexed to that Prayer: This Prayer is the Prayer
of these times: I wish with all my heart, That all Ministers, and Magistrates,
Men, and Saints would make this seasonable Formula the Pattern of their Prayers
in this juncture of time, and (praying continually) say, Turn us again, O God,
from halting betwixt halves in our Opinions and Practices, and we shall be
saved. Turn us again, O God, from our disloyal revoltings from Faith and good
Manners, and from affecting a confident, fruitless, dead, or dying Faith: Turn
us again, O God, from the constant Errors of our hearts, and our contented
ignorance of thy ways, and we shall be saved: Turn us again, O God of Hosts,
from worshipping the works of our own hands (Literal and Spiritual Idols of
Gold, etc.) and from our Spiritual and Literal Murders, and Sorceries, and
Fornications and Thefts; And we shall be saved: For, As there is no Name, but
the Name of Jesus, under Heaven, by which we can be saved; So there is no other
way or means on Earth, by which Men, Saints, Sects, and all Nations can be
safe, but by turning from Sinai to Sion; from those sins to serve the living
God, and stand with the Lamb: He is and shall be the Rock of safeties to all
Ages; and, to follow his perfect Pattern of true Christian practice in a
fourfold conformity is (as the Fruit only, keeps the Tree from being cursed)
the only outward means thereunto.

But here I must (partly by constraint) conclude this first Part, because many
that promised to futher me are slack in persormance, and not a few fallen off
(like Demas) through covetousness, whereby I am betrayed into the hands of
deceitful men, drawn into some debt, and, thereby, have suffered long
imprisonment; Haecreferunt tantos Secula Fabricios.

Paul was a day and a night in the deep; But my dangers are most from the
multiplicious dasnings of shallow waters: Shallow Professors (men of busy
ignorance, some literate, some illiterate) have most resisted me, and retarded
this Treatise: Such men (that cannot read it, or not understand what they read)
have done me (as the Copper-Smith did to the Apostle) the most harm by their
ignorant defaming of Me and It: Wherefore, I humbly request the truly Learned
and Judicious (if they find we deserve it) to suffer Me and It to Anchor in the
safe Harbor of their Candid Favor and Protection.

Lastly, A third cause, compelling me, is the confident opposition of very many
Learned and Religlous Divines. (some of whom are my intimate friends) who
maintain that the Texts in the 17th and 18th Chapters of the Apocalypse hold
forth Papal Rome only, and not Imperial, nor Primitive Rome Apostate in
Manners, contrary to what I, perhaps, have fully proved in this Treatise, and
Primitive Fathers affirm: To wit, that those Texts hold forth Heathen and
Imperial Rome, and likewise Christian Primitive Rome Apostate in Manners; but
not Papal Rome, otherwise than by a Prophetick-adumbration; which Tenent, many
Doctors and Divines of Note count a dangerous Error in my Treatise, and, in Me,
a great mistake, and (representing Me and It in such manner to many) draw back
their hands from furthering me, to my great damage: Wherefore (not being able
to stand against the violent Cataracts of their manifold Erroneous
contradictions) I cannot proceed, but must set all aside to refel, effectually,
their confident, and, indeed dangerous Errors: I shall therefore Intersert a
short Answer to their Objections, betwixt this first, and the second Part of
this Treatise.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 64. line 30. for Paganorian, read Pagano-arrian. p. 155. l. ult. read Qui
jacet in terra. p. 166. l. 23. read, in them. p. 187. l. 31. read, of this, p.
233. l. 13. read, Subjects. p. 239. l. 13. read, by these. p. 168. l. 13. read
hominum.


