THE FRENCH CHARITY:

WRITTEN In French by an English Gentleman, upon occasion of Prince Harcourt's
coming into ENGLAND;

And translated into English by F. S. J. E.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for William Shears, at the Bible in S. Paul's Churchyard,
Anno 1655.

THE FRENCH CHARITY.
ALthough we see that natural causes produce sometimes contrary effects, that
the Sun which draws up the Clouds can also scatter them, that the same Wind
both lights and blow's out the taper, that Vipers serve for wholesome
medicaments, and Scorpions carry about them an Antidote to their own poison: it
is not so nevertheless in moral and politic affairs, wherein that which is
once ill, is always accounted such; from whence is begot in us that quality
which we call Experience, whereby wise men are accustomed to judge of present
and future actions by those that are past. Which is the foundation whereupon
all Monarchies and Republics have established the Maxims of their subsistence,
and found out both what they ought to follow and what to avoid.

The Charity which France has testified to pacify our differences is so great
that it is become incredible, so unseasonable that it is suspected, and so
contrary to their former proceedings that it is quite otherwise understood.
Philosophers say, we cannot pass from one extremity to another without some
mean; I cannot see by what steps they are come to this perfect goodness, nor
what good Genius can have made them in an instant so good friends of such
dangerous neighbors to us. I will pass my censure upon nothing, yet let me
have the liberty to judge of all. I find so great a wonder in this change, that
I find a conflict in my self to believe it. It is no common marvel, that those
who have for so long a time beheld all Europe in a flame, and could not be
moved by the blood and destruction of so many people to cast thereon one drop
of water, should now have their bowels so tender as to compassionate the
dissensions arising in a corner of the world which has always bin fat all to
them; That those who have made it their chiefest interest to divide us, should
now make it their glory to reunite us; That those who place their rest in our
troubles, should now apply their cares for our repose; and that after they have
cast us down headlong, they should reach us a plank for to come ashore. Let the
wise Reader here (whilst I determine nothing) allow me at least a little
distrust; it is the Mother of Safety. The Trojans, who could not be overcome by
Arms, perish't by a pledge of peace. All the French civilityes are fair and
good; but in the bottom Quicquid id est, timeo Gallos, and dona ferentes.

Let us see what reasons can oblige them to interest themselves so passionately
in our agreement. Is it Religion? surely no; for that which they profess is
contrary to that of this Kingdom; and the little Charity they have for their
own, ought not to persuade us that they have much for ours. Is it for the
inclination they have to peace? surely no; for if they esteemed it a benefit,
they would seek it first for themselves. It is perhaps for an acknowledgement
of their obligations to us in the late wars, and for the assistance we gave
to those of Rochel. I, this would be truly Christian indeed, to render us good
for evil. They will say that they are the bands of blood and parentage, which
bind them to the Queen; and yet they have let the Mother beg her subsistence
and retreat among strangers, which she could not find with them, and having
beheld her without pity and succor in her greatest extremities, they advise
to offer her a remedy upon the declining of her ill. But if this be the reason
of their admittance, I conceive them no lawful nor indifferent Mediators,
since they are so much concerned in one of the parties. They will whisper us in
the ear, that the design is to pacify us, and to engage us in a league with
them against the Spaniard; although at the same time they design Ambassadors
for Munster to endeavor a peace with him. O, we should wrong them very much to
believe it, though they might seem in an humor to desire it of us; They are
too gallant spirited to pretend it, they know that we are better advised then
to serve them to pull their Chestnut out of the fire; that a body recovering
health from a long sickness ought not to expose it self to a violent
agitation; that the State will find it self laden with debts, and the Subject
exhausted by Contributions; that we ought to prefer the evident profit of
traffic before the uncertain vanity of a conquest; that Iealousies being not
yet removed, nor aemulations suppressed, all kind of arming would be suspected by
the State, fearing least some under pretense of a foreign war might study
private revenge, or the oppression of the public liberty; and that in the end
it will be our gain to see them deal with Spain, and to make our advantage of
their troubles, or not to meddle at all with them, unless by adding secretly
(according to the revolution of affairs) a little weight to them that shall be
found the lighter. If then it be none of these motives, it remains that it must
be either Generosity, or deceit. O Generosity (that have so long since
withdrawn thy self to heaven, there to keep company with the fair Astraea, or
rather, who were buried in France in the Sepulcher of Monsieur Gonin) is it
possible that thou should be risen again, or that France should have recalled
thee with her exiles since the death of her King; and that the first labor she
should put thee to should be in favor of England, against whom but few days
since she showed such violent resentments, for an offense received by a
pretended violation of the treaties which had past between us? Truly if it be
she, we must reverence her with extraordinary respects; but before we give her
the Honors due unto her, we must know her, for fear of Idolatry in adoring
her masque for her self, or embracing a cloud in stead of a Goddess. Let us
give a thrust with our lance into the Trojan horse, to see if there be no
ambush within.

In walking lately with some French Gentlemen (as this nation is free enough of
their discourse) a word escaped from one of the company without making
reflection (as I think) of what Country I was, That amongst their Prophets
there was one which said, That the Conquest of England was promised to their
young King. This thought cast into the air though inconsideratly, seemed to me
very considerable; and having given me an occasion to reflect upon all things
both past and present, it served me as a light to guide me in the obscurity of
this Labyrinth, upon which before I had reasoned but superficially. From thence
being returned to my lodging, I opened accidentally a book of Monsieur de
Rohan, entitled The interest of the Princes of Christendom, and I fell
presently upon a passage where he said, That one of the surest ways to make
ones self Master of a State, is to interpose and make himself arbiter of its
differences. I had no need of any other Oedipus to expound to me the riddle of
the Prophesy, these first motives of suspicion having cast me into more
profound thoughts, I revolved in my mind how France had managed the whole
business, both before and since the beginning of our troubles, and weighed all
the circumstances of this Embassage. Why such a solemn Embassage in a time
when all things seem most exasperated and furthest from accommodation? Why then
not sooner, while differences were not yet irreconcilable between the two
parties? Why such a warlike Prince, who is not experienced in the affairs of
this Kingdom, to manage a negotiation of a peace the most nice and intricate
that the world at this time affords? Why at the same time levying of Soldiers
in Normandy, when all the other troops are in their quarters? Why therefore
should they supply one of the parties with money, when they come to act the
persons of mediators; if not to cast wood and oil into the flame? Why at the
same time an Agent in Scotland, who propounds to them openly a League with
France? Why begin they only to turn their cares upon England, when they are
upon the point of concluding a peace with Spain? May not we well judge that it
is to prepare themselves for a new employment? since they themselves confess
that their boiling and unquiet temper has need of continual exercise, and
that the only means to prevent troubles at home, is continually to furnish
them with matter whereupon to evacuate their choler abroad. Why does only
France afford us this so sudden and unexpected Charity, after all the fresh
wounds which bleed yet among them because of the expulsion of the Capuchins,
after the continual cares she has taken for so many years to lay the
foundation of our troubles by the secret negotiations of the Marquis of
Blainville, by the intriques of the Cardinal of Richelieu with Buckingham, by
the long plots in Scotland, and by the open solicitations of the Marquis de la
Fert? by all which they sometimes incited the Kings ministers to make him
independent and absolute, offering to that purpose their assistance, and anon
they solicited the States to shake off the yoke of servitude, finally they
transformed themselves into a thousand different shapes, till having plunged us
deep enough in the gulf, they then call back their Embassage, to give in
appearance some satisfaction to the King, but in truth because his commission
was expired. May not we well conclude from all this, that they will now reap
the fruits they have so carefully sown and cultivated amongst us? From these
considerations falling insensibly on those of England, what need (said I in my
self) have we of the intermeddling of strangers? are they more versed in our
interests then our selves? can they afford more expedients? are they more
sensible of our miseries then those that suffer them? Is it to exhort us, or to
constrain us? the first is superfluous; the second dangerous. It must needs be
that either in the one case they think to go beyond us in wit, or in the other
to master us by force. If peace be profitable for us, have we any need either
of a Master to make us know our advantage, or of an Orator to persuade us to
it? If it be hurtful to us, we ought to give them thanks for their advice, but
follow that which is better. If the peace be feasible, why should we leave the
glory of it to others? if impossible, why loose time in making vain
propositions? why should we acquaint strong and ambitious neighbors, and trust
the Philistines with the secret of our force? Must England, that has in times
past compelled France to purchase peace, be now constrained to beg it of her?
that one of the most considerable and flourishing Monarchies of the world
should serve for matter of sport to the vanity of the French, and be the first
upon whom they exercise the Title they give themselves of being Arbiters of
Christendom? What Counsel then shall we follow in this encounter? That of good
and wise Nature, who having separated us from all other Nations by a vast and
deep trench, silently teaches us, that the principle of our subsistence is in
our selves, and that we ought not to submit our government to the arbitrament
of others.

FINIS.

