THE CONDEMNATION OF Monsieur Du PIN HIS HISTORY OF Ecclesiastical Authors, BY
THE ARCHBISHOP of PARIS; Together with his own RETRACTATION.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom and William Keblewhite, at the East End of
St. Paul's, and at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TO offer any Account of the History of Ecclesiastical Writers by Monsieur Du
Pin, or to give a Character of it, would be Labor to no purpose, seeing it is
so well known here by the accurate Translation of it which has been Published.

Monsieur Du Pin's Performance in that Work, as well as Undertaking, did at
first receive the Approbation of many Learned Roman Catholics, as they have
still the general Applause amongst Protestants: But the Esteem, which the
latter had of this Work, tended to the Prejudice of the Author, raising
Jealousies in those of his own Communion, as if he intended to betray the
Church, and to weaken the Foundation upon which it pretends to stand. What
chiefly recommended him to Protestants was his Ingenuity, in declaring both his
own Sentiments, and the Sentiments of the Fathers. But this very Thing
displeased the Heads of his own Church, where even Truth it self is not allowed
to be spoken but when it may serve their Interest. Nay the more Moderate
charged him with Imprudence in delivering Truths very unseasonably: for while
they were extirpating the Opinions of Protestants as damnable Heresy, it was
no ways proper to Publish a Book which yields great Advantage to Protestants,
and which shows that their Sentiments are more agreeable to what the Primitive
Church and Fathers held, than the present Tenets and Practices of the Church of
Rome. These Prejudices and Objections were managed by some who did bear
Monsieur Du Pin a Personal Grudge, and by this means he was complained upon
publicly, and a public Censure of his Person and Books was demanded, which
the Circumstances of the French King also required and made necessary, that
thereby he might soften the Pope, dispose him to a Reconciliation, and either
engage him to side with France against the Confederate Princes, or at least to
abide Neutral. For it was generally believed, that that Confederacy did first
spring from the Pope, who suspected that the French King designed to throw off
his Authority, and who was highly displeased with him upon the account of those
Propositions relating to the Papal Jurisdiction, which the Assembly of the
Clergy had Concerted and Published, Anno 1682.

Thus Policy and Interest required the Condemnation of Monsieur Du Pin's Works,
but some desired to save himself, which could be done no other ways than by a
Retractation which he long struggled with, but at last was prevailed upon by
the Example of the Gallican Church, which (it is said) the Archbishop of Paris
urged upon him very much, saying, that it was no shame for him, a single
Person, to make a Retractation, when a whole Church had done it, to prevent the
inconveniences which might otherwise follow.

The Translator of these Works of Monsieur Du Pin, in his Preface to the Third
Volume takes notice of the Condemnation and Censure that were past upon them,
but also says that he was not able to procure either a Copy of them or of Du
Pin's Retractation, which has moved me to Publish them, believing that they
will be acceptable to the Curious, and useful to those who have bought the
Books themselves, which are not to be the less esteemed because they are thus
Condemned. And notwithstanding the Author's Retractation it does appear, that
the Protestants have Antiquity on their side: for as the Retraction was not
voluntary, but forced from Du Pin, so it does not flatly contradict any
material point in his Books, but is merely to be considered as a Prudent and
Political Defense to save himself from the Consequences of being judged guilty
of what was esteemed Heresy.

Having said that Monsier Du Pin was prevailed upon to make his Retraction by
the example of the French Church, who, considering the present Circumstances of
their King, did also Retract the abovementioned Propositions of the Assembly
1682. which were so offensive to the Pope. I Judge it will not be unacceptable
to set down their Retraction, which I suppose is not not very common, and it is
as follows.

Ad pedes Sanctitatis Vestrae provoluti, declaramus nos vehementer, and supra
id quod dici potest, ex cord dolor, super rebus gestis in Comitiis praefatis,
quae Sanctitati vestrae ejusque Decessoribus valde displicuerunt, ac proinde
quod ibidem [circa] Ecclesiasticam ac pontificiam authoritatem, sive in
praejudicium Ecclesiarum, quod a mente nostra prorsus alienum esse testamur,
deliberatum decretumque [videri potest] pro non decreto and non deliberato
habemus and habendum esse declaramus. The Pope was not pleased with the words
circa and videri potest, he judged them too soft and general, and therefore
would not accept of this submission of the Clergy of France until they were
changed into contra and fuit.

It is to be remembered that the Quotations in the following Retractation are
marked according to the English Translation of Du Pin's Works. The Remarks
mentioned by Du Pin are Critical Observations upon his History, which were
never Translated, nor yet his Answers to them, and therefore the Quotations out
of them are according to the Paris Edition of them.

An ORDINANCE of my Lord the Archbishop of PARIS; containing the Condemnation
of a BOOK having this Title; A New Library of Ecclesiastical Authors, etc.
By Monsieur ELLIES Du PIN, Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris. Printed
by Andrew Pralard.
FRANCIS, by the Grace of GOD, and of the Holy Apostolic See, Archbishop of
Paris, Duke and Peer of France, Commander of the King's Orders, Provisor of the
House of Sorbonne, and Superior of that of Navarre;
to all who shall see these present Letters, Salvation and Blessing.
It being the Chief Duty of the Pastors of the Church to keep the Doctrine
wherewith they are entrusted, such as they have received from the Apostles,
whose Successors they are, and not to suffer any Person to make any Change in
it without due Censure; and as Tradition is the Channel which should convey to
us by an uninterrupted Course, the Catholic Doctrines in all their Purity, so
there should be a singular Regard had to Books and Authors which pretend to
represent the same entire, deriving it from the Source, and tracing it from Age
to Age, even to the present Times. We have therefore judged that we ought to
apply our selves carefully to the Examination of a Book printed some Years
since in this City, under the Title of a New Library of Ecclesiastic Authors,
etc. of which there has already appeared Five Tomes, one after another,
divided into seven Volumes. The design of this Work being to treat of all the
Ecclesiastic Authors, which have been since the first Establishment of the
Church, to Publish what they have Written, and to give an Account of their
Character and Merit, which the Author professes to have been performed for the
first Eight Ages in those Volumes which he has already published, intending to
continue those which follow until the present. And we are so much the more
concerned to enter upon a narrow Enquiry into this Book; having understood that
many Persons do find these first Tomes full of considerable Faults. That
nothing in this Affair might pass without great Deliberation and a perfect
Scrutiny, we caused this Book to be read by four Doctors in Divinity of the
Faculty of Paris, who did read all those Tomes, each apart by himself, and then
conferred a long time together about them, of all which they have given us an
exact Account in many Meetings. We have also our self examined this Book with
all possible Attention, and have found that this Work is so far from being
useful to the Church, that it would be on the contrary very prejudicial, if we
should allow the Sale of it. Moreover, we desired to hear the Author's
Defenses, that so we might know his Sentiments and present Disposition, for
which Cause we have granted him as favorable an Audience as was possible, for
several Meetings, in the presence of the same Doctors: And as we have found in
him an entire Submission to all we should ordain, having put into our Hands a
Writing signed by himself, which is annexed to these Presents, in which of the
Twelve Articles which we judged chiefly censurable in his Book, he does retract
many Propositions advanced by him, and testifies in general, that he submits
himself to our Judgment without any restriction or reservation. And as this
absolute Submission (without which we could not think his Writings sufficient,
there being in his Book many Propositions censurable, which he does not touch
in his Writing) secures his Religion, and obliges us to spare his Person; so
there remains nothing more to be done, but to give Sentence against the
Doctrine of his Book. We could have wished that this Work might have deserved
only a limited Censure, and so would have been satisfied to have marked out of
the Author such Changes as he should make for saving the rest of it, without
proceeding to a full Condemnation, and to an entire Suppression of it. But the
Evil being almost spread through the whole Work, we could not dispense with the
Condemnation of this Book, but are obliged to prohibit the Reading it to all
Persons, whom it has pleased God to submit to our Conduct, for preventing the
Prejudice which it might otherwise do amongst People, if such a stop were not
put to it, that the Church may receive no more Scandal, nor Heretics get any
Occasion of drawing Advantage against the Catholics. For these Reasons after
having implored the Grace of the Holy Ghost to beseech his Guidance of us, we
have Condemned, and do Condemn the Book, entitled, A New Library of
Ecclesiastic Authors, etc. by Monsieur Ellies Du Pin, Doctor of the Faculty of
Paris, etc. as containing many Propositions false, rash, scandalous, offensive
to pious Ears, tending to weaken the Proofs of Tradition about the Authority of
the Canonical Books, and many other Articles of Faith; Injurious to Ecumenical
Councils, to the Holy Apostolical See, and to the Fathers of the Church;
Erroneous and leading to several Heresies. We most strictly, and under the
Penalties prescribed by Law, forbid the Reading of this Book to all our
Diocesans of either Sex, or the causing or advising it to be Read by any
Person, or having it in their Houses, or any other where; enjoining them under
the same Censures, to return them to us as soon as possible. So we command the
Officers of our Ecclesiastical Court to see the Execution of our present
Ordinance to cause it to be affixed upon the Church Doors of this City and its
Suburbs, and in every other place where it shall be needful; and also to
require, if it be necessary, the Authority of the Magistrates, of whose Zeal
and Piety we have had Proofs on other Occasions, to stop by all due and
reasonable Methods, the Impression, Sale and Vending hereof.

Given at Paris in our Archiepiscopal Palace the 16 th. of April, the Year One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninty and Three. Signed, Francis Archbishop of Paris, and
a little lower, by my Lord Wilbault.

Here follows the Writing mentioned in this Ordinance, signed by the Author
of the New Library, which he gave into the hands of my Lord the Archbishop.

Declaration of Monsieur Du Pin.
THere being some Persons, who after the Reading of my Books of the New Library
of Ecclesiastic Authors, have testified that they were offended at many
places; and those Complaints being carried to my Lord Archbishop of Paris; who,
in Quality of proper Judge of Doctrine, has taken them into his Consideration,
and named some Doctors to search narrowly into this Work, and make a Relation
of the same to him. I do my self acknowledge by a serious Reflection on their
Observations that there has indeed dropped from me some Expressions which are
hard, obscure, and that might give some Offense to the Reader; some also which
may not be true, and which, against my Design, may be brought against the
Truth, for which I shall always have a Respect, and which I do believe, ought
to be maintained in the Church.

This obliges me, seeing my Lord the Archbishop has had the Goodness to
discover the same to me in three different Assemblies, in which I have not been
less touched with his Goodness and Paternal Charity, than instructed by his
great and clear Light, in the presence of the Doctors to whom he committed the
Examination of my Book, and with whom he himself did Examine it: I say, this
obliges me to give, to what is obscure in that Work, the Illustrations which
he has judged, and which I may self have perceived necessary, to mollify the
Expressions which are too hard, and to make an Authentic Declaration
concerning those which may bear an Ill Sense, that it may appear that my
Sentiments are Orthodox, and that I have transgressed only by inadvertency, not
sufficienly considering the Terms used, nor the Consequences which might be
drawn from them.

To keepthe same Order which my Lord the Archbishop himself observed, when he
required an Account of all these Places.

I. I do first acknowledge, as I have always owned for Sacred and Canonical
Books, all those which are contained in the Canon of the Council of Trent,
Sess. 4. in all their Parts. I am persuaded that they were all written by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; that it is not lawful in any wise to doubt of
their Canonicalness, after the Decision of the Church; and though some were not
received as Canonical at first by some particular Churches, it is nevertheless
true that they were owned in the first Ages of the Church, for Books of Holy
Scripture, and quoted as such by many Fathers. Therefore these indefinite
Expressions in my Book, The Ancient Christians followed the Jewish Canon in the
Books of the Old Testament (Prel. Dissert. p. 27.) they did not own any other
Canonical Books of the Old Testament, but those which were in the Canon of the
Jews, Tom. 1. p. 181. ought not to be understood generally of all Churches, nor
of all the Fathers in the Three first Centuries. My Intention being only, though
my Terms seem more general, to distinguish the Books which have been always
received as Canonical through all Churches, and of which there was never any
Ground to doubt in any Church, called for this cause Proto-Canonical, from
those who have not always been received as such through all the Churches, and
of whose Canonicalness some have doubted, named therefore Deutero Canonical.

I did think that I might hold with Sixtus Senensis, that the Canonicalness of
the six last Chapters of Esther might be called in question, and that I might
say with him, that it was an Addition to the Book of Esther, not comprehended
in the Canon of the Council of Trent. But seeing they have convinced me, that
we ought not to apply this Solution to the precise Terms of the Council, which
admits all these Books contained in its Catalogue for Canonical, both in whole,
and in all their Parts, as they have been in use to be read in the Catholic
Church; Libros integros cum omnibus suis partibus prout in Ecclesia legi
Catholici consueverunt. I have therefore changed my Sentiment, and do now own
them for Canonical, and so much the rather, because the Church has taken out
of them Epistles and Prayers to be said in its Office; and Origin, St.
Augustine, St. Jerome, and other Fathers do quote Passages out of them. The most
part of the Reasons which I formerly brought, do only prove that these Chapters
have another Author than the rest of the Book of Esther, except as to some
apparent Contradictions in Chronology or History which may be easily reconciled.

II. As to the second Article which concerns Tradition, of which the Fathers
are Witnesses, and their Writings the Channel by which it is conveyed to us. I
confess that I have forsaken some Fathers in Points of Faith, in which I ought
to have defended them, as St. Justin and St. Irenaeus, concerning the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Eternal Punishments of the damned, because of
two difficult Passages which ought to be explained by a great many others,
where they do acknowledge the Immortality of the Soul, and the Eternal
Punishments of the damned, as I have remarked of St. Justin in the Note x, p.
54 by quoting the Passages of this Father, where he calls the Punishments of
the damned, Eternal, opposing this word Eternal to the Punishments which should
once have an end: And as we can prove from St. Irenaeus by many of his
Passages, and particularly by that of the 47th. Chapter of the Third Book,
where he says, That the Punishment of those who believe not the Gospel, is not
only Temporal but also Eternal; non solum temporalis sed and aeterna. I have
not ascribed the same Sentiment to St. Hilary, nor yet to St. Cyril; for when I
said that St. Hilary asserted, that the wicked should be annihilated by the
Fire of Hell, Tom. 2. p. 76. This, as this Father says, is not that they
should be totally annihilated, but that they are reduced to an Estate which
approaches to nothing; non in nihilum dissoluti, sed in inane ac leve
aridumque protriti. And as to St. Cyril, I confess, that by a mistake, I have
slipped into the Version of his Passage, the Name of Jesus Christ instead of that
of God, translating the Soul is immortal because of Jesus Christ who gave it
immortality, where it should be translated, because of God who gave it
immortality; but I had no intention to ascribe to him by this, any Error
concerning the Immortality of the Soul.

As to Original Sin, I acknowledge it is a Doctrine of Faith which has always
been believed in the Church, it is a Truth of which none shall find that I ever
doubted, but when I asserted, that St. Cyprian was the first that had spoken
very clearly of it, Tom. 1. p. 142. that the Fathers of the three first Ages
seem not to be all agreed, whether Children were born in sin and worthy of
damnation, p. 180. I did not pretend by this, to deny that the first Fathers
did own it, but I intended only that they had not spoke so clearly of it as St.
Cyprian. However, because this may be brought against the Tradition of this
Doctrine, and that moreover I have found that St. Justin, St. Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and Origin, do speak very clearly of Original Sin; I do declare
that I will not maintain these Propofitions, nor insist upon the Answers which
I have given to the Passages of these Authors, to prove that they did not teach
Original Sin so clearly as St. Cyprian. I acknowledge also, that St. Chrysostom
believed Original Sin, even as St. Augustine has explained it since, excepting
the Punishment of Sense for Children dead without Baptism, and that he has not
made this Sin consist in the inclination to Evil only, but also in the Guilt
which is the Principle of it. In this Sense is to be understood what I have
said of the Agreement of his Opinion with that of Divines (Tom. 3. Part. I. p.
35.) which I would not oppose to that of St. Augustine as to the main, but only
as to the way of speaking; and as to that Punishment of Sense inflicted on
Children dead without Baptism; I would have it acknowledged, that these Two
Fathers are entirely agreed as to the main Point of Doctrine, and that both of
them taught, that Children were born in Sin, and that they were purged of it by
Baptism.

I acknowledge that the Name of the Mother of God, which the Church gives to
the Virgin, is of Apostolical Tradition, and that it is not only an Expression
Innocent, but Sacred in all times of the Church, and that not only we may, but
also that we ought to call the Virgin the Mother of God, seeing she is so
really; and wherever I have used the Term Innocent upon the Occasion of this
Name of the Mother of God; I have not intended that it had no more but this
Quality, but designed to show how far the Obstinacy and Error of Nestorius
reached, who denied, not only that we ought to use this expression, but even
also that we might do it lawfully.

I do profess to own the Doctrine of Purgatory as it is held in the Church, and
as it has been defined in the Councils of Florence and Trent, and that it is a
Tenet well established upon the Doctrines of the Fathers of the three first
Ages, and so it must not be said Universally, as I have done in my Answer to
the Remarks, P. 61 and 64. that we find nothing of it positively in the Fathers
of the first three Ages, and that they have not taught, by their Writings, the
Doctrine of Purgatory as we have it now. Expressions which I only designed in
reference to some Circumstances of Purgatory differently explained by Divines,
and which should not prejudice the Faith of the Church, nor the Substance of
the Doctrine Defined in the Council of Trent, disowning whatsoever other Sense
may be put upon it.

What I have said in the Answer to the Remarks, P. 144. of the New System which
St. Augustine formed about Grace and Predestination, ought to be understood only
of the manner how Grace operateth by it self, and of the free Predestination
for Glory, and of some other Questions which are still debated amongst
Catholic Divines, about which the Church has determined nothing; and not of
the necessity of Grace, which I have acknowledged always to have been believed
in the Church, Ibid. P. 145. And in the abridgment of the Doctrine of the three
first Ages. It is true, I have said in one place that St. Cyprian is the first
who spoke very clearly of the necessity of the Grace of Jesus Christ; but I
have not pretended that others did not speak clearly of it, seeing I my self
have remarked, when speaking of the Works of St. Justin, St. Irenoeus, St.
Clement, and many other Fathers, that they taught it. I therefore only intended
to say that St. Cyprian spoke of it more strongly and more frequently than any
other.

When relating the Sentiments of the Semipelagians, I did not sufficiently
distinguish their Errors, from some Catholic Truths, which they also Taught,
such as the Death of Jesus Christ for the Salvation of all Men, I am therefore
obliged to advertise that I never intended to confound the one with the other.
It has also happened in relating diverse Propositions of St. Augustine, that I
have sometimes used Terms, which takenstrictly might lead to Error, as taking
free and voluntary for the same thing, and opposing only the necessity of
constraint to liberty; which is very far from my Thoughts, my design being to
keep by the Definition of the Church, and the Papal Constitutions received by
it.

I acknowledge I was deceived when I said, That commonly in the three first
Ages, they did not give the name of Altar to the Sacred Table, upon which they
Celebrated the Eucharist.

I believe concerning the Sacrament of Penance, That in the Ancient Church they
distinguished three sorts of Sins; Crimes great, heinous, and known subjected
to Public Penance; Sins Venial and very light, which may be remitted by
inward Repentance alone; and Sins Mortal less heinous than the first, because
Secret, which yet it is necessary to bring under the Discipline of the Church,
without which the Remission of a Mortal sin cannot be obtained; for Confession
and Absolution are of Divine Institution, and have always been believed
necessary for the Remission of all Mortal Sins. So that I disown all the
Consequences and contrary Instances, which may be drawn from what I have said
of Public and daily Repentance, Tom. 3. Part 1. Part 2. Tom 2. and when I have
said Tom. 5. p. 9. That Confession of all sorts of Sins was a Pious Practice,
very common amongst Christians in the sixth Age. I do not pretend thereby that
it was not in use before for Venial Sins also, but only that the Confessions of
these Sins were at that time become more frequent than formerly.

I acknowledge all that is contained in the seventh Canon of the twenty fourth
Session of the Council of Trent, and even as it is distinguished there: that is
to say, the Sentence which Anathematizes those who believe the Church Errs in
the Point of the indissolubility of Marriage as an Article of Faith; and that
Marriage cannot be so dissolved, even in the case of Adultery, as that it
should be lawful for either Party to Marry whilst the other is living, as being
a Doctrine received in the Church from the beginning, and which agrees with the
Doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles. And tho there be some Divines, who
from the observation of Palavicin, upon the Remonstrance of the Venetian
Ambassadors, occasioned by the Greeks, to the Council, while they were forming
this Article, do believe that what is said in the Canon, That the Church has
taught, and does teach, agreeably to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and of the
Apostle concerning the indissolubility of Marriage even in the Case of
Adultery, is not an Article of Faith, yet I think my self obliged to follow
what the Council said. And tho it may be thought that I have spoke against it,
Tom. 1. p. 182. in my Answer to the Remarks, p. 71. and in many other places,
yet I do declare that I had no design of denying that this Doctrine was
Evangelical and Apostolical, but only to observe, that some did practice
contrary thereunto; and if I were to handle this matter over again, I should
apply my self as much to prove this Sentiment as I have seemed to neglect it.

When I bring in Jobius the Monk, speaking of the difference of the Procession
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and saying, Tom. 4. p. 37. That the one is
called the Son, and the other the Holy Ghost, because such has been the custom,
and that Men do express as they can the differences of the Divine Persons, tho
they do not comprehend them, which Sentiment I have commended. I had no design
to lay that difference merely upon our way of speaking and thinking, as if
there was not a very real one, and altogether independent from our Thoughts and
Expressions, betwixt the Generation of the Word and the Procession of the Holy
Ghost; the first of which is truly a Generation, and the other is not, but only
the mind of Man can neither conceive nor imagine wherein it consists.

I had no Reason to commend that of Socrates as a judicious Observation, when
he says, that the Question About the day of the Celebration of Easter was of
small Consequence, seeing the Church has made it a Capital Head of Discipline.

III. As to the third Head which concerns Councils, I do protest that I have
always had in my Heart a sincere and true respect, such as every Catholic
ought to have, for Councils, and I have considered the Decrees of General
Councils, in Matters of Doctrine, as Articles of Faith. I have always
acknowledged the advantage, and also on some occasions the necessity of
assembling them; being persuaded that this is the most proper and most
effectual means, and sometimes also necessary to suppress Error, to establish
the Catholic Doctrine, and to remedy the disorders and abuses which the Enemies
of the Church would introduce into the world. Thus, Councils in themselves must
always have a good end, and produce good effects: but it happens sometimes
through the malice of Men, and the obstinacy of Heretics, that they do not
presently give Peace, but Debates continue, and the Enemies of the Church
oppose their Violence and Error to Justice and Truth, which nevertheless has
always the Victory in the end, by the particular Protection which God gives to
his Church, against which the Gates of Hell, that is to say, Heresies and
Errors shall never prevail. It is in this Sense that I would have understood
what I have said, viz. That it is very seldom that General Councils, held upon
matters of Faith, procure the Churches Peace by their determination. Which is
not, because Councils are not a means of Peace, or do not always espouse the
Party which they ought to take, but it is through the blindness and fury of
Heretics, who, being incensed and confounded to see themselves justly
condemned, do their utmost endeavors against the Orthodox Doctrine Established
infallibly; as I fully explained it by the instances of the Arians, and of the
Adversaries of the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon. But notwithstanding all
the Attacks and Oppositions of Heretics, the Definitions of Councils are the
Rule of Faith, and all those who will not acknowledge them are without the
Church, all Catholics should submit unto them, and all those who do not submit
are Heretics. So that the Church is at Peace within it self, and is only
troubled from without by the Persecution, the Attacks, and Violence of those
who are not of it. It is thus that I would have my words taken, having never
had any intention to maintain, nor even to say, that after the Definition of
Faith by a General Council, those who do not submit to it could belong to the
Church.

The distinction which I have used in many places, Tom. 1. of Articles
Fundamental and not Fundamental, Principal and not Principal, is very different
from the Sense which Heretics give to these Terms; for by Articles Fundamental
and Principal, I understand those which we are obliged to believe Explicitly,
or which are contained in the Creed and not in the Sense of Heretics, who
pretend that there may be Articles framed by the Church which may be denied.

Tho I believe not that I have given any occasion of doubting the Orthodoxy of
my Faith concerning the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in Jesus Christ;
however, because a Catholic Doctor cannot be far enough from all sort of
suspicion of Heresy, I protest before God, that I do believe firmly that there
are in Jesus Christ two Natures, united in one only Person by an Hypostatical
Union, to wit, the Divine Nature and the Humane; that Jesus Christ is both true
God, and true Man together, and that I am ready to defend this Catholic Truth
even to the last drop of my blood. That I do Anathematize the Error of
Nestorius, his Person, and Party, and that I have a sincere and true respect
for the Holy Council of Ephesus. And because some have judged, that without any
design, there has escaped me, in my Relation, things which may give a
disadvantageous Idea of that Affair, and Omitted Matters of Fact which may be
to its advantage. I thought it my duty to make here a short review for taking
away all occasion of Scandal and Complaint. Having said, Tom. 3. Part 2. p.
191. That St. Cyril did advertise the Monks of Egypt, that it were better not
to move these kinds of abstracted questions, which could not be of any use.
This ought not to be applied to the Defenders of the Catholic Doctrine against
Nestorius, but to that Heretic and his Party who excited these Debates, by
sowing their Novelties, and publishing their Errors.

That Expression which I used, p. 192. viz. St. Cyril fearing that those of his
Party: having given occasion to some to think that I did consider St. Cyril as
the Head of a Party like to that of Nestorius, this obliges me to declare that
there is nothing farther from my Thought, and that on the contrary I do
consider St. Cyril as a Defender of the Catholic Doctrine, and Nestorius as the
Head of a Heresy. And therefore if any think, that the word Party cannot be
taken in a good Sense, I beg Pardon for having used it in that place, and
elsewhere, declaring that it was never my Thought to compare or to put into the
Balance the Cause of the Church, of which St. Cyril was the Defender, with
that of Nestorius, who was in Heresy. I forgot to advertise, that the
Reproaches, contained in the Letter of the Emperor to St. Cyril, related p.
195. were not true, and that this Prince was surprised by the Enemies of this
Saint.

I have observed in two different places, p. 196. and p. 214. That the Council
was lawfully held before the arrival of those from the East, seeing the time of
its Indiction was passed, and that they themselves believed that they might
begin it without them. I add now, that as the Letter of St. Cyril to the
Emperor imports, they could not put off the Council longer, because there were
Bishops who could not stay longer in a Country so far from their own; that many
Bishops were in danger of dying, because the Air of Ephesus did not agree with
them; that some were already Dead, and that all demanded that the Council might
be held as soon as possible. Having observed, p. 196. That the Bishops did
assemble themselves, although the Legates from the Holy See were not come, and
notwithstanding the opposition of threescore and eight Bishops, yet I intended
not by this to insinuate, that they were in the wrong for assembling
themselves; nor that there was any regard due to that opposition. As to the
number of the Bishops of the Council, having said That the Subscriptions prove
one hundred and sixty. I justify sufficiently what the Council says, viz.
That they were near two hundred, and do show the falsehood of what is alleged
by the Easterns that they were only fourscore.

P. 196. Having related that Candidian. said, That he had read his Commission
against his will; it must be remarked, that this bribed Officer is not to be
believed in this matter, and that it is only a pretense which he has since
invented.

P. 197. Having related all that passed in the first Session of the Council of
Ephesus: I had no intention to accuse that Council of Precipitation in its
Judgment; and I do acknowledge truly that there was none, because the matter
was wholly prepared, and, as I have said elsewhere, it is evident that Nestorius
was in an Error.

When I said, That there were in the Subscriptions of the Letters from the
Easterns more than fifty Bishops, tho St. Cyril only observes thirty six. I
intended not to accuse St. Cyril of falsehood, but it may be that the Easterns
might get some Bishops, who were not present, to sign afterward.

All that is said by Candidian deserves no Credit, being related by a Man
suspected and Bribed: nor ought we to give any more Faith to what the Easterns
write in their Letters, nor to what Acacius of Berea says of the Corruption of
the Emperors Officers by John the Physician, and Friend of St. Cyril, of which
I have spoken.

Having* said That the event of what passed at Ephesus, was, if I may so say,
under the Power of the Emperor, and that the success of the Council depended
upon the Resolutions the Court should take, I did not thereby intend, that the
Definition of the Council of Ephesus, and the Condemnation of Nestorius
depended on the Will of the Emperor, as to the Right and Obligation of
submitting thereto, but only as to the External Execution and Publication. For
it must have happened, if the Emperor had continued to be deceived, that he
would have Persecuted the Catholics, opposed the Truth, and protected Violence
and Error for sometime; but this is nothing to the Validity of the Council, or
the Solidity of its Decision, which no ways depended on the Judgment of the
Emperor, nor on the Resolutions of the Court.

Having said P. 201. That the Emperor consented to the deprivation of
Nestorius, and to that of St. Cyril and Memnon, because of their Caballing. I
designed not to approve this Conduct of the Emperor, nor to accuse St. Cyril of
Caballing, but only to mark, that the Emperor was prepossessed falsely by
Acacius of Berea, that St. Cyril and Memnon had Caballed together.

Tho it seems to me, that I have given very solid Answers to the Objections,
which I have brought against the Council of Ephesus; nevertheless, because some
have been offended at the Objections, I agree with them, that I had done better
not to have related them in a Frenck Book. We may also add to the Answers, that
there was nothing done in the Council with Precipitation. That all the Matter
was prepared and discussed beforehand. That St. Cyril held it not only at the
time when it ought to have been held, but that it was morally impossible to
delay it. That the Zeal which actuated this Father was commendable and
according to knowledge. That there came Bishops from the farthest parts who
arrived much before John of Antioch. That it is certain that John of Antioch
designed not to come to the Council; and that he was very glad to have it
begun, that he might have a pretext for keeping away from it. That Nestorius
was sufficiently convinced out of his own Writings of not admitting a real and
Hypostatical Union in Jesus Christ. That there is no regard to be had to the
Judgment of Isidorus Dam. who only spoke by confused Reports. That the Error of
Nestorius was so evident, and so horrible, that it was just to Condem it in
such Terms as might denote the horror which we ought to have for his Heresy,
such as these, Nestorius another Judas, Tom. 3. Part 2. p. 2 14. That they did
examine carefully, and related faithfully the Extracts of Nestorius's Books in
this Synod; and lastly, that all was transacted there Legally and Canonically.
As to the Sentiment of Nestorius, it is true that he never durst openly say,
that there were two Christ's and two Persons, but he said what was equivalent,
denying the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures, admitting only a Moral Union
betwixt them, as appears by a great many passages in his Writings. He held not
the Error of Paulus Samosatenus, and of Arius concerning the Divinity of the
Word, who did not admit of any Union of the Divine Nature with the Human, as
Father Garner has observed before me, but he erred expressly, and in formal
Terms, concerning this Union, admitting only, betwixt the two Natures, an Union
Moral and Apparent, and not Real and Substantial: of which Error it was easy
to convince him by his Writings, tho he disguised it in some places. So when I
say. Tom. 3. Part 2. p. 42. That if we appeal to his Writings, it does appear
that he has maintained, that the Word was united with the Humane Nature by a
very intimate and strict union. However, this is not to to be understood of his
true Sentiment, nor of all that he has said, but only of some places in which
he has affected, as Heretics do, the use of Catholic Terms. For in many
other place he discovers visibly his Error, as I have marked Page 43. p. 215.
and if their be any Expressions in my Work which may give another Idea of him,
I declare that it is against my intention, and I do beseech the Reader to take
them in this Sense. And when Isaid p. 42. That he always said that he could not
own that God was born, that God suffered, that God died, and that his Error
consisted only in this; I in no wise pretend to make it consist only in the
refusal which he made of these Expressions, acknowledging that he did really
admit a Moral Union betwixt the two Natures, and that he would have two Persons
in Jesus Christ, which was the reason why he would not admit the Consequences
of the Unity of one Person alone.

These words in the beginning of the History of the Council of Chalcedon, Tom.
3. Part 2. p. 230. That this Assembly had turned into a confused Rout, if the
Commissaries of the Emperor had not put a stop to the tumultuary Exclamations
which were made there, by advertising the Bishops that it was unworthy of them
to behave themselves after such a manner. I say, these words not appearing
respectful enough to that Council which I honor, I wish I had not used them,
though I did it innocently, and without any bad intention.

When I said, Tom. 4. page 146. That it had been better not to have moved the
affair of the three Chapters, I designed that this Censure should only fall
upon what preceded the time of the Council, and on the Person of Theodorus, who
stirred up Justinian to push on this Affair. As to the Council, I acknowledge
that as Affairs stood then, and seeing how far the Assembly was carried on,
that it was absolutely necessary for the good of the Church to pass the
Condemnation of the three Chapters, and that all the Catholics ought to have
submitted to it; that they had reason to condemn Theodorus after his Death, and
that that Conduct of Anathematizing the Dead may be followed, as the Church
has often done since; that they had reason also to condemn the Letter of Ibas,
and the Writings of Theodoret, thus I disown what I have said to the contrary,
p. 146. and what follows.

As to the matter of Images, the Worship of which is determined in the second
Council of Nice. I acknowledge that this Council is a General and Lawful one,
and that therefore there is a perfect submission due to it, acknowledging for
an Article of Faith all which it has decreed, and that all its Proofs are not
drawn from supposed Monuments, and Apocryphal Passages of the Scripture and
Fathers which prove nothing; that there are there very solid Proofs and
unanswerable, drawn either from Scripture, or the Writings of the Fathers, or
other Pieces of Antiquity. I did not intend to make any comparison betwixt this
Council and the false Council of Constantinople against Images, nor to speak of
them as two opposite Parties. I believe very firmly in the one, what I detest
in the other, acknowledging with the first, a Worship Relative, True and
Sincere to be paid to Images, out of Respect to what they represent, according
as it is explained in the Council of Trent. And when I said, Tom. 5. p. 146.
That Image Worship was established by the simpler and weaker sort, who seeing
the Saints drawn upon Tables for the Instruction of those who could not read,
could not forbear to testify by external Signs, the Veneration which they had
for the things they represented; and that this worship of Images thus
established, was moreover fortified by the Miracles which were ascribed to
them. I did not intend that this was the only Origin of the worship of Images,
nor the reason of the Progress which it made, which was established and
approved by the Church for very good Reasons; and I do acknowledge, that to
give it no other Origin, nor any other Progress than this, should be to lessen
the Respect we have for them, and very far from promiting it as I ought.

What I have said, page 147. That we cannot condemn as Heretics, those who
will not admit Image Worship for some particular Reasons, either because the
Practice of their Church is otherways, or because they fear those outward
Duties should be mistaken for Adoration; or Lastly, Because they do not believe
the Worship of Images to be sufficiently warranted, seeing to prove it they
have alleged a great number of false Pieces, or of impertinent Passages that
prove nothing. And what I have said in the same place, Moreover the proceeding
of those Persons could not be blamed, who to settle Peace in the Church, and to
reunite two opposite Parties; of which, the one were for breaking down all
Images, and the other for honoring of them, endeavoring to make their own
usage to be received every where, and wrote to the Pope respectfully about it.
I say, these are Expressions which have escaped me, which I wish I had not
uttered; because besides that, they are too indefinite, and that taking them in
the ut-most extent, they may give ground to think that we ought not at this
time to condemn any who should refuse by some one of these Reasons to honor
Images, though my intention was to apply them only to the Church of France in the
time of Charlemain, to which I have afterward fixed them. Besides this, they
may give occasion to think that we may consider the Iconolasts, as a Party
tolerated in the Church, and whom the French did not condemn as Heretics, though
it be certain that these Enemies of the Orthodox Faith have always been looked
upon as such by all Catholics, and that it is certain that the Iconoclasts and
Claudius of Turin, who was of their Sentiment, were considered as Heretics,
even by those of our French who did not own the Adoration of Images. Therefore
left my words be so taken, I am here obliged to say, that I never believed that
these very Persons, who do not yet acknowledge the Second Council of Nice for
lawful, should consider the Iconoclasts as being within the Church, or that
they should tolerate them in it. And when I said, p. 133. That the Emperor
Constantine Copronimus designed to have his Discipline received every where,
speaking of his Design to break down Images, I did not understand it of the
Heretical Doctrine of the Iconoclasts, nor did I intend that it should be
thought no Heresy to use Images after that manner.

When I said, p. 148. That it were fitting to suffer no Image of the Deity and
Trinity, I did not intend to condemn these Images, and I have spoken too
generally, that all the most zealous Defenders of Images have condemned them,
which is only to be found in some. I do acknowledge that the Celibacy of
Priests and Deacons is a Practice very Holy and most Praise worthy, commonly
observed in the Church from the first three Centuries: and I did not intend to
say any thing to the contrary, Tom. 1. p. 183. Tom. 2. p. 248, etc.

IV. As to the fourth Article which concerns the Primacy of the Holy See, I
ought to have collected with more Care what the Councils, the Fathers, and
other Ecclesiastical Authors have said of the Primacy of the Holy See, and of
the Greatness of the Church of Rome, and to have taken occasion to remark to
the Reader the extent of this Primacy, its Divine Institution, and its
Jurisdiction in all the Church, without doing prejudice to the true Privileges
of particular Churches, and to the Rights of Bishops. This did not happen
because I do not believe, or have not always believed this Primacy of
Jurisdiction over all the Church to be of Divine Institution, as I have
observed it, Tom. 2. p. 90. and elsewhere, in these very Terms, The Bishop of
the Church if Rome was in possession of the Primacy, which he received from
Jesus Christ, as being Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles: This
Primacy was given him with great Privileges and great Prerogatives in all the
Church, for maintaining in it the Faith, and for causing the Holy Canons to be
observed. But I should have insisted more upon it, and ought to have spoken of
it oftener, to confirm it by greater Proofs, and not to have neglected the doing
of this as I may seem to have done, either by omitting very fair Passages of
Antiquity upon this Head, or not giving these Passages all their force in my
Translations; as when I bring the Passage of the 53 Epistle of St. Cyprian to
Pope Cornelius, I have omitted these words; Nec cogitare eos esse Romanos
quorum fides Apostolo predicante laudata est, and ad quos perfidia habere non
possit accessum, and to some other Passages which are of the same Subject.
Speaking of the Condemnation of Nestorius by the Council of Ephesus, I have
translated these words, Coacti per sacros Canones and Epistolam Celestini, thus
we have been constrained according to the Letter of Celestine, which ought to
have been literally translated thus, We have been constrained by the Holy
Canons, and by the Letter of Celestine. As also the Council of Calcedon
speaking of the re establishment of Theodoret in his Bishopric by Pope St.
Leo; I have used an Expression which does not give the Terms of the Council all
their force; for, restituit ei Episcopatum, is translated thus, he owned him
for Bishop.

When I said in the Advertisement of Tom. 5. That the missions served to
enlarge the Authority of the Pope; these words ought to be understood of the
actual extent of his Jurisdiction, and not of his right of Primacy.

When I made mention of the Complements, Tom. 3. Part 1. and Part 2. which St.
Augustine and Theodoret gave to the greatness of the Church of Rome, when
writing to the Popes, I did not design Complements which are not founded upon
Truth, but do acknowledge that these Praises are very true.

I cannot but disapprove the Liberty which I have taken to speak of some Holy
Popes with very little respect, and amongst others, of Pope St. Cornelius, whom
I have too much accused of Weakness in the Defense of St. Cyprian; of Pope St.
Stephen, whom I have taxed with excessive Passions, Heat,and Fierceness. Tom.
1. p. 118, etc. and of whom I said, That it was very probable that he fell into
the Error of Re-baptizing all Heretics, however they had been baptized; of
Pope Zosimus,by saying, That he had a design to enlarge his Authority, for
which cause it was that he entered upon the defense of Celestius; of St.
Innocent, by observing that he was very jealous of the Greatness and Authority
of the Church of Rome, and very tenacious of his Rights, and that he wrote
tolerably well; of St. Leo, of whom I said, Tom. 3. Part 2 p. 110. That he
sought all occasions to show his Authority; and of what I may have said in some
other places.

V. As to the fifth Article, which concerns Heresy and Heretics, I may in some
places have spoken of them, though contrary to my intention, in such a manner as
does not seem to beget a due aversion to them, and which does not sufficiently
preserve the Reader, treating too gently those who furthered or supported them.
I wish I had not said of Eusebius That we cannot refuse him the Quality of a
Saint without rashness, after having asserted that he never approved the Term
Consubstantial, although he established a perfect equality betwixt the Father and
the Son.

I did only translate the Passage of Gennadius about Vigilantius, and as he
said, That this Man had advanced Frivola, I have heedlesly translated this Term
by Bagatels, though it may bear another signification, and point out Errors which
have no foundation: But I do not pretend by this, any ways to excuse
Vigilantius from Errors which he has advanced against the Invocation of
Saints, and the Veneration of Relics, nor yet to approve wholly the Sentiment
of Gennadius.

VI. As to the Sixth Article which concerns the Advertisements which I have
given to the fourth and fifth Tome. I acknowledge that in the three first Pages
there are Expressions very hard, and if they be taken literally and generally,
and not according to my Intention, they are capable of offending Pious Persons,
therefore I wish these Pages were torn out. But however Protestantss would be
in the wrong to draw from them any Consequence to the prejudice of the Church,
which I do acknowledge immovable in her Faith and in her Manners, though she may
change in her Discipline. I do acknowledge in particular, that to celebrate the
Mass every Day, is a practice Holy and Commendable which I never design to
disapprove no more than the frequent Confession of Venial Sins.

VII. As to the seventh Head which concerns the Fathers, I acknowledge that I
have spoke of some of them in Terms which testify too little respect for them;
as relating, Tom. 1. p. 60. The Judgment of Phocius upon the Works of St.
Irenaeus, where I should have remarked, that what Phocius said in this place
had a respect to other Works than those we now have. It seems to me that I have
drawn the Picture of Novatian too favorably, and that that of Pope St.
Cornelius is not favorable enough. I cannot approve of what I have said of St.
Gregory Nazianzen, That he had much Piety, but little Conduct and Policy in
Business; that he undertook readily great Matters, but repented himself
presently of having undertaken them; that he had in his Lifetime there
Bishoprics, and nevertheless it cannot be said that he was lawful Bishop of
any one; that his Humor was Chagrine and Satirical; that he loved Raillery and
spared no body. I wish I had not said of St. Epiphanius, that he had no
Judgment, nor Conduct, nor Policy. As I approve of what I say of St. Jerome,
that he was without doubt the most learned of all the Fathers, so I disapprove
of what I said afterward, p. beginning with these words; that he turned his
Adversaries into ridicule, etc. When I said of Severus Sulpitius, that he was
too credulous of Miracles; and of St. Paulinus, that he was too much inclined
to believe Miracles, and to have a veneration for Relics. I did not design to
obstruct the Belief of Miracles well confirmed, nor the Veneration due to
Relicts well attested. By what I have said of St. Augustine, it does appear how
much I esteem this Father, whom I own to be one of the greatest Doctors of the
Church, and most observant of Tradition, which he has only illustrated in all
that he has written concerning the Doctrines of Faith, therefore it should not
be taken in ill part what I have said, p. Tom. 3. Part 1. that be very often
runs away from the Sentiments of those who preceded him to follow a way
altogether New, whether in the Explication of Scripture, or in the Opinions of
Divinity. Here I did not understand Matters of Faith, but some Questions which
are only regarded by Divines as simple Opinions. In the Character which I have
given of this Father, there may be Expressions which are very hard above all in
these Pages.

I have spoke with very little respect of St. Cyril his style and manner of
Expression, when I said, Tom. 3. Part 2. p. and that it is easy to write great
quickly Volumes of this nature, etc. And to what I have observed of him to his
disadvantage drawn from Phocius, I should have added what the same Author says
in his favor, that he pressed Heretics so strongly by Texts of Scripture, and
by Logical Reasonings, that they knew not where to turn themselves. I have
testified sufficiently the Respect and Esteem which I have for St. Leo; and
when I said, that he was not very fertile upon the points of Morality, which he
treated very drily, and after a manner which rather diverted than affected. I
designed only to mark that he did not treat Matters of Morality so largely and
so much as other Fathers, though I do acknowledge that his Sermons are very
useful, and his manner of expressing things as capable to persuade as to please.

In the Elogy which I have given to St. Chrysologus, I should have stopped at
what I said, p. without adding, that he had nothing great or high to merit the
Name of Chrysologus. When I said, speaking of the Book of the Celestial
Hierarchy, and of that of Mystical Divinity, that nothing solid, profitable, or
agreeable could be drawn from them; I have spoken so only in reference to
Popular Instructions, acknowledging that there are in this Book things very
good and very profitable for Divinity.

Finally, if there be any other place in my History which may be contrary to
the respect due to the Holy Fathers, or any Terms which may be construed to
their disadvantage, it is against my Intention.

VIII. As to the Eighth Article, which concerns Penitentials, Casuists, and
Scholastic Divines; what I have said of the two first in the Advertisement of
the 5 Tom. p. I did not mean of all Penitentials, nor of all Casuists
acknowledging that there are of them who are profitable and good. As also when
I said in my answer to the Remarks, that Scholastic Divines would forget
nothing of all that might have a reference to their Metaphysical Questions,
whereas these good Divines, etc. I intended not here to oppose good Divines to
good Scholasticks, but only to those Scholasticks who insist too much upon
subtle Questions and Logical Difficulties, without applying themselves to the
Study of the Scriptures and Tradition, acknowlegding, that there are good
Scholastic Divines and that this Science is useful.

When I said, that St. Thomas quoted Fathers carelessly, and with little
Judgment, I intended only that this Saint, as well as many Writers of his time,
did not quote the Authors with any critical exactness, which was the Effect of
the Age he lived in, rather than a personal Fault.

IX. As to the Ninth Article which concerns the Extracts I have given of
Authors; it is true, that I have not set my self sufficiently to distinguish
what is good from what is amiss in them, nor to answer the difficult Passages
for enabling the Readers how to guard themselves.

X. As to the Tenth Article, which concerns Critical Questions, I own that we
ought to regard the Apostles Creed as a formulary of Faith, drawn up by them as
to the Substance, though some Terms were not the same in all Churches And as to
the Institution of Lent, that we ought to say with St. Leo, St. Jerome, and
other Fathers, that it is of Apostolical Institution, and that the Passages,
which I have related, do not prove the contrary.

XI. As to the Eleventh Article, which concerns Miracles, Revelations,
Apparitions, and pious Practices; when I said that ^t was surprising, that
Eusebius never spoke of the Invention of the Cross; I did not intend by this to
call in question this Matter of Fact which is attested by contemporary Authors,
nor to doubt of the Miracles which they have related, of which I ought to have
spoken more confidently than I have done, Tom. 2. Part. 1: p. (...)as well as
of the Revelation made to St. Cyprian to retire, Tom. 1. p. (...) And of the
Miracle of Healing of Leo III. related by Anastasius the Library Keeper, Tom.
5. ^.

Speaking of the Wax Candles which they light in honor of the Martyrs, and
relating a passage of St. Jerome, Tom. 3. Part 1. p. When I remarked That in the
times of this Father it was not the custom to light them at Noon, I intended
not to blame the present Custom of the Church, nor to take from it the
Authority which it has from Antiquity. It must be added that St. Jerome does
not condemn those who lighted Wax Candles at Noon out of Devotion, and he
testifies that they did it in the East in all Churches while the Gospel was a
reading.

XII. Finally, As to the last Head, which concerns some passages, where I
seem not to have comprehended the Sense of the Authors; I make no difficulty of
acknowledging that this may have happened many times, it being very hard not to
be deceived in so great a Work, and to keep always an equal application in
reading so many great Volumes. But as I have only done it through inadvertency,
so I shall be always obliged to those who will advertise me of it, and be ready
to set me right.

In particular, I do acknowledge that, Tom. 3. Part 2. p. 52. I have ill
understood the Sentiment of Philostorgius on the Second Book of Maccabees, who
does not say that it is of less Authority than the First, but of another
Author. That Hipatius does not say in the Conference with the Severians, That
we must not regulate our selves by what every Apostle has Written and
Practiced concerning the Observation of Legal Ceremonies, but only by what
every one has Practiced. That the passage of Cassian related Tom. 3. Part 2.
p. 13 should not be understood of the Law and Obligation to observe Lent, but
of the Reason of its Institution. That St. Jerome said not in the one hundred
and twenty ninth Letter That some Churches, both Greek and Latin received not
the Epistle to the Hebrews, nor the Revelation, but only that some Latin
Churches did not receive the Epistle to the Hebrews no more than some Greek
Churches the Revelation, notwithstanding that it is authorized by the Testimony
of the Ancients, and after this manner the Extract of that Letter must be
rectified, p. Tom. 3. Part 1. Behold the principal things which have been
observed to me; if there be yet any other thing in my Works which causes any
difficulty, I shall he always ready to clear it, to change it, to correct it,
and even to revoke it, if need be; my only design, in Writing, being to seek
the Truth, and to Edify the Church. I acknowledge with St. Augustine, that it
is a great favor which God does to Authors, when he gives them the means of
rendering their Works more learned and more exact, by the Censures of those who
read them and examine them; and I do very readily apply to my self these words;
Ego autem cum per eos qui meos labores legunt non solum doctior verumetiam
emendatior fio, propitium mihi Deum agnosco, and hoc per Ecclesiae Doctores
maxim expecto, si and in ipsorum manus venit, dignanturque nosse quod scribo.
St. Aug. De dono Pers. circa finem. But I do consider it as the greatest
happiness which could befall me, to have for my Judge the most able and learned
Prelate of the Kingdom, to whose Judgment I shall ever think it my glory to
submit, as I am obliged to it, without Restriction and without Reservation.

Signed L' Ellies Du Pin with his own Hond.
By Monseigneur Wilbault.

An Extract out of the Registers of the Parliament of Paris, Saturday, April,
25. 1693.
THIS day the Kings Council entered the Court, and by Monsieur Chrestien
Francois de la Moignon, Advocate to our Lord the King, did acquaint them, that
they thought it was their Duty to inform them, that the Archbishop of Paris had
lately Condemned a Book Entitled Novelle Bibliotheque des Auteurs
Ecclesiastiques, written by Monsieur Ellies Du Pin, Doctor in Divinity of the
Faculty of Paris, because it contained Propositions contrary to sound Doctrine.
That the Cognizance of every thing that relates to the Faith, belonging to the
Church, and the decision of these Matters to the Bishops within their
respective Diocese. The suppression of the Books which they Condemn, and the
afflictive punishment of those who persist in Opinions which have been Censured
by the Bishops, belongs to the King's Officers, and chiefly to this Court,
which is the Depository of Sovereign Justice. That they had nothing to object
against the Author of this Book, because he has submitted himself to the
Judgment of his Bishop; and because it appears by a Writing which he has
published, that he has retracted some of those Propositions which had advanced,
and explained the rest in such a manner as frees them from all suspicion of
Error; that they are willing to believe, that the Faults which Monsieur Ellies
Du Pin fell into, and which deserved the Censure pronounced against him,
proceeded rather from the greatness of the Work which he undertook, than from
any formed design of introducing new Opinions; and besides, that there is a
great deal of Learning in his Books. That they were obliged to take notice to
this Court upon this occasion, of the care, the application, and vigilauce,
which Monsieur the Archbishop of Paris shows to preserve sound Doctrine in his
Diocese, and to stiffle every thing in the beginning which may disturb the
Peace and Tranquillity of the Church. And therefore that they could omit nothing
in those Stations in which they had the Honor to be placed, that was necessary
to second such good Designs; upon which account they were obliged to demand of
this Court, that those Books, which the Archbishop had condemned, might be
suppressed, and that all Booksellers should be forbidden to sell them, till
they shall be Corrected according to the Writing of the said Du Pin, annexed to
Monsieur the Archbishop's Censure; and that the Corrections shall have been
approved by him. The King's Learned Council withdrawing, the Matter was taken
into deliberation, and the Court did forbid all Booksellers, and others, to
sell or keep by them any Copies of the said Books, which have hitherto been
Printed. And it was ordered, that they should be brought forthwith into the
Office of this Court to be suppressed, with very express Prohibitions to all
Persons to Reprint that Book in any manner whatsoever for the time to come,
without the Advice and Consent of the Archbishop of Paris.

Given by the Parliament of Paris the 25. of April 1693. Signed Dongois with
his Seal.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Charles Brom. 1696.
SOngs and Airs set by Dr. Blow, Mr. Henry Pursel, Mr. James Heart, Mr. William
Turner, Mr. Mich. Wise, and several other Eminent Masters. Octavo.

New Lessons for Viols or Violins, by sundry Composers of Music. Octavo.

The Snake in the Grass, or Satan transformed to an Angel of Light, discovering
the deep and unsuspected Subtilties of the Quakers. Octavo.

The Case of the Quakers relating to Oaths stated; price 6 d. Quarto.

The Fundamental Charter of Presbytery, as it has been lately Established in
the Kingdom of Scotland, examined and disproved by the History, Records and
public Transactions of that Nation. Octavo.

A Geographical Dictionary in Folio. Price 12 s.

The plain dealing Poulterer, or the Poulterer's Shop opened, with all sorts of
Ware. Price 4 d.

Bishop Ken's Letter concerning Lent. Price 1 d.

-- Manual of Prayers for Winchester-College, with his Hymns at the end of it.
Price 1 s.

The Portuguese Asia, or the History and Conquests of India by the Portuguese,
in three Volumes in Octavo. Price 14 s.

Whear's method of Reading Histories in English; to which is added a Preface by
Mr. Henry Dodwell. Octavo.

The Political Last Testament of Monsieur John Baptist Colbert, late Minister
and Secretary of State to Lewis XIV. Wherein is an account of all that has
passed under the Reign of that King, unto the year 1684. With Remarks upon the
Government of the Kingdom of France: Translated out of the French, and Premised
with the Life of Monsieur Colbert; and a Chronological Table of the Dates which
are chiefly wanting, by Mr. Bernard. Octavo. Price 4 s.

The Planters Manual; being Instructions for the Raising, Planting, and
Cultivating all sorts of Fruit Trees, whether Stone-Fruits or Pepin-Fruits,
with their Natures and Seasons; very useful for such as are Curious in Planting
and Grafting: by Charles Cotton, Esquire; Octavo.

A Paraphrase upon the Psalms of David; by Samuel Woodford, D. D. The second
Edition Corrected by the Author. Octavo.

A Paraphrase upon the Canticles, and some Select Hymns of the New and Old
Testament, with other occasional Compositions in English Verse: by Samuel
Woodford, D. D. Octavo.

The Commentaries of Messire Blaize de Montluc, of France; Wherein are
Described all the Combats, Rencounters, Skirmishes, Battles, Sieges, Assaults,
Scalado's, the Taking and Surprises of Towns and Fortresses; as also the
Defenses of the Assaulted and Besieged: With several other Signal and
Remarkable Feats of War, wherein this great and renowned Warrior was
personally engaged, in the space of fifty or threescore Years that he bore Arms
under several Kings of France. Together with Diverse Instructions, that such
ought not to be ignorant of, as propose to themselves by the practice of Arms
to arrive at any eminent degree of Honor, and prudently to carry on all the
Exploints of War. Folio.

BOOKS lately Printed for W. Keblewhite, at the Swan in St. Paul's Church Yard.
IMpar Conatui or Mr. J. B. the Author of an Answer to the Animad versions on
the Dean of St. Paul's Vindication of the Trinity, Rebuked and proved to be
wholly unfit for the Great Work he has undertaken; with some account of the
late Scandalous Animadversions on Mr. Hill's Book, Entitled a Vindication of
the Primitive Fathers against the Imputations of Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum,
etc. By Thomas Holdsworth, M. A. Rector of North Stoneham, near Southampton.
Quarto.

A Plain and Rational Vindication of the Liturgy of the Church of England,
together with an Explanation of the Terms, Order and Usefulness of it,
Collected from the Discourses of some of the Reverend Bishops and Doctors of
the same Church: by John Clutterbuck, Gent. Octavo.

The necessity of a present Repentance, in a Sermon preached before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of London, at Guild Hall Chapel, March
10. 169^. By William Bramston, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God; by the
Right Reverend Father in God, William Lord Bishop of London Derry. The third
Edition. Octavo.

An Admonition to the Dissenters of the Diocese of Derry, concerning a Book
lately published by Mr. J. Boyse, Entitled Remarks on a late Discourse of
William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the Invention of M^n in the Worship of
God, from William Lord Bishop of the said Diocese. Octavo.


