A SERMON PREACHED AT Shadwell-Chappell IN YORKSHIRE.

By Thomas Hardcastle Minister of the Gospel.

Published by some of the Hearers for their own Vindication and the Worlds
Satisfaction.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his Neighbor
comes and searches him.

Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against falsely for my Sake.

Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

London Printed in the Year 1665.

To the Reader.
Reader, THis Sermon was preached at Shadwel Chapel in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, June 18. 1665. being the Lords day, where several times before at
the request of the Inhabitants (the place being vacant) the Author had bestowed
his pains; when the Sermon was finished in the forenoon, several Bailiffs upon
color of (...) warrant from three of his Majesty's Justices of the peace
within the said Riding; requiring them from time to time to apprehend all
persons riotously, seditiously, and impudently assembled at any unlawful
Conventicle or Meeting, did Apprehend five and twenty of the hearers, and
brought us before the aforesaid Justices, who upon the Act made by this
Parliament to prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles, committed us to the
Gaol for two Months and three weeks; we not being conscious to our selves of
any the least seditious design or practice against the King or his government,
and desirous likewise to clear our innocence to the World, have printed the
Sermon, as it was taken in shorthand by some of us, without any addition,
alteration or correction by the Author, which we did purposely wave, that the
matter might appear in greater simplicity and plainness; we not looking on it
as any offense, to be at the public worship of God, on a public day in a
public place; if the Author had not a license to preach as we hear since is
pretended, we conceive that did not belong to us to examine. The main design
thou see then of making this Sermon public is our own vindication from the
imputation of Sedition and faction, which effect we doubt not but it will have
among all sober and peaceable-minded men; and if it afford thee any hints for
the good of thy soul, that additional advantage must be set upon the account of
free grace, to which head we must likewise refer the benefit we have received
by suffering in so good a cause; Farewell.

The 1 Epist. of John Chap. 3. v. 1.
Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be
called the Children of God; Therefore the World knows us not, because it knew
him not.
THE Doctrine which several times has been insisted upon, is this.

Doctr. That believers or right Christians, are the Children of God. I have
upon other occasions spoken largely (...) this Doctrine; and showed what it is
to be the Children of God; And what the special Privileges of the Children of
God are. I named Six. First, Freedom or Liberty. Secondly, Honor or Dignity.
Thirdly, Instruction. Fourthly, Correction. Fifthly, Maintenance; and Sixthly,
Inheritance. I showed you from the Gospel what this inheritance was, and made
some entrance upon the Application.

The First Use was this, To let us see, who they are that are truly rich, and
who the great heirs are. Not (perhaps) they that can say The lines are fallen
to us in a good ground; those that have many Lordships and large Possessions
but those that are heirs of God and Joint heirs with Christ, how poor soever
they be in the World: and truly it will not be spoken too much, nor indeed any
thing beside the Scripture and right Reason to say, That there are but few that
are great heirs in the World that are right heirs of God; Not many Wise, not
many Noble are, etc. The Poor have the Gospel preached unto them. It is not for
nothing that both our Savior and likewise the Apostle tells us of a great
Enmity and Difference that is betwixt the riches of this World and the Riches
of another.

They seldom agree together; God has chosen the Poor in this World, Rich in
Faith: The Poor in this World and Rich in Faith go together, which puts me in
mind what Mr. Herbert in his Poems says to this purpose, speaking concerning
the course of the Gospel, that it went like the Sun from East to West, and in
time it would come to America, and that God was making way for the Gospel in
America by fetching their Gold from them.

Then shall Religion to America flee;
They have their times of Gospel even as we.
My God! thou do prepare for them always
By carrying for them, first, their Gold away;
For Gold and Grace could never yet Agree;
Religion always sides with Poverty.
This answers that of the Gospel, the Poor in this World, Rich in Faith: But
then Secondly.

Use. 2. This lets us see why those that had an interest in this Inheritance,
were so little concernd about the World. They have so much in their hope, that
they reckon little of what they have or might have. If they had been mindful of
the Country from whence they came they might have had Opportunity to Return.
The people of God are said not to be of the World: They are come out of it; God
has called them out of it; but if they were mindful of this World from whence
they came, they might have Opportunity of Returning thither and getting the
Advantages and Attaining the Dignity and Possessions that others have.

2. Now they desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly: Regard not your
stuff, for all the good of the Land of Egypt is before you: As for the Asses,
set not thy heart on them; for on whom is the Desire of Israel but on thee?
Those, that have an interest in the Kingdom, they do not set their minds upon
the Asses; they are of Abraham's mind to Lot, Let there be no strife between me
and thee; If thou will take the Right hand, I will take the Left; and if thou will take the Left hand, I will take the Right. Those that are heirs of the
Promise, they are either for the Right hand or the Left, in the World: where
will he not be contented to sit, that knows where one day he must sit? He will
not much strive for place that knows any thing of Gods Right hand; he will
never strive much for pleasures here that knows of pleasures hereafter.

But we come to a seventh use, That since there is such an inheritance of the
Saints, we should be provoked to all Care and diligence to make it ours: This
use is seasonable, and let this be the end of our Meeting this day, to get as
near heaven as we can. What? so good an inheritance as you have heard, and
shall we be so slack about it? What said Caleb upon hearing the words of the
spies that went to the Land of Canaan? Number. 13.27, 30. Let us go up at once and
Possess it. They had affirmed that it was a Land flowing with Milk and Honey,
etc.

But it may be inquired: How may we get Heaven. I shall spend some time in
Answering to this. If you would be partakers of this Inheritance, then,

First, Endeavor to clear up your belief of it: It is not for nothing the
Apostle faith, that all men have not faith. It is not for nothing our Savior
says, When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Nay there
is much of unbeleif amongst those that are believers: Labor therefore to get a
greater knowledge of the truth and certainty of the Gospel: For all must hang
upon this. It is not for nothing, that one chief Reason why St. Luke writes his
Gospel, it was this: Luke 1.4. That thou might have the certainty of those
things wherein thou have been instructed. Well; Therefore labor to be
acquainted with the Last Article of your Creed, Life Everlasting: with the
truth of it. When we read in Heb. 3.12. to the end of the 4. etc. that they
could not enter in because of unbelief; how should this make us tremble and
take heed lest a promise being made of entering into rest, any of us should come
short of it by an evil heart of unbelief, etc. Surely if we had a greater and
more firm belief of Heaven, we should be much altered creatures: we should not
love the World so much, nor fear the World so much; we should not be so
backward in Duty, nor so straightened in Duty: all proceeds from unbelief: How
active are the men of the World! their grounds of certainty are not so great as
the Truths of the Gospel: According to our faith, so will our Love be; and
according to our Love, so will our working be: when we speak of the Glory of
Heaven and of the Inheritance of the Saints, it is to be feared that many are
ready to think concerning us, as they said concerning Ezekiel, O Lord, they say
of me, Does he not speak Parables? They complained and said that he spoke
Parables; so when we are speaking of the Glory of Heaven and of Life
Everlasting, do not many think that we are speaking Parables and Paradoxes?
pretty Allusions and Conceits to pass away the time, or that we speak
figuratively or Hyperbolically? Therefore there is great need that our thoughts
should run much upon the truth of the Gospel; doubtless the same spirit that
was in Dives possess many now adays; that conceit of his that if one came
from the dead, they would believe: so if a Messenger came from heaven and told
us of the joys of that place and what he saw, then we would believe; but see
what a great deceit of the heart this is: First Our Savior tells us, They have
Moses and the Prophets, and if they believe not them, neither would they
believe, though one came from the dead: Oh! Consider this.

But then Secondly, this is a great deceit of the heart: Consider from this
that this is to be wiser then God: as if he had not provided the best Means of
Faith that could be devised: either God is not so wise as he should be, or has
not that good will, or else he would provide the best Means: But then

Thirdly, Those that say If one came from the Dead, they would believe: They
speak daily with them that have been there: Jesus Christ knew better (because
he was purchaser of this Inheritance) what this Inheritance is; we are speaking
daily with him, and he tells us frequently what a place it is in the Gospel,
and therefore we do speak with one that came from the dead.

Fourthly, There is greater Reason that we should believe Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, then one raised from the dead, because there
are more Reasonable exceptions against one coming from the dead then there can
be against Christ and the Gospel; for there might much be said against one that
pretends to come from the dead: He must bring his Letters Pattents with him, he
must bring his Commission with him: he must bring Evidence with him that he
comes from God; else we ought to Reject him as one of Satan's Angels and
Messengers.

Fifthly, Consider this, that the word of God is preferred before the voice of
an Angel from Heaven contradicting of it, and that is more then a Ghost from
the dead, Gal. 1.8.

Sixthly, The word of God is preferred before the voice of God from Heaven; we
have a more sure word of Prophecy; the Gospel of Jesus Christ is more then the
voice of God, which said This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: The
Gospel is a more sure word then the voice of God from Heaven.

Seventhly, Consider with me the two great confirmations of Divine Testimony
for the grounding of you; and for the strengthening of your belief as to the
truth of the Gospel. It will be very seasonable to speak to the two great
evidences and Confirmations of the truth of Divine Testimonies (to wit) The
Spirit of Prophesy, and the Power of Miracles. Though I might mention many
grounds of the truth of the Gospel; yet I take these two to be the chief; (to
wit) The Spirit of Prophecy, and the Power of Miracles. And Jesus Christ had
both: God furnished Jesus Christ with both these thereby to Confirm and make
Evident the truth of that Doctrine which he was to preach in the World: The two
clearest Evidences of the Truth are the Spirit of Prophecy and the power of
Miracles. First of all, The Spirit of Prophecy: I shall show, First, What it
is; and then Secondly, That Christ had this spirit of Prophecy: and Thirdly,
how it comes to pass that it is a Confirmation of the Gospel. First* What it
is; There are three branches of a spirit of Prophecy: First,

The Foretelling or Prediction of Future Events that are out of the reach of
Created understanding; and so the foretelling (First of all) of things that
depend upon the Series of Natural Causes; or Secondly, the foretelling of
things which are within the reach of Devils to foretell; or Thirdly, The
Foretelling of such things as fall out Casually true; but have no certain
ground of Prediction: These do not fall within the compass of the Spirit of
Prophecy; But then,

Secondly, Those things fall within the compass of the Spirit of Prophecy or
Divine Revelation, (for that is the proper Notion of a Prophet (scil.) Divine
Revelation) such things as are certainly known by one man, and cannot be known
by another; such as are the knowledge of things that are done at a distance:
and the knowledge of the thoughts of another Man's heart; and then Thirdly,

Matters of Faith that do exceed the reach of Humane Apprehension or
Comprehension, do belong to the Spirit of Prophecy: Thus you see what belongs
to a Spirit of Prophecy; now Jesus Christ had all these. First,

As to his foretelling of things to come; This the Gospel is full of, that
Jesus Christ foretold Judas betraying of him; and as he foretold, so it came to
pass: and the Destruction of Jerusalem: many things that he foretold in the
Gospel, came to pass and, are coming to pass daily. And Secondly,

For those things that are known to one and not to Another; Jesus Christ knew
the thoughts of another man's heart. He knew his enemies hearts, his Disciples
hearts, and he knew what was doing before it was done. But Thirdly,

For matter of Faith, Jesus Christ was a Teacher that came from God; the
Incarnation of the Son of God, the union of the two natures, the death of
Christ, these are discoveries that can be made by none but God, and these
things Christ discovered: Thus you see that Jesus Christ had a Spirit of
Prophecy: But then Thirdly,

That this Spirit of Prophecy was given to Christ to be a confirmation of the
Doctrine which he should deliver to the World, see these places; John 13.18. He
that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel against me: Christ foretells
that Judas should betray him: This was a very unlikely thing: for it was
observed that he was the forwardest of any of the Apostles: he was so forward
that every one of the Apostles did say, Mr. is it I, rather then Is it he; they
suspected themselves sooner then he: now says Christ, I tell you before, that
when it comes to pass, you may believe that I am he: Christ foretells things to
come, that when they come to pass we might believe that he was the Messiah; and
truly the things that come to pass in the Christian World, they seem to look
with an evil aspect upon the Church and people of God: now these things should
be so far from discouraging of us, or from weakening our belief of the Gospel,
that they should be a confirmation because they are come to pass: we should
believe that Christ is he.

The Second place is John. 14.29. says he, And now I have told you before it
come to pass, that when it is come to pass you might believe. I will send the
Comforter, and I have told you this before, that when it comes to pass you
might believe: Well now, Has Jesus sent you a Comforter? he is as good as his
word: and here is a confirmation of the Truth of the Gospel: so that the coming
to pass of those things which are foretold in the Gospel, is a confirmation of
the Gospel. Therefore believe it because he is no other but God that has
discovered it: Thus you see the Spirit of Prophecy or the foretelling of
things that are without the reach of created understandings is an Argument of
Divinity; and he that comes furnished with such a Commission, we may believe
what he says.

Secondly, For the power of Miracles; concerning which I shall show, First,
what it is. A Miracle is a production of something out of nothing: which cannot
be done by less then God: For none but God can create or alter the Course of
Nature: It is as Mr. Stilling-Fleet says, a bringing of something out of
nothing; and that either in the thing it self which cannot be produced by second
Causes, as raising of the dead: or else a bringing something out of Nothing in
the manner of doing, which may be done by Second causes, but yet is done
without the help of Second causes, as Curing Diseases with a touch of the hem
of a Garment, or with a word speaking. Thus you see what a Miracle is.

Secondly, Observe that God never alters the course of Nature, but for some
special end. The power of Miracles is not ordinary; for God never alters the
course of Nature, but for some special end.

Thirdly, The chief end of the power of Miracles, is for the Confirmation of
some truth that God would have the world to know.

Fourthly, That God will not give this power of Miracles to any that will abuse
it, for the confirming of a lie.

Fifthly, That Jesus Christ had truly this power of Miracles; this cannot be
denied; even his enemies would grant it, or else they had opportunity to
confute him.

Sixthly, That true Miracles may be known from false ones, because Antichrist
comes with lying words.

Seventhly, Divines lay down rules to know true Miracles from false ones; and I
would have you take special notice of three especially.

First of all, true Miracles they always bring evidence along with them that
they are of the truth, and they leave no dispute but that they are true; they
leave no doubt upon the Spirit.

Secondly, True Miracles are for the confirmation of a Divine testimony, and
they do not contradict a divine testimony already confirmed by a true Miracle;
for the most of the Doctrines which the Papists hold against us, they have
confirmed them by Miracles; but it is a sign they are no true Miracles, because
they tend to confirm a Doctrine contrary to the Doctrine which is already
confirmed by unquestionable Miracles. Then

Thirdly, True miracles oppose Satan's Kingdom; those that tend to the
advancement of Satan's Kingdom, are lying wonders: Then

Fourthly, I might add another; that true miracles are commonly mercies as well
as miracles: Satan's wonders tends to amaze, but not at all to do any good; but
Christ's miracles were most of them mercies as well as wonders: Thus you may see
what may be said to the power of miracles, as being a chief confirmation of
divine testimony.

Eighthly and lastly, the power of miracles in Christ was a confirmation of the
truth of the Gospel, and of his being the Messiah; We know thou art a Teacher
come from God, because no man can do the miracles which thou do except God
be with him. Thus far we have gone, but yet grant it in the Hypothesis, that
miracles are an evidence of the truth of divine testimony. Can we say in the
Thesis that such miracles are truly done? There is a threefold argument for
that, which I would have you take notice of.

First of all, the Apostles they were eyewitnesses and could not be deceived;
nay, many that would have been glad of any opportunity to accuse them; yet it
was never said that any thing was falsely done. Nay the Jews that were as
cunning in finding out deceits that way, would have been glad of any
accusation; if they had not been truly done, they would have found it out.

Secondly, the Apostles they could not be deceivers; for they had no temptation
to it; it was impossible that if Christ had not been risen otherwise then by
their stealing of him, (which was objected) when they had found that Christ had
not been so good as his word, they would rather have cursed him then confessed
him: and if they preach Salvation by one that was not otherwise risen but by
their stealing of him; yet the world would not have had the faith to believe
it; yet we find that serious and inquisitive men, confessed to be in their wits,
did sacrifice their lives upon their belief of Christ's being risen from the
dead: of which they had no other assurance but the miracles which the Apostles
wrought and their testimony; and then

Thirdly, a third thing will clear all; That there is a certain way of
conveying the Copy of the Gospel down to us, and that it is impossible that it
should be corrupted in any of those things which are of concernment to the
Christian world; for there being Heretics in all ages that wrest the Scripture
on purpose, if there had been any corruption in the Copy, they would have
detected it, as being glad of such an advantage against the truth of it. Well
then, let it not seem a diversion that I have spoken this to those two
arguments of the truth of the Gospel; for since, if we come to suffer, all must
hang upon this point, If the Gospel be not true, we are undone for ever. He
that finds his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my sake
shall find it, etc. and in other Scriptures, thus says the Gospel; and if this
be not true we are undone for ever; and thus though the most satisfactory
conviction to us be the testimony of the spirit of God, yet since we are
rational creatures, and God deals with us as such, we ought to be furnished,
and enabled, and ready to give a reason of the hope that is in us. For Religion
is reasonable; and though the matter of the Gospel be above reason, and not
capable of being demonstrated from the things themselves; as how can it be
proved by reason that there can be a resurrection, that there can be Three
Persons in One? and many other Doctrines of the Gospel; yet I say it may be
demonstrated that it is a reasonable thing to believe such things, though they
be above reason; and though we cannot have reason for the things themselves,
yet there is reason why we should beheve them. And I say since that it is not
unusual with Satan to assault the best Christians here about the belief of the
Gospel; and seeing the operation of the spirit, and the feeling testimony of
the spirit to the truth of the Scriptures, may not be always ready; therefore
it is good to keep the outworks, to keep the Guard in the outworks, not to
lie all the stress within, but to be fortified with arguments and reasons: for
the operations or vvorking of the Will and the affections are more uncertain
and more changeable then the acts of the understanding; let us therefore always
be furnished with arguments of reason to help our feeling, to rub up our
feeling, and to quicken us. The spirit is a spirit of understanding, a spirit
of Wisdom and does deal with rational men by rational means ordinarily. Well,
therefore you see that we ought to be furnished with Arguments; and these are
two that we may be furnished with: If Satan should assault us that way, we
may be ready to beat him; and Lastly,

Consider, the Miracles which Christ wrought, are not only a Confirmation of
this Doctrine as they are a Conviction that he comes from God, and what he
says comes from God: but likewise in his Miracles there is something
Christians may make use of as a Motive, and as an Argument to do these Duties
which those Miracles were brought to confirm; There is something in the
Miracle besides the Divine power which may be as a Motive and an argument to
Christians in their duties; as thus, Jesus Christ when they came to apprehend
him, he with a word speaking caused the officers to fall to the ground, saying,
I am he. This may encourage us that Jesus Christ will stand with us* though not
with a Miracle, yet by his powerful presence when we come to be apprehended; so
He that will lose his Life, shall save, it etc. Now we may be comforted that we
shall save ours by losing of it; for he did so, He saved his life by losing it
for our sakes; so when we come to any Doctrine or Precept, get a Miracle to
back it and it will be of great use to you; when you would be exhorted to the
duty of Charity, let that Miracle so back it, how Christ fed 500. with five
Loaves, and 2. small fishes; so get your charity strengthened by a Miracle etc.

But I cannot stand upon this: these are the two specal things for confirmation
of the Doctrine of the Gospel: the spirit of Prophesy, and the power of
Miracles.

The Eight and last, for those that seem to be at an uncertainty about Heaven:
Consider whether it be not worth the while to put it out of doubt whether there
be such a thing or no: For it is not a matter of such small moment, whether it
be or no.

But you that are not sure, are you sure there is no such thing? if there be a
Heaven and a Hell, what a case are we in, if we do not look after the one, and
avoid the other? Surely it should cause us to work out our Salvation with fear
and trembling: If there be any such thing, no diligence is too much; and if
there be no such thing, any diligence is too much: Let us not halt between two
Opinions, etc. Let there be no demurrs in our Spirits, but let us be satisfied
about it: I press hard, says the Apostle; I was once a persecutor and earnest
against the Gospel, and I use the same violence in preaching the Gospel that I
used before in persecuting it: I persecute: the word signifies I press and
pursue. So run that ye may obtain: It is a dishonor to the Joys of Heaven, to
have half and saint attempts about it. To conclude, Examine your selves and you
will find that all that sluggishness in Duty, all that fearfulness that you are
guilty of, proceeds merely from unbelief; you are not satisfied and persuaded
of the truth of the Gospel of Christ; this is evident: compare it with your
practice: What pains does the Husbandman take for Corn upon the hopes of a
Crop? The Merchant he will venture and run hazards. We ought to run hazards for
Heaven of which there is more certainty then can be of any thing.

This is the First thing that you must do for the getting of Heaven, Be
satisfied of the truth of it that there is such a thing.

Secondly, When you are satisfied of the truth, endeavor to understand the
nature of it from Scripture: Men take up false Notions concerning Heaven, and
they look on it as a place free from trouble, and so desire it. Oh! look upon
Heaven as an holy place, free from sin, and that is the happiness of it: There
are thousands of men that desire heaven, who if they were there, it would be a
burden to them: Heaven must be begun here.

Thirdly, study to know more your Distance by Nature from heaven: You are not
born heirs, unless it be heirs of wrath: No man ever got this Inheritance that
thought he deserved it; no man ever got to be in any place in heaven that did
not think that he did deserve to be in the lowest place in hell; they that
think to have this Kingdom by their own good Nature, and not through the
Fathers good will, they shall never come at it. We come into the World quite
contrary unto God; we are by Nature haters of God, hated by God, strangers and
enemies, and afar off; And look what Heaven is, the diameter is our nature, and
look what our natures is, the opposite point is Heaven; we are dead, but our
Life and Immortality is with God in Heaven: we are darkness, but there is a
mavelous light: There is freedom, but we serve diverse lusts and pleasures:
There is the love of God, but we have carnal minds which is enmity unto God.
Oh! you can never come at heaven, till you understand your distance from it by
nature; and then

Fourthly and Lastly, be acquainted with those ways and means, steps and
degrees, which God makes use of to bring his Children to heaven, and so you may
observe, how you pass from Egypt to Canaan, and how you proceed from one point
unto another; it is a long March, and it is through the Wilderness, which is a
tedious, dark, and difficult, and solitary way; only there is your beloved to
lean on; there is a pillar of a cloud, and a pillar of fire: It may be you want
water for many days, or you have the bitter waters of sorrow, and then God
throws in a Tree, (to wit) the Cross of Christ which makes them sweet;
sometimes you want bread, and God gives you bread from Heaven; and when you
complain again for want of water, He makes it come out of a Rock, to confute
your unbelief; search the Gospel and you will find by what ways and means,
steps and degrees God brings his Children to Heaven: The Gospel tells us that
it is by Repentance and faith in Christ; that is one description of the way; he
tells us it is by dying unto sin, and living unto righteousness: It is by
Mortification, and sanctification; by putting off the old man, and putting on
the new man; by crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts, and putting
on the Lord Jesus Christ: It is by casting off the works of darkness, and
putting on the armor of light; It is by denying a man's self, and taking up his
Cross and following Christ; denying sinful self, and righteous self, and being
ready to deny his natural self; It is Regeneration, and being born again; It is
a being transformed; It is a renewing; It is a change; It is a having Christ
within us; It is a having the spirit of Christ within us; It is a bringing
forth the fruits of the spirit, and and not the fruits of the flesh: Divines
have made four or five steps. First, Illumination or knowledge. Secondly,
Conviction of the filthiness of our Natures, and of the weakness of them to do
any thing. Thirdly, Humiliation or Evangelical sorrow for sin: A sorrow for sin
because it has wronged and envied Jesus Christ, because it has Crucified him;
then a discovery of the necessity, suteableness, and fullness of Jesus Christ;
and then a breathing after Jesus Christ, and a longing after him, and
resolutions to give up our selves to him; to keep nothing from him, and to
bring nothing to him; to keep nothing from him (that is) no lust, no sin; to
bring nothing to him, no duty, no righteousness of our own. These things I
might be large in, but I do not intend a large discussion of them; so much for
that Use to know how a man may get to heaven: A Christian by going these steps,
may know how he comes nearer to heaven, how his love increases to the Father,
and what Victory he gets over the world, and over himself. In the eight place,
Is it so that Christians have such an Inheritance? this may persuade the
Children of God that are rich in this world, to employ some of their riches
this way, as may not only be a sigh that God has made it sure, but likewise a
means, if other things be answerable, to secure that of the true riches; but
how is that done? the Apostle tells us in the first of Timothy 6.17, 18; Charge
them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, etc.

Here are four expressions; why is the Apostle so pressing in these four; but
because the duty is of great necessity, and because of men's backwardness to
perform it? It is a truth of much plainness, and therefore must not be
neglected.

But before I proceed, I shall premise two things by way of Caution.

First That I do not speak this as if I thought or believed you to whom I am
speaking to be slack this way; for according to that,

Qui monet ut saclus quod am facis, ille monendo
Laudat and hortat (...) comprobat a^^as^io.
He that does admonish a thing which a man performs already, he commends him by
that admonition, and does approve of that which he does by that exhortation; so
that such an exhortation is a commendation. And it is a truth of much
plainness, therefore it must be spoken to; there is much of a Christian, and
much of the Gospel in it: Now for one part of a Christians doing good,
Christian communicating must be to the poor Ministers of the Gospel; This must
be spoken to because it is a truth of much plainness, and it is a Maxim as
true (almost) as the Gospel, He never had any share in the Gospel, who grudgeth
that the Gospel should have a share in him. The Gospel was never accounted a
chargeable Guest, but where it was no profiting Guest; let the Gospel do what
it should to us, and we will not grudge, if necessary, and in our power to give
Gold to eat, and Balm to drink. It is a sign of great fruitfulness; but wisdom
and discretion must be used in this; for such bounty and liberality must be
bestowed where there are the greatest necessities. I mean in a time of distress
and necessity, because occasions are many and urgent; else the Gospel will
prove burdensome: it should be the desire of all, that the Gospel and the
Ministers thereof might be without burden, though it is a thing rather to be
wished then hoped for. All Ministers should endeavor to make it without a
burden.

Second Caution; I am not saying these things that it should be done so to me;
as the Apostle says, Go we about to take you by craft? I hope I may say that
we have renounced such hidden things of dishonesty, not using the glorious
Gospel of Christ to so inglorious and base an end; he is unworthy of the name
of a Minister that makes the Gospel a Lacky for his gain: Ministers have their
reward in heaven; and if God so order the matter that they can make the Gospel
without charge and burden, it is the greater honor that he does them; and
they may expect a great reward. Let them fail of their end, and miscarry in
their trast, whose hearts meditate on such a things and let the Curse of Elves
house come upon them, to be base and beggarly Priests to crouch for a piece of
Silver and a morsel of bread, first of Samuel second chap. last ver. What
therefore I say, I speak it for your Edification; and I do it the more freely
because my own Conscience is clear, that I have no sinister end in it. But then
to return to the matter (that they do good) but that Is not enough; but that
they be rich in good works, not sparing and niggardly, but rich; not so only,
but ready to distribute, free and liberal to any honest motion, without
wringing and wresting through importunity; and not so only, but willing to
communicate; yea, willing so to communicate, as if all they had were common,
and they but Carriers of the common Purse: But what is the matter? why does St.
Paul thus press? does he speak for himself? nay, but for the laying of a good
foundation against the time to come. But if St. Paul's Divinity will not down
with you, what think you of Christ's two Parables to this purpose, that men
would be persuaded to employ some of the worlds goods to attain heavenly
riches? First, observe the Parable of the last Judgment, Mat. 25. Six special
things worthy of your observation.

First, the order how this Parable comes in, it does immediately follow upon a
Parable of Talents; for no sooner was the sentence past. Cast the unprofitable
servant into utter darkness, etc. But he adds this, the Talent of means and
worldly riches to be employed; and he that hides this Talent of worldly riches
in a Napkin, he must have his portion you know where. But

Secondly, To provoke to this duty, he tells us that special mention shall be
made of this at the day of Judgment; not for fasting, or prayer, or for
hearing, but that this shall be rewarded; this shall have a special honor in
the Process of the last solemn Judgment.

Thirdly, observe that good deeds are made to be done to no less then Christ;
not to this poor wretch, or the other, or that miserable Caitiff, or the third
poor prisoner, but to Christ. And that you may know he is serious and in good
earnest, you have his Verily for it, Verily, verily, etc. A form of speech
never used but when he is in very good earnest. Christ says v. 40. Verily,
verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the Least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Take heed of your saying you know
not Christ now, least he tell you he knows not you another day; take heed of
Nescio for a Nescio.

Fourthly, observe the property of a true charitable man; he is not good to one
but to all; I was hungry and ye fed me, sick and in prison, and ye visited me;
he is good to one, and good to all.

Fifthly, the property of true charity is to be doing good in this lifetime;
that can hardly be true charity, if a man be niggardly while he is alive,
though he leave a great deal at his death, because he gives it when he cannot
keep it. When saw we thee an hungry, or sick, or in prison, and did not
Minister unto thee? you never saw me, but you saw my Members. It is good for a
Christian to be his own Executor as to matter of charity, and then he can see
what naked he has clothed, etc. But then

Sixthly and lastly, observe the suteablenesse and naturalness of receiving the
Inheritance, as having done good with their inheritance here upon earth;
Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; for I was an hungry and ye gave me meat.
As if he should say, you fed me, etc. Therefore inherit the Kingdom; You gave
to me, therefore I will give to you; you gave me yours, and I will give you
mine; there is suteableness in it. Again take the Parable of the unjust
Steward, propounded by our Savior in the 16. of Luke, For no other end but to
persuade them that have a good portion of earthly things, to use it for the
compassing of heaven. The unjust Steward when he was to be turned out of all,
by kindnesses done to his Masters Debtors provides how he should be received
into their houses when all saild; so says our Savior, Make to your selves
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting hobitations; what they? why your goods, and the lands, they will be
means to receive you.

Q. How come your goods and your lands to be a means to receive you? Ans.
Because it was for their sake that it should be said, Inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, for I was an hungry etc. Observe the several following
circumstances he uses to enforce to this duty. First of all, an extenuating of
the things done by them. Secondly, an aggravating the fault. First, by
extenuating the things to be given, they are but the least; And he that is
faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: And then Secondly,
that we part with all; it is but the shadow as it were; and the other, is the
riches; If you have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who shall
commit to you the true riches? That which we give is another, but heaven is
our own. These things are another, they are Gods; nay riches, They take
themselves wings and they fly away, and other men have sometimes the power over
them: But heavenly riches they are our own. But then

Secondly, he aggravates the fault, If we do not make friends of the
unrighteous Mammon; First, by calling it unfaithfulness; He that is not
faithful in the least, is not faithful in the greatest. Secondly, by calling it
Injustice; He that is unjust in the least, will be unjust in the greatest.
Thirdly, he calls it plainly Impiety; He that does prefer his riches before
God, he does cast off God, and serve Mammon. To all this, add this one
circumstance, that the spirit of God to terrify all worldlings, does by a
special gird and brand note the covetous Pharisees for deriding him; The
Pharisees also who were covetous, heard all these things, and they derided him,
Luke 16.14. And so much shall serve to be spoken by way of use, of the sixth and
last privilege of the Children of God. I should now make a general use of the
whole Doctrine: you know the Doctrine what it is, That Believers or right
Christians are the Children of God; But this I shall do (God permitting) in the
Afternoon.

FINIS.

