The Nations Claim Of Native RIGHT.

Wherein the gross and extreme Defection and Injustice of the Court Martial,
and of all Courts; The destructive abuse of the Law, and pressing necessity,
that the Nation speedily unite [as one man] for an Agreement in Righteousness,
is by particular Example, and an Appeal to the general Council of the Army, and
by several considerations clearly demonstrated and proved.

Secondly, The nullity of Order, Matter, and Form of a Free People is asserted,
and proved by Scripture: and how [to Persons, Families, People, and Churches]
right Order, Matter, and Form may be attained.

Thirdly, A brief Pourtraict of a right Government of the Nation, and Agreement
of the People; and how such Government and Agreement may be with ease attained;
A new Representative freely Elected: The Law rectified: The Poor relieved: and
the Peoples, and Armies, and every particular Persons just Interests [in Peace
with Truth] satisfied, is preposed to the Nation.

By Thom. Harlye, late Quartermaster in the Regiment lately under Command of
Maj. Genesis Skippon.

Genesis 1.2, 3. The Earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the
face of the Deep. And God said, Let there be light.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCL.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Have set the faults in Printing, as they may be mended With little labor.
Much reading is weariness to the Flesh, and many books a burden: Therefore I
set out this to ease the Reader [upon his] and Nation [upon its accompts] of
their burdens: Let him that runeth, so run that he may obtain; So let him that
writes: yet this is not in him that runeth, nor in me, nor in man, but in God,
and from God: He that so runs not as he may obtain, is at double loss (of his
labor, and of the end of his running. If I propose not an expeditious and safe
way to free the Reader and Nation [on their accompts] from burdens; I must
account me an Oppressor, and him, and it oppressed and burdened With double
loss. Freedom in part is but pretense, not freedom, and the end of it worse (by
occasion) then the beginning, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind;
To. 14. Full persuasion is the whole duty of man, [redeemed to Freedom] and my
endeavor [herein] in reference to the Nation. False persuasion is disswasion
and deceit; the cause [in and through lying spirits] of the Peoples fall [as
Ahab fill at Ramoth Gilead. Full persuasion is perfect conviction, the essence
of Faith, Romans 4. (that frees the people and the chief part in them [their
judgments and spirits] from chains of darkness] The key of deliverance from
the curse of bondage. The Bond-womans son [so soon as God opened her eyes to
see a Fountain of Life] was freed from death; the business was soon done, the
matter ended. Reason [reduced to right order] is the ground of just persuasion,
and rule of the Laws and actions of a free people: The literal rule and form of
Reason [in order] is the Scriptures, (quickened from bondage of death: The
essential form is perfect and free light, (the work of the free Spirit in the
word of God: But all Families, People, and Churches [as to these Forms Order,
and Matter,) are now most [at least outwardly] without form, and void: (...)
not void, nor without form (in reference to opposite forms of corruption of
bondage, sin, and death; as the earth (without form, and void of light) had an
opposite form of darkness: That darkness, and that darkness in Egypt that
might be felt, and that horror of darkness which fell upon Abraham, were
figures of Past, Present, Oeconomick, Civil, and Ecclesiastical darkness of
bondage to all slavish misery, destruction, sin, and death [in, and under
which, the free people, (...), and the whole Creation [oppressed] groan and
travel in pain to be delivered out of it.

I do not [in this Treatise] mind [so much] to discover the evils of bondage
[yet I do that] as an evident and easy issue out of them, without violence,
difficulty, disturbance, not in part, but entire; For Freedom in part, is by
occasion worse than bondage. The beginning of this Treatise is not the Index,
but order to the premises: Who answers or judges any thing before he hears or
knows it, judges himself guilty of shame and folly. All I desire of the Reader
is, his faithful perusal of it in order, and his care to mend the faults in
Printing; Farewell.

Thomas Harbye.
September. 18. 1649.
The Complaint of Thomas Harby Quartermaster of the Regiment lately under the
Command of Major General Skippon, against Richard Ashfield Lieutenant Col. of
the same Regiment.
Charge I.
FIrst, The Complainant says that the said Lieutenant Colonel keeps back
from him six weeks pay amounting to seven pounds, due to him from the 26 of
Feb. 1647. to the 9 of April 1648. And keeps receipts in his hands for 81.15.
having) not withstanding) received out of the Complanants pay the said sum.

I cannot set down the proofs of this or of any Charge, because the Court
Martial would not admit me to make any proof, nor my witnesses to be examined
(though I had Petitioned the Court Martial for that purpose, and had Order
upon that Petition from the said Court under the Judg-Advocates hand: I was
mustered the 26 of February 1647. and the precedent Quartermaster was crossed out
of the role, because dead before; and I had Commission from the General
bearing the same date with that muster, and the money (which was allowed by the
State upon that muster) the Lieutenant Colonel received, and paid it (as he
says) to the widow of the precedent Quartermaster as in right to the said
Quattermaster; whereas it had been rather due to any Alien, or to any newborn
or un-born infant (if living) because living) then to him that was dead before
any part of it was due for to any living it might be rather due for their
service, but to the dead nothing can be due for their service to the State
after they are dead, no Mustermaster may muster a man dead, upon pain of
death, nor pass any man (if he know it) that is dead before the date of the
Muster and before the Muster-roles are closed, neither was this the
Muster-masters, but the Lieutenant Colonels fault, but to deprive the States
living servants of their due pay, and to pay it to the dead that never did, nor
ever could do service for it, and who (when living) were not really and indeed
the States Servants, but usurpers over and intruders upon the Proprieties and
Rights of those who were (really and indeed the States Servants) is worse then
false muster, or to muster the dead for the living: What the Lieutenant Colonel
spoke at the Court-Martiall as being mere air and emptiness, I omit; But (if
I may be admitted (upon equal terms of freedom and right) to have a legal and
just trial (let the Lieutenant Colonel object what he can, and choose whom he
will to assist him) I shall by Gods assistance) declare to what he or they can
plead or object, and make good all the charges in every punctillio and tittle
against him and them.

I was Quartermaster and had Commission from the General at Tame, until about
the time of the relief of Gloucester, at which time (by the perfideous violation
and infringment of the faith and honor of some (then in the Regiment) I was
(contrary to all Law of Military Discipline or equity) (wrongfully) deprived of
that place, which was injuriously kept from me almost six years: all which
time I reckoned that the Quartermasters place was really and according to
equity my own proper place; But I (being the first that did act openly to
engage the North Army with the South Army, when it engaged at New Market heath)
was not restored to my own proper place, but I only and no other in the
Regiment (whether by design or not, let others judge) was contrary to the
engagement, disbanded as a supernumerary without any Debenter, or arrears
audited or stated, without having any disbanding money at disbanding, being six
months in actual service after I was disbanded (serving all this time for
nothing) before the Lieutenant Colonel did acquaint me that I was disbanded;
Then being restored to my own proper place, the Lieutenant Colonel paid away my
first six weeks pay (as inright to a dead man, to whom it was most impossible
it could be due) endeavored by all means, and threatened to turn me out of my
place, kept receipts of mine for 8 l 15 s having paid himself the money, and I
not owing him a penny; and though he had likewise wronged many others, and all
the honest party at Tinmonth and New Castle, and the whole Nation by perfideous
breach of trust, seizing at once 600 l of the Nations treasure, and sharing it
with another wicked confederate and dissenter; The Court Martial admitted no
trial made no redress in these relations, nor suffered witnesses to be
examined, but contrarily censured me to confess (against my conscience) I had
done him wrong, if not to be cashered; informing me also I deserved death,
having done nothing but what (without wilful violation of my duty and faith to
God, my conscience and the Nation I could not avoid.

Charge II.
That he has broken his Trust to the State, in that he (having a Commission of
Trust and Fidelity to the General and the Army) did (contrary to his trust)
violently resist the said Regiments first, engaging with the General and the
Army wherein the safety of all the well-affected of the Kingdom was concerned.
Secondly in thvt (he being about to be suspended his Command by the Regiment,
for breach of Trust as abovesaid) he (upon his seeming humble submission,
promises of trust and fidelity, and upon his wives suite, tears and
entreaties, was again admitted to his trust, and did (immediately thereupon)
break his trust, in assuming to himself 600 l of the States, which he borrowed
of the Commissary of Provisions for the Garrison of New Castle and he and Major
Clarke (who was then suspended his Command for dissenting) and both firmly
withstanding and engaging together a against the said first engagement with the
General and the Army) did share the said 600 l. betwixt them, and thereby left
the said Garrison bare and naked of Moneys, for provisions to support it, apt
and incident to intestine discontents and mutinies, and open and exposed to
invasions of a Foreign Enemy, and the Scottish (continual expected)
Incursions.

The Lieutenant Colonel could not deny at the Court-Martiall but that he had
the said 600 l and that Major Clarke had share of it: Also I overheard the
president Lieutenant Colonel Hammon speaking softly to him) advise him to go
to the Committee of Accounts and pay it, or tender it, to that effect: Howbeit
all the Officers of the Regiment know that (when the Regiment engaged with the
General and the Army in their engagement at New Market heath) the said
Lieutenant Colonel did seize upon the said 600 l (which was the treasure for
Provision for the Garrison of New Castle and Tinmouth-Castle, and that Major
Clarke had share of it with him they both dissenting from the Engagement of the
said Garrisons; and that notwithstanding the said Lieutenant Colonel gave a
Bill of his hand to repay it to the Commissary of provisions for the said
Garrisons, the said Lieutenant Colonel and Major have ever since shared and kept
and still keep the said 600 l (which was or might be some means to invite and
encourage the Scots to come into this Kingdom, and a means to encourage
Lieutenant Colonel Henry Lilburn to revolt and betray Tinmouth Castle the key
of the North of this Kingdom) finding the said Garrisons so destitute of
provisions, to the hazard of the loss of this Nation.

Charge III.
The Complainant says, the said Lieutenant Colonel keeps from him moneys
which have been long due in other relations then as his pay, viz. his part and
share of what was due to be paid by the Officers of the Regiment for moneys by
the Complainant expended in their march to the Relief of Gloucester, in their
march into Cornwall, and in his going to Lyme.

Charge IV.
That the said Lieutenant Colonel has been a violent oppressor and wronger of,
and an enemy to such as have been faithful, well-affected, diligent and
deserving, viz. to all that engaged in and with the Army, to the Complaintant
in particular in wronging him in his pay, in wronging Captain Bowen and
Captain Simmons in their accounts and by wrongfully seasing the said 600
pounds.

All the honest party of the Regiment can testify the truth of this Charge,
and that he has been a constant enemy to honest men, that slandering, wicked
and lying persons, and men of Belial, whose mouths have beeen full of foulest
calumny, have been by him most respected: His enmity to all that engaged with
the General and the Army (at New Market heath) and ready compliance with the
contrary Party, is well known to all the honest party of the Army: witness his
great Amity and Intimacy with that bloody Traitor, Hen. Lilburn, that betrayed
Tinmouth Castle, who wickedly and falsely aspersed those honest Agitators who
stood firm to the just Principles of their first Engagement, who endeavored to
persecute Captain Bray unto death, and falsely aspersed his own Brother, Lievt.
Col. John Lilburn (who were of as resolved Faith and Integrity to stand for the
Nations Interests and Freedom as Henry Lilburn (their bloody persecuter) was a
resolved Traitor. That H. Lilburn, with Lievt. Col. Ashfield, and as many as
they two could collate and win to their party (by whom some honest men were
likewise seduced and drawn in) did (before and about the very instant of time
that the said Lievt. Col. Revolted) violently oppose, and had almost ove-born
and suppressed all the Conscientious and honest party of the said Garrisons to
the Rending and Dividing of the said Garrisons. And I wish the Conscientious
and honest party of the Army could not say of Lievt. Col. Ashfield, and Lievt.
Col. Henry Lilburn (what David said of Saul and Jonathan) That in death they
were not divided: For the Captain that commanded the Second Party at the
Storming of Tinmouth Castle (of whom I never heard but that he was an honest
and stout man) told me that Lievt. Col. Ashfield (when they were to fall on)
refused to give him Orders, but referred him to the Engineer for Orders, by
which means that Party fell not on till the Castle was taken, and the other
Party engaged their lives alone, and Stormed and took the Castle alone. The Mr
Enginneer also said he would call Lievt. Col. Ashfield to account before a
Council of War (for miscarriages on his part) about the Storming and taking of
the said Castle.

Charge V.
The Complainant further says, That the said Lievt. Col. did use many
mis-reports, sharp menaces and revilings against the said Complainant in his
humble and quiet pursuit of his own just due and proper right, viz. He
threatened to lay him at his feet, to strike him upon the mouth, to confine him
to his Chamber, to abstract all his Pay, and to turn him out of his Place;
affirmed the said Complainant did scandalize him in speaking words, and in
reading of scandalous papers against him, upon the ser eral Guards of the sand
Garrison, by which said means, he obstructed the Complainants proceedings for
Justice, and occasioned extreme hazard of the Army, by rents and divisions
amongst the Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrison.

What am I or any man the better that our Cause is good, if the means to
manifest the truth serve but to Condemn, Cashier, Suppress, Imprison, Asperse
and Ruin the Assertors and Witnesses of the Truth (without trial or
examination) which when the Lievt. Col. (as he has endeavored) shall
accomplish, I believe he will put in an Answer to these Charges, and not
before. If Delinquents (in matters of highest concernment to this Nation) may,
(for self-safety and self ends (if need be) dissolve the Order and Frame of
Government, and if partiality and respect of persons, and relations be the
series and form of judicial proceedings) this Nation must suddenly become a
Field of blood, a Wilderness full of Ravening Wolves, and a Den of Wild-Beasts.

I gave in these Charges about the eight of February 1648 to the Judge
Advocate, and made this ensuing Appeal to the General Council about the
eighteen of February, but had no Redress, nor Answer of it.

Thomas Harby, Quartermaster.

To his Excellence, the Lord General FAIRFAX, and the General Council, The
humble acknowledgement and Appeal of THOMAS HARRY Quattermaster in the Regiment
lately under Command of Major Genesis SKIPPON.
I Humbly present to your honors this acknowledgement (in which God is my
record, that I confidently and verily believe the Charge I have Exhibited
against Leivt. Col. Ashfield, is both really true, and probable by good and
suficient proof and witness:) I confess I am not skilful in proceedings of
strife and divisions, as having ever sought peace, and therefore I might err
in order and manner of such matters; but I look upon the truth of God (in this
confession, that Charge, and all other relations) as the Rod of God in Moses
hand, which (when he cast it from him) turned into a Serpent, and he sled from
it: If I cast away the Truth, and flee from it, it is a Serpent to destroy me,
and to destroy such as cast it away and flee from it: If we take it up and hold
it fast, it is the Rod of God to bring us from a Land of burdens under War,
Violence, and Oppression, into a Kingdom wherein dwells Righteousness: What
is absolute truth, God knows; what I believe is really true, and probable by
suficient witness I here assert. What can or shall appear, I leave to God to
discover, and to just men to discern and judge: I know no president in the
Army, comparable to me, for wrongs and unjust sufferings; and I believe there
is none, nor has been any, therefore I made my humble Addresses to several
Representatives, but without Redress and in vain: My humble Desires in the said
Addresses chiefty were, That two men of approved fidelity (whom I on my part
should choose) as the Lievt. Col. on his part might have the same liberty) might
be appointed and authorized with power to take Examinations, and either to
decide and end all Differences and Grievances, or Report them, (as the best
expedient to Truth and Peace), and this Was my humble Desire to the Court
Martial. I gave the Charge to the Judge Advocate, in his Chamber, and asked him
if I must set the names of the Witnesses in the Margent? he said, No: and gave
it me back to alter something in it: The next morning I gave it him in his
Chamber, and he gave it me back, biding me give it him into the Court, which I
did; I told the Court, I would prove the Charge by sufficient witness, and
Declare to what he could allege against it, and desired that my witnesses
might be sent unto to be Examined; but the Court did not admit me that liberty,
but Ordered I should acknowledge at the Head of the Regiment, That I had
wronged the said Lievt. Col. and that should be all my punishment: I Answered,
I could not do it; not out of contempt to the Court, but because I was clearly
convinced in Conscience, That I had done him no wrong in that Charge: The Court
there upon Ordered I should be suspended 14. days, in which time if I did not
acknowledge I had done him wrong, I should be Cashiered. The Causes why I
Exhibited that Charge, are, First, because I do verily believe, and am
satisfied in Conscience, That that entire Charge for the substance of it) and
much more, is really true; and that he was the first causer and mover of that
strife. Secondly, because I did verily believe that from the time of the said
Regiments first Engaging with the Army, (about the time the Army engaged at
New-Market-Heath) the said Lievt. Col. did labor to work out, wrong, and
suppress, the honest Party of the Garrisons of Newcastle, and Tinmouth Castle,
to the extreme hazard of the said Garrisons: And I verily believe also that
this was the Sense of the honest party, and of those that had Engaged in the
said Garrisons. Thirdly, Because as David (a good man and a wise King) having
wronged Vriah, did from that Principle, improve all his power in himself, and
all the power and interest in the Captain of his Host to destroy that man, and
he did destroy him. So it is clear to me that he having wronged the honest
party, and those that engaged with the Army, in these Garrisons, must (and did)
from that Principle, improve his own power, and all his power and interest, in
and with other Officers and Commanders, to engage them unto him, to work out,
wrong, and suppress the honest party, and such as did engage, and thereby did
extremly hazard to destroy the Army by most unjust Oppressions, and continual
Rents, and Divisions. I am free in Spirit, that being convinced in Conscience
that this and much more, and that Charge is true: I had been guilty of
betraying my Faith, and Trust, had I not made Discovery of it; and for this
cause for Conscience sake, because I will not, nor can against my Conscience,
betray my Faith, and deny the Truth, am I censured to be Cashiered: Naboth was
stoned to death, yet not without testimony of two witnesses, though men of
Belial. I am deprived of the price of my blood, for seven years faithful
service, and in it of the Symbol and Staff of my native, and acquisite support
and maintenance, because I will not, nor in Conscience can, reject the Record
of God, witnessing the Truth, being Plaintiff my self, having no witness for
me, nor against me, that I saw, intending none, nor any Trial then, and at that
time, but to desire assistance of the Court, to order a right way, that my
proofs and witness might be received and examined, not doubting but to make
good the Charge, having the liberty of requisite and lawful time and means to
do it. Jotham put his Life in his hand to hazard it, that he might discharge
his Trust to the men of Sechem and Milo that they might not be destroyed,
saying, Harken to me you men of Sechem, that God may harken unto you: yet they
did not harken, and therefore were destroyed, Man, Woman, and Child, and their
City was sown with Salt. All Israel put their Lives in their hands, to hazard
them, that they might discharge their Faith and Trust to Benjamin, that they
might harken to do righteous judgment, and not be destroyed; but they did not
harken, and therefore were destroyed, Man, Woman, and Child; and they that did
not oppose them, and help to destroy them, were likewise destroyed: Not I, but
many of us (not once, but many times) have put our Lives in our hands, to
hazard them, that we might discharge our Faith and Trust to several
Representatives, in our many humble Addresses to them, That they might do
righteous judgment, and not be destroyed; but they have not harkned. And I am
free in Spirit, and in Conscience convicted, That this has been, and is the
only main Cause of all the War, Blood, and Destruction upon this Nation; and
will be the Destruction of the Army and it, if God do not incline the said
Representatives hearts, and Yours, to harken to do righteous judgment, that God
may harken to You and this Nation. To harken is better then fatt of Rams, but
sudden haste of rash Censure in Judgment, to judge any thing before the time,
or any man unheard, is to disobey and reject the Voice of God, and has no
concord with that soft and still voice, which is of God, and in which God is:
What I have often done to diverse of you, I do at this time to all of you; that
is, I put my Life in my hand, to hazard it, that I may discharge my Faith and
Trust to your Honors, and I must be free in discharge of it. Joseph's Brethren,
brought his Coat, rent, torn, and bloody, to his Father, and said, See, is this
thy Sons Coat, or no? I set (before your Honors eyes and the Alseeing eye of
God) this Coat miserably rent, and torn, of a deep Crimson, died red, dipped in
Blood, but whether it is or ought to be mine, or mine in such sort, I humbly
enquire? If I humbly seeking right and Redress of the greatest wrongs, must
receive seven fold, and that by those men, and that means from whom, and by
which only Redress can be had; I humbly enquire, whether this is your Sons
Coat, or no? If (because I bear the Record of God, the testimony of a good
Conscience, witnessing to me, that the things in that Charge, and this
Confession are true) I am deprived of the price of my blood, for seven years
faithful service, and of the fruits of all my hopes by that service; whether is
this your Sons Coat, or no? If I have (heretofore (often) and now.) hazarded my
Life to diverse Representatives, in free discharge of my Faith and Trust, for
their and this Nations safety; and if only for this very cause, I must perish,
and be destroyed, and that even by those, for whom I have hazarded my own Life,
to preserve them from being destroyed; whether is this your Sons Coat, or no?
If I have discharged my Trust to the State, and you, with as much simplicity of
Spirit, and integrity of heart, as any, as little seeking private unjust ends,
profits, or preferments, as any; as free from corrupting adulation, and
destructive fawnings of betraying flatteries, as any; And if I am exposed to
most unjust sufferings, more then any, and must be (by the only remedy) more
then any, remediless; whether is this your Sons Coat, or no? If your Honors say
it is my Coat, your Sons Crimson Coat, and that I must wear it, I accept it
with all meekness, and submission, and humbly resign my Place, and Life, at the
feet of this Honorable Council. But if I may receive at the hand of this
Honorable Council, my own proper Coat, clean washed from Blood, entire, and not
rent and torn; that is, I your Honors will admit me all due administration of
Right and Justice, viz. Alegal Trial by proof of Witness, and demonstration of
Reason, against whatsoever be can allege, or object: If your Honors please to
Authorize with power, and to appoint Two men of approved fidelity whom I on my
part, shall choose in our own Regiment; as he may have the same Liberty, to
choose Two for him, in the same Regiment, (that best know this business) to
examine Witnesses, and to decide the business; if not, to order and prepare it,
that it may be Reported to this Honorable Council, which was my humble Desire
in all my Addresses, as the only, best, and safist expedient for Truth and
Peace, and to prevent the extreme hazard of the Army, by dashings of men
contrary minded in Councels. If your Honors please to appoint the said men, to
examine, and to report to your honors my exceeding many grievances, in other
Relations, and to grant I may have effectual Redress of them; If you will grant
me the price of my Life, my due Pay, repeal the Sentence of the said Court, and
refrain the members of it, from having any suffrage or vote in this Council, or
any other against me, until the Truth do appear: Your Honors in so doing, (and
by harkning to do so to every man, that God may harken to you and this Nation)
shall begin a good work, to stay the Sword of the destroying Angel, which
hitherto has been drawn, and is imminent upon the Army and Nation. I must
freely, (as from God) discharge this one Duty more of Faith and Trust to your
Honors, in which I do not barely mind your Honors, but I humbly request and
beseech your Honors to retain this circumspect care, with, and amongst you,
That Courts of Justice ordained to be Pillars, to support the Safeties, Lives,
and entire Beings, of the Innocent, (when wronged, and oppressed) may not
become Mills to grind them to dust, and to destroy them, and Pillars to support
the contrary. I contemn no Court, Council, or Person, I condemn none, I shall
ever intercede for that Council, and the members of it, that past Sentence upon
me, and pray for your Honors, and shall ever do all Offices of Faith and Trust
to your Honors, Them, and the Army.

Thomas Harby, Quartermaster.

To all the Cordial Friends of the Armies and Peoples Rights and Liberties: The
sincere Lovers of Truth and Peace.
DEer Friends, Shall Tribulations, shall Anguish or Persecutions, shall fiery
Trials, shall love of filthy Lucre, Life, or Death, divide you or me from the
free discharge of our Consciences to God, or Duties to Men? God forbid. If any
be ignorant of any necessary Truth, or guilty of any Sin or Error, it is your
and my Duty (if we know it) to seek in all Wisdom of Meekness, to rectify and
convince their Judgments, lest they perish in the multitude of their sins, and
their sin, guilt, and destruction, be double upon us, and we our selves become
the greatest Transgressors (though actually in our own persons never so
innocent.) The sins of Ely's sons, were Ely's sins (which he committed not) but
his sons made themselves vile, and he stayed them not; therefore he
(especially) was guilty of their sins, and of his own and their destruction, A
man that sees and suffers the blind to fall into a Ditch and perish, is far
more guilty of his destruction then he himself: Therefore that I, and every one
of you may be free from the sins, and from the blood and destruction of all
men, I exhort earnestly, all and every one of you, to improve your Talents for
the good of this Nation, and of all men; for which end I set before you what
most concerns you to consider; because all our evils (if wisely foreseen and
well considered) are more then half remedied; I herein sometime assert mine own
advice and judgment, wherein, if I err, and if any will convince my judgment,
I shall with hearty thankfulness, accept it, and willingly recede from, and
forsake any known error.

1. In order to what ensues, I briefly set before you what hard measure I had
from the Court Martial, in censuring me to be cashiered, without suffering me
to prove my charge, or to have any trial, or any witnesses examined.

2. And thereby my great and most unjust disadvantage, because I being already
cashiered for that charge, no witnesses will dare to testify the Truth, lest
they should be censured to be cashiered or destroyed for so doing; I being a
President before them in the same thing.

3. Consider the superlative injustice of enforcing (not the Body, as the
Levites Concubine in Gibeah of Benjamin, to Sodomitish filthiness) but the
Spirit and Conscience of any man, and that upon penalty of being destroyed, to
deny and renounce God, and wittingly to embrace professed Atheism, against a
clear light and conviction of Soul and Conscience; to be forced to confess and
acknowledge a Ly to be Truth, contrary to knowledge and conviction of
Conscience, is to be forced to deny, and renounce the Truth of God, and to deny
and renounce God, contrary to knowledge and Conscience: Which because I utterly
refused, I was censured to be cashiered; and certified by Lieut. General
Hammond, President of the Court, that I deserved to die, but that the Court
favored me. And this was my sentence for seeking Justice, and for seeking
Right and Redress for the greatest wrongs done to the State, and to private
Persons, without being admitted to have any witness heard, or trial had.

4. Consider the transcendent misery of the Army and people (the honest party
especially) who when wronged and oppressed, may not approach a Representative
or Court of Justice for Justice, without inevitable peril of being destroyed
for so doing,

5. Consider the extreme misery of the disbanded, sick, and wounded Soldiers,
deprived of the price of their lives, their due pay in Arrears, which
countervails not their pains in seeking after it; for want of which, many
thousands have miserably perished, and do perish. Secondly, Consider that these
miseries upon them, and the poor, and the middle sort of people, are
exceedingly augmented, and occasioned by the Soldiers quartering in Cities and
Market Towns, especially in Inns and Alehouses, where the Soldiers learn
loose conversation, and waste the short pittance of their slender pay. Thirdly,
By means of their quartering in Cities and Market Towns, the Country being
free, enhanceth and almost doubleth the price of all provisions, whereby a
general scarcity and famine is procured. Fourthly, By means of this scarcity,
the Soldiers and the poor of the Nation, but the disbanded Soldiers, and the
poor of Cities and Market Towns especially, perish for want of food and
raiment. Fourthly, By this means the middle sort, and Tradesmen of Cities and
Market Towns, being also over-burdened with Taxes, Excise, and Quartering, and
not having trading nor visible Estates, are forced to become suddenly extreme
poor; and which is worst, the remedy of all these evils, is the root of the
disease; that is, they that should redress all these miseries, are the cause of
them: To redress which, and to take away this cause of all the rest,

Sixthly, Consider the many intolerable encumbrances incident to Representatives
and Courts of Justice, through their several Administrations, and multiplicity
of business; whereby, if any of them desire to do Justice, and to redress the
cruelties and oppressions which the Soldiers, the middle fort, and the poor of
the Nation suffer; yet they cannot do it, because they are overcharged and
encumbered with more business then they may possibly discharge; amongst whom,
all just causes of all sorts of people, and of the poor, are like good seed
sown amongst thorns, that choke it. So that while they are busied, Martha-like,
about many things, they must of necessity omit in all things, the only one
thing necessary; which is, To do righteous Judgment. By this means War and
Destruction has bin, and is continued upon this Nation; and the people every
where perish for want of their proper food (the fruit of the Tree of Life)
which is Justice and Righteousness. For remedy hereof, and to take from Courts
and Representatives this burden, which they can no more bear, then a new born
child can bear the weight of a Millstone, let the order and method of going to
Law after the manner of Infidels, be (what may be) declined and abrogated; and
let the Rule of God in the Gospel, to end all Differences, and cease strife, be
strictly observed and followed.

The manner of going to Law as Heathens, is when two or more at variance
betwixt themselves, cannot judge their own cause, but go to a corrupt
Representative or Court for Judgment, that has no judgment, or that has
less judgment then themselves, because it knows less of their business, and
has no leisure or time, neither will or can have leisure to apprehend the true
grounds and caus^s of their differences, whereby both complainants and
defendents mispend their time, waste their Estates, and neglect their business:
The Courts also by casting blindly and at random their ras^^ bolts, make the
Nation (as they are, and through them) guilty of corrupt and wicked
Administrations, and they instead of ceasing strife, cause it; Gods Rule in the
Gospel is thus, or after this manner; That the grieved party should peaceably
convince and reprove the Trespasser in private, with the Spirit of meekness. If
the grieved party cannot convince him that trespasseth, then he is to choose one
that is b^st able and most faithful, to judge. Is it so that there is not one
Wise man amongst you? (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 6.5.) One is fittest to end all
matters of difference betwixt two or more dis-satisfied parties (if both or all
parties shall agree to choose and appoint one to end all strife betwixt them; if
one cannot end all matters of difference betwixt two parties, let each party
choose one, Set them to judge, who are least esteemed in the Church (says the
Apostle) because they that are least esteemed in the Church are evermore, or
(at least) are, usually, best able and most faithful to judge. They that are
set to judge any matters of difference, must not maintain a difference where
the business may be justly composed in peace; nor move unto peace, where there
is real cause of difference, and where Peace with Truth cannot be reconciled.
If one or two cannot end any matter of difference, let them bring it into fit
Series and Order for further trial, and let the dis satisfied parties add for
each, one or two more: If two or three for each cannot end it, then let the
dis-satisfied parties choose a Representative, consisting of twelve men, and a
President freely and equally chosen for, and by each; and let the two or three
first chosen, having succinctly stated the business, transmit it to the Select
Representative, and be in, and of the said Representative themselves: If the
Select Representative cannot end the difference, the dis-satisfied partys may
have liberty to Appeal to a more general Representative, and the Select
Representative is to refer and transmit the Order of the business, and of their
proceedings in it, to the more general Representative.

By this means all matters of difference in all places, will be (by the
Christian wisdom and prudence of a few persons) composed, the seeds and roots
of Sedition eradicated and destroyed; and War, and the miseries of it,
prevented and ended.

Or, if any shall Appeal from Persons and Representatives of their own choosing
to any other Courts, their business comes to these Courts, as the Dove, with an
Olive branch, to Noah's Ark, with clear evidence and decision in it self, from
the test and trial of these that have before examined it.

If any difference be betwixt person and person, or betwixt person, or persons,
and any Representative, or betwixt Representative and Representative, Court and
Court, they (being parties one against another) cannot be Judges of, or
Witnesses one against another; or, if they assume that power, to be proceeded
against, as usurpers over the persons, lives, and liberties of the Freeborn
people.

But whether the difference be betwixt man and man, or betwixt a man and any
Representative, or Court, (select, subordinate, or more general) they are to
choose persons, or Representatives upon equal terms of Liberty and Freedom,
without respect to parties or relations whatsoever.

If any dis-satisfied parties have Appealed to the Supreme Representative, they
are not to Appeal from that Representative to any other, during the time of the
Being of the said Representative. Howbeit the dis-satisfied parties or their
representatives, in their own cause, may Appeal, if need be, to the
represented, and claim the suffrage and result of it: and the represented must
take Cognizance of their Appeal, and redress their wrongs, as all Israel did at
the summons but of one single private man, the Levite of mount Ephraim, that it
may free it self from the Nations sins and guilt of bloodshed in the seat of
Judgment, and this is but equivalent to that rule in the Gospel, Tell it the
Church.

7 Consider the necessity and Justice that the equity of the Law be judged, and
declared to be the Law it self, and the only essential rule, of all
administrations, in Judgment, and Execution.

Secondly, That the Letter of the Law be Judged and Declared to be the proper,
visible Conduit, containing the equity of the Law (the Law it self, but not
that Law, nor that equity) and to be the elementary instrumental rule of all
administrations, wherein the equity of the Law consentaniously occureth and
agre^th with the letter, and in these relations only.

Thirdly, That they that are contrary to the equity of the law under pretense
of adhering to the letter of the Law, be looked upon, and proceeded against as
breakers of the law.

Fourthly, That all Representatives, Courts, or Councels that act contrary to
the equity of the law, under pretense of adhering to the letter, be looked upon
and proceeded against, as breakers of the Law (as persons) and as breakers of
Trust, (as Representatives.)

Fifthly. That all persons that act contrary to the letter of the Law under
false pretense of adhering to the equity of the law, be looked upon, and
proceeded against as breakers of the Law in relation to the letter and equity
of it.

Sixthly, That all Representatives, Courts, or Councels, that act contrary to
the letter of the Law, under any false pretense of adhering to the equity of
the Law, without the concurrence and assent of those they represent, be looked
upon, and proceeded against as breakers of the law, as persons; and as
betrayers of their Trust, as representatives; and that in relation to the
letter and equity of the law: because in their obstinate pursuit especially,
they act against, as persons; and betray, as representatives, the life and
form of the State, equity; and dissolve all Law and Government.

That it be not in the power of any representatives, Courts, or Councels, to
act according to the letter of the law, contrary to the equity, or according to
the equity of the law, contrary to the letter, without the concurrence and
assent of those they represent; lest, contrary to the end of their appointment,
they involve themselves, and those they represent, into the deepest guilt.

Seventhly, That all bodies represented; be accounted, and declared to be
really guilty of all injuries, oppressions, and bloody cruelties which are
done, or not condemned; or which are justified by their Representatives,
Courts, or Councels, and that they may be liable to give full reparations
accordingly, except the said bodies represented, reprove and punish their said
representatives, with due severity, and effectually redress the wrongs and
injuries by them done or decreed; for if a man eat poison and destroy himself,
it were fondness to say the fault was in the mouth that was enticed by the
taste of it, or in the eye that was allured to it, because the fault is in all
the parts of the whole body alike.

Eighthly, If any Plaintiff, Witness, Council, Judge, or Jury, give a false
Indictment, Evidence, Decree, Sentence, or Verdict; and if the said Indictment,
Evidence, Decree, Sentence, or Verdict, upon just trial, and due examination
first had, shall be found to be wholly false, let the Authors be judged and
declared, by those persons or Courts that shall find them false, guilty
(respectively) of the same Crimes, and receive the same Sentence and punishment
which had been the proper issue and result of their respective false
Indictments, Evidences, Decrees, Sentences, and Verdicts (if they had been
true) against the Innocent; and unjustly, wronged Defendants: and they are to
satisfy the law unto death, if they have acted unjustly to the death of any.
Also all Officers, Marshals, and Persons, whether Soldiers or others, that
execute such, or any unjust commands or decrees, by virtue of any injuncti^n or
order from any Representative, or Commanders whatsoever, are strictly
accomptable to the Law, and liable to the same sentences of guilt and
punishment; and that (if the breach of Law which they execute deserve death)
unto death.

The reasons of such proceedings against all such Plaintiffs Witnesses, Courts,
Judges, Juries, Officers, Martials, and Persons that execute such Decrees, are
first, Because all such proceedings are according to Law, which is equity.
Secondly Because such violations of Law and Equity (by Trustees and
Representatives) sill the Land, and the Representatives of it, with all excess
of cruelty, and guilt of crying and bloody sins. Thirdly, Because Plaintiffs,
Courts, Witnesses, Judges, and Juries, that act unjustly in Council; and all
Officers and Persons (whether Soldiers or others) that execute their unjust
Acts or Decrees, are Trustees; and all Trustees that arrogate and usurp Trust
and Authority to themselves, or that are false to the Power and Trust that is
committed to them, are Traitors. Good and just Trustees, conjunct in bodies
Representative, are like Trees of Life; which by their good fruits of Justice
and Righteousness, sustain and preserve alive their respective bodies
represented. Plaintiffs and Witnesses are Trustees impressive, as the root of
the Representative Tree. Courts, Counsels, Judges, and Juries, are Trustees
intensive, as the Stem. They that execute their Edicts and Decrees, (whether
sub-Officers, Martials, Soldiers. or others, are Trustees expressive, as the
Branches. False Trustees, by fair, but deceitful fruits, betray their
respective represented, and themselves to sin and death. Trees nourish, if
acquired or, ingrafted, contrary natures and fruits, but according to nature,
the fruits of their own kind; If Plaintiffs and Witnesses be roots of
bitterness, and dispense death, the Stem may not derive sap from these roots.
If the Stem (Courts, Councels, Judges, and Juries) derive its sap from such
roots, the Branches, the Executioners, (whether Sub-Officers, Soldiers, or
others,) are not to derive their sap from that Stem, or these roots to put
forth their wicked Councels, and unjust Decrees into execution: or if they do,
the body represented, must (with due severity) sharply reprove and punish their
evil fruits of unrighteousness; and, if Justice require, destroy Root, Stem,
and Branches, at least from being any more a Representative. That Body
Representative which does not with Justice and due Severity, sharply reprove
and punish its Representatives evil fruits of unrighteousness, eats their
deadly fruits, as destroys it self; as Eli not reproving and punishiag his
sons, made their sins his own, and himself most guilty of them; and so
destroyed himself, them, and his house.

Trustees that shed innocent blood, or shed not their blood tdatare guilty of
blood, are murderers: All oppressions, wrongs, cruelties, and unjust actions,
are degrees and species of real bloodshed and murder; and they usually differ
from visible and express manslaughter or murder no otherwise, then as the
wickedness of hypocrisy differs from visible and apparent sin; For it was all
one for David to have slain Vriah with his own sword, or with the sword of the
Ammonites, only that had a better color of hypocrisy: So it is all one to
slay the poor, and the middle sort of people, and the Soldiers by immediate
stroke of violence, or to slay them by oppression, or by extorting from them
unjustly, that which should maintain their lives, or by needless delays of
doing right, or by keeping back their proper estates, pay, and just interests;
only this has a better color of hypocrisy: So it is all one to kill the
conscientious and honest party, or others (as Doeg did the Priests of the Lord)
by immediate violence, or to kill them by oppressions or imprisonment; or as
Naboth was, by false witnesses, or by starving and famishing of them: only
this has a fairer pretense, and better color of hypocrisy, and therefore is
more wicked. And those Trustees that either in Counsel or Execution do act or
commit such things, are Law-breakers (as persons) and betrayers of their Trust
(as Representatives) and embrue the hands of the Nation, and their own, in the
deepest guilt of blood. Therefore all Plaintiffs and Witnesses that know
certainly any oppression, cruelty, or unjust actions done unto, or by any
person, the Nation, or themselves, must (as Trustees) faithfully discharge
their Consciences to God, and duties to themselves, and Nation, to free it and
themselves from guilt of blood, and breach of the Law; and to free themselves
from breach of Trust; and that in the cause of any, and of every particular and
distinct person within the limits of their relation whatsoever.

Ninthly, And therefore the Law (that is equity) and the just ministers of it,
need not, nor do, nor can admit of any unjust or corrupt connivances,
indulgencies, or indempnities whatsoever. Adam when he had sinned, and saw
himself naked, sought Fig Leaves to cover his nakedness; So let them that break
the Law, and that betray and destroy it, and those that stand to maintain it;
seek unjust ^egments and shelters: But the Law (that is, Equity) and the just
ministers of it, must be impartially free to bring forth judgment into
righteousness, without respect of Persons or Relations, and without regard of
the Office, Eminency, or multitudes of any.

Tenthly, That all Representatives for their own justification and security,
and satisfaction of all men; keep a complete and perfect record of all their
Decrees and Executions, expressing the whole series of all their proceedings,
and the Votes of every particular person of their Representative, their names,
and places of residence, and the particular examinations of every witness, with
their names, and place of residence: These Records to be attested by two or
three men of known integrity, under their hands; men (if it may be) no way
concerned in the cause, nor engaged to any parties that do try, or are tried;
and that the parties tried may have (if they desire it) Copies of the
Representatives whole proceedings (as aforesaid) so attested. For it was no
satisfaction as to the assoylment of Ahab by the Elders of Israel from the
blood of Naboth, that Naboth was put to death by a wicked Representative
through false witness: Also that the evidence of men of Pharasaical and bloody
Spirits, common Barretters, and men of Belial, and such as manifest looseness,
and little or no Conscience in their conversations, may not be easily admitted
in Judgment, especially against men of known honesty and integrity: Let their
testimony be circumspectly examined, and if their evidence upon due examination
be found false, let them suffer the same punishment which had bin due to the
defender, if their witness had bin true.

8 Consider the wrong, and abuse done to the Soldiers, and Nation, in not
paying the Soldiers, at disbanding, their full and total due for their
Service, especially in disbanding some without having their Arrears Audited and
Stated, without any Debenter, and without any Pay at Disbanding: First, Because
the Nation is thereby made guilty of devouring the Symbol and price of the
Blood and Lives of the Soldiers, who with the uttermost hazard of their blood,
and lives; have supported the Nation; this David abhorred, and would not drink
the price of the blood of his soldiers, though it was but water, and he
himself like to perish for want of it. Secondly, the Nation is hereby made
guilty of most unnatural ingratitude of extensive horror and vastness. Thirdly,
The Nation is hereby made guilty of perfidious violation and enfringment of the
Faith and Honor of the Nation, and the Army of its Faith and Honor in its just
Engagements to the contrary. Fourthly, By this means, many of the Army and
Nation (were justly) and some (desperately) imbittered, and provoked, and
thereby, as a just punishment of this Nations bloody sins, a new War was
caused, wherein the whole Nation was at the very brink of being wholly lost.
Fifthly, The Nation is thereby made guilty of the blood that was shed in that
War, and of its own extreme hazard by that War, for the violation of the Faith
of the Nation, by the Nation; and of the Army, by the Army; was judged to be
the undoubted main Cause of that dangerous and bloody War, and of all the
distresses and miseries that have thereby, since ensued: therefore it had been
more safe and honorable, better accepted of men, and more just in the sight of
God, though they had Disbanded but. Ten in a day, to have paid them their total
and full Due, in Arrears, at Disbanding. Sixthly, Consider that a Debenter is
but a titular, and no real Interest, and satisfies not the Nations, and
Peoples, nor the Soldiers just interest, in relation to the Freedom of the
Nation, from the slain of guilt that lies upon it, and in relation to the
Soldiers in point of Right. The Kings Party are r^koned, by some, better
without Debenters, because they are not therewith undone and destroyed, by
fruitless seeking their Pay in Arrears, till they starve and perish. To prevent
this, and procure present necessary relief, many Soldiers are forced to sell,
as Esa^ his birth right for pottage, their Debenters f^r some small me
inconsiderable sum of money perhaps Ten pound in Arrears for Ten or five
shillings of present money; So whiles the Soldiers serve the State with
hazards of their lives; perhaps they that have bin their enemies in field, or
their oppressers, receive their pay in arrears, and (by making advantage of
their necessities) wrong and defraud them of the price of their blood; and they
and their families miserably without remedy starve and perish for want of it.
Consider this bloody extortion, and the cause of it, necessity; and the cause
of that necessity; a paper, instead of real pay; insufficient to relieve the
least necessity. Consider the equity that this superlative extortion, and the
causes of it, be effectually abrogated; that all such contracts may be null,
and that the Soldiers may receive the entire price of so deer a purchase
(without fraud) infallibly.

9. Consider the sad condition of all the Foot and Horse, in relation to their
present pay; and of the disbanded, sick, and wounded Soldiers. Many of the
Foot and Horse have Families to provide for; now whether is 8 d per diem
sufficient to maintain a single man in any due equipage, as to conserve health,
or keep him an honest man? Much less him that has a charge and family. A
single man in ordinary health, may eat eight penny worth of bread and wholesome
meat (as rates are) at one meal, and yet be forced to drink water with it: But
a Soldiers clothes, and linen, and washing, and reparations, and shoes, and
stockings, (if he order himself in any wholesome or seemly manner) will cost him
4 d per diem, throughout the year: So then, he has 4 d a day to find him,
which (as rates are) is not so much as 2 d a day was formerly, and which is not
sufficient for one Soldier, to afford him half of one good meal in a day,
through the year, and yet this must maintain his Wife and Family also, if he
have any. And because this pittance, (too short for any prisoner) is too much
for a S^uldier, about a third part of their pay in Arrears, must be deducted
for Free Quarter; which no Law nor Equity can justify, except they that deduct
it can prove to whom, and from whom in particular it is due, and pay it
accordingly, and then the rest of the Soldiers pay in arrears (which amounts
to nothing except extreme damage and loss looking after it) must be paid them
seldom or never: So that the condition of Soldiers (of the disbanded, sick,
and wounded much more) is the most exquisite masterpiece of oppression and
slavery, that can be conceived, and directly and wholly against all humanity,
much more against Christian equity, integrity and goodness. The Soldiers of
Horse and Foot are Freeborn English, and not Native Bondslaves: Slavery and
Bondage in corporal and spiritual. Corporal Bondage is a subduing and bringing
under of the Body by sore labor, and servile work, or watchings, not affording
food and raiment sufficient to bear up the body in its laborious thrall.
Spiritual bondage is co-incident to Corporal bondage; For as a corrupt vessel
corrupts what is contained in it, so the bodies of the Soldiers, brought low
by many surfets, through sundry constant hard services, wearied with often
watchings and ill accomodations, lamed and broken with bruises, wounds, heats,
hunger, cold, aches, and often sicknesses, filled with all serdes, and filth of
lothsom poverty and nakedness, renders their Spirits slavish and abject, their
persons desperate, and careless of themselves and families, and them and their
families debauched and wicked, and ready and prone to pursue rash and unjust
courses, which cast them upon the mercies of their Representatives, who condemn
and cashier them; deprive them of their just and necessary livelihood, the
staff of their lives, and bridle which should restrain them from wickedness;
and they deprive many of life also. Want is Virtues clog, and the most violent
spur and provocation to all wickedness: It fits men for all vassallage and
slavery: It puts out the eyes of reason, and renders men's minds brutish; It
subjects their Spirits to all servile wickedness, and their Bodies to all
unjust burdens of corporal calamities and miseries; It makes Soldiers slaves
to bloody Designs, Vassals of base and wicked enterprises, to kill (if
commanded or not commanded) one another, or their best friends, and to engage
in blood against any, or against all the Freeborn People, to destroy them.
Extreme and unjust Poverty caused by cruel oppression, is the iron chain of
cursed bondage, which makes men slaves to other men's wills, and wickedness;
Slaves to their own sins, slaves to all miseries, slaves to their own utter
^uine, slaves to destruction of Body and Spirit: They that put the poor, and
the Soldiers, and the middle sort of people in iron chains of unjust wrongs
and oppressions, and they that do not effectually endeavor to break their
chains, and to redress their wrongs and oppressions, bring the guilt of the
blood of the poor, and of the Nation, upon themselves, and upon the Nation.

The poor of the Nation (for the most part) are Soldiers, undone in service,
turned out, and deprived of their proper Rights, the price of their blood: Many
of the Nation are made poor in pursuing their, and the Peoples Rights and
Liberties; and the rest of the poor (for the most part) are such as are undone,
by slavery and oppression.

I mention these things for no other purpose, but that the bloud-guilty
defilement of the Land, if possible, may be purged from it; and for redress of
it, I propose, First, that the Foot may have 12. d. per diem, from the beginning
of the Service (as was promised) or as due by a better right, the just claim of
Equity and Necessity; Why should the Soldiers eat ashes, and be clothed in
rags by those for whom they have purchased by their hazard and blood, to be
clothed in Scarlet, and to eat the fat of the Land. Secondly, That the constant
future pay for the Foot, be (at least and when things are as cheap as they have
bin) twelve pence per diem; and that their present and future pay be (as rates
of all provisions are now, and may be) so much above twelve pence per diem, as
may competently maintain them and their charge in due health with honesty.

3. That Troopers and Dragoons may have 2. s 6. d per diem, from the beginning
of the Service: and for future, what more may justly countervail their
necessities; the deerness and scarcity of all things considered.

4. That the sick and wounded Horse and Foot, that for that cause are out of
Service, may have the same pay that they in service have, but not pay for
horses except they keep horses for the Service. The Soldiers when sick and
wounded, have most need of their pay, and they best deserve it, who (in
discharge of their faithfulness) have suffered most.

5. That the sick and wounded Officers may the same pay which they had in
service, it being extreme hard, and unjust measure, that they or the Soldiers
should be then most destitute, when they have most need; or that their
faithfulness (wherein they have hazarded their lives, and bin wounded) should
be punished with privation or abridgement of their pay.

6. That all Officers and Soldiers that have bin faithful to their trust, and
(for that cause) or otherwise unjustly turned out, dismissed, or cashiered, may
be forthwith restored to their respective charge and places of trust, and have
all legal and due administrations of Right and Justice, and equal and
answerable reparations given them in all just relations; For it is unreasonable
and unjust in the Nation, and in its Trustees and Officers, and dangerous to
the Nation; That they that have bin ever faithful to their trust, and born the
burden of the Service, should be turned out or cashiered, especially without
due satisfaction, and other Officers and Soldiers (perhaps false to their
present Trust or late enemies to it, or newters, or not fit for Service)
should' be trusted with the charge and trust of the Nation.

Seventhly, That all Widows, and Orphants, or the next kindred of all such
Soldiers, or Officers (if they have been faithful to their Trust) as have
been, or shall be dead, or slain in Service, may have their Arrears Audited and
paid them, that the Nation may be free from the guilt and sins of blood and
oppression, least God say to it, or to many of it, (as Elisha to Ahab for
Naboths blood) Have thou killed, and also taken possession? or least God plead
the Cause of the many thousands of Soldiers slain by cruel and unjust murder
and oppression, and the Cause of their desolate widows and fatherless, with
the Nation, and Representative of it, and say, Have you killed, (not one man as
Naboth was but one) but many thousans: not who denied you their vineyards, but
gave their lives for you to do you service. Have you killed them by keeping
back the slender pittance of their deer purchase, their due Pay, which should
have kept them alive? Have you killed there by keeping back the price of their
bloods, who kept not back their own blood, that they might preserve your lives
and Estates entire? Did you enthral their bodies in all corporal calamities,
exigences, extremities, even unto death; and did you kill their bodies? did
their calamities, and extreme exigents enslave their Souls and Spirits in all
excess of wickedness? for ^so greater inforcement can be to all wickedness then
necessity; are they utterly cut of and killed Body and Soul, in and by their,
and in them your wickedness? And have you cut off, and killed them in body and
soul? To keep back and bridle them from wickedness, had been your duty; and did
you set your steely spurs of oppression in their sides, and cause them to rush
headlong into all wickedness, and perish in it? Did you kill them by keeping
back the price of their hazard and blood, which had you paid them, they had not
perished, or you had bin guiltless? And have you taken possessian of it? Did
you possess the whole Land in peace? and did you keep back (when you had no
need) the price of their lives from their desolate widows, and forsaken
fatherless? Did you give possession of it to others that had no right to it?
and did dogs (to whom it was not due) lick their blood? Did you, when you had
power, free the Nation from blood, or by not doing it, plunge and re-involve it
in a new bloody War? Did Ahab, when sharply reproved, humble himself, and have
you hardened your hearts, when friendly admonished in the spirit of meekness?
Did you harken to corrupters and seducers, and despise, imprison, persecute,
and destroy those that did faithfully admonish, and friendly exhort you? Let
the Nation, at least the Conscientious Party, seriously consider these things,
as what highly concerns the entire safeties of them and it?

Eighthly, For relieving of the rest of the poor, and for preserving of the
middle sort of people from extreme poverty and beggary, Let every parish be
brought into a Body represented, and constitute a Representative and
Representators of its own in its self. Let the body represented, Conveen as often
as there shall be just cause: the body Representative (if need be) every week.
Let the end of the Conveening of the body represented, and of the body
representative, be (especially at first) to determine who are the poor of that
body that must be relieved, and how relieved. Secondly, Who are the middle sort
that cannot relieve, and need not be relieved. And Thirdly, who are the rich
that may relieve and bear some burden, and what burden they may bear toward
the discharge of the Debts of the Nation, and relief of the poor.

The poor are to be relieved by having all Commons, Fennes, Forests, Parks,
and donations of Houses, Lands, and Moneys that have been anciently their due,
restored to them, and a stock of cattle raised for them to improve it for their
maintenance. They that cannot improve Land or Cattle by their labor, are to be
relieved by being set at work, and what they want of sufficiency to relieve
them by their labor, must be allowed by Contributions.

Secondly, The middle sort that cannot relieve, and need not relief; and the
poor must be freed from all burdens, that they may the better provide for, and
maintain their own Families: and to this end, let Excise and Tithes be taken
off from all. 2 Where Tithes have been bought, let just recompense be given to
the Buyer (if it may be) by the Seller, and let the Seller in like manner
require his satisfaction. 3 The considerations and original grounds upon which
Tithes were first granted by the people, are to be considered: If they were at
first freely demised and granted by the people, and not extorted: and if the
considerations and grounds upon which they were demised and granted, were (in
those times) visibly just, and equal; then there is some reason they should be
re-bought by the people (they not paying more then what the buyer paid.

Thirdly, Let all Taxes, Sessements, and Quartering be taken off from the poor
and middle sort of people, and let their Landlords bear their burden.

Fourthly, Let no Farmers pay any Taxes or Sessements, nor bear any burden of
Free Quarter, or otherwise, in relation to the Land they Rent: For Free Quarter
is not, nor can be quite taken away, as Rates of Provisions are, and the
Soldiers Pay being no more.

Fifthly, Let no Soldiers Quarter in Cities and Market Towns, which causes
scarcity and famine in the Land, and destroys the poor and middle sort of
people.

Representors of every Parish are to be but two; their Office is to see, and
provide that the poor and middle sort of people (whose Representors they are)
be not oppressed, or deprived of their just Rights, and to obtain them (where
wanting) that all due administrations of Right and Justice be extended to all
persons, and to decide and end all differences, and cause strife to cease in
their respective Parishes, without going to Law, as Heathens, to destroy one
another.

To complete a perfect Representative in every Parish, let eleven or twelve
more be added to the two Representors to perform the same Office with them
where they have first done their endeavors, and cannot determine or end any
difference. Let every complete Representative consist of twelve men, and a
President. Let their Representors (especially) and also the body Representative
be men fearing God, dealing truly, and hating Covetousness; haters of
Oppression, enemies to Usurpers, and Oppressors, impartial to all, free from
Pharisaical bloody rigor, and lovers and approvers of the Nations and Armies
just Engagements for the Nations Freedom, and the just Liberties and Interests
of all persons. If two or twelve so qualified cannot be found in some Parishes,
then they are to join with some other Parish or Parishes, until so many may be
found. No person, or grieved parties shall be tied to refer their grievances to
the said two, or twelve, unless they freely choose them themselves; otherwise
they may equally and freely choose any other two or twelve. Every person in
every Represented, and Representative, may freely give his Vote and Advice; but
if the Sentence and Result be recented as unjust, their sufferage, and Voice
only, that are known to be conscientious and qualified as aforesaid, shall
stand; and the Voices of others, though never so rich and powerful usurpers and
oppressors, be of no force. Two Representors in every Parish (elected by the
Represented, or by the poor and middle sort of people in it) may (by the
approbation and assent of their respective poor and middle sort of people)
choose two for the County or Shire to perform the like Offices to the poor and
middle sort of people of the Shire or County. Also two Representors (chosen in
every Shire or County) may (by approbation and assent of their respective
Parochial Representors, and of the middle sort of people and poor of the
Nation) choose and appoint two Representors (for the middle sort of people, and
poor of the Nation) who (being fitly qualified) may reduce the sad and
afflicted condition of the poor and middle sort of people into an expeditious
and right order of speedy and effectual redress.

Consider that slavery is the most vile and miserable condition, and blackest
curse, that is or can be incident to men; the bond of sin and death to their
bodies and spirits, the chain of destruction to the Nation; and therefore it
requires our earnest care to quit our selves and Nation from it. A Pillar of a
cloud, and of fire, did direct Israel out of Egyptian Bondage into the
promised Land of Liberty. The light and truth of God in the Judgments and
Spirits of men, is that real and true Pillar of fire, which all freeborn
people of God do and must follow; That was outward, this inward: That gave
light to the Body, this to the Spirit. God (in, and by that Pillar of fire) led
and delivered Israel ( Abraham's Freeborn) from their chains of cruel bondage,
into their land of promised liberty. God (in and by this Pillar of light, and
fire, in the judgments and Spirits of his people) leads and delivers his
Freeborn, from real bondage of body and spirit, (under all burdens of bloody
guilt, and cruel oppressions) into the land of promised peace, truth, and
perfect freedom. Israel moved not but after that cloud by day; and moved and
did all things by night, in and by the light of that pillar of fire. So the
Freeborn of God (in the Army and Nation) must in all their motions and
actings, follow after, and act in, and by the light of the Pillar of God (the
pillar of light and truth in their own Spirits:) They must not sell or enslave
their own or others lives, light, liberties, interests, bodies, and spirits, to
serve (under all barbarous calamities, and bloody wickedness of blind
obedience) the vi^est vassals of slavery, as the sons of Jacob sold their
brother, the preserver of their lives and beings, into the house of bondage.
They must (in all their motions and actions) walk and act in the liberty of the
light of God in their own spirits: and not act or acquiesce from principles of
an implicite-faith in the Arbytrarie commands of will and power in any
Representative or person whatsoever. It is small satisfaction or security to
any man (that may see if he will, but will follow and be led by a blind man,
till both fall into a ditch and perish) to think to say for himself a blind man
led him, and it was his own will, and he would be led by him. So if any
sub-Officers, Soldiers, or others, shall execute any unjust decree by order of
or from any Commanders or Representatives whatsoever, the plea of their order
were weak, and without all satisfaction. They must not think their Officers
command (if unjust) can free them or their Officers from the just doom and due
penalty of the Law, no more then a murderers plea at the Bar, that his fellow
robber commanded him to kill the murdered, can quit him or his fellow from
guilt of murder, or from death due to murderers. Neither may any person or
persons, or Representatives, Courts, or Councels, vainly conceive that any
imposed Trust, Place, or Office, or personal Eminency, or that their being
many, is or can be of any force to free them (more then any one private mean
man) from due punishment, though it be death which the Law inflicteth for,
breach of it; or to free any person or persons whom they employ, from the like
punishments. Howbeit the Freeborn of God in Army or Nation, Officers,
Soldiers, or private men, that groan under the cursed burdens of bloody
wickedness, and barbarous oppressions which they have born themselves, or laid
upon others, if they seek earnestly, and effectually endeavor the redemption
of their bodies and spirits; and to free others from the same bondage (whereof
the Israelites bondage in Egypt and deliveranoe out of it was but a type and
shadow) may, and ought to be in some measure commiserated; and their cruelties
time past, if utterly renounced, and really repented of, may be so far passed
by, as the Law can admit: also some unjust actions o^ infirmity and weakness,
so far only as may stand with law and equity, may be born withal.

God keeps not the children of light in chains of darkness, but wills that
all men should be saved from cursed servitude, and bondage of body and spirit,
by coming unto, and following after the pillar of God, the knowledge of the
Truth in their own Judgments and Spirits; and that they walk and act at all
times and in all relations, in the light of this pillar of fire within them,
Wherefore let all the Freeborn of God in the Army and Nation, cast off the
wicked burdens of cursed and blind obedience to Representatives Arbytrarie
commands of Will and Power; and fix the eyes of their understandings upon the
pillar of God, in their own Judgments and Spirits: Let them seriously consider
in and with themselves, and with one another, the grounds of all their actions;
engagements, and executions, and be well advised and satisfied in their
Spirits, to what end, and where unto they tend; whether to liberty or bondage,
light o^ darkness, to Zion or Sinai; whether they be works of Hagar o^ Sarah;
Sem or Cham: and whether they tend to enslave, oppress, and wrong themselves,
the people, and Nation; and other persons, people, or Nations; or to right, and
free themselves and Nation, and other Nations from slavery, wrong, and
oppression?

Let them improve the most rich, and precious Talent of their Birthright, and
Freedom, to debate, dispute, plead, question, and examine the causes, grounds,
and terms, upon which they act, engage, or execute any thing. Ephesians. 5.15. And
(in all things) walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; Heb. 15.14. And
as those that are of full age, who by reason of perfection, and use, have their
senses exercised, to discern both good and evil.

Let them consider their Representatives Propositions, Counsels, and Decrees,
whether they be just or unjust: whether they are to be observed by them, or to
be reproved, or punished in their Representatives: whether they tend to involve
them and the Land in blood, and massacre, or to free it and them from it. If
Chams cursed Sons compel, or persuade them to forsake Freedom and embrace
bondage; to mo^l themselves by doing all base, and dirty drudgery of vile, and
servil wickedness, and to wallow in all unjust, and extreme wants, and cursed
calamities, caused by unjust oppressions, and cruelties; let them fix their
eyes upon the pillar of God in their own Spirits, and walk in the light of it,
and follow after it: If they command them to couch under all burdens of cursed
servitude, and to be (with them, as they are) servants of servants: slaves of
servile, and blind obedience, and brutish ignorance; to act from an implicit
Faith in their usurping taskmasters arbritary commands of Will and Power, to
kill and murder, at their command, their best and most faithful friends, and
fellow Soldiers, to enterprise any bloody act of massacre, and slaughter upon
each other, or upon the nation: to perpetrate and execute (at their command)
all oppression, and cruelty, upon the nation, and (through wicked blindness,
and brutish ignorance) upon, and against themselves also; and to involve the
nation at their wills, in new Wars, to destroy it and themselves: Let them
renounce and detest such cursed servitude, and cast off slavish bondage of such
blind obedience, and fix their eyes upon the pillar of God (the pillar of light
and truth in their own Spirits) and let them walk in the liberty of that light:
Let them try all things, and hold fast the truth; for this liberty is the
proper, peculiar, and most rich and precious Talent of all the freeborn of God,
which God has given them: Therefore let them try and examine with all
exactness in themselves, and advise together whether the light in their own
Spirits, be the light of the pillar of God, or a delusion; and whether it be
the light of truth, or a lying dream in their own fancies: For, if it be a true
light to discover the truth of God, and if they walk in that light, and follow
after that truth, it will be certainly and infallibly a pillar of support and
deliverance to free them from the most extensive, and deepest guilt of bloody
and desperate wickedness; and from the fruit and reward of such bloody
wickedness, the most cruel, and accursed calamities, and destruction of body
and Spirit. All that observed, and followed the commands of Chams cursed sons,
(being free from danger before) were drawn into a sea of death, and destroyed,
not one escaped. All Israel that observed, and followed the pillar of God
(being before involved in the greatest troubles that ever were) were all freed,
and delivered; not one perished.

That this pillar of Light and Truth may be more conspicuous and apparent to
all the freeborn of the Army and Nation, I propose first for the Army, That
all Troops and Companies, select and appoint (in each Troop of horse, and
Company of foot) two Representors, men (if it may be) that have been ever firm
to all the Armies and Nations just Interests, and Engagements; and faithful and
well-affected to the conscientious and honest party in both; impartial to all;
yet free from Pharisaical bloody rigor, and indiscreet rashness: Let these
sit, and act in all Councels of their Regiments with those Officers that concur
with them in their Agreements, according to their just Engagements. Secondly,
Let them have liberty to sit and act in general Councels, with concurring
Officers, as aforesaid. Thirdly, To sit and act in Council in their own Troops
and Companies. Fourthly, To sit and act in Council in their proper Bodies
represented, the Soldiers of their respective Troops and Companies. Their
Office in Council, in, and with their proper represented (the soldiers of
their respective Troops and Companies) is to inform, satisfy, and convince
their understandings and judgments what their, and the armies, and the nations
proper Rights and Interests are; what the proper Rights of the poor of the
nation are; and to re-present the Proposals, Results, and decrees of superior
Councels to the Soldiers of their respective Troops and Companies in all
things, wherein their concurrence in execution is to be required: They are to
assert, sign, and attest under their hands, superior Councels Proposals,
Results, and Decrees, to their said Troops and Companies; that the truth may be
firmly ascertained, and established to them, by testimony of two witnesses, in
all things wherein their concurrence in execution is to be required: They are to
represent to them, and from them reciprocally to superior Councels, such things
as are profitable, and honest for the Army and Nation; and those things that
are good, just, and lawful for them, and for all men. Without this or the like
Order, the particular Bodies Represented, and their Representatives, and the
general Body Represented (the State) and its Representatives, must sit in
darkness, and the shadow of death, without guide of light, or pillar of truth
to deliver them from the most execrable slavery of bondage, and misery in body
and Spirit; and both Army and Nation must remain a dead Babylonish Chaos of
confusion, darkness, and disorder, without light or form. Let the Representors
of Troops and Companies, by concurrence and assent of their respective
Represented, choose in every Regiment two Representors for the Regiment to
concentrate the work of many into unity, and to avoid confusion. Let the
Representors of Regiments, by concurrence and assent of their respective Troops
and Companies, and their Representors, choose two Representors for the whole
Army, who may sit, and act in any Council in the Army, and also sit, and act in
the general Representative of the Nation, for, and in behalf of the Army, as
Commoners and Soldiers. Let the people of the Nation, (the poor and middle
sort of people especially) select and appoint for them Representors to perform
like offices to them, to preserve them from iminent, and otherwise irresistible
necessity of perishing, and to free them from most vile, and miserable bondage
of body and Spirit. Let the poor and middle sort of people in every parish,
choose two Representors for the poor of their parish, or (at least) for every
120 or 200 families of poor Representors that fear God, deal truly, and hate
covetousness, and that are qualified as aforesaid, are, to the Army, Nation,
and poor of it, as Anchors in violent storms to ships; and as strong cords,
binding arrows in bundles, whereby they cannot be broken.

14 Consider the Impostury, and guilt of those that (what they can) cast
infamy, and odium upon the conscientious and honest party of the Army and
Nation, calling them Levellers, Jesuits, etc. putting them upon vile and unjust
actions, turning them out of employment and places of Trust, oppressing,
killing, or cashiering them without cause, and feigning many a^persions and
slanders against them; as to which I enquire whether there is not the same
Anal^gy in antitype and substance betwixt these and the usurping, and
tyrannical Egyptians in type and shadow: The Egyptians wicked and unjust fear
was, That the Israelites by their might and multitude, would Level the powers
of Egypt, and therefore sought by all means to Level their number and power by
drowning their Males in rivers, by imposing heavy burdens and servile labor
upon them to keep them under, by withholding straw for fuel, by restraining
them their proper rights and liberties, and the use of their own goods
wherewith to sacrifice unto God, and to serve him: Whereas the Israelites from
the time they came first into Egypt were (under God) the only supporters of the
power and might of Egypt, and the only freers of the whole Land from all
destructions and plagues: So these real, and indeed self Levellers, the true
sons of Cham (servants of wicked Jealousies and Fears) doubting the honest
party of Army and Nation will level and overpower their might, begin first,
and that effectually to level them. They level their power and number by
casting their male Children (that is such as have the spirit and courage of a
man, to stand for the Armies and Nations just Rights and Liberties) into the
violent streams of unrighteous judgments, rash executions, unjust oppressions,
starving prisons, where they sink and perish. And none but Females, that is
such as are of feeble spirits, and courage to seek and stand for Right and
Justice, are suffered to survive and live. They level them by imposing upon
them heavy burdens, not only of hard service, but of wicked and unlawful
actions, and by setting the vilest and basest persons to be overseers, and
taskmasters over them.

They Level them by putting them out of places of Trust, by Disbanding them
without satisfying their, and the Nations just Interests; without considerable
recompense for their faithful service, and some without any pay or recompense;
by cashiering them without cause, or for being true to their Trust,
conscientious, and faithful; by condemning them contrary to all Law of God or
Nature, their enemies being Judges, accusers, and witnesses against them.

They Level them by reducing their pay already due for their service past, in
deducting part for free Quarter, without showing, or proving what, or how much,
or to whom, or from whom in particular any part of it is due.

They Level them by reducing the future, past, and present pay of the Horse in
general; and of diverse Officers of Horse and Foot, contrary to the Faith of
this Nation, and their own just engagements.

By this means, they that are conscientious and honest (both Soldiers and
Officers, and their families) perish and are destroyed, or at least are
dis-inabled to discharge their Places, or to do service.

By this means the Faith of the Nation is grossly abused, and perfidiously
infringed and broken, and the Nation made guilty of defrauding, and of
oppressing its preservers; guilty of most unnatural cruelty and injustice;
guilty of re-involving it self into this last new War, wherein it was brought
to the very brink of extremity to be utterly lost and destroyed.

By these means they are guilty of causing all the Treasure that has been
spent, and all the Blood that has been spilt in this Nation to establish
righteousness; to be spent, and spilt to no purpose, or to establish oppression
and unrighteousness.

By this means they make themselves and the Nation guilty of all the scarcity,
famine, poverty, persecutions, cruelties, bloodshed, oppressions, and
sicknesses (thereof ensuing) which have been caused by this last War, and yet
these causes are not taken away, and the means are not yet removed.

By these means they unjustly imbitter the conscientious and honest party, and
exasperate others, and kill and murder them for being (justly) imbittered and
exasperated.

They Level (the object of their wicked and unjust Jealousies and Fears) their
real, and best, and most faithful friends, suppor^ers, and preservers, by
aspersing and slandering them falsely (as the men of Belial did Naboth) to
destroy them.

They Level them by withholding straw, their due pay, the slender pittance and
fuel of their lives and beings.

Howbeit these, the true Israel, the free born of God, the object of Chams sons
cursed fears; and of their desires to Level, and Destroy them; have ever been
(under God) their causeless persecutors, levellers and oppressors preservers,
and the freers of them from all plagues and destruction at all times; and they
themselves the greatest oppressors, persecutors; levellers, and destroyers of
their own supporters and preservers (but indeed) of themselves that ever were
in the world.

Lastly, Pharaoh and his servants were set upon their wicked purpose to
oppress, level, and destroy Israel, by believing the lying words and works of
Sorcerers: So these are set upon their wicked purpose, to oppress, level, and
destroy the true Israel, by harkening to real Sorcerers, and seducers. The
Sorcerers of Egypt resisted Moses, sent to deliver Abraham's free born from
Egyptian bondage: These resist (the true Moses) Christ, sent to deliver the
true Israel (the free born of God) from real misery, and bondage, in body and
Spirit.

The works of God by Moses, were true Miracles, real Righteousness, and types
of true Righteousness: For example, The Egyptians (thirsting the blood of their
supposed Levellers, but real Supporters) drowned their Males in rivers;
therefore all rivers and waters of Egypt were turned to blood, that they and
their cattle could drink no water, but blood: and this work of God by Moses,
was a work of true Righteousness, and a type of a more perfect righteousness of
(the true Moses) Christ.

2 The Fishes (which in these rivers are more various and monstrous then in any
rivers in the world) fed upon the flesh and blood of the Israelites new born
infants: therefore in a type of Justice, the fishes had rivers of blood given
them, and nothing but blood to drink and feed upon; therefore the fish died,
and the rivers stank.

3 The Egyptians regarded not the just Petitions, cries, and complaints of the
afflicted Israelites; nor the pitious cries of their perishing Male children
whom they drowned in the rivers: therefore Frogs, a helpless, naked, and
unarmed; also a clamorous and crying creature, came up out of the Rivers into
their houses, and bed-chambers, and covered their Land as it were so many
millions of witnesses attesting to their faces, and with loud voices
proclaiming their bloody cruelties, and oppressions: As the naked and unarmed
condition, and helpless innocence of the new born infants, cast into these
Rivers, was remonstrant to the eyes of the Egyptians in this creature; so these
creatures were a type of the helpless, and miserably naked, and stripped poor.

4 The Egyptians did eat up the afflicted poor of the Land like bread, and did
grind them to dust: therefore the dust of Egypt (a type also of the poor) was
turned into Lice, and did eat the flesh of the Egyptians.

Where the peoples Representatives oppress and destroy the people of God; the
plague of Frogs follows and innumerable helpless, and naked poor cover the
Land, and fill the houses and bed-chambers of their oppressors with loud
clamours, petitions, cries, and complaints.

If oppressors will not hear the cries of the people of God, nor of their
miserable murdered male children, nor the cries of the poor; the plague of Lice
follows, and the dust of Egypt (the poor of the Land) turned into Lice, eat
the flesh of their oppressors. Their corruption and cruel oppression bred them,
and they must feed them.

These plagues, and all the rest, were not upon Abraham's freeborn, the
Israelites; but upon the Egyptians, their oppressors: And these plagues (in the
truth and substance) will not fall upon those that in sincerity seek Freedom
from Bondage, but upon their oppressors, that seek to enslave, level, and
destroy them.

These, and all the Miracles which God wrought by Moses, were true Miracles,
and likewise works of real Justice, and types of true Righteousness, tending to
deliver Israel from the most bloody and cruel bondage and oppressions that ever
were. But the lying miracles of the Magicians and Sorcerers were false, and
imposterous works, tending to harden Pharoahs and his servants hearts in their
wicked purpose, to oppress, and destroy (their own preservers) afflicted, and
oppressed Israel.

5 The lying miracles of the Magicians and Sorcerers, which they wrought before
Pharaoh and his servants, falsely shaddowed forth the true Miracles of Moses;
and were miracles in show not in substance; seemingly, not indeed; in
appearance, but not in truth.

6 The words and works of Pharaoh and his servants, by be lieving the lying
words and works of Magicians and Sorcerers became like theirs, falsely
shaddowing forth the true words and works of Moses, and were just and true
words and works it show, not in substance; seemingly, not indeed; in
appearance, bu^ not in truth: For Pharaoh and his servants were willing to le^^
Israel go, seemingly; but did indeed enslave and suppress them They repented,
and were sorry for all the evils they did to Israel seemingly; but indeed
endeavored to oppress, level, and destro^ them.

They were mighty forward that Israel should go out fre^ seemingly; but did
indeed pursue them to destroy them, and (...) take all that was theirs.

So the words and works of those that seek to level and destro^ the free born,
and the words and works of their heart-hardenin^ Sorcerers and seducers, are
sorceries falsely shaddowing forth the true works of Righteousness, wrought by
the true Moses Christ and his members; and are just and righteous in show, not
(...) substance; seemingly, not indeed; in appearance, but not in trut^

They are forward to promote Justice, and favor just me seemingly, but indeed
oppose Justice, and destroy and persecu^^ just men.

They intend the Soldiers, the poor, and people of the Na^^on shall have their
just dues and proper Rights, seemingly; b^ indeed deprive the Soldiers, the
poor, and people or the Na^^on, of their just dues, and proper Rights.

They are mighty forward and zealous in all godliness and ^^ligion, seemingly;
but indeed resist Christ, as the Sorcerers ^sisted Moses.

They are (seemingly) ready to call all to an Account the purloyn the States
Treasure, and keep it unjustly; but indeed sharply punish or destroy such as
but begin to question those that do it.

They intend to set the Freeborn free from Bondage (seemingly) but indeed
enslave, level, and destroy them. And all their words, actions, decrees, and
executions are (seemingly) righteous, and really Sorceries. So all works of
Pharisaical hypocrisy in any persons, to say or teach well, and do evil; to
act, and order in Council what is just and right, and execute the contrary to
pretend zeal, and forwardness to Reformation, and practice all violent, and
wicked enormities, and to persecute and destroy their faithful reprovers that
witness against their Pharisaical bloody wickedness, are contrary to the works
of (the true Moses) Christ and his members, and are really the works of
Magicians and Sorcerers.

Also all unjust defaultings, or semi-administrations of Justice: All ill-legal
halfway meetings, unjust condiscentions, causeless delays, corrupt closeings,
and imperfect executions (partly or wholly) are Sorceries.

It cannot be denied, but that Saul (sent against Amaleck) did obey the command
of God in most things, in part not: and therefore did not obey the command of
God (really) in any thing: And his disobedience in part, was compared to
stubbornness, rebellion, and witchcraft: for, the works of the Justice, and
Righteousness of God, and of the true Moses Christ, and his members, are real
and perfect works of Righteousness, and not imperfect Sorceries and Impostors.

12 Lastly consider the necessity that the nation, and all in it (the
conscientious party especially) make (as one man) their speedy address to the
people with their Representatives, and (reciprocally) to, and with each other
by joint Remonstrance for an Agreement of the Nation.

2 That this Address be made in all wisdom of meekneess, and the mean, and end
of this Agreement be, by, and for satisfaction of all just Interest.

3 That the drift, and aim of this joint Address of the people to, and with
each other, be to convince the judgments of the People in the Evidence and
truth of all things wherein the just Interest of the Nation, and of all
persons, and their satisfaction consists (as the fittest means and expedient)
to accomplish these ends.

4 That the people join (as one man) to excite, and call upon each other, to
endeavor (with all faithfulness) this (mutual) conviction and satisfaction of
their judgments and Spirits; and earnestly seek God in secret by Prayer and
Fasting, that they may effectually discharge this necessary duty to God,
themselves, and the Nation.

5 That this conviction of the judgments and Spirits of the People (the
fittest means, and expedient in order to a perfect Agreemant in Peace and
Truth) be endeavored by peaceable missives in writing from one, two, or three
(chosen and appointed by, and for each dis-satisfied party) and not by verbal
shufflings, serving but to foment the fires of strife and division. And that
all such dis-satisfied parties (choosing, and appointing, and all persons (in
such sort) chosen and appointed) may (in the interim) enjoy all due privileges
and liberties of Free Commoners, inviolable.

6 The sixth Necessity (in order to conviction of the judgments and spirits of
the people) and (thereby) to a perfect Agreement of the Nation in peace and
truth) is, That the people of the Nation (at least the conscientious party
choose Representors as aforesaid, to represent all just Proposals, and
discoveries of the people to superior Representatives, and to inform, and
convince their judgments how, and wherein the just interests of all persons
may be satisfied: and to represent back likewise the debates and results of
superior Trustees to their respective Represented.

7 If an Agreement of the people cannot be procured, or hold not, because
satisfaction of just interests (the end, form, soul, and sinews of all just
Agreements) is, or shall be (through partiality and injustice) denied; or
(through covetousness, or corruption in the Peoples Trustees, or themselves)
cannot be had; or if hardness of heart hinder it, and so make all Agreement
void and of no force, (for an Agreement to defraud any, ought not to be made,
nor can stand) Then the conscientious and honest party are (with all Christian
speedy care, and providence, to make, and constitute such a Government amongst
themselves, as may (by Justice, absolute and impartial) preserve the persons,
estates, lives, and ^^ire Beings of each other, and of all that close with, and
co-adhere to them; and to come forth, at the command of God, out of corruent
Babel.

The Reasons and Ends of a general Address of the Nation to, and with each
other by join Remonstrance for an Agreement of the Nation, by satisfying all
just Interests, are, That all dis-satisfactions and wrongs, the grounds of War
and Destruction, may be speedily and effectually Redressed in relation to the
Middle sort of people, and poor of the Nation. 2 To the Army. 3 To the Nation.
4 To all Persons. Secondly, That the People (Military and Civil) stir up, and
call upon (by joint and mutual address) one another in all wisdom of meekness,
to seek to inform, convince, and satisfy one another, and to be convinced and
satisfied in their judgments and spirits in all things wherein the safety of
the Nation, and satisfaction of all just Interests consists: The Reasons are,
First, That the Nation and Army may be freed from the perfidious violations of
their Faith and just Engagements to God, and man. 2 That they may be freed from
the Nation sins, and guilt of blood; and the many imminent miseries that are
like to destroy the Nation. 3 Because, if any wrong be done, or sin, or
trespass committed (whether against a mans-self, or any other) there is a
necessity from God laid upon that man, and upon every person that knows it, and
upon the Nation (if it has notice of it) to seek to Redress that wrong, sin,
or trespass; and the whole Nation (if it be not otherwase Redressed) must join
together, as one man, to Redress effectually that wrong, or sin, though it be
committed only by, or against one private person, or family: Nation sins (the
vilest and most unnatural) much more. First, Because that person, people, and
Nation that knows any wrong done, or sin, or trespass committed (though by, or
against but one private person or family) and does not seek effectually to
redress it; commits it, and is guilty of it: and by making that Personal sin
(in not redressing of it) National, is guilty of it in that relation also.

The Levite of Mount Epharim was but one private person, and the wrong which
was done to him, and not redressed, was done only to him, and his private
family: yet all Israel was gathered together as one man unto the Lord at
Mispeh, and sent men throughout the Tribe of Benjamine to convince it, and to
be convinced what that wrong was, and to redress it; and to move Benjamine to
join with them unto the Lord for redress of it: But that Tribe harkned not, and
was therefore destroyed (600 excepted) man, woman, and child, with their
cattle; and their Cities were fired; and God owned that Action.

The wrong done to the Levites family was vile and wicked; yet in it self a
private wrong: but in Benjamine that did not redress it, a Nation sin derived
upon it by that Tribe, from one wrong done to one single private family.

Nation sins properly are these wrongs, trespassesr or sins that are committed
by, or against the major part of a Nation. There were Egypts sins for which God
judged that Nation. Isreal's sins for which that People perished by Sword,
Famine, and captivity. Babels sins for which that Kingdom was translated. And
these are this Nations sins which will destroy it if the people of it do not
vigorously stir up, and call upon one another to join as one man, to redress
all wrongs, and to satisfy all just Interests.

They that stir up, and provoke the people and their Trustees to do Justice
equal and impartial, are looked upon as Disturbers, and Traitors; but they
indeed ^upport the Nation, and to that end, must persevere in the same faithful
discharge of their duties to God, the Nation, and themselves: if they fail, the
Nation falls. Sins political and universal are of like nature, for which many
Cities were, and the world in a Type was, and shall be in the antitype,
destroyed.

If the Nation, or part of it, or the people, whether few or many, shall stir
up one another to join as one man, to pursue the Peace of the Nation, by an
Agreement in Righteousness, to free themselves and it from their Nation sins.
All such so joining shall be gethered together unto the Lord, the Rock of their
and this Nations deliverance, as all Israel was gathered together as one man
unto the Lord at Mispeh.

All Israel that were not gathered together with Israel as one man unto the
Lord at Mispeh, to free themselves and Nation from their Nation sin (to wit the
inhabitants of Jaoesh Gillead) were all, men, women, and children (except 400)
utterly destroyed. So all in this Nation that shall not stir up, and call upon
the people, and upon one another to join in an Agreement in Righteousness for
the paace of the Nation, and to free it and themselves from their Nation sins,
shall therein divide and scatter themselves from the Lord, the rock of their
and this Nations deliverance, and be more guilty of, and liable to their own
utter ruin and destruction then the men of Jabesh Gillead were; because there
can be no compare betwixt a Nation sin, derived from a private family, and a
Nation sin derived from a Nation. It is likewise just with God and men, That
all they of the Nation that sit still as the men of Jabesh Gillead did, or that
hinder the Nations deliverance from their and its sins and destruction, that
call not upon the people to join unto the Lord as one man, in order to these
ends; or hinder others from calling upon them, of that shall harden their
hearts that are called upon: That they that will not help forward, but hinder
Redress of wrongs, and satisfaction of just Interests; that will not help
forward, or shall hinder the causing of a new Representative; and that will not
help forward, or that shall hinder an Agreement of the Nation in Righteousness,
should answer and satisfy for these wrongs and damages that blood shed, and
these outrages and barbarous cruelties which are caused by their oppositions
and obstructions in these relations.

All Israel fled, and fell twice before Benjamine, and Benjamine slew 40000 of
them: and the reason of it (is conceived) was, Because Israel was not so
circumspect and diligent to discharge all faithfulness of duty to one another
in exciting and calling upon one another; and because they did not excite and
call upon the men of Jabesh Gillead to hearken and to join with them as one man
unto the Lord to free their Nation, and themselves from their Nation sin.

Fourthly, That joint endeavors of Agreement be made with ^ll wisdom of
meekness and faithfulness: the Reasons are, 1 Because wisdom without meekness,
is but appearence without substance. 2 Because there is not, nor can be any
effectual means of this Nations deliverance, but by Addresses in wisdom, with
meekness. 3 Because Gods Message unto Pharaoh was meek, and when neither the
cries of Israel, nor the endeavors of their Elders nor Aarons eloquence could
deliver them; Moses sent with a meek Message, did deliver them, and left not a
hoof behind him of all that appertained unto Israel. 4 Because as Nadab and
Abihu that offered strange fire, we^^ destroyed by fire from Heaven; so all
wisdom of zeal without sobriety and meekness, hinders our deliverance; and as
strange fire which God accepts not, destroys those that endeavor it (...)
such means. 5 Moses (Gods Messenger) was faithful according to the command of
God in all his house, and delivered no Message t^ Pharaoh and his servants, nor
to the Israelites, but what God commanded: He did all possible good to the
Egyptians, and purchased their deliverance from many grievous plagues which
the^ brought upon themselves; neither did he nor the Israelites la^ their hands
upon the life of Pharaoh, or of any of his servants (except when violently
assailed) wherein the Law of Nature, a^^ all Laws of God, and Nations require
present resistance: And i^ this case only, when an Egyptian and an Israelite
strove togeth^^ Moses slew the Egyptian: So Gods Messengers sent to deliv^^ his
freeborn from bondage, are faithful according to the command of God, in all
his house. They earnestly endeavor ^ preserve, and deliver their oppressors
from all plagues and destructions, and from the bloody guilt of their sins; and
to preserve, and deliver the oppressed from the destruction and mise^ of their
oppressions. They delivered no Message to their, a^ Isreal's unjust murderers
and oppressors, but what God commanded: Their Message, and Gods command, is
only that whi^^^ the just Laws of the Land (Equity) require: This Message th^^
must deliver to both Egyptians and Israelites; oppressors, a^ oppressed: And if
God command them to smite the Rivers a^ Waters, and turn them into Blood, they
must do it. They lay (...) their hands upon the life of any Egyptian or other,
by wrong^ or oppressing them in word or in deed; neither do they unjustly
assayl or resist any, except when they, or any other are violently and unjustly
assailed; and in this God commands them ^ make (what they can for their own
safety) present resistance that is, All Laws of nature, God, and nations,
require all men in behalf of themselves, and in behalf of every man, to make
present resistance against all unjust, violent, and murderous assailents
whatsoever, for the safety of their own, and their lives and beings.


Fifthly, The Reasons that the people, at least the conscientious party of the
Army and Nation, should earnestly seek God in secret by Prayer and Fasting,
that the Nation and its Representatives may harken to satisfy effectually all
just Interests as aforesaid, and free it self and them from its Nation sins and
destruction, are, 1 Because Israel by so doing, were often delivered. 2 Because
all the Jows under Ahashuerus, designed by an irrevocable Law for slaughter and
destruction, earnestly sought God by Prayer and Fasting; and they that were
hardened against them, and resolved to destroy them, harkened to them, and
delivered them from being destroyed. 3 Because the Disciples of Christ could
not cast out a Dumb and Deaf Spirit, and our Savior gives this Reason why they
could not; Mark. 9.29. Because that Kind can come forth by nothing but by
Prayer and Fasting. But a more deaf and dumb Spirit possesses this nation,
that neither the people nor their representatives, nor the conscientious party,
can, or will call upon one another to harken, nor harken when called upon to
break off their nation sins by Righteousness: and though the cries of ^he
freeborn of God, and of the poor, and of the murdered and oppressed people and
soldiers ascend as the cries of Israel in Egypt to heaven continually, they
harken not, and these kinds of deaf and dumb Spirits can come forth by no thing
but by Prayer and Fasting.


Sixthly, The Reasons that the drift and aim of the nation in ^his recipocral
and joint Address for an Agreement in righteousness, be to convince the
Judgments and Spirits, what is possible, of all the people in the Truth of all
things, by which their nation sins may cease; and their, and its safety be
procured: are, 1 Because Truth discovered is the rock of righteousness, upon
which the City of Peace is built. 2 Because as when the eyes clearly see, the
whole body sees, and may see whatsoever might profit, or hurt the body: So if
the Judgments of the people be rightly convinced, the nation sees and is
convinced; and may see and shun all things that might prejudice or destroy it,
and likewise these things that conduce to its peace, and how to improve them. 3
Because conviction of Light and Truth is the key that unlocketh and dissolveth
all chains of darkness and bondage. And as when Peter imprisoned by Herod, was
kept by 4 quaternion of Soldiers, bound with two chains, watched by two
Soldier that lay with him, having likewise a doubl guard, and his Keepe^
watching him without, and then an iron gate fast locked: and as when the Angel
raised him, his chains fell from him, and the iron gate opened, and he past all
guards, and was freed from death and imprisonment. So conviction of Light and
Truth is the key of deliverance from bondage, in the hand of Christ (the Angel
of the Covenant) which opens the Prison doors and iron gate of blindness and
hardness of heart; which sets the freeborn o^ God free from death and
imprisonment; causes their iron fetters of ignorance and misery to fall from
them; frustrates all watchings of these that seek to enslave them; and makes
them pass the strongest gaurds set to ensnare and destroy them: An^ this key of
conviction only, can free the nation and people of i^ from the double chains of
their Nation sins, and from their, an^ its destruction.


Seventhly, The Reasons that this conviction (the drift an^ aim of a joint
Address for an Agreement in righteousness) b^ endeavored by peaceable Missives
in wrighting from one, two or three equally selected and appointed by, and for
each dis-satisfied party: is, 1 Because, as Mushroms that spring up in one
night are spungy, profit little, and many of them poison; so sudden verb^
Results are for most part spungy, and profit little; and often lik^ the
Firebrarnds (betwixt Sampsons Foxes) destroy those to whom they relate. 2
Because as Trees generally put forth first leaves, and afterward (leasurally)
Fruits: but the fruits are the proper and natural product of their kind, and
are gathered; and the leaves no^ regarded. So the Spirit and Judgment of man
puts forth (first sudden verbal results (as it were leaves) and afterward
(leasurally) its more mature and deliberate results; but the mature and
deliberate Results of it, are the perfect and natural product of the Judgment
and Spirit: whilst its rash and sudden Results (as the leaves of it) are not
to be regarded. 3 That this conviction be endeavored, and all differences
(what are difficult especially) debated by peaceable Missives from one, two, or
three, as aforesaid; the reasons are, because unadvised words cause violent
evils; and so much folly and offense may issue from the lavish verbal rashness
of two or three men, as may suffice (as the Apostle says Iam. 3.6.) to set on
fire the course of Nature: If any man offend not in Word, the same is a perfect
man (says the Apostle) and able also to bridle the whole body: But men
perfect, and that offend not in word, are now no where or are seldom found: But
(be it) that such men were, or might be found that offend not in word; yet
their ripe fruits of mature and deliberate results collected and gathered, are
to be preferred before their fruitless leaves of verbal unadvisedness.


Whereas the Nations and Armies just engagements (for the peace and safety of
both) were (by both) perfidiously violated, and broken; such as were true to
those just engagements turned out of the Army, imprisoned, or destroyed. The
Nations and Armies just proprieties and interests no ways satisfied: The
Nation generally discontent, and a new, desperate, and bloody war raised: I
enquire whether (if peaceable Addresses by Missives in this manner had bin
used) all these violent evils, and those bloody Nation sins, and breaches of
faith to God and man, might not have bin easily prevented?

3. Whereas diverse Well-affected of the Army and Nation (to prevent all
misunderstandings, and evils thereby ensuing) did in February 1648. humbly
petition the House that they might freely debate (by peaceable Missives in
writing) all differences that either were or might seem to be; and whereas the
House did not grant (then nor since) their just desires (the best expedient to
satisfy and convince the judgments of the people, and procure thereby peace
to the Nation) and now a new war is the third time strongly threatened, and
blood already spilt: I enquire whether (had their just desires bin granted, or
yet shall be granted, all these eminent evils, and miseries, bloodshed, and
the guilt of it upon the Authors, and upon the Nation, might not have bin
easily prevented; and whether all differences might not have bin, or may not be
(by conviction and satisfaction of reason) fully ended in peace with Truth?

3. I enquire whether the withholding of the best means to manifest Truth by
Reason for the peace of all men, be not a privation or restraint of the use,
liberty, and benefit of the image of God in man (which comprehends all Rights
and Liberties) or not?

4. I determine nothing positively or absolutely, but (for my own and the
Nations clear conviction in all Truths concerning the peace and safety of it) I
further enquire whether there is not a necessity from God laid upon all men in
the Nation and Army to maintain and stand to all their just promises and
engagements made in Righteousness?

5. Whether the Armies Engagements at New Market and Triploe Heaths were not
just and (for both Army and Nation) safe, profitable, and honest? Or (if not)
whether what was deficient, might not, or may not (by Missives in writing, as
aforesaid) be clearly discovered, and rectified?

6. Whether the Soldiers and Officers that perfidiously persist to break their
just Engagements (made to maintain the just Laws of the Nation, and to procure
to all persons their proper Rights and Interests) be not breakers of the Law
(as persons) breakers of their faith to God (as Christians) and of their Trust
to the State (as Trustees of the Nation) and are not thereupon quit and
dissolved from all Trust, as Betrayers of it?

7. If they that stand firm to their just Engagements made in Righteousness, in
order to the ends aforesaid, are (for this cause cashiered) or (without due
satisfaction of Just Interests to the Army and Nation) disbanded, imprisoned,
or murdered; whether are they that disband them without satisfaction, cashier,
imprison, or murder them, usurpers over, and oppressors and murderers of the
most faithful Freeborn people, and destroyers of the conscientious party of
the Nation, or not?

8. Whether ought such as are so cashiered, disbanded, imprisoned, or murdered,
or their survivers, to have just reparations and satisfaction, or not? and
whether are such as are living to be restored to their former places of Trust
and employment?

9. If they that stand firm to their Just Engagements made in Righteousness
(wherein all the people and Representatives of the Nation, as true, and not
Traitors to the State, ought to stand firm) are, or should be for this cause,
engaged against in blood, or violently assailed: Whether do all laws of Nature,
God, and Nations require those (that are in such sort engaged against, or
assailed) to resist those that engage against them, or assayl them, whatsoever:
as enemies to the State, as hostile Assailants, and murderers of the most
faithful freeborn people, and as destroyers of the conscientious party of the
Nation, or not?

10. And whether all Officers, Trustees and Representatives whatsoever, in
whose Name, and by whose order and authority, all such engagements in blood,
and hostile Assailments shall be moved, acted, and carried on, be not primarily
guilty of the premises, and guilty of betraying their Trust as Trustees?

11. Whether all they (whether they be Justices of the Peace, Constables,
Sergeants, Bailiffs, Pursuivants, or other persons whatsoever, that shall by
virtue of any Warrant or Order whatsoever, assayl, apprehend, or imprison any
such persons for standing firm to their and the Nations faith made in
Righteousness, and in defense of it) or shall cause any such persons to be
assailed, apprehended, or imprisoned, are not strictly liable to satisfy the
Law, as usurpers over the persons and just liberties of the free born people?

12. Whether all Representatives, Military or Civil, and all Jury men, and
Judges, or other persons whatsoever, that shall condemn to death, or
imprisonment any such persons for the causes aforesaid, be not strictly
accountable to satisfy the Law for their lives, or imprisonment, or for any
other unjust punishment upon them?

The Nation (for want of clear conviction) is made guilty of their blood that
stand most firm for the Peace, and safety of it: because the judgments and
spirits of the People are not convinced who are faithful, and who not: and what
blood is shed (justly) and what unjustly, therefore the Nation sin of blood
shed is set upon it (as the dye of scarlet died in wool) neither can it be
freed from it without conviction of the judgments and spirits of the People,
because it cannot repent of it (for how should the People repent of that blood
shed and those wrongs, and oppressions for which they conceive they ought
rather to rejoice, or know nothing to the contrary) therefore (that the Nation
may be freed from these chains of its sins, and destruction) all faithful
endeavors (by joint address of the Nation) must be made to convince the
judgments and spirits of the people, that they may be convinced and satisfied,
who are and have bin faithful, and who not: who stand or have stood firm to
their just Engagements for the Nations safety, and who against the peace and
safety of it: what, and whose blood is justly spilt in order to free the Nation
from guilt of blood shed, and what blood and oppressions polute and defile the
Nation, and are (earnestly) to be repented of. I determine not who are, or have
bin faithful and who not, what blood is spilt justly, and what unjustly to be
repented of: But had all differences bin peaceably and freely debated by
missives in writing (as diverse well-affected of the Nation and Army did humbly
Petition the Parliment) there had bin no ground of the last desperate war, nor
danger of a third, and all differences and grounds of war might have bin (by
reason and satisfaction) reconciled and composed in peace.

8ly. The reason of the necessity, and the manner of choosing representors are
shown already, and further are, because they are the fitest instruments to
convince the judgments and spirits of the people in these things, by which the
general safety of the Nation may be procured, and wherein satisfaction of all
just interests to all persons does consist.

Secondly, because they are fittest to take cognizance and notice of every
particular and private man's wrongs and grievances, and to procure full and
through redress of them,

Thirdly, because they are the fittest means to gather the people into order
and unity; and to keep the just power of freedom and sovereignty in their
hands: How often (says our Savior) would I have gathered you together as a hen
gathers her chickens under her, and you would not: nothing tends more to
cause and conserve the entire safety and peace of the Nation, or to constitute
a firm Agreement of the people, than to gather the people into order, and
unity, which cannot be done but by Representors, whom they choose by their own
power and freedom, and who remain (continually) liable to be questioned,
deposed, or continued by the same power, and freedom.

Fourthly, because Representors are the proper intermediate instruments betwixt
the people, and all subjects, ends, and objects of their freedom, peace and
safety (as the neck instrumentally dispenceth and returns life and sense to
all parts of the body) by them a new Representative of the Nation may be
(easily and freely) chosen, which cannot be otherwise obtained.

Secondly, by them the soveraignity, power, and freedom of the people may be
derived, and convayed to their Representatives, that they may improve it (in
righteousness) for the profit, peace, and safety of the Nation.

Thirdly, by them the increase and benefit of the peoples sovereignty, power,
and freedom, may be returned back from their Representatives to the people,
otherwise it is, and will be (wholly) obstructed.

9ly. The reasons of an Agreement are, because if an Agreement be not, the
dissolution of the whole Nation must follow: When the clay and Iron in the feet
of the great image, could not agree and mix, the whole body of the Image was
dashed in pieces, and dissolved; It is every man's duty to discharge his utmost
faith and care, to continue all just ways, and means to procure the peace,
and Agreement of the people, and Nations safety: And that only (which can cause
and continue a firm Agreement) is just satisfaction of all Interests, (without
which no right Agreement can be made, or kept, and the nations destruction must
follow, Therefore let the nation rouse up it self, and let the people of it
stir up one another, to join as one man unto the Lord (as Israel did unto the
Lord at Mizpah) and agree that all just interests may be satisfied; that the
poor and middle sort of people may have their just interests, the rich theirs,
the Nation its, the Soldiers theirs, the disbanded, sick, and wounded Soldiers,
and Officers theirs, and that Widows, Orphans, and friends of those (that are
dead and slain) their interests, that all evil doers may have their due
interests, and they that do well theirs. That Presbyterians and Independents
may have their proper interests, the late Kings party theirs, Papists and
Protestants theirs, the conscientious party theirs, and that all sects,
nations, and persons, may have their just rights. Let the Nation and Army (at
least they that are conscientious in both) call upon, and stir up the people and
one another (to vindicate and dis-oblige their faith in truth and
righteousness) unloose the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, break
every yoke and let the oppressed go free. Let them feed the hungry, harbor the
poor, and cloth the naked at least in their own houses, and with their own food
and raiment. To say the satisfying of all just interests would undo, or
impoverish the Nation is absurd, and wicked: for the not satisfying of all just
interests is the utter undoing, and destruction of the Nation: and that real
crying sin, and guilt of blood (filling the hands of all persons and
overflowing (as a boundless River) the whole Land) whereof the rivers of Egypt
(turned into blood) were but types and shaddows; But grant that the satisfying
of all just interests would undo and impoverish the Nation, yet to do it were
but justice, and what God absolutely wills and requires: and the not doing
of it is in every person (under what specious pretense of holiness soever) a
rejecting and renouncing of God, and a rebeling against him; And to suppose or
say it would impoverish, and undo the Nation, is most absurd, and false, for
suppose (a man having many bones broken and shivers causing violent fevers,
and symptoms of death) a Chyrurgeon should set right all his bones assuage his
fever, and recure the party to perfect health of body, limb, and life, it
were most senseless for that party to say he were impoverisht, and undon,
because all his joints and bones are set right, and he fully restored to
perfect health: Just interests (unsatisfied) are fractures and distortions in
the body Politic (the nation) and shivers causing fevers and death; and
every man in the Nation is a distorted member, a limb out of joint, a broken
bone, or shiver; because every man is deprived of his, or depriveth others of
their proper rights, and interests: Now suppose every distorted and broken
limb, shiver, and bone, were set right in its proper compage, and place (that
is) if every several person of the Nation did (reciprocally) give, afford to,
and receive from each other their respective rights, and just interests: it
were most unreasonable and absurd, that the Nation, or any of it should say,
that all its bones and limbs are broken, and out of joint; but now all are set
right and healed, therefore the Nation is impoverished, and undon, that every
person (in the body Politic) was deprived of his, or did deprive others of
their proper interest, but now every man injoys his own just due, and proper
right, therefore the Nation is impoverished, and undon. That the not satisfying
of all just interests caused violent fevers and evils of war and famine, and
desperate symptoms of destruction to the Nation: But now the Nation (by
satisfying all just interests) has happily recovered perfect health and peace
in truth, therefore the Nation is impoverished and undon; all such conclusions
are most false and wicked, and the contrary conclusions are infallibly true;
therefore they that shall bring the guilt of the Nations sins, and their, and
its destruction upon it, and upon themselves, are and must be without all
color or excuse.

10 But lastly, (if the people like Jabesh Gilead) shall sit under the shadow
of their own destruction, in chains of bondage and death, and shall not as one
man unite to pursue and Agreement in Righteousness, or if no such Agreement
shall or can be procured; Then all the Freeborn of the Nation, are with all
Christian speedy care and providence, to constitute such a Government amongst
themselves, as may by Justice absolute and impartial, preserve the Persons,
Estates, Lives, and entire Beings of each other, and of all those that close
with, and adhere unto them; and to come (at the call and command of God) forth
from Babel (falling down as a Millstone cast by the hand of a mighty Angel into
the midst of the Sea.

The reasons are, because there is a necessity laid upon them from the call and
command of God, and also God gives the reasons of this necessity, Rev. 18.4.
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues: Her (that is Babylon) is the great City, called
spiritually Sodom, Egypt, Babylon, where also our Lord was crucified: this,
and all Nations, the whole World: Her sins, and plagues, are the sins of those
Cities, and the plagues of their sins in the Truth and substance, which were in
these Cities in a type. Gods call and command for his people to come out of
her, is the substance of his call to Lot in Sodom by Angels, to Israel in
Egypt by Moses, to the Jews in Babylon by Prophets, and to the Saints in Jury
by Apostles.

My people, that is, all that are (so far as man may judge) obedient to the
call and command of God, to be delivered from her sins and plagues, and their
own destruction, as Lots Family in Sodom, and Noah's Family in the Ark, were
obedient to the call and command of God in a Type; Lots Family in Sodom was (in
a Type) obedient to the call and command of God, to be delivered from her sins,
and destruction; and all creatures, clean, and unclean, birds, beasts, and
creeping things that came into the Ark, were (in a figure) obedient to the call
and command of God to be delivered from the destruction upon the world by the
flood: So all persons, and creatures, clean and unclean, that manifest
obedience to the call and command of God (by coming out of Babel) that they may
be delivered from her sins, plagues, and destruction, are here meant by the
people of God. Secondly, All that have desires, and spirits of Freedom, from
being real bondslaves to all oppressions and miseries, and sin, and death, of
body and spirit (as Israel groaned to be delivered from their sore oppressions,
and miseries, and slavish destruction) are here meant by the people of God.

Lastly, God calls and commands his people in Babylon, to come out of her; and
the answer of their obedience to him, and the only means of their deliverance
from her sins and plagues, is (according to their call and command from God) to
come out of her. Isreal's going out, was local and corporal; this real, and
spiritual: not by change of place, but of the order, form, and end of their
Government.

All Nations are Babylon, but this Nation is the Tower of it: All are the
Cities of the Plain, but this Sodom, where Lot dweleth, and preserves them and
it from destruction. All Nations are the body of the beast, the serpent, but
its head (where its eyes, life, and wiles are, is in this Nation. God has
promised the seed of the woman shall break the serpents head; not in type, but
in truth; not by promise, or passing that sentence of judgment, but by
performance and execution of it: The breach upon its head, begins here, and in
this Nation the first stroke is given for Babels downfall: Therefore there is a
strict necessity (from God upon all his people) to obey him, and come out of
her, lest they, in the body of this dying serpent, utterly perish with it: The
only safest way, and best means for the people of God to come out of her (in
order to their own perfect Freedom and Peace) is to discharge all faithfulness
to her, to move her, if it may be, to an Agreement in Righteousness, to inform
and convince her of, and in all wisdom and meekness, to reprove her for her
sins, the cause of her plagues and destruction. When Moses continued to
discharge all faithfulness to Pharaoh and his servants, then their destruction
came, and Isreal's deliverance. When Lot ceased not to admonish Sodom, two
Angels came and freed him, and fire fell and destroyed it. And the people of
God in Babylon, exercising all goodness (what may be with Justice) toward her,
discharging all faithfulness to her, advertising, convincing, and exhorting her
to forsake her sins, the cause of her plagues; and she not harkening, does more
fully and clearly justify their going out of her; and magnify the righteous
judgments of God, in pouring forth upon her, the full vials of her plagues and
destruction.

Secondly, The reason of this necessity upon the people of God, that they must
come out of her, is, because of the greatness of her sins. The violence and
cruelties of the old World, Sodom's sins, Aegypts iniquities and murders,
Babels pride, persecution, presumption, and Jerusalems pharisaical bloody
hypocrisy, were but types of her sins: Her sins, presumption, pride,
hypocrisy, guilt of innocent blood, insolent and wicked confidence, and
hardness of heart, transcends theirs, as truth exceeds the Type, and as a real
substance the shadow; and they that come not out of her, commit these her sins,
and must suffer her plagues.

Thirdly, They must come out of her, because of the greatness of the voice of
Gods call, and strictness of his command. His calls to the old World, Sodom,
Babylon, and Jerusalem, were but Types: And the voice of Gods miracles by
Moses, the voice, of that express type of the Harp of God, Moses wisdom and
meekness, and the silver shrill Trumpet of Aarons Eloquence, which summoned
Pharaoh to hearken, and free Israel from their bonds of slavery and death,
wherein they were destroyed and murdered, and which summoned Israel to hearken,
and to free themselves (if Pharaoh did not) from those bonds, were but types of
Gods call to Babylon: But God dispenses his summons to her, to hearken, and to
his people in her, to come out of her (if she hearken not) under the figure of
a mighty Angel, crying with a loud voice, as when a Lion roareth, and under the
similitude of seven thunders, uttering their voices, Rev. 10.3. Therefore her
sins and hardness of heart are, and her plagues must be so much greater (if she
hearken not) by how much greater her summons, and the call of God is: and the
rebellions and disobedience of the people of God in her are; and their plagues,
if they come not out of her, must be so much greater, by how much their
summons, and Gods call to them to come out of her is greater.

Fourthly, The people of God must come out of her, because if they be in her
when she falls (as a Millstone cast into the Sea by a mighty Angel) they must
(after all her fore-running plagues are inflicted upon them) fall with her into
the deepest and most irrecoverable destruction; and because they in her (at her
best, much more in her dying condition, are as Jonas was in (her figure) the
Whales belly, where his complaint was, That the weeds wrapped about his head in
the Belly of hell, That the depth in the midst of the Sea enclosed him, That he
went down to the bottom of the Mountains, That the Earth with her Bars were
about him for ever. So the people of God in the belly of this Leviathan are
caged, and imprisoned in bondage to her sins, death and miseries involve and
enclose them, and the weeds of her wickedness and destruction wrap about them,
and if they get not out of her before she fall, and sink as a Millstone, they
perish for ever.

Fifthly, The people of God in Babylon are to come out of her, because she is
already fallen or falling in her quickening form, her Righteousness; after which
her plagues and her total fall must follow, Rev. 18.2. An Angel cried mightily
with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen; that is,
is fallen sick irrecoverably in the form of her being, her righteousness; and
is become the habitation of Devils, etc. and then, and not before, a voice from
heaven called and commanded the people of God in her, to come out of her; for
if she do not, or shall not fall from righteousness, which only can support
her from falling, and the people of God in her from perishing, if she retain
Truth, that the people of God may retain peace in Truth, I mean not aerie
tenants of truth, but practique and executive truth, which is righteousness;
then the people of God in her, are in no wise to come out of her, but they are
to pray for the peace of Babylon, and to seek it, for in her peace they shall
have peace. Neither were the people of God ever called or commanded to come out
of her, until she be first fallen, or falling in her righteousness (her and
their form, and life of their being: but if no address or agreement in
righteousness, whereby all just interests may be satisfied, shall be
endeavored, or shall or can be made; and if Babylon be already fallen, or
falling in her supporting form, her righteousness; if she be an habitation of
Devils, a strong hold wherein every foul spirit is fortified: Then God with a
strong voice calls and commands his people to come out of her, and then her
plagues are coming upon her, and her final destruction follows: But it is to be
feared that she is already fallen in her supporting form, and become a strong
hold wherein every foul spirit is fortified, and that the plagues of her
destruction have seized, or are seizing upon her, because she vomits up all
antidotes which should expel her sins, the poison of her plagues: If a man
(infected with the plague, be taken with a violent vomiting and casting, it
shows that the plague has seized, or is seizing upon the life. When God sent
all his plagues upon Pharaohs heart, and upon the hearts of his servants they
vomited up the antidotes of wholesome admonitions by Moses; which showed that
those plagues had seized upon the life of Pharaoh and his servants, and were
the plagues of their destruction: So Babylon is taken with a violent vomiting
and casting: If any wholesome means or medicine of faithful and sincere
admonitions be given her, she vomits it up; If any thing profitable for her
peace and safety be proposed to her, or if any thing that should free her from
her sins, break her sickness, and bring health, be given her, her stomach
nauseates and loathes it, it stays not there, she casts it up again; her soul
loathes all cordial antidotes against the poison of her plagues; which shows
that she is fallen or falling in her supporting form, her righteousness, and
become a strong hold wherein every foul spirit is fortified, and that the
plagues of her destruction have seized, or are seizing upon her.

Sixthly, The people of God must come out of her, because they al so are fallen
from their righteousness, which is their and her sole life and support, and
therefore cannot support her, nor be supported in her: They were once in (her
type) that great Image in Daniel, a head of gold compact, and knit in
Righteousness, and had (in, and with her) a Kingdom, Power, Strength, and
Glory: Then they were in that Image (as a little gold) in its Breast and Arms
of Silver, which did not change the name and property of Silver, yet did
support the whole Body, that it fell not: Then they were as a little gold in
its Belly, and Thighs of Brass, which did not change the property of Brass, yet
did support the whole Body that it fell not: Then they were as a little gold in
its legs of Iron, not changing the property of Iron, yet did they support those
legs of Iron, and the whole Body, that it fell not: Then they were as a little
gold in its feet and toes, that were part Iron, and part clay, not changing the
property of Iron and Clay, yet did they support those Feet and Toes, of Iron
and Clay, and the whole Body, that it fell not: But now the Iron will not mix
with the Gold, but rejects it, and thinks to rule by perfect force of the Sword
alone, and will have no power of the gold (by Law and Righteousness) mixed in
its government, and gold, mixing with myrie clay, is made weaker, and more
embased: Therefore the gold in this Image, that is, the people of God in
Babylon, can now no more support her, or themselves in her, from falling.

Seventhly, But the people of God in Babylon are so far from supporting her, or
themselves, that they are (if they come not out of her) the first that must
fall and be destroyed: The two middle pillars in Dagons house (upon which the
house stood, and on which it was born up) fell first, and then all the House
fell: So the people of God in Babylon, are the middle pillars upon which she
stands, and on which she is born up, and shall be (if they come not out of her)
the first that must fall and be destroyed.

8ly. The people of God in Babylon must come out of her, because she rejects
God and them, Saul rejected God and Samuel, and God him, and Samuel came no
more at him (but prayed for him) unto the day of his death. When Pharaoh and
his servants rejected the just Addresses of the Elders of Israel; and the cries
of the Israelits, and drove out Moses and Aaron from their presence, then their
destruction and Isreal's deliverance from bondage was at hand, so Babylon
rejects all calls and commands of God, rejects the cries of the poor, and
perishing freeborn people, rejects all just Addresses, and drives out the
people of God from her presence in Army and Nation, therefore (it may be feared,
the plagues of her destruction are coming upon her, and therefore the people of
God in her may justly, and must come out of her.

9ly. They must come out of her: because (as the people of God in Babylon did
(by their righteousness) ever suport her and themselves in her) so if they come
not out of her (being called and commanded of God) their sins of stubborness
and rebellion against God shall be the only main cause of bringing the plagues
of her destruction, and her sal upon her and upon themselves, as Jonas (by his
sin of disobedience) was the only cause that the ship and all in it was ready
to sink and perish, until they cast him out into the Sea: So the people of God
in Babylon who by their righteousness have ever heretofore suported her and
themselves from falling, shall now (being called (if they come not out of her)
sink her, and destroy her and themselves, (by their sins of stuborness and
rebelion against God; and it is not likely that they should preserve and
support her or themselves in her any ^onger, who (by their sins of rebelion
against God) are the only main cause of her, and their fall and destruction.

10ly. The people of God cannot support her nor subsist in her, and therefore
must come out of her, because her Governors and Commanders are bruitishly
violent, and impatient, and (by impatience incapable of being convinced by
reason, and satisfaction, Nabal (as a fool) railed upon David's messengers that
came in peace and sent them away empty with a churlish answer; And Pharaoh said
to Moses, get thee from me, see my face no more, for in that day thou see my
face thou shall die. But these (as Nabals servants said of him) are such sons
of Belial that the people of God cannot speak to them, nor make any humble and
faithful Addresses to them, to undeceive and convince their judgments, and
cause them to see and forsake their bloody sins and oppressions, or (if they do
make any such humble and faithful Addresses) they do not only rail upon them
(as Nabal did) and send them away empty with churlish answers: but add greater
wrongs to their injuries, and cruelty to their oppressions; they answer their
humble and faithful Addresses by doing double injury, and satisfy their just
interests by making their oppressions so much greater, as their thigh is
thicker than their little finger, they do not only threaten to kill them (as
Pharaoh did Moses) but do murder and kill them, either by immediate stroke of
lawless and wicked violence, or by injury, oppression, and extortion: But they
will not believe that injuries, oppressions, and extortions, (well hooded and
masked under false forms of holy pretenses) can be murder: as if Saul
(standing in the midst of the people) was Saul: but Saul (hid amongst the
stuff was not Saul) but Saul hid amongst the stuff was Saul, and the people
ran and brought him thence, and he stood before the people; So injuries,
oppressions, and extortions, (hooded and masked under forms of holy pretenses)
are murders hid in the stuff, and the people must run (as the Israelits did)
to fetch them thence, and set them before the people: Murders of the tallest
statures are ever hid amongst the stuff; and these implicit massacres are most
in number, and the worst kinds of murder, Lam. 4.9. They that be slain with the
sword are better than they that are slain with hunger. Therefore to murder the
poor, or midle-sort of people, or the Soldiers by poverty or hunger, caused by
unjust oppression, is worse than to slay them with the sword: If the people do
not seek out these sinister and implicit murders that are hiden amongst the
stuff and se^ them before the people they cannot be freed from their Nations
sins, and their and its destruction,

11ly. They cannot support her because of the grand imposturies of her
Sorcerers, and Seducers, who (by her harkning to them) do deceive and harden
her heart. The Kings of Egypt and their servants did once harken to the
wholesome council of the people of God (then they exceeded all Nations in peace
riches, strength and glory) but when they rejected their counsel and harkened
to Sorcerers, and corrupters (creatures most vile and filthy) they were led and
fell into infamous sins, and the plagues of their destruction came upon them:
But by her (that is Babels Sorcerers) all Nations are deceived, Rev. 18 23. Her
Rulers, Commanders, and Officers, reject the people of God, and hate them and
their Councels, and their own Sorcerers and flatterers vilest and most wicked
of execrable creatures) take up their (the affections and understandings, and
entire beings, (as spirits take up little children and sell them for slaves into
far countries; And why do they dote so upon the Sorcerers? because they cover
their filthy sins and nakedness with the figg-leaves of their Libels, cast
stumbling blocks before them, betray, and destroy them, but these Sorcerers
must set no name to their Libels lest the virtue of their hocus pocus vanish
like bloome colors, as soon as it sees light, these lead them, and by these
they are and will lead, and hardened that the people of God cannot (by any
faithfulness) undeceive and convince their judgments, that they might be freed
from their sins, and from the plagues of their destruction

12ly. The people of God in Babylon cannot support her from falling, because
they themselves are fallen in the spirit of their form, which is love. The
Apostle distiguisheth man into body, soul, and spirit, and the form of the new
man into faith, hope, and love; Spirits are the fiery, living and executive
powers of creatures so is love in the people of God: But their love is fallen
from all lively executive heat and become (contrary to the nature of spirits)
cold: The love of many says our Savior shall wax cold; Coldness of love is the
power of death in the spirit, and sourse of life, from whence universal
defection in the people of God flows, their goodness, righteousness, and
faith is cold, dying and decaying, their courage and constancy wavering as a
wave of the Sea, the Sun, and the light, and the Moon, and the Stars are in
them darkened; Their faith to God and man does but deceive and destroy
themselves and others, they are pillars made up of shadows and deceits, dashing
pitchers, broken pot-sheards. The stars of heaven fell to the earth as a
fig tree casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind. Rev.
6.13. They are the stars fallen from heaven to earth, from heat to coldness;
from life to death, or are dying; They are Fig Trees that keep their leaves;
and cast their fruits; They have left the power of Righteousness, for
appearances, and embraced (like Demas) this present World; Their Designs and
Actions relate not to God, nor the good of one another, but terminate in their
own corrupt ends and interests: They are ignorant of true Righteousness, and
know not what it is, nor wherein it consists, but are zealous in their own
Righteousness: For the Jews (the Type of the people of God) had a Righteousness
of their own, wherein they were exceeding strict, and that Righteousness was
extreme wickedness: So the people of God have a Righteousness not of God, but
of their own; not of faith, but of their own fancies; and they are zealous in
tihs their own Righteousness: The Righteousness which the Jews had of their
own, consisted in Sacrifices, refrainings from meats, washings, and in solemn
fruitless Assemblies and Meetings, Isa. 1.10. and they were most hot and
violent in pursuit of this their own Righteousness (when they were most cold,
and fallen in their love to true Righteousness: So the people of God being most
cold, and fallen in their love to true Righteousness, are most hot and violent
in pursuit of their own Righteousness, which consists much in many Assemblings,
and fruitless solemn Meetings, most needful were they well improved where they
come together to serve God, by jaring one with another. What is true
Righteousness (the doing of that which is good and just unto all men) they call
moral, and civil Righteousness, and think it not essential in Religion; whereas
to give to every one their just right, and proper due, to evil doers their just
reward, to those that do well theirs, and to all persons their own proper
interests is the only expressive esential part of Religion, and the visible
life and marrow of all righteousness; pure religion and undefiled (with them)
is to abound in fruitless, and needless disputes, nice tenets, and fond
opinions: They conceive that true righteousness and their obedience consists
much in certain joint solemnities of empty functions, which they call duties,
(whereof just consideration might be had in their due respects) and as some
filled sponge with vinegar and gave it to Christ, so they sacrifice these empty
spunges, or take and fill them with all filth and defilement of oppression and
wickedness, and offer them up to God; these sacrifices without salt of
sincerity, or substance of truth, are their own righteousness, which is extrem
wickedness, and in this their own righteousness they are very zealous, they are
also forward to execute true righteousness, so far as it conduces to the
satisfying of their own lusts, or advances their own designs and unjust ends:
But for pure religion and undefiled and perfect righteousness, without respect
to their own corrupt ends and interests, they will not once see it nor look
toward it, their love to true righteousness is cold (that is indeed) dead, or
dying, for coldness is as contrary to life as light to darkness, therefore (the
original sourse and cause of life in the people of God being cold and dying)
all its effects, the whole body of true righteousness in them is dying and
dissolving, they are slippery as ice brittle as glass, you may put your life
in their hands and be sure they will deceive you, ask not their counsel in any
thing, for they can give none, nor receive any: but carp at (without cause)
those men and that means wherein and in whom their own safety most consists:
it is dangerous to advise them; for they can give no advice but to destroy
themselves, nor take any but to destroy those that give it: Moses advised two
striving Israelites to agree and he that was in fault betrayed him, and (in
him) all Israel, and questioned him for his life, for which cause he was forced
to flee from Egypt to Midian, so if any faithfully advise the people of God to
agree in righteousness, they are the first that will betray and destroy them,
and it is their best safety that are faithful amongst them to flee from them
(as Moses did) and not come near them, for they will betray and destroy both
them and themselves, (such are the violent evils and effects of slavery) the
furnaces of base and slavish bondage separate (as fire separtes gold from
dross, or oar) all virtues from the people of God and deprives them of
wisdom, prudence, and reason: This imbased the Israelits spirits and made them
slavish and wicked, Number. 14.12.10. But it separates occasionally the dross from
their gold that are his people (indeed) as in Moses, Caleb, and Ioshuah, and
makes them more compact and refined; yet the people of God have a great noise
of a name (as Sardis had that she lived and was dead) Laodicea, that was most
fallen from her love to true righteousness, boasted more than all the other six
Churches, that she was rich and increased with goods, and needed nothing: but
knew not that she was wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked:
So the people of God are rich, and increased in the riches of their own
righteousness, (that is) in Babels scarlet sins, and apostasies: the eyes of
their faith look back (like Lots wife) to her Sorcerers; they are fallen, or
falling from God, and from all love unto true righteousness, and have embraced
a righteousness of their own (a righteousness contrary to true righteousness)
of their own fancies, and deceitful hearts, (as the Jews and Churches of
Sardis and Laodicea did) which is an immediate fore-runer of sure destruction
to the people of God, (as it was to them) without their vigourous and speedy
care to prevent it, which they may and must endeavor, but can hardly do it
without being transient, or passing into another body.

The people of God are so far from supporting her by their righteousness that
their sins are the chifest cause of her fall, and they most guilty of her sins;
she is fallen from truth and righteousness, and they from faith toward her and
themselves, she is wholely putrified and corrupted, and they (her salt) have
lost ^ts savor, she was a City of defense, they her watchmen, but she is
surpised and become a habitation of devils, and they did not warn her but
betray her; they have seen (as the Prophets of Israel did) foolish things for
her, and themselves have not discovered their own and her iniquity: but have
loved vain visions, and flattering divinations, Ezekiel. 12.24. Lam. 2.14. They
have betrayed her and themselves, by suffering their hearts to be deceived and
hardened by her Sorcerers; she has committed main crying sins, and they like
the men of Iabish Gilead have sitten still and have not gathered themselves
together as one man unto the Lord to convince her, and to free her and
themselves from these sins; and have thereby dyed her sins in a scarlet dye
upon their own spirits, she had not fallen had not they fallen, her power to
stand was in them and their righteousness, and they have dissolved and
destroyed her and their own power to stand, they have drawn one another, and
those that have bin farthful amongst them, to unite and engage in
righteousness for her and their own support, and then have apostated
perfideously, and broken their faith to God and Man, (leaving these that were
faithful, that in Conscience could not betray their faith, and revolt as
sacrifices to the iron teeth of her tyranny and oppression.) They have been
forward to condemn them themselves for their faithfulness, and have seen her
grind and destroy them whiles they stood and looked on; as those Parents that
offered their children to Molech. The blood of those that have been most
faithful, and their perfideous infringement of their just faith to God and Man
will be required at their hands, if they do not vigourously and faithfully quit
themselves. Therefore they are so far from supporting her by their
righteousness, that their wickedness and guilt of blood, and their slothful
unfaithfulness has polluted her, and their sins are the cause of her fall.

Fourteenthly, The People of God cannot support her or themselves, and
therefore must come out of her, because they are divided and scattered: The
Israelites (because straw was not allowed) were scattered over all Egypt. The
cause is the same here, Gods people are Pharaohs Brickills; those in Egypt
burnt with fire; these in the fire and rage of slavery, and food maintains
their lives, as straw did their fires; Pharaoh denied Israel straw, afflicted
them with burdens, and hard bondage, and all their service (wherein their
Taskmasters made them serve) was with rigor. The oppressors of Gods people
deny them straw, afflict them with burdens and hard bondage, and all their
service (wherein they make them to serve) is with rigor: Isreal's oppressors
kept back Straw; but these both straw and corn; they kept back fuel, these food
and raiment: they kept back that straw which was the Egyptians; but these keep
back that Straw (that food and raiment) which belongs to Israel, and (if they
would eat straw, or if straw would save their lives, they will not allow them
their own straw (with such violent rigor do they make them serve in slavery)
therefore were the Israelites scattered over all Egypt to gather stubble
instead of straw, that the fires of their Briekilnes might not die. And for this
cause the people of God are scattered all over their Egypt to get food and
raiment to sustain them instead of their own, which their oppressors keep back
from them. They are scattered in their persons and estates, scattered in their
resolutions, and power, in their executions scattered, scattered in commutual
help, succor and assistance, and inprudence, direction, and Council scattered:
They are scattered and divided us the dry bones were in the valley of Bones,
Ezekiel. 37. which were an express figure of the people of God in Babylon, the
bones were scattered in the open valley, they had no flesh, nor sinnews upon
them, they were the whole house of Israel, (that is) all the people of God; and
the text says they were slain. So all the People of God in Babylon, are these
dry bones, their flesh is consumed (that is) they have no substance of truth
nor sinnew of strength; their marrow of true righteousness within is all
wasted, they are dry bones, and they are all slain by slavery, and therefore
are as dead men, in no power or capacity to be gathered, or to be spoken unto,
or to hearken that they might be gathered: their sins of slothful
unfaithfulness to those that have been most faithful amongst them; the guilt
of their blood, and their often breaches of their just Faith to God and man
(wherein they are so hardened that their hearts smite them not) are breaches
great as the Sea which cannot be healed. The first heaven and earth departed
away: but the reason is given in reference to Heaven only; The Sun, and the
Moon, and the light was darkened, and the stars fell from heaven, as the
fig tree casts her untimely figgs, that is, the light of truth (the knowledge
of true righteousness) departed from the people of God, and they fell from the
love of righteousness to the love of the world: coveteousness, sloth, slavish
fears, sensual pleasure, and their own designs choke (like thorns) all life
and power of God in them, that none appears, they are barren figg-trees that
bring forth figg-leaves, and no fruits of righteousness, or (if they do) there
is no faith nor truth in them, but they fall to the ground, and are scattered
before they be ripe: the first earth departed, because Heaven first departed
from all righteousness, (their form and essence;) they, (let them fancy what
they will) have no order, way, guide, or light, how or which way to stand in
Babylon: Representers in the Army was their most likely and possible way to
regain strength that they might stand, but those Agitators that were faithful,
were turned out and destroyed, and they that betrayed their Trust preferred;
they cannot advize themselves, nor be advised, nor help forward, but hinder her
and their own support; and as they are scattered and divided, all they do or
can do is but to contradict, and divide and dash against one another, and
against that means most (and those that offer it) by which they might be
gathered and united.

Many also are caused to trespass and blaspheme through the rigor and cruelty
of oppression, (therefore their oppressors are guilty of oppression and
blasphemy,) and the Authors of it: their passions indeed (thereby provoked)
have been the bellows of these distempers: and the right temper of the best
metal may be spoiled in an overheated forge, yet not the metal nor the
forge, nor the bellows, but the black Smith is the author of these distempers,
but the effects of their provocations (in the iron furnaces of their
oppressions and slavery) are not light distempers: but all composed order,
wisdom, and sobriety, and their spiritual endowments, and righteousness, which
should support them are reduced (through the vehemence of the fire, and rage of
their slaverie) not into sindars, but ashes; like the ashes of the furnace
which Moses took, and sprinkled up toward Heaven, which became small dust
scattered throughout the land of Egypt: and Heaven saw that scattered dust, and
turned it into a real Plague upon all the Land of Egypt. When Israel was most
fallen to dust and ashes, God then raised them; when they were most slain he
then revived them; when most scattered, he then gathered them; and when they
were most irrecoverable, and desparately lost, he then sought them out, and
that there might be no appearance of man's power, in their deliverance; he then
saved them from bondage, and destruction of body and spirit: So his people
being most fallen, slain, scattered, and lost, God will now raise and gather
them out of dust, and arm and unite them in life and power, that there may be
nothing of theirs, nor of man, but of God only in their deliverance; and that
his power alone may be made known: by calling Israel out of Egypt, and causing
them to hearken was Israel delivered, and by calling his People out of Egypt
and Babylon, the house of their bondage and destruction, and causing them to
hearken, shall his people be delivered.

Lastly, The second principal cause and end of their coming out of her is, that
they might with all speedy care and providence, make and constitute such a
Government amongst themselves, as may by Justice absolute and impartial,
preserve the persons, estates, lives, and entire beings of each other, and of
all those that close with, and co-adhere unto them: Such Government consists in
a right constitution and Direction: In a right constituted Government the power
is to be (for substance) wholly in the people, and not in pretense or title, but
really. This power is the power of God, the richest Talent of his goodness
which he dispenses to a people; If they improve it well, it brings the
greatest Safety, Peace, Freedom, and Prosperity, that a People can have, and if
they improve it ill, the greatest confusion, ruin, and destruction. Therefore
the people are seriously and advisedly to consider how they may best improve it
to Gods glory, and their benefit: They are to consider it in relation to God,
in relation to it self, and in relation to themselves. This power in relation
to God, is the power of God, demised and dispensed from him to a people for
their Prosperity, Peace, and Safety. Secondly, In it self it is the richest
Talent which a people can receive from God, therefore God will require the
strictest account of them for their improvement of it. That servant that lost
not, nor wasted his masters Talent, but kept it, and returned it back to his
master, was called a wicked slothful, and an unprofitable servant, and cast
into utter darkness, because he^^d not increase and improve it. All powers are
of God, therefore all Powers are good; but some Powers are (in relations) evil,
wicked, and unjust; the evil and injustice in Powers, is the abuse of them:
That people or persons that corrupt and abuse the Powers of God, or that obey
those Powers (as corrupted and abused) rebel against the Power of God, and do
not keep, but lose and abuse the richest Talent of his goodness. Lastly, Just
Powers (in relation to the People) are the breath of their life from God, and
the Form and Essence of their Beings, without which the people are (as they
ever have bi^) dead carcasses of destroyed and slain men: What power or force
have dead men? and what force and life have a people that want their own just
power? The want of just power, is their chain of slavery unto all misery, sin,
and death. Esau (to save his life) sold his birthright for pottage; but that
people that will sell their lives and birthrights for misery, sin, slavery,
and destruction, are miserably and slavishly wicked and profane.

Secondly, That the People may improve their Talent of just power with all
faithfulness to God (whose it is) and to themselves (to whom) for their joint
preservation from bondage and destruction it is committed, they must consider
that the people are many several, or single, and there can be no joint
improvement by many single or several. A single file or hair of silk has no
strength, and millions of files, or hairs of silk (single or several) have no
more strength than one single file. If they let (their Talent) this power rest
in every man's hand (single) they bury it in the earth, and improve it not, but
bring infinite destruction upon themselves; for where many are together single
and untwisted, there must needs be great disunion and division, from whence
utter confusion and destruction to all (severally) must follow: Therefore the
peoples chief and speedy care must be, to find out the fittest and best means
and expedients to unite and twist them in this power. The means and expedients
that are best and fitest to unite and twist them in this power of God, are
Representors and Representatives freely chosen by them in such manner as I have
already set down, to which I refer the Reader. Faithful and just Representors
(freely chosen) are like the stalks in bunches of grapes, that feed, nourish,
and unite all the berries, and they derive pure wine, life, and power to the
people, from the root and stem of the true Vine. The people must be careful, as
God has committed (the richest Talent of his goodness) their just power into
their own hands, that they do not set light by, slight, or profane it, that
they be not slothful, wicked, and unfaithful in improving of it, nor choose such
as are slothful, wicked, and unfaithful to be Representors or Representatives,
lest they lose or abuse the Talent which God has given them, and God strictly
require it at their hands, and lest they mis-improve it against the people, and
destroy the people and themselves by it: to avoid which, let them choose men
most endowed with the spirit (not of bondage, but) of Freedom, just, faithful,
fearing God, dealing truly, and hating Covetousness; They are to choose the rich
(so qualified) as soon as the poor or middle sort, and them as soon as the rich
to officiate as their Representors in Parliament, or in any other
Representative, God respects not the persons of men, neither must they, (but in
righteousness only) why may not a poor man, or the middle sort be as faithful
and able in Parliament, or in any other Representative as the rich; neither
must the rich (if righteous) be rejected because they are rich: but if the
poor, and middle sort of people respect the persons of the rich and choose them
to be their Representors in Parliament, or in other Representatives (because
they are rich) then they miss their just ends, and interests, and the boule
runs cross to all their ^imes, because the bias is set the wrong way, for how
can rich men and oppressors be Representors of the poor and middle sort, (that
are oppressed) betwixt whom their is no shadow of similitude; ye have despised
the poor says the Apostle, James 2.6. Therefore the rich do oppress you; do
not rich men oppress you (says the Apostle) and draw you before the judgment
seats; Such Representors will rob the people of life, and power, render them
wicked, and unfaithful to God in wasting his talent, and betray and destroy the
people and themselves; God has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith,
James 2.5. So it is better for people to choose the poor of this world rich in
faith to God and them, then the rich of this World, poor in faith, to God and
them, to be their Trustees, Representors. God offered the Gospel to the Jews,
and such as were saved, gladly received it: but God cast off those that
rejected it, and the Apostles and people of God departed from them, and turned
to the Gentiles, so an Agreement and Government (in righteousness) must be
speedily, and faithfully offered to the whole Nation, that the whole Nation may
be joined as one man unto the Lord, in an Agreement in righteousness, as all
Israel was gathered together unto the Lord at Mizpah, such as shall resist, or
refuse such Agreement, or Government, or shall harden their hearts (as Pharaoh
and his servants) or shall sit still as the men of Iabish Gilead did, or that
shall reject such a government and Agreement (as the Jews rejected the Gospel)
are to be left to themselves, and the people of God (that they may be freed
from Babels sins, and plagues, and from her fall, and destruction) must come
out from them, and turn unto such as shall freely close, and join with them (as
one man) unto the Lord in righteousness. The direction of this constituted
Government consists in a right regulating of it, that it may reach and attain
the supreme ends, and objects of its being; this regulating of it, and these
supreme ends, consist in a twofold action, and an intermediate action of the
people: This twofold action is a moving, and turning to, or from the termini,
or bounds, to which, and from which they must move; their intermediate action
is a constant joint perseverance in their twofold action; this twofold action,
or motion in the people of God (rightly constituted, and to be constituted) is
a a moving, or turning from darkness, and error, to light and truth; from
implicit faith in blind guides, to clear and free conviction in their own
spirits, from slavish obedience to the Wills of wicked usurpers, and
oppressors, to a spontaneous and free concurrence with those that are faithful;
from being scattered (as Israel was in Egypt) to be gathered (as one man) unto
the Lord in righteousness, from cruel calamities, burdens, and oppressions,
(the needless fruits of wicked slavery) to the just power and liberty of a free
people, from the seat of the Beast (the sourse of violence, the seat of
darkness) to the white Throne which impartially dispenceth righteous judgment;
from the vallie of dead and dry bones of men slain by slavery, to be a
rallying and living Army (the Army of God knit and compact in righteousness)
from Babels scarlet sins, Sorceries, apostasies, to the City of God (the City
descending wherein righteousness (with peace) dwells, and truth and judgment
lodges for ever; Israel was Abraham's freeborn: Gods people (that are rightly
constituted especially) are his freeborn, and brethren in a far nearer
alligement than by flesh and blood; far be it that freeborn brethren should
sell one another to slavery, and destruction; Abraham's freeborn sold their
brother to be a slave in Egypt, and God sent them after, and sold all them,
and their posterities to the same slavery, in the same place, so Gods people
did ever, and do betray, and sell those that are faithful to slavery. If any
have bin, or are faithful amongst them, or manifest a spirit of freedom from
bondage to unrighteousness (really) the people of God (their brethren) either
by slothful unfaithfulness, or for preferment, or vain glory, or to accomplish
their own sinister, and base interests) sell, and betraye them to slavery; and
destruction: Therefore (as they have sold their brethren) so God has sold and
sels them, into the same house of bondage where they are, and remain in the
iron furnaces of oppression, and tyranny, where they do all filthy and sinful
drudgery of a long and cursed servitude; where cruel and wicked Sorcerers set
them their taskes, and extort their servil obedience; and base service (with
all ri^our and extremity) wherefore let the people of God forsake this trade
for ever, and never sell any freeborn of God (their brother) to slavery, and
destruction; Let them never sell the poor, nor the rich, nor the middle sort of
people amongst them, nor any of them, nor any part of their estates, nor of
their just rights into bondage; for if they do, God will assuredly send them
after, and sell them into the same slavery, and destruction. They that wrong
and oppress the poor, or the rich, or the Soldiers, or the middle sort of
people, and they that seek not to free them, and their rights from bondage, and
oppression, betraye and sell them into slavery and destruction, and God will
assuredly send them after, and sell them into the same bondage, and
destruction: therefore the people of God must advisedly improve, and direct
their just power (which God has given them) to free the persons, rights,
interests, estates, lives, and entire beings of each other (both of the poor,
and of the rich, and of the middle sort a-amongst them) from being subject to
bondage and oppression; Moses was faithful to all Israel (poor, and rich) and
left not any thing of all that was theirs in bondage, not a hoof behind him
So the people of God must improve their just power which God has given them in
all faithfulness (in reference to him) toward all, and to each other
(especially) They must not leave the right of the poor, nor any part of it in
the house of bondage, nor sell them, nor any thing that is theirs into bondage;
they must not leave the just rights and interests of the rich, and middle sort
in bondage, nor sell them, nor any thing that is theirs into bondage. They may
not leave the Soldiers just rights (that have in bondage, nor sell them, nor
any thing that is theirs into bondage. They may not leave the Soldiers just
rights (that have bin, or shall be faithful) in bondage: but their Arreares
(notwithstanding all imposturies and cheats, and the necessitated sale of their
Debentors) must be faithfully redeemed from bondage, and fully satisfied; Their
Widows mites of just right (which their slain husbands purchased with their
lives in faithful service) and their Orphans inheritance must not be left in
bondage, neither may they sell their distressed Widows, and fatherless into
bondage; For, this is pure religion, and undefiled, and true righteousness, To
loose all bands of wickedness, to undo every heavy burden; to let the
oppressed go free, to break every yoke. And to keep a man's self unspoted from
the world. Isa. 58. I am. 1.27. And herein was Moses faithfulness (in all
righteousness) manifested; he brake the whole yoke of bondage, he undid every
heavy burden; loosed all bands of wickedness and oppression, and set all that
were oppressed free, he sold no Israelits, nor any thing that was theirs, into
bondage, nor left any thing of theirs in bondage. They that (through
covetousness, or for respect to persons, or private ends, or through slothful
unfaithfulness) leave any of Gods freeborn, or any thing of theirs in bondage,
betraye, and sell them into bondage, and God will send them after, and sell
them (as he sold all Israel) into the same bondage, and destruction; The
substance of all that God calls for, and commands, and the whole obedience
of man is to come out of all bondage to unrighteousness, oppression, and
destruction; and not to sell any thing into bondage, nor to leave any person,
or thing, (which belongs to the liberty of God) in bondage. Spiritual things
are forms in themselves, and in persons (whereof persons are the subject)
These spiritual things are forms and efficients (working unto bondage, or unto
liberty) and (as locks open Prison doors) keep in bondage, or set at liberty;
Therefore the People of God must first, and especialy seek and labor for the
Key of the Liberty of God (which is true light, and conviction in their own
judgments and spirits) that they may discern betwixt things that differ, and
know the things of God, and what things are not of God and keep in bondage; and
what things belong unto the liberty of God, and work unto liberty. Gods People
have and do commonly call good evil, and evil good, light darkness, and
darkness light; speak evil of things they know not, and harbor and express
rash, gross, and sensual apprehensions, censures, and conceits wherein their
unrighteousness is greater, and they manifest the power of the spirit of
bondage, more than if these forms and things were in subjects or persons, for
it is worse to condemn goodness (in it self) than a good man, and whiles their
judgments call that which is good evil, that which is good is kept in bondage
by them, and (it being as a lock^ upon a Prison door that is locked) and not
open to their judgments, they are kept in bondage by it; and in this, and in
their justifying, or condemning of form, or things which they know not, they
are more blind than Balaam, and more brutish than beasts, for they (through
blindness) justify not only wicked men, but wickedness, and condemn not only
just men, but justice; But Balaam justified just men, and just forms, and
condemned wicked men, and wickedness, and brute beasts are wary to go into
those ways they see not. Those beams of darkness in the eyes of the
judgments and spirits of Gods people (in relation to forms and things) are
the thick darkness of Egypt upon their spirits, and the iron bars of their
bondage and destruction. The key of Liberty wherewith God opened the locks and
iron bars of all (otherwise) impossibilities in Isreal's way out of bondage
into the land of promised liberty, was the pillar of fire, which (after they
hearkened to Gods call and command in coming out of Egypt, and had manifested
perfect obedience in a type) went before them and led them; And the people of
God that shall manifest perfect obedience to Gods call and command, shall find
the pillar of light, and truth from God in their own spirits, which is the true
key of liberty from all burdens, destruction, and bondage of soul, and body.
They that manifest not the life and power of God by ready obedience to Gods
call and command, in coming out of bondage to all oppression, misery
unrighteousness, and destruction of soul and body, are not only dead and dry
bones, but they rebel against God, and sell his talent and power (their breath
of life from him) into bondage, God called upon the dry bones that they might
live, and did they rebel, and reject life, no, but (as the Prophet called upon
them to hear the word of the Lord) there was a noise, and a shaking, and the
bones came together, bone to his bone; That noise was the rallying noise of a
re-uniting Army; These dead and dry bones were all the people of God (slain and
destroyed by slavery) into whom the breath of life from God was re-enterings,
and they by ready hearkening and obedience willingly received it; Did they then
return to the valley of bones? never, but became an exceeding great Army, and
never sold themselves into bondage unto death, and destruction any more.
Israel (being gathered out of bondage wherein they were scattered in Egypt) was
an exceeding great Army; before the most miserable and slavish: but then the
freest-people that ever were; They that were poor amongst them before, were
then rich, and the persons and estates of poor and rich were-freed from
bondage, all the house of bondage durst not lay their hand upon a Kid of the
Hebrews to bring it back into bondage; Before there was no appearance of the
life and power of God in them; The dry bones (when God called upon them to
hearken and live, did hearken and live, but Israel at first, when God called
upon them to hearken, and live) did not hearken: but refused life Exodus 6.9.
The life and power of God in his People is first manifested, by their real
hearkening, and resolved obedience (when God calls them out of bondage) to all
that he commands, and when their hearkening, obedience, and righteousness are
not Sorceries, that is, are not sayings, but doings, not shaddows, but
substance, and not parcels of obedience (which are but Hypocrisy) but perfect
obedience. The first real appearance of the life, and power of God in Israel in
a Type was, when first they (being called out of bondage) did all jointly
hearken unto, and do all that God commanded them (which was when the Passover
was first kept by them) wherein (as Moses was faithful in all the house of God
in a Type, so were they every man faithful in his own house) in all that God
commanded; This their joint faithfulness in keeping the Passover in a Type,
was the present and immediate insertion, and the ingraffing of them into the
life, and power of God, and (that very night) they reunited, and rallied into
a living Army, and were delivered from bondage and destruction of body and
spirit in a Type; the Lamb (which they were commanded to kill and eat) was
called the Lords Passover, Exodus 12.11. and their observance of that command
was called the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover; verse. 27. It was the first
Ordinance which God gave unto Israel, and the first fruits of their faith and
obedience; That Ordinance was an Prophetical Act of a thing really done in
Israel, or an actual Prophecy of the same thing (in truth and substance)
which shall be done in and by the true Israel; For as all Israel did (that very
night they were delivered) observe and keep the Passover, so all Gods people
(the true Israel) shall and must (as certainly) observe and do the whole
substance of that Ordinance, at the instant time of or immediately before their
deliverance from real bondage and destruction (whereof the Egyptian was but a
Type, or shadow, their obedience in that Ordinance was Typically) inward and
outward; Their inward Typical obedience (required and done) was in that, each
family, or so many together (as might eat up the Lamb did (that very night
they were freed from bondage) eat it in one house (without carrying any part of
it out) and none of them might go out of the house until the morning verse.
22.46. Which shows that Gods People must and shall with one accord depart out
of bondage, and not (by cowardly fears, or faithless backslidings) betraye and
destroy one another, or be scattered all over Egypt but co-unite indissolubly
in the life and power of God.

Secondly, they did eat the whole Lamb to show that Gods People must, and
shall readily do, and observe all which God in Christ (the Lamb, their perfect
Freer, and Redeemer) shall command them: that they shall gladly, and willingly
receive (as the best meat when they are most hungry) Freedom from all bondage
to all unrighteousness, sin, misery, and destruction, and come not only out of
Egypt: but out of Sodom, and Babylon, and out of bloody and Pharisaical
Jerusalem.

Thirdly, they might not eat it soden in water at all, but roasted with fire, to
show, that the spirit of Freedom in Gods People must and shall be fervent as
fire, and that their love of deliverance from bondage and slavery shall not be
(as it is) cold, decayed and dead (as Water is the coldest of all Elements) God
would not accept of but rejected their service that bowed down to drink Water
when they were to pursue their deliverance from slavery, Judges 7. They that
thirst more after ditch water than Freedom from bondage are sit for nothing but
slavery.

Fourthly, they were to eat it with their shoes on their feet, and their staf
in their hand, etc. and they were to eat it in have, and the reason is given,
for it is the Lords Passover, verse 11. to show, that Gods people must and
shall pursue their deliverance from bondage, with a ready and dilligent
preparation to depart, and not remissely, but in have, the reason is, for it is
the Lords Passover, that is, because if they do not haste to make diligent
preparation to come out of Egypt and Babylon (to which God calls them, and
which God commands) and out of all bondage, and if God (when he comes to pass
through Egypt and Babylon) find them there, he will lay upon them their, and
their own sins and rebelion, and their and their own due plagues and
destruction: But his People are not ready for deliverance if God should deliver
them, they can no way use it but mis-improve it, to destroy themselves, because
they make not any real and faithful preparation to receive and use it, they
are all unready, and neither shod nor clothed, they have put on no garment, no
shoes of preparation.

Fifthly, they were to eat it with their loins girded, and they were not to eat
it raw; to show that Gods People must and shall pursue their deliverance from
bondage and destruction, not with headlong rashness, but with vigourous
advisedness, and not scatteredly; but succinctly and orderly. When Israel was
commanded to observe the Passover, they did not confusedly run to contest with
their Taskmasters, or to tell the Egyptians of their cruelties, or to
continue long, fruitless and wicked brawles in word, or writing, nor to
demolish Phythom and Raamases (Cities of treasure which they had built for
Pharaoh. Gods People have built all Babels Cities of strength, and procured for
her all her, power and riches: as they built her Cities, so let them fall of
themselves, they are called out of her, neither does her strength consist in
Cities, or Armies: but in the People of God and their righteousness. Why did
not Pharaoh put all the firstborn of Egypt, and his own in Phythom, to
preserve them from being destroyed? Why did not he and his mighty Host flee
into Raamses to preserve himself and them from being wholely destroyed, without
ever seeing any one enemy, whilst they in vain pursued Israel, to destroy
them? Israel had other business, and being commanded to observe the Passover,
did with their loins girt observe it; So Gods People commanded to observe the
Passover, shall speedily and faithfully prepare it, and with their loins,
girt observe it; that is, their resolutions and endeavors to depart from
bondage, shall and must be girt with the girdle of faithfulness, righteousness,
wisdom and sobriety.

Sixthly, Their outward Typical obedience (required and done) was in the
striking of the Lintel, and Posts of the door with the blood of the Lamb, that
it might be a token upon the houses where they were, that God (seeing the
blood) might pass over them, and that the plague might not be upon them to
destroy them, when he should smite the Land, ver. 13. A token is a sign, or
seal; This sign, or seal was in blood, and the life and power of all living
creatures is in the blood; Therefore that seal was a typical seal of the life
and power of God in his people. The Antitype and substance of that Typical
seal is, the seal of God upon the foreheads of his People, Rev. 7.3. These
are numbered 144000. ver. 4. But whether Persons, or Families the letter does
not clearly determine; Israel were sealed by their Families, Isreal's Families
were Natural and Typical, and these Anti-typical (if Families) may be mystical
(freely gathered to Representors in the life and power of God, they were Israel
these are Israel, they were twelve tribes, these are twelve Tribes, verse. 4.5.
The Egyptians were not slain till they were sealed, the earth must not be hurt
till these be sealed. verse. 3. God past over them, and did not destroy them
when he smote the Land of Egypt, and these are exempted and redeemed from the
destruction of the earth v. 14.3. They were the Typical Freeborn, these the
true Freeborn; They were redeemed from Egyptian bondage and destruction, these
from the slavery, sins, plagues, and destruction of Sodom, Egypt Babylon, and
Jerusalem, they Typically, these Really and truly; They sung a Song of
deliverance (Moses Song) these sung a New Song of deliverance, the Song of
Moses and of the Lamb; Exodus 15. Revel. 15.14. That seal was an outward
Typical seal of the life and power of God in his People; this seal is the
Name of God written in their foreheads, Revel. 14.1. This Name or seal of God
written in their foreheads, is an outward real indicies, and sign in their
practice, that they are armed, sealed and united in the life and power of God,
that was the seal or sign of the Typical Passe-over, this of the real and
true Passe-over: The Israelites sealed were Gods first born in a Type, that is,
his first fruits, redeemed by a Lamb unto himself, and these are redeemed from
among men, and are the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. Rev. 14.4. That
Mark, Seal, and Name, which is opposite and contrary to the Seal and Name of
God, written in the foreheads of his people, is the mark and name of the beast
in their foreheads or hands that worship the beast; Rev. 13.16. and 14.9. This
name of the beast is the seal of slavery, the mark of bondage, and the
manifestation of the life and power of the beast in profession or practice;
which is the power of Antichrist working unto bondage against Christ, as the
Sorcerers resisted Moses.

Seventhly, All the Congregation of Israel was commanded to keep the
Passe-over, v. 49. and they kept it as the Lord commanded. So all the true
Israel, that is, all the people of God, must speedily prepare and observe the
true Passover: All that shall not faithfully prepare and observe the true
Passover, that is, all that shall not manifest the life and power of God in
the unity of the spirit of freedom from all bondage and destruction, are really
(as all they were in the Type that did not) Egyptians, sons of Cham, children
of the curse, improvident for their own and all families, deny the faith of
God, and have no power of God, nor any seal or sign of it, but are ruled and
governed by the spirit of bondage unto all sins, slavery, and destruction of
body and spirit.

Secondly, All the people or God must speedily prepare and observe the true
Passover, because as God past through all Egypt, and smote all the first born
both of man and beast in every family where the Type was not kept; so God will
as certainly pass through the earth, and smite all Families where the life and
power of God appears not in the unity of the spirit of freedom, and visit upon
it and them, not Aegypts, but Sodoms, and Babels, and backsliding Jerusalems
sins, and the blood of all that have bin slain upon the earth, and the blood of
all that have bin wronged and oppressed, and the blasphemous, atheistical,
sortish, and brutish opinions and practices of hypocrites and formal professors
upon it and them; and the breach of faith (in those that have broken their just
faith) to God and man; and their defections that have fallen from all
righteousness, and from all life and power of it; and their unrighteousness,
that have kept righteousness, and truth, and goodness (in relation to spiritual
forms and things) in bondage, and chains of darkness and ignorance in their own
judgments, upon them and it, and involve the earth in circum-ambient and sharp
destruction, sharp as sickles. Rev. 14.16, 17.

Eighthly, The keeping of that Passover, was the first beginning of Isreal's
typical-being and existence, Exodus 12.2. This month shall be unto you the
beginning of months, it shall be the first month of the year; Man was earth
the first day, but that earth was not man until the sixth day; So Israel was the
people of God before (as they were dead earth, and dust of bondage) but never
the people of God redeemed in a type, until the lamb was killed, and until they
all with one accord kept the Passover, as God commanded, and then, and
therefore God commanded Israel, that that month should be the beginning of all
months unto them, and the first month of the year, because it was unto them
really the beginning of their being: So the keeping of the true Passover, shall
be the first beginning of the being and existence of the true people of God;
They are Gods people, as Israel was before they kept the Passover, that is, as
dead earth, and scattered dust; they are not, nor have order, matter, or form,
nor manifest any life of obedience, as a people redeemed; dead trees bring not
forth fruits of life and power, nor plants of bondage righteous obedience; What
obedience they do manifest (which is little, and in bondage) is as persons (
Jonas might pray, when in bondage in the belly of hell) but perform (as
families, people, and churches) nothing really, because they are (as Israel
before they kept the Passover) in bondage, as persons, families, people, and
Churches. Strict professors, and pretenders to freedom and righteousness (of
all nations) were ever many, but Israel was free by birth and promise, and a
figure of the true freeborn: Professors were and are four sorts, The first
were pretenders in all nations to freedom and righteousness, who
notwithstanding were not of Abraham's substance after the flesh; and to whom no
promise of blessing, that is, of freedom from the curse was made; So now, there
are many strict professors and pretenders to freedom of all nations, who not
withstanding manifest no spiritual substance of Abraham, no true righteousness
in practice, which is the substance of the freeborn of God.

Secondly, The Egyptians ( Pharaohs servants and sorcerers especially)
approved (and did falsely) that which Moses did, and practiced quite contrary;
they were not Abraham's, but Chams seed after the flesh, the peculiar people of
the curse in the antithesis to Israel; so usurpers over the freeborn, and all
that receive the seal of the spirit of Sorcery, and the mark of the power of
the beast to enslave the freeborn, profess what the freeborn do, and practice
quite contrary, and are the peculiar people of the curse, in an antithesis to
the true Israel; The curse is bondage and slavery, the blessing redemption unto
freedom: The power of the curse is diffidence, slavish fear, and subjection to
the spirit of bondage unto sin, and destruction of body and spirit; The form of
the blessing is faith, freedom, and life in the power and obedience of God.

A third sort (not Hebrews, nor Egyptians, but Neuters) set the Ark in one
Temple with Dagon, and in profession serve God, Dagon in practice; They serve
God by sleeping, and to that end, creep into strictest societies of Profession
(as into sleeping holes) that they may only sleep (as Dormice) and do nothing;
They serve God and Dagon, as the rebellious Ephramites did, Judge. 12.2. who
when they were called upon to free the people of God and themselves front
bondage, slept and harkned not; and after, when God by Jephtah had delivered
his people without them, they falsely pretended great wrong from Jephtah in not
calling them, whereas he had called them, and they would not hearken: So
Neuters serve God by a slothful and sleepy profession; Those Ephramites
slandred Jephtah for his faithful service in freeing Israel, and gathered
themselves together to burn down his house upon him; so Neuters serve Dagon in
slandring and destroying such as hate sloth and slavish fear, and are diligent
and faithful: They say sibboleth in a sleepy profession, but they cannot frame
to pronounce shibboleth in practice: Judge. 12.6.

The fourth sort were Israelites, Abraham's seed, the true Professors of
freedom, and people of God in a type, the peculiar people, in whom the promise
of blessing unto all Nations was made, and Abraham's substance after the flesh,
in an Antithesis to the Egyptians; Israel had the flesh, but not the faith of
Abraham; So the true Israel seem to hold forth the spiritual substance of
Abraham (faith and obedience) and are the true people of God in antithesis to
all that receive the seal of the power of the beast; and in reference to the
type, but not in relation to truth in sincerity; They hold forth the outward
carcass of Abraham's faith and obedienc (or a shadow of it) but not the life and
power of Abraham's faith and obedience. Gods people are sincere or seeming: All
Creatures (clean and unclean) that came into the Ark, were a type of the people
of God, manifesting faith and obedience outwardly, but there is no mention of
more then Noah and Sem only that were sincere: All that kept the Passover in
Egypt, were a figure of Gods people, but there is no mention of above five or
six that were sincere, and but two only entered into the land of promise, the
rest received again the spirit of bondage, and perished, and fell by
slavishness: So Israelites (like Nathaniel) indeed, are few, scarce visible,
but have, and had ever an inward principle of life and power, obscure and
infirm, because of bondage; their faith and obedience is like that Prophets
that was sent to prophecy against the Altar in Bethel, and returned back an
other way, who did go, prophesied, and returned back an other way; but before
he had thoroughly done his work, he sat him down under an Oak, and then
(contrary to Gods command) returned back to Bethel, wherefore a Lion met him
and ^l^e him; Some small hid sincerity there is in their actions, but if they
do any work of God, they either leave it off before they well begin it, or sit
down before it is half done; The best of them are like the barren fig tree,
full of fruitless leaves of profession; If a man seek (as the Prophet did Mic.
7.) ripe fruit, he may weary or destroy himself before he find any: Their fruit
falls before it is ripe, yet they put forth some ripe if a man could find it;
they desist from all good actions before they perfect them, or transmit them
seemingly imperfect, because they are outwardly under the power of bondage. The
seeming people of God manifest outward faith and obedience (as the generality
of creatures that came into the Ark did in a Type, and) as the generality of
Israel that harkned to Moses when he was first sent did, but their faith and
obedience is not sealed with any life and power inward or outward, nor shall
be, until they prepare to keep the true Pas-over: Israel at first harkned, and
then generally revolted, and would not harken; their harkning was no obedience,
because not sealed, and what is not sealed, is in no force or being, but their
disobedience in not harkening, was rebellion against God; So Gods people seem
forward to harken and to act unto righteousness and freedom from the curse, and
then immediately relinquish freed^m and righteousness, and desert and betray
those that cooperate sincerely, to slaughter and destruction; Their best and
most forward obedience is not wrought by the free spirit of God in life and
power, but their perfideous Apostasy and tr^ch^ry are real works of the spirit
of bondage: No Fountain sends forth at the same place sweet water and bitter,
Iam. 3.11, 12. Neither can a fountain of bondage bring forth any work of
Freedom; Their continued breaches of faith, and their quiet and peaceable doing
and suffering of all unrighteousness, and their often revoltings, are manifestly
the works of bondage, and do manifest that all their obedience are real works
of bondage; They seek just things for and from slavish and unjust principles
and ends, and seek to accomplish those ends by headlong and rash means, and
their best actions being subject to unjust ends, and under the powers and forms
of bondage, the matter must needs be the matter of those forms, and not of the
free spirit in the power of God. That some sincere are among them alters not
their condition of bondage, because they also are outwardly in bondage, and
outwardly not seen, nor visible; their righteousness and freedom is inward, and
so secret, and secret things belong to God: They that wore sincere of Israel in
bondage, did not alter the condition of the generality, for they were all in
bondage; But as the Law by transgression is the power of sin, so their service
and obedience by backsliding is the power of the curse of bondage, for they
could not revolt, did they not first seem to stand, nor betray the sincere, did
they not seem to hold forth faith and obedience, nor be nigh unto cursing, were
it not that they were once enlightened, Heb. 6. therefore the people of God are
so far from being or beginning of order, matter, or form of a people, called to
the life and form of freedom and righteousness, which is of God, that their
seeming form, their service and obedience, is the occasion, and their
deflecting from it the real cause of their being under the form, or power of
the spirit of bondage. There is no mention of any service to God, that Israel
ever did in Egypt, before they kept the Passe-over; for it was impossible for
them to serve God before they were or had being or beginning of order, matter,
or form of righteousness and freedom, but of bondage unto sin and slavery only
in a type. So the true Israel, as persons, families, people, and Churches did
never, nor can or shall ever do any service to God, at least, in the clear
evidence of the life and power of God, until they by and in their anti-typical
families prepare and keep the true Passover: neither shall they have being or
beginning of order, matter, or form, in the power of true righteousness and
freedom, until they be called out of the power of bondage into the freedom and
power of God, receiving the seal of the Name of God, etc. and they only shall
be the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, Rev. 14.21.

A stone, or clodd of earth, cast by a strong hand, flies as fast as the
swiftest creatures that have life and motion in themselves: so the people of
God act just things vigorously, for their own private ends (singly) of which,
did they seek them in the joint good and safety of each other, and by right
means, they could not miss: and their outward motives failing, they fall as a
clodd of earth, quit freedom; and if peril appears, their hearts (like Nabals)
are dead as stones, but they not only lick up the vomit of a slavish spirit,
but bend the power of it, in resistance, against God. They hide their
treacheries and apostasies with fig leaves of deceits, adding fraud to
unfaithfulness, and ensnare and betray those that are sincere, and themselves
(in them) to destruction and slavery.

Israel told Sampson plainly, that they were come down to bind him, and to
deliver him into the hands of the Philistims, and that they would bind him
fast, and deliver him, (that is, betray him,) and they did so, Judges 15.12,
13. but the people of God deal not so sincerely and truly with those that are
faithful and sincere amongst them: They indeed bind them fast in cords of
bondage, and betray them, but tell them not they will do so, they need not,
they have many examples to warn them, Moses, and the Prophets; reason and
experience tells them that as Israel bound Sampson and betrayed him, and Moses,
and in them, all Israel into the power of slavery and death, so all that the
people of God do, or can do (in bondage) by any Engagement, is but to bind
those that are sincere and faithful, in strong cords of slavery and death, and
betray them to destruction and slaughter: And this their treacherous disservice
thus quitted, they confine and terminate in outward strict form; of profession,
and their own corrupt interests, until opportunity be given that they may again
seek (for slavish ends) just things by headlong and rash means, and again
betray those that are faithful to slaughter, and themselves to slavery; So they
scarce leave any name or being of those that are sincere (as few were left when
the flood came in a Type) They rally not, but to revolt, desert, and betray
those that are faithful, and oppose base excuses to faith and obedience: Israel
heard gladly the message of their deliverance, and then all (both Elders and
People (so soon as resisted) revolted, and were scattered all over Egypt under
the power of bondage more then ever; God sent a second message, but they in no
wise harkned, Exodus 6.9. They had something else to mind then Moses; they must
either submit to bear, or be beaten; it was their living, their calling, and
they must follow it; The people of God (bidden to the great Supper, Luke
14.17.) begin all with one consent, to make excuse; one had bought five yoke of
Oxen, another a house, etc. So the people of God called out of bondage, at
first seem forward to harken and engage for just Freedom; but then the first
noise of Fear (before they see any danger) puts them all to retreat, and
scatters them under the power of bondage more then ever; the first brunt
(before it approach or come near them) breaks their spirit; Moses was sent with
a second message, but they did not harken for cruel bondage, their servile
spirits made bondage matter of excuse, and a strong Bar against their
deliverance from it; The Lord sent to call those that were bidden to the great
Supper, and they also harkned not, but opposed the power of bondage against the
power of God in making excuses; an excuse is a shaking off, or a casting out;
and they by making excuses, did shake off God and his power for their
deliverance: So the people of God cast off God, oppose his messages, and resist
his power by slavish excuses; They oppose against their just faith to God and
man (broken by their treachery) the unfaithfulness of others, to excuse their
own; They through greedy avarice betray the true Israel, and themselves, their
liberties, estates, and entire Beings, to perish and be destroyed by slavery
(as Judas betrayed the Truth and himself for money) and then cover that bitter
root of all evil, with false pretenses of Frugal Providence: Their occasions
obstruct their obedience, and their callings and business are mere instruments
emissary to slavery: Neuters (that out-sit the time in sleeping, and censure
all that are not slothful) excuse their treachery under pretense of wary and
secure acting: they are moderate men, who sit still, and suffer the Lands (like
Sodoms) swift destruction, whiles they drink the sweet, and eat the fat of it,
and receive the States pay for so doing.

The people of God will not put the strength of their little finger to remove
(really and indeed) the least burden, (though they groan under the greatest
that ever were, of which the Egyptian were but shaddows) Why? Their burdens
are so great and many, and their slavish fear suggests more, and greater; yet
they are forward enough to seek just Freedom and Righteousness, and just things
for their own ends (singly) to enslave, and by headlong and rash means (like
Nadabs and Abihu's strange fires) to destroy themselves. But if any message or
command from God recall them to seek their own safeties and freedom (not in
their own single, but of one another) and to do all righteousness in the right
order, and rule of God, they reject it, and them them that bring it; propose
what, and from whom you will, they will not meddle with it, nor engage in what is
good: They have bin burnt enough; It urged, or pressed, they summon all the
powers of the curse of covetousness, sloth, and slavish fears, to make excuses;
swords befit not their hands nor hearts, but burdens and sharp scourges their
servil backs: Why say they, Are Zeba and Zalmunna (the keepers of our
Captivity) in your hands? etc. Judge. 8. Why servile backsliding Israel, can
your treacherous and bas;e excuses, or churlish slavishness, prevent Gods
purpose to free his people, or free your selves from the curse and destruction
of bondage? The Lord declared expressly, that none of all those that were bidden
and made excuses, should taste of his supper. Luke 14.24. Let all Gods people
that make excuses fear, and beware utter rejection.

The fearful and unbelieving spies, and all Israel (by believing them) brought
evil reports upon the Land of Canaan, and the guilt of most degenerous, and
base wickedness upon themselves: they feared strong Cities, and tall statures
of men, more than confided in the living God; and that fear destroyed (except
Caleb and Joshua that sought to bear up their slavish spirits) every man of
them; when Caleb told them they were well able to overcome they all lift up
their voices and cried, and wept fore, and were wholly routed and slain
(without any enemy, or danger near them) by mere slavishness, all above twenty
years old (women not excepted) fell, and perished through the power of the
curse of their own slavish spirit; when Caleb and Joshua sought to bear up
their backsliding spirits, all Israel bid stone them with stones, rebelled, and
gathered together against God Numb. 14.9.35. that is, they gathered together in
the power of bondage against the power of God, for their freedom, and
deliverance; So all that the people of God (in bondage) do, or can do, is but
to begin seemingly in the spirit, and end in the flesh; to seek Freedom and
righteousness by headlong, and rash means, and for their own sinister and base
ends increase bondage, destroy themselves, and resist God: They bring (if
opposed especially) only evil reports upon all right means, and ends of their
deliverance, and project nothing but base excuses and cavils (the fruits of
wicked fears) their hope (like Nabals heart) is dead as a stone; they quit
faith; and their love to true righteousness, and Freedom leaves them, and they
it: why say they its in vain to stir, our just ends (the more we act) are the
farther off, and to accomplish them (by any means) is impossible; What should
we run our selves into danger for and need not? we see clearly that to stir in
this way is but to destroy our selves without remedy, and for our parts we have
seen a great deal of means used, and much pains taken, and no good has come of
it, we will labor to seek God, keep in compass of our own callings, and leave
the affairs of the State to those they do belong, the times are suffering
times, and call not to stir, but sit still, we must mind Christ preached, and
not these just things indeed, but dangerous to be meddled with; We define bowing
our knee (in holy profession) to Baal as much as any, but (in practice) none
but turbulent spirits deny it (troublers of Israel and themselves) that disturb
the Na^ion: We will wait upon God, and turn back into Egypt. They vent the
slanders of their slavish spirits (as the Type did) and say thus in effect;
They told us of the land of Canaan, and of the land of promise, and bring us
into a Wilderness; of milk and honey, and now we see it (indeed) it is the
sharp sword of unvanquishable enemies, to slay us and ours. They pretended to
give us the land of Promise, a place of rest from all burdens, see how well
they have performed it: Had we not tasks hard enough in Egypt, but they must
bring us out from thence to set us harder tasks impossible to be performed?
Tasks to destroy us, to cause us to engage our lives against men of tall and
procerous stature, and invincible strength, whose very names are enough to
affright our little ones: Must we come thus far to buy our burials, purchased
with the loss of our lives, and must our wives and children (to purchase this
prize) be likewise slain without obtaining it?

Israel (the peculiar people, in whom the promise of blessing to all people and
nations was made) made themselves by rebellious unbelief and slavish fear, the
curse, scorn, and shame of all people, and Nations: So the true Israel (from
amongst whom the real blessing of freedom and deliverance from bondage shall be
derived to all People and Nations) make themselves (by their rebellious, base,
and slavish fears, the curse, scorn, and shame of all people and Nations upon
earth: Because Israel (when they were brought to subdue Canaan) subjected their
own spirits to covetousness, sloth, and faithless and slavish fears; Gods wrath
brake out upon them, and slew them by sword, plague, and famine forty years:
his displeasure (the heaviest he ever manifested to his people) rested upon
them forty years, until he had utterly destroyed every man and woman that
reassumed the plague of a slavish spirit; that the true Israel might not want
example (the most remarkable that ever was) for their warning.

The Egyptians were Chams children (the peculiar people of the curse, in the
antithesis to the promise of blessing) and so most contrary to all order,
matter, and form of a free people, above all Nations; but Israel (under their
power and command, and in bondage unto them) were (visibly) their vassals,
slaves unto servants, bondslaves to the curse: They were servants to God by
promise, but (in power) servants to the Egyptians, under whose power they
were; and so more contrary to all order, matter and form of free families,
persons, people, and churches, then the Egyptians, until (being sealed with
the blood of the Passover) they were called, and redeemed unto freedom in the
power of God, by the Lamb in a Type: So usurpers and their servants (all that
receive the mark of the power of the Beast) are the people of the curse
(servants of servants) in antithesis to the true blessing, and so (their slaves
Gods free people excepted) most contrary to order, matter, and form of a free
people. But Israel (Gods free people in bondage to them) are (visibly) their
vassals, servants to God by promise, by power theirs; bondslaves to servants,
and so are and shall be more contrary to right order, matter, and form (as
Persons, Families, or Churches) then the peculiar people of the Curse, or any
people upon earth, until (being sealed with the seal of God in the blood of the
Lamb) they shall be called and redeemed from the Will and power of Usurpers, to
the power and Freedom of God in their anti-typical Families. The rule and form
of a free people is the Law, of Law, Reason; of Reason, the Word by the work of
his free spirit; the elementary form and rule of the law of Nature and Reason,
is the Scripture; But the matter (the people of God) and their forms (Law,
Reason, and Scriptures) and the order of both matter and form, are kept in
chains of slavish dis-use, dead to Freedom and Life, alive and active unto
bondage and death; as all Israel (living in bondage) acted unto bondage only,
The most just Law is but a bond-slave to Will and Power, Will without Reason is
the form of it; Right (if any be or seem) is an effect contingent, or a work of
Bribery, or of by-respects, and not of the Law: for there can be no right
effect from that cause, whereof Reason is not the Form and Power: Reason is the
power of (Law-natural) the Image of God in man, fallen (when man fell) under
the power of bondage and death: Dead bodies (not presently, but in time) wholly
corrupt and putrify; So this Image, and (its form) Reason (though dead) did
not presently, but in time, wholly putrify; the order and manner of its
dissolution is set forth in that Image in Dan. 2. Howbeit, God by his Word (the
embalming myrrh of this dead Image) has at some times healed its unsoundness:
But now this Image (and Reason the form of it) is (as in a Type when the Flood
came) wholly corrupted and putrified; Learning and Ignorance have puffed up the
wise, and foolish; and pride has putrified this Image in man, and the form of
it, Reason; as it did in Nebuchadnezzar in a figure, for he was the head of
Civil Empire and government, and a shadow of it from his time, in which the
Image of God (as to Justice, Reason, and Sobriety) is wholly destroyed, and the
people (ruling and ruled) turned (through pride) feral, agrest, and wild in the
substance, whereof the same in him was a shadow. The wise and learned render
reason sensual and divelish, the unlearned brutish. Gross and stupid (but
conceited) ignorance, and pedantick learning have eaten up (like Pharaohs
ill-favored lean kine) all real Virtue and honesty: Religion, and the Law, and
light of Reason, is turned putrified filth and dirt of wickedness, and folly in
the thin bellies of these ill-favored beasts: Reason is but a bond-slave to
absurd Tenants of fond and sottish bruitishness; delatory and evasive sophistry
seems most to be, but is no part of just reason, or of the Image of God, but of
Satan: There Is no true indoles of goodness, or good nature left in this Image,
because the Scriptures are not, neither can be but the imaginations of the
thoughts of the hearts of men (which are in bondage, and only evil
continually) are as they were in the Type, Genesis 6.5. the forms and power of
Reason; wherefore this spiritual Image in man, and (the form of it) Reason,
being dead, corrupt, and putrified, as to Freedom, Life, and Power, but alive
and active unto bondage and death, cannot be the form and power of the Law of
the free people of God.

Thirdly, The Scriptures are not (but ought to be, and shall be) the elementary
form and power of reason, and of the Image of God in man; that is, they are
properly, and shall be really, the Conduit and Instrument by which the Spirit
of life (in the Word of God) shall convey light of life into the Image of God,
and into the form of it (Reason) But the Scriptures are also in bondage of
death, Rev. 11.7. dead to Freedom, and Life, and alive and active unto bondage.
The Scripture is not (by strictest pretenders to it) extended to Persons,
Families, and People (as the elementary form and rule of their Law, and
Government, as Persons, Families, and people. They call the Law of the people
the Civil Law, and discern it, as having it original power and form (not from
the Scriptures, but) from the people; and (for government of Families and
Persons, and the power of it) they think not of it, or (at least) practice not
(really and indeed) any: They confine the power of the Scriptures to Churches
only (as Shimei was to his house in Jerusalem) by which means the Scriptures
are in bondage, and are dead, and have no power, but to promote empty forms of
pretenses, and hypocrisy; For it is impossible that those herbs that retein
the strength and power of poison in the place where they grow, and likewise
retein the same strength of poison in the pot, and in the mess, should ever be
wholesome in the stomach: So it is impossible that they that have no power or
form of Law, or government according to Scriptures (as Persons, Families or
People) should have any form or power of Law or Government according to the
Scriptures as Churches; The Scriptures are a Cup of Gold, Rev. 17.4. that is, a
vessel of pure righteousness (not kept in the power of Gods people, but in
mystical Jezabels hand, the mother of all abominations and filthiness) Joseph's
steward said to the Brethren of Joseph, That the Silver Cup was that wherein
his Master used to drink, and indeed to divine: The Scriptures are indeed a
vessel of perfect honor, but (as kept in bondage of death, in possession, and
under the power of an harlot) a vessel of vilest dishonor, a cup of divination,
full of all abominations, and filthiness of her fornications (the false wares
with which all mercenaries (the Merchants of the earth) chandle and trade their
high prised deceits of no value) which they exchange for the treasure of the
earth to make themselves rich; some teach against some, some against all forms
of Godliness, and deny all the power of it: others press empty forms of
fruitless profession, and make these, and all other painted Sepulchers, seem to
arise out of this Cup: They seem to make the blindest bra^s of Egyptian
darkness their brainsick conceits of grossest folly and blasphemy to arise out
of this cup. All base Sorcerers and seducers take up this cup for a pretense to
dissimulation, for lucre sake, and make it their instrument to deceive and
inslave the Nations, subordinate to their own unjust gain, and ends. The
Scriptures are but nets spread only to catch their prey, their shadow of
darkness to deceit, their vessel of divination to ensnare and destroy the earth
for reward. All Impostors take up out of this cup, forms to deceive for gain
unto themselves, and they that receive the mark of bondage (hardness of heart)
drink deceit, and all deceivers the wages of lying divinations out of this cup.

The word of God shall be, but is not, but the wills and power of wicked
Impostors, and (their filthy lusts and desires are the power of the dead
subjected and inslaved Scriptures; Therefore the Scriptures (in bondage under
the forms of vilest, and most slavish disuse, and death) cannot be the form,
and power of the Image of God, nor of reason; nor reason of the Law; nor the
Law, of the free people of God: But (as the abomination of desolation was
(instead of the Ark of God) set up in the Temple of God, so right order,
matter, and form of Freedom, life and power in the people of God is (by a
general falling away from what they seemed) null, and void, and positive
opposite forms and powers of bondage (the substance shaddowed by that
abomination of desolation) set up in the Temple, the people of God and in all
powers of their being (Law, reason, and Scripture.) And the matter (joined to
these forms) is their proper matter in being, and the order, ends, and effects
must necessarily (as effects their causes) follow their productive matter and
forms; therefore the people of God (as families, persons, people and Churches)
and all their powers, and forms (Law, reason, and Scriptures) and the order,
ends, and effects of these forms are wholly in the power of bondage, and basest
disuse, dead to Freedom, life and power of God; alive and active to slavish
destruction, sin, and death, and shall be until God call them, and they come
(and bring with them all that is theirs) out of the power of bondage, unto the
power and freedom of God, in their anti-typical families.

While Israel was in bondage their persons, estates, law, reason traditions,
and entire beings, were wholly in the same bondage, and they never had being,
nor beginning of Freedom, until they were called out of the power of bondage,
unto their proper form of Freedom, (the power of God, and of the Lamb) and were
gathered, and sealed in that power (typically) by their families; So the true
Israel (and all that is theirs) are alike in the same bondage, their bodies,
spirits, power, rights, estates, and their forms (of being (law, reason, and
Scriptures) are to life and Freedom) void of being and beginning: But by
occasion vials of slavish disuse, destructive, sinful; and must so remain
until God gather Israel, and all that is theirs, from being putrified dust
(rebelling against him) to a being, and beginning in his power of Freedom, by
their anti-typical families; The dust (which after was Man) had no order,
unity, nor figure of body whiles it was dust, nor fleshly form, until it was
transmutated into flesh, nor life until the flesh had liniaments, and breath of
life, and not till then it had the beginning and being of a man; So Israel were,
and and the true Israel are scattered dividuals of dust, and Atoms most
contrary to order and unity of a body, and form of life; When Israel rebelled
against God and (being called out of bondage hearkened not Exodus 6.12.) they were
putrified and scattered dust (warring against the life and power of God;) when
they readily hearkened to prepare and keep the Passover (as God commanded) then
they were changed from dead and scattered dust into fit matter of a redeemed
people, when all their families were gathered together into their own houses
(or so many as could eat the Lamb) into one house, and kept together without
going out, or stirring from one another, then they were rallyed and knit in a
compact body, when they did eat the Passover together (as God commanded) then
the life and power of God (their breath of life from bondage of death was (in a
Type) breathed into them; and (that night) they were delivered, and all the
firstborn (the power of Egypt in a Type) were that very night destroyed, and
God ordained that month (by an Ordinance for ever) to be the beginning of all
months unto them, and the first month of the year, because it was indeed
really the first beginning of their being: So the true Israel (the free people
of God) and all that is theirs, have bin, and are in that deep sleep, and
horror of great darkness of bondage, and death (in the substance of it) did
which fell upon Abraham in a figure Genesis 15. and are really those divided
pieces of flesh betwixt which the furnace and burning lamp passed, which
pieces of flesh putrified: That deep sleep, and great darkness, and those
pieces of flesh were a twofold figure of Abraham's seed after the flesh, and
after the spirit; in bondage, dead, disobedient, and putrified dust, which
being called hearken not: When they shall readily hearken to prepare, and keep
the true Passover (the substance, and truth of the typical) then they shall be
changed from putrid dust (repugnant to all life, and freedom of God) into fit
matter of a free people: When their anti-typical families shall be gathered in
the unity of the spirit of life, and freedom, unto the power of God in their
natural, and mystical houses to prepare, and keep the true Passover, and not
revolt, not stir out, nor desert one another: then they shall be rallied into
the com-pages, and joints of a body of a Free People: When they shall eat the
Passover together (as God commands (that is) when they shall do really the
works of righteousness, (not the Type: but the truth, and substance of what
God, and the Lamb requires of a people redeemed to life, and Freedom) then the
power of God (their breath of life from real bondage) shall be breathed into
them, and that time (which is at hand shall be unto them, and all that is
theirs really) the very first beginning of being: Then Israel, and theirs first
began (in a Type) and then the true Israel (as persons, families, people, and
churches) shall first begin really: That shall be the first time wherein their
proper Rights, Estates, Law, Power, and the Image of God, and Reason, and the
Scriptures, shall have (in reference to right use) beginning of Freedom from
desolation, slavish dis-use, sin, and death. The Text is express, Rev. 14. That
the hundred forty and four thousand (sealed in their foreheads) were the first
fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, redeemed from the earth: And it is not
supposed, but clearly proved by Scripture, that these one hundred forty and
four thousand shall be the same in truth and substance that the Israelites
(sealed in the blood of the Lamb in Egypt) were in Type, and shadow; They came
out of the greatest Thrall and Oppression that ever was, these come out of
great tribulations; Rev. 7.14. They overcame Pharaoh, and all his servants and
seducers, these shall overcome the Beast, Chap. 15.2. They sang a song of
deliverance, the song of Moses, These sing a song of deliverance, the song of
Moses expressly, v. 3.

They came forth out of Egypt by their Families, Tribes, and Armies (which may
be a figure of the sub-ordination of anti-typical families, Oeconomical,
Provincial, and National.) They were wholly freed from all slavish rigor of
bearing any Egyptian burdens in the least measure for ever; These shall be
freed from all affliction, tribulation, and oppression for ever, Rev. 7.16.
That night was a still and silent night (wherein Israel prepared the Passover,
against whom not a dog moved his tongue, Exodus 11.7. but a night of the
greatest cry amongst the Egyptians that ever was before or after; They
received not the outward, but the inward seal also, and did eat the Passover,
and could not be diverted in that action by going about any other occasion,
because they were to eat it standing; and they were to eat it in have,
therefore they would not speak much, or be diverted or hindered by talking, and
they might be well satisfied (eating in have) in about half an hours time;
therefore that time (for about half an hours space) was a time of the greatest
stilness and silence, and more was done in that half hours time of silence,
then was done in all the time from the beginning of the world before, for all
Israel received the inward seal of the life and power of God, and of the Lamb
(in a Type) in the time of that half hours silence. There was silence in heaven
about ths spate of half an hour. Rev. 8.1. We need not enquire what was said,
but what was done in that half hours space. There is not the like expression in
all the Scripture, nor any place, so pertinent and express for the action of
that time: In heaven, that is, in the houses of the hundred forty and four
thousand (immediately forementioned.) Large mention is made of the outward
seal, but instead of any mention of the inward seal, it is only said, That
there was silence in heaven for the space of half an hour: The Tongue
interprets the Spirits secrecy, and the outward seal of the Name of God in
their foreheads, declares the secret actings of this half hours silence; The
following and foregoing coherence shows, That as all Israel did not prepare
only, but eat the Passover, so Israel (their antitype) shall not receive the
outward only, but the inward seal of the free Spirit of life in Christ the
Lamb) and this is to eat the flesh and substance of the Lamb: Its soon gathered
what hungry men are doing that have meat set before them, and are silent; When
all free people (the true Israel) shall be gathered together in their
anti-typical families to eat the flesh, and substance of the Lamb after this
manner, as all Israel were by their families in a Type) and shall thus conveen
to take real (not verbal) council to accomplish these ends; then the yoke of
bondage upon them, and upon all they are, and have, shall be broken for ever;
then the seal of constant conformity, or real sincerity (in true righteousness
of freedom) shall be engraven upon their spirits; then the vanity (that is, the
nullity of right use) and slavish dis-use (to which the people of God, and what
they are and have is subjected) and the bondage of corruption under which they,
their just rights, and estates, the Image of God in them, their Laws, Power,
Scriptures, and the whole Creation groan, and travel in pain to be delivered,
Romans 8.21. shall be taken off for ever, and their, and the creatures earnest
desire and expectation of the manifestation of the sons of God, v. 15. shall be
then accomplished; that shall be the time of the great Marriage-Supper of the
Lamb, Rev. 19.7, 9. And these shall be the high and serious transactions of
this half hours silence: More was done (in a Type) in that short space by the
seeming weakest means, then had bin done in all the time before; and more shall
be done by the seeming weakest means in this half hours silence, then has bin
since time had beginning. Actual redemption is the hardest work that ever was,
yet done upon the easiest terms; What easier terms of redemption can be to
hungry weary bondslaves, then to say go home to Supper, you have bin
(heretofore in rigous of cruel bondage) ever restless, go home and
hence-forward rest quiet for ever? God offers the same terms (in substance) to
the true Israel, to redeem them, and the whole Creation from bondage unto
vanity and corruption; As if he should say, Israel (in Egypt) was oppressed, and
murdered with heavy burdens, and by rigor of cruel bondage; you really and
indeed, I redeemed them naturally, and will redeem you effectually; Free grace
freely given them, was all the ransom they paid, and Free grace from me (the
greatest that was ever) and your acceptance (in it) shall be all your ransom
required from you: Their task was most easy and acceptable; yours the easiest
and most acceptable (in truth and substance.) I bid them go home, rest, and
refresh themselves for ever; Go ye home, and be free from all burdens, rest and
refresh your selves for ever. A dog did not open his mouth against any of them,
nor shall against you: I did not busy their memories with many observations
(only to prepare and eat the Passover) neither be you busied ( Martha-like)
about many things, but mind the only one thing necessary (to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, and) to do and observe (in your Oecunomical consults
and executions) all which God and the Lamb says; That was the first feast and
sacrifice that ever was kept in Israel, they kept it by their families, (the
first subjects of beginning and being of all Power and Government.) I (in like
manner) call, and redeem you (by your families) out of the greatest and most
slavish tribulation and destruction that ever was, to keep the same feast in
truth and substance; and your anti-typical families (so called and redeemed)
shall be (really and indeed) the first subjects of beginning and being of all
true Power and Government.

Government is the intense Order of Agreement; Oeconomical Agreements are
(conjunct) political: Forms of right Agreements are elementary or literal, and
virtual or essential: Elementary or literal form, is the figure or tenor of
the matter of the Instrument; Virtual or essential form, is the subscribing or
consigning of force, figure, and matter in one act: Literal forms ought to
express the whole necessary substance in summary compactness; wherefore because
no Instrument is more necessary, I insert this Pattern.

WE the free people of England indent (as Persons, Families, and People) to
receive (as much as in us lies) all power of Freedom, which God dispenses to
redeem us and ours, from misery of most slavish dis-use and destruction; and
agree to choose Representors, by and for so many families of us, as shall be by
them judged expedient. Secondly, to choose Comissial or Provincial: Thirdly
National Representors: And that the Commissial or National Representors (whom
we shall choose) shall be by us ordained our free National Representative,
lawfully constituted and appointed by us.

Secondly, We agree (not any more to sacrifice our Freedoms and Estates, our
Fathers and Childrens Inheritances and Birthrights) to arbytrarie-corrupters
of judgment, to Leeches of deceit and rapine, usurpers and Lawyers) but to
judge and decide all differences and controversies amongst us, in and by our
Oeconomical Classes, or (if need be) in and by our Provincial and National
Classes.

Thirdly, We agree to prove and examine all causes of every particular person
amongst us, in relation to all oppressions and wrongs done by or to any of us,
and in reference to all their particular just Rights and Interests, in manner
as aforesaid; And likewise to commence Suits, claim, demand, and recover all
their debts, rights, dues, reparations, and interests, in the name and power of
each particular persons Classis; for, and in behalf of every particular person
amongst us, or (if need be) in the name and power of the Provincial or National
Classis.

Fourthly, We agree to remove all Taxes, Excise, Cessments, Free Quarter,
Impost upon Coals or other Commodities, Monopolies, and all other burdens from
the poor and middle sort (especially) for ever: Because what the poor and
middle sort pay or bear in such relations, is by double right (of propriety and
necessity) due to themselves, to relieve and support their own lives, and the
lives of their families.

Also we agree, that the estates of those that are rich amongst us, all debts
due from them, (which are no part of their Estates) being first satisfied,
shall be freed from all bondage of corruption, and slavish dis-use for ever.

Fifthly, We agree to choose those (whether poor or rich) whom we conceive most
sober, sincere, and emulous of just Freedom, Representers of congregated
Families, and to be Provincial and National Representors; and to negotiate and
discharge all business entire in and with our selves, by assistance and advice
of each other, and by and with those Representors. When Moses hands were
dimitted, Amaleck prevailed against the free people; when by Aaron and Hur born
up, the free people prevailed. Such (in effect) shall discreet and faithful
Representors be to free people to unite them in order of life and freedom: for
want of them, and consigning Agreements, the conscientious of the City, Nation,
and Army, convene (as ciphers) without doing any thing: And the effects of
their meetings are ruin to the most faithful, and confusion of all: wailes the
really industrious (promised indemnity) spend time and estate to attain the
ends of their just engagements, the rest draw back, and leave them (ruinated)
to perish (by unprevented rigor of cruelty and injustice) and they (thus
wronged) and utterly undone, and expecting persolvance of their faiths that
engaged with them, gain their ungrateful enmity for repair of their wrongs.
These evils are caused for want of consigning an Agreement, and for want of
discreet and faithful Representors.

Sixthly, We agree to seek things honest for all man, and justice absolute to
good and bad (what may commensurate their evil or good actions equally and
impartially) and to this end, we agree to prove and examine all causes and
differences with all faithful and advised exactness; and (that our Consciences
and Judgments may be free and clear before we pass judgment, or determine any
thing) we agree to permit each party, or any for each, to declare in word or
writing, and (by demonstrative argument, and evidence of witness and reason) to
prove in particular) their Complaints or defenses: Also agree to compose the
state of matters difficult and obscure, with all succinct and advised cleerness
(if need be) in writing, for satisfaction of all men; and that the Scriptures
shall be the original literal form and rule of all our results and
determinations.

Seventhly, We agree that the present Army shall be paid off all Arrears, and
disbanded, and after rallied (as there shall be need,) every man in his own
Parish, Shire, Country, or where his calling or estate lies, that Soldiers and
Officers may have the advantage of a double benefit in the management and
oversight of their own Callings and Estates, added to their standing Sallary or
Pay. Secondly, We agree that all Soldiers and Officers that have not bin in
actual service (in this Army in time of War) shall be first paid off, and
disbanded, and that not any more shall be listed (except such as have served in
this Army in time of War) until this Army be wholly paid off and disbanded: For
it is extreme injustice that they that never served in War, should receive the
pay of War in time of peace, whiles they that have served in War, want Arrears
and maintenance. Thirdly, If the Nation agree not generally to pay and disband
the Army, we agree to pay off, disband, and to re-dispose of our proportion,
and to leave to such as assent not, their proportion, to pay, maintain, and
dispose of at their own charge, provided it no way burden or annoy us, etc.

To prevent that bloody, ingrate murder upon soldiers and others by delay of
right, and privation of it; and (thereby) of their lives (for want of it) they
may demand their whole pay, and remit what is due from them; but what can be
proved due only, can be justly deducted for Free Quarter, or otherwise; they
that deduct it should give particular receipt in his name to whom it is due, and
secure the payment.

General confused pretenses cancel not personal debtss, nor should the
Soldiers be delayed, robbed, and destroyed, under these colors, or for want
of their Colonels Certificate, whereby none (but who are mercenary to vicious
Officers) can have their just dues, the price of their lives: Nor should they
or their Officers be tied to make oath in cases of this nature, nor be tied to
arbytrarie carvings of corrupt accountants, nor to receive their pay in such
moneys, houses, lands, whose title they question, nor be entangled or defrauded
with Debenters, buying them before they receive money or after, nor ought their
forced conveyances of their Debenters to stand valid, or be in any force; nor
should any reducement of their pay be made against equity, and the faith of the
Nation (unnaturally, ingratefully) to their and their families impoverishment
and utter ruin: Every man (as not flatly denying the faith of Christ, and as
not being a Barrabas and robber to himself and others) must pay every man (what
he may justly) his whole due, and to that end must demand (what he may do
justly) his whole just due: The free called, military and civil Families must
(in conscience) see to it strictly, that every one among them have all just
interests entire, as Moses faithfully demanded, and had all Isreal's just due
entire: He that is unfaithful in a little; is false in all (but these things
are the greatest) and imperfect righteousness is the fruit of bondage, not of
freedom: Either let them do justice absolute and impartial, or else let them
that are filthy be filthy still, and them that are unfaithful and unjust, be
unjust still.

The virtual or essential form is real or paral consignation of force, figure,
and matter, in one act to, and with oecunomick Representers, and their
represented (the persons and families signing to them) and to and with
Provincial and National Representers, and their represented (the free people
and families of the Provinces, and of the Nation sighing to them) for as an
Instrument of an act or deed (not sealed nor subscribed) is no act or deed, but
a dead instrument of no force or virtue; So an Agreement (not signed) is no
Agreement, but a dead instrument or carcass; Therefore it is that Lieut. Col.
John Lilburns Agreement (though he and they with him that made it have done
their parts in it, and discharged their Conscience) has (as yet) come to
nothing, because the free people (through slavish fear and sloth) did not (on
their parts) sign and subscribe it: And therefore it is that the good (which
those that they call Levellers endeavored) was a dead birth (the hazard of its
parents life) because they gave it not life (by consigning it) in a right Order
of a free gathered people: for there were many busy pretenders (betrayers of
them) amongst them, and diverse unsteady and vicious, and rash persons (that
deserved not the name of Levellers) who hindered their good endeavors, and
brought all into dis-order and confusion.

Lastly, Right Government is the intense order of a right Agreement; This
intense order is an intermediate pressing forward (in the righteousness of life
and freedom) from the bounds (from which) to the bounds (to which) a free
people must act and move; Righteousness is either of bondage or freedom:
Bondage and Freedom, and their righteousness, differ as light and darkness; The
righteousness of bondage (in the people of God) is lame, and imperfect, mere
impostury, reprobate righteousness of corruption; Ishmael the bond-womans son
(with his mother) to be cast out: but their righteousness of Freedom shall be
(at least as to outward conformity) firm and constant. The good works of
bondage in the people of God, are dead carcasses of righteousness, and
therefore have an an appearance (in their impressive act especially) and so
their impressive power of bondage, is less visible; but the intense power of
bondage in the best righteousness of the people of God, is in its intermediate
act apparent: For as thorns obstruct and choke the best seed, so bondage and
its forms (respect to private ends, and disrespect to duty and conscience)
kills the very impressive life of all righteousness: Therefore their dead and
slavish righteousness (for they have no other) cannot reach any supreme end of
the righteousness of life and freedom; but bondage forms and steers its
intermediate, first and last course to slavery, sin, and death: for dead men to
do the works of the living, and for Gods people in bondage of corruption and
death, to do the righteousness of life and freedom, is impossible: Their best
actions are but good words, and these mere deceits and trecheries: Such forms,
such effects: but the powers of bondage are the forms in which the people of
God, and the whole Creation (as the matter) are sub^ected: therefore all their
righteousness is the righteousness of the power of bondage, a base offspring
of pride, avarice, and vainglory; a vile instrument to advance empty forms, a
servant to perfideous sloth and apostasy, a prostitute to vice, and
bond-servant to base designs. The rigor of Egyptian bundage killed Isreal's
fruits after the flesh (their children) so soon as born, and captivated all
that lived, in continual bondage: but this vehement rigor of real bondage,
suffers not the people of God, nor their best righteousness, to have intense
motion, being, nor beginning of life and freedom, but of perfect captivity only
to slavish dis-use, sin, and death.

The sincerest, and their best righteousness, are (like Ishmael) in bondage
partly, and partly free; Ishmael was freeborn by the fathers side, but by
Hagar the bondwoman: Wherefore subjecting none, and subject, and in bondage to
none, his hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him; So the
sincere, and their righteousness are of God their Father, and so free and
perfect, but outwardly of Hagar the bondwoman; therefore their free Spirit
bows not its knee to bondage; but (being Hagar the bond-womans sons) the spirit
of bondage, not the free spirit, coucheth to all burdens, and resists in all
things the free Spirit of God: Therefore (as wild men like Ishmael) they
resist, but subdue not, and are resisted, but are not subdued by all vassals of
bondage, and their, and its corruptions; and bring forth no righteousness of
life and freedom into manifestation of being; because they are free, and live
(partly) and are (partly) dead, and in bondage.

Righteousness of freedom, is the good works of a people equally legitimate and
free (not as the people of God were and are in Egypt) by promise only, and
really, and indeed the greatest and most miserable slaves that ever were, nor
as Ishmael was; and the most sincere are (free by the fathers side only) but by
father and mother as David's fathers house was in a type free in Israel.
Jerusalem descending shall be the only free mother (as Evah of all the living)
of all living branches of the Tree of life (the freeborn of God that shall
bring forth perfect fruits of life and freedom. The integrity of Primitive
times did antitype Adams and Evahs innocence, and typified that equally
legitimate and free righteousness of the freeborn sons of God, by that City,
the Lambs Bride. Man's fall prefigured the general falling away from the
Primitive Churches, and second Adams first righteousness, which general
Apostasy and corruption of all flesh (in the antitype) is now full, as Adams
fall, and his offsprings general apostasy (in a type) was full when the flood
came: The Ark (made of one wood into mansions or rooms) shaddowing forth the
order of the families which shall be actually redeemed unto freedom) brought
forth (1656 years after the first tree of life) its first fruits of life, in a
type: So the true Ark (the tree of life in antitype and truth) shall then
bring forth (and not till then) its first fruits of righteousness of life and
freedom, when the order of its mansions (that is, the prefigured mystical
families there) shall be completed and full: The righteousness (which is now,
and has bin) is the righteousness of false appearance, covetousness, and
filthy corruptions of bondage, born and begotten by and for base designs and
ends; the offspring of illegitimacy, and seed of incest, conceived (like Moah
and Ammon) in the heat and zeal of blind and empty profession, and bloody
hypocrisy, the fruit of perfideous treachery and deceit. If any righteousness
of life and freedom has bin, or is, that Righteousness, or they that produce
it, have or has bin, or is the first fruits to God and the Lamb: but the Text
is express, That the sealed Tribes or Families of Israel, shall be the first
fruits to God and the Lamb: There was no righteousness of deliverance from the
curse of destruction, bondage, and death of Adams sin (in a type) until those
creatures that were saved (the shadow of the free people of God) came (as it
were by their families) into the Ark after their kind; and there has not bin
any perfect (but dead, spurious, and illegitimate) righteousness; no
righteousness of deliverance, life, and freedom from real destruction, sin, and
death, nor shall be any, until the free people come into the true Ark by their
anti-typical Tribes and Families, and possess their proper mansions in truth
and substance. The people of God (absolute free) and their righteousness shall
be equally legitimate in relation to God their father, and in relation to the
new policy or City (their mother) descending, which shall be free; And they,
and their righteousness shall be perfect (as their heavenly father is perfect,
and as their mother descending from God out of heaven shall be perfect)
Perfect, not of the essence of God, but after the pattern and image of the mind
of God (as the Tabernacle was the figure of that pattern in the Mount, and as
the Rainbow is the Image of the Sun) so they shall be created and formed (by
the free Spirit of life in Christ) after the Image of God; For the Creator,
Former, and Inhabitant, is not the creature, thing formed, or house: Howbeit,
God shall dwell in them more fully. The perfection of a free people and of
their righteousness, consists in an impress, intermediate, and express act of
Life and Freedom, but the last gives their and its denomination and being; and
the first two (without the third) are properly the righteousness of bondage;
This perfect righteousness of a Free people is a commutative threefold
righteousness of deliverance from evil, in evil, and out of evil of bondage; a
figure of this righteousness was in Moses, his visiting of his brethren three
times, the first time he went forth, he (seeing an Egyptian and an Israelite at
strife) slew the Egyptian, and freed the Israelite (in a Type) from evil of
bondage; The second time he went forth he (seeing two Israelites at strife)
sought to reconcile and unite them, and so to relieve and support them in the
evil of bondage; These actions were properly the righteousness of bondage (for
Moses was then in bondage) and therefore it inslaved him and them, and hazarded
his life much more; for which cause he fled, and left them forty years. Men may
not be faithful indeed, nor do impress, or intense works of Freedom in bondage:
but extremely hazard their lives, or estates, they, and their righteousness must
be corupt by constraint or they must act (if strictly faithful) single, For the
people of God in bondage (having no order, nor unity) deceive and betray each
other. Moses in his first visit acted but with one Israelite, and delivered
him, and that one betrayed him: The second time he acted but with two and one
of them betrayed him, and he fled for his life (such are the perfidious
treacheries and deceits of the righteousness of bondage) but Moses did not
desist but (sent) came the third time, and Freed Israel and their entire beings
out of bondage; all Israel therein joined with him, and this his, and their
joint work, was the proper righteousness of Freedom (in a Type) To avert evils
of bondage (in bondage) or relieve and support those that groan under the
rigor of it, and rest so (being works of bondage) strengthens the power and
rage of it, and depresseth all means of deliverance; So Moses did, and fled for
his life, and left all Israel desperately helpless, and worse inslaved than
ever. Ahimelech relieved David with the shewbread and Goliahs Sword, which was
a very just and good work, yet it occasioned that Ahimelech and all the Priests
of the Lord and their City were cut off, and destroyed man, woman, and child:
such are the violent evils of the bondage of corruption, that the best and most
perfect righteousness of bondage, causes (through corruption) the worst evils
and effects, because corruption of the best things is the most destructive
corruption that can be,

Its the greatest and most desparate hazard of utter ruin to a man's life or
estate, to be conscientious and exactly faithful in bondage: Also performances
of impress and intense acts of righteousness in bondage, without the express
act of the righteousness of Freedom out of bondage, is dead and imperfect
righteousness, and mere impostury, which deceives and hardens (like the works
of Pharaohs Sorcerers) all men's hearts in vanities and corruptions of bondage;
For whiles they follow and mind sorceries and deceits, imperfect righteousness
of relief, or support in bondage, they dream not, nor once think of any
legitimate or perfect righteousness of Life and Freedom out of bondage: These
rotten deceits destroy or hazard (as in Moses and the Priests of the the Lord)
their Lives, Families, and Estates: for the righteousness of relief and support
in bondage, and not of Freedom out of it, rouseth up the power and rigor of it
(as a sleepy lion) to destroy them: he that pricks a sleepy lion must also kill
him, or be sure to be destroyed.

This corruption of bondage under which the Creation groans and travels in pain
to be delivered out of it, is briefly this; The Creation was at first
subservient to bruit beasts, till man (a figure of the Creatures Freedom) was
made the head of all creatures; and thus far the creature was not properly
subjected unto vanity under bondage of corruption: Satan and the serpent (the
parents of all corruption of bondage, sin, and death,) co-inspired into the
spirit of man the corrupt nature of bruit beasts (from the bruit beast the
serpent, the mother of sin in a type) and of fallen Angels (from Satan the
Father of sin and filthy corruptions of bondage:) So the spirit of man (the
head of the Creation) became brutish, and divelish, and then the creature was
properly subjected unto vanity and bondage of corruption: The corruption of
bruitishness in man did corrupt, and darken the Image of God (reason, righteous
judgment) in man, as dense earth darkens the light of the Sun, and satanical
corruption impressed the Image of Satan (that is, an opposite, corrupt, and
contrary light of reason and judgment) in the spirit of man. This twofold
fall, from which (God and Nature) to which (the Beast and Satan) was not full
till the Flood came, at which time all flesh was corrupt, the earth filled with
violence, and the thoughts of men's hearts only evil continually: But this was
but a shadow of the bondage of corruption, under which the whole Creation, and
the free people now groan and travel, and must travel in pain to be delivered
out of it. Man then fell from the first Adams righteousness, now from the
righteousness of the first and second Adam: Then the creature was subjected to
all sorts of evil beasts to serve them whiles they devoured the most innocent
and best creatures; Men are now those evil beasts that devour the best men:
Pharaohs lean beasts ate the fat; Fire went out of the briars, and devoured the
Cedars of Lebanon; so it ever was, but is now indeed: The thoughts of men's
hearts were then only evil continually, now their thoughts and works are
continually only evil; Now all flesh is wholly corrupt in Spirit and Judgment
(as it was then in a Type.) The spirits of men were then corrupt after the
similitude of their parents (the best, the Serpent their mother, and Satan
their father; but now expressly: Judgment is only preposterous, and precedes
knowledge, and sentence goes before examination. Right Judgment is the sourse
of Righteousness, but all Judgment is now mere rottenness and corruption. M^n
learned, and unlearned, wise, and ignorant, judge and speak evil of what they
know not, and corrupt themselves like bruit beasts in what they know; and all
light and form of Judgment in them is satanical and divelish in antithesis to
true light, as the light of the judgments of the Pharisees judged Christ, and
released Barrabas. Then the earth was filled with violence, every one was an
oppressor and murderer, or murdered and oppressed; none free, but all were full
of violence: Now bond-masters and oppressors are full as fountains pouring
forth, and the oppressed are full as vessels (receptacles of all cruelty and
oppression) there is no vacuum, none are empty, all are full. The Prophet writs
to the Church of Smyrna, that the devil should cast some of them into prison
Revel. 2.8. but these cast many of the most faithful into Prison, yea all the
faithful, their Interests, external Liberties, and Consciences are (by them
kept in greatest Imprisonment of real bondage, that ever was) They give Liberty
of Conscience (to the Free people) in profession, they may sacrifice (as to
outward form) the fruit of the ground, or of their flocks, herein is no
Liberty, nor Conscience; These were shaddows: Liberty of Conscience is free
Liberty, to exercise perfect righteousness of life, and Freedom out of bondage,
they inhibit this Liberty wholly, and all righteousness of bondage is made by
them (out of measure) destructive. The wicked Steward laid violent hands upon a
poor man, took him by the throat, and said, pay me what thou owe me: But
Bond-masters and Oppressors now lay violent hands upon the perishing poor, and
middle sort, take them by their throats, and say, pay us what you ow us not,
and what you have not to pay, pay us (what by right and necessity is due to
your selves) that little relief the support of your lives and of the lives of
your Families; The Pharisees laid the Cross (the instrument wherewith they
crucified and killed Christ) upon Simon, and compelled him to bear it; So these
lay heavy burdens of cruel bondage (the instrument wherewith they crucify the
poor, and impoverish the rich) upon poor and rich, and compel those (by day
labor) and those (with their estates) to bear these cursed burdens of violence
to crucify and kill themselves: These are the burdens of cruelties, the
corruptions of real bondage, under which the creature is subjected, and under
which the Creation, and they that have (by the Fathers side) the first fruits
of the Spirit, groan, and travel in pain to be delivered. As it was in the
days of Noah, so now at this time, in which the Son of man (Christ mystical)
is coming to reign in his mystical families (as Noah in the mansions of the
Ark) until time, and they be transient, and pass into eternity.

The first means in a Type that freed the groaning Creation, and the earth
(filled with violence) from violence and the curse of bondage; was the coming
of the freed creatures (as it were by their families) into their mansions in
the Ark.

The second typical means that freed the Creation and the free people of God,
was the coming of all Israel, and sealing of them (by their families) in their
own houses.

The third means of efficacy and truth, that shall deliver the burdened earth
(filled with violence) and the Creation and People or God (groaning under it,)
shall be by the coming of the true Israel into their own Mansions mystical by
their anti-typical Tribes and Families: God sealed, that is, shut in the
creatures, delivered from destruction, in the Ark, by their Tribes and Kinds.
God sealed all Israel (delivered from Egypts bondage) with the blood of a Lamb,
the Sign of the life of righteousness; and shut them in their own houses by
their Families, and God will seal all his servants the true Israel with the
Seal of the living God (the blood of the Lamb ^in truth) by their mystical
Tribes, and Families, expressly Rev. 7.

When the Creatures in the Ark (delivered from destruction) were shut in, then
was the beginning of a new policy, or City, and of a new Heaven, and a new
earth in a Type. When Israel (sealed with the blood of the Lamb in the power of
God) came into their own houses (by their Families) then was the beginning of a
new policy (Oeconominick, Civil, Ecclesiastic) and of a new Heaven, and of a
new Earth in a Type. And when the true Israel shall come into, and shall be
sealed, and shut in (as the Creatures in the Ark were in, and by their
mansions, and Families mystical, then, and there shall be a real beginning of
a new policy, or City (Oeconomick, Civil, and Ecclesiastical) and of a new
Heaven, and of a new Earth (in Antitype and truth) Impresse, and intense acts
of charitable civilities (in bondage) are dead carcasses of righteousness (as
the Law is a dead carcass, or letter) Therefore they are just, good and lawful
(as a carcass, or body of righteousness) but (as the Law is the strength of sin
by occasion) so are they (by occasion) the strength of bondage, sin, and death;
for they being dead to righteousness of Freedom, live in, and unto the life,
and power of bondage, and are the strength of it; as a strong Castle is his
strength that keeps it, or as a strong and healthful body lives in, and unto
the soul, and is the strength of it. Impress, and intense righteousness of
bondage (relief, and support, from and against the evils of it, without
righteousness of Freedom out of it) is like Sions strong Tower in the Iebusits
hands, which deceives and hardens their hearts that extend it, destroys their
lives, Families, and estates, and is so far from all righteousness of Freedom,
that it ratifies, and fortifies an opposite habit of spurious, and imposturous
deceits against all perfect and legitimate righteousness of Freedom, it stirs
them up to say Soul, Soul, take thine ease, thou have many parcels of good
words (and works too) of releif, support, and refreshings (done to oppressed,
imprisoned, and undone Saints, the people of God). That Fool that put his
confidence in deceitful riches (for that cause) lost his soul and his riches
that night: So the people of God (for, and by their putting confidence in rotten
deceits of imperfect righteousness of bondage (as the Iebusits did in their
lame, and blind gods, 2 Samuel 5.) lose their souls, Families, and their
deceitful temporal riches, and of supposed righteousness; Their relief and
support they boast of and confide in, is straightened in its bowels, and theirs,
it is their blood, their Soul is in it, and goes with it; and by much struggling
in their striving spirits it is strangled, a dead birth; destructive to both its
parents, their Families, and estates. Blood and things strangled are forbidden;
Why should the people of God ^un such real hazards (worse far than the curse
laid upon women in bringing forth children) to bring forth these straightened, and
strangled dead births, of the bondage of corruption? who requires it? to what
use? let them pay, not this mint and cumin of the righteousness of bondage, but
that only one necessary main debt of the righteousness of Freedom out of
bondage, due to God, and to each other, to the Nation, to the whole Creation,
to their own Souls, and Consciences, Estates, Families, and to all their
interests entire; let them seal to God, and to each other in perfect, and
legitimate righteousness of Freedom, and there will be no need of this
strangled, and slavish righteousness of the corruptions of bondage.

Bondage, and the powers thereof are inward, and outward, the righteousness of
inward bondage is real wickedness; of outward, violence and unrighteousness:
both are destructive to their subjects, and objects, their Families, estates,
and entire beings: but inward bondage (causally) outward bondage (occasionally)
Nabals bowels were straightened by inward bondage which brought imminent
destruction upon him, his Family, and estate, and he (by it) lost (with his
life) both Family, and estate. This straitness of bowels by inward bondage,
destroyed Ananias, Nabal, Judas, whole Nations, and the first world (filled
thereby with violence) and this straitness of bowels by inward bondage has
filled the hands of the rich oppressors of this Nation (and the rest are not
free) full of blood, and violence the greatest that ever was; The miserable
objects of this violence, the poor wronged and oppressed, are murdered, merely
by their oppressors straightened bowels of inward bondage, and are robbed of their
most just Rights, due (not for keeping sheep, or without indentment) but upon
better accounts of most deeply engaged Faith, and extremest hazard: Nabals
words were churlish, yet he did not destroy David's messengers; but the words of
these are churlish, and they also destroy those that come, or are sent
peaceably in meekness for their rights, and for redress of their wrongs;
therefore these straightened subjects of extremest violence (oppressors) may much
more expect destruction of their Lives, Families, and Estates, then Nabal, or
the old world, if they seek not free deliverance, and full acquittance from
this inward Abaddon, this inward straightened spirit of bondage, the destroyer of
their Souls, Families, and Estates. Ahimelech was not straightened by inward, but
outward bondage; his relief to David (a very good and just work) could cause no
evil effect, but being in outward bondage of corruption under the power of
Saul, that wicked power took occasion by his good work, and made it through
corruption what in it self it was not, the cause of destruction of the Priests
of the Lord, of his, and their lives, and of the lives of their Families, man,
woman, and child: Such are the rage and cruelties of outward bondage of
corruption, that the people of God in bondage under these powers, cannot so
much as exercise the outward carcass of dead righteousness, but their lives and
estates are extremely in danger for it, or destroyed by it.

A necessity from God, binds all to provide for their Families; He that does
not, denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel: But no man in bondage can
provide for his House and Family, but by seeking Freedom out of bondage.
Providence of inward bondage is perfect wickedness, of outward oppression:
There Is no Providence but of Freedom only: Freedom and Bondage (as Fire and
Water) eagerly cast out each others joint Beings and Powers; Cast out the
Bondwoman, and her son (says Sarah the Freewoman,) for he shall not inherit.
So bondage alternately, suffers not the Freeborn to inherit any thing, no
fruits of faithfulness, industry, providence, not their lives nor goods: What
just providence, goodness, and justice builds, Bondage casts out and destroys:
Aegypts bondage dis-inherited the Hebrew males of their lives, cast them out of
all; so real bondage dis-inherits the true Israel of all they have or can
provide, lives, liberties, and goods: yet they may provide things, not honest,
but corrupt; fruits of deceit, and those inherit. Gods people in bondage cannot
provide, but to destroy their own lives, Families, and Estates; No Providence
but of perfect Freedom out of bondage, by possessing their mansions and
Families (prefigured by those in the Ark and in Egypt) can preserve their
Lives, Families, or Estates. All providence of men and creatures (without this
of perfect Freedom out of bondage) deceived, and destroyed utterly all
creatures, and men from the earth, in a figure, when the flood came. The first
fruit of Faith, and ground of true Righteousness, is providence of Freedom out
of bondage. The first object of providence of the Freeborn in bondage is, that
they may have being and beginning of right order, matter, and form, as Families,
People, and Churches. Its preposterou^ fondness and improvidence for a person
or a people to act before they are, or seek to be, or have beginning of form and
power. They that act or cease to act without or against providence, deny the
faith, and destroy themselves without remedy.

The people in inward bondage are really wicked, and they that are in outward
bondage, must be wicked, or destroyed by constraint: there is no safety but in
hypocrisy and deceit; therefore a most urgent and pressing necessity is laid
upon the people of God from God, their consciences, the creature, and their
duties to God and each other, from their joint Interests, and just Liberties,
from their own Lives, Families, Estates, as to their security entire, to labor
with all speed and fidelity, to g^t a just power of Freedom, and Being of their
own, in manner as is declared.

All Armies upon earth could not hinder the rallying of the dry bones into a
living exceeding mighty Army. They came together, bone to his bone, as it were
by their Families into their own houses natural) their own bodies; and were
sealed and cemented with strength, and sinew in life and power. All Armies and
Powers of death that opposed them, were utterly dashed in pieces, and destroyed
by them.

Moses in bondage looked this way and that way least he should be seen; and the
people of God in bondage must act warily, and watch narrowly (if they do any
good, or just action, if they relieve any, or support any) that none see them.
If any Doeg or Edomite be nigh them, or amongst them, they are verily betrayed
utterly destroyed and so must and shall be; till they get a power of Freedom of
their own (the Free power of God) which now is the easiest thing to atttain,
God freely giving it, that is, or can be: But this relief, and support (so
dangerous to the people of God) is but vain boasting, they relieve none, and
support none: but in talk; as the Amalekit told David he killed Saul whereas he
was free from his death; so are they from relieving or supporting any: David
slew that Amalekit, because he said he killed Saul though he did not; and they
and their Families and estates are ruinated, and destroyed: because they say,
and pretend they relieve and support the people of God, in and against their
evils of bondage: whereas they relieve none, and support none: but in word
only, and indeed destroy those that have sacrificed liberally their lives and
estates, for their support and relief. The Spirit of bondage, inward avaric^,
and the irregularities, and rage of it kills and consumes (as the worm smote
Jonas Gourd and consumed it) the slavish lives families, and estates of each
other, with their own entire, they relieve and succor none: but by deceits and
shaddows of doing good without doing any.

But if any fragment of relief fall, or if they fancy they have done or do, any
good, or just work in bondage, there they rest, and there they stay. Ioabs
soldiers followed him till they came to slain Amases dying carcass, and they
stood still; so, but few yet some Free people in bondage follow righteousness,
until they come to some fragments of this dead carcass of releif, and support
in bondage, and here they sit still, there, they rest; they go no further. The
chief pretenders to Freedom look no farther, they think not of any legitimate,
and perfect righteousness of Freedom out of bondage. The slavish Spirits of the
people of God in bondage desire private Freedom only a tanto but not a toto: If
they could have but so much of their just Right for themselves, they care not,
they wish no more; the Harlot (so she had but half the Child) was indifferent
(the mind of a murderous and bloody Harlot) so satisfaction in the people of
God with half righteousness, or part, or with imperfect righteousness, denotes
the basest mind of bloody Iezebel, mother of all abominations, and filthyness.
So long as Israel were of this wicked, and base mind, and demanded no more then
Freedom in part, their cruel burdens and ridged slavery was justly greater, and
they were never freed, nor fit for deliverance; till Moses demanded all, and
they accordingly acted with him, and had all their Rights entire. All imperfect
righteousness whatsoever is impostury, and deceit of the curse of bondage, and
a main cause of rejection, and destruction to those that do it, or joining rest
in it; as Saul's imperfect righteousness was the cause of his utter rejection,
and of his, and his whole Families destruction. All true righteousness is of
Freedom only, a fruit of the tree of life from death for ever, a freeing
righteousness, so soon as the creatures that came into the Ark did but one work
of Freedom out of bondage, they were all freed from destruction. So soon as the
Israelites did but that one work of Freedom out of bondage, in coming by their
Families into their own houses, etc. they were all freed from destruction; and
so soon as the people of God shall perform but this one work of Freedom out of
bondage, which is, to come out of great tribulations, real bondage by their
Anti-typical Families, into their Oeconomick bodies, and houses mystical, they
shall be freed from all coercive, external power of bondage, destruction, sin,
and death, for ever; these works were the first fruits of the Tree of life in a
Type, this work shall be the first fruit of the Tree of life prefigured. When
man (Christ mystical) shall put forth his hand and taste this legitimate, and
perfect fruit of the righteousness of Freedom out of bondage, he shall live in
the power of life, and Freedom of God for ever, and never be wholly subjected to
vanity, corruption and death of bondage any more.

The people of God, and their righteousness shall be perfect after their
pattern, their mother, the new Policy, or City descending; that City shall be
four square, equally, without unequal, or indents, every way, and on every side
exactly, just and even. Secondly, the height, and breadth, and length of that
City shall be equal; So the reallity of things what they are, and the
judgments, and estimations of the people of God upon them, and their executions
according to their just estimations, shall be exactly, paral, or equal.
Thirdly, that City shall be perfectly square the most firm pattern of immovable
stability; So shall they, and their righteousness be permanent in a progressive
way, in the righteousness of Freedom for ever; and not generally revolt any
more: but if any, as particular persons, shall look back, they shall return
back, and cease to be the people of God. Lots wife delivered out of Sodom,
looked back, and returned back to destruction. They that look back unto the
horour of darkness of bondage, shall return back unto that horour of darkness.

Nothing so displeased God as the spirit of apostasy, and slavery in his
people, in looking back unto the house of bondage, the land of their
destruction, after they were delivered out of it. The Free people of God
(indeed) must, and will (constantly) press forward in the power of perfect and
legitimate righteousness of Freedom, and follow after ( Rev 14.4.) and be led
by the Lamb wheresoever he goes. I have (herein as in the sight of God)
discharged my Faith. Faithfulness reapes (what it does not sow) destruction to
those that are Faithful: but this God disposes. The sequel to my self, whether
love or hatred, bonds, or liberty, life, or death, I leave to God, it is
sufficient for me, If I may by all means discharge my duty, and disoblige my
Conscience.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 22. Lieut. Col. Hammon, read Lieut. Genesis Hammon. p. 18. l. 7. their
own cause, r. their cause. p. 18. l. 23. that are, r. that act. p. 21. l. 3.
Representative, r. represented, p. 21. l. 6. as destroys, r. and destroys.
and l. 10. tdatare, r. that are. p. 30. l. 2. where, r. wherein. p. 32. l. 18.
time past, r. in time past. p. 41. l. 6. really, r. real. p. 41. l. 14.
defaultings, r. defalkings, p. 52. l. 16. to be repented of, r. and to be
repented of, p. 53. l. 3. Widows, r. The Widows. p. 55. l. 2. are broken, r.
were broken. p. 63. l. 9. vilest, r. the vilest. p. 63. l. 9. there (the
affections, r. their affections. p. 63. l. 12. the sorcerers, r. their
sorcerers. p. 67. l. 29. there food, r. these food. p. 69. l. 8. the
oppressors, r. their oppressors. p. 69. l. 9. these authors, r. the authors. p.
87. l. 24. begin, r. began. p. 88. l. 10. emisary, r. immissary. p. 90. l. 2.
define, r. defy. p. 96. l. 1. did which fell, r. which fell. p. 98. l. 36.
them naturally, r. them really. p. 102. l. 2. That Soldiers, r. that Soldiers
with a little t.


