A SERMON Preached before the SOCIETY FOR Reformation of Manners; ON
Easter-Tuesday, at Kingston upon Thames, 1700.

By Gideon Harding, M. A. Vicar of Kingston upon Thames,

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns near
Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside, 1700.

TO THE READER.
AS this Sermon was Preached, so now it is Printed, at the Request of a Society
of Men, who do not, as far as I have been able to inform my self, behave
themselves superciliously, nor invade the Office of the Lord's Anointed,
considered either in a Sacred or Civil sense; and who, by consequence, are not
possessed of such Principles, as are apt to hurry others on to Enthusiasm: No,
they are Men of peaceable and sober Lives, who seem heartily concerned at the
unbridled violation of the Laws of God, and of the good and wholesome Statutes
of their Country; and they wish, I dare say, with all their Souls, that the
Zeal of all Magistrates was such, as that they might be excused from the
Prosecution of Profane and Immoral Men, for their Vices. And if such Men as
these shall be accounted enemies to their Neighborhood, there is no such thing
as true friendship in our little World; but the Devil and his Agents may act as
they list, till they have made us all ripe for Vengeance. All that I shall say
more, before I dismiss Thee, is, that I have endeavored, in this Discourse, to
fortify these Men (for whose good Success I shall ever Pray) against all those
Insinuations, which are designed to discourage their Proceedings; and to
encourage both them and all others that are, or shall hereafter be, engaged in
the same useful Undertakings, to go on with their Work as long as the Day
lasts. And if I have contributed, even in a lesser degree, toward any of
these ends, Bless God for it, and reckon me (if thou please) the meanest
Servant at His Altar.

Gideon Harding.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Society for Reformation of Manners, etc.
2 Timothy 2.8. Remember that Jesus Christ, of the Seed of David, was raised from
the Dead.


THE Occasion of these Words, was this: St. Paul had very lately Consecrated
his beloved Timothy a Bishop, and sent him, as such, to preside over the Church
of Ephesus: And foreseeing what Afflictions and Persecutions' he would there
meet with, by a faithful Discharge of his Pastoral Office; he very prudently
fortifies him against them, by re-minding him of Christ's Resurrection; and
very properly joins, with that Memento, that part of the Messiah's History,
which declares him to be of the Seed of David: For by this, the Apostle
inculcates, that if David (from whom Christ, according to the flesh, descended)
did undergo so many Afflictions by the frequent Persecutions of Saul, though he
had both merited to be his Son-in-Law, and was also actually anointed King over
Israel, by the express Command of God; and that, if Jesus Christ, who was King
of Peace and Glory over spiritual Israel, did meet with so many Indignites from
those his own Countrymen, the Jews, whom, in the highest Charity, He came to
save; Then might Timothy, in all reason, patiently endure his expected, rough
treatment; as remembering, that David, did at last, peaceably enjoy Readiness
Crown; and that Jesus Christ, after all His Sufferings and Death, did
triumphantly Rise from the Dead, and Ascended into Heaven, where He now sits in
the Throne of his Glory, having made His Enemies His Footstool.

Thus much being premised, touching the occasion of the Words of my Text;
before I enter upon the ensuing Discourse, I shall take the liberty to say,
That being desired to preach to the Society for Reformation of Manners, lately
set up in this Town; I thought, I could not fix upon a more seasonable or
suitable Subject than the Text will afford. For this being Easter week, The
Resurrection of Christ ought not, I concluded, to be passed over in silence:
And the Text, which re-minds Timothy of that Grand Article of our Faith,
supposing him in a state of Affliction and Persecution, through a vigorous and
courageous performance of his Duty; I saw no reason why I might not directly
apply the Apostle's Words to you: For, now that you are engaged, though in
diffeing circumstances from Timothy, yet in the same commendable Design of
beating down the strongholds of Satan, (the faithful discharge of which, will
often expose you to danger and hazard) I see not, as I said before, any reason,
why you should not, with Timothy, Remember, that Jesus Christ, of the Seed of
David, was raised from the Dead.

In speaking to which Words, I shall do these two things:

I. Show, that a state of Afflictions and Persecutions is highly consistent
with a state of Christianity.

II. Prove, That a frequent Remembrance of, and a serious Meditation upon, the
Resurrection of our Blessed Savior, is the best preservative against the
prevalency of Afflictions, and the most effectual Method to prevent our sinking
and desponding under their weight.

First, I shall show, That a state of Afflictions and Persecutions is highly
consistent with a state of Christianity.

For the full clearing of which Point, it will be very sufficient, if I can
show, that Christianity, or a faithful Adherence to the Rules of the Gospel,
has ever yet been, and, by parity of Reason, will ever be attended with
Sufferings. And this will abundantly appear:

1. From the Holy Scriptures.

2. From the Examples of such as have suffered.

3. From the Reason and Nature of the Thing.

And First, The Holy Scriptures of the New Testament assure us, that
Christianity will always be attended with Sufferings and Afflictions.

When our Blessed Savior, St. Mark. 10.29, 30. promised His Rewards to them
that forsook any thing for His sake, and the Gospels; He assures them indeed,
that they should receive an Hundredfold; but that they should not be exempted
from Persecutions.

So again; St. Mark 13.9, 13. He tells some of the Apostles plainly, that, if
they adhered to his Doctrine, they should be delivered up to Councils; be
beaten in the Synagogues; be brought before Rulers and Kings; and be hated of
all (wicked unchristian) Men.

The same thing is recorded, though in a different Case, yet in almost the same
Words, St. Matthew. 10.17, 18.

And that Christ might effectually prepare His Disciples to undergo those
Persecutions, with Courage, which he knew would befall them, after his
Departure; He directs a great part of His dying Discourse to them this way, St.
Joh. 14.15, 16. Chapters, that they should be evry severely dealt with on His
Account, and be in almost constant Tribulation. And all along, the Apostolical
Epistles, Christians are frequently warned to be, upon their guard, against
their Enemies Assaults. All which Instances, with many more that might be
easily produced, do abundantly prove, that the state of Christianity, must be a
state of Suffering.

Secondly, This will be farther evidenced by the Examples of Christ and his
Apostles, as well as of others who have lived since Christ.

A Man cannot but see, (though he only takes a cursory view of the Four Gospels)
that the whole Life of our Blessed Savior, from the vile Manger to the Bloody
Cross, was one continued Scene of Sufferings and Afflictions.

The things which Men generally most esteem, are nobleness of Birth, Honor,
Riches, and a fair Reputation. But which of all these was the portion of our
dearest Redeemer?

It Is true indeed, that the ever Blessed Jesus, (according to the flesh)
descended from the Royal Line of David, both by Joseph, His supposed Father,
and by Mary His true Mother, as St. Mat. Chap. 1. and Luke, Chap. 3. do attest
in their Genealogies: But, besides that, this is not allowed by the latter
Jewish Rabbi's, wherein consisted that Pomp and Splendor that usually appears
at the Birth of Princes. We know, it is true, that a Star appeared to the
Wisemen in the East, (Mat. 2.1, 29.) about the time of Jesus's Birth, by which
they were directed to go to Bethlehem, to Worship Him; and that a Quire of
Angels ( Luke 2.8, etc.) proclaimed Him, to the Shepherds, A Savior Christ the
Lord. And one might reasonably have expected, that the whole Jewish Nation
should have been ready to accommodate their Messiah with every thing,
answerable to his Character; but on the direct contrary, not so much as a
Lodging room can be procured for Him; no, He must be content with a Manger,
instead of a Bed or a Cradle; and instead of a good Fire, to nourish His tender
Body, and to defend it from cold, He shall feel no other heat, than what is
emitted from the breath and dung of Beasts.

Honors, and Riches, and a plentiful Substistence, were but the just due of so
welcome a Guest to the World: But instead of these, Christ himself tells us,
that He had not so much as a resting place of His own: The Foxes have holes,
and the Birds of the Air have nests; but the Son of Man has not where to lay
his Head, St. Matthew. 8.20. And yet as poor and miserable as He was, the
Taxgatherers demanded Tribute of Him at Capernaum, for the use of the Temple,
and force Him to work a Miracle to pay it, St. Matthew. 17.24, etc. A fair and
unspotted Reputation (lastly) Christ might well have expected from his own
Countrymen, among whom He went continually about, doing good; but instead of
more deserved Eulogies, they contemptibly called Him, the Carpenter's Son, a
Galilean, a Gluttonous Man and a Wine-biber, and a friend of Publicans and
Sinners.

But, besides that bitter portion of hunger and cold, poverty and disgrace,
which the innocent Son of God shared; what Snares were there laid for His Life?
How many Stones were taken up to throw at Him, for only telling the Jews
necessary and seasonable Truths? What Sorrows and Agonies did He feel in the
Garden? What unspeakable Torments (lastly) did He undergo on the Cross?

If these were not Afflictions, I Am certain there is then no such thing as
(...) in humane Nature; and if the Captain of our Salvation suffered so much
from a froward and perplexing World, must the Soldiers, listed under Him,
expect no Scars in His Quarrel? No, no: His Apostles and Evangelis^s met with
much the same usage, as He met with; for besides that contempt and hatred,
those Stripes and Imprisonments they were constantly exposed to: One was Stoned
to death; another was Beheaded; a third was Crucified with his Head downward;
some died one Death, others another; and all of 'em (St. John only excepted, as
the Ecclesiastical Historians relate) were barbarously murdered for adhering to
their Master's Doctrine: Not that St. John ended his days in an exemption from
Persecutions; for besides that, he was banished into Patmos, as he says of
himself, Rev. 1.9. for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ:
Tertullian vouches, that before his Banishment, he was accused to Domitian,
and, by his Proconsul in Asia, sent to Rome; where, at the Emperor's Command,
he was cast into a Caldron of boiling Oil; from which, notwithstanding he
escaped, as unhurt, as those Servants of God, who were cast into the Fiery
Furnace, Dan. 3d. Chapter

Of this, I think, we may be very certain, that only St. John, of all the
Apostles, had that favor of God (maugre all the Spite of Men and Devils) that
he died, without violence in a good Old Age, when he had lived about 72 Years
after Christ's Ascension into Heaven.

Nor did Persecution find a period with the Death of the Apostles, but rather
it might then be said to begin to bear date: For about five Years after St.
John's peaceable Exit (as if that devilish Spirit of Malice would have an ample
Satisfaction, for the escape of one Apostle out of its hands) that truly
Apostolical man St. Ignatius Bp. of Antioch, was condemned by the Emperor
Trajan, to the Lions; and being sent to Rome, was there torn to pieces by
Brutes, less Savage than the Spectatours, in the Amphitheatre.

And that very venerable Man, St. Polycarp, Bp. of Smyrna, was condemned to the
Flames; to such Flames (I speak it by the Testimony of Eyewitnesses) as rather
sought to guard, than to consume his Body; insomuch that the Executioner was
forced to dispatch him with his Sword, when but half burned.

To these two I might add Justin-Martyr, Origin, and St. Cyprian Bp. of
Carthage, who all were put to Death for the Cause of Christ: Nay, I might fill
A Sermon, with a bare recital of the single Sufferings of the great Athanasius,
Bp. of Alexandria; only because he would not strike Sail to the Arians, and
betray the Catholick-Faith; but that I intend not a Martyrology. What then
shall I say more? The time would fail me to give you but a short Abstract of
the frequent Banishments, the strange Tortures, and the various Deaths, that
were inflicted, not on the Fathers of the Church only, but on Thousands of
private Christians, during Ten bloody Persecutions.

Thus much only, I shall here add, that what the Author to the Hebrews says of
the Patriarchs, Judges of Israel, and of the Prophets, Heb. 11.35, etc. was
literally true of the primitive Christian Martyrs; They were tortured, not
accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better Resurrection. And others
had trials of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea moreover, of Bonds and
Imprisonment. They were Stoned, they were Sawn asunder, were Tempted, were
slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepshins, and Goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and
in Dens and Caves of the Earth.

All this they contentedly endured, for the sake of their most excellent
Religion, and for that warrantable Zeal which they showed, in asserting and
holding fast the Heavenly Doctrine of God their Savior.

By this time, I suppose, I have produced Examples enough to show, that
Afflictions are to be expected in a zealous Profession, and earnest Practice of
Christianity. I proceed now (Thirdly) to clear this Point yet further, by
showing the Reason and Nature of the thing it self.

The Religion of a Christian is established upon Principles, that are very
contrary to the corrupted Inclinations of Mankind: Men sometimes feel in
themselves such impetuous Desires after sensual Enjoyments, and Nature eggs 'em
on so fast to a compliance with its Dictates, that they no sooner yield, than
they are tempted to think that, That Religion had not God for its Author, which
so directly gain-says their Passions, and denies 'em the fruition of their
strongest Longings.

Hence is it, that a Man cannot venture to reprove Men for their Vices, or,
with the most friend-like Essays, endeavor to convince 'em of their Mistakes;
takes; but immediately he will find an Insurrection of their malignant Spirits, and
a strange Alteration in their very looks; and though they may then play the
Sycophant so far, as to thank him for his kindness; yet they shall, it may be
ever after, greedily catch at every opportunity of venting their rancor and
hatred, by a studious misrepresentation of all that he says or does; and the
highest pitch of their Charity shall be found to center in his continual
Defamation. Every serious and considering Christian must needs attest this
Truth on a too frequent Experience; and both Sacred and Church-Histories,
furnish us with too many instances of the same Nature.

St. John Baptist might have kept his head on his shoulders, if he would but
have let Herod alone, and not have reproved him for his Incest; so likewise
might the Apostles have died in their Beds, if they could have sat down
contented, to see Judaism rampant, and the Worship of Idols prevalent: But no
sooner do they pursue their truest Interest, in a faithful Execution of their
Commission, than they are persecuted for it, by Stripes, Stonings,
Imprisonments, and Death

And from the Transactions of those several Occurrences, in all Ages of
Christianity, down to this present time; we may reasonably conclude, that the
same game is to be played to the World's end: For the Reason of the Thing
continuing for ever the same; and the Opposition that impious wretches will
always make to Lectures and Examples of Piety and Virtue, standing upon one
bottom; we may certainly infer, without a Spirit of Prophecy, that as the state
of Christianity has ever been, and in our Age is, a state of Afflictions; so
that it will never cease to be so, till time is swallowed up by Eternity.

Having thus at large proved: 1. From express Texts of Scripture. 2. From many
Examples of persecuted Christians. 3. From the Reason and Nature of the Thing.


I. That a state of Afflictions is very consistent with a zealous and vigorous
discharge of the Duties of Christianity.

II. I proceed now to my 2d. General Head, which was to show, That a frequent
Remembrance of, and a serious Meditation upon the Resurrection of our Blessed
Savior, is the best Preservative against the prevalency of those Afflictions,
that are entailed upon a Christian state.

I need not be tedious in an Argument of this nature, after St. Paul himself
has pressed it home in the Words of my Text.

I shall therefore only enforce the Apostle's Memorandum, by these Two
Observations following. And

First, We may observe, that Men are generally so devoted to this World, and
their Souls are so strongly bent toward sensible Objects, that, so long
especially as their Sails are crowded with a prosperous Gale, they very rarely
will afford one thought to the things that may or shall hereafter happen. The
present time is what they are for, and they thence resolve, as they falsely
estimate things, to lose none of it; but with the blind Watchmen, whom the
Prophet inveigheth against, Isa. 56.12. they solace themselves; Come ye, say
they, I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with Strong drink, and to
Morrow shall be as this Day, and much more abundant.

But now, if God shall please to send a slight Affliction upon these Men;
there is an immediate damp upon their Spirits, they are quite at their wits end;
and they complain as much, at a little Headache, as if they were losing their
Limbs or their Lives: The Reason is manifest; they don't think of Afflictions
till they feel their weight; and then, having made no provision against the
Evil Day, by a regular Devotion and Meditation, they fret, they murmur and
repine, and are still at a loss, how to be easy under the load that oppresses
them.

Whereas, on the contrary, if Men would but allow one Hour in a Day for
thinking, and spend that very little part of their Youth and Health in a
serious Reflection upon those many Evils and Disappointments, which the most
Righteous and Innocent Son of God met with; what a scanty portion of worldly
goods He enjoyed; what Hardships He encountered; and what Severities. He was,
all His Life, exposed to: But that after all His Sufferings, even unto Death,
He gloriously arose from the Prison of the Grave, after Three Days Burial, and
Triumphantly Ascended into Heaven, and Sat on the Right Hand of God: If, I
say, Men would often and seriously meditate on these things; this would most
effectually quell their peevish and impatient Desires after the good Things of
this Life; this would teach 'em to know themselves to be but Men; this, lastly,
would both prepare 'em for Sufferings, and make 'em contentedly undergo a few
momentary Afflictions, that so they might at last partake of the same joyful
Resurrection to eternal Pleasures and Delights, of which their great Forerunner
and Author of their Faith, has already been partaker.

Secondly, We may observe; That not only disappointments, crosses and losses,
in things relating to the Body, but even Afflictions of an higher nature, such
as are peculiar to the Mind of Man, would sit more easy, by frequently
remembering, that Jesus Christ, of the Seed of David, was raised from the Dead.

How angry and churlish do some Men grow, when they fail of that respect, which
they think to be their due? A Rich Man, with a proud Heart and towering
Thoughts, believes, that every one affronts him, that does not pay him all the
reverence, which is claimed only by the Nobility, etc. it may be, by Princes of
the Blood Royal: Nay, even a Man in narrow circumstances, who has made it his
great care to do his Duty to God and to his Neighbor, thinks it no small
hardship to be exposed to want and distress; he is inclined to think that
Divine providence neglects him, and, possibly, is tempted to forsake, or to
grow more remiss in, his Christian Duty; by his best discharge of which, he
meets with oppression, instead of encouragement; and instead of the love, he
gains only the ill will and hatred of his Neighbors.

In both these Instances, to which most other Cases may be easily reduced: The
best method for the afflicted Man to take, will be to consider the exemplary
Humility, Patience, and Resignation of Mind, which appeared so eminently in
Christ our Head: Our ever Blessed Redeemer was infinitely more innocent and
inoffensive, than the best of Men either now are, or ever were; and yet,
nothing but calamity and affliction, contempt and scorn, disgrace and calumny
were the Rewards of His Goodness and Charity: And if He, who was Lord and King
of both Worlds, was willing, for our sakes, to endure all this, without one
Murmuring word or Repining thought; shall we, that are sinful dust and ashes,
complain and rail, and be at our wits end, merely because we suffer some petty,
shortliv'd evils? Better will it become us all, in prudence, to hold fast the
profession of our Faith, without wavering, and patiently and submissively to
demean our selves, under all the calamities of mind that shall befall us: For if
we do this willingly, we have our reward; we shall find such a calmness,
sedateness, and composure in our Breasts, as Words cannot aptly describe; and we
shall hereafter be carried up to Heaven, where we shall be filled with such
wonder and joy, as are only competible with our then enlarged faculties, and be
completely blessed in those Mansions of our God, which Jesus Christ, by His
Death, has purchased, and is now going to prepare, for all His faithful and
obedient Servants.

THe Inference, from what has been said in this Discourse, is, in general,
This; That no person ought to forbear a vigorous prosecution of his Duty, upon
the score of that calumny and disgrace, that malice and hatred, those
afflictions and persecutions, that the profligate and wicked are always ready
to load him with. I have before suggested, that the whole Host of Christian
Martyrs might have lived and died in peace, (in the peace of this World, I
mean, for I doubt not but that in their Lives they had daily inward Peace of
Mind, and in their Death Comfort) if they would have been, as some in those
early Days, and others both in Queen Mary's, and in a later Reign, were,
Proditores, and have tamely delivered up their Bibles to be burned, and
cowardly forsaken the Religion of the Gospel: But contrariwise, they considered
themselves, as Soldiers and Volunteers, listed and engaged to fight under the
Banner of Christ; they remembered, at once, His Sufferings, and His Victory, in
the end; they daily saw their Bishops and Pastors suffer Martyrdom with an
inflexible Courage and Constancy, and, by their brave Example, were animated to
endure the loss of all things, rather than draw back unto Perdition.

And, Oh that we, who are as Firebrands plucked out of the Fire, and have not
many Years since escaped, by a wonderful Deliverance, could be influenced, by
the Carriage of such Christian Heroes, to seek for true Peace with God, and
with our own Consciences! But how shall this Peace be obtained? Be not startled
at what I say; This Peace cannot, humanely speaking, be found, but in a
continual warfare with the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; in a perpetual
resistance of all Temptations; and in a constant abstinence from all worldly
and carnal Lusts: These are those our deadly and implacable Enemies, which, if
we use not our whole stock of Grace and Industry to destroy, will never leave
the Field, till they have lest us none remaining, and have carried away both us
and our standards to Hell.

But if we be careful, as it infinitely concerns us to be, to steer our Lives
by the Compass of God's Law; if we courageously set upon, and go through with,
the works of Righteousness, and true Holiness; and if we will be persuaded to
exercise such a Zeal for the Honor of God, and for the depressed Cause of
Religion and Virtue, as has Christian Prudence and Knowledge for its
inseparable Associates; we may reasonably expect an happy Voyage to the Haven
of Rest and Peace.

And what if it should happen, that the frowns of the Wicked, that the utmost
rage and fury of Men and Devils, should constantly attend and pursue us, in
this our Conflict? Shall these things move us to leave laboring in our
Master's Vineyard? Heaven avert such sloth and cowardice! Can we forget, that,
by the help of our God, we shall be able to leap over all these Walls? Or can
we imagine, that if we do our parts manfully, the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
will be wanting to enable us to keep our Ground?

Only, amidst all the trials and temptations we lie under, let us often and
earnestly seek, in prayer, for God's Assistance and Direction; and frequently
remember, that Jesus Christ of the Seed of David, was raised from the Dead; and
let this single Consideration inspire us with patience and fortitude in our
extremest Sufferings: And then we shall not fail of that Crown of Glory which
Jesus, our Lord and our God, has in store for all His Victorious Soldiers and
Servants; which He bought for us, with the price of His own most precious
Blood; Which He has assured us of, by His Resurrection from Death and the
Grave; and which He Ascended up into Heaven, to put on our Heads with His own
Hands.

If these comfortable Promises are not true and just, and certainly to be
relied on; I do not only say, that Christians are, of all Men most miserable;
but then also, I say, that the Sacred Scripture is (as it has been often
phras'd by some inconsiderate Men among us of unfound and Heterodox Principles)
an insignificant and dead Letter; and then, by necessary consequence, both our
Preaching is vain, and your Faith is vain.

Thus much I thought fit to offer, in the general, by way of Application to all
People, as being that, in which every Christian living is concerned.

But I have other, and more particular things to say of, and to you, for whose
sakes, more especially, this Discourse was made, not more through your earnest
solicitation, than a cheerful compliance on my part.

You have declared your selves sensible of the dishonor done to God, by the
open profaneness of many dissolute and lewd Persons, professing Christianity;
which indeed is so great, that I cannot but wonder, that some, otherwise
discerning, People, should not be able to see, that we hasten, what we can, to
make our selves and the Nation too, ripe for destruction: I wish, I might say
truly, that these short-sighted Folks, did not wink hard, and affect blindness.

It cannot be denied, that we have many good Laws, now in force, against
Immorality and Profaneness; and such, as, if duly and impartially executed,
would force all open Vice especially, to pull in its horns: But on the other
hand, it cannot, and therefore ought not, to be dissembled, that the supineness
and remissness of those Persons, which should put these wholesome Statutes in
execution, and make 'em living Laws, is shameful and abominable: This is the
repeated Language of our Parliament, in their Addresses; and of our King, in
his Proclamations; and these were the Thoughts, and in the Orders, of our late
most Gracious Queen, of blessed Memory, who first encouraged, and promised to
protect the Societies for Reformation of Manners; and with so good and
honorable Company, I trust, I shall never have cause to repent, that I have
opened my Mouth so wide.

It is pretended, we all know, by Magistrates in general, that they can only
punish such as offend in their sight and hearing: But do Adulterers and
Adulteresses (whose Eyes wait for the twilight, that no Eye may see them) use
to act their various Scenes of Lewdness before the Magistrate's Face? Or do
they, that impudently and profanely accustom themselves to Cursing and
Swearing, affect to belch out their horrid Oaths and Imprecations, in the
presence or hearing of the Magistrate? No, these things they care not to do:
For though they fear not God, yet they regard Man, when their Interest lies at
stake, and either their Purses, or their Bodies, must satisfy the Sanction of
that Law, which they transgress. Or lastly, is it for the Honor either of our
Laws or of our Lawgivers, that the common Swearer, or the Drunkard, or the
incestuous Person, or the Whore and her Master, should be indulged and connived
at? Or that Stews and obscene Houses should be openly tolerated by the State,
as it is practiced at Rome, at Venice, and at Amsterdam? If not: Why shall he
be thought a busy and forward fellow, and why shall he be stigmatized with hard
Names, that will not suffer all these Sins upon his Brother? Or why shall the
Magistrate frown upon, and not rather encourage, all that in him lies, the
Person that informs him against all these Offenders?

But it may be objected, that in Cities and Corporations, there are many
Officers, whose proper business it is, and whose Oaths oblige them, to search
after, and to bring to punishment, all that violate the Laws of the Land, or
the particular and Bylaws of such respective Jurisdictions; and therefore that
such Societies of Men, as are now on foot, being for the most part, Inhabitants
of such Cities and Incorporated Villages, are not at all necessary.

But what if such places abound with Officers? What though these Officers are
bound by the sacred Obligation of an Oath, to look diligently after, and
impartially to present all Offenses, without favor or affection, hatred or ill
will? All this is but a more solemn piece of pageantry; when neither their
Obligations to God, nor to their Neighbor, can prevail to make 'em do their
Duty.

The safety, and flourishing state of every Commonwealth, depend almost
altogether upon the virtue of its component individuals: But if we may guess at
the health and soundness of a Body, by the ill Symptoms we see in many of its
Members; I am sure, that we have very great reason to apprehend that our state
is much shattered, and near to a total dissolution.

So that, let it but be granted (and I know not how it can be denied) that Vice
ought to be discountenanced and suppressed; and let it but be owned (for I Am
sure it is a great truth) that neither of these are done, as they both ought to
be, and might be done; and then, I am bold to say it, I plead both for the
honor of God, and for the good of the Commonwealth, in making the best way I
can, for the encouragement and protection of such a Society, as have undertaken
to do their utmost, toward the pulling down the strong holds of Sin and Satan.

Hitherto, I have endeavored only to thew the usefulness of such a Society, as
many here present have formed themselves into; and which is therefore
necessary, if for no other Reason, yet for that mutual Encouragement, which is
thereby given to Men of courage, to show themselves. It Is in this case, as it
is in the defense of a Town, or of one's Country; The hands of one Man, or of
but a few Men, are not sufficient to guard the Breach, or to repel the Enemy: I
need not, I hope, show the justness of the Allusion; for the Case is too too
obvious to every one's Experience.

Let me, now, then entreat the Magistrates of this ancient Corporation, and all
other Men of influence, to look with a favorable Aspect on the Society, here
lately set up; not to be jealous at the Undertaking, as if (what has been said
by some unthinking Men) the Game of Forty One was to be played over again; but
to believe it, as really it is in it self, and by the prudent management of its
Members, it may prove, a very useful and excellent thing.

This Society, I am glad to see it, has already had a good effect in this
place; I do not hear frequent Swearing in the Streets, as, I too often, have
heard, before the Society was formed: Let God be praised for these Gleanings;
He will, in His own good time, give us, I doubt not, a plentiful Harvest: In
the mean time, to you, that are engaged in so good a Design, I speak it, from
the Apostle, Gal. 6.9. be ye not weary in well-doing; for in due season ye
shall reap, if ye faint not.

And in order to this very desirable Blessing, let my Advice take place with
you. Labor for a Reformation of other Men's Manners, by first reforming and
amending your own: Remember that Character of an Hypocrite, which Christ
himself has given, St. Matthew. 7.3. who officiously offers to pull out the mote,
out of his Brother's Eye; but all the while forgets, that a beam is in his own
Eye. You know how to apply this passage; and, I hope, you will so effectually,
that I need not do it.

Let Courage and Conduct, let Zeal and Prudence go hand in hand, and be never
separated from any of your Undertakings. But here arises a difficulty, which
has been proposed to me; and that is, whether you ought to distinguish between
an habitual, customary, and confirmed Sinner; and him that, it may be, is for
the first time a transgressour? For my part, to speak freely, I think the
distinction absolutely necessary, and in the highest reason, warrantable: For
if you can reclaim the latter, at a proper season, by a gentle rebuke, and
private admonition; I Am sure, that you will do him more good, and, by consequence,
discharge your own duty better, than if you made his offense more public, by
an information to the Magistrate. Not that I would be thought to advise
partially; for surely this method may have a much softer term, and be rather
called a higher and more endearing Charity; and as such only, I recommend it to
you.

Let no Man's wickedness, how great soever, no, not his rude and ill language,
nor yet the worst of his defamations, tempt you to hate his Person, or but to
wish him harm; but rather show your selves indeed good Men, in the practice of
those Commands, which are solely Christian, St. Matthew. 5.44, etc. by loving
your enemies; by blessing them that curse you; by doing good to them that hate
you; and by praying for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you.
Spend much of your time in Prayer to God, to inspire you with a truly Christian
Zeal, for His Glory, and your Neighbor's good: And because you will find, that
the World will hate you, and that the more good you do, the more will
aspersions pursue you; Arm your selves with steadfast Resolution and Prayer, to
bear all these slight Skirmishes with fortitude and magnanimity.

Be not disheartened at the disappointments you may meet with, either through
the want of Courage and Sincerity in some of your own Members, or by the little
ground you can, at first, gain; He that is desirous of being an instrument of
suppressing rampant Vices, must be content to weed them up one by one: Be ye
then strong in the Lord, and in the power of his Might. Ye have taken upon you
to plead and defend the Cause of GOD, and of Virtue, which is now grown very
much out of Fashion; you ought therefore to learn to despise the little, mean,
ill will of Man, when especially you cannot win his favor, but by losing your
God, and your inward Peace.

And the more to strengthen your hands in this useful Undertaking; call to mind
your Baptismal Vow; by which you stand obliged to Renounce the Devil, and all
his Works; the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh. For my part, I do not see, that you have engaged your
selves any thing beyond this, in becoming Members of your respective Society.

Reflect often on that Admonition which Christ gave to his Apostles, St. Matthew.
10.32, 33. Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in Heaven.

But whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in Heaven.

And fear not them which kill the Body, ('it is Christ's own Advice in the same
chapter, and on much the same occasion, that I am now Preaching on) but are not
able to kill the Soul, etc. nor let your Hearts fail you in this warfare; for
though the Opposition that you will meet with, be strong; yet for your comfort,
St. John has assured you, 1 John 4.4. that greater is he that is in you, than
he that is in the World.

What remains, is, only that I discharge my duty to you, by recommending You,
and your Undertaking, to the Throne of Grace; which I often, and heartily
shall; and now do, in St. Paul's words, 1 These. 5.23. The very God of peace
Sanctify you wholly: And I pray God, your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

To whom, etc. be all Glory, Honor, and Adoration, both now and ever. Amen.
FINIS.

