A REFUTATION of the Objections Against the ATTRIBUTES of GOD in general.

IN A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, September the Fifth,
School.

BEING The Sixth of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

JEREM. ix. 24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight, says the Lord.
PRide and Vainglory, are Things which Human Nature is strangely subject to;
there being scarce any one so mean, but who judges that he has something or
other that he may justly be Proud of, and value himself for. But as Pride is
Folly in the general, so it apparently discovers itself in this respect, That
those Men are usually most Vain, who have the least Reason to be so, and that
too in Things that are the least valuable in themselves. Thus, as the Prophet
intimates in the Verse before the Text, Men frequently glory in Bodily
Strength, in Beauty, and Agility, and in the Affluence of external Possessions:
Things which are the meanest Appurtenances to our Natures, and which are
neither in our Power to get nor keep. Wisdom indeed, and Judgment, Learning and
Parts, Wit and Penetration, and all the Nobler Endowments of our Minds, are
things of the greatest intrinsic Worth and Value, and we have much more reason
to esteem our selves for them, than for all the Goods of Fortune, or any Bodily
Excellencies. But yet, Let not the wise man Glory in his Wisdom and Knowledge
neither; though as the Targum on the place hints, it were as great as that of
Solomon himself; for we have in reality no just ground to value our selves for
even this, when we consider that the best of us have it but in a very slender
Proportion; and that our highest Knowledge is very imperfect and defective.
Hence it comes to pass, or at least ought to do so, that the Modesty and
Humility of truly knowing Men increases with their Learning and Experience:
Their being raised something above the common level, instead of lessening and
shortening in their Eyes the Statures of other Men, increases their Prospect of
a Boundless Field of Knowledge all around them; the more of which they
discover, the more they find yet undiscovered. But he that knows but little,
vainly thinks he knows every thing, and judges all is empty and void that is
without the Bounds of his scanty Horizon.

Another great Vanity there is also in Pride, which is, That Men are frequently
conceited and Proud of those things, which they have the least share of, and
are fond of such Actions as do plainly discover their Defects. For usually
those Men are most forward to talk of Learning, who are least acquainted with
Books; and those make the greatest Noise about, and Pretensions to Philosophy,
who have the least insight into Nature. Those who talk most of Certainty and
Demonstration have usually the most confused Idea's, and the most Superficial
Notions of things, and are the farthest of all Men from true Science. This is
apparently seen in the Pretenders to Skepticism and Infidelity, and in all the
Atheistical Writers. No Men express themselves with such an insupportable
Insolence as these New Lights, these Reformers of our Philosophy and our
Politics; who yet after all are Proud knowing nothing, as St. Paul speaks,
Romans 1.21. But are vain in their imaginations; their foolish heart is darkened,
and professing themselves to be wise, they become fools. And therefore it is
that the wisdom of God appears as foolishness to them, because the carnal mind
savoureth not the things that are of God.

Though would Men but studiously apply themselves to consider of, would they
carefully and impartially examine into, and would they but seriously make use
of those Means that God has graciously given Mankind, in order to attain a
sufficient Knowledge of his Nature and Perfections; They would then find so
much Beauty, Wisdom, Harmony, and Excellency in this inexhaustible Fund of
Knowledge, as would sufficiently Reward their Pains and Endeavors. And this we
may glory in; this Knowledge will be the most noble and honorable that our
Capacities can attain unto; and in comparison of which, there is no other
Qualification and Excellence in our Natures at all valuable. For here we have
an Object the greatest and most perfect that can be, the more we know of which,
the more we shall exalt and perfect our selves. Here are no empty Speculations;
no difficiles Nugae, no false Lights, nor Fantastical Appearances; but it is a
real and substantial, an useful and practical Knowledge; a Knowledge that does
not only delight us for the present, but which brings constant and lasting
Satisfaction here, and eternal Happiness hereafter. Let him therefore that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows God, that He is the
Lord, who exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth,
for in these things do I delight, says the Lord. In which words, there are
these two Things chiefly considerable:

I. A Supposition that God is capable of being known to us by his Attributes.

II. An Account of some of those Attributes which he exercises in the Earth,
and in which he delights.

Under which Two Heads, I shall, in pursuance of my general Design, endeavor
to Answer those Objections that Atheistical Men have brought against the
Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature.

I. Here is a Supposition that God is capable of being known to us by his
Attributes. He that glories, let him glory in this, that he understands and
knows God, that he is the Lord, who exercises loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth.

It Is plainly supposed here, That this Knowledge which we are directed to
acquire, is a possible Knowledge. God would not command us to understand him by
his Attributes of Goodness, Mercy and Justice, which he continually exercises
in the Earth, if it were impossible for us to attain to it: He would not
delight to do such Works in the World, if nothing of them could be known, nor
himself by them. But the Psalmist tells us, the Lord is known by his Works: And
that the Heavens declare his Glory, and the Firmament shows his handiwork:
And St. Paul is express, That the Invisible Things of Him are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead.

And indeed, These Attributes of God are what is most and best known to us, and
from the certain Knowledge that we have of these, we may be effectually assured
of the Existence of some first Cause, some Supreme Being in whom all these
Attributes and Perfections must inhere. The Infinite Nature, indeed, of This
Divine Being is Incomprehensible to our shallow and scanty Understandings, and
we cannot by searching find it out, nor discover the Almighty unto Perfection.
But notwithstanding we have as certain a Knowledge, and as clear Idea's of his
Attributes as we have of any thing in the World. And Grotius's Gloss on this
place is very just and proper: God does not bid Men know him according to his
Nature, which exceeds Humane Capacity to do, but according to those Attributes
or Properties of his which relate to Mankind, which the Hebrews call Middoth,
i.e. those Measures or Dimensions of Him which are proportionable to our
Understandings and Capacities. And such his Attributes are, for we see them
visibly exerted in the Works of the Creation, and we find them necessarily
included in the Notion that we have of the Supreme Being, or the First Cause of
all things; as I have already showed in another Discourse.

But this, some are pleased to deny; and say, That nothing at all can be known
of God, but only, that he is: for his Nature is perfectly Incomprehensible;
that we do but dishonor God, by pretending to Understand and to talk about his
Attributes; about which we can say nothing but only what serves to express our
Astonishment, Ignorance, and Rusticity; and therefore the Civil Magistrate
ought to determine what Attributes shall be given to the Deity. This seems to
be the Sense of Vaninus, and is plainly of Mr. Hobbs; and was before them of
Sextus Empiricus. Which take in their own words:

Non Deum melius Intelligimus quam per ea quae negamus nos Intelligere, says
Vaninus Amphitheatr. Provid. Aetern. p. 9.
. Again, Deum nullis tam plene indicatum intelligimus Vocibus, quam iis quae
Ignorantiam nostram praetendunt. We can have, says Mr. Hobbs, no Conception of
the Deity, and consequently all his Attributes signify only our Inability and
Defect of Power to conceive any thing concerning Him, except only this, that
there is a God Humane Nature, p. 69.
. And in another place, says he, God's Attributes cannot signify what he is,
but ought to signify our desire to honor him; but they that venture to reason
of his Nature from these Attributes of honor, losing their Understanding in
the very first Attempt, fall from one Inconvenience to another without End and
Number, and do only discover their Astonishment and Rusticity Leviath. p. 374.
. Again, When Men (says he) out of Principles of Natural Reason dispute about
the Attributes of God, they do but dishonor him; for in the Attributes we give
to God, we are not to consider Philosophical Truth Leviath. p. 191.
. And therefore he concludes, That those Attributes which the Sovereign Power
shall ordain in the Worship of God, as signs of Honor, ought to be taken and
used for such by Private Men in their Public Worship Leviath. p. 192.
. In which he agrees as he uses to do, exactly with Sextus Empiricus; who
tells us that the Sceptick is in the right for asserting Gods according to the
Laws and Custom of his Country; and in paying them that veneration and worship
which on the same account becomes due to them, will not venture to determine
any thing Philosophically about them (...). Adv. Math. p. 317.
.

Now from these Passages, I think it appears plain enough, that though these Men
did in words pretend to own and acknowledge a God, yet in Fact they were
Atheists, and had no true Belief of any such Being. For a Deity without the
Attributes of Understanding and Wisdom, without Ends or Design; none of which
Mr. Hobbs asserts expressly, can be in God Leviath. p. 190.
, is a Ridiculous stupid Being, an Idol that every rational Agent must needs
despise, and which can never be the Object of any one's Adoration, Love, or
Obedience. To assert therefore that the Attributes of God are not discoverable
by Reason, nor agreeable to Philosophical Truth, but may be declared to be any
thing which the Sovereign Power pleases to make them; this is designedly to
expose the Belief and Notion of a Deity, and to render it so Precarious, that
it can be the Object of no Rational Man's Faith. And this last named Writer
Treats the Deity after the same manner in most other Places of his Works; He
says, we must not say of Him that he is Finite, that he has figure Parts or
Totality, that he is here or there, that he moves or rests, or that we can
conceive or know any thing of him; for all this is to dishonor him: And yet to
say that he is an Immaterial Substance, that he is an Infinite and Eternal
Spirit, is, he says, Nonsense, and what destroys and contradicts it self.
However he is willing to allow the word Immaterial or Spirit to be used toward
God, as a Mark of Honor and Respect.

That is, we may attribute to God what we know to be Nonsense and
Contradiction, and this is the Way to Honor him; and to speak of him any other
way, is to Dishonor Him! Who does not perceive that it was plainly the Design
of this Writer to treat of the Deity after such a manner, as should deprive Him
of all Knowledge and Care of Humane Affairs, and consequently, effectually
Banish out of Men's Minds a just Veneration for Him, and Adoration of Him? Such
Men are the most Dangerous and Mischievous of all others; Professed Atheists
can do no great Harm; for all Persons are aware of them, and will justly abhor
the Writings and Conversation of Men that say boldly there is no God. But there
are but few such; they have found a way to pass undiscovered under a fairer
Dress and a softer Name: They pretend to be true Deists and sincere Cultivators
of Natural Religion; and to have a most Profound Respect for the Supreme and
Almighty Being: But when this Profound Respect comes to be thoroughly examined
and duly understood, it will appear to be the most abominable Abuse that can
be, and a most wicked and Blasphemous Idea of the Deity. For they make him
either nothing but the Soul of the World, Universal Matter, or Natura Naturata,
a God that is an absolutely necessary Agent, without any Rectitude in his Will;
without any Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Mercy, or Providence over his
Works. But let such Persons take what Names they please upon themselves, a
little consideration will soon discover what they are in reality; and, I hope,
give Men a just abhorrence of such Notions, though never so speciously put forth.

But let us now proceed to examine what Ground there is from the Nature of the
Thing, for Men to advance such wicked Opinions, and to show the weakness and
precariousness of them. And here it must be premised and taken for granted,
that there is a God. This is what the Persons I am now concerned with, pretend
to own, and to acknowledge. Which being supposed: It appears very plain that we
may have if we will, and some Persons, as I have showed Sermon 4 th. and 5 th.
, have always had, a very clear Notion or Idea of the Attributes and
Perfections of such a Being; as also that they are fixed and immutable
Properties in the Divine Nature. For by professing to believe a God, they must
mean, if they mean any thing, The first Cause and Author of all Things, and the
Governor and Disposer of them; A Divine Being, containing in himself all
possible Perfections; without being subject to any manner of Defect. This I
have already hinted at in another place In my Second Sermon
, and shall now more largely prove.

So far is it from being true, that we cannot reason of the Nature of God from
his Attributes, nor Discourse of those Attributes from our Reason; That this
seems to be the only proper Way of enquiring into the wonderful Depth of the
Divine Perfections. I mean, the only Way we have without Revelation, for I am
not now considering what God has farther discovered of Himself to us by his
Word. For though the Deity does abound with Infinite Excellencies and
Perfections; yet by the Light of Nature we can discover those only, of which he
has given us some Impression on our own Natures; and these are the Scales and
Proportions by which our Reason must measure the Divine Attributes and
Perfections. For in order to gain good and true Notions of these, we ought to
take our Rise from those Perfections and Excellencies which we find in the
Creatures, and especially in our selves.

There can be but two Ways of coming to the Knowledge of any thing; by its
Cause, and by its Effects. It Is impossible for us to make use of the former of
these, in Reference to the Deity: For He being himself without Cause, and the
First Cause and Original of all Things cannot be known to us this Way. But by
the second Way, he very properly may be the Object of our Knowledge, and we
ought to apply our selves to this Method, in order to understand the Attributes
of God. For whatever Excellency or Perfection we can any way discover in the
Effects of God in the World, i. e. in the Works of the whole Creation; the same
we cannot but suppose must be in Him, in the highest and most noble Proportion
and Degree; since they are all owing to, and derived from Him.

And if we take a serious and considerate View of the Excellencies and
Perfections that are to be found in the Creatures, or the Works of God in the
World; we shall find that they may be reducible to these Four general Heads;
Being or Substance, Life, Sensibility, and Reason. All which we find to be in
our selves, and therefore they are at hand, and ready to assist our
Meditations; and these will, if duly considered, lead us into a good Way of
discovering the Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature. And I doubt
not but a great Reason why Men have had and advanced wrong Notions of God, has
been because they have had such of themselves, and of those Perfections that
are in our own Natures. Men that do not understand that the true Perfection of
Humane Nature consists in Moral Goodness, or in an Universal agreeableness of
our Will to the Eternal Laws of Right Reason, cannot conceive aright of the
Attributes and Perfections of God: For they will be for making him like
themselves, guided by vehement Self-love, and inordinate Will, or whatever
predominant Passions possess them.

'Twere easy to Trace this in the Epicurean Notion of a God dissolved in Ease
and Sloth, and who neglects the Government of the World, to enjoy his own
private Pleasures; and in the Hobbian one of a Deity not guided by any
Essential Rectitude of Will, but only by Arbitrary, Lawless, and irrisistible
Power; for both these Opinions are exactly agreeable to the Genius and humors
of their Authors and Propagators.

But to proceed with our Deduction of the Divine Attributes from the
Excellencies and Perfections which we find in our selves. 1. If in the first
place we consider Being, and the high Perfections that do belong to it; we
shall find that they must needs be in the Deity, who is the First and Supreme
Being, and the Cause and Author of all others in the World, in the utmost
Perfection. Now the highest Perfections belonging unto Being, we find to be
these two: 1. That it shall have an underivable and necessary Existence, always
be, and never cease, die, terminate or be extinct; and, 2. That it be Great and
Ample as to its Extent, in opposition to Littleness or Scantyness, and to being
Limited, Circumscribed, Bounded or Restrained by any Other Thing.

And if we attribute these two Perfections to God, thence will plainly Arise
his Eternity, and his Immensity or Omnipresence. For what cannot possibly cease
to be, but has necessary Existence included in its Nature, is Eternal. And
what cannot be any way Limited, Circumscribed or Restrained, must needs be
Boundless and Immense, and present every where. And I dare say, that these
Notions of God's Eternity and Immensity, do find an easy admission into, and
are firmly rooted in all considerate and unprejudiced Minds; and who are not
debauched by Skeptical and Atheistical Metaphysics. For it is impossible for
any one that thinks at all, to have a Notion of a Deity that can die, or cease
to be; or that is so confined and imprisoned in any one part of Space, that he
can extend himself no farther: No! it must be an Epicurean Stupefaction of
Soul, indeed, that can induce a Man to fancy a Mortal or a Topical God; one
that may be slain, or die of old Age, or be shackled and confined to any one
part of the Universe, exclusive of the rest. And though a Man cannot find perhaps
that he has an adequate Idea of Eternity; yet that God must be without
Beginning or End, he will readily allow, as soon as he considers the Thing; for
he will perceive that the First Cause of all Things could not be caused by any
thing else, but must be Self-existent, and without Beginning: and if nothing
could cause his Being, nothing can take it away neither, and consequently he
must be Everlasting or Eternal. And of this Attribute the Heathens had a clear
Idea and Belief, giving God the Title of (...), and Swearing usually by the
Immortal Gods. Tully says, Deum nisi Sempiternum Intelligere qui possumus? How
can we conceive the Deity any otherwise than to be an Eternal Being. And
Aristotle in many places makes Eternity Essential to the Idea of God; and
particularly, Lib. 2. de Coelo.

And so as to Immensity or Omnipresence, though he, indeed, cannot tell the
manner how a Spirit or Immaterial Substance permeates Matter, or is present to
every part of it; yet he will conclude that the Deity must some how or other
actually fill and be present with all things; since it is impossible he should
be excluded any where, or be in any respect bounded or limited; as it is also
that he should act or operate where he is not. Nor would, I believe, any free
and unprejudiced Mind have recourse either to the Notion of God's being
Universal Matter or Infinite Space, in order to solve His Immensity or
Omnipresence. For the former, he would see, necessarily makes the Deity
materially divisible, into Parts actually separated from each other; and to be
part of him here, and part there; which he could not but think monstrously
absurd and impossible: and the latter renders God nothing at all, but Imaginary
Room, Vacuity or Space, in which Bodies are capable of Moving up and down, or
to and fro, without hindrance or impediment from any Medium. Which how it
should, any more than the former account for the Energetical Power, Wisdom,
Justice and Goodness of the Divine Nature, (the noblest Perfections he can have
any Idea of) 'twould be as impossible for him to conceive, as it is for the
Assertors of it to prove. The ancient Heathens allowed this Attribute of
Immensity to the Deity, by common consent. Tully tells us, That Pythagoras
asserted, Deum esse animum per Naturam Rerum omnium intentum and comeantem, De
Not. Deorum. And he cites it as the Opinion of Thales Milesius; Deorum omnia
esse Plena, De Legib. lib. 2. which Virgil also affirms expressly, -- Jovis
omnia plena. And again, Deum namque ire per omnes Terras tractusque maris,
coelumque profundum, Georg. lib. 4. And Seneca tells us, That God is ubique and
omnibus proesto Ep. 95.
. And in another place De Benef. lib. 4.
, Quocunque te flexeris, ibi Deum videbis Occurrentem tibi, nihil ab illo
vacat, Opus suum ipse Implet.

2. If we consider Life; Another Perfection which we find in our selves, we
must needs conclude that this is in the Deity too, who is the great Author and
Fountain of Life, in the highest Degree and Proportion imaginable. Now the
Perfection of Life seems to consist in Activity, or an Energetical Power to
Act, or Operate; in opposition to Impotence, Weakness, or Inability. And this
Perfection, no one sure can possibly doubt to be in the Deity. For besides that
it is impossible for us to conceive that Life and Activity in our selves can
proceed from a Dead and Unactive Principle; our Reason must needs reject the
Notion of an Inanimate, and Impotent Deity, or of one that is any way defective
in Power, as soon as it can be proposed to it. Can we imagine that a Being from
whom all Life, Power and Energy is derived, can be without it himself? and that
he who has, as Simplicius calls it, (...), a whole entire or perfect Power,
that has all the Power of Nature at His Command, can be unable to perform
whatever is possible to be done? that is, whatever is agreeable to, and
consistent with, the other Attributes of the Divine Nature? And if so, must not
then such a Being be owned to be Almighty or Omnipotent? From whence we see
another great Attribute does plainly arise. And of this Attribute of the Deity,
there was a plain and clear Notion all along among the Heathen Writers; as
appears from Homer in many places, who speaking of God, says, (...). The same
thing also we have in the Fragments of Linus, long before Him. And in
Callimachus also, in express words. As also in Agatho, an Ancient Greek Poet
cited by Aristotle in his Ethics. So in Virgil and Ovid, you have frequently
the Title of Pater Omnipotens given to the Deity. And this Attribute of
Infinite Power in God, Epicurus set himself with all his might to confute;
denying there was any such thing as Infinite Power at all; that thereby (says
Lucretius, lib. 1.) he might take away Religion too.

And from hence also his Eternity might be naturally deduced. For we cannot
conceive this Life or Activity, this Almighty Power that is in God, can ever
cease, decay or determine, any more than it can have had a beginning, and
consequently such a Being must necessarily Exist, be Eternal, or Endure and
Live for Ever.

3. If we proceed a little higher, and consider Sensibility which is another
great Perfection that we find in our selves, and some other Creatures, we must
needs Attribute This also, and that in the highest degree, to the Divine
Nature. I take this now in the general, for that Power or Faculty whereby any
Being is capable of taking Pleasure or feeling Pain. And such a Sensibility, or
something Analogous to it, we cannot but think God must have in the most
exquisite Perfection, since our Own, as well as that of all other Creatures,
must be derived from Him. And though, indeed, we ought to think that the Infinite
Perfection of his Nature secures him from all Possibility of feeling Pain,
(since nothing can contradict his Will, run counter to his Desires, or
frustrate his Expectations) yet we have no reason to suppose the Deity
insensible of Pleasure; but may justly conclude from hence, that he is always
most perfectly happy. For he contains in Himself all Possible Good and Infinite
Excellencies and Perfection, and of this He is most exquisitely sensible, and
consequently must eternally be Pleased and delighted with himself in the
Enjoyment of his own Infinite Fullness: And this Notion many of the Heathens had
of God, that he was a most Happy Being; stiling Him frequently, (...); and
(...).

4. But the Highest Perfection which we can discover in our selves, and in any
created Beings whatever, is Reason. And this, no doubt, we ought also to
attribute to God in the highest Degree and Perfection. Now the Perfection of
Reason seems to consist in these two Things:

1. In Knowledge and Wisdom in the Understanding Faculty. And,

2. In Rectitude or Righteousness in the Will.

All which we cannot but suppose the Divine Nature to be perfectly endowed
with. And first as to Knowledge and Wisdom; The former of which, implies an
Understanding of things as they are in themselves, according to their true
Natures and Properties: And the latter, a considering of them as to their
Relations to, and Dependances upon one another; or in other words, according as
they are fit or qualified to be Ends or Means.

And these must certainly be in God, for the same reason that we have found in
Him the other Perfections abovementioned. To the Deity therefore, from this
Consideration, we ought to Attribute Omniscience, and Infinite, or most perfect
Wisdom; for no doubt we ought to conclude, That the Deity both knows every
thing according to its Nature, and also understands its Usefulness and
Subservience to any End, Design or Purpose whatsoever. And therefore it was as
stupidly or impiously said by Mr. Hobbs, That there can be no such thing as
Knowledge in God, and that he can have no Ends. For I cannot imagine there can
one so grossly Ignorant and Foolish be found among Mankind, who does really
believe there can be an ignorant or a foolish God; and who would not abhor such
a Position as monstrously absurd and impossible. A Man must be a long while
conversant with Atheistical and Skeptical Philosophy, before he can grow so
dull as not to perceive the force and Power of the Psalmists Logic and
reasoning in Psalm. 94. v. 8, 9, etc. and he must be very Studiously brutish and
Learnedly foolish, before he can think that he that planted the Ear, should not
be able to hear himself; and that he that formed the Eye should not see; and
that he that gave and taught all Knowledge to Men should have none himself.

The mighty Reason that Mr. Hobbs is pleased to give, Why there can be no
Understanding in God is, because that Faculty being in us nothing but a Tumult
of Mind, raised by External Things that press the Organical Parts of our Bodies
Leviath. p. 190.
, there can be no such thing in God. And in other places, he sagaciously
determines, that it is impossible to hear without Ears, to see without Eyes, and
to Understand without Brains, none of which God has; and therefore must be
Ignorant and Stupid. But, methinks, it is very hardly done of Him, to determine
the Deity to be Corporeal, and yet to assign Him none of these Material Organs
in order to make him an Intelligent Being. Why should not the same Matter which
is able to form the Mechanic Understanding of so great a Philosopher, be
capable of being modified as Intelligently in the Divine Nature? Must the Deity
have the worst and most stupid Body of All others? Into what abominable
Absurdities will such Principles as these lead a Man! or rather into what
abominable Impieties and Blasphemies will Vice and Pride hurry him! He does not
only think wickedly that the Deity is such an one as himself, but infinitely
worse; a Corporeal Being that has less and fewer Perfections than a Corporeal
Man! But I must not dwell on showing the Design of this Writer, having
sufficiently done it already. I shall only now add, that I think I have already
proved that Matter alone cannot think, know, nor understand; and therefore it
is not Men's Brains, but their Soul that has this Intelligent Power; and no
doubt an Infinite and Immaterial Mind, needs not any Material Organs to convey
Knowledge to him, in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge do Inhabit,
and from whom they are all derived and do proceed.

And there was, Anciently amongst the Heathens, a clear belief of the Infinite
Knowledge and Wisdom of God. Tully tells us, that Thales used commonly to say,
Deos omnia cernere, the Gods behold or know all things. And Seneca says, Deo
nihil Clausum est; interest Animis nostris, and mediis cogitationibus
intervenit. And as to the Wisdom of God, Tully deduces it after the same manner
as we now have done, by attributing the Excellencies of the Creature to the
Deity in the Highest Perfection. Sapiens est Homo, says he, and propterea
Deus; Man has Wisdom, and therefore God, from whom the Wisdom in Man is
derived, must needs have it himself. But again, As we must attribute to God
Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom; so we must Rectitude of Will or Perfect
Righteousness too. And since the Rectitude of the Will consists in an exact
Conformity of it and all its Affections to the Impartial Rule of Right Reason;
we cannot but suppose also, that the Will of God is in a most exquisite
Conformity to the Dictates of his Unerring Reason; and that the Deity does in
every respect act exactly agreeable thereunto. And by this means we shall find
that God must be Just and Righteous in all his Proceedings, and that he always
executes Justice and Righteousness in the Earth, and delights in these things.
Our Adversaries, indeed, do assert, That there is no such thing as any
distinction between Good and Evil, Just and Unjust, that can be taken from any
common Rule, or from the Objects themselves; but only with Relation to the
Person that uses them; who calls that Good which he loves, and that Evil which
he hates Leviath. p. 24, 63, 64, Spinozae Oper. Posth. p. 37.
. That God does every thing by his Irresisistible Power; and that in that is
founded our Obedience to Him, and not in any Principle of Gratitude to him (b)
for Benefits which we have received from him. Leviath. p. 187.
That Justice is founded in Power, and that whatever is Enacted by a Sovereign
Power cannot be Unjust. The Groundlessness of which Impious and Dangerous
Notions, I shall fully show in a subsequent Discourse; and therefore shall only
now observe, that this Way of depriving the Deity of these most excellent and
lovely Attributes of Justice and Goodness, and making Him to Act only according
to the Arbitrary Dictates of Irresistible Power, gives us the Notion of a Devil
instead of a Deity, of an absolute Tyrant, instead of a righteous Governor of
the World; and is directly contrary to the Sober and Considerate Sentiments of
all Mankind Plato calls the Deity (...), the very Idea or Essence of Good. And
herein he seems to have followed the Pythagoreans and Timaeus Locrus in
particular: Who asserts of Mind, according to him the first Principle of the
Universe, that it is, (...), of the Nature of Good: And says further, (...),
that they call it God, and the Principle of the best things.

Aristotle also reckons Moral Goodness among the Perfections of the Divine
Nature: And Plutarch says, it is one of the chiefest Excellencies in the Deity;
and that on this account it is that Men love and honor Him.

Hierocles in Carm. Pythagor. asserts the Deity to be Essentially Good, and not
by Accidental or External Motives.


, in whose Minds a plain Distinction between Good and Evil is founded, and who
can never be brought without doing great violence to themselves, to assert that
the Deity is not guided in all things by the Eternal Rules of Truth and
Justice, and that the Judge of all the Earth should not do right. They see the
comeliness and loveliness that there is in good and just Actions among Men; and
therefore cannot suppose that an Infinite and Almighty Being can do any thing
contrary to them; they are sensible that Deviations from those Rules proceed
only from the Defects and Imperfections that are in our Natures; but that God,
who is (...), who possesses and sustaineth all things, cannot make use of any
indirect Means to procure himself Happiness, or to slave off Misery; since the
Perfection of his Nature gives him all the one, and secures him from all the
other. And they which certainly never believe that God will do any Action, that
they do not think suitable to be done by a good and just Man; But will on just
Grounds conclude, That whatever Excellence or Perfections they can any way
discover to be in a Good Man, must needs be in the highest Proportion in God,
and consequently that the Deity must be most Righteous, Just and Good, and most
Kind, Merciful and Gracious in all his Dealings with his Creatures.

And thus we see how by considering the Excellencies and Perfections which we
find in our selves, and attributing them in the Highest Proportion to that
Supreme Being the Deity, from whence they must all be derived; we may attain to
a good and clear Knowledge of the Properties and Attributes of the Divine
Nature: We may find them to be such as are agreeable to the plainest Reason and
to Philosophical Truth: and consequently conclude, that they can have no such
weak and precarious Foundation as the Order of the Civil Power, and the Will of
the Supreme Magistrate.

And were it now my Business, 'twere very easy from hence to show also the
True Foundation of Religious Worship; that it does depend on the Right
Apprehensions and Notions that we have of the Attributes of God; and that our
Obedience to Him, is founded in our Gratitude to him for the Benefits which we
receive from Him, and consequently is our Reasonable Service. But the Proof of
this will be more proper in another Place.

FINIS.

