A SERMON On the Decease of Mr. Hanserd Knollis, Minister of the Gospel.
Preached at Pinners-Hall, October. 4. 1691.

By Tho. Harrison.

Rev. XIV. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their Works do follow them.

LONDON: Printed for H. Barnard, at the Bible in the Poultrey. 1694.

THE Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Do not Entitle the following Discourse, Mr. Knollis's Funeral Sermon,
because that was Preached to his own Congregation by a Person far more eminent
than my self; But it was a Sermon which I voluntarily Preached upon the
occasion of his decease, in that morning Lecture at Pinners-Hall, which was
first erected by him; and wherein I have ground to hope he Labored with great
success, as well as acceptance. Soon after this Sermon came from the Pulpit,
some were desirous that I would send it to the Press; But I was not then
willing to appear in so public a manner upon the stage of the World. It is at
last brought out of my study (wherein I designed that it should have lain all
my days with the rest of my unpolish't Papers) by the request and encouragement
of some Friends, to public view. I must expect the Common Lot of such mean
Authors as my self, and which sometimes has been the Portion of others, of a
higher rank, to have both my Person and my Book Censured and Condemned, But
however if God shall be Pleased to bless this little piece to the good of one
Soul, I shall have no cause to repent its publication.

That thou may reap some spiritual advantage therefrom is the Prayer of,

Thine in the Lord T. H.

A SERMON On the Decease of Mr: Hanserd Knollis.
Zech. l. v. 5. latter part. And the Prophets, do they live for ever?


WHat frequent Conquests does the King of Terrors gain over the Children of
Men! Man goes continually to his long home, and the Mourners walk about the
streets. Men of all ages, ranks and degrees are led away into Deaths gloomy
Territories. One would think that if any could plead an exemption therefrom, it
should be they who are in the highest place and office in the Church of Christ;
That if any could be discharged in this warfare, it should be they whose work
it is to subdue Rebellious sinners unto Christ: That if any could be delivered
from going down to the dark grave, it should be they who are the lights of the
World; That they, if any, should escape the house of silence; who are to convey
the Joyful sound of the ever blessed Gospel to the ears of men. But yet they
must dye as well as others; for the Prophets, do they live for ever? Before I
come to the words of my Text, I shall give you a brief account of the occasion
of them. When God had wrought out an unexpected and Miraculous deliverance, for
the Jews from their Babylonian Captivity, and brought them again into their own
Land, from whence they had been exiled seventy years; He was pleased to send
the Prophet Zechariah (having not long before sent Haggai) to them, to excite
and stir them up to those duties which were at that time Incumbent on them; In
v. 3. of this Chapter the Prophet gives a summary account of that message which he
was Commanded to deliver from the Lord of the Prophets to them; Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, return unto me; which Command is enforced with a gracious
Promise, that if they did so, God would return unto them. Our return to God in
a way of duty, is the most likely means to obtain his return to us in a way of
grace and mercy.

And for as much as this People were very prone to Imitate the evil examples of
their Progenitors, and to follow them, in those crooked ways which they walked
in; he verse 4. Cautions them against an Imitation of their Forefathers in
their Impenitency and Contumacy. And this he enforces by an Argument taken
from the dreadful event thereof, in the former part of this 5th ver. Your
fathers, where are they? q. d. they are not, for they are said not to be, who
are departed out of the Land of the Living; and made free among the dead, Jer.
31.15. v. q. d. Your fathers have been Consumed and destroyed by fire, sword
and Pestilence; they have been made dreadful examples of God's displeasure
against stubborn and impenitent sinners; and their ruin should be a warning to
you, least treading in their steps, ye should undergo the same punishment with
them. And says he in the words of my Text, the Prophets, do they live for ever?
The scope and design of these words is (and according to the Judgment of
expositors) to distinguish between the Persons of the Prophets, and those
things which were in the name of God delivered by them. He here speaks by way
of Concession, for this Interrogation carries a negation in it, and amounts to
a Negative Proposition q. d. the Prophets do not live for ever; But tho they
dye, it may be, before their Predictions are fulfilled, yet they shall
certainly be Accomplished; as you may see, if you compare these words with the
following verse. But I shall no farther consider the words relatively, with
respect to the Context, but absolutely in themselves, as they are a negative
Proposition, wherein we may consider, First, the subject, the Prophets.
Secondly, the Predicate, do not live for ever.

1. The subject, The Prophets, with respect unto which expositors are divided
in their opinions.

1. Some hereby understand the false Prophets, who came when God did not send
them, and delivered those things in his name, which they never received from
him. Who endeavored to please, rather than to profit the People; sowing
Pillows under their Elbows, and crying Peace, Peace, when destruction was
hastily marching toward them. But,

Secondly, With others I conceive we are hereby to understand the true
Prophets, who received their mission from God, and acted according to that
Commission which he had given them. God at sundry times and in Diverse manners
spoke by the Old Testament Church by the Prophets, Heb. 1.1. v. He made great
Revelations and discoveries of his mind and will unto them; which they, by
virtue of their office, were obliged to declare unto the People. But under this
title are comprehended, not only the extraordinary, but the ordinary Ministers,
both of the old and new Testament. Thus Mat. 10. 41. He that receives a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward, Luke 11.49.
v. Though the ordinary Ministers of the new Testament^, are not now to exercise
that part of the Prophetical office, which consisted in the Prediction of
Future events; yet there are other parts of this office, viz. More clearly to
unfold and explain the mind and will of God contained in his word, to Reprove
for sin, and excite to duty; which appertain to them.

Secondly the Predicate, do not live for ever. There is a threefold life
whereof we read in the holy Scripture, viz. A Temporal life, or a life of
nature; a Spiritual life, or a life of Grace; and an Eternal life, or a life of
Glory.

In the two latter senses, the faithful Prophets of God, shall live for ever.

The life of grace which they are partakers of here, shall never be destroyed,
but will terminate in a Life of Glory, and that Life of Glory which the Saints
shall live above, will be of an everlasting duration. But the Spirit of God in
the words of my text speaks of a Temporal Life, or a Life of nature, to which a
Period must be put.

In this sense, the Prophets do not live for ever. From the words thus
explained, I shall present you with the following observation.

Doct. That they who minister about holy things, are not exempted from a
Temporal Death.

Or, That ministers are liable to, and must undergo a Temporal Death. The
Prophets, do they live for ever? If they do not live for ever, they must
certainly die.

I need not Insist long upon the Proof of such an undeniable Proposition. Have
not all God's Ministers, who lived in Preceding ages, fallen by the stroke of
Death? Is not Moses gone to the House appointed for all living, who is styled
the Prophet, by way of eminence. Hosea 12.13. Who was the Prince of the old
Testament Prophets; an eminent type of the Great Apostle of our Profession,
with Respect to his Prophetical Office, as appears from, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Compared
with Act. 3.22. What is become of that famous Prophet who came in the spirit
and Power of Elias, who was the Morning Star that ushered the Sun of
Righteousness into this World; did not he set in a Gloomy night of Death? Where
are the Apostles of our Lord, those Heralds that first Proclaimed the glad
tidings of Peace, to the Rebellious world; are not they gone down to the dark
and silent grave? Do not we frequently see the King of terrors hewing down
those who are Pillars in Jehovah's Temple, with his fatal Ax. In the farther
Prosecution of this Point, I shall proceed in the ensuing method.

1. To show you more particularly what that Death is, which they who Minister
about holy things are liable to, and must certainly undergo.

2. To assign some general Reasons, why they must die as well as other men.

3. To assign some particular and special Reasons of their death.

4. To give you some Account of the time when God usually calls them out of
this world.

5. To make some Improvement and Application of the whole.

1. I shall show you more particularly, what that Death is, which they who
Minister about holy things are liable to, and must undergo. 1. Negatively.
Neither they nor any of the Children of men are liable to, or shall undergo a
natural death of the Soul. Though the Souls of wicked men are subject to a
Moral Death, which Consists in a Privation of felicity and blessedness, yet
they are not subject to a Physical Death, which Consists in a Privation of
Existence, or Life; when men die, their Souls depart from their Bodies, they do
not die, or sleep with their Bodies. When their Bodies return to the Earth from
whence they came, Their Souls return to that God as a Judge, from whom they
came forth as a Creator. Otherwise it would be in the Power of man to kill the
soul as well as the Body, which our Savior denies, Math. 10.28. Fear not them
which can kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul. Death's fatal dart cannot
pierce this Immortal Being. Death may break the Cabinets, but cannot touch that
rich Jewel, which is Enclosed therein: It dissolves that earthly Tabernacle
wherein the Soul resides, but cannot destroy it is noble Inhabitant. The Soul is
a spiritual Immaterial, and therefore an Immortal Everliving substance. If the
Soul sleeps with the Body, I know not how our Lord's Promise to the Penitent
theif, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. could be
accomplished; nor what Reason can be assigned for the Apostle Paul's desire
speedily to depart out of the world, Phil. 1.23.

I might produce many Arguments to establish this assertion; But I cannot enter
upon a large discussion of this controversy at this time.

2. Affirmatively, There is a two fold death which they who Minister about holy
things are liable to, and must undergo as well as other men, viz. A death of
the man, and a death of the Body.

1. A death of the man: Which Consists in a separation of the Soul from the
Body. As the union of the Soul with the Body is the Life of the man: So the
separation of the Soul from the Body is the death of the man. When the Soul is
Joined to the Body we begin to live; when it is divorced from the Body, then,
we die. Death's fatal stroke breaks in sunder the Ligament wherewith the Soul
and Body are tied together, and Rends these Intimate Companions from each
others Embraces.

2. A death of the Body. This is inseparable from a death of the man; The Soul
is the Principle of the Bodies Life and Motion while it continues in it; and
therefore when it takes it is flight from it, it ceases to be a living Creature,
and becomes a lifeless lump of clay. This death of the Body consists in a
Cessation of the Circulation of the Blood and Spirits, which are the Animal
Soul of man. Thereby the Body is deprived of it is strength and vigor, of it is
Motion and Activity, and of it is comeliness and Beauty. Death makes a great
alteration in this Curious structure. It ties the most voluble tongue, fetters
the most active and nimble hands and feet; It introduces paleness into the most
ruddy face, and dimness into the most sparkling eyes.

2dly, I Proceed, to assign some general Reasons why Ministers must die as well
as other men.

In general, because it is appointed for all men once to die, Heb. 9.27. This
is a statute Law of Heaven, which never was, never will be repealed, but shall
be fully executed. The Law is universal, and therefore none can plead an
exemption from the execution of it. They who give Laws to men are subject to
this Appointment of God.

No Priveledges either Temporal or spiritual, can give the Children of men a
Protection from death's arrest. If it be objected, that some have past by, not
through the Gates of death, for Enoch was Translated, and Elias mounted up to
Heaven in a fiery Chariot; and they who remain alive upon Earth, at the coming
of the Lord from Heaven, shall not sleep but be changed. It may be replied,
that, some Particular exceptions do not destroy a general Rule; besides, the
forementioned Persons either did or shall undergo a change equivalent to a
Death. But more Particularly, Ministers must die as well as others.

1. Because, they as well as others descended from the first Adam, by whose
transgression death was entailed upon all his natural offspring and Posterity.
In this one man, all sinned, and therefore death passed upon all men, Romans
5.12. That apple which our first Parents ate in Paradise, has brought a fatal
surfeit upon all their Posterity. Tho the Godly are delivered from a spiritual
and eternal death, yet they are liable to a Temporal death: Tho they are
delivered from Temporal death, as a Penal evil; yet they are liable to it as a
natural evil. Death is not the effect of nature, but the fruit of sin. Had man
Persevered in his holiness; he should have continued in a state of Immortality.
Sin opened the door to let death into the world; for death entered by sin, Romans
5.12. Yea, it is observable that the sentence of Temporal death passed upon
man, Immediately after a deliverance from spiritual and eternal death, by the
seed of the Woman, was promised to him. And this sentence began Immediately to
be executed, with respect to that necessity of Dying which man was brought
under, and those Bodily distempers, the seeds of which were then Introduced to
him.

2. That they may appear before the Judge of all the Earth to give an account
of the Actions of their Lives to him. That Judgment which will ensue upon
death, is one Reason of our Dying. We must depart out of Life, that we may
appear before the Divine tribunal in the next Life. Ministers are the subjects
of the heavenly King, and therefore they must give an account to him as well as
their hearers. We who declare and expound the Divine Law to you, press you to
yield obedience to it, must be Judged by this Law our selves, and come under a
strict examination, with respect to our observation of, and obedience to it. We
who persuade you have, or ought to have, some knowledge of this part of the
Lords terrors, even the future Judgment, as that which we are liable to our
selves, Cor. 2.5, 10, and 11.

3. I proceed to assign some special and particular Reasons why Ministers must
die. And they will be such as have a peculiar reference to their station and
employment.

1. They must die that they may give an account how they have discharged that
office which they are called to and that trust that is Reposed in them.
Ministers are stewards of the manifold grace of God, and therefore must give an
account of their stewardships. They have peculiar gifts bestowed upon them to
fit and qualify them for their work; therefore they must give an account how
they have Improved and laid them out in the service of that Lord from whom they
received them. Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors, whom he sends to deliver
the message of Life and salvation unto Rebellious sinners, and to treat with
them about a Reconciliation to their offended Sovereign. They must therefore
Return unto their Lord, to give an account how they, and their message, were
received and entertained in and by the world; how they have managed and behaved
themselves in the execution of their office, and what success their Embassy
has had. They are Laborers sent to work in the Church which is God's
vineyard, and Husbandry, and therefore they must return to the master of the
vineyard and the Lord of the harvest; that they may give an account what work
they have done therein. They are the shepherds wherewith Christ the great
shepherd of the sheep has entrusted his little flock; therefore they must give
an account what care they have taken of them. They are Gods Watchmen, whom he
appoints to watch over Souls, and therefore they must be accountable for 'em,
Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves for
they watch for your souls as those that must give an account, that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Tho all men
have a great account to give, yet Ministers have the greatest.

2. They must die, that they may be eased of those burdens that lie upon them,
and delivered from those Troubles and Afflictions which they are frequently
exercised with in this life. Indeed they are so many and great, that well might
the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of all men most miserable. We Christians, of all men; we Ministers, of all
Christians. I shall mention some of them, that you may see what cause you have
to pity and pray for your Ministers.

1. The laboriousness of their Work. Know them who labor among you, and
admonish you. 1 These. 5.12. they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy
5.17. (...), who labor to weariness. It is a work that is attended with much
inward pleasure and delight, to those whose hearts are duly engaged in it; but
yet much study and much preaching too, is a weariness to the Flesh. It is a
labor that spends the Vitals, and consumes the Oil which should preserve the
Lamp of Nature. It is such a labor as makes Old Age and Youth often meet
together. The Jews took Christ to be about 50 years Old, when he was little
above 30, Joh. 8.57. and some assign this reason for it, that he had so
enfeebled his body with his laborious exercises that he seemed older than he
really was. Other Callings are but Exercises to Nature; but the Ministers work
debilitates Nature. The Minister, like the Candle, wastes while he shines. But
at death he rests from his labors.

2. The discouragements which they meet with in their work.

1. From themselves. How often have they aching hearts, and weeping eyes, when
they consider the weight, importance and difficulty of their work, and their
own insufficiency for it? Says the Apostle, Who is sufficient for these things?
2 Cor. 2.16. It is true, God has promised to assist them; but their faith is
sometimes at a low ebb, as well as the faith of others. When their faith is so
unactive, that they cannot with this spiritual Eye behold an Omnipotent Arm
stretched forth for their support, they are ready to sink under their pressure.

2. From others; Even those who are professed Friends to that work which they
are engaged in.

How often are they reflected upon for their fidelity in the discharge of their
duty?

How often are Professors ready to account Ministers their Enemies, because
they tell them the Truth? How apt are they to fly in their Faces, if they do
but touch any of their Lusts with the Sword of the Spirit? How often are they
deserted by men for declaring the whole Counsel of God! We have an instance of
this in the great Apostle of our profession, because he preached a Doctrine
which did not lie level with the carnal Reason of his Auditors Joh. 6. Many of
his Disciples from that time went back, and walked no more with him, 66. v. It
is a great discouragement to labor hard, and not to have our labor accepted.
It is true, we should look above the dispraise of men, to the praise of God;
but Ministers are imperfect men, and therefore cannot always do so.

3. Their unsuccessfulness in their work. They have many times occasion to say
with the Prophet, Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed, Isa. 53.1. We have spread out our hands all the day long unto a
rebellious people, which walks in a way that was not good, after their own
thoughts, Isa. 65.2. The Ministers work is set forth by the pangs of a woman in
travail, Gal. 4.19. And who can tell the Throws that their souls feel, who all
the time of their Ministry, or a great part of it, go in travail, and bring
forth dead children at last? It is a trouble to any man to take a great deal of
pains, and not to have his Endeavors crowned with success. It must needs
grieve these Fishers of men, to stand all the day long, and catch nothing. It
cannot but trouble these Husbandmen to be continually sowing, and yet see no
Harvest, or gathering in of Fruits: To preach themselves into their Graves, and
yet not preach others to Christ, must needs be a great affliction. They seek
not yours, but you, 2 Cor. 12.14. They think not themselves successful, if you
give them a little wool from your backs, unless ye become Christ's Sheep.

4. The great opposition and persecution which they meet with from the world.
To be a Minister (said Luther) is nothing else but to derive the world's wrath
and fury upon himself. The He-Goats of the Flock are most furiously assaulted
by those Ravenous VVoolves who seek its destruction. The Leaders of the
Christian Army usually bear the greatest shock of the Enemies Rage. As the
Syrians gave charge to fight neither with great nor small, but with the King of
Israel only; so sometimes wicked men only bend their Forces against Christ's
Ministers.

The children of darkness take the greatest pains to extinguish the Lights of
the world. Persecutors usually thirst most eagerly after the blood of Prophets.
The Persecution in Acts 12. begins with the murder of James. 7000 men could
lie hid in Jezabel's time better than one Prophet. These are the burthensom
stones which almost every one is lifting at; in almost every National Storm
they are taken up to be thrown over board, for those that raised it. They are
treated as those who turn the world upside down. Wicked men think, that if once
the Shepherd be removed, the Sheep will soon be scattered; That if once the
Leaders of the Christian Army be taken off, the Christian Army will quickly be
dispersed. God will not suffer his Servants to be always laboring, toiling,
and mourning in Affliction and Distress; and therefore by Death he delivers
them therefrom.

3. Ministers must die, that they may receive the reward of their labors. It
is true, Nothing that is done by us for God, deserves any thing at his hands.
Could we perfectly answer the Requirements of the Divine Law, we must, when we
have done all those things which are commanded us, say, we are unprofitable
servants; for we have done no more than it was our Duty to do, Luke 17.10. But
alas! how many flaws and defects are there in the best of our services? and
what a vast disproportion is there between Gods Law and our Obedience, in their
Latitude and Extent? But God is pleased, in a way of condescension, to give the
Title of a Reward to that glory and felicity which he has prepared and
promised to his faithful servants, for their Encouragement in their Work. It is
not a Reward of Debt, but of Grace, according to that excellent distinction of
the Apostle, Rom 4.4. Tho conscientious Ministers find a great Reward in their
Work, yet their greatest reward is to be reciev'd when they have finished it.
There is a Prophets reward, which is greater than that of a righteous man, as
appears from Mat. 10.41. Tho we shall not be rewarded for, yet we shall be
rewarded according to our works. What we sow that shall we also reap, not only
as to kind, but also with respect to degree. The more service any of us have
done for God in this life, the greater will that recompense of Reward be which
we shall receive from him in the next life. They that be wise, or they who by
their instructions do instrumentally make others wise, (as the word properly
signifies) shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. These
Husbandmen who have labored in God's Husbandry all the day long must go to
their Master at night, that they may receive their Penny.

The Apostle Paul, when the time of his Departure was at hand, expressed his
assurance, that he was going to receive his Crown, 2 Timothy 4, 6, 7, 8. I proceed
now to (...) 4th General. To give you some account of the Time when God usually
calls his Ministers out of this world. In General, When the time appointed for
their continuance in this world is at an end, and he time appointed for their
departure into another world is come. There is an appointed time to man upon
earth; for such an Affirmation is implied in that Interrogation, Job 7.1. We
may well say of Ministers in particular what Job affirms of Men in general,
Their days are determined, the number of their months are with God, he has
appointed their bounds, that they cannot pass, Job 14.5. But more particularly,

1. When their work is done. God has allotted to every one of his servants
some work to be done by him in this World, and till that is accomplished, he
shall continue therein. Some Ministers live longer than others, because God
has appointed them more work than others. It is true, many Ministers have been
called off from preaching work long before their dissolution, but they have had
other, it may be, suffering work cut out for them: God sends them to a Prison,
or confines them to their Chambers or Beds, by the strokes of his hand, that
they may glorify him, and convince, instruct and strengthen others, by their
Christian fortitude and exemplary patience. That Reverend Minister, whose
Decease occasioned this Discourse, had a great deal of work to do for God in
his declining Age, which is evident from the many Seals which God gave to his
Ministry, even toward the close of it. When he had, as it were, one foot in
the Grave, he was Instrumental to the Resurrection of many Dead Souls to a
Spiritual Life. God put an end to his Ministerial Work but a very little time
before he called him to receive his Crown, which was a singular favor granted
to this Venerable Old Man.

2. When their Message is generally slighted and rejected. If they to whom an
Ambassador is sent, by an earthly Prince, will not give him Audience, or
refuse to comply with those Proposals which he makes in his Master's Name; it
is time for his Lord to recall him. God will not always suffer Minister^, who
are his Ambassadors, to make Offers and Tenders of Salvation to poor sinners,
and entreat them to be reconciled to him in vain and to no purpose. When Men
rebelliously stopped their Ears against his Gospel Calls, and slights those
compasionate Invitaons which he gives them by his Prophets; he calls them home
unto himself.

3. When desolating Judgments are hastily advancing toward and make a near
approach unto the places wherein they live Noah, that famous Preacher of
righteousness, entered into the Ark but a few days before the old World was
destroyed by the Deluge. God frequently calls his Servants into the Chambers of
Death, when an overflowing scourge is coming. The setting of these Lights in
the World portends a gloomy night. These Righteous Men are often taken away
from the Evil to come, tho few observe and lay it to heart.

4. I shall now make some improvement and Application of the whole. And that,
1. By way of Information. 2. By way of Exhortation. 3. By way of Consolation.


1. By way of Information. 1. Are the Ministers of Christ mortal men? then this
may inform us, what cause we have to admire the goodness of God entreating with
us by them. Should the great Jehovah treat with us immediately, we should be
forced to say with the Israelites, Let not God speak with us, least we die,
Exodus 20.19. Nor could we in our mortal state bear to converse with those
glorious Angels, who continually behold his face, and stand before his August
Throne; but God, in compassion to our weakness, treats with us by men like our
selves; such, who tho they are in God's stead, are also formed out of the Clay,
whose terror shall not make us afraid, neither shall their hand be heavy upon
us, as Elihu says to Job, 33.6.7. who can, from the acquaintance they have,
will their own hearts tell us the baseness of ours, and with whom we may
converse with the greatest familiarity.

2. Are Ministers mortal men? This may inform us that we ought not to Idolize
them; honor and respect them we must, but Idolize them we must not, tho they
are men highly dignified by God, yet they are mortal men still, tho they are
sent to proclaim the Promise of Everlasting Life, yet they are liable to a
temporal Death. Tho the rich treasures of Spiritual Gifts and Graces are
pouer'd into these Vessels, yet they are but earthen ones, and will soon be
broken by the blow of God's hand, tho these goards are very delightful to us,
and we find great refreshment in sitting under their shadow, yet the worm of
Death will soon make them to wither.

3. Must Ministers Die, and give an Account of their Ministry unto God? Then
how diligent and laborious should they be therein. Surely they should endeavor
to bring as much Glory to the reverend and holy Name of God, and to do as much
good to the precious Souls of Men, as they can, while they Live, for when they
Die, they can do no more, when Death has seized upon them, they can no more
proclaim the glad Tidings of Peace to the rebellious World; they can no more
inform the Ignorant, quicken the Slothful, convince Gainsayers, persuade the
Disobedient, strengthen the Weak, or comfort the Disconsolate. Moreover, they
should be excited to Diligence in their Work, by that awful Account which they
must give e're long to their Lord. Will a prudent Servant loyter in the day
time, who knows that his Master will take an account of his Work at night? Oh!
how little do some who enter on the work of the Ministry consider that dreadful
Account that they have to give unto the Judge of all the Earth, when they depart
out of this World. Ministers must be accountable for those Souls which are lost
by their unfaithfulness and negligence, as appears from Ezekiel. 33.6. And
therefore the Apostle Paul charges Timothy to be diligent in his Work as he
would answer it unto the Judge both of quick and dead, at his appearance and his
Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.

4. Must the Ministers of the Gospel die, and give an Account of their
Ministry? Then how unreasonable is it for the People to be offended with them
for their faithfulness and Eagerness in the discharge of it. It may be you are
ready to think them too sharp in reproving Sin, too earnest in pressing duty,
and too severe in urging the threatenings of the Divine Law, but consider, they
do it for their own sakes, as well as for yours, that if they cannot deliver
your Souls, yet they may deliver their own.

5. Must the Minister of the Gospel Dye, that they may rest from their labors,
be eased of their Troubles, and receive their reward? Then it is a great piece
of self-denial in a Minister that is satisfied in his fitness for Death to be
willing to Live. We have an instance of this in the Apostle Paul, who, tho upon
his own Account, he desired to depart, and to be with Christ, yet for the sake
of the Church, he was willing to abide longer in the flesh, 1 Phil. 23.24.

2. By way of Exhortation, Have a care that you do not hasten the Death of your
Ministers. It is true their days are determined by that God, in whose hand all
our Times are; but you may be instrumental to shorten their Lives, and that not
only by putting them to death, as wicked persecutours have ^ften done, but by
other means.

1. By over valuing of them. If you give that honor to them, which belongs
only to the Lord of the Prophets, you will provoke him to take them away from
you; if ye fall down and Worship these bright and glittering Stars, no wonder,
if the Father of lights remove them from your sight. If you advance them to
God's Throne, he will quickly lay them in the dust.

2. By undervaluing them, by slighting and contemning their Persons, their
Gifts, or their Message. If you do not prize your Mercies when you Enjoy them,
God will make you to know the worth of them in the want of them, if you despise
God's Ambassadors, it is time for him to recall them. Moreover, hereby you will
wound their Souls and break their Hearts; and why will you bring their heads
with sorrow to the grave, who have so great a regard to your welfare.

2. Look upon your Living Ministers as dying men: and that to these two ends
and purposes.

1. That you may moderate your Affections toward them. The consideration of
the vanity and frailty of all created objects should wean our Hearts and
Affections from them, and this consideration should have the same influence
upon us with respect to Gospel Ministers. Why should we set our eyes, our
hearts upon those who are not? for they will soon take to themselves wings and
fly away from us into an invisible world.

Secondly, that you may make the utmost improvement of them while they continue
with you, endeavor to get as much good as you can from them while they live;
for when they are once entered into the gloomy shades of Death, they can be no
farther beneficial to you; they shall no more entreat you, Caution, or warn
you, Counsel and admonish you, comfort and encourage you, then they shall no
more pray for or with you; as death stops the ear of the hearer, so it ties the
tongue of the preacher. Oh sinners! Speedily accept of those offers of
salvation which they make to you in their masters name, for you know not how
soon their feet who bring these glad tidings may go down to the grave; it may
be, when they are taken away from you; you will lament and bewail your
misimprovement of 'em; it is rare that we prize what we have, till we have it
not; and we seldom know the worth of a mercy, till we experience the want of it.

Furthermore, consider that as your Ministers must appear before the Divine
Bar, to give an account of their Ministry; so you must appear there to give an
account of your attendance on it; if you reject their Messages, they will come
in as evidences against you in the Day of Judgment; says the Apostle, Do ye not
know that the Saints shall judge the World? 1 Cor. 6.2. and Ministers shall,
with other Saints, judge the World, not only Communicatively and Participatively
in Christ their mystical Head, and approbatively with respect unto that Assent
which they shall give unto Christ's Sentence, but also testificatively, by
becoming Witnesses against them. How dreadful a thing will it be for those very
Ministers who now plead with God for you; and with you for your own Souls, to
become Advocates for the Law and Justice of God against you? what horror will
seize upon you? how inexcusable will you be left, when they shall say, Lord,
these are the Men upon whom we spent our time and our strength, whom we taught
and admonished in season and out of season; for the Salvation of whose Souls we
destroyed our own Bodies; we Preached to them with the greatest seriousness,
and persuaded them with the greatest importunity, as if our own Salvation had
depended upon the working out of theirs; we were as Boanerges, sons of Thunder,
proclaiming to them the Terrors of a Fiery Law; and like Barnabas, sons of
Consolation, declareing to them the blessings of the everlasting Gospel; we set
before them Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing, but they were like the deaf
Adder, which stops her Ears at the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely. Therefore, O Lord! we acknowledge they deserve the heaviest strokes of
Vindictive Justice.

Thirdly, When God has taken away any of his Faithful Ministers, be not
insensible of the stroke; tho we must not murmur at it, yet we ought to Mourn
for it. Shall not we lie in the dust, when the Crown is fallen from our heads?
shall the Lights of the World be removed, and we put no Sack cloth on our
Loins? Let us consider whether our sins have not occasioned the removal of Gods
Prophets; and if they have, let us speedily repent of them, and turn from them,
least we provoke God farther to stretch out his hand, and take more Laborers
out of his vineyard.

If one Affliction does not reform us, we must expect another will quickly
tread upon its heels.

Fourthly, When God has taken away any of your Ministers, endeavor to
recollect and retain those excellent truths which were delivered by them, while
they went in and out before you. Let me persuade you who attend upon this
Lecture, to call to mind those blessed Truths which that faithful Servant of
God, who once spoke to you in the Name of the Lord (but is now entered into the
place of silence) delivered to you therein; and endeavor to reduce them unto
practice. Tho he is Dead, the word of the Lord Lives and abides for ever. Those
Counsels which he gave you from the word of God, do oblige you, tho he is bound
with the chains of Death.

Fifthly. When your Ministers are taken away by Death, consider what things
were commendable in them, and endeavor an Imitation of them therein. It is
true, the best of them had their failings and imperfections: Moses and Elias
were men subject to the like passions as we are; the most Eminent Saints are to
be followed by us, no farther than they followed Christ; but when they are
gone, all their failings should be buried with them, and their Excellencies
should be kept alive in our Memory, in order to our imitation of them; and
indeed there were several things of this nature observable in this Reverend Old
Man.

1. His accurate and circumspect walking. I do not say, that he was wholly free
from sin (sinless perfection is unattainable in a mortal state) but yet he was
one who carefully endeavored to avoid it. He, with the Apostle Paul did herein
exercise himself to have always a conscience void of Offense, toward God and
toward men.

He walked with that caution, that his greatest Enemies had nothing against
him, save only in the matters of his God; That holy Life which he lived, did
command Reverence even from those who were Enemies to the holy Doctrine which
he preached. He was a Preacher out of the Pulpit as well as in it. Not like
those who press the Form of godliness on a Lord's Day, and openly deny the
power of it the remainder of the week; who pluck down that in their
Conversations which they build up in their Pulpits.

2. His universal love to Christians. He had a great respect to Christ's New
Commandment which he gave to his Disciples, to love one another. He loved the
Image of God wheresoever he saw it. He was not a man of a narrow and private,
but of a large and public spirit. The difference of his fellow Christians
Opinions from his did not alienate his affections from them. He loved all his
fellow Travelers, tho they did not walk in the same particular path with
himself. He embraced those in the Arms of his Love upon Earth, with whom he
thought he should join in singing the Song of the Lamb in Heaven. It would be
well if not only private Christians, but also Ministers did imitate him
therein; there would not then be that sourness of spirit which is too often
(with grief be it spoken) found among them.

3. His meekness and humility. He was not of a proud and lofty Temper, but like
that Master whom he professed to serve, meek and lowly. He was willing to bear
with and forbear others. To stoop and condescend to others, and to pass by
those injuries which he received from them.

4. His laboriousness in that work which he was engaged in. He was not a
loyterer, but a labourer. He was willing to spend and t^ be spent in the
service of his Lord, and for the good of poor souls. It is true, Old Age and
Youth did as it were meet in him: God had blessed him with an extraordinary
measure of bodily strength; and he was not an unfaithful Steward of this Talent
wherewith God had entrusted him; yea, when his flesh and his heart seemed to
fail; when his flesh was so weak that he could hardly bear to stand in a
Pulpit, and his Voice so low that he could scarcely be heard, his affestions
were so much engaged in his work that he was very unwilling to leave it.

5. His courageous and cheerful suffering for his Masters and the Gospels sake.
He cheerfully went about suffering as well as preaching work: He was not
unwilling to take up his cross and follow his Lord and Master in the Thorny
Road of Tribulation.

In these things let us imitate and follow the Example of this holy man, who I
question not is gone to the Assembly of the first born; to that glorious
Company of Prophets, who having finished their work on Earth, are wearing their
Crowns in Heaven.

6. When Ministers are taken away, beg of God to raise up others in their
stead. When God calls any Laborers out of his Vineyard, earnestly cry to the
Lord of the Harvest, that he would thrust out more Laborers into it.

That there may be a succession of Ministers, who may rightly divide the Word,
and faithfully break the Bread of Life to you, and to your Posterity, when your
places shall know you no more.

Thirdly, By way of Consolation to the Saints.

First, With respect to their own Death. It may be you are ready to go all your
lifetime in Bondage for fear of Death, the thoughts of your Dissolution are
troublesome to you; but consider that you go the same way that the most Eminent
Servants of God, who have been, and are in the highest Place and Office in the
Church, either have gone, or must go: You are going to the Glorious Society of
God's Prophets, who are made Perfect in Holiness and in Happiness. Death will
Translate you from the Militant Church upon Earth, to the Church Triumphant in
Heaven.

Secondly, With respect to the Death of your Ministers. It is an Affliction,
but yet it admits of Consolation; and that upon these three following Accounts.

First, Tho it be your Loss, yet it is their gain. For me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain, says great Minister of the Uncircumcision, 1 Phil. 21. They
are only gone to exchange mortality, for a glorious Immortality, a heavy Cross,
for a ponderous and never fading Crown, a Pulpit wherein they Labored for
Christ; for a Triumphant Throne whereon they shall Eternally Reign with him
Could they who are Rejoicing above, speak to you who are Mourning below, they
would say to you, as our Lord did unto the Women who followed him to the Cross,
Luke 23.28. Weep not for me, but for your selves. Weep not for us, who are come
to our Journeys end, but weep for your selves, who are still Traveling through a
waft and howling Wilderness. Weep not for us who rest from our Labors; but
weep for your selves, who are still Laboring and Toyling. Weep not for us who
are safely Arrived at the Haven of Rest, and the Port of Blessedness; but weep
for your selves, who are tossed to and fro upon a Tempestuous Sea. Weep not for
us, who stand upon a Mount of Triumph, and have obtained a Complete Victory
over All Our Enemies; but weep for your selves, who are still in a Field of
War, Wrestling not only with Flesh and Blood, but with Principalities and
Powers.

Secondly, God can supply their Places, and make up your Loss, by Raising up
others.

When Moses Dyed, the Lord sent Joshuah to Lead Israel into the Land of Canaan.
Is Elijah gone to Heaven? The Residue of the Spirit is with God; and he can
cause a Double Portion of it to rest upon Elisha.

When God has Work to do, he will never want Instruments: He can perfect
Praise out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings; and make even a persecuting
Saul to become a preaching Paul.

Thirdly, E're long you shall meet them never more to be separated from them.
'Twill be but a few Days e're you shall enjoy their Society, in a more Glorious
Place than this.

Oh! What Greetings will there be between you and your Faithful Ministers, when
you are entered into the Joy of your Lord! Then shall you who Worshipped God
together with them, upon Earth, Join with them in a Triumphant Song of Praise,
to him that sits upon the Throne and to the Lamb for evermore, in Heaven. Ye
shall then see the Great Prophet, our Lord Jesus Christ, sitting upon a
Majestic Throne, and all the other Prophets, like so many bright Stars,
compassing about this Son of Righteousness for ever and ever.

AN HYMN Composed and sung on the same Occasion.
ALL Adam's Children once must die,
Deaths fatal stroke will sever
Their bodies from their souls surely;
Prophets don't live for ever.
These bright illustrious Stars must fall
into a bed of dust.
God will his Messengers re-call,
tho Prophets die they must.
Then shall they enter into Rest
who here have labored hard.
They must die, that they way be blessed
with a prophets reward.
Our sins do often times God provoke,
to take these Lights away.
When prophets do fall by deaths stroke,
expect a gloomy day.
Oh Lord! us unto Canaan bring,
that with thy prophets we
May Joyful hallelujahs sing
unto Eternity.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9, line 12, dele and, p. 33, l. 21, r. the, p. 40, l. 13. f. stopped, r.
stop, l. 15, f. slights, r. slight.

Several small mistakes the reader is desired to correct with his Pen.


