A Farewell to Popery: IN A LETTER TO Dr. NICHOLAS, VICE CHANCELLOR of OXFORD,
and WARDEN of NEW-COLLEGE, from W.H. M.D. lately Fellow of the same College.

SHOWING, The true Motives that withdrew him to the Romish Religion, and the
reasons of his Return to the Church of England: Concluding with some short
Reflections concerning the Great Duty of Charity.

Licensed, Jan. the 15th. 1679.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Church-yeard, 1679.

A FAREWELL to POPERY, IN A Letter to Dr. Nicholas, Vice Chancellor of Oxford,
and Warden of New-College, from W.H. M.D. lately Fellow of the same College,
etc.
SIR,
THOUGH I was not so happy to live under your Government, and thereby take so
near a prospect of your Merit as my Fellow Collegiates have often told me they
do; yet some of your worthy acts tending to the good of our University, and
best establishment of Learning and Virtue together, have raised you Admirers,
even where you may least imagine: And if I should here take occasion, or
presume to speak of the Piety of your Life, the Solidness, of your Judgment,
the Gravity of your Person, or your Prudent Conduct in all particulars of your
Government, I must quite lay aside my intended design, and write a Volum on
purpose.

Therefore only Congratulating the discreet choice of your University and
College, in a Person so fitted for the government of both, and desiring your
favorable construction of what I write, shall endeavor to make them both some
amends for the scandal I may perhaps have occasioned by my indiscreet conduct
in matters of Religion: Such as give a public Scandal should do a public
Penance; and I Am contented to undergo it, as I am sure I must, in the Malicious
censures of Roman Catholics; for it is very well worth the while to endure
that, and much more for the discharge of a good Conscience, which is all I
chiefly aim at in this matter, though indeed 'twill be a confortable addition
too, that I shall be fully restored to the good Opinion of those, among whom I
was first and best Principled.

Nor can I at all doubt this last good effect, if I either consider the real
Innocence of my actions, relating to Religion, or the goodness and well-wishes
that I have been often told my Fellow-Collegiates have all along expressed
toward me.

My own Innocence will, I hope, sufficiently appear by giving the world a clear
and true account of the first motives of my favoring the Popish way, my
behavior since I espoused their Cause, and what reasons have induced my
judgment to fix again upon the old foundation: This I shall do with much
sincerity and candor, and shall speak the utmost truth according to the best of
my memory, and the faithfulest information my own Conscience can give me.

'Twill seem very strange that too much Charity and Submission should happen to
drive a man headlong into the most Uncharitable and Proudest Church in the
World; and yet so it was with me. You know, Sir, that our College has had the
fortune to retain greater and more lively Memorials of Popery in Statues and
Pictures on the Gates, and in the Chapel, than any other throughout the
University. Those sights did often put me in mind of that Religion, and finding
the best Divines of the Church of England unanimously agree that those
Superstitions with many others, had prevailed over the World at least a
thousand years before the Reformation, it struck my heart with a great deal of
Compassion, and made me often wish that Roman Catholics were in the right, and
we in the wrong, that the more People might thereby be saved. This Charitable
consideration did by degrees work further and further; but before ever I saw
any one of that Persuasion, or read any one of their Books, I did long to be
Convinced that they were in the right way, for the sake and general good of
Mankind: So that by mere chance lighting upon a Popish Book in one of our
Chambers, I opened it with all the have and greediness in the world, and read
it with as much joy as if I had found a Treasure beyond value. I was impatient
to be drawn from the Book, either by Prayers, Meals, Visits, or any other
accident: It overjoyed me to find that they had some Arguments on their side;
and by that time I had got half way in the Book, I turned a Zealous Champion
for them, took their part vigorously wheresoever I chanced on, or could make an
occasion; and from that time was perfectly deaf to any thing that could be said
against them, by the best wit of judgment that either College or University
could oppose me with in private Conversation. Now that which amazes me
sometimes, is, that I could possibly have such a tendency of spirit, so strong
an impulse on my affections, notwithstanding that I had not one Relation in the
World, not one Friend or Acquaintance of that Persuasion I so strangely
affected. And considering how innocently I was deluded, upon no worse Motive
than too much Charity, I can promise my self the easier Reconcilement to all
such as have been scandalized at me upon the account of Religion.

And as Charity had this influence upon me, so I hope I can in some sincerity
say that a little Humility incident to my natural temper, made me think it Duty
and Conscience to follow the guidance of those God had placed over us in
matters of Religion: And for that reason was ever very Zealous for the
Authority of the Church of England, so far that I thought any little breach of
the Canons and Constitutions to be a kind of Sacrilege. This temper made me the
fitter to be workt upon by a Romish Book, called the The Guide in
Controversies, especially the 5th, part being a Vindication of the Council of
Trent. About this time I happened to receive much encouragement to proceed in
leaving my College, for sake of the Religion I was so wholly bent on, from the
Discourses and Example of Mr. R. of Magdalen College, a most ingenious and
honest Man, whom I can never but have a particular respect for, because I know
he liad no manner of temporal motive to quit his All, besides the preservation
of a good Conscience. He meant well, I really think, both to me, and in what
else he gave offense; therefore I shall never tax him unkindly for what he
meant honestly, but wish him heartily well, though I imagine him to be gone
beyond all reach of hopes of any return to the Church he was born in.

Whatever was the matter, it is very true that I was wound up to so high a Zeal
in those days, that if I can now guess at, or remember the Constitution then of
my mind, I could have chosen to have begged my Bread, or undergone any manner of
Afflictions in that Persuasion, rather than to have enjoyed the greatest plenty
imaginable (the Empire of the World, I did not forbear frequently to say)
continuing a Protestant.

And this Zeal made me extraordinary desirous of Traveling abroad, that I
might the betten see the Church in its Glory, as well as in its truer colors.
France was the place I soon fixed in, and I am very glad I did so, because I
conceive the Gallican Church; to be the best Trincipled in Government, etc the
most moderate of any that are Roman Catholic. Jansenius an exemplary good Man,
has there a great many followers, who stoutly maintain the cause of Virtue and
good Life, against the powerful contrivances of the Jesuits and their Faction.
As for the speculative points in difference between those that are called
Jansenists and the Jesuits, I never concerned my self about them; only I
observed the Jansenists to be Men heartily disposed to reform peoples lives to
the ancient discipline of the Church, and who thought nothing too much to work
a real Conversion of the soul to God in a virtuous good life; whereas I ever
conceived the Jesuits to be the most subtle, sly, undermining Generation that
ever I saw. I don't know what is the matter, but whenever I saw of Jesuit,
me-thought I perceived another sort of Mankind different from the rest; they
had a more Intriguing Countenance than others; whether it were their Habit that
conduced to work in me this opinion, or what it was, I cannot imagine; but so it
was, that I often expressed my self to that purpose, even among R. Catholics.

In those years I spent at Paris, I must confess I had no scruples in Religion,
but went on and did as my Neighbors did, in those matters, wholly bending my
mind to Improvement in Physic, with all the industry and application I was
capable.

The Roman Religion has the greatest Charm, of any thing in Nature; 'twill soon
cause a more than Stoical insensibility upon the Conscience; and though it were
never so squeamish, troublesome, or scrupulous before, 'twill now turn proof
against all future doubts, and never suspect it self in the least, let things
be in themselves never so Ridiculous or Unreasonable. This I have nearly
observed, both in my self and others, and there is very good reason for it: For
when men have wholly shut the eyes of their understanding, and leave themselves
to be conducted by others they repose an absolute Confidence in, they go on
boldly and blindly, and consider no further whether they are in the r^ght or
wrong way to Heaven. And again, if we consider the propensity of Man's Nature to
impose upon others, when they have an absolute indisputable Power, we may
fairly presume that these Uncontrollable Guides will be apt to lead where their
own Interest draws them. And indeed the Roman Church has always had so constant
diligent an Eye upon their own beloved secular Interest, that they have made
the whole Christian Religion, in every particular almost, as subservient as the
Wit of Man can invent, to this great End, their Diana above all others. Now we
should certainly suspect the judgment and advice of any private Person in the
management of an affair, if we perceived this temper to prevail; and why may we
not with the same reason suspect it in so great, though public a concern? May
not a knot of People of the same Gang, the same Interest and Measures, met in
in a General Council, have the same Consideration for their own advantage, as
we always observe in lesser Communities or Societies? If every Member of these
larger Assemblies were of this or that Opinion before they met, that is to say,
of such as dear Interest guided them, we can expect no more from their
conferring Notes together, but a Confirmation of what they held, were resolved
to hold before.

Now de facto that the Church of Rome has notoriously steered their
determinations in Councils according to this Principle, may be seen with half
an eye by any Intelligent person, who shall either weigh the Controversies in
debate between them and Protestants, or consider the History and Passages of
former times. Man's Infallibility was very ingeniously contrived to supersede
all such disquisitions, but God be thanked, no Barbarous Inquisition does here
hinder us from a free exercise of our Reason, nor stupid voluntary blindness
disenable us from discerning Light from Darkness.

If it may be good Logic to make an Induction of a general Temper from that of
Particulars; our English Priests will serve to give us a very good instance of
their worldly Inclinations. I have heard one of themselves (one of the best
Priests, and best Men, I had the fortune to meet among them, and no less than
Dr. of Divinity) seriously tell me he had frequently observed, that he never in
all his life knew a Religious Man, who was once become a Missioner hither, and
had here exchanged his Religious into a Secular Life, but he fell so much in
love with it, that he thought it Death and Misery to return again to his
Monastery. 'Twas my fortune to Dine with one good Father Jesuit, the day
before he was bound for St. Omers, by Command of his Superiors; and poor Man,
it pitied me to see him look so ghastly, as if he wanted a Physician both for
Soul and Body; the World, the Flesh, etc. it seems, had got too great a
dominion over his Spiritual Intentions that he had, when he made his Rash Vows.
I have known some of them as Critical in their Crevat-string and Perimigg, and
examine themselves by the Glass with as much care, as a Fop that is lately
arrived from France, who is grown so vain by his Travels, as to think all the
Ladies in love with him. Particularly one Man I cannot but take notice of; he is
no less than an English Dr. of the Sorbon; he was a very hopeful ingenious Man
while he lived in his Monastery at Paris, but being lately sent to breath fresh
secular air, I met him several times in the Streets, and other places, and he
was so great an Admirer of his Sword and Periwigg, and turned so true a Sr.
Fopling, that I could hardly know him again; a stranger Metamorphosis is seldom
found in Ovid. Now when such people as these (so Spiritually disposed!) are
summoned to meet in a general Council, there is mighty hopes of an Accommodation
and Christian management in Doctrins which relate to temporal interest.

And now I am speaking concerning 'em, I shall venture to give you my opinion
as to their Learning and Capacity: I did expect indeed to have met with Men as
Universally Learned as they would fancy themselves Catholic; but really they
seem to me to be generally a very illiterate and weak people. Illiterate, I
mean, as to any true solid Learning, the knowledge of History, Mathematics, or
Nature. So ignorant they are in those substantical knowledges, that I seldom
met with any one of 'em who so much as pretended to things of that nature. But
we must except the Jesuits, whose general Learning, and most politic Arts have
renderd them more considerable to the Sea of Rome, and formidable to Princes
and great Families, than all other Orders put together. They know how to be
usesful in other things besides hearing Confessions; nor do they value
themselves mainly for skill in chopping of Logic, as other little Priests will
do. But one thing I can never forgive any of them, and that is their fond
Opinion of their own way of Education, in so much that they cannot be persuaded
that a truly learned Man can come out of our Universities, though at this day
there is not a Man among 'em but one, that has writ sense in defense of their
Religion, besides such as they have had from us. The Author of the Guide in
Cantroversies is no doubt an Oxonian, and so was good Mr. Cressy, whom though
dead, I shall ever honor; Dr. Godden and Mr. Sergeant were of Cambridge: And
who else have they now to brag of, besides Canes the Jesuit, who is able to
talk and write Coherently and Sophistically of any side.

But it is time to take my leave of them, and go on with my first intention. The
first Book that Alarmed me out of the Lethargy I lived in, was put forth by
Dr. Stillingfleet, called The Jesuits Loialty, which pulled off the Vizard
they generally wore. The R. Catholic Gentlemen did always profess as much as I
could hear, good Principles of Loyalty, and would often venture to maintain
full as much as is contained in the Oath of Allegiance. And this made several
Heads of the Jesuitical Society fall to work with their Pen, to hinder the
effects, as much as they were able, of such prevailing Principles For you may
be assured the good Fathers, who writ those discourses, as well as the rest of
their Tribe, make little or no distinction between those that are called
Heretics, and those that are not truly Jesuitical: They think, or would
persuade us, that the Temporal Interest of Rome, and their Party is of as much
concern to men's Salvation, as the Doctrinal part of Christianity. For my part,
my nature ever abhorred the dismal Consequences that must ensue from the Pope,
or Church-mens invasion of Temporal Power. Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods, is very good Scripture, and
plain sense, let the Jesuits comment as they please. The Priest does well in
the Church, and executes an Office that deserves Reverence from all who pretend
to honor God; but in the politic Capacity, or at the temporal Tribunal, Gods
grace is apt to leave him, and he becomes the most unmerciful Man that can be
approached. This is too too evident in the Conduct of the Bishop of Rome, his
Legates, or other Court Officers, who have certainly done the Life of
Christianity more harm by their Tyranny, than can be made amends by all the
benefits of Unity, or other pretended consideration why they ought to execute
such Power.

Is it possible to imagine that Christianity, which was taught with such
plainess and simplicity at first, by plain, harmless, illiterate, innocent Men,
should now necessarily want all the art and intrigue, all the cunning devices
and politic impostures that the most subtle Learning and working brains of Men
is able to invent! Was Learning and Policy in the Apostles time so
insignificant and useless to the propagation of Religion; and must they now be
the only prop for its Continuance? Certainly we may suspect the Primitive
spirit of Religion to be much changed, when such contrary methods are now
practiced. And this reflection has made me much undervalue all the pains of the
Schoolmen, and sometimes think that Seneca and Cicero will be found to deserve
better in the other world than they, when the works of all Men shall come to be
tried. Virtue and good Life will have a different luster from that of
Amusements and Speculations, and the practical Commandments of God will far
out-dazle all the false lights of little Questions and Disputations. Much
Knowledge will then serve only to enhance the guilt of our neglects to God, and
we shall wish much rather to have been Doers than Inquirers of his Will. Alas
what general Defections from Virtue must the world expect, and how great ones
must it needs feel, when the greatest part of Church men, who teach us Christ,
are much more concerned to advance their own Grandeur and Luxury, than the real
good of souls, when they altogether study this world instead of the other.

But here I would not be understood to condemn humane Learning; if we will but
join the seeming foolishness, the simplicity of the Gospel to our
Book-acquisitions, we shall do no harm to either: Learning will then serve to
convince us the better of our own Ignorance in most things, and not puff us up
with empty swelling conceits, and we shall not despise our Fellow Creatures,
because better acquainted with Notions and Languages.

This Digression I hope may be excusable, if rightly understood even by
Scholars as well as others, and I shall now return to my former subject, the
exorbitant power that Popes have gotten into their hands by their subtle
Policies, and the assistence of sawning Parasites; whether it is consistant
with our Blessed Saviors Declaration, that his Kingdom is not of this World,
may easily be judged. But I have often admired how Emperors and Monarchs came
first to part with their Birthright, and bow their Scepters down before an
Ambitious Prelate. I conceive they might have been wrought upon, some through
Zeal and Weakness, and others through Fear and Terror. The Pope had every where
his cunning spies in the Courts of Princes, his Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, to
acquaint him with his best advantages, and direct him where he might make the
most prosperous Invasions, and easiest Accesses to Princely Power.

The Doctrine of Deposing Kings, and Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance,
for Heresy, or any thing else, it matters not much; for they will call Heresy
what they please, as they do call Heretics whom they please; this Doctrine I
say, is equally senseless as prodigious. 'Twill appear sufficiently Senseless
and Irrational, if Men will but consider that they are Christians as well as
Papists, and are obliged to follow Christ as well as the Pope. Our Savior gave
us the most perfect example that Christians can pretend to imitate. How did he
earnestly avoid all Temporal Power, that his Disciples would even then by their
good will have been nibling at? What pains did he take to Spiritualize their
Conceptions? The Jews did expect indeed the Messias's Kingdom to be of this
World, and that he would govern in pomp and greatness; but how we should come
to think so of him or his followers, I cannot possibly understand; we who own to
believe that he was born in a Stable, a poor Carpenters Son, that had seldom
stock enough by him to provide for the morrow. When God was pleased to humble
himself in this manner, and after suffering all the Indignities this world was
able to bestow, did choose to conclude his most Innocent Life with the
Ignominious Death upon the Cross; can we think he designed that any under
pretense of being his Vicar, should presently hoise above all that is called
God, and enlarge their Scepter from Rome to the uttermost parts of the world?

How Prodigious this Doctrine must have been too in its effects? How it has
made Christian Princes and the World to tremble, our Nation is now grown
sufficiently sensible from the frequent Tragedies that have been acted, or
designed to be acted upon our own Theater without enumerating the many Foreign
instances which might be produced.

That the Pope and Church of Rome have proudly arrogated such intolerable Power
over all Princes that come within their reach, all such as desire, or are
capable of being satisfied concerning it, may have recourse to a Letter writ
lately on the discovery of this Plot, wherein this subject is most solidly and
fully, as well as briefly handled by a most excellent Pen; they may also
consider those three Treatises formerly mentioned, called The Jesuits Loyalty.
And yet notwithstanding that this charge is as evident as the Sun, it is
pleasant, shall I say, or wonderful to consider, that many good well-meaning
Popish Women, as well as deaf and blind Gentlemen, will not yet be persuaded
that the Church is guilty of any such Doctrine; no, seeing it, they will not
see, and knowing it, they will not understand. The Infallible Guide must not,
cannot be suspected of doing any harm; and the Director of the Conscience shall
presently settle any such scruple with a little of his Art, either by flatly
denying it, or softning it, or turning the charge into Ridicule.

And from this Consideration I shall take occasion to urge one most invincible
Argument, or Demonstration rather, against the Pretended Infallibility of the
Romish Church. It Is this:

That Church which teaches Doctrines that destroy Morality, may be fairly
suspected, (nay, necessarily concluded) to teach Errors in matters of Faith.

But the Church of Rome has taught Doctrines that destroy Morality.

Therefore it may be concluded to teach Errors in matters of Faith.

The Major has as much evidence as Reason can possibly desire. For supposing
any Man, or Men, guilty of notorious Vices, and exhorting us to the same Vices,
can the reason of a Christian think such a Man, or Men infallible in their
Councils in a small affair, so as to repose absolute Confidence in him, or
them, much less in the greatest concern of this life, the eternal concern of
Heaven? especially if we consider that Christian Religion all along the Gospel,
and the rest of the holy Scriptures, does advance Morality, and put the
greatest esteem upon it, of any Religion in the World. Besides the Doctrines of
Self-denial therein urged further than any Philosophers ever thought fit; it
teaches us to love our Neighbors as our selves, to live Peaceably with all
men, to forgive and do good to our very Enemies, and recommends Love and
Charity so often, and so earnestly, as if the rest of Religion, Faith in
Christ, etc. were things that needed not being exhorted to, they would so
necessarily follow by the secret workings of Gods grace, where so Loving and
Good a Disposition takes place in the heart.

Now the Minor Proposition, that the Church of Rome has taught Doctrines which
destroy Morality, will easily enough appear, if the arrogant allowance of a
Proud Prelate to dispose of Kingdoms that don't belong to him, to Prosecute
with Fire and Sword all such poor innocent Souls as refuse to submit their
necks to his heavy yoke, to Murder and Assassinate such Kings or Persons as
resist his dreadful Invasions, which he calls Spiritual, though diametrically
opposite to the spirit of the Gospel, the spirit of Meekness and Charity, the
spirit of Long-suffering and Peace: In a word, if the allowance of doing Evil
that Good may come of it, doing any thing cruel or barbarous for the promotion
of Religion, be Doctrines that destroy Morality, as most certainly they are;
nay, and if those Co^neils which did immediately, and that often, soon follow
the perpetration of such Villainies, were so far from detesting the facts, that
they rather confirmed and encouraged the Pope in them, at least never muttered
(good Men!) at what his Holiness had done; then the Assumption of this Argument
holds good.

Now as for the Promises in Scripture, which the Church of Rome proudly applies
to it self for its Infallibility, as concerning God's being with his Church to
the end of the world, etc. I can see no reason why that Church should think it
belongs to them more than others. It is because that Church has escaped those
Devastations and Judgments which the others have so severly felt? They have the
greater reason to suspect themselves for that; for God's People, the
Israelites, did always fall from the true Worship of the Lord, and bowed down
to the false Gods of the Gentiles, when they flourished most in Prosperity, and
God was pleased to think that nothing would reclaim 'em but fearful Jugdments,
such as Plagues, War, Famine, and sometimes Captivities for many years: And
still upon their return to him, he delivered them out of all their Afflictions.
But there and sufficient natural reasons why Italy has less felt the Sword and
Power of Foreign Enemies than the other Churches. Its Situation defends them
from Enemies aboard; they have the Ocean on one side, the Alps on another, and
Friends to sustain the brunt on all parts, by Land: And besides, the same
reason will plead better for Mahomets Successors, as every Age growing more and
more Victorious, whereas the Empire of the Prelate of Rome has considerably
decreased.

Again, That Promise beforementioned was not made to St. Peter alone, but to
all the Apostles, so that the other Bishops of Apostolical Sees should have
derived the same Infallible spirit to their Successors, as the Bishop of Rome
insolently claims to him and his Church.

But that other Promise, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church, makes the Romanists scorn the rest of the World, and look upon
themselves as the only Chosen of God. St. Peter certainly was a great Apostle,
Converted many Countries, and had the honor to be named first in the Catalogue
of the Apostles, and so had Priority of Order, though in another place he is
not numbered for the first, Gal. 2.9. But surely if this great Apostle had had a
Superior jurisdiction over the rest, St. Paul would have been more modest than
to have so severely Rebuked him to his Face, as he did, Gal. 2.11. for a shrewd
miscarriage in his charge, making the Christian Gentiles to Judaize. And St.
Paul was so far from encroaching on the Power of St. Peter, that he thought
himself unworthy of the great Name of an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.9. was so Good,
that he could have been contented to have been an Anatheina, or Accursed for
ever, for the sake and happiness of his Brethren the Jews, Romans 9.3. Besides,
St. Peter was more likely to have chosen Antioch for the Seat of his
Successors, as being the place where he lived most part of his Life, and
exercised his Episcopal Charge with honor, benefit, and safety, rather than
Rome, where it is certain he could be but a little while, and many with good
reason doubt whether ever he was there or no; where likewise he was so far from
being welcome, that it is said he was there very unkindly received, and after
much opposition, Crucified most cruelly.

He that will needs have a Church to be Infallible, I would desire him to
consider the condition of the Israelites, the Chosen People of God, who were
brought out of Egypt with such a mighty Hand, so great an attendanee of
Miracles and Favors. One would think certainly, if it were in the Nature of
Man not to go astray, if any were capable of Worshipping the True God as they
should do, these should have been the Men above all others. And yet, though
they had a Cloud by day, and a Pillar of Fire by night to guide them all along;
though the Glory of God did often fill the Tabernacle in the sight of them all;
nay, though they were fed with Miracles, Manna and Quails, and Fountains ran
out of dry Rocks, yet these same People would be continually falling from their
Duty, they would be longing after Egypt, nay and making Gods to go before
them; they were not only guilty of the highest Immoralities, and Murmurings at
their good God upon every trivial account, but were contented absolutely to
forsake him, and fall into gross Idolatry. If after all this, so sad a
manifestation of the proneness of poor Mankind to Sin and Error, Infallibility
can still glibly go down to a considering Man, I shall more wonder at him, than
have any thing to say to him.

Nay, if Men can be supposed to have so clear and undoubted understanding in
Spiritual Truths, how comes it to pass that all Natural things lie so his and
intricate to the conceptions of the wisest Men. A little Knowledge indeed will
puff up, and be apt to persuade People that they know a great deal, but a
significant Progress will have a contrary effect, and make them humbly
acknowledge they know very little, if any thing at all. The nature of light and
colors, the plainest things of any, remain so obscure and unintelligible, that
they still occasion new Hypotheses, and perhaps will do so to the end of the
World.

To speak one word with Submission to my own Faculty; What certain infallible
Methods has Physic yet attained to? it is much to be doubted whether Beasts by
the Instinct of Nature (so much undervalued by our Opiniative Reason) do not
Cure themselves of most distempers much sooner and safer than fanciful Men can
yet do with all their Art and so much glorified Reason. Besides the Cure of
Agues, brought now to a kind of absolute certainty by some rightly Educated
real Physicians, to my certain knowledge, as well, if not better than by the
much Celebrated, though Illegitimate Son of this Art, what truly specifical
Cures can Physicians yet boast of? The cause of this slow advancement, I take
to be, that Men will impute the failures of their Remedies and Methods, rather
to Nature than their own Conduct. Let never so many men dye unhappily of such
or such a distemper, long-practising Physicians will never suspect themselves,
but think all was done by them as well as it might have been done. whereas, if
they took their Indications from what does sensible good or ill, and from
judicious observations did all their might to correct the failures of their
Practice, and would but once impute these failures to their own ignorance, and
want of sufficient skill, there seems to me to be hopes God would then bless
their endeavors for the Body, as he does humble Divines on behalf of the Soul.
The gift of Healing was once the gift of God, as all good things most certainly
are still; and if Men would sometimes look up to the Fountain of all Goodness,
as as well as into Books, we might then expect to find Learned Ingenious
Physicians do as much, if not more than mean ignorant People, and weak Women
are often found to do.

But there are, God be thanked, some Physicians among us, who have pleased to
be of this Christian Opinion, and do work no few real Cures in the most
dangerous Distempers by mild and innocent ways, such as will at last be
acknowledged most agreeable to Nature, when truth and moderation shall have
against the Victory over Envy and Passion.

One word more, and I pass from this subject. The Fathers of the 4th. General
Council had no such deference then for the Bishop of Rome, as he now claims for
his inherent right. They did give the Bishop of Rome, Can. 28. Aequalia
Privilegia, equal, or the very same privileges as they did to the Bishop of
Constantinople. Their reason they said was, Quod ^rbs illa imperare^, because
that was the Imperial Seat; the Empire was then divided, and Old Rome was the
Seat of the Western Empire, as New Rome, or Constantinople was the Imperial
Seat of the East. It was not for any derivation from St. Peter, but in honor
of the Emperor, that they were pleased to allow him equal privileges. And this
they did not lightly, irregularly, or Uncanonically, but jure, they said they
did it justly, what they ought to do, and no more. Then again, the Legates of
the Roman Bishop had no Authority allowed them to speak any thing in the
Council, no more than the rest, without leave first granted them from the
Emperors Officers, who sat there in his place and stead. The Legates of Pope
Leo spoke to him thus, Si Imperat Magnificentia vestra, habemus quoedam refer
vobis. Gloriosissimi judices dixerunt, Quod vultis edicite. If your Highness
will give us leave, commands us to speak, we have something to say to you. The
most noble Judges, answered, Speak what you please. Now whether the World is
not strangely changed since those Primitive days, whether the Popes Supremacy
over Emperors, Kings, and that very Bishop of Constantinople be right and just,
and whether his calling all Schismatics, If not Heretics, that will not own
his Universal-spreading Supremacy, ought to frighten and scare people, I leave
you and all Men calmly to judge.

And now to return again to the more immediate design of this Letter, which is
not intended to be an angry Child of Controversy, but mildly and truly to give
an Historical account for my self, and some of my own thoughts, which shook and
chilled my Roman Zeal a good considerable time before the late Hellish devices
made every innocent soul to tremble.

The first was a strange and proposterous influence that Religion has on all
its Proselytes, wholly to neglect, if not slight the holy Scriptures. Let a Man
have used himself never so much to the reading that Holy Book, and let him have
received never so much sensible edification from it, yet as soon as ever he
embraces that Religion, he presently throws the Book out of his hands, easily
parts with it as a thing altogether useless to any body that will but receive
it, and entirely delivers himself up to the conduct of humane Traditions. No
future Curiosity shall draw him to read in it, nor Arguments taken from it,
make the least significant impression. Now it is a most wonderful consideration
to me, how those who profess the Doctrine of the Gospel, and think the
Scriptures Penned by the Spirit of God, should presently lose all deference to
Gods Word, and mind it as little as some idle tale.

The Fathers of the Church were of a very different temper. St. Chrysostom
Homil. 9. in Epist. ad Coloss. speaks thus, Audite omnes saeculares, comparate
vobis Biblia, si nihil aliud vultis, vel Novum Testamentum acquirite,
Apostolorum Acta, Evangelia, etc. Hearken to me all you of the Laity, provide
your selves Bibles every one of you, and if you cannot reach to procure the
whole Bible, get the New Testament at least, the Acts of the Apostles, the
Evangelists, etc. for we must remember that such large Manuscripts as were the
whole Bible, were too dear to be purchased by every body, before Printing was
found out. There are abundance of Exhortations in St. Chrysostom to the same
purpose, which Bellarmine, as great a wit as he was, gives but a very poor
Childish answer to.

Another thing made me seriously reflect, and that was the fruitless Devotions
that are generally practiced in that Church. Men shall instead of Praying,
spend their time in tossing a string of Beads, and mumbling they consider not
what, a Devotion fitter for Children to sport with, than Men to Pray with.
'Twas a most excellent contrivance to make People think they were saying their
Prayers, when as they were doing nothing; for the Beads are of such singular
use, that you may gape and stare about as much as you please, while you say
'em; you may talk between whiles, walk about the Streets, think on what you
will, and mind what you will, and still go on with your tale of Prayers: And
yet notwithstanding the impertinency of these Knick-knacks, they are celebrated
by the Church, as a most extraordinary Devotion. When the Rosary is to be said,
that is, these Beads told over in the Church, you must kneel down, or else be
accounted a Heretic: For you must understand the Services of our Lady, as
this, our Ladies Litany, and the Salve Regina, require much more Reverence, and
more necessary Obeisance than any Services of our Lord God. At Prayers to our
Lord, you may either sit, stand, or be as careless as you please, but at
Prayers to our Lady, you must learn better manners, and fall on your Knees,
though it is never so painful to you to kneel. Blessed Soul! she does not
require these things at our hands; she was humble and meek when she was upon
Earth, and is not to be doubted of the same temper now in Heaven. God was then
her Savior as well as ours, but now she must be Immaculate and free from
Original sin, and be supposed to have had no need at all of the Savior her
good spirit did then rejoice in. But it is natural to Men to flatter Ladies, and
some must be excused if they do Romance on their account. Hence it was she came
to be Queen of Heaven, Queen of Angels and all Saints, the hope and refuge of
Sinners, etc. and is represented with Crowns and Glory, whereas her Son must
never be suffered to grow bigger than a Baby in her arms, to show his filial
subjection to her, though the Scripture mentions not any thing that our Savior
said to her, or of her in his whole lifetime, without something as it were on
purpose to restrain Men from that Superstition which does now so prevail in the
Roman Church.

Again, to enervate quite the very design of true Devotion, they have found
another way to amuse people with, by instructing them to say their Prayers in
Latin, which they don't understand. Women forsooth shall venture to say our
Ladys Office in Latin; one would think it were on purpose that their Prayers
might not be a whit beneficial to their Souls, but they say it is in Reverence
to the Church, which does all in Latin, which Baptizes, nay Marries in Latin,
and plights those Sacred Ties between ignorant people with a Volo, promising
they know not what or how. And is it not a wise business, that because the
Priest sings his Part in Latin, every ignorant Sot must needs be chirping the
same tune, in the same (unknown) language? This puts me in mind of a story in
my own knowledge: A certain Gentlewoman goes to Confession to Somerset House,
there eases her mind in a great many matters to the Friar that understood
English Confessions; when she had done her story, the good Father sets her for
her Penance to say our Ladies Office in Latin every day for a year together; a
very severe task indeed, 'twould have been even for a Nun that had little else
to do. A Priest of my acquaintance, from whose own mouth I had this Relation,
gives this Lady a Visit the next day by chance, and finds her full of tears and
trouble: He enquires into the Cause (for they love dearly to know the Secrets
of Families, and to be a meddling where they can) and after a few reluctancies
were conquered, she discovered to him her grief, that she had such a Penance
set her as 'twas impossible for her to perform, for she was not Learned enough
to understand a word of Latin. He presently Counseled her to make the same
Confession to him, and she should have no such reason to be troubled (for if a
Person dislike his Penance, he may lawfully have a new one set him, if he will
make the same Confession again to another Priest). She (good Lady) was very
loath to do that, for it seems 'twas no small matter she had confessed, and was
therefore unwilling to uncover her sores again. Upon that, he takes his leave,
and she blubbered it out that night; but the next morning upon second thoughts
grew wiser, and came to him with tears and courage together: She then fell upon
her Knees, and out came the grievous things she had committed, and this
Indulgent Priest was so favorable as to order her only to say the Penitential
Psalms once over in English, and the Lady became as merry as a Cricket again.

Hence you see what a mighty stress lies upon Prayers in Latin, in the opinion
of those senseless Men, who never saw any thing of the World out of a
Monastery, and what wise Statesmen they are like to prove, when they meddle
with public affairs. This other was a secular Priest, a Man of a good capacity
and judgment, and I have seldom met with a more understanding Man of his Coat.

A few years ago there was Printed an excellent Book of Devotion, called
Devotion by way of Offices; a Book so full of the Divine Spirit, solid sense,
and good English, that I can hardly remember to have seen the like, unless it
be the (...) of our late Incomparable Sovereign. 'Twas a work so free from
exception, that paring a way the Ave Mary, a Hymn to our Lady at the conclusion
of the Office, and very little or nothing more, it might serve as well for the
use of Protestants as Papists. 'Twas writ by a Lay-Gentleman, a man of a most
exemplary life, and so ingenious, that all who knew him, or heard of him, or
had any inward respect for true Learning or Virtue, coveted his acquaintance so
far, that they made his House the Center of all their meetings. And yet the
Jesuits will not bestow one kind word on this Man, or Book. The Gentleman they
condemn for a Blackloist, that is as they will have it, a worse Heretic than a
Protestant, though he declared himself with never so much submission to the
Catholic Church. The Book they dissuade all People from using, for no manner
of reason, but because it is not stufft with those Litanies, and Prayers to
Saints the Manual abounds with, or that it will do their souls too much real
good, or because it was written by a Layman no ways Jesuited.

There Is one thing more I cannot but observe. And that is, that all the Convents
of Nuns, let them be never so Ignorant, must be forced to say and sing the
Office of the Church in Latin, for Morning and Evening Prayers, and the other
Canonical hours. So it seems they separate themselves from the World to a good
purpose, and must needs make strange advancements in Devotion to God, when they
thus spend their time at Church, and in numbering long Catalogues of Ave Mary's.
It Is much, if they don't repent their first Zeal, when they have lived long
enough there to grow sober, and consider.

True Devotion consists in those means that raise the heart to the love of God
above all things, and which conduce to make us live Honestly and Charitably
with all Men, and not in a toothless Lip service, where the heart is not,
cannot be concerned.

A third thing that must touch sensibly upon the Conscience of any one that was
ever a Protestant, is the Prayers to Saints, and especially those continual
Supplications that are made in the highest manner to the Ever-blessed Virgin.
He may indeed comply a little, following the general rule of Believing as the
Church Believes, and practicing as the Church practices, but he can never force
out of his mind his dependence on God Almighty, and heartily quit his natural
refuge to God to make Applications to this or that Saint.

The Worship of Images, so flat against the 2d. Commandment, and the putting
out the 2d. Commandment so plain against the Worship of Images; the Adoration
of Relics, Agnus Dei's, and other Consecrated Bawbles will make the
Conscience of a Protestant grumble sometimes, let him do what he will, and
declare himself never so much for that Church. Concerning Relics I observed,
that when they were exposed on great days to the view of all comers, there was
a Priest to gard'em, who would take it very unkindly, if any body presumed to
kiss the Case they were kept in, without depositing some Mite into the Dish
just by. So that poor People must only look on, and devoutly admire the
Relics and the rich Case together, without profaning it with an empty, too
near an approach. And again, some Images and Altars have a much greater virtue
in 'em than others. His Holiness has bestowed most liberal Indulgences to some
above others, that is, he has favored more particularly such or such a
Monastery, and granted them a means to make Fools stocks thither more
abundantly, and confer their Charity with a freer hand to the disposal of a
pack of Covetous Insatiable Wretches.

Now it is most certain and plain that the Worship of God without an Image is
lawful beyond dispute; with an Image it is dangerous at least, to say no worse.
To Pray to the God that made us, is safe beyond scruple: Prayers to Saints may
make God Jealous of his Honor. To say such Prayers as affect the heart, cannot
but be very acceptable to him, but a dry insipid Lip-service ought much to be
suspected. To Receive the Blessed-Sacrament as our Savior did himself
Institute it, cannot but he effectual to a soul duly prepared: but the mincing
this great Sacrament, the taking it by halfs is not what he intended, if we
will follow his own example, or believe his own words. In a word, to believe
the three Creeds, the foundation of Christianity, and imitate the Primitive the
best and purest times, is very rational for a good Christian; but to take in
all the idle Superstructures that Politic, or Zealous, or Ignorant Men have
since raised, either for self ends, or through weakness, or the wilfulness of
Opiniators, gives too great a Latitude to the Enemy of Mankind, who watches
all opportunities to withdraw us from our duty.

It Is not the Title and Name of Catholic, which Roman Catholics do so
uncharitably appropriate to themselves, that should frighten us into a better
opinion of them than they deserve. I know not why an English Catholic should
not sound full as well as a Roman Catholic; but in their sense it is a mere
Solecism, as much as a Particular-general. It Is not the Name, but the Thing
that must do our business hereafter. And a most uncharitable exclusion of all
Mankind from Salvation, besides those that are Crossed with that Title on
their Foreheads, will help but little to forward our future happiness, let
Zealous fiery Priests urge it till their hearts ache. But that nobody may be
scared from doing their duty in England, upon the consideration that no
Salvation can be had out of the Roman Catholic Church, I shall here declare,
that I have often talked with some of the most judicious and knowing Priests
among them concerning this point, and they have seriously agreed with me, that
neither they nor the Church do think so Uncharitably. Paltry Priests will say
so to frighten Women, and weak persons, but they do not, cannot in their
Conscience think so, if they have but the least grain of wit.

I could add a great many other things to those already said, though for
several years I have not so much as looked into any Book of Controversy, having
had something else to do, and being persuaded that Controversy is the Mother of
far more Harm than Good, as turning Practical Religion out of doors, and
spending the true spirit of Religion in talk and noise, which rather consists
in Peace and Action. But I must remember I am writing a Letter, not a Treatise;
Do to others as you would be done unto, is a greater and more substantial part
of Christianity than we are commonly aware. And he that would take a few words
to guide his life by, let him remember now and then what S. Paul teaches him in
the 5th. Chapt. to the Galatians, where he reckons up what are the fruits of
the Flesh, and what the fruits of the Spirit. These latter he says are Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance,
against such there is no Law. What a chain of kind, soft, tender words does he
here put together, as if Goodnature were all in all, and our Religion required
no other qualification to make the best sort of Christian, And doubtless if
this be true, that Opinion which renders men Morose, Harsh, Unkind,
Uncharitable, Contentious, or Cruel, springs not from the Spirit of God, but
some evil Spirit.

But above all things Charity is the Lesson that Christians are obliged to
practice heartily; so necessary it is thought in the Holy Scriptures, that there
are infinite repetitions exhorting us to it; and so useful the Meditation of it
seems to me, that I shall venture to adjoyn some thoughts on this subject,
though it be a little besides my main intention.

Charity is almost the whole Duty of Man, and he that performs this duty as he
should do, needs little to be remembered of his duty to God. Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, is so comprehensive a Precept, and does so fully contain
all that can be said, that nothing but the Spirit of God could have sum'd up
the Law in so few words.

Charity does respect both our Opinions and our Actions. Our Opinions or
Censures ought to be governed always by it, or else they will be found to deviate
very widely from what the Apostles taught us. Judge not least you be judged,
sounds very dreadfully and severely, if we consider the narrow Principles and
uncharitable Constructions of almost every party of Mankind. How does every
Man now think it Prudence to think the worst of one another? How does every
little Hot-brain now peevishly confine Salvation to his own narrow Herd, though
a number so inconsiderable as hardly fit to be named in the large Arithmetic
of Nature? I should be glad nevertheless if they did not wish ill to, as well
as think ill of one another.

That there is no Salvation to be had out of the pale of Gods true Catholic
Church, I believe as firmly as the great Athanasius did; but in what manner
this mystery is to be understood, I as little perplex my thoughts, as how Three
can be One, how God could be Incarnate of a Virgin, or how we shall Rise again
with the same numerical Bodies, that have by long successions served to nourish
one another, or been corrupted into as many forms as there are different
species of things. I could never conceive how this Article of our Belief should
render us, uncharitable to all that are not of our own persuasion. We may as
soon expect to have a clear Idea of the Joys of Heaven, the frame of Angels, or
the Essence of our own Souls, as to know what company we shall meet with in the
other World, or who alone shall enter into inconceiveable Bliss. Let us but
take care of our own particular, and by acts of Charity and Devotion provide
suitable dispositions for a fit Reception there, and we shall be found at last
to have spent our time to much better purpose than in such needless, and
perhaps dangerous disquisitions. Men have all souls of the same immense value,
and the Providence of God is over all in general, but what allotments of Grace
he has made 'em here; or shall hereafter of Rewards and Punishments, neither
the Apostles seem to define, nor Apostolical Men since have presumed to
determine. I should sin if I ventured to speak of this subject, either as
largely as Origin once did, or as narrowly as some Divines do of a latter date;
though I am apt to think that Errors sprung from too much Charity (if I may so
say) will be found far more Innocent than those from too little.

Truly it makes my heart ache sometimes to consider how easily and willingly
people can hurl one another headlong into the Bottomless pit. Suppose but
twenty Men were here Condemned to the Rack, and appointed to suffer the most
exquisite tortures that cruel blood-thirsty Men can tell how to invent, every
day for a month together; would not the hearing on seeing such a masterpiece
of cruelty make every good Man shiver, knowing not how near his own turn might
be, if God should suffer he furious barbarous disposition of some to take
place. How much more inhumane and dreadful then is it, to precipitate one
another into that place of torment, too intolerable to be expressed, if it
consists in nothing else but confusion of face and heart, the gnawing remorses,
and continual stings of a guilty self-confounded Conscience. Methinks it
should rather trouble us that any are like to be so unhappy, than to keep out
by our goodwill all that are not of our own Opinion. Christ certainly died for
all men, and I hope we shall find his death applied to the eternal benefit of
many harmless, virtuous, invincibly ignorant People, that common
Uncharitableness will not let us have a kind thought of here. We may lawfully
think and hope the best of all Men; for though we are forbidden to say too much
for 'em, I Am sure we are not allowed to judge them too severely.

Who could imagine that those who have often read St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13. should
forget the absolute necessity of Charity, and not be touched with the greatest
concern? It Is a Sermon that is second to nothing I know extant, unless that
Preached upon the Mount; and I think it deserves to be read full as often, as
some have well conceited that Pythagora's Golden Verses do deserve; not to take
a leasure-minute now and then, but be the excellent subject of our daily
Meditations. The Charity there described, is of so absolute necessity, that
though I had the knowledge and Angels, and Wisdom of Solomon, though I had
Faith strong enough to remove Mountains, though I gave all my Goods and
Possessions to the Poor, and my Body to be burned, upon any other never so good
account, yet without this; all would signify nothing. That Charity is such as
thinks no evil of any Man, believes and hops the best of all things, and
peaceably submits to all that God pleases to inflict. In a word, we are
advised to abide in Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, but the greatest of
all is said to be Charity.

I shall not offer to comment upon this Divine Chapter, and compare the
practice of those that are called Christians with the extensiveness of St.
Paul's Description, for fear I should either prove or become more uncharitable
than I desire. To uncover such foul sores, without better hopes of healing 'em,
would but cause a noisome smell, and but offend those who suffer them as well
as my self; and therefore I shall pass to the next branch of this duty, and
consider it as it concerns our actions.

Charity in the distributive sense, as it relates to our actions and practice,
is so inculcated by the Law of Nature, and common Genius of Mankind, that
unless one puts off all Humanity to receive the Wolf and Tygar, 'twill be
extreme hard not to have some fellow-feeling of the deplorable wants and
miseries of our Fellow Creatures. Those who are Stewards of large and ample
Fortunes, will have long accounts to make at the great day. But Oh what a
ravishing sight will it then be to see the Hungry we have Fed, and the Naked we
have Clothed! What a multitude of Sins will they stand between and cover! for
then 'twill be enquired, not what Learning we had gained, what Cobwebs we had
spun, or what nice speculations we had made; but what good we have performed,
and how we employed our hands and hearts, not our wits and fancy.

If the Jewish Law was but a Type of Christian Discipline, and our Savior came
not to abrogate the Moral-Law, but to fulfill and raise it higher, (...), how
much then ought we to exceed the Jews in acts of Charity? and yet it is to be
feared we come too short of what their duty prompted them to. Besides their
Annual Tithes to the Church, they gave another Tithing to the Poor every third
year, by Gods own appointment, Deuteronomy. xxvi. 12, 13. and this comes to the same
reckoning as an Annual 30th. which whether Christians Charity does reach to, or
exceed as far as it should, I leave to every Man's Conscience seriously to
consider. For except our Righteousness, (...), the very same word that in many
places of Scripture does necessarily signify Legal Almsgiving, except, I say,
our Righteousness does exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
we can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now if we consider but the Peace and Serenity of Mind, the Heaven upon Earth,
that is gained from a consciousness of having done some real good to others, it
would be a thing eligible, if there were no further motive.

But again, If we will but examine our own Interest, I mean not only our
Eternal Interest which would certainly move us, if we were but effectually
persuaded of it, but also our dearly beloved Temporal Interest, the truest way
of multiplying our riches, and best improvement of our Estates, we should
readily comply with this Duty in all respects. What says the Prophet Malachi,
chapter iii. v. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be
meat in mine house, and prove me herewith, says the Lord of Hasts, if I will
not open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there
shall not be room enough to receive it, and see again Prove. iii. 10. So shall
thy barns be filled with plenty. And the Scriptures are full of passages to
this purpose, inviting us all manner of ways to try the goodness of God which
he pleases to offer us in this life, upon one only condition, if we will but
believe his promises to us. And this puts me in mind of an excellent story I
have read in a good Author concerning a Jew, who when he had perused several of
those places which promise abundance of Temporal blessings to Charitable
persons, resolved to try whether God would be as good as his word, and spared
no occasion of profuse Charity, until he had reduced himself to one single
piece, the whole remain of all his former riches. Now was he come to the Crisis
of trial, a Crisis able to shake even a Christian courage, and it did shake his
indeed, though he had proceeded boldly hitherto without any fear or distrust.
He began then to murmur and repine, and blamed his Credulity, for what he had
so rashly, he thought, done; and in this pensive heartbreaking mood, he spied
two men a quarelling and fighting. Notwithstanding his own afflictions he
presently interposed, and demanded the cause of their so great difference. They
answered that going along there they had found a stone, which both laid claim
to, but could not agree which was the first discoverer, so that if he would
bestow something for it, they told him it should be his. He gave them all he
had, his one remaining piece, and so they went well contented with it. He
presently repairs to a Jeweller to know the value of his purchase, and was
informed, that it was the best Jewel which belonged to the Highpriests,
Breast Plate, and that if he would carry it to the right owner, he need not
doubt of a sufficient recompense. He goes to the High Priest, acquaints him
with what he had found, and the accidental occasion that brought him to such a
Treasure. The Man of God roundly gave him first a box of the Ear, for
distrusting Providence, and then dismissed him with a reward answerable to the
occasion. From that fortunate day he thrived in such measure, and received the
full satisfaction of all his former wishes, that notwithstanding the Charitable
continuance of his former good intentions he soon grew to be one of the richest
men in all Judea.

God never forsakes those that will trust in him. He will try them indeed
whether they are in earnest, and how far they will venture to trust in him, but
be assured he never leaves man in his extremities, unless he leaves his God
first. And I have observed several instances of people that have been brought
to the very brink of ruin and despair, who have been strangely and suddenly
advanced, to the amazement of all their acquaintance, by the immediate hand of
Almighty God. And if all good people in affliction do not find the same, it is
their duty to resign themselves up to the wise, but unaccountable ways of
Providence.

Now notwithstanding all that has been said, if any man will be so
Uncharitable, as to think the Current of the Times of late, and not my own
inclination and real judgment, induced me to write these things, I must be
contented, to remain unhappy in his opinion; for no other Arguments can
persuade him to alter. I am very well satisfied, that every man who thinks at
all of Religion, has a natural affection for some one Religion above others, as
he has for some particular Person, but if upon sober thoughts and familiar
Conversation he finds the Lady he dotes too much upon to be either a Strumpet,
or wretchedly Painted, or Proud and Cruel, especially if all these together, he
is not to be blamed if he recalls his extravagant passion, and settles it
rationally upon a pure and unspotted, a mild and innocent, and deservedly
amiable object. There Is great variety of tempers in Men, and these different
tempers make Men naturally incline to as great variety in Religions. Some take
to the sour and morose, others are led with an artificial show, and with this
most Men are apt to be ensnared; till they find out the Cheat; some are taken
with licentious encouragements, and others (the fewest of all) with an honest
naked truth. Now if among these various attractions an innocent well-meaning
Man happens to be a while deluded, there is no such real wonder; but God's Grace
and Providence which over-looks Mankind, and watches incessantly for the good
of us all, is not like to pass by long those who are in no worse circumstance
than that. How do we know but that these many different Religions are most
agreeable to the great end of the Creation? When we cannot possibly see two
faces alike, no nor any two things exactly so in all respects, must we fondly
desire that all Nations in the World should be of one and the same Opinion? God
says Heresies shall come (and no doubt remain too) that the Faithful may the
better be tried; and for that reason I should rather suspect Italy and Spain,
where are no Dissenters to try their Faith, than think that blind forced Unity
makes so much for 'em. Christian Gospel-liberty cannot avoid Dissenters, the
Enemy will sow his Tares; but the Inquisition gags the mouths of all who
presume to examine any whys or wherefores.

One thing I shall adjoyn, and so conclude: When first I returned to Church,
God be thanked, I can truly say, I never did any thing with more peace and
assurance of mind, or with more inward comfort to my soul, than that time at
Church, which really to me is a most comfortable reflection as often as it occurs.

Now may Virtue and Charity increase among us all, and may the World grow more
and more sensible of the future and present benefit of a just, peaceable, and
well-disposed Life. Sir, I am,

Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, W. H.


