A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Capt. John Briggs, At Dunstable, March 23,
1694/5.

By THOMAS HARRISON.

ISAIAH LVII. 1. The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to Heart; and
merciful Men are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away
from the Evil to come.

London, Printed by J. D. for the Author. MDCXCV.

The Epistle Dedicatory, To Mrs. ELIZABETH BRIGGS, Widow of the Deceased Capt.
JOHN BRIGGS.
MADAM,
THE Meanness of the following Discourse would have been an effectual Bar to
its Publication, had not your Desire ushered it into the World. The first thing
of mine that came forth from the Press was a Sermon, occasioned by the Decease
of your beloved Daughter; and I concluded you would not take it well, if I
denied you the liberty of reading that Discourse which was preached at your
Husband's Funeral, in a fairer Character than mine own Handwriting. Besides,
that Divine Blessing which I hope attended the Publication of the former, gave
me the greater Encouragement to expose the latter to public View. I am not so
vain as to think printing this Sermon will advance my Reputation among Learned
and Judicious Readers, it is more likely to produce a contrary Effect; but if
God should bless it to the Conversion of one Sinner, or the building up of one
Saint, I hope I shall rejoice more than if I gained the greatest Applause
thereby. Tho it be not Meat for strong Men, yet I hope it may be Milk for
Babes. To conclude, That he who has promised to be an Husband to the Widow,
and a Father to the Fatherless, would put his Everlasting Arms under you, and
sanctify all the Dispensations of his Providence to you; that he would shower
down the choicest of his Blessings upon you and the Fruit of your Womb; that
your Children may tread in the steps of their deceased Father, and their living
Mother, is the sincere Desire of your Friend and Servant,

THO. HARRISON.

A SERMON preached at the Funeral of Capt. JOHN BRIGGS.
2 COR. v. 1. For we know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in
the Heavens.


MAN is born to Trouble as the Sparks fly upward. Various are the Miseries and
Calamities which attend the Human Race during their Continuance in, and
Pilgrimage through the waste and howling Wilderness of this World. And sincere
Christians are so far from obtaining an Immunity and Freedom from Temporal
Evils while in a Mortal State, that they generally have the greatest share of
them: But they have those Cordials to support and revive their Spirits under
the Pressure of Afflictive Providence, whereof others are wholly destitute. We
need look no further for an Instance of this, than the Chapter preceding that
which my Text begins; wherein the Apostle having mentioned those Sufferings
which himself and his Brethren underwent, for their steadfast Adherence to, and
Endeavors to propagate the ever-blessed Gospel, he gives an Account of those
things which afforded them Comfort and Support under such deplorable
Circumstances, whereof the hope of future Glory was not the least, which he
proposes in the close of that Chapter, and farther prosecutes in the words of
my Text, For we know, that if our, etc.

The Method that I shall take in speaking to these Words shall be, I. To
explain them. II. To apply them.


I. I shall explain them: And in order to a regular and distinct Explication of
them, I shall take notice of these four following things contained in them.

First; A Description of the State and Condition of the Human Body in this
Life; Our Earthly House of this Tabernacle.

Secondly; An implicit Assertion of its Dissolution; If it were dissolved.

Thirdly; A Description of the blessed State and Habitation of the Saints after
the Dissolution of their Bodies: We have a Building of God, an House not made
with Hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Fourthly; The comfortable Knowledge and Assurance which the Apostle and other
Christians had concerning their present Right to, and future Fruition of this
Blessedness, We know.

First; A Description of the State and Condition of the Human Body in this
Life; Our Earthly House of this Tabernacle.

That this is a Description of the Body in its Mortal State, is evident both
from the Text and Context. Tho the Apostle here speaks particularly of
Believers, yet what is said concerning the present Frame and Condition of their
Bodies, is applicable to the Corporeal Part of all Mankind. The Earthly House
of this Tabernacle, or, this Earthly House or Tabernacle: For when two
synonymous Words are made use of in the Description of the same thing, the
latter is sometimes put in the Genitive Case, instead of their being joined
together by the Conjunction or; thus Numb. 19.2. This is the Ordinance of the
Law, i. e. this is the Ordinance or Law, and in several other places. More
particularly, there are two things observable in this part of the Text.

1st. The things to which he compares Man's Body, viz. an House and a
Tabernacle.

2dly. The Epithet which he gives it, Earthly.

1st. The things to which he compares Man's Body, viz. an House or a
Tabernacle; for these words must not be taken in a Proper and Literal, but in a
Figurative and Metaphorical Sense.

First; He compares it to an House. This Denomination is given to Human Bodies,
Job 4.19. they are called Houses of Clay. The Body may be compared to an House
for two Reasons.

1. Because of the Curiosity of its Structure. Some Art and Skill must be
exercised in building an House, that all its Parts may be commodious, and bear
a due and comely Proportion to each other. The Divine Architect has displayed
his Wisdom as well as his Power in the Formation of the Human Body: We are
fearfully and wonderfully made, and our Substance was curiously wrought, Psalm.
139.14, 15. Tho it is made of a vile Material, yet it has a noble and
excellent Form, yea the Matter it self is sublimated and refined: There is
nothing wanting that is necessary for use, and there is nothing superfluous or
un-useful. But I shall not now anatomize the Human Body, lead you into all the
Rooms of this stately and compact Fabric, or show you the Curiosity of every
Part.

2. Because it is an Habitation for the Soul. Man is said to dwell in this
House of Clay, Job 4.19. I conceive Man is here by a Synecdoche put for the
Soul, which is the superior Part of Man. The Soul dwells in the Body as an
Inhabitant in an House, only with this difference, there is a formal Union
between the Soul and Body, which there is not between a Man and the House
wherein he dwells. And the Body in this respect bears a Resemblance to an House
in three things.

(1.) In its Inferiority to the Soul in Worth and Excellence. As a Man is of
more Worth than the most stately and costly Palace that can be inhabited by
him; so is the Soul of more Value than the Body wherein it resides, and which
is informed by it. In the Body there are visible Footsteps of God, but the
Divine Image is stamped and portrayed upon the Soul. The Image of God in Man
consists not in what is seen, but in what is not seen: God expressly says, that
none saw a Similitude of him, Deuteronomy. 4.15. which had not been true, if Man in
regard of his Body had been the Image and Similitude of God; for then a Figure
of God had been seen every day, as often as we saw a Man, or beheld our selves.
Tho many of the Children of Men are destitute of God's Moral Image, consisting
in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness, yet every Human Soul bears his
Natural Image in its spiritual Nature and Properties. Surely the more remote
from Matter, and the more like to the supreme Spirit any Being is, the greater
is its Excellency.

(2.) In its Usefulness and Subserviency to the Soul. As the House is erected
for the use of the Inhabitant, and the several Rooms thereof are prepared for
his Service, and all the Affairs therein are managed and conducted by him; so
the Body was framed for the Service of the Soul, tho Sin often renders it
injurious to its noble Inhabitant. The Motions of the Bodily Members are all
directed and guided by that Intelligent Spirit which is seated in it.

(3.) In the Independence of the Soul upon the Body, as to its Operations and
Existence. An Inhabitant can act without, and may exist separate from his
Habitation. There are many Operations of the Soul while it lodges in the Body,
which it puts forth independently from the Body, and whereto the Corporeal Part
does not at all concur. And when the Soul shall be dislodged from this
Dewlling Place, it will still have an Existence. This noble Inhabitant shall
not be buried in the Ruins of that Earthly Tabernacle. Tho the Life of the Man
is destroyed by the Separation of the Soul from the Body, because it consists
in their Union; yet the Life of the Soul, which has no Dependence on such an
Union, is not destroyed thereby. The Soul animates the Body, but the Body
conveys no Life to the Soul.

Secondly; The Body is compared to a Tabernacle.

The Apostle Peter gives the same Denomination to his Body, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14.
Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by
putting you in Remembrance: Knowing that shortly I must put off this my
Tabernacle.

And the Body may be compared to a Tabernacle for two Reasons.

1. Because of the short continuance of the Soul in it. A Tabernacle is opposed
to a fixed Habitation, Heb. 11.9. They who only sojourned in a place, and were
speedily to remove from it, did in former times erect Tabernacles for
themselves. Indeed our Bodies are rather Tabernacles wherein we sojourn for a
little time, than Houses wherein we have a fixed Habitation: We are Pilgrims
and Strangers in the Earth; our immortal Souls will soon take their flight from
our Bodies. We often read of the Brevity of Man's Life in the Holy Scriptures.
Man that is born of a Woman, is of few Days, and full of Trouble. He comes
forth like a Flower, and is cut down: he flees also as a Shadow, and
continues not; Job 14.1, 2. Man's Life is compared to a Vapor, which soon
vanishes, James 4.14. to Smoke which quickly disappears, Psalm. 102.3. to the
Grass which is withered by the Summer Sun, or cut down by the sharp Scythe,
Isa. 40.6, 7. it is said to be swifter than a Weaver's Shuttle, which quickly
runs from one side of the Web to the other; its Motion is represented by the
telling of a Tale, the sailing of a Ship in the mighty Ocean, and the flight of
an Eagle toward its Prey: It is compared to an Hand's breadth, yea to nothing,
Psalm. 39.5. How short is the Life of Man in this World if compared with the
eternal Duration of God, or with the Life which we shall live in the other
World! Yea, the life of Man in our days is exceeding short, if compared with
the Lives of the Antediluvian Fathers. There are but a few steps between our
Cradles and our Graves: They who live longest in the Body live but a little
time; but how short is the Continuance of some in this World, who are cut off
in their flourishing Age, in the Morning of their Days! We are all hastily
marching to Eternity, and shall shortly come to our Journey's end.

2. Because of its Weakness and Frailty. Tabernacles were but slightly built,
very weak and infirm Structures; they were not made of durable Matter, nor
fixed upon strong Foundations. Our Bodies, those Houses of Clay wherein our
Souls reside, are said to have their Foundation in the Dust, Job 4.19. The
Strength of a Building lies very much in its Foundation; and that Edifice which
has but weak Walls, being strongly founded, may last long; but when the
Building is weak, and the Foundation weak also, in how tottering a Condition is
such a Fabric? The Foundation of Man's Body is Sand or Dust, and the word
signifies unstable moveable Dust, such as lies upon the Surface of the Earth,
and is carried away with every puff of Wind. Man in his best Estate is
altogether Vanity on the account of his Corporal Frailty and Weakness; his
Strength is not as the Strength of Brass or of Stones, but he is like a Reed
shaken with the Wind. How small a matter will make a Change and Alteration in
the Body! How soon will the Gust of a violent Distemper, like a furious Wind,
blow it down to the Ground! So weak is the Body, that we have more cause to
wonder at its standing so long, than at its falling so soon.

2dly. We may observe the Epithet which the Apostle gives to the Body, Earthly;
it is an Earthly House or Tabernacle. This Epithet may be given it upon a
fourfold Account.

1. Upon the account of the Matter whereof it is formed. It is made of Earth,
Clay or Dust. The sacred Historian tells us, That the Lord God formed Man of
the Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2.7. and that the Woman was formed of a Rib taken
out of the Man's Body, ver. 22. When the great Jehovah came to pass Sentence
upon Man for the Breach of his Law, he put him in mind of his Original and
Frame, as to his Corporeal Part; Dust thou art, out of it wast thou taken; Genesis
3.19. And if our first Parents were formed of the Dust, we who are their
Offspring were formed of their Substance, and proceeded from their Loins, must
be also formed of the same Matter. Elihu acknowledges that he was formed out of
the Clay, Job 33.6. The Psalmist tells us, That God knows our Frame, he
remembers that we are Dust, Psalm. 103.14. our Bodies are breathing Clay,
animated Earth.

2. Upon the account of its Situation, or the Place wherein it is pitched: It
dwells in, it is erected upon the Earth. Tho Angelick Spirits were originally
placed in the superior World, Heaven was their first Habitation; yet the Human
Body was lodged in the Earth at its first Formation, this is the place of its
Residence, and must be while in its present State and Condition. Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; 1 Cor. 15.50. Heaven is too pure an
Air for our Animal Bodies to breath in, till they shall be purified and
refined, and endued with those excellent Qualities which will fit them for such
a noble Region. Therefore so long as our Souls continue in our Bodies, they
have but an Earthly Lodging; tho their Motions and Operations may reach to
Heaven, yet their Essential Residence is in the Earth: on this account while we
are present in the Body, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.16. While we
dwell in this Tabernacle, we sojourn in a polluted and troublesome World, a
place to which Sin has introduced the greatest Disorder and Confusion, where
Iniquity abounds, and where many Occasions of Grief are continually ministered
to us; a Vale of Tears, a Field of War, a Stage of Contention, and a waste and
howling Wilderness.

3. Upon the account of those Means whereby it is supported and refreshed. Our
Bodies in their present State would immediately fall if they were not propp'd
up and repaired by Earthly Comforts, viz. Meat, Drink, Physic and Raiment. All
the Conveniences of Life which we value and prize, which we industriously
labor for, and after which our Affections do often run in an immoderate
degree, are nothing better than Earth. An Earthly Body is only capable of
Earthly Enjoyments.

4. Upon the account of its Disposure and Resolution. When Death rends the Soul
from the Embraces of the Body, then the Dust returns to the Earth as it was,
Eccles. 12.7. it is turned into common Earth, and laid in a Bed of Dust. Thus
much for the Description of the State and Condition of the Human Body in this
Life. I proceed,

Secondly; To the second thing contained in the words, viz. An implicit
Assertion of its Dissolution; If it were dissolved.

Tho the conditional Conjunction (...) if, is here made use of, yet it does not
import any Hesitation or Doubt in the Apostle's Mind concerning the Dissolution
of his Body, as if it were uncertain, whether it should be dissolved or not;
but that Conjunction has the same Signification here with the Adverb (...)
when, and so the words may be rendered thus, When our Earthly House of this
Tabernacle shall be dissolved. We find that this Particle has the same
Signification, Joh. 16.7. 1 John 3.2. so that these words do amount to an
Assertion of the Body's Dissolution: For what Comfort could arise to the
Apostle and his Fellow Sufferers from the Thoughts of their Entrance into an
Heavenly Habitation after the Dissolution of their Bodies, if they were not
assured that some time or other they should be dissolved? We read of a twofold
Dissolution made by Death in Sacred Writ, viz. a Dissolution of the Person or
the Man, Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart, or, as the original word may properly
be rendered, to be dissolved; this consists in the Separation of the Soul from
the Body: and a Dissolution of the Body, in my Text. This is a Metaphor taken
from the Destruction of Buildings, the Overthrow of Earthly Fabrics: When a
Structure is demolished, it is said to be dissolved; for so the Original Word
whereby the Ruin of the Temple is expressed, Mat. 24.2. Mark 13.2. most properly
signifies. In Allusion hereunto the Death of the Body is called its
Dissolution. Now pursuant to the Metaphor several things are implied in the
Body's Dissolution.

1. The Continuance of its Matter after Death. When an House is demolished, tho
it loses its Form, yet the Matter still remains, it is not annihilated. The
Matter of the Human Body passes through various Changes after Death, yet it is
not reduced to nothing; for if it were, at the great Day there could not be a
Resurrection, but a new Creation of Human Bodies: Whereas the Scripture assures
us that the same Body which dies shall live and rise again: Tho it may be
accidentally and with respect to its Qualities another Body, yet it will be
essentially, and with respect to its Substance, the same.

2. The Destruction of its Form. When a Building falls, its Form is lost, tho
its Matter remains; the same Effect does Death produce in the Body. Herein
these two things may be comprehended.

(1.) The loss of its Beauty and Comeliness. What Beauty is there in the
Rubbish of the most splendid and stately Palace? Surely there is nothing in it
that can attract the Admiration and Esteem of those who behold it. They who
delighted to view and walk in a House while standing, will turn their Eyes from
its Ruins. The Beauty of the most amiable Body becomes a Prey to Death, when
it is seized by this mighty Conqueror. Death draws a dismal Vail over all its
Glory, and makes very unlovely and deforming Impressions on it. The Bodies of
our deceased Relatives which we formerly beheld with great Delight, would be
now very unpleasant Spectacles to us; we cannot without Regret turn our Eyes
toward the Corpse of our dearest Friend, but are willing soon to bury it out of
our Sight.

(2.) The loss of its Excellency and Usefulness. What Value is there in the
Rubbish of a fallen Sructure, which while standing was worth many thousands, or
what use can it serve for? Tho a living Body is exceeding valuable, yet a dead
Body is of no more Worth than common Earth, and it is as useless and
unprofitable. The Eyes, Tongue, Hands and Feet, which were all active Members,
and performed many Operations, when seized by Death become wholly unactive,
they lose their Motion and Activity when bound with its Adamantine Chains and
Fetters. Those Bodies of our Relations which were very serviceable to us while
in the Land of the living, can do us no good when numbered among the Dead.

3. In the Dissolution of the Body may be implied its entrance into the Grave,
and corrupting there. A standing House is raised above the Ground, but a fallen
House lies level with it, and the Materials thereof are separated and divided.
When Men's Bodies die, they are laid in the Grave, which is the House appointed
for all living: They enter into the place of Silence and of Darkness, and there
they moulder away, and crumble to Dust.

4. Herein may be implied the various ways whereby the Structure of the Human
Body decays, and is destroyed. Some Buildings fall down of themselves, Time,
the Consumer of all material Things upon the Earth, destroys them; other
Fabrics are blown down by violent Winds, others fall by the force of devouring
Flames, and others are demolished by Men. In like manner some Men's Bodies may
be said even to fall of themselves, because no internal Distemper, nor external
Violence is the Cause of their Dissolution; old Age has dried up their natural
Moisture, exhausted their Strength, and brought them down to the Dust; their
Life was like a Lamp that goes out when there is no more Oil to feed it. The
Bodies of others are destroyed by the immediate Stroke of God's Hand, some
Bodies are burnt up by the Heat, or blown down by the Blast of violent
Distempers, others fall by Human Force and Violence.

That our Bodies must be dissolved we have a sacred Assurance from the God that
made them: He has told us that the Body must return to the Earth from whence
it came, that he will bring us to Death and to the Grave, which is appointed
for all living. It is appointed for all Men once to die, Heb. 9.27. This
Appointment is accomplished upon our Fellow Creatures every day; Man goes to
his long Home, and the Mourners continually walk about the Streets: Yea many of
our dear Relatives have been rent from our Embraces, and hurried into the
gloomy Territories of the King of Terrors; some whose Bodies were stronger than
ours, and seemed more able to hold out against a besieging Enemy. Do not the
continual totterings and shakings of our Earthly Tabernacles, and the frequent
Repairs which they stand in need of, portend their Downfall? So that the living
may many ways know that they must die.

Thirdly; I proceed to that Description which the Apostle gives of the blessed
State and Habitation of the Saints after Death. We have a Building of God, an
House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens.

The Apostle carries on the same Metaphor in the latter part, which he made use
of in the former part of the Verse. As he compares the Soul's Residence in the
Body to that of an Inhabitant in an House, so he represents the Glory and
Felicity of the Soul, after the Dissolution of the Body, by its Entrance into
and Abode in a more glorious Habitation. But what this House is whereof the
Apostle speaks, is not yet agreed among Expositors: Some do thereby understand
the same Body, which the Soul now dwells in, and must be dislodged from; when
raised again at the last day. Others think the Apostle intends that Glory and
Blessedness into which the Souls of Believers enter immediately after their
Separation from their Bodies. It is certainly true that the Earthly Tabernacles
of the Saints shall not always lie in the Dust, that the Divorce between their
Souls and them will not be perpetual, but they shall be raised from their
Graves, and reassumed by their ancient Possessors; and then the Soul will have
a more noble Habitation than now it has, the Body will be much more excellent
and glorious than it is in its Mortal State: And it is as certain that the Soul
will not be without an Habitation when it is by its great Landlord turned out
of its Earthly House, but will enter into the blissful Regions above. I
conceive the latter to be principally intended: for the Apostle comforts
himself with the well-grounded Hopes of that Glory to which Death would
introduce him; When our Earthly House of this Tabernacle is dissolved, we have
a Building of God, an House, etc. i. e. we shall enter into it and become
Possessors of it: And in the following Verses he expresses a vehement Desire
to be discharged from his Body, that he might enter into this House; now he
would partake of the Glory of the Resurrection never the sooner for his speedy
Dissolution, the Bodies of all the Saints will be raised and glorified at the
same time. However I shall not exclude but include the former Sense in my
farther Discourse of these words, wherein we have a twofold Account of this
Building or House, viz. Negative and Affirmative.

1. Negative: It is a Building, an House not made with Hands. This Character
agrees to the glorious Habitation of the Saints above, in opposition to all
Terrene Structures. The splendid Palaces wherein Earthly Monarchs dwell, were
contrived by Human Skill, and framed by the Hands of Men, and consequently all
their Excellency and Glory is of a carnal and sensible Nature. The Tabernacle
in the Wilderness was contrived by God himself, and yet because Man had an Hand
in the Erection thereof, it is said to be made with Hands, Heb. 9.11, 24. But
that glorious House in which the Saints shall dwell when they leave their
Bodies, was neither contrived by Human Art, nor framed by Human Strength; no
Creatute was instrumental to the Erection of that stately Fabric, and the
Glory thereof is not of a carnal and sensible Nature: And the Saints Bodies at
the Resurrection may in some sense be said to be made without Hands, in
opposition to those Bodies which they now carry about with them; because, tho
these Structures will be materially the same that now they are, yet there will
be an accidental Alteration in them; and whereas Man was instrumental to their
first Production, (tho God only was their principal Efficient) yet they shall
be raised again by the immediate Operation of God. It is observable, that the
Human Body of our blessed Lord is called a Tabernacle not made with Hands, Heb.
9.11. not only in contra-distinction from the Jewish Tabernacle, but also from
all other Human Bodies, because no active Principle but Divine Power produced
it.

2. This Building or House is described Affirmatively, and that from three
things: Its Efficient, its Situation, and its Duration.

(1.) It is described from its Efficient, God; it is a Building of God: The
Preposition (...) to which God is subjoined, denotes the Efficient Cause. The
Excellency of any Building is suitable to its Contriver and Builder. Seeing
Divine Wisdom and Power infinitely surpass Human, surely the Works of God's
Hands must transcend the Works of Men's Hands. The glorious Place above is
called a City whose Builder and Maker is God; Heb. 11.10. Now this World which
is the Saints present Habitation, being made by God, surely something more must
be intended by his Erection of this House, than the immediate Creation thereof
by him. It can import nothing less, than that the Divine Being has exerted
more of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, in this than in any other Fabric which
he has erected; and that the Blessedness of the Triumphant Saints is more
immediately derived from God, than any thing that is enjoyed in a Mortal State.
And there will be a more admirable display of the Divine Glory in the
Resurrection of the Saints Bodies, than there was in their Creation, they will
become as glorious and perfect as Human Bodies can be.

(2.) From its Situation, in the Heavens. It is observable, that some words are
in the New Testament put in the Plural instead of the Singular Number,
particularly (...) Heavens, for (...) Heaven, Mat. 12.25. in my Text, and
several other places, with a Design (as I conceive) emphatically to denote the
Excellency and Glory of that lofty Region. Not the Aerial or Aetherial, but the
Imperial Heaven is here intended. This is a place far superior to the Earth,
and therefore an Entrance into and Abode in it, is sometimes mentioned as
comprehensive of all that Felicity which is possessed by those that inhabit it.
When the Soul of a Believer quits its Earthly Tabernacle, it mounts up as on
Eagle's Wings to the Heavenly Temple. This is the Habitation of God's Holiness,
there the great Jehovah in a special manner dwells, there are the brightest
Discoveries of the Divine Splendour, and the highest Adorations given to his
most Excellent Majesty: There the glorified Courtiers do not behold him through
a Glass darkly, but see him face to face. In that Building dwells and reigns
the Lord Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant: When we shall be absent from
the Body, we shall be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. The Heaven must
receive him until the times of restitution of all things. There dwell an
innumerable company of glorious Angels, far more glorious than any of the
Princes of this World; and all the Spirits of Just Men that are made perfect.
This is not an Habitation of Violence and Oppression, for no unclean thing can
enter there. The Inhabitants of this House are out of the reach of Satan and
his malicious Offspring; they are not exposed to the Hostile Attempts of the
roaring Lion of Hell, or his Whelps upon Earth: They are liable to no
troublesome Changes, Heartbreaking Exercises, perplexing Disappointments,
corroding Cares, or sinful Infirmities. This is a delectable and secure
Habitation, here is fullness of Joy, here are Rivers of Pleasures which
constantly refresh the glorified Soul. In this House is Light without Darkness,
Day without Night, Joy without Sorrow, and Singing without Weeping. The Soul
that enters into this House has the most intimate Fellowship with God the
Master of it, and a refreshing Communion with the blessed Angels and Saints who
cohabit with it therein: All things in this House are suitable to the Grandeur
and Magnificence of the Structure. And when the Saints Bodies shall come forth
from their Houses of Silence and Darkness, and be reunited to their Souls, they
shall be received together with them into the Heavenly Jerusalem, and shall
share with them in the Felicity of that blessed Seat.

(3.) It is described from its Duration, Eternal.

This I conceive is predicated of this Heavenly Habitation in opposition to the
Frailty of our Earthly Tabernacles, which must be dissolved, and then all our
Temporal Comforts and Delights will vanish, we shall no longer enjoy them.

The Celestial City has immovable Foundations, it is subject to no Decay or
Dissolution, its Duration will run parallel with the Ages of Eternity: And the
Glory of that Place will last as long as the Place it self; it is called a
never-fading Crown, an Incorruptible Inheritance, and an Everlasting Kingdom.
The Divine Being, in the Vision and Fruition of whom the Happiness of glorified
Saints principally consists, is to everlasting. Moreover, their Abode in this
House will be as lasting as the Building, they shall never be dispossessed of, or
expelled from it. Tho the first Adam was driven out of an Earthly Paradise, yet
the spiritual Seed and Offspring of the second Adam shall never be expelled
the Heavenly One: And when their Bodies shall rise from their Beds of Dust,
they will live to die no more; Death will have no Power to demolish these
curious Fabrics, for it shall be swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. This
Mortal shall then put on Immortality. Tho a little time wastes and consumes our
Bodies in their present State, yet there shall be no Diminution of their
Excellency and Beauty in an endless Eternity, when we become the Children of
the Resurrection: These Buildings will be always kept in their Vigor and Glory,
by the immediate Power of the supreme Architect. I proceed,

Fourthly; To the comfortable Knowledge and Assurance which the Apostle and
other Christians had concerning their present Right to, and future Fruition of
this Blessedness; We know.

Herein we may consider the Subject We, and the Predicate know.

1. The Subject, We. The Apostle here speaks only of those that were real
Christians, who had sincerely closed with, and were united to the blessed
Jesus, they only have a Right and Title to, and therefore they only have ground
to expect and hope for, this glorious Habitation. They who come not under such
a Character, have reason to fear that when their Earthly Tabernacles shall be
dissolved, their Souls will enter into a different Habitation. An House indeed
contrived by infinite Wisdom, and framed by Almighty Power, and an eternal
House, but not in Heaven, but in Hell; an House where there is Blackness of
Darkness, inconceiveable Grief, and intolerable Torment; an House prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, wherein the Wicked must cohabit with and be tormented
by those Apostate Spirits who left their Primitive Habitation, for evermore: An
House wherein they shall be Exiles from God's comfortable Presence, and every
thing that is either really good, or esteemed so by them. But I conceive the
Apostle speaks not here of all Saints; for tho they may know and have ground to
hope that when their Souls are dislodged from their Bodies, they shall enter
into this blissful Habitation, yet all Believers have not attained to this
Knowledge and Assurance thereof; Clouds and Darkness do overspread some gracious
Souls, and they are filled with many Doubts and Fears concerning their
spiritual and eternal State. But he speaks concerning himself and some other
Christians, who had attained to, and were in the Exercise of this Knowledge.
This leads me to the second thing, viz.

2. The Predicate, know. This Knowledge here spoken of, is a certain Knowledge, a
firm and full Persuasion that when their Bodies should be dissolved, their
Souls should be received into Heaven. There are several things included in this
Knowledge, viz. a firm Belief of a future State of Blessedness provided for the
Saints, and into which they shall enter after Death. This might be known from
the Holy Scriptures, wherein we have a sufficient Confirmation of this sacred
Truth. Moreover, a firm Persuasion that they were interested in Christ, and
made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. This they might know by
comparing themselves with those Marks and Characters of the Heirs of Salvation
which were laid down in sacred Writ, by the lively exercise of their Faith upon
Christ, and by the Testimony of the holy Spirit, bearing witness with their
Spirits that they were the Children of God. Lastly, an Assurance of their
Preservation in a State of Grace to a State of Glory. This they might fairly
collect from the Word of God, wherein there is a full account of the
Everlastingness of the Covenant of Grace, the Immutability of Divine Love, the
Efficacy of Christ's Death, together with the Constancy and Prevalence of his
Intercession, and the perpetual Residence of the holy Spirit (the Earnest of
the Heavenly Inheritance) in his Royal Palaces, and holy Temples. Our Apostle
expresses the like Assurance, 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that
day. Holy Job also expressed his Assurance of future Glory in his adverse State,
Job. 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the Earth. And tho after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body,
yet in my Flesh shall I see God, etc. Tho all who have a Faith of Affiance do
not attain to a Faith of Assurance, yet it is attainable in a Mortal State.
Thus much by way of Explication.

II. I shall present you with some Inferences from the Words.

First; I infer, The prodigious Folly of those who give their Bodies the
Preference to their Souls. It is the part of a wise Man, to value things in
proportion to their Worth and Excellency. But the generality of Mankind show
that their Corporeal Part has a greater share of their Esteem than their
Spiritual Part: They carefully provide Food and Raiment for the former, but
never seek after the Bread of life to feed, and the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness to array the latter. They will labor hard to erect or purchase a
comfortable Habitation for their Bodies, but do not at all endeavor to secure
an happy Dewlling Place for their Souls when they enter into an invisible
World: They will hazard the loss of their Souls to secure their Bodies from
Temporal Evils, or to procure those things which will gratify the sensitive
Appetite. What Madness is it to prefer a Clod of Earth to a Spirit? Is not that
a foolish Soul that values its sojourning-place more than it self, and will
expose it self to eternal Ruin for the Preservation of its Earthly Tabernacle?
What stupid Fools are they who esteem their Bodies, which are continually
advancing toward, and must speedily return to the Dust, more than their Souls
which shall survive them, and live for evermore? Surely such Persons are as the
Horse, or as the Mule, which have no Understanding.

Secondly, I infer, The Folly of those who are proud of, or glory in their
Corporeal Strength or Beauty. As Men are apt to boast of the exact Form and
Strength of those Houses wherein their Bodies dwell, so likewise of the
Excellency of those Bodies wherein their Souls tabernacle. But this will appear
very foolish to us, if we consider our Frame, and remember that we are Dust.
Our Bodies were formed of the same Matter for kind that we trample under our
Feet, and disdain to touch with our Fingers. Tho our Bodies are very robust,
yet they are but Earthen Vessels, and will soon be broken to pieces. In a very
short time our Bodies must be dissolved, and then all their Beauty and Strength
will vanish and become a Prey to the King of Terrors.

Thirdly, I infer, The Vanity of placing our Happiness in our living Comforts,
our near and dear Relations.

We are exceeding prone to let out our Affections immoderately toward them, to
give them too high a Place, too large a Room in our Hearts, to think our selves
happy in an Husband, Wife, or Children, not considering they are frail mortal
Creatures. They can be no longer enjoyed by us than while their Souls continue
in their Bodies, and those curious Fabrics, which we behold with Pleasure and
Delight, keep their Station. Did we seriously consider what frail brittle
Houses their Souls inhabit, how soon they may be demolished, and in how short a
time they shall be dislodged from them, we should see it highly reasonable to
moderate our Affections toward them! O let the everliving, everlasting God be
the Darling of our Souls, and the Sovereign of our Affections.

Fourthly, I infer, How necessary it is for us all speedily to endeavor after
a Right and Title to an Heavenly Habitation. To confirm this Assertion, and to
press you to this Duty, I shall offer these things that follow to your
Consideration.

1. Your Souls are designed to a perpetual Residence in some Habitation. The
Father of Spirits has resolved to preserve the Being and Life of your Souls
for evermore, no Period shall ever be put to their Existence; and therefore
when they leave their present Habitation, they must enter into another. There
are but two Receptacles of departed Souls, viz. an Heavenly Paradise, and an
Infernal Lake: when your immortal Spirits are divorced from your Bodies, they
must either ascend to the former, or descend to the latter. And how can you
bear to think of dwelling with consuming Fire, and abiding with everlasting
Burnings?

2. Your Bodies shall enter into the same Habitation, when reassumed by your
Souls, into which your Souls enter when divested of your Bodies. Wherever
your Souls go after Death, there will your Bodies be disposed after the
Resurrection. If the noble Inhabitant dwells in Heaven, the House that it dwelt
in upon Earth when rebuilt shall be fixed in that glorious Region, this Earthly
Tabernacle shall become a Celestial Structure; but if it be cast into Hell, the
raised Body must stand in that direful Prison as an everlasting Monument of
Divine Wrath. By making Provision for your Souls, you will also secure the
Felicity of your Bodies; their true Interest is inseparable.

3. How terrible will the Agonies of Death be to us, if we see our selves
destitute of a Title to Eternal Life? They who have disregarded their future
State, when the evil day of Death seemed to be at a distance from them, have
had very aweful and terrible Thoughts about it, when it has made sensible
Approaches to them. With what Horror will your Souls be seized, when Death sits
upon your quivering Lips, if you apprehend that they shall be speedily expelled
your Bodies, and eternally excluded the Heavenly Building!

4. This Life is the only time for securing an Interest in this glorious
Habitation. As the Tree falls, so it must eternally lie: Death will fix us in
an unalterable and unchangeable State. Those Spirits that are now in Prison
will find no place for Repentance, tho they should seek it with Tears.

5. The time of our Souls Residence in our Bodies is very uncertain. Persons
are very apt to defer this weighty and important Business; some put it off to
old Age, others to a Sickbed; some think it will be time enough to seek after
another Habitation when the Strength of their Earthly Tabernacles decays, and
they feel them shake and totter: Our Lives will be but short at longest, and
how short they will be we know not. Some are cut off in the Morning of their
Days, others in their full Strength: we are not sure that Age will snow upon
our Heads before they are laid in the Dust, or that the Structure of our Bodies
will by any loud Crack give us notice of its Downfall. Some Bodies are
demolished by a speedy and sudden Stroke, their Souls are turned out of them
without any warning. Let us therefore speedily seek that City which is above.

Would you, O Sinners, get a Title to this Habitation? then come to Christ, and
sincerely close with him: It is not to be purchased with your Money, nor
procured by your Labor; if you accept of Jesus, you shall freely receive it;
if you persist in your stubborn Rejection of him, you shall never obtain it.
Heaven is a purchased Possession, Christ has bought it with the invaluable
Price of his precious Blood; and if he become yours, that shall be yours also:
You will have a sure Title to it which can never be lost, but will issue in an
actual Possession of it. If you lay hold of Christ with the Hand of Faith while
you live, you may securely commit your Souls into his Hands when you come to
die, and say with expiring Stephen, Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit.

Fifthly, I infer, That Saints should diligently endeavor to get an Assurance
of the happy Disposure of their Souls after their Separation from their Bodies.
This is not unattainable by them, this will not be unprofitable to them. It is
their Duty to labor after it, and an Attainment to it will be very beneficial
and advantageous to them. This will comfort them under all the Frailties and
Infirmities, the Perishings and Decays of their outward Man, and mightily
sweeten all the Troubles and Afflictions wherewith they are exercised during
their continuance in it. This will familiarize Death, and render its Approach
welcome to them. Death is terrible to Nature; the Soul is naturally unwilling
to leave its old dewlling place, Nature cannot but abhor a Dissolution, besides
violent Pains do ordinarily attend the taking down of this Earthly Structure.
But they can embrace the King of Terrors with Joy and holy Triumph, who are
able to say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed, and I
am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that Day. We ought to give Diligence to make our Calling and Election
sure; for so an Entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. But
if we want this Assurance, we cannot comfortably walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death.

But what Trouble will possess our Spirits, if when our Souls are going to be
unclothed of their Earthly House, we know not whether ever they shall be
clothed upon with an House which is from Heaven! If when they are launching
into Eternity, we know not whether they are entering into a bright or a black
Eternity! In order to our obtaining this Assurance, let us seriously and
diligently search our Hearts and try our Ways, put forth direct Acts of Faith
upon Christ, and beg of God to shed abroad his Love in our Hearts by the Holy
Ghost.

Sixthly, I infer, What vast Obligations Believers are under to their Blessed
Lord! How highly are they obliged to him, who descended from his Imperial
Throne, tabernacled among us, dwelt in an House of Clay, and submitted to a
Dissolution, that he might procure for them an eternal Habitation with himself
in the highest Heavens! By dying he conquered Death, so as to render it a
blessed Gain and Advantage to them, and to give them cause to triumph over it
in their sharpest Encounter with it. How should we love and live to that
blessed Jesus, through whom we are more than Conquerors over our last Enemy,
who is gone to Heaven to prepare a Place for us, and will receive us into it,
that where he is there we may be also!

Seventhly, I infer, That a Believer's Conversation ought to be in Heaven.
Shall we not be frequently conversant in that glorious Place, where we hope
eternally to dwell? Seeing we are Strangers in the Earth, we should live like
those who know they have no continuing City here. Let us endeavor frequently
to mount up on the Wings of our Thoughts and Affections to the excellent Glory.

Lastly, I infer, That the Saints have a solid Ground of Comfort under the
Death of their godly Relatives. We cannot but mourn to see those Structures
wherein we took Pleasure laid in the Dust, and going to be a Feast for Worms;
to think that we shall see the Desire of our Eyes no more in this World. But
shall we not be comforted when we consider, that their Souls are gone into a
far better Habitation than they dwelt in while they cohabited with us, that
they have exchanged our Embraces for Christ's, that they are now triumphing and
rejoicing in the Heavenly Mansions; that the Loss is only ours; they are
Gainers by their Departure, and e're long we shall go to them and dwell with
them for evermore? I shall conclude with an Address to the near Relations of
our Deceased Friend.

I must acknowledge your Loss to be very great; it is no small Affliction, to be
deprived of such a loving Husband and indulgent Father, yet you ought not to
mourn as those who have no Hope. They who observed his Conversation, might from
thence take knowledge that he had been with Jesus: He adorned the Doctrine of God
his Savior; He was a burning and shining Light in the Place where Divine
Providence fixed him: Therefore you have no Ground to question his Exchange of
an Earthly for an Heavenly Habitation, and the Church Militant for the
Triumphant Assembly of the Firstborn. Were it put to his Choice, whether he
would stay where he is, or return to you, he would prefer the former to the
latter. You ought humbly and silently to acquiesce in God's Sovereign Will, who
is righteous in all his Ways, and holy in all his Works, and to depend upon him
who has promised to be an Husband to the Widow, and a Father to the
Fatherless. Let me exhort his Children to an Imitation of that excellent
Example which he has set them, and to a Remembrance of and Compliance with
those wholesome Instructions which he has given them. These Advantages you are
now deprived of, but a serious Reflection upon them may be beneficial to you;
if not, they will aggravate your Guilt. It had been better for you to have
descended from a Turk or Pagan, than from such an Eminent Christian as your
deceased Father was, if you prove degenerate Children. How sad will it be, if
he who put up so many Prayers for your Salvation before the Throne of Grace,
should testify against you to the Aggravation of your Condemnation before the
Tribunal of Justice? He is gone before, you must follow after, how soon you
know not: Death has made three Breaches in your Family within the compass of a
few Years, and shall not these frequent Warnings put you in mind of your own
Change? O get an Interest in Christ! that will be more valuable than the Estate
which your deceased Father has bequeathed to you; so you may be able to say
when you come to die, We know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.

