THE VVOOLF UNDER Sheeps-Clothing DISCOVERED: OR The Spirit of Cain, appearing
in the Bishop of Liechfield, Reproved.

As hereafter is sufficiently manifested by the Fruits of his Sermon at
Polesworth in Warwickshire.

Published for the benefit of the people in those Parts, by a lover of their
Immortal Souls, Charles Harris.

For I know this, that after my departure shall grievous Wolves enter in among
you, not sparing the Flock, Acts 20. 29. Printed in the Year, 1669.

The Woolf, under Sheeps-Clothing, discovered, etc.
IN or near the seventh month, 1668. the Bishop of Liechfield came to preach,
upon a first Day, at Polesworth; whether many people resorted to see and hear;
who, for his Text, clothed himself with the words of the Psalmist David, to the
fourth verse of the first Psalm: And after he had pa^ched up his Matter, and
came to his last point, it was to conclude all men sinners: and that the best
of men cannot be perfect; which, I know, would be very sweet doctrine to many
Drunkards (and such as love their Pride and Pleasures) there abouts: But, there
being by the appointment of God, a young man in the place, whose Soul loved
Righteousness, and being grieved to hear such sin-pleasing, or license to
ungodliness, the Word of the Lord was as a fire in his Breast, by which he
cried, God accepts not of the Sacrifice of sinners; therefore I warn all in the
Name and fear of the Lord to repent, repent, and to return unto the Lord while
they have time^ neither is he worshipped in Temples made with hands; for he is
a Spirit, and is worshipped in the Spirit and in Truth; therefore I warn all
again to repent, and return unto the Lord; for it is their sin that makes the
only separation between God and man, but he that repents, and forsakes, and
returns to the Lord, there is Mercy with him: When he had thus spoken, the
Bishop ( Jeroboam like) cried for some to lay hands on him, and would not
reason out the matter, but soon gets his way, and left the people in a confused
noise; and had all the rest been as envious as the Bishop, its much, if the man
had not been spoiled; but many of the people knowing him to be an honest man,
it pleased the Lord to work for his preservation, and at that time had liberty
out of all their hands; but (as Soloman says) anger rests in the bosom of
Fools; for afterward the Bishop sent to warn him to his court; so the young
man went according to time and place, and desired, seeing the Bishop would not
stay at the Steeple-house^ that now he would appear to maintain, in his own
court, that which he had delivered, or to own his shame; but he would not
appear, nor bring him upon trial, so the man returned home: But the Woolf
divised another way, giving order to the Priest of the place to excommunicate
him, which the Priest said he would do; and then said he, If any one run him
through with a Sword, and kill him, there is no Law against them: You that have
an understanding, judge what Spirit rules this man; he also told the young man,
that he had better have broke the commands of God, and committed Adultry with
any lewd woman, or to have layn drunk under a Hedge that while, meaning that
time whilst he cried against sin, and called to repentance, Oh Neighbors and
People! was ever the like heard? surely that Prophecy is now to be fulfiled,
their Folly shall be manifest to all men, and they shall not proceed much
further; it is like this Priest is brother to Priest Vincent of London, who
said, Its better to go to a Bawdy House, then to go to Quakers Meetings; surely
the Merchants of Babylon are casting du^t upon their own heads, because the Day
is dawned, that people will buy their wares no more: The same Priest at another
time, told me, I deserved to be whipped at a Cart-tayl, and if he was in power to
make Laws, and had the rule, he would have all such as I to be hanged, because
I opposed him about Sprinkling of Children, and called for Scripture Proof: Is
it not high time to post up the fruits of such Bishops and Priests as these?
Oh, the very Nation stinks of them, they are a shame to the name of
Christianity. And furthermore, this Bishop proceeded against his opposer, until
by a private way, he sent a writ, and fetched the man out of the field, not
suffering him to go speak with his tender Parents and Relations, or get his
clothes, but one pulled out a Pistol, and said, If he offered to stur from
them, he would shoot him, though he never resisted; so they took him to Warwick
Goal, 20 Miles from his Father's house, and there has been kept, as a close
Prisoner ever since; and if this Bishop has not appeared more like a Woolf
then a Sheep of Christ, let all true Christians judge: and has not the spirit
of Cain plainly appeared in him? for [mark] Cain was the evil doer, and the sin
was laid at his door; and because of sin, his Sacrifice was not accepted; but
Abel's righteous Sacrifice did witness against Cain; and then Cain (like this
Bishop) was full of wrath to destroy his Brother: So let all people see, whose
rule the Bishops and Priests walk by, Cain's rule, for Persecution: Balaam's
rule, for Reward: Corah's rule, for gainsaying the Truth: Now let us try the
Bishop by his own Text, Psalm the first, Blessed is the man that walks not in
the counsel of the ungodly: and yet at the same time, manifests whose counsel
he takes, such as Jeroboam, and wicked Ahab, and Herod; but not the counsel of
Christ, who bids, Love Enemies, and overcome evil with good; but it was no evil
work to bid sinners to repent, and turn to God: (again as to his Text) nor
stands in the way of sinners, but delights in the Law of God: And yet, at
the same time, himself not only standing in the way of sin, but pleading for a
continuance in it term of life; surely boys and girls may see this man's
confusion: Now that which fulfils the royal Laws, is to do as one would be done
by; but who believes the Bishop would be served, as he has done: Verse 3. He
shall be like a Tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth fruit in
due season; well, Every Tree is known by its fruit, but we see this old
Thorn-like-man, does not bring forth sweet Grapes, but untimely fruit, by which
its manifest his root is not watered by a River of Life and Love; but by the
foul black puddles of Egypt, such as Pharaoh's hard heart and root was watered
by, which made him grow up in rebellion against God, and reject the counsel of
his servants, and strive to bring and keep the righteous People in bondage; let
all people consider this, the close of the Text; The ungodly are like the Chaff
which the wind drives away; well, it is sin that makes a man unlike God, and
that is it which this man lives in, and pleads for: And so he, and all such,
are in those chaffie notions, and amongst the husks where the Swine feed; and
when the Word and Power of the Lord appears in his Servants against them, they
run, and are driven like Chaff: For if this Bishop had been of the weighty
Seed, he would have taken up better Weapons, and stood to his cause: But the
5th verse says, The ungodly shall not stand in Judgment: And verse the 6th,
The way of the ungodly shall perish: And so the Bishop's Text is opened, and he
manifested to be one, that can use his tongue, to say, The Lord says, and the
Prophets say, and the Apostles testify thus and thus; and so to strive to
cover himself with sheeps clothing; but, its proved, he is ravened from that
Life and Spirit of Love which dwelt in them, and by which they were guided to
bring forth the ^ruits of the Spirit; even Meekness, Forbearance,
Brotherly-kindness, and all other heavenly Virtues, etc and is following the
lusts of the flesh, according as they are declared, Gal. 5.20, 21. but not
according to Paul's Exhortation, see 1 Timothy 3. also Titus 1.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
they who would know a true Bishop, let them not miss reading these places; for,
although many may call the Scriptures their rule, the name of a Christian now
must not serve, and to live in the nature of Heathens and Infidels, tearing
like Dogs, and Swine, and Wolves: and what is the matter with many called
Bishops and Priests of late, they begin to stir more then formerly to prosecute
their design against the innocent Lambs of Christ? do you think your Seat is
stablished for ever? many of you came in hungry a few years since, but your
great yearly revenues has soon fed you up, and now you begin to kick, and grow
wanton: Will not strong drink and wine serve to content you still? must you
needs have the Saints Blood to sup, and mingle with your Sacrifice? will not
bloody Bonner's spirit be yet laid amongst you? you would fain be blowing the
Fire, the bottom of the Cup will be bitter to you: Well, take your day, and do
your work, there is an eye open that sees you will soon be ripe, if you go on:
The Anger of the Lord of Hosts is already kindled; and though you may fortify
your selves to an evil work of Persecution; think not to speed better then they
which undertook it before you, for the Lord is on our side, before whom the
strength of all men is but like a Bull-rush; and though you may seek to Kings,
Councils, and Parliaments, for add, in such a work, the more you strive, the
weaker you shall grow; and when you have filled up your measure, and your
iniquity is full, the sower Grape shall be ca^t into the Wine Press of God's
Wrath, and your lofty looks shall be bowed; and I must tell you, from your
seats of Covetousness, and Opression, and Cruelty, and Violence, you shall be
overturned; and though you mock at Revelation, and movings by the Spirit, when
this is fulfilled upon you, remember it was told you by the Spirit of Truth.

And all people high, and low, who are yet in the broad way, walking at ease in
the flesh, mind your latter end, and take heed of following such Blind-Guids,
who daub you with untempered Mortar, telling you, you are good Christians, and
Believers, and Children of Abraham, and heirs of Christ's Kingdom, though you
live in that which can never enter: Oh, awake to Righteousness, while the door
of Mercy is open; and come to Judgment, that ye may know God's Word in your
hearts like a Hammer ^o knock down all Satan's works; and like a Fire, to burn
them up out of your hearts: For, its the heart that God requires; and take heed
of pleading ignorance, but mind that Light of Grace, in you, which manifests
sin, and believe in it, that so you may receive Power to overcome it: For, its
those that overcomes, that have right to ente^ the Kingdom; but sin and
unbelief shuts out of it.

And all you who see the deceit of the Deceivers, and yet follow them for
fashion-sake, or for fear of su^^ering for the Truth, if you should leave them,
and walk in it: I warn you from the Lord, (unto whom one day you must give
account) to take heed and con-consider, you have immortal Souls lies at hazard,
and if you do not obey the call of God, to come out of Sodom and Babylon, you
must have a share of their Judgments; for they that have eyes, and will not
see, and ^ars, and will not hear, but sport themselves in the day time, and
slights the day of their visitation, and puts far the evil day; the Lord will
overtake such as a Thief in the night, and then though they may call and cry,
it will be said unto such, I called, and ye would not hear, so as to answer me
by obedience; and therefore now when ye call, I will not answer you with my
Salvation, which in time past I freely offered unto you in the day when my
Light (...) in your hea^ts, by which you knew what you ought to do, and what
you o^ght not to do; but you re^used the good^ and chose this present evil
World, and the pleasures that are therein, and would not take up the Cross, but
denied me before men, and set at naught my Counsel, and stiffned your necks,
and would not bow to my yoke; therefore shall you have a reward according to
your doings: think on this, all you l^ke-warm Professors, and you who love the
praise of men more the^ to follow the Lord in the way of Self-denial, for God
will not be mocked, from whom every man must receive a reward according to his
works.

And now further to the Bishop and Priests in those Parts, or elsewhere, seeing
^^ey say the Quakers are Laymen, and cannot understand the Sc^^ptures, because
they have not the Original, as they call Hebrew, Greek and Latin; these places
following are sent to you to be interpreted, and that forthwith you give the
true meaning of them to public view, under your hands, with a plain Answer to
the two following Queries; and let it be left in the hands of any of your
Neighbors, called Quakers, directed for me.

Isa. 56.11. Yea, they are greedy Dogs which can never have enough, and they
are Shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one
for his gain from his Quarter.

Jer. 5.30, 31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and the
people love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Micah 3.5. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People
^rr; that bite with their Teeth, and cry peace, and he that puts not into
their mouths, they even prepare war (or Law) against him. Also see Verse 11.

Luke 20.46, 47. Beware of the Scribes which desire to walk in long Robes, and
love greetings in the Markets, and the highest Seats in the Sinagogues, and the
chief Rooms at Feasts, which devour Widows Houses, and for a show make long
prayers, the same shall receive greater damnation.

2 Pet. 2.14, 15. Having eyes full of adultery, and tha^ cannot cease from ^in,
beguiling unstable Souls; an heart they have exercis^d with covetous practices,
cursed children, who have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray,
following the way of Balaam the son of Bezor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness.

Jude verse 11. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying
of Corah; (read to the end) but must this trade always hold in Babylon?

See Rev. 18.11. And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and morn over her,
for no man buyeth her Merchandise any more: verse 14. And the Fruits that thy
Soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and all things that were dainty and
goodly (as the Wheat-Sheaf, and tithe Calves, and Lambs, and Pigs, and Ducks,
and Geese, and Chickens, and Eggs; as also Glebe-Lands, Midsummer-dues,
Easter-reckonings, Garden and Smoke pence, and such like) are departed from
thee, and thou shall find them no more at all. Verse 15, and 16. The Merchants
of these things, which were made rich, shall weep and wa^l saying, Alas, alas,
that great City that was clothed in fine Linen (and great Sleev'd Surplices)
and Purple, and Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and Precious Stones, and Pearls^
Verse 17. For in one hour so great riches is come to naught. And every
ship-master, and all the company (of Balaam's tribe) in Ships, and Sailers
(like poor Journey-men Priests) and as many as ^rade by Sea stood afar off.
Verse 19. and they cast dust upon their heads, etc. Do not they already begin
^o throw dust, and bring dirt upon their own heads, that sees their City and
Building is going down, and cries against the Spoylers of Babylon, and say, You
had been better to have lain drunk under a hedge that while; oh, you had better
have been committing Adultry with a lewd woman that while; oh, rather then go
from this City to Quakers Meetings, go to a Bawdy House; and rather then drink
in the doctrine of Perfection from the Quakers, drink a cup of Poison; surely
as Jude says Verse 13. These are raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their
own shame.

There is many places more that might be collected for you; but let me see
these fairly from you interpreted, and as I like your work, you may have more
hereafter; and forget not to answer my two Queries, which are to you as
follows.

Query I. What one particular Practice in matter of divine Worship of God,
either of Christ Jesus, or any of his holy Prophets or Apostles, do you walk
in, in truth and in reallity as they did, according to the testimony left unto
us in the holy Scriptures, from the beginning to the end?

Do not star^e at the Query, but answer it fairly, seeing you say the Scripture
is your Rule.

Query II. What one particular practice is there mentioned, in all the holy
Scripture, by Christ himself, his Prophets or Apostles, whereby we might know a
false Prophet, false Priests, or false Apostles and Deceivers, which were in
time past^ or were to come in the latter times, but you are really walking in
it, and manifest by it, according to the testimonies left upon record by the
holy men of God, through ages, as the Scriptures witness from the beginning to
the end?

And if you do not answer, to clear your selves, these Queries shall stand upon
your heads, to your shame.

C. H.
Here is also annexed a seasonable Exhortation for the Inhabitants of
Polesworth, and neighboring Towns thereabouts: Also a Copy of a Letter
formerly sent to the persecuting Bishop from Warwick Goal, where I am a
Prisoner for the Word of God, in standing a faithful Witness unto him, in his
Truth and Righteousness, against such as hold the Truth in unrighteousness.
The first of the 6th Month 1669. William Harris, the younger.
HE that reads, let him understand; read in the fear of the Lord, in whom is
true wisdom, and then thou will not read to fill the outward ear, but turn in
to the Witness of God in thy Conscience, and keep the eye of thy mind single to
that which is pure of God, by which thou may come to a right understanding;
for what is to be known of God, is made manifest in us, and God has showed it
unto us; who has given Christ Jesus, the Son of his love, a Light into the
World, (the world is placed in man's heart) now as every one turns in the eye of
their understanding unto Christ the Son of God's Love, who is Love, Truth,
Righteousness, Light, Life, Wisdom; and is our all, and in all: So look not
without, at outward observations, for the Kingdom of Heaven, as the professing
Jews did, for the Kingdom of Heaven is within; therefore was that Parable of
the woman that had lost a Groat, and she looked without, and could not find it,
but when she turned home, she lighted her Candel, and swept her own house, and
there she found it: So every one that hungreth and thirsts after
Righteousness, and desires their souls eternal Peace and Salvation, return
home, and look not without, but turn in to the Witness of God, Christ the true
Light, and in the love of God, Christ the Light, Spirit of Truth, light thy
Candle, and sweep thy own house of all that which is earthly and corrupt, so
will thou come to find the Pearl, which is of great price, which a Merchant-man
had hid in his field, and he dug deep, and found it; and when he had found
it, he went, and sold all to purchase it; but the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be
purchased with Silver or Gold, or any corruptible thing; therefore read in the
Spirit the mysteries of God's Kingdom; There was a rich man came to Christ, and
spoke of many things he had done, and kept from a youth, and said, What lack I
yet? Christ said unto him, Go sell all that thou have, and give unto the poor;
but he went away very sorrowful, for he had great Possessions: Now if any have
possessed their minds with the love of this World, and with the earthly
delights that are therein, if they will not lose their life in those things,
they cannot live to God, for people cannot be heirs of two Kingdoms; they must
forsake all for Christ, in whom is the Blessing: Blessed are the poor in
Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; and whosoever will not forsake all
for Christ, is not worthy of him.

Blessed is every one that believes in God, and in Jesus Christ his only Son in
whom is the Election, in the acknowledging of the Truth, which is according
unto godliness, unto the hope of eternal Life, which God has promised, that
cannot lie, before the world began, whom he has given a Light into the World,
that whosoever believes in him should not abide in darkness, but have
everlasting Life; and this is the Record, to wit, that God has given unto us
eternal Life; and this Life is in that, his Son: He that has the Son, has
that Life; and he that has not that Son of God, has not that Life: these
things have I written unto you that believe in that Name of the Son of God,
that ye may try your ways, and examine your own hearts, and see what it is that
is head in you; for if Christ be not risen all Preaching is in vain, who is the
Resurrection and the Life; John 11.25. I am the Resurrection and the Life, said
Christ, he that believes in me, though he wore dead, yet shall he live.

Now let not your Faith stand in the wisdom of me^ but in the Power of God; for
the foolishness of God is w(...)en men, and the weakness of God is stronger
then men; (...) not many wise men after the flesh; nor many mighty; not many
noble are called; but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the World, to
confound the mighty things, and poor things of the World, and things which are
despised, has God chosen; and things which were not, to bring to naught things
that are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence: but we are of him in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption; that according as it is written, He that
rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord, and let your love be without
dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, and cleave unto that which is good;
for God is Love, and every good and perfect gift, comes from above, from the
Father of Spirits; who so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son
Christ Jesus a free Gift to all; who is the true Light which lights every one
that comes into the World, that all through him might believe: Now every one
that makes any profession of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, see that your
Faith stand in the power of God, according to the measure of Faith or Grace ye
have received, which has appeared unto all, by which through Faith and
Obedience Salvation is witnessed unto all them that witness the Scriptures
fulfilled in them; according to the Spirit of Truth, which was left for our
example, unto whom the ends of the world is come; for the world is placed in
man's heart, from whence proceeds all wickedness; 1 John 5.19. as said the
Apostle, We know that we are of God, and this whole World lies in wickedness,
in which is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life,
which is not of the Father, but of this World; which is the earthly part, that
is got up into the heart of man, by which the true Seed is held in captivity,
and is oppressed as a Cart with Sheaves.

And out of this earthly heart, and corrupt ground, proceeds Strife, Murder,
Theft, Adultery, Drunkenness Swearing, Lying, Cozening and Cheating, Pride,
Ambition, Self-exalting, Proud, coveting after their own hearts lusts, in which
the Serpent is head, who got into man through temptation; who also tempted our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when he took him and set him on a Pinnacle, and
showed him the glory of the World, All these will I give thee if thou will fall
down and worship me: Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee behind me Satan: So as
every one comes unto Christ, and are truly obedient unto him, in the power of
God, they can resist the Devil, and he will flee: But the first man is of the
earth, earthly, earthlike; and so the Serpent got into man through an earthly
object, tempting with the forbidden fruit, which God did and does forbid,
though things pleasant to the eye, and to the ^arthly heart, in which the
carnal mind does not see God, but lies in death, but to be spiritually minded
is Life and Peace. And the Strong man keeps the house, until a stronger then he
comes, which is Christ Jesus the second Adam, who is Lord from Heaven, who
takes the Strong man, and binds him, and casts him out with all his goods; who
was, and yet is exalted in the Temple of God, above all that is called God,
where Christ is not yet witnessed to be their alone strength, and their all,
and in all; such are of Antichrist, and are under his command, though they may
profess God and Christ, Faith, Love and Righteousness: for that spirit which
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the Spirit, is of Antichrist, and
denies Revelations, and also the knowledge of God: And the Serpent which was the
subtil'st Beast of the field, he came unto Adam and Eve, and he would be
interpreting the Scriptures, though God had said they should not eat of the
Tree of Knowledge of good and evil; (which is a Mystery, for great is the
Mystery of Godliness, which is held in a pure Conscience,) the Serpent called
the old Devil^ the Liar, he contradicted the comm^nds of God, and said they
should not dye; and so through disobedience of Eve the Serpent entered her, and
so to the man: (and so the strong Man being got in, has armed himself, and so
keeps the house until a Stronger comes) and he has taken the name of a
Christian upon him, even he who was head in the professing Jews, Scribes, and
Pharisees, who looked for Christ's coming, yet when he was come (to wit Christ)
the Serpent who was got up, and is the god of the World, had so blinded their
eyes; Antichrist, the man of sin, he in his members gainsaid Christ: Therefore
Christ told them, Ye are of your father the Devil, and the works of him ye will
do; and so they persecuted Christ to the death; and persecution was always
blind, for it proceeded from the God of the World, and does to this very day;
for God is Love, and has given Christ Jesus the Son of his Love, who is full
of Grace, and Truth, and true Righteousness, in whom is our peace and Souls
eternal Salvation; who said, Do good against evil; Bless and curse not.

Now in true love to your immortal Souls, I beseech all, and forwarn all (in
the Name and fear of the Almighty God) unto whom this may come, that you lay
truly to heart, and consider your latter end before it be too late; and turn in
to the Witness of God in your Consciences, Christ Jesus the true Prophet, the
Spirit of Truth, that will tell you all that ever you have done all your life,
and will set your sins in order before you: O repent, repent, and forsake, that
your sins may go before you to judgment, for if they come after they will fall
heavy: for there is no repentance beyond the Grave; such as man sows, he shall
reap; If ye live after the Flesh then shall ye die; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Flesh, then shall ye live; for Christ came
not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to repentance: and he is come in the
Spirit, we are Witnesses of his Glory; who is not come to send peace on the
Earth, but a Sword, to cut down all that which is contrary unto him; whose Word
is as a Fire, and as a Hammer; who is stronger that is in us, then he that is
in the World, who takes the strong man armed, and dispossesseth him of all;
and overturns the Earth and the Foundation thereof; and destroys the old Earth,
and the old Heavens, where Antichrist the God of this World has taken up the
heart with other Lovers; but blessed be the Name of the Lord our God, who has
given the Son of his Love into our hearts, and has changed our hearts, and
minds, and has set our affections on things above, and has taken away the
stony unbelieving heart, and ^ath given us a new heart, and has renewed a
right spirit in us, by which we witness his Promise fulfilled, who said, he
would create a new earth, and new Heavens, wherein dwells Righteousness,
(Christ the Righteousness of God) who came not to destroy men's lives, but to
save them: Antichrist he persecutes in pretense of the true Christ, and puts to
death; (O subtle Serpent) Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, therefore his
Servants will not fight; Antichrist, self-exal^ed man, whose Kingdom is of this
World, he fights and kills about Religion, lest his Kingdom should go down; for
if the true Christ, whose free Grace, Truth, and Righteousness, which cannot be
bought with money, or purchased with any carnal earthly object; I say, if the
Grace of God, Christ Jesus the Son of his Love, who is the true Oil, if this
take place in the heart, and therewith the Lamp be trimed, ye will be wise
Virgins, and need not go buy of Babylons Merchants, or that any man should
teach you; but as that same Anointing abides in you, it will teach you all
things, which is Truth, and no Lie: then will Antichrist's Kingdom go down,
which he was afraid of, (before he had crucified Christ) when exalted in the
Scribes and Pharisees, being got up into the heart of man, yea, in the Temple
of God, and would be exalted above all that is called God, (when many believed
Christ, and followed after him) then Antichrist s^ood up in his Members, and
said, If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him; and the Romans
will come, and take away both our place and Nation, John 11.48. therefore they
arose and crucified him: but he is risen again, and is come in the Spirit, and
has made many Witnesses of his Resurrection, through Faith in his Name, whose
Name be blessed, and praised, and magnified for evermore.

Now every one prize the day of your visitation, not knowing how soon your
Soul^ may be required of you: O have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of persons, in an outward Profession, and in formality of any carnal
Ordinance, as in remembrance, of Christ, to show forth his death until he come^
for he is come in the Spirit, and is worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth;
and this is the Ordinance of God, Christ Jesus, who is the Righteousness of
God, in whom is the spiritual Baptism; for there is but one Faith, one Lord,
one Baptism: So every one keep unto that Faith which works by Love in the
heart, through the Spirit, by which you will come to know the deeds of the
Flesh to be mortified, and your hearts to be cleansed, purified and sanctified,
and so come to know the redemption of your immortal Souls; and this is the true
Faith, and the true Baptism which washes and purifieth the heart in the water
of Regeneration, through the Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus, by which we
are come to know the new birth, born again of that which is immortal, which
cannot feed upon any thing that dies of it self; but of that which is living,
pure, clean, and uncorruptible, even of the Bread of Life which comes down from
Heaven, from the Father of all our mercies; who has broken of his own body,
and has given us to eat of his Flesh, and to drink of his Blood, in which is
Life indeed, Life Eternal (but this is a great Mystery) to the carnal mind in
which is death: Therefore return in the eye of your understandings unto that
which is pure and holy of God; for as the Apostle said, What is to be known of
God is made manifest in us; and God has showed it unto us, who is a Spirit;
and to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace.

The Superscription and Copy of the Letter to the Bishop. This for the hands of
John Hackitt, who is called Bishop of Liechfield and Coventry, for him to read
over, that he may try all things, and hold fast that which is good.
Friend,
I Being c^st into Prison by thy servants, at thy command, for obeying the Word
of God, and keeping of his Commandments, in obeying the Truth, as it is in
Jesus Christ our Lord, whose Name be praised and honored over all, for
evermore, whose Love and Mercy through the riches of his Grace, which has
appeared unto all men, has appeared unto us, as the Apostle said, Teaching us
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live Soberly, Godly, and
Righteously, and Holy, in this present evil ^orld; and the arm of the Lord is
not shortened, who is the same yesterday to day and for ever; who is the
Salvation of his people unto as many as believe in him: Now it is not such,
that says with their lips, and opens their mouths, and cries Lord, Lord, that
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and also talk of God and Christ, Faith
and Righteo^sness, and of being Believers, and yet live in their sins, that can
enter into God's Kingdom; for his Kingdom stands not, or consists in Meats or
in Drinks, or in diverse Washings; but in Righteousness and true Holiness,
without which there is none can see God; but sin is an unrighteous work, by
which the Enemy got into man through temp^ation and a lie, and all
unrighteousness is sin, and that must never enter into God's Kingdom, nor any
while they are servants thereunto; for, no man can be a servant unto two
ma^ters, God and Mamon, Christ and Belial; but his servant thou art unto whom
thou yieldest thy members servant unto [mark] whether of sin unto Death, or
unto Righteous in which is Life eternal. Now in the beginning when God made man
and set him and placed him in Paradise, he created man in his own Image, in the
Image of God created he him, male and female, and God blessed them, and said
unto them, Be fruitful and multiply and gave him Dominion over all, Genesis 1. And
the Lord God took the man and put him into the ^arden^ t^ dress it and to keep
it, and the Lord commanded the man (...), Of every Tree of the Garden thou
may freely eat, but of (...) Tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat of i^; for, in the day thou eats thereof thou shall surely dye, Now the
Serpent was more subtle then any Beast of the field, and he said unto the
woman, ye shall not surely dye: but we see the Serpent was a Liar from his
beginning, who got in through a temptation and a Lie, by which sin entered,
through ^ransgression, for which the Law was added; and for his wicked work was
accursed from God; and man for his disobedience was cast out from God; so by
the disobedience of one, many were made Sinners; and by the obedience of one,
many were made Righteous^ which was, and is through Faith (...) Christ; For the
Just lives by Faith, and without Faith, it is impos^^ble to please God: but
^here was and is the Faith of Devils, that works not in the love, but in the
emni^y, and so brings forth of the sower Grap^, which is sin and
unrighteousness; and through disobedience sin entered, by which man is led
captive at the Enemie^ will, into the corrupt nature, into ungodliness and
unrighteousness, which is the corrupt ground from whence proceeds all evil, in
which ^ate there is none does good, no not one; and in which (...) all have
sinned and come short of the Glory of the living God, in whom is Salvation^ and
Eternal Life, through Christ Jesus, who is the Author and the Finisher of our
Faith which we have received from God Almighty, from whence every good and
perfect gift comes^ And that Faith which comes from God alone, it works by love
in the heart, and this is the Love of God that we keep his Commandments, and
his Commandments are not burdensome, For all that are born of God overcomes
this World, 1 John 5.4. But the Priest told me, that thou said to him, thou
strangest at me, that I opposed thee in that partic^lar above all the rest, for
thou well remembredst what thou were speaking of, thou were come to thy last
point, and to conclude, that all were miserable ^inners, and thou said all
the World would con^ess that they were Sinners: now, as (...) is written, 1
^ohn 5.19. We know that we are of God, and thi^ whole World lies i^
wickedness; and the World loves its own, in which is the lust of the flesh; the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life, which is not of the Father^ but of this
World. And when the Ph^ri^ees he^rd that Jesus had put the Sadduces to silence,
one of them, which was an expounder of the Law, asked him a Question, saying,
Master, which is the greatest Commandment in the Law? Jesus said unto him, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, wi^h all thy soul, and with all
thy mind; and the second is like unto this, Thou shall love thy Neigh^our as
thy self, Matthew 22.

Now to the witness of God, in thy Conscience, do I speak, which, if thou turn
in to it, it will tell thee whether thou art faithful herein, and whether thou
do act herein according to Christ's Doctrine; and the Scriptures which was
given forth from the Spirit of Truth freely, and not to be made a trade of for
money; neither can the gift of God be purchased with money, if so then would
Simon Mag^^ have purchased the Kingdom of Heaven with money, and the rich of
this World; but Christ's Kingdom stands not in corruptable things, but in that
which is uncorruptable, and is Pure, Holy, R^ghteous, and Eternal of God;
therefore said Christ unto them, in the days of old, Except a man ^e
regenerated and born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Read the
Scriptures (as Christ said) for they are them which do tes^ifie of me, but you
will not come unto me, that you might have Life. Now many have a life in the
ea^thly part, serving their own hearts lust, but whos^ever will follow Christ,
let him forsake himself, and take up his cross and follow him; and whosoever
will not take up his cross and deny himself daily, is not worthy of him; And
whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall lay down his
life for my Name sake, and the Gospel, the same shall find it; For what shall
it profit a man though ^e should win the World, if ^e lose his soul, or what
exchange sh^l^ a man give for his soul: And whosoever shall be ashamed of Me
and my Words amongst this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him shall the
Son of ^an be ashamed also, when he comes in the Glory of his Father with his
holy Angels, Mark 8. And he that fulfils the lust of the flesh, he shall dye,
but if thou through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, then shall
thou live^ so now, do thou know the new birth? ar^ thou regenerated and born
again, not of flesh and of blood, but of the Water, and of the Spirit? the
Water washes, and the Spirit purifieth the heart through Faith in Christ, by
which we come to witness Mortification, Redemption, Sanctification and newness
of ^ife, by the Power of God revealed in Christ, whose Blood was shed for his
people; now that none make his Blood, his Covenant, his Commandments of none
effect by their Traditions, For the Blood of Christ cle^seth from all ^^n; and
it is only the sins of people that makes the separation between God and man,
[mark] Your sins ^ath separated between me and you, says the Lord God; and as
it is written, He hears not sinners, neither does he ac^ept of the Prayers,
or Teachings, or any Sacrifices of sinners, while they remain in their sins;
but he that comes to believe in God and in Jesus Christ, and repents and
forsakes shall find Mercy; but he that hides his sins shall not prosper; so
that it is good for all to confess and to forsake, and not always to be making
a confession of miserable sinners year by year, and so all a man's life time,
this is but the sacrifices of the wicked, which is abomination in the sight of
the pure God; therefore confess and forsake and return to the Lord while thou
have time, that if thou have not sinned ou^ the day of thy visitation, thou
may find Mercy with the Lord; for there is no repentance beyond the Grave;
For as the Tree falls, so it lies; and as death leaves, so Judgment finds;
and if any dies in their sins, which is the transgression of the Royal Law of
God, for which the Law was added, now when God shall come at the last day to
call all to Judgment, for their deeds done in their Bodies, whether good or
evil; if thou have done well, thou shall be accepted, if no^, sin lies at the
door: then he that has done well, and wrought out his Salvation with fear and
trembling, and has known the Living Faith that works by love, to have purified
his heart from dead works, to serve the Living God in newness of Life, and
therein has stood a living Witness for God, and has abode faithful to the
end; to such it will be said, Come, ye blessed of ^y Heavenly Father, enter
into the j^y of ^he Lord: but unto such as have been unfaithful, and have not
known the bridle to the Tongue, nor have not through the Spirit mortified the
deeds of the Flesh, and so never come to witness Redemption by Christ Jesus,
but has hid their Talent in their earthly hearts; such may cry, Lord, Lord,
and bring their Talent or Gi^t, and give it to the Lord, as the unprofitable
Servant did, as is mentioned in the Parable: but mark the answer, though they
cried, Lord, Lord, and brought him his own righteousness, which they had hid in
their earthly hearts, but never joined their hearts, which the Lord required,
(the heart above all things) but it is a manifest token, that such served
themselves, and not the Lord, who never improved his Talent; [mark] what was
the Sentence of such, Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity, into everlasting
punishment, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Thus in true love unto thy Soul, in the fear of the Lord, I warn thee, before
Night comes, when no man can work: and also, I would have thee consider of thy
late proceedings against me, who am an innocent man: first, I not knowing of
thy being at Polesworth, until I saw thee in the Synagogue, unto which place I
was sent by the Spirit of the Living God, to warn all people to repent of their
sins, and to return unto the Lord, and saying, 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin to
rebuke openly, that the rest may also fear.
God accepted not the Sacrifices of Sinners; neither is he worshipped in
Temples made with hands; but according to the Scriptures of Truth declared, how
that he is a Spirit, and is worshipped in the Spirit, and in the Truth; and
therefore I warned all to repent, and to forsake their sins; and to return to
the Lord, for there is mercy with him: and this was but according to the Spirit
of Truth, and the Apostles Doctrine; That if any thing was revealed unto him
which stands by, let the first hold his peace: but herein thou manifested thy
self not to be in the Apostles Doctrine; Romans 12.14. Bless them that p^rsecute
you, bless I say, and curse not.
(who called for Officers to hale me out of the Synagogue) but of those which
cannot abide sound Doctrine; also thou art one of those which Christ foretold
of; saying, They shall hale you out of their Synagogues, and they shall
excommunicate you: examine thy self, whether thou have not been acting in this
work of late, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, who when he taught his
Disciples to pray, said, Pray on th^s wise, Our Father which art in Heaven,
hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, on Earth as it is in
Heaven, and forgive us our debts, or trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us; but herein thou have manifested thy self not to keep
Christ's Comman^s; now if the Lord should forgive thee according to thy works,
who has cast a man in Prison for speaking the Truth, and has done thee no
wrong, or owes thee any thing, or any man, but love. And again, when Peter
said unto Christ, How often shall my Brother sin against me, and I forgive him?
unto seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not to thee unto seven times, but
unto seventy seven times, Matthew. 18.22. and so read on to the end of the
Chapter, of the Parable of the Debtor, of that hard-hearted man, that would not
forgive his Brother, that had trespassed against him, mark the severity of the
Lord; So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do unto you, except ye from^ your
hearts forgive each one to his Brother their trespasses, Verse the last.

But I have not sinned or trespassed against thee, yet thou have cast me into
Prison only for keeping Christ's Commands; therefore greater will be thy
condemnation, except thou repent, and return to the Lord, before it be too
late, when there is no place of repentance to be found.

And whereas it is reported we deny the Scriptures, and are unlearned, and
unmannerly because we speak the Truth, as thee or thou, thy or thine to a
single person; read from Genesis to the Rev^lation, and see where it is you or
your to a single person; but they are unlearned, that have not learned Christ,
and follows not his Doctrine, but Teaches for Doctrine the commandments of
men, Mark 7.7. and such are unmannerly that speak not Truth, but ^uns on
according to their own hearts lust, not knowing a bridle to their tongue, and
are from the pure fear of the Lord, in their hearts, which keeps clean, but
runs on in the broad way into evil communication, that is it which corrupts
good manners.

And much more might be spoken according to the Scrip^ures of Truth, which we
own and practice according to the Spirit of Truth from whence they were given
^orth: and therefore I desire that all people may read them, profess them, and
possess them, that they may live the life of them, for which end they were
given forth f^^ely, and not to be made a trade of.

Again, read the Scriptures, and see who it was all along that per^ecuted about
Religion, Pharaoh the hard-hearted one; Ishma^l a Mocker; Cain a Manslayer,
the envious one; Herod the Adulterer, that cut off John Baptists head, and slew
the innocent Children, aiming at Christ, whom the Scribes and Pharisees,
Elders, and the high and chief Priest fulfilled, with many that followed after
him, (to wit Christ)

Again, read the Scriptures, and see where the Prophets, Christ, or his
Apostles, or a^y of the holy men of God persecuted about Religion; but Christ
said, When ye are persecuted in one City flee to another: or when they were
^ocked, reproached, reviled, and sha^efully entreated, or buffetted, and
smitten on the ^ne Cheek, turn the ^ther also: read James 2.20, 27.

So Christ's Commands are contrary to thine, which is, to do good against evil,
and not to render evil for evil; but bless, and curse not, and pray for them
that dispitefully use you, for God is Love.

Therefore examine thy self, and see whether of these footstep^ thou treadest
in, who sent thy Servants with a Writ of Excommunication, who came unto me to
the Plough, and violently haled me away; and one of them came with a Lie in his
Mo^th, saying, He was come to cite me again to the Court; but it was to take me
to Prison, unto which I never resisted, but went freely to suf^er for the Name
of Christ; for he has not only called a people to believe in his Name, but
also to suffer: read the Epistle of Jude.

And so Christ's Prophecy is fulfilled in this day, who said, They shall
Excommunicate you, and cast you out of their Synagogues; yea, if they kill you,
they shall think they do God Service. And the other, as I was going with them,
about ^ Lands-length from the Teem, pulled out ^ Pistol, threatening, if I
offered to resist them, to slay me: Read T^^^^ 1.7. to the last Verse.

And so the Teem was con^trained, as I heard since, to return with the Seed
home again: Are these the Fruits of Christ, who said, his Kingdom was not of
this World, therefore his Servants would not fight? And art thou a Bishop like
unto Timothy, that was blameless? O consider of these things before it be too
late, and lay them truly to heart, for the good of thy Soul; and do not despise
me because of my Youth; but forsake that persecuting spirit of Saul, that thou
may become a preaching Paul; But if thou perish, I am clear of thy Blood.

W. H.
Warwick, the 3 d Month 1669.
THE END.

