Political Aphorisms: OR, THE True Maxims GOVERNMENT DISPLAYED. Wherein is
likewise Proved, That Paternal Authority is no Absolute Authority, and that
Adam had no such Authority. That there neither is or can be any Absolute
Government De Jure, and that all such pretended Government is Void. That the
Children of Israel did often Resist their evil Princes without any Appointment
or Foretelling thereof by God in Scripture. That the Primitive Christians did
often Resist their Tyrannical Emperors, and that Bishop Athanasius did approve
of Resistance. That the Protestants in all Ages did Resist their Evil and
Destructive Princes. Together with a Historical Account of the Depriving of
Kings for their Evil Government, in Israel, France, Spain, Portugal, Scotland,
and in England before and since the Conquest.


The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Harrison at the West End of the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1691.

Political Aphorisms: OR THE True MAXIMS of Government DISPLAYED.
IT is evident that no Rule or Form of Government is prescribed by the Law of
God and Nature; for that then they would be both immutable, and the self-same
in all Countries. For the better proof whereof, it is necessary to show, how
far Government proceeds from Nature, and how far from Man; to wit, that Man is
sociable, and inclined to live together in Company, which proceeds from Nature,
and consequently also from God, that is Author of Nature; from whence do
proceed all private Houses, then Villages, then Towns, then Castles, then
Cities, and then Kingdoms and Commonwealths (as Aristotle says in his Book of
Politics). Tho Government in like manner, and Jurisdiction of Magistrates,
which does follow necessarily upon this living together in Company, be also of
Nature; yet the particular form or manner of this or that Government, in this
or that Fashion, as to have many Governors, few, or one, and those either
Kings, Dukes, Earls, or the like; or that they should have this or that
Authority more or less, for longer or shorter time, or be by Succession, or
Election themselves and their Children, or next in Blood: All these things (I
say) are not by Law Natural or Divine (for then, as has been said, they should
be all one in all Countries and Nations) for God said, Genesis 2.18. It is not
good that Man should be alone, I will make him an Help-meet (or Assistant like
unto himself): So that as this first Society of our first Parents was of God,
and for so great purpose as the one to help and assist (not destroy or inslave)
the other: So all other Societies, as proceeding from this first, stand upon
the same ground of God's Ordinance, for the self-same end of Man's Utility or
Happiness; all which is confirmed by the Consent and Use of all Nations
throughout the World; which general Consent Cicero calls Ipsius vocem
Naturae, the Voice of Nature her self. For there was never yet any Nation found
either of ancient times, or of later days, by the discovery of the Indies, or
elsewhere, where Men living together, had not some kind of Magistrate, or
Superior to govern them; which evidently declares, that Magistracy is also
from Nature, and from God that created Nature (though not in this or that
particular Form:) which Point our Civil Law does prove in like manner, in the
beginning of our Digest, de origin Juris civilis and omnium Magistratuum, of
the beginning of the Civil Law, and of all Magistrates, which beginning is
referred to the first Principle of Natural Instinct, and God's Institution.
Though Commonwealths and Government of the same by Magistrates are of Nature;
yet the particular Forms or manner of Governments are not of Nature, but are
left unto every Nation and Country to choose what Form of Government they like
best, and think most fit for the Natures and Conditions of the People.

By the State of Nature we are all equal, there being no Superiority or
Subordination one above another; there can be nothing more rational, than that
Creatures of the same Species and Rank promiscuously born to all the same
Advantages of Nature, and the use of the same Faculties should also be equal
one amongst another, without God by any manifest Declaration of his Will had
set one above another, and given him Superiority or Sovereignty. Were it not
for the Corruption and Viciousness of degenerate Men, there would be no need of
any other State; for every one in that State being both Judge and Executioner of
the Law of Nature, which is to punish according to the Offense committed. Men
being partial to themselves, Passion and Revenge is very apt to carry them too
far in their own Cases, as well as Negligence and Unconcernedness makes them
too remiss in other Men's. This makes every one willingly give up his single
Power of punishing to one alone, of more, as they shall think most convenient,
and by such Rules as the Community, or those authorized by them to that
purpose, shall agree on, with intention in every one the better to preserve
himself, his Liberty and Property. What is it but Flattery to the natural
Vanity and Ambition of Men, too apt of it self to grow and increase with the
Possession of any Power, who would persuade those Monarchs in Authority, that
they may do what they please, because they have Authority to do more than
others; since Rational Creatures cannot be supposed, when free, to put
themselves into Subjection to another for their own harm, which were to put
themselves in a worse Condition than in the State of Nature, wherein they had
liberty to defend their Lives and Properties against the Invasions of any Man
or Men whatsoever; whereas by giving up themselves to the absolute Arbitrary
Power of any Man, they have disarmed themselves, and armed him to make a Prey
of them when he pleases.

I have been the longer in speaking of the State of Nature, and the natural
Instinct to Society and Government, for that it is the Fountain of all the rest
that ensues in a Commonwealth; but if we respect God and Nature, as well
might all the diversity of Governments, which have been, and now are in the
World, have followed one Law, as so different, but that neither God, nor Nature
(which is from God) has prescribed any of those particular Forms, but
concurreth or permits such which the Commonwealth appoints. Can any Man say
that God and Nature did not concur as well with Italy when it had but one
Prince, as now when it has so many, and the like with Germany, and also with
Switzerland, which was once one Commonwealth under the Dukes and Marquesses of
Austria, and now are divided into thirteen Cantons or Commonwealths, under
popular Magistrates of their own? England also was first a Monarchy under the
Britains, and then a Province under the Romans, and after that divided into
seven Kingdoms at once, under the Saxons, and after them of the Danes, and then
the Normans, and then the French, and now a Monarchy again under the English;
and all this by God's Providence and Permission, who suffered his own peculiar
People the Jews to be under diverse manner of Governments at diverse times; at
first under Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; then under Captains, as
Moses, Joshua, and the like; then under Judges, as Othoniel, Ebud and Gideon;
then under High Priests, as Eli and Samuel; then under Kings, as Saul, David,
and the rest; then under Captains and High Priests again, as Zorobbabel, Judas
Maccabeus, and his Brethren; until the Government was lastly taken from them,
and they brought under the Power of the Romans. And last of all that God does
concur with what Magistrate or Magistrates the Community thinks fit to appoint,
is plain by the Testimony of holy Scripture, as when God said to Solomon, By me
Kings rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8.16. that is,
by his Permission they govern, tho chosen by the People; and St. Paul to the
Romans avoucheth, that Authority is not but of God, and therefore he that
resists Authority, resists God, Romans 13. which is to be understood of
Authority, Power and Jurisdiction in it self according to the Laws of every
Country.

All Politic Societies began from a voluntary Union and mutual Agreement of
Men, freely acting in the choice of their Governors, and Forms of Government.

All Kings receive their Royal Dignity from the Community by whom they are made
the Superior Minister and Ruler of the People.

Aristotle, Cicero, Augustine, Fortescue, and all other Politicians agree, that
Kingdoms and Commonwealths were existent before Kings; for there must be a
Kingdom and Society of Men to govern, before there can be a King elected by
them to govern them; and those Kingdoms and Societies of Men had (for the most
part) some Common Laws of their own free Choice by which they were governed,
before they had Kings, which Laws they swore their Kings to observe, before
they would crown or admit them to the Government, as is evident by the
Coronation-Oaths of all Christian and Pagan Kings continued to this Day.

The Safety of the People is the Supreamest Law; and what they by common
Consent have Enacted, only for the Public Safety, they may, without any
Obstacle, alter when things require it, by the like common Consent.

The lawful Power of making Laws to command whose Politic Societies of Men,
belongs so properly unto the same entire Societies, that for any Prince or
Potentate, of what kind soever upon Earth, to exercise the same of himself, and
not by express Commission immediately and personally received from God, or else
by Authority derived at first from their Consent, upon whose Persons they
impose Laws, it is no better than mere Tyranny. Laws they are not therefore,
which Public Approbation has not made so. Hooker's Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 10.

Whosoever (says Aristotle) is governed by a Man without a Law, is governed by
a Man, and by a Beast.

As every Man, in the delivery of the Gift of his own Goods, may impose what
Covenant or Condition he pleases; and every Man is Moderator and Disposer of
his own Estate. So in the voluntary Institution of a King, and Royal Power, it
is lawful for the People, submitting themselves, to prescribe the King and his
Successors what Law they please, so as it be not Unreasonable and Unjust, and
directly against the Rights of a Supreme Governor.

No Man can be born an Absolute King; no Man can be a King by himself; no King
can Reign without the People. Whereas on the contrary, the People may both be,
and are by themselves, and are in Time before a King. By which it appears that
all Kings were and are constituted by the People, because, by the Law of
Nature, there is no Superiority one above another; and God has no where
commanded the World, or any part thereof, to be governed by this or that Form,
or by this or that Person; therefore all Superiority and Authority must, and
does proceed from the People, since, by the Law of God and Nature, there is no
Superiority one above another.

Aristotle says, That the whole Kingdom, City, or Family, is more excellent,
and to be preferred before any Part or Member thereof.

Succession was tolerated (and appointed in the World) to avoid Competition,
and Inter-regnum, and other Inconveniences of Election.

It Is plain, from what has been said, that all Government proceeds from the
People. Now I will prove that they have Authority to put back the next
Inheritors to Government, when unfit or incapable to Govern: And also to
dispossess them that are in lawful Possession, if they fulfill not the Laws and
Conditions by which, and for which their Dignities were given them; and when it
is done upon just and urgent Causes, and by Public Authority of the whole
Body, the Justice thereof is plain; as when the Prince shall endeavor to
establish Idolatry, contrary to the Laws of the Land; or any Religion which is
repugnant to the Scripture, as Popery, etc. or to destroy the People, or make
them Slaves to his Tyrannical Will and Pleasure: For as the whole Body is of
more Authority than the Head, and may cure it when out of order; so may the
Weal-Publick cure or purge their Heads, when they are pernicious or destructive
to the Body Politic; seeing that a Body Civil may have diverse Heads by
Succession or Election, and cannot be bound to one, as a Body Natural is: which
Body Natural, if it had Ability to cut off its aching or sickly Head, and take
another, I doubt not but it would do it, and that all Men would confess it had
Authority sufficient, and Reason so to do, rather than the other Parts should
perish, or live in Pain and continual Torment: So may the Body Politic choose
another Head and Governor in the room of its destructive One; which has been
done for many Ages, and God has wonderfully concurred therein (for the most
part) with such Judicial Acts of the Commonwealth against their Evil Princes;
not only prospering the same, but by giving them commonly some notable
Successor in Place of the Deprived, thereby both to justify the Fact, and
remedy the Fault of him that went before. First, King Saul was slain by the
Philistines by God's Appointment, for not fulfilling the Law and Limits
prescribed unto him. Ammon was lawful King also, yet was he slain, for that he
walked not in the way prescribed him by God, 2 King. 21. and David and Josiah
were made Kings in their rooms, who were two most excellent Princes. Shalum,
Pekahiah, and Pekah, three wicked and idolatrous Kings of Israel, were, by
God's just Judgment, slain one after another. And all the Kings of Israel, who
violated the Covenant and Conditions annexed to their Crowns, did, for the most
part, lose their Lives, and underwent the utter Extirpation of their
Posterities from the Crown. Rehoboham (for only) threatening to oppress the
People, was deserted by them, who chose Jeroboham his Servant in his stead,
which was approved on by God.

If I should instance all the Kings over the Children of Israel whom God
permitted (and appointed) to be slain, and those that were carried away Captive
by the Heathens for their unjust Government, I should be too copious. But I
will leave the Hebrews, and give you several Examples of the depriving of Evil
Princes of the Government, in France, Spain, Portugal, etc. and last of all in
Scotland and England; and of the Happiness and Prosperity that did attend those
Kingdoms upon such Acts, which can be imputed to nothing but the Blessing of
Almighty God which attended those Proceedings; and by consequence he approved
thereof, and does approve of such Acts.

There has been two great Changes made of the Royal Line in France; the first
from Pharamond to the Line of Pepin, the second from Pepin to Hugo Capet.
Childerick the Third was deprived for his Evil Government, and Pepin was chosen
King in his stead, whose Posterity reigned for many Years after him, and were
brave Kings, as History does testify.

Lewis the Third, and Charles surnamed Le-Gross, were both deprived by the
States of France for their ill Government, and such who were thought more
worthy, appointed in their stead. All French Histories do attribute to these
great Changes that have been made by the People, the Prosperity and Greatness
of their present Kingdom. Henry the Third, before he was King of France, was
chosen King of Polonia: But for departing thence without leave, and not
returning at his Day, was deprived by public Act of Parliament. If I were to
mention all the Acts of this Nature throughout Europe, I should be too tedious,
therefore I will mention only some few.

In Spain, Flaveo Suintila was deprived for his Evil Government, together with
all his Posterity, and Sissinando chosen in his room.

Don Pedro, surnamed the Cruel, for his injurious Proceedings with his
Subjects, they resolved to dethrone him; and to that intent sent for a Bastard
Brother of his, named Henry, that lived in France, desiring him to come, with
some French Men, to assist them in that Act, and take the Crown upon himself.
Which he did, by the help of the Spaniards, and slew him in Fight hand to hand,
and so enjoyed the Crown, as does his Offspring to this Day. This Henry was a
most Excellent King, as well for his Courage in War, as for his other brave
Qualities.

In Portugal, Don Sanco the Second, was deprived, by the Universal Consent of
all Portugal, and Don Alanso his Brother set up: Who, amongst other great
Exploits, was the first that set Portugal free from all Subjection, Dependence,
and Homage to the Kingdom of Castile. And his Son, who was his Successor,
builded and founded above forty great Towns in Portugal: Who was likewise a
most rare Prince, and his Offspring rules there to this Day.

Cisternus, King of Denmark, for his intolerable Cruelty, was deprived, and his
Wife and three Children disinherited, and his Uncle Frederick was chosen King
in his stead, whose Offspring remains in the Crown.

In Scotland, the Nobility and Gentry, etc. took Arms against Durstus their
King, for his intolerable Cruelty, and slew him and his Confederates in Battle,
(and put by his Sons, lest they should imitate their Father's Vices) and
elected Even, his Brother, King; who leaving a Bastard Son, the Kingdom was
conferred on him. Crathy Cinthus having surprised and slain Donald for his
Tyranny, he was unanimously elected King. Ethus was, for his Evil Government,
deprived, and Gregory made King in his stead. Buchanan, a Scotsman, speaking of
his Country, says, That it was free from the beginning, created it self Kings
upon this very Law, that the Empire being conferred on them by the Suffrages of
the People; if the Matter required it, they might take it away by the same
Suffrages. Of which Law many Footsteps have remained even to our Age.

I will end this Narration with Examples out of England, (before and since the
Conquest) Archigallo, Emerian, Vortigern, Sigibert King of the West Saxons;
Beornred, and Alured King of Northumberland, were all deprived of their Thrones
for their Evil Government, and such who were thought more Worthy preferred in
their Stead. King Edwin being deprived for his Unjust Government, the Crown was
given to his Brother Edgar, who was one of the rarest Princes that the World
had in his Time, both for Peace and War, Justice, Piety, and Valor: He kept a
Navy (says Stow) of three thousand and six hundred Ships, distributed in
diverse Parts for defense of the Realm; and he built and restored forty seven
Monasteries at his own Charge, etc.

The Crown of England has been altered by the Community, and settled upon
those from whom they expected more Justice than from the right Heirs; Witness
the Electing and Crowning of Edelwald and Casebelian; Egbert not next in Blood,
Edward, Adalston, and Harold, who were all Illegitimate; and Edred, against the
Right of his two Nephews, Canutus a Foreigner, and Hardiknute, without Title,
and Edward the Confessor, against the Right Heirs.

After the Conquest, Anno. 1087. Robert the Elder Brother was put aside, and
William Rufus, the third Son of William the Conqueror, was Elected: After whose
Death, Henry the First, his Younger Brother (though not next Heir) was chosen
by the People, not summoned by Writ. After the Death of Henry the First,
Stephen was chosen King against the right of Maud, the Daughter of Henry the
First. After his Death Henry the second was admitted King, against the Right of
his Mother Maud. After the Death of Richard the First, King John (Earl of
Morton) was Elected, and Arthur the Right Heir disinherited. Henry the Third
was chosen against the Right of Eleanor Prince Arthur's Sister. At the Death of
Henry the Third, the States of the Kingdom met and settled the Government, by
appointing Officers, and what else was necessary for the Defense of the Realm,
and Edward the Fourth was set up by the People during the Life of Henry the
Sixth.

Now it is plain, that the Kings and Queens of England, ever since William
Rufus's Time, have proceeded from those who were set up by the People against
the next Heirs. King Edward the Second, Richard the Second, and Richard the
Third, were, for not governing according to the Laws of the Land, deprived of
the Government, and Edward the Third, and Henry the Fourth and Seventh, were
preferred in their rooms, which were most Rare and Valiant Princes, who have
done many Important Acts in this Kingdom, and have raised many Families to
Nobility, put down others, changed States both abroad and at home, altered the
Course of Descent in the Blood Royal, and the like; which was unjust, and is
void at this Day, if the Changes and Deprivations of the former Kings were
unlawful, and consequently all those Princes that have succeeded them (which
yet never failed of a constant Lineal Descent) were Usurpers; and those that do
pretend to the Crown of England at this Day, have no Title at all, (which was
yet never denied) for that from those Men they descended, who were put in the
place of the aforementioned, deprived by the Commonwealth: And this is, and
has been the Custom and Practice of all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to
deprive their Princes for their Evil Government; and that God has, and does
concur with the same, is plain from the Examples beforementioned, of the
Prosperity and Happiness that has attended those Acts.

The Barons, Prelates, and Commons took a solemn Oath, That if King John should
refuse to grant and confirm their Laws and Liberties, they would wage War
against him so long, and withdraw themselves from their Allegiance to him,
until he should confirm to them by a Charter, ratified with his Seal, all
things which they required: and that if the King should afterward peradventure
recede from his Oath, as they verily believed he would, by reason of his
double-dealing, they would forthwith, by seizing on his Castles, compel him to
give Satisfaction. He afterward breaking his Oath and Promise, the Barons
said, What shall we do with this wicked King? if we let him thus alone he will
destroy us and our People; it is expedient therefore that he should be expelled
the Throne, we will not have him any longer to reign over us: and accordingly
they sent for Lewis the Prince of France, to be their King, and swore Fealty to
him, but they afterward discovering that he had sworn that he would oppress
them, and extirpate all their Kindred, they rejected him, and set up Henry the
Third.

The Bishops of Hereford, Lincoln, and several Earls, Barons and Knights for
each County, being deputed to go to Edward II, and demand a Surrender of the
Crown, said to him, That unless he did of himself renounce his Crown and
Scepter, the People would neither endure him, or any of his Children, as their
Sovereign; but disclaiming all Homage and Fealty, would elect some other for
King who should not be of the Blood; upon which the King resigned his Crown,
etc. By the common Usage of England, which is the common Law of England, Kings
may be deprived for evil Government, and others set up in their stead, is plain
from the afore-going Examples.

Richard the First being taken Prisoner by the Emperor in his Return from the
Holy Land, it was decreed, that the fourth part of all that Year's Rents, and
of all the Movables, as well of the Clergy as of the Laity, and all the Woolls
of the Abbots of the Order of Cistersians and of Semphringham, and all the Gold
and Silver Chalices, and Treasure of all Churches, should be paid in toward
the Ransom of the King, which was done accordingly. If all this was given for
the Liberty of one Man; certainly much more ought to be given now, when all our
Liberties and Properties, and even our Religion too lies at stake, if Necessity
required it, which God forbid.

By the Law of Nature, Salus Populi, the Welfare of the People, is both the
supreme and first Law in Government, and the scope and end of all other Laws,
and of Government it self; because the Safety of the Body Politic is ever to
be preferred before any one Person whatsoever.

No Human Law is binding which is contrary to the Scripture, or the general
Laws of Nature.

Religion does not overthrow Nature, whose chiefest Principle is to preserve
her self; and God does not countenance Sin in the greatest, but rewards the
Punisher, witness Jehu, etc.

The end for which Men enter into Society, is not barely to live, but to live
happily, answerable to the Excellency of their Kind, which Happiness is not to
be had out of Society.

All Commonwealths are in a State of Nature one with another.

As Magistrates were designed for a general Good; so the Obligation to them
must be understood so, as to be still in Subordination to the main End; for the
reason of all Law and Government is the Public Good.

Government being for the benefit of the Governed, and not for the sole
advantage of the Governors, but only for theirs with the rest, as they make a
part of that Politic Body, each of whose Parts and Members are taken care of,
and directed in their peculiar Function for the good of the whole, by the Laws
of the Society.

The end of Government being the Preservation of all as much as may be, even
the Guilty are to be spared where it can prove no prejudice to the Innocent.

The public Power of all Society is above every Soul contained in the same
Society; and the Principal use of that Power is to give Laws unto all that are
under it, which Laws in such cases we must obey, unless there be reason showed
which may necessarily enforce that the Law of Reason or of God does enjoin the
contrary. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 10.

T. Cicero says, there is one Nature of all Men; that even Nature it self
prescribes this, that a Man ought to take care of a Man who ever he be, even
for this very cause, that he is a Man. If otherwise, all human Consociation
must necessarily be dissolved; therefore, as there are two Foundations of
Justice: First, that no hurt be done to any; next, that the Profit of all, if
it can be done, be advanced.

That all Magistates and Governors do proceed from the People, is plain from
the following Examples in Scripture; Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19. the Children of Israel
are commanded to make Judges and Officers throughout their Tribes. Deuteronomy. 17.14,
15. When thou art come into the Land, etc. and shall say, I will set a King
over we, like as all the Nations that are about me: Thou shall in any wise set
him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose: One from among thy
Brethren shall thou set over thee; thou may not set a Stranger over thee. So
God did only reserve to himself the Nomination of their King; by which he
designed to make his People more happy than they could expect by their own
peculiar Choice; he knowing the Heart of Man, and Corruption of his Nature,
would be sure to nominate such who was most fit to govern his People.

God did not require the Jews to accept of him for King whom he should choose,
but left it to their own free Will, whether they would accept him or no, is
plain from the following Examples. Upon the Death of Saul, David was set up by
the Appointment of Almighty God, yet there was only the Tribe of Judah that
followed David and made him King, eleven Tribes following Ishbosheth, Readiness
Son, whom they made King; and though David had a long War against the House of
Saul, yet he calls them not Rebels, neither do we find that God punished them,
or sent any Judgment upon them for not accepting of David as King; and when
Rechab and Banah had slain Ishbosheth, and brought his Head to David at Hebron,
saying, Behold the Head of thine Enemy! yet David, instead of rewarding them,
caused them to be slain for killing of Ishbosheth, whom he calls a righteous
Person, not a Rebel: After whose Death all those Tribes came to David, and made
a Compact with him for the performance of such Conditions which they thought
necessary for the securing of their Liberty before they made him King: 2 Samuel
Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5. The making of Solomon King by David his Father, was not
thought sufficient without the Peoples Consent, else why did the People anoint
Solomon, and make him King the second time. We read, Judge. 8.21, 22, 23. that
after Gideon had slain Zebah and Zalmunna with the Midianites, the Children of
Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou and thy Sons, and thy
Sons Son also; for thou have delivered us from the Hand of Midian. But he
refusing their Offer, they afterward made his Bastard-Son Abimelech King,
though he had threescore and ten lawfully-begotten Sons. Zimri having slain
Baasha King of Israel, reigned in his stead, but the Children of Israel hearing
thereof, rejected him, and made Omri the Captain of the Host King of Israel, 1
Kings 16.15, 16. The Kingdom of Edom appointed a Deputy to rule over them
instead of a King, and gave him Royal Authority, there being then no King in
Edom, 1 Kings 22.47. See Macchab. 9.28, 29, 30. and 13.8, 9. and 14.41 to 49.
By which it is further apparent that their Kings and Governors were chosen by
the People.

As propinquity of Blood is a great Pre-eminence toward the attaining of any
Crown, yet it does not bind the Commonwealth to yield thereto, and to admit at
hap-hazard every one that is next by Succession of Blood, (as was falsely
affirmed by R. L'estrange and many others, when the Parliament would have
disinherited the Duke of York as unfit to govern this Nation, he being a
Papist) if weighty Reasons require the contrary, because she is bound to
consider well and maturely the Person that is to enter, whether he be like to
perform his Duty and Charge to be committed to him: For to admit him that is an
Enemy or unfit to govern, is to consent to the destroying of the Commonwealth.
See how God dealt in this point with the Children of Israel, 1 Samuel 8. after he
had granted to them the same Government as the other Nations round about them
had, whose Kings did ordinarily reign by Succession as ours do at this day, and
as most of the Kings of the Jews did afterward: yet that this Law of
succeeding by Proximity of Birth, though for the most part it should prevail,
yet He showed plainly that upon just Causes it might be altered, as in the case
of Saul, who left behind him many Children, yet not any of them succeeded him,
except Ishbosheth, who was not his eldest Son, who was anointed King by Abner
the general Captain of that Nation, to whom eleven Tribes followed, until he
was slain; and then they chose David. And Jonathan, Readiness other Son, so much
praised in holy Scripture, being slain in War, his Son Mephibosheth did not
succeed in the Crown, though by Succession he had much greater Right to it than
David* God promised David that his Seed should reign (for ever) after him --
Yet we do not find this performed to any of his elder Sons, nor to any of their
Offspring, but only to Solomon his younger and tenth Son. Rehoboam, the lawful
Son and Heir of King Solomon, coming to Shichem, where all the People of Israel
were assembled together for his Coronation and admission to the Crown, (for
until that time he was not accounted true King) who refusing to ease them of
some heavy Impositions which they had received from his Father, ten Tribes of
the twelve refuse to admit him their King, and chose Jeroboam his Servant, and
made him their lawful King, and God allowed thereof; for when Rehoboam had
prepared an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen Men, who were Warriors, to
reduce those ten Tribes to the Obedience of their Natural Prince, God commanded
them to desist by his Prophet Shemaiah, and so they did. These and the like
Determinations of the People about admitting or refusing of Princes to reign or
not to reign over them, when their Designments are to good Ends, and for just
Causes, are allowed by God, and oftentimes are his own special Drifts and
Dispositions, though they seem to come from Man.

He who is set up or made King by the Consent of the People, has a just Title
against the next Heir of the Blood and his Issue, who are put by the Crown;
else most of the Princes now reigning in Europe would be Usurpers, and want
good Titles to their Crowns, they or their Ancestors being set up by the
People, which were not the right Heirs of the Royal Stock.

The Laws of the Commonwealth is the very Soul of a Politic Body.

Kings and Emperors always have been, are, and ought to be subject to the Laws
of their Kingdoms; not above them, to violate, break or alter them at their
pleasures, they being obliged by their Coronation-Oaths, in all Ages and
Kingdoms, inviolably to observe them: for St. Paul says, A Prince is the
Minister of God for the Peoples Good, and Tribute and Custom are paid to him,
that he may continually attend thereto.

The Defense and Procuration of the Commonwealth is to be managed to the
benefit of those who are committed, not of those to whom it is committed. A
just Governor for the benefit of the People, is more careful of the Public
Good and Welfare, than of his own private Advantage.

Allegiance is nothing but Obedience according to Law, which when the Prince
violates, he has no Right to Obedience.

There is a mutual Obligation between the King and People, which whether it be
only Civil or Natural, tacit, or in express Words, can be taken away by no
Agreements, violated by no Law, rescinded by no Force.

A Kingdom is nothing else but the mutual Stipulation between the People and
their Kings.

The supreme Authority of a Nation belongs to those who have the Legislative
Authority reserved to them; but not to those who have only the Executive, which
is plainly a Trust when it is separated from the Legislative Power; and all
Trusts by their Nature import, That those to whom they are given are
accountable, though no such Condition is specified.

If the Subject may in no case resist, then there can be no Law, but the Will
and Pleasure of the Prince: for whoever must be opposed in nothing, may do
every thing; then all our Laws signify no more than so many Ciphers: And what
are the Lawmakers but so many Fools or Madmen, who give themselves trouble to
no purpose? For if the King is not obliged to govern by those Laws that they
make, to what purpose are the People to obey such Laws?

Whether another has Right to my Goods, or, if he demand them, I have no Right
to keep them, is all one.

If the King sue me by pretense of Law, and endeavor to take away my Money, my
House or my Land, I may defend them by the Law; but if he comes armed to take
away my Liberty, Life and Religion, which are mine by the Laws of God and Man,
may I not secure them with a good Conscience?

Every Man has a Right to preserve himself, his Rights and Privileges, against
him who has no Authority to invade them: And this was the Case of Moses, who
seeing an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, he slew him. And Samson made War upon the
Philistines for burning his Wife and her Father, who were both but private
Persons, who knew they could have no other kind of Justice against them, but
what the Law of Nature gives every Man.

We ought (says the Learned Junius Brutus in his Discourse of Government) to
consider that all Princes are born Men. We cannot therefore expect to have only
perfect Princes, but rather we ought to think it well with us if we have gained
but indifferent ones: therefore the Prince shall not presently be a Tyrant if
he keep not measure in some things, if now and then he obey not Reason, if he
more slowly seek the Public Good, if he be less diligent in administering
Justice. For seeing a Man is not set over Men as if he were some God, as he is
over Beasts, but as he is a Man born in the same Condition with them: as that
Prince shall be proud, who will abuse Men like Beasts; so that People shall be
unjust, who shall seek a God in a Prince, and a Divinity in this frail Nature.
But truly if he shall wilfully subvert the Republic; if he shall wilfully
pervert the Laws; if he shall have no care of his Faith, none of his Promises,
none of Justice, none of Piety; if himself become an Enemy of his People, or
shall use all or the chiefest Notes we have mentioned, then verily he may be
judged a Tyrant, that is, an Enemy of God and Men: And by how much longer he is
tolerated, the more intolerable he becomes, and they may act against him
whatever they may use against a Tyrant either by Law or just Force. Tyranny is
not only a Crime, but the Head, and, as it were, the heap of all Crimes;
therefore is he so much the more wicked than any Thief, Murderer, or
sacrilegious Person, by how much it is more grievous to offend many and all,
than particular Persons. Now if all these be reputed Enemies, if they be
capitally punished, if they suffer pains of Death, can any invent a Punishment
worthy so horrid a Crime?

The Laws are the Nerves and Sinews of Society; and as the Magistrate is above
the People, so is the Law above the Magistrate, or else there can be no Civil
Society.

He who makes himself above all Law, is no Member of a Common wealth, but a
mere Tyrant.

If a Magistrate, notwithstanding all Laws made for the well-governing a
Community, will act plainly destructive to that Community, they are discharged
either from Active or Passive Obedience, and indispensibly obliged by the Law
of Nature to Resistance.

Is it not reasonable and just I should have a right to destroy him who
threatens me with Destruction? for by the Fundamental Law of Nature, Man being
to be preserved as much as possible, when all cannot be preserved, the Safety
of the Innocent is to be preferred; I say, he who having renounced his Reason,
the common Rule and Measure God has given to Mankind, by endeavoring to
destroy me, is thereby become as a Beast of Prey, and ought to be treated
accordingly.

The Laws (says Tully) are above the Magistrates, as the Magistrates are above
the People.

He who is destructive to the Being of another, has quitted the Reason which
God has given to be the Rule betwixt Man and Man of Justice and Equity, has
put himself into the State of War with the other, and is as noxious as any
savage Beast that seeks his Destruction.

No Man in Civil Society can be exempted from the Laws of it: for if there be
no Appeal on Earth, for Redress or Security against any Mischief the Prince may
do, then every Man in that Society is in a State of Nature with him, in respect
of him.

Thucidides l. 2. says, Not only those are Tyrants who reduce others into
Servitude, but much rather those, who when they may repulse that Violence, take
no care to do it; but especially those who will be called the Defenders of
Greece and the Common Country, but yet help not their oppressed Country.

If a Man may be a Wolf to a Man, nothing forbids but that a Man may be a God
to a Man, as it is in the Proverb. Therefore Antiquity has enrolled Hercules
amongst the number of the Gods, because he punished and tamed Procrustes,
Busyris, and other Tyrants, the Pests of Mankind, and Monsters of the World. So
also the Roman Empire, as long as it stood free, was often called the Patrocine
against the Robberies of Tyrants, because the Senate was the Haven and Refuge
of Kings, People and Nations.

It is as lawful, and more reasonable, to prevent the overthrowing of our
Religion, Laws, Rights and Privileges, from any Man or Men whatsoever amongst
our selves, as from a foreign Power; because one acts contrary to the Laws of
God and the Country, and the other being not subject to the Laws of the
Country, can be no ways bound by it.

It was thought no Injustice in the Ship to cast out the Prophet, when they
found he was likely to prove the Wrack of them all; and the Almighty showed he
approved of their Act, by quieting the Storm when he was gone. The Scripture,
that has set us none but good Examples, tells us, That some Princes should not
have one of their Race left that pisseth against the Wall: Now what were their
Faults but Idolatry and Oppression of their People? Then how can it be a Sin in
a Nation to free themselves from an idolatrous and oppressing King? When it is
done by the greatest and most considerable part thereof, it does silently imply
a Consent of God; for it cannot be Covetousness or Ambition that moves such a
Multitude.

When once the Christian Religion is become a part of the Subjects Property by
the Laws and Constitutions of the Country, then it is to be considered as one
of their principal Rights: and so may be defended as well as any other Civil
Right; since that those different Forms of Government that the Jews were under,
is no Rule for the Government of any Nation or People whatsoever.

The Principles of Natural Religion give those who are in Authority, no Power
at all, but only secure them in the Possession of that which is theirs by the
Laws of the Country.

That Cause is just which defends the Laws, which protects the Common Good,
which shall preserve the Realm: And that Cause is unjust which violates the
Laws, defends the Breakers of the Laws, protects the Subverters of the Country.
That is just which will destroy Tyrannical Government; that unjust which would
abolish just Government; that lawful which tends to the Public Good, that
unlawful which tends to the Private.

But alas, that Bugbear Dagon of Passive Obedience, is a Notion crept into the
World, and most zealously, and perhaps as ignorantly defended: Here all our
Laws and Decrees, by which we are governed, are of the Peoples Choice; first
made by the Subject, and then confirmed by the King. Here a King cannot take
our Sons and Daughters, our Fields and Vineyards away, unless we please to give
him them.

Where was the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, when Elisha prayed for Blindness
to come upon those who were sent by the King of Syria to fetch him? And when he
commanded the Door to be shut, and the Messenger to be held fast who was sent
for his Head by the King of Israel? And when Azariah, with fourscore valiant
Priests, thrust out Vzziah, their lawful King, out of the Temple? And when
Elijah destroyed the two Captains with Fire from Heaven, with the hundred Men
under their Command, who were sent at twice, by King Ahaziah, to fetch him? And
when the Children of Israel slew Amasiah, their lawful King, for his Idolatry,
without any appointment in Scripture, or prophecy of his Downfall? and yet that
is no where called Rebellion, neither were they punished by his Son, whom they
had made King in his Father's stead. And when Mattathias slew the King's
Commissioner, for compelling Men to Idolatry? And when Mattathias and his
Friends pulled down the Altars which were adapted to Idols, 1 Macc. 2.25, 45.

Where was the Doctrine of Passive Obedience when the Edomites revolted from
Jehoram, and made themselves a King? And Libnah did also revolt, because of his
Evil Government, 2 Chronicles. 21. without any appointment, or foretelling of their
Revolt by God in Scripture, or being called Rebels. And when Readiness Subjects
swore that Saul should not kill Jonathan; and they rescued him that he died
not? 1 Samuel 14.45. And when David (though a private Man) armed himself with six
hundred Men, no doubt but he designed to have fought Saul and his Army, if the
Men of Keliah would have assisted him, and have been true to him; when he
enquired of the lord, Whether the Men of Keliah would deliver him and his Men
into the Hands of Saul? upon the Lord's answering, They would deliver them up,
he and his Men departed the City, 1 Samuel 23. Can any Man imagine their meaning
was to run up and down the Country together, and fly before Saul and his Army,
if they had been able to cope with any Number he could bring or send against
them? If Resistance was Unlawful, and a Sin, surely David, a Man after God's
own Heart, would have known it; and then he would not have involved the six
hundred Men that came to his Assistance in the Sin of Rebellion, but have told
them, that the Prince was not to be resisted, though never so great a Tyrant.

Where was the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, when Constantine the Great aided
the oppressed Christians and Romans, against the Tyranny and Persecution of the
Emperors, Maxentius and Maximinius, with Force of Arms, with which he conquered
those Persecutors in several Battles, fought against them at the Christians
earnest Importunity? And when the Primitive Christians resisted Lucinius their
Emperor, for persecuting them contrary to Law; and Constantine the Great joined
with them, who held it his Duty, says Eusebius, to deliver an infinite
multitude of Men, by cutting off a few wicked Ones, as the Pests and Plagues of
the Time. And when the Primitive Christians of Constantinople opposed Asper's
being made Emperor; but Leo being named, they consented thereto. An4 when the
Christians, under the King of Persia, resisted him for persecuting them, and
was assisted by Theodosius the Roman Emperor, who told the King of Persia, He
was ready to defend them, and no ways to see them suffer for Religion? And when
the Christians of Armenia the Greater, made a League with the Romans for the
securing of their Persons and their Religion, against the Persians under whom
they lived? And when the Novatians, assisted by the Orthodox, resisted and beat
the Macedonians, though they were assisted by Constantius the Emperor, with
four thousand Men to drive them from Pap^lagonia? And when the Primitive
Christians destroyed Julian's Idolatrous Temple in his Reign?

Where was the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, when the Lutheran Churches
defended themselves against the Emperor Charles the Fifth? And when the
Protestants Austria took up Arms, Anno 1608, against Matthias King of Hungaria,
for denying them the free Exercise of their Religion? And when Queen Elizabeth
assisted the Hollanders against their lawful Sovereign? And when she assisted
the Protestants of France, against their lawful Sovereigns Charles the Ninth,
and Henry the Third? And when King Charles the First, and the Bishops and
Clergy of England assisted the Protestants of France? And when the Protestant
Princes of Germany invited Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweeden, to come into
Germany to assist the Protestants against their lawful Prince for persecuting
them? And when the Protestants joined with him upon his Arrival? And when King
Charles the First assisted them with Men from England? So that, according to
this Christian Doctrine of Passive Obedience, Queen Elizabeth, and King Charles
the First, with the Bishops and Clergy of England, and several other Princes
and States, have been guilty of St. Paul's Damnation; for they that are aiding
and assisting to Rebels, are as guilty as those that are actually in it.

Lucifer Calaritanus, a famous Christian, wrote a Book against Constantius the
Emperor, which he sent him to read; wherein he calls him, and his Idolatrous
Bishops, Blasphemers; and charges him with inviting the Christians to Idolatry,
and tells him, he ought to be put to Death for so doing, by the Command of God,
in Deuteronomy. 13. where God says, That he that (but) intices secretly to Idolatry,
shall be put to death. And this was approved on by the great Bishop Athanasius,
and those Christians that were with him, who calls it, The Light of Truth, the
Doctrine of the True Faith: How came you (says he to Calaritanus) to understand
the Sense and Meaning of the Scripture so perfectly, if the Holy Ghost had not
assisted you in it? Now I would fain know, whether, he that is aiding and
assisting toward the bringing in of Idolatry, (as the Popish Religion is) is
not as worthy of Death, as he that only inticeth to Idolatry? And this is the
Case of many who call themselves of the Church of England, who are for the
Restoration of King James, and by consequence of Idolatry.

Surely if God had commanded the Yoke of Subjection to the Tyrannical Will of
Princes, it is strange that neither the Prophets, Elisha and Elijah, nor
Azariah, nor David with his Followers, nor the Jews under their Kings, nor the
Primitive Christians after their Religion was established by Laws, nor any of
the Reformed Churches, should not have known this Doctrine of Passive Obedience.

In the Barons Wars, under Simon of Monfort, the King and his Sons were taken
Prisoners; but the Prince escaping, fights Simon and kills him: The Historians
of those Times calls him not a Rebel or a Traitor, but a Martyr for the
Liberties of Church and State.

If Resistance be unlawful upon any Account whatsoever, then were all those
People guilty of Rebellion, who in all Ages have resisted or turned out their
Evil and Destructive Kings and Governors; and then the Jews were guilty of
this Sin, for slaying and turning out several of their Kings, without any
appointment from God in Scripture. So likewise the Primitive Christians did
involve themselves under the Guilt of St. Paul's Damnation, for resisting of
their Kings and Emperors; and likewise the Christians in all Ages since, who
have resisted their Princes by turning them out, etc. And then Bishop
Athanasius, (Author of our Creed) and those Christians with him, did also come
under the Guilt of St. Paul's Damnation, for approving of Calaritanus's Book,
which, according to the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, was a Treasonable and
Rebellious Book; for the Incendiaries to Rebellion, are as guilty as they that
are actually in it. And then all those Princes that have been set up by the
People, in the room of those whom they have turned out, (for their Evil
Government) were Usurpers; and consequently all those who have succeeded them,
where the Descent of the Blood is altered, are Intruders, Usurpers, and no
lawful Kings.

Were the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, without reserve, a True Doctrine, no
doubt but we should have had a better Account thereof than from a few
Court-Divines, who have most learnedly interpreted the Will and Pleasure of the
Prince against the Laws of Nature, or of the Country, to be the Powers which
St. Paul requires Obedience unto, under the pain of Damnation. So by
consequence the Law cease to be the Powers; then we are in a worse condition
than in the State of Nature.

With what Face can any Man assert that Passive Obedience, without reserve, is
the Doctrine of the Gospel? which is charging God with as palpable a
Contradiction as any two things can be, it being diametrically opposite to the
Law of Self-preservation, which is the Law of Nature, and the Decree of the
Almighty, which Law is Sacred, and not to be infringed by any Man.

God never commanded any thing contrary to the Law of Nature, unless it were in
the Case of Abraham in commanding of him (as a trial of his Faith) to offer up
his Son Isaac.

Protection is the only cause of Allegiance and Obedience, is plain, from the
Example of David and his six hundred Men, who were protected from Saul and his
Army, by Achish King of the Philistines, who gave them Ziklag to live in, and
David and his Men fought for the Philistines against the Geshurites, Gezrites
and the Amalekites, and subdued them. David owed no Allegiance to Saul, who
sought his destruction, is plain; for when Achish told David that he and his
Men should go with him to fight against the Children of Israel; David offered
his service, and said to Achish, Surely thou shall know what thy Servant can
do. Then Achish said unto David, Therefore I will make thee keeper of my Head
for ever. So David and his Men went in the rear of the Army; and when the Lords
of the Philistines would not let David and his Men, fight for them, lest they
should betray them into the hands of Saul and his Army, then David expostulated
with Achish, and said, What have I done? and what have thou found in thy
Servant, so long as I have been with thee unto this day, that I may not go
fight against the Enemies of my Lord the King? 1 Samuel Chap. 27, 28, 29. This is
a plain case, that David intended to fight Saul and his Army. Now the Intention
of the Mind is as bad as the Act; and yet it is no ways said, that David
repented thereof, or of his arming the six hundred Men (before mentioned) with
design to fight his lawful Sovereign King Saul.

The Primitive Christians took Protection to be the only cause of Allegiance:
For when Julian the Apostate was chosen Emperor of the Romans, (not by the free
Consent of the People, but) by the Soldiers, during the Life of Constantius
the lawful Possessor of the Throne. The Christians did not reckon themselves
obliged to fight for Constantius against Julian; for they troubled not their
Heads with the Rights of Princes.

Augustus, tho he had violently usurped the Throne, yet he was confirmed in it
by the People and Senate of Rome, who established it in his Family by a long
Prescription, when St. Paul's and St. Peter's Epistles were wrote, of Obedience
to the Laws to Kings and Magistrates: so that we see that Obedience was
required to an Usurper under the pain of Damnation, when the Government was
confirmed to him by the People, that is, by the Majority, for it cannot be
thought by every Body consented thereto.

Apolonius Thyanaeus, writing to the Emperor Domitian, says, These things have
I spoken concerning Laws; which if thou shall not think to reign over thee,
then thy self shall not reign.

In Matrimony, which is the nearest and strictest Obligation of all others, by
which those who were two, are made one Flesh, if one Party forsakes the other,
the Apostle pronounces the Party forsaked to be free from all Obligation,
because the Party deserting violates the chief Conditions of Marriage, etc. 1
Cor. 7.15. And shall not the People be much more absolved from their Allegiance
to that King who has violated his Oath, and the Laws of the Land, the very
cause for which they swear Allegiance to him?

Absolute Monarchy is inconsistent with Civil Society; and therefore can be no
Form of Civil Government, which is to remedy the Inconveniences of the State
of Nature.

No Man, or Society of Men, have Power to deliver up their Preservation, or the
Means of it, to the absolute Will of any Man; and they will have always a right
to preserve what they have not Power to part with.

No power can exempt Princes from the Obligation, to the Eternal Laws of God
and Nature.

As no Body can transfer to another more Power than he has in himself, and no
Body has an Absolute Arbitrary Power over himself, or over any other, to
destroy his own Life, or take away the Life and Property of another; therefore
a Man cannot give such Authority to any, or subject himself to the Arbitrary
Power of another: for the Law of Nature is an Eternal Rule to all Men, whose
Actions must be conformable to that Law, which is the Will of God. For the
Fundamental Law of Nature being the Preservation of Mankind, no human Law can
be good or valid against it; and much less the Will and Pleasure of a Prince
against the Law and Custom of the Country, which shall be prejudicial to the
Subject.

As the Happiness and Prosperity of Kingdoms depend upon the Conservation of
their Laws; if the Laws depend upon the Lust of one Man, would not the Kingdom
fall to ruin in a short space? But the Laws are better and greater than Kings,
who are bound to obey them. Then is it not better to obey the Laws, rather than
the King? Who can obey the King violating the Law? Who will or can refuse to
give Aid to the Law when infringed?

It is impossible any Body in a Society should have a right to do the Community
harm.

All Kings and Princes are, and ought to be bound by the Laws, and are not
exempted from them, and this Doctrine ought to be inculcated into the Minds of
Princes from their Infancy.

Let the Prince be either from God, or from Men, yet to think that the World
was created by God, and in it Men, that they should serve only for the benefit
and use of Princes, is an Absurdity as gross as can be spoken; since God has
made us free and equal: But Princes were ordained only for the Peoples benefit,
that so they might innocently preserve Human and Civil Society with greater
Facility, helping one the other with mutual Benefits.

In all Disputes between Power and Liberty, Power must always be proved, but
Liberty proves it self; the one being founded upon positive Law, the other upon
the Law of Nature.

With what Ignorance do some assert, that Adam was an Absolute Monarch, and
that Paternal Authority is an Absolute Authority? for that the Father of a
Family governs by no other Law than by his own Will, and the Father is not to
be resisted by his Child? and that Adam had a Monarchical, Absolute, Supreme,
Paternal Power? and that all Kingly Authority is a Fatherly Authority, and
therefore irresistible? and that no Laws can bind the King, or annul this
Authority?

How could Adam be an Absolute Monarch, when God gave him the Herbs but in
common with the Beasts? Genesis 1.29, 30. Can it be thought that God gave him an
Absolute Authority of Life and Death over Man, who had not Authority to kill
any Beast to satisfy his Hunger? certainly he had no Absolute Dominion over
even the Brutal part of the Creatures (much less over Man) who could not make
that use of them as was permitted to Noah and his Sons, Genesis 9.3. where God
says, Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you; even, as the green
Herbs, have I given you all things. Is it not as reasonable to believe, that
God would have cursed Adam if he had killed his Son Abel, as Cain for killing
him? Cain was very sensible every one had, by the Law of Nature, a right to
kill him for being guilty of Blood, when he said, every one that found him
should slay him, Genesis 4.14. God made no exemption to the greatest Man living
who should be guilty of innocent Blood, when he said, He that sheddeth Man's
Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, Genesis 9.6. neither Noab or his Sons were
exempted from this great Law; and therefore could have no absolute Authority:
since God has no where given any Man such Authority, there can be no such
Authority; for the Community cannot make themselves Slaves by investing such an
Authority in any Man: should they do it, it is not binding, it being against
the Law of Nature.

If Noah was Heir to Adam (I ask) which of Noah's Sons was Heir to him? for if
by Right it descended to all his Sons, then it must have descended to all their
Sons, and so on; if so, then are all Men become equal and independent, as being
the Offspring of Adam and Noah: If it descended only to the eldest, and so on,
then there can be but one lawful Monarch in the World, and who that is, is
impossible to be found out; so that Paternal Monarchical Authority, take it
which way you will, it comes to just nothing at all.

Where human Institution gives it not, the Firstborn has no right at all above
his Brethren.

No Man has an absolute Authority over the Creatures (much less over Mankind)
because they were given (for the use of all Men) as occasion should serve:
should any Man or Men destroy them for their Will and Pleasure, beyond what is
necessary for the use of Man, or for his Preservation, it would be a Sin, and
therefore could be no Authority; for God authorizes no Man to commit a Sin, tho
he often permits it.

The Law of God and Nature gives the Father no absolute Dominion over the Life,
Liberty or Estate of his Child, and therefore he can have no absolute
Authority; and where there is no absolute Authority, there can be no absolute
Subjection due. There is an eternal Obligation on Parents to nourish, preserve,
and bring up their Offspring, and under these Circumstances Obedience is due,
and not otherwise. What is a Father to a Child more than another Person, when
he endeavors to destroy him? Nay, is he not so much the more odious as the Act
is more barbarous, for a Father to endeavor to destroy his own Offspring,
than for another Person endeavoring it? certainly in such a case no Passive
Obedience can be due, it tending to his Destruction (not for his Good) which is
no Fatherly Act, and therefore not to be submitted to.

He that lets any Person whatsoever destroy him, when it is in his power to
preserve his Life by defending himself, does tacitly consent to his own Death,
and therefore is guilty of his own Blood as well as he that destroys him:
Whereas by defending himself, there can be but one guilty of Blood, (which is
the Invader) in which Defense, if he kills the other, his Blood lies at his own
door: By which it follows, that Passive Obedience to unjust Violence is a Sin,
but resisting such Violence is no Sin, but the Duty of every Man. The first
Duty that I owe is to God, the second to my self in preserving my self, etc.
the third to my Parent and Sovereign, in obeying them in all things reasonable
and lawful.

By all the Precepts in Scripture which require Obedience to Parents, Homage
and Obedience is as due to the one as to the other; for it is nowhere said,
Children obey your Father, and no more; the Mother is mentioned before the
Father in Lev. 19.3. Ye shall fear every Man his Mother, and his Father. Sure
Solomon was not ignorant what belonged to him as a King, or a Father, when he
said, My Son, hear the Instructions of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of
thy Mother: And our Savior says, Matthew. 15.4. Honor thy Father and Mother.
And Ephesians. 6.1. Children, obey your Parents, etc. If Paternal Authority be an
absolute Authority, I ask, Whether it be in the eldest of the Family? if so,
Whether a Grandfather can dispense with his Grand-Child's paying the Honor due
to his Parents by the fifth Commandment? It Is evident in common Sense, the
Grandfather cannot discharge the Grandchild from the Obedience due to his
Parents, neither can a Father dispense with his Child's Obedience due to the
Laws of the Land; therefore the Obedience required to Parents in Scripture is
not to an absolute Authority, for there can be no absolute Authority where
there is an Authority above it.

With what Folly and Ignorance do some assert, That the Kings of England are
Absolute, as proceeding from William the Conqueror? To which I answer, That a
Conqueror has no right of Dominion (much less any Absolute Authority) over the
Wife and Children of the Conquered, or over those who assisted not against him.

Conquest may claim such a Right as Thieves use over those whom they can
master, which is a Right of Tenure, but no Tenure of Right.

Conquest may restore a Right, Forfeiture may lose a Right, but it is Consent
only that can transact or give a Right.

There is no other Absolute Power, than over Captives taken in a just War.

If the Possession of the whole Earth was in one Person, yet he would have no
Power over the Life or Liberty of another, or over that which another gets by
his own Industry, for Propriety in Land gives no Man Authority over another.

William the Conqueror made a League or Compact with the Nobles and Lords of
the Land, to the performance of which, he takes an Oath to observe the ancient
Laws of the Realm, established by his Predecessors the Kings of England, and
especially of Edward the Confessor; as likewise did Henry the First, with the
Emendations his Father had made to them. Stephen who succeeded Henry, made a
Compact, and promised a Meloration of their Laws according to their Minds.
William Rufus, Henry the First, and Stephen get the Consent of the People by
promising to grant them their usual Laws, and ancient Customs. Henry the First,
Richard the First, King John, and Richard the Second, oblige themselves at
their Coronations to grant them, and then the People consented to own them as
their King; and Richard the First, and King John were conjured by the
Archbishops not to take upon them the Crown, unless they intended to perform
their Oaths. If any King refused so to do, the Nobles thought it their Concern
to hinder his Coronation, till he had either made or promised this Engagement.

What can be more absurd than to say, That there is an absolute Subjection due
to a Prince, whom the Laws of God, Nature and the Country, have not given such
Authority? as if Men were made as so many Herds of Cattle, only for the Use,
Service and Pleasure of their Princes.

But some do object, That the anointing of Kings at their Coronations makes
their Persons Sacred, Unquestionable and Irresistible, for any Tyrannical or
Exorbitant Actions whatsoever. To which I answer, That every Christian's*
Baptism is a Sacrament of Christ's Institution; a Spiritual Unction and
Sanctification which makes a Person as sacred, yea more holy than the Anointing
of Kings can or does of it self, (that being no Sacrament) a Truth which no
Christian can, without Blasphemy, deny: And yet no Christian is exempted from
Resistance, Censure, or Punishments, according to the nature of his Crime; and
therefore the Anointing of Kings at their Coronations cannot do it; it being a
Ceremony of the Jews, not instituted by Christ, or any ways commanded to be
continued by the Apostles, or their Successors; it signifying only the choosing
or preferring one before another, and so became the Ceremony of consecrating to
any special Office, and so was ordinarily used in the enstalling Men to Offices
of any Eminency.

The Reign of a good King resembles that of Heaven, over which there is but one
God, for he is no less beloved of the Virtuous than feared of the Bad; and if
human Frailty could admit a Succession of good Kings, there were no comparison,
Power being ever more glorious in one, than when it is divided.

It Is not the Title of a King, but the Power (which is the Laws) which is
invested in him, which makes the difference betwixt him and other Men in the
executing of this Power: his Person is sacred, and not to be resisted, he being
above every Soul contained in the same Society, and therefore cannot be
resisted, or deprived of his Office by any part, or by the whole Community,
without the greatest Sin of Robbery and Injustice imaginable.

If a Government (say some) may be disturbed for any unlawful Proceedings of
the Governor, or his Ministers, how can any Government be safe? To which I
answer, That it is not lawful for every private Man to fly into the Bosom of
his Prince, for he is no competent Judge, be he of never so great a Quality;
else a King was the most miserable Man living, lying at the Mercy of every
desperate Fellow's Censure.

It is impossible for one, or a few oppressed Men, to disturb the Government,
where the Body or the People do not think themselves concerned in it, and that
the Consequences seem not to threaten all; yea when it does, yet the People are
not very forward to disturb the Government; as in King Charles the Second's
time, when the Charters were condemned, and seized upon in order to make us
Slaves, and the Laws perverted to the loss of many innocent Lives, and many
other Oppressions too many to insert, and yet no body offered to disturb the
Government; I say, till the Mischief be grown general, and the Designs of the
Rulers become notorious, then, and then only, will the People be for righting
themselves.

Whosoever, either Ruler or Subject, by Force goes about to invade the Rights
of either Prince or People, and lays the Foundation for overturning the
Constitution and Frame of any just Government, he is guilty of the greatest
Crime, I think, a Man is capable of, being to answer for all those Mischiefs of
Blood, Rapine and Desolation, which the breaking to pieces of Governments
brings on a Country; and he who does it, is justly to be esteemed the Common
Enemy and Pest of Mankind, and is so to be treated accordingly; and how far the
late King James was guilty of this, I leave the World to judge.

FINIS.
The Author's Advertisement.
JUST as I had finished this Book, I received a Reply to my former Book, which
I thought to have Answered; but finding the Arguments to be Frivolous and Weak,
and my necessary Avocations allowing me but little time, therefore I forbore
answering it.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THe Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and Jure Divino disproved. Price 1 d.

The Letter which was sent to the Author of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience
and Jure Divino disproved, etc. Answered and Refuted. Wherein is proved, That
Monarchy was not Originally from GOD. That Kings are not by Divine Appointment,
but that all Government proceeds from the People. That the Obedience required
in Scripture, is to the Laws of the Land, and no otherwise. That Resisting of
Arbitrary Power is Lawful. That the Oath of Allegiance to the late King James
was dissolved before the Prince of Orange (our present King) landed. That upon
the nonperformance of an Oath on one side, the other becomes void, is plainly
proved from several Examples in Scripture. That Protection is the only Cause of
Allegiance; and that Obedience or Allegiance is due to the present Government,
is proved from Scripture, Law and Reason: And those Texts of Scripture which
relate to Government, of Monarchy, are Explained.
Price stitched 6 d.

Both written by the same Author, and printed for Tho. Harrison.


