A THANKSGIVING SERMON FOR DISCOVERY Of the Late Phanatick Plot, September 9.
1683. By JOHN HARRISON D. D. Rector of Pulborow in Sussex.

Tantum Religio potuit Suadere Malorum. LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the
Sign of the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple,
by Devereux Court, 1683.

To the Right Honorable Sir WILLIAM MORLEY Knight of the BATH, One of his
Majesty's Honorable Deputy Lieutenants for SUSSEX.
Right Honorable,
NEver was such a Mite presumptiously offered as this Trifle, to Your Honors
Patronage: But having once Entitled it a Loyal Sermon, I knew not where more
seeurely to shelter it, than under Loyalty it self. Your Honors known Modesty
could never yet endure large Encomiums, which are also unsuitable Prefaces for
a Religious Discourse, nor can I give an account of any secret Impulse of
Nature, except your Powerful Name, in relation to my Lord Bishop of Winchester,
with your Train of attractive Virtues, that has ever secretly inclined my
heart more peculiar to your Honors Service than any other Person whatsoever. I
have endeavored my utmost, what will best agree with your Loyal thoughts, to
keep my self (as close as possible) within the Method of his Majesty's
excellent Declaration, accounting it far beneath the sense of Honor, to write
after an Enemies Pattern, either bitter Invectives, or, if in my Power,
Characters of Blood, so humbly Addressing my hearty Zeal for my King and
Country, better beseeming your Protection than an Elegance or softness of
Style. I take leave with my Fervent Prayers to God for a farther Discovery of
this Fanatic Plot, with all imaginable success on your Loyal endeavors, and
the other his Majesty's Honorable Deputy Lieutenants of this Western Division
of Sussex, perchance for its bigness more fruitful of such great Examples, than
any other Spot within his Majesty's Dominions,

Right Honorable, your Honors most obliged humble Servant, JOHN HARRISON.

A SERMON ON 2 SAMUEL XVIII. XXVIII.
And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the King, all is well. And he fell down to
the Earth upon his face before the King, and said, Blessed be the Lord thy God,
which has delivered up the men that lift up their hand against my Lord the
King.
THE Preacher tells us, that that which has been, is now, and that which is to
be, has already been, and There is no new thing under the Sun.

We have had, and have still the same Instances of Danger: what befell David,
in the case of his Son Absalom, has befaln our Sovereign, of a like unnatural
Son, both Righteous Kings afflicted with a Rebellious Offspring. And if there
be diverse circumstances in either of these hellish Conspiracies, Ours has been
heightened of far more endearing Kindness. As Absalom by fair Speeches did steal
the hearts of Israel, 2 Samuel 15. 5, 6. And it was so, that when any came nigh
to him, to do him Obeisance, he put forth his hand, and kissed him, And on this
manner did Absalom to all Israel, that came to the King for Judgment, so
Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. And our Israel can witness, this
has been no new thing, for that which has been of old time, was also
practiced of our Absalom. Again, the Rebellion that was to begin at Hebron did
happen under pretense of paying of a Vow unto the Lord, that is, under the Veil
or Disguise of Religion, 2 Samuel 15. 7. Absalom said unto the King, Let me go
and pay my Vow, which I have vowed unto the Lord in Hebron. But this pretense
of a Vow was only in effect, to send Spies through all the Tribes of Israel,
ver. 10. As Soon as ye hear the sound of the Trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom
Reigns in Hebron. Nothing more usual than to give out the Cause of Christ,
whilst under that Vizor, they act Parts quite contrary to his Holy Doctrine and
blessed example, so true is the Observation of the Preacher, That which has
already been, now is.

As if the Kings Declaration (for this Days Deliverance) had been the very
Transcript of the Text. And this is ever observable, in a well-formed
Conspiracy (if a Conspiracy can in any sense be so expressed) First, To settle
it self under some chief Leader, that especially of Popular Arts, has
insinuated himself into the Multitude, giving out himself to be some Mighty
one, and what he wants of a just Title, (as that ought ever to be pretended in
an Hereditary Kingdom) he will make good, in his Defense, of the Peoples
Religion, Estates, Lives, and Liberties.

The business is, to cheat the World with a pretense of Sanctity and Zeal, and
to blind the Peoples eyes more strongly in these Mischievous Attempts; they do
ever join this Chief Leader with some notable Achitophel, that is, some
experienced Counselor (if such can be procured) as has been formerly eminent
or successful in the overthrow of a State or Kingdom, 2 Samuel 15. 12. And
Absalom sent for Achitophel the Gilonite, David's Counselor, from his City,
even from Giloh, while he offered Sacrifices; and the Conspiracy was strong,
for the People increased continually with Absalom. And this was professedly
done (as being no new thing under the Sun) in the late Earl of Shaftsbury. And
to make it farther appear, that the Church has formerly had such Enemies, he
is at large described in Psalm. 36. 2. 3, 4. He flattereth himself in his own
Eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful; the words of his mouth are
Iniquity and deceit, he has left off to be wise, and to do good; he imagines
Mischief upon his Bed, etc. A Character so peculiar to our Achitophel, that
instead of describing (as some Interpreters do hereby) an Enemy (in general) of
the Church of God.) It seems a special Prophecy (for so David was a Prophet)
that such a wretch should arise in these days. Now from this Description, ye
may easily conclude, the Conspiracy in a short time grew very strong. And to
this purpose, there happens a singular Instance in the story of Absalom, how
they did continually increase in numbers; and that was, by sending messengers
through all the Tribes of Israel, nor can I deliver in more fitting words what
these Spies did intend, than Tremellius's Paraphrase on this Passage. Nunciorum
speciem (...) se ferebant, Re tames explorabant Animos Praecipuorum Israel,
Absalonis Parts seductos: that is, These Spies did seemingly carry the joyful
news of this Journey to Herbron. (Re tamen explorabante) But in truth, they
were to underfeel the chief of Israel, who were inclined to take part in this
intended Conspiracy. And is not Tremeliu^ his Paraphrase verified in our Spies?
I Or else, what meant the Multitudes of Men and Horses in most Parts of
England? utterly contrary to Law, unless on (a Reception of the King himself;
only to evince the King's Son (as they flatteringly styled him) that by this
mighty strength they were able to make him a King indeed.

And now all things being thus ready for the fatal Blow, (and yet by an
All-seeing Providence no Blow given) The old Fox that had never learnt that
part of the Gospel* that it was expedient for one man to die for the Nation,
begins to shift for himself. And pitching an eye on Holland, most agreeable
with his Commonwealth Genius. He chose rather to hazard his Den of Foxes, with
his whole Association, than his own precious Neck to the stroke of Justice. It
was this Association, together with a Vote of Parliament, That if the King fell
by an untimely Death, it should be revenged on the Papists, which first gave
birth to this Hellish Conspiracy, (...) belief all along, to accomplish (...)

For some the Solemn League and Covenant (on which (...) was bottomed) never
such a Piece of Machiavilian Mischief did enter on the Christian Stage, as this
Association; which however they called The Solemn Union of all true
Protestants, comprehending under this Union, all sorts of Sectaries, no matter
how Dignified or Distinguished, so they were in their wild Principles, quite
opposite to the Communion of the Church of England, by Law Established (the
true Protestant here intended, being a Dissenting Member of the Nonconforming
Communion of the Church of England.) Is not this then a mere Jesuitism, and a
double-refined Treason, for any of these Conspirators to pretend themselves of
the Church of England? when the true Test, without tricks or evasions means
only the Church of England, by Law Established. No wonder then, if the Sword
intended by this stratagem to be entrusted with our deadly Enemies of all
sorts; it was very probable, to have been sheathed in the Bowels of the best of
Princes, and his dearest Brother, his Royal Highness: for it was the
Suppression of the Crown with Episcopacy, which they had resolved the best
expedient for pulling down of Tyranny, and the Church of Rome.

And yet had these Weapons, so craftily formed, prevailed either against Church
or State, these true Protestants had a Salvo at hand to have laid it on the
Papists, a People bloody enough! Yet their numbers being very few,
comparatively with these Incendiaries, (which have overspread this Nation) they
never could have aimed such an universal Massacre as was designed of these true
Protestants. It is here observable of what mischievous consequence any
Combination is, of what kind soever, whether influence of self-Interest, Pride,
Ambition, Spite or Malice; to be led out of the Kings Highway of Honesty into
any Bypath of our own, be it in the smallest matter: only at first perchance
into a Combination of lesser moment; tho only against your Lawful Minister: for
ye know not how soon of these beginnings of Mischief ye may be led into the
broad Road of Rebellion. What a Tempest should we have had, if this black
Fanatic Cloud had broken over our Heads! Never was Death figured with so many
terrible shapes, as were visible in this Conspiracy; but God have the Praise
that we are in hopes not to see it not only blow over, but that the Storm is
like to fall upon the heads that raised it. Some of these Treacherous dealers,
who have dealt so very Treacherously with us, are already fallen into the pit
which they dug for others, and are ensnared in the mischievous works of
their own hands. And it is to be hoped for the rest, that their violent dealing
will fall upon their own heads. (For he who is truth itself, in whom we trust,
whose we are, and whom we serve has assured us, that wicked and
blood-thirsty-men shall not live out half their days) For he who is the God of
all mercy abhors the cruel and deceitful man.

Thus far the Committee of six did succeed in this Enterprise, under many Fears
and Jealousies of a Popish Successor, to hold correspondence in several parts
of England, for a general Insurrection, their Followers being poisoned with
several treasonable positions (viz.) that it was agreeable with the Christian
Religion, with the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, to defend the Prostant
Profession with open Force and Resistance. That there is a Liberty in the
People to acquire to themselves that which they apprehend to be their Right, by
Force, if they cannot obtain it of the Prince by fair means. And this was
especially instanced in the case of the Bill of Exclusion (where reflecting on
many violences, that were offered for compassing this Bill, no passage did seem
more unnatural than a forcing Sir Lionet Ienkins to carry it up to the House of
Lords, who had best opposed it by his admirable Reasoning) on purpose to
represent him (had it been possible) a betrayer of his Trust and Conscience,
grounding themselves on this Julian Principle, that the Peoples Preservation
was the Supreme Law. Thus did these subtle Foxes (while their heads look
several ways) carry these Firebrands between their Tails to have reduced this
flourishing Empire (once more) into Dust and Ashes. These Opinions, with diverse
of the like stamp, I might reasonably insist much larger (only bound in the
compass of a Sermon.) They can be only mentioned to give a fair warning, how
under the most colorable pretenses we never be enticed to combine with any
number of men against a Lawful Power; for however they sweeten or guild over
this Poison, there is no more real way to introduce Popery than a vain fear of
it; and this was the very thing the Jesuits aimed at in the Reign of King
James, and the late unnatural War, to destroy each other by these Jealousies,
and at last, either by Force or Policy to bring us back to the Romish Church:
nor can we ever enough abhor this Pestilence, which in several Kings Reigns
has struck many Subjects dead, by a due course of Law, too sadly made appear
in the death of the late Lord Russel, who encouraged by this Scotch Doctrine,
that it is lawful to defend a man's Conscience by open Force against any
Authority whatsoever, did dare adventure his Body, (yea I tremble) his very
Soul on this false Bottom, so his execrable Paper seems to import; as if
purposely to embolden such persons as are left behind of the same Leven;
instead of a faithful (I fear) he met a faithless Confessor. I cannot believe
but that the whole World will entertain this Discovery with horror; and tho the
Sectaries will endeavor with the greatest Impudence to deny or mitigate it,
yet certainly this many headed Hydra will receive the Blow which they intended
for our Religion: for who, that is not resolved to quit Humanity, will believe
that Religion which is to be maintained with Treasons and Murders of the most
purple dye?

But here a smile must part from me (which however is lawful enough on a
Thanksgiving day) that all this was to be done to keep out Popery, when they
made it one main branch of the Conspiracy to say they did fear it, and when
they were to act that themselves which they had persuaded the World was ever
the contrivance of the Jesuit, viz. to murder the King. In the case of the Bill
of Exclusion, the Duke was to be made away for preservation of the King. In
this Plot the King was to be Murdered for sake of the Duke; so King and Duke
taken in this sad Dilemma were after this new Presbyterian Logic to be both
Sacrificed. Where will these Wretches appear hereafter? That of these hellish
mental reservations did design nothing Base and Inhumane, when forsooth relying
of much Gallantry in their vast numbers, they did resolve to do it with Swords
in their hands: but I would ask them what difference between Walcot's Sword,
and Wakeman's Poison? When the Nation had laid weltring (as at this day) in its
purest Blood; such had been the life of the best of Princes, his Illustrious
Brother James Duke of York, the Reverend Bishops, Nobility, the Loyal Clergy,
Gentry, and Commons of this Realm: But instead of these Fiery Trials, we are to
bless God for a sudden unexpected Fire at New Market, (which the Worcester
Address excellently expresses) was purposely kindled a Sacrifice from Heaven
for his Majesty's happy Deliverance.

The Noonday Star that appeared at this Glorious Birth, did doubtless presage
our now Dread Sovereign, the peculiar care of Heaven, to be attended with
Miracles, where ordinary means should fail his Preservation; instead then of
his Majesty's being wounded of their deadly Quills, which in the Language of
these Ishmaelites did signify several instruments of Death, God shall suddenly
shoot at them (as of this days discovery) and wound the hairy scalp of such an
one, that still persisteth in this kind of wickedness.

Tho it has pleased an all-powerful God to preserve his Majesty in his Royal
Person, through the whole course of his Life, safe and untouched of the
innumerable attempts and devices of his Fanatic Enemies; yet (as if it pleased
the same God) for an aggravating punishment of these Treasons hereafter, he
has given way of his permissive Power to set their Tongues (as it were) on
Fire from Hell, to speak evil of Dignities, and such as are in Authority over
them. The Stature of 13 Car. 2. says expressly, That whosoever shall advisedly
Publish or Affirm the King to be a Heretic or Papist, or that he endeavors to
introduce Popery, to incite or stir the People to Hatred or Dislike of the
Person of his Majesty, or the Established Government: Every such Person or
Persons being thereof Legally Convicted shall be disabled to have or enjoy, and
is hereby disabled and inade incapable of having, holding, or enjoying any
Place, Promotion, Office Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military. Tho in other Cases
these grand Reformers do seemingly Reverence an Act of Parliament more than the
Word of God it self, which has expressly ordained, Let every Soul be subject
to the higher Powers; yet in this Case fully assured to advance themselves of a
popular Odium to the Government, rather than of an Act of Parliament; I do here
appeal daily Experience whether this be not the Billinsgate Language of our
pretended Saints? to burden the King and all his Loyal Subjects with the
hateful name of Papist: certainly a more senseless piece of detraction was
never invented on this side Bedlam, than to Brand the Church of England by Law
Established with the name of Papists, who are the only Bulwark against Papists
and Phanaticks. And to deliver a known Truth, all sorts of Sectaries (how
different soever) in other Opinions and Interests are here like Herod and
Pilate made Friends, for a Crucifying the true Church of God; an observable to
this purpose being first a demure hatching abominable Scandals in Coffeehouses,
to belch them afterward more loudly, being heightened with Wine in several
Fanatic Taverns, for these Shops of Wickedness formerly objected on the Loyal
Party, are become Nurseries of Rebellion, Incest, Drunkenness, Debauchery of
every kind, becoming the sure marks of these chief Leaders of Sedition. The
Lambs were ever allowed to skip and play, (but in this age joined with
Atheists) they may leap over Mountains; for, if you are for a Commonwealth Vice
shall pass for Virtue, Falsehood for Truth.

Enough (I trust in God) to discountenance wickedness hereafter, and no Loyal
Person ever to be out-stript of his real Religion for the seeming pretense of
it in others: so of this glib Treason of the Tongue as it usually happens, they
were hastening to downright Blows.

Several places appointed of these Traitors for this purpose, but with all
imaginable Thanksgiving disappointed of an Almighty God.

Rumbold a Malster; a suitable Leader of these Sick-brained Wretches,
staggering too and fro like Drunken men, yea, at their wits ends, of the deep
draught which they had often taken in of Sin and Treason.

These Bulls of Bashan far more disdainfully cruel, than the Bulls in Red-Lyon
Fields, where again of Savage minds, they thirsted after Royal Blood.

But why all this while no news from Scotland? Such a Train of Mischief to be
hatched in any part of the World and no Scotch Treachery intermingled with it?
Can there be a War at Hebron, under pretense of paying a Vow to the Lord? Or in
England under color of Religion, and nothing in it of the Solemn League and
Covenant? The Serpent may want his Sting, or the Adder his Poison; but I fear
this People will never be without an Argyle or a Ferguson, yet I must
acknowledge, some few of Her Nobility, with her late Parliaments have somewhat
atton'd past Offenses: and perchance this Correspondence now intended, was
rather to be held with the Field-meeters than any sober heads of that Nation,
for sure they have been so many years a Passing mark of Infamy (over the
habitable Earth) for selling the late King of Blessed Memory, as Judas did his
Savior; that they cannot delight in a continuance of such Disgrace, as wants a
Parallel.

Now after a Survey of this Hellish Conspiracy which (being one of the meanest
of my Brethren) I have drawn with a very weak Pensil; a sudden horror nere
seizes my trembling heart, at the sad apprehension what had befaln all of us
(had this Conspiracy took effect) from the Palace of the King himself to the
meanest Cottage, for such was the violence of this Treason, that it seems they
had readily concurred to take up Arms, to destroy the Government, even before
they had agreed what to set up in the place of it, so instead of a Reformation,
which they pretended to have been, of taking up Arms, it must have happened as it
did in our late Confusions. First, Divisions had arisen among themselves, and
then, on what side soever Victory had inclined her self, the Conquered Party
must have been Slaves to the Tyranny and Dust of the Conqueror.

Then the proud Waters would have gone over our Soul, they would have swallowed
us up quick, while they were so wrathfully displeased at us. The face and voice
of an Angel (which hitherto had been for Religion, Estates, Lives, and
Liberties,) would have been changed into the hands of a Devil, to have rent all
these in a thousand pieces, the bleeding marks and lashes of these
Common-wealth-Protestants scarce out of our sides had been turned into a very
Shambles: For it is a damnable Maxim among them (if ever they again attain the
Power) to destroy all Loyal Families Root and Branch, for, say they, the
sparing these Amalekites, was the high provocation which Restored Charles
Stuart to the Throne; no better Language to have been allowed our now Dread
Sovereign and all his Loyal Followers.

Should we ever trust a Rebellion, though flattered with Golden Lives and
Liberties; never any single Person that had signally served his King and
Church, but he shall be shackled with Iron Fetters. In one word, to conceive
our selves under the mercy of a Sword, is no other than England, now an Earthly
Paradise, to become an Akeldama; that is, a very Field of Blood.

Therefore the Thanksgiving in the Text fitly applies it self on this days
Deliverance.

Blessed be the Lord thy God, which has delivered up the men, that lift up
their hand against my Lord the King.

I can compare the Enemies of this day (next this of the Text) with no fitter
Scripture examples, than with Bigthan and Teresh, the Chamberlains of
Ahasuerus, the great Persian Monarch, Esther 2. 21. Two of the Kings Eunuchs,
Bigthan and Teresh were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the King. More than
Heathenish wickedness this, to render evil for good, because the King had
raised them to be the chief keepers of his Body, to become the chief seekers of
his Blood. The Text gives no reason for all this, only they were angry; yet
being said they were angry in those days, it is agreed by Interpreters, it was
at the Marriage of Queen Esther, she being a Captive of the Jews, they
presently clamor, we shall now all be Jews, for Ahasuerus must not Marry but
where Bigthan and Teresh do appoint.

No reason this at all, to forget an Oath of Allegiance, to cast behind them
all past Favors, to betray their Trust, to lift up a hand against God's
Anointed. Yet for a far less Reason were our Traitors full of wrath, not for
the Kings Marriage with a Captive, but for his near adherence to his own flesh
and blood, his dearest Brother, James Duke of York, presently we must be all
Papists.

As Bigthan and Teresh, so our Traitors, once men of great Wealth and Renown,
some Guardians of the Kings Person, others of his Council Board, are on a
sudden entrapp'd in the Devices of their own hands.

This must needs be the Lords doing, and it is Mavelous in our eyes, O that
men would therefore Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders
that he does for the Childen of men!

Sure there are, the better they be dealt with, the worse still ye shall find
them, and of these David was in most danger. Alas! nothing but a Vow at Hebron,
when this Vow was to have deprived him of Life and Kingdom. This is the way of
them all; that before it be seen it may do the Mischief that is meant. What
Dangers are they in that are in this Case? How near being lost, only the Kings
Enemies being the Enemies of God? They are preserved of Ishbenot, an open
Enemy, 2 Samuel 21. 16. as well as of Achitophel, a wicked Counselor. No way (it
seems) to prevail against a Righteous King, except they can keep back an
All-seeing Eye. And shall it please God to find a watchful Eye to save us, and
shall not we find Lips to Bless and Magnify him for it?

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the Children of Men!

Ahimaaz and Cushi strive very hard which might outrun the other, to bring an
earthly King the defeat of a Rebel-Army. Theirs was an open Rebellion, opposed
of a like open Force, and so in some sense to be ascribed to the help of men,
ours was a close Conspiracy, carried on in dark corners, impossible ever to
have seen the Light, so as to have been prevented, except of an All-mighty God.

How infinite more Reason then, for each of us to hasten, which may exceed each
other in our Joys, Praise, and Thanksgiving.

O that Men would therefore Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
Wonders that he does for the Children of Men.

FINIS.

