The ATHEIST's Objection, That we can have no Idea of GOD, REFUTED.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, February the 7th.
1697/8.

BEING The Second of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's- Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

PSALM. X. 4. The Wicked, through the Pride of his Countenance, will not seek
after God; neither is God in all his Thoughts.
IN these words, I have, in a former Discourse, taken notice of these Three
Particulars:

I. The General Character or Qualifications of the Person here mentioned, which
is, That he is a Wicked Man.

II. The Particular Kind of Wickedness, or Origin from whence the Spirit of
Atheism and Irreligion does chiefly proceed, and that is Pride; The Wicked,
through the Pride of his Countenance, etc.

III. The great Charge which the Psalmist brings against the Person here spoken
of in my Text, viz. Wilful Atheism and Infidelity; He will not seek after God,
neither is God in all his Thoughts.

The Two first of these I have already dispatched, and therefore shall now
proceed to discourse on my Third Head, viz.

The great Charge here brought against this Wicked Person, That he will not
seek after God; neither is God in all his Thoughts: or, as it is in the Margin,
with good grounds (as I have before observed) from the Hebrew, All his Thoughts
are, There is no God.

Which appears to me to imply a wilful and malicious slighting and contemning
of God, and his Laws, and an endeavor to banish the very Thoughts of his
Existence out of their Minds. And under this Head, I shall make it my business
to enumerate all the pretended Arguments and Objections which I have met with,
and are of any weight, against the Being of a God, in general; and then
endeavor to show how Weak and Inconclusive they are, and how miserable a
Support they will prove for Atheism and Infidelity.

But first it will be necessary, briefly to clear up one Point, and to obviate
one Objection that may be made against this very Attempt of mine, of Refuting
and Answering the Atheists Arguments and Objections.

It will, I doubt not, be said, That there is not now, nor ever perhaps was in
the World, any such Person as a Speculative Atheist, or one that believes,
there is no God. It is said, with great assurance, by some, That the Ancient
Atheists were only such as declared against the Plurality of Gods, and the
Idolatry and Superstition of the Heathen Worship. And we are told by one, very
lately, Two Essays from Oxford, in the Apology.
That he has traveled many Countries, and could never meet with any Atheists,
(which are few, if any;) and all the Noise and Clamor, says he, is against
Castles in the Air.

To which I Answer, That nothing can be more plain and clear, than that both
Ancient and Modern Writers do give us an account of such Persons as were known
and reputed Atheists, by those that were Contemporary with them, and did well
understand their Principles and Tenets. I need not insist on Proofs from any of
the Ancient Christian Writers; for it is sufficient, that Plato, Diogenes
Laertius, Plutarch, Cicero, and many others, do acquaint us, that such kind of
Men there have been in the World. Though I shall particularly produce the
Testimony of two Authors, one ancient, and the other, it is probable, now
living, to prove this Point; and these are, Sextus Empiricus, and he that wrote
the Thoughts on the Comet that appeared in the Year 1680. Sextus is express,
Adv. Mathem. p 317, 318, etc. Genevae, 1621.
That Diagoras Melius, Prodicus Chius, Euemerus, Critias Atheniensis,
Theodorus, and many others, were absolute Atheists, and denied that there were
any Gods at all. And the French Gentleman Pensees diverses a l' Occasion de la
Comete, Tom. 2.. clxxiv. p. 531.
says the same of most of those mentioned by Sextus, and other Ancient
Writers; and to the number, adds some others of a Modern date: And Mr. Blount
says, Anim, Mand. p. 96.
that the Epicureans constantly affirmed, there were no Gods. Now the Evidence
of these Authors will, I hope, be allowed, because they seem Well-wishers to
the Cause of Infidelity themselves. To these I might add, were it necessary,
That Vaninus himself tells us frequently of Atheists that he met with, (and no
one will doubt but that he knew where to find one at any time,) and he calls
Machiavel, expressly, Atheorum facile Princeps Amphitheatr. D. Providentiae, p.
35.
But indeed, this Assertion of these Gentlemen, That there is no such thing as
an Atheist in the World, is like most other things that they advance, Uncertain
and Precarious, and often contradicted by what at other times they deliver: for
though they are sometimes, and in some Companies, for Reasons that are very
obvious, unwilling to take the Title of Atheist on themselves or their Party;
yet they are often ready enough to bestow it on others; and when it is
subservient to their purpose, will insinuate, Vid. Blount's Translation of the
Life of Apollonius, p. 34.
That the greatest Lights and Teachers of the Church believe as little of
Religion as themselves. But I say also,

2. That it is one thing to disbelieve the Existence of a God, and another to
declare so to the World. And it does not at all follow, that a Man is not an
Atheist, because he does not openly profess himself to be so, at all times, and
in all Companies. There are no Writers so insincere as these kind of Gentlemen;
they are very cautious and tender how they expose themselves to the just
Punishment of the Law. Vaninus himself, though he did at last suffer Death
madly, for his Infidelity, (as one Anima Mundi, in the Oracles of Reason, p. 54.
says of him, that died as madly himself,) yet is he very cautious and
careful, in his Writings, how he renders himself obnoxious to the Censure of
the Inquisition; and he declares, Amphitheatr. p. 151, 334. Lugdum. 1615.
That he will submit all things to the Judgment of the Roman Church. So a
Gentleman of our own Nation, though he endeavors, as effectually as it is
possible, underhand, to ridicule and undermine Religion; yet he would fain
appear to the World to be a good Christian, and one that has a mighty
Veneration for God and his Laws: but, in the mean time, it is very easy to
discover his true Principles and Design; for he declares, Blount's Translation
of Philostratus's Life of Apollonius, in the Preface.
That he thinks it much safer to believe as the Church believes, and to pin his
Faith always on my Lord of Canterbury 's Sleeve, as he says he will do, and
subscribe to any ridiculous Legend, rather than incurr the Censure of the
Popish Clergy; as he basely calls the Ministers of this most Excellent
Protestant Church: for the same laudable Reasons also, he forbears
communicating, what he does, or ought to think Truth, to Mankind, (as he tells
us in many places.) Now if this be the case with these Men of Honor, that they
dare not speak their Minds, nor discover their true Sentiments plainly to the
World; we must by no means conclude over-hastily of their Orthodoxy, by what
they say in Discourse at some times, or publish in Print at others: but, in
short, if they set up such a Notion of a God, as is essentially inconsistent
with the Idea that all Mankind have of such a Being; if they make him either a
Necessary Agent, or a Blind, Idle and Unactive One; if they divest him of his
Providence, or cramp him in his Attributes, as those that call themselves
Deists generally do: in a word, if they make him such an Impotent and Careless
Being, as either cannot or will not govern the World, give Laws to his People,
vindicate his own Honor, and punish and reward Men according to their Actions:
It Is plain, I say, that though in words they may profess to believe and honor
a God, yet in reality they deny him, and have no manner of Notion of his true
Nature and Perfections. But it is not the Name only, nor the empty Sound of the
word Deity, but the Thing, that is wanting in the World; it is the true
Knowledge and Belief of this only, that can clear a Man from the imputation of
Atheism: If he be not right in this Point, i. e. if he have not such a belief
of God, as implies in it a knowledge of the Perfections of his Nature, he may
call himself by as fine and fashionable Names as he pleases, and pretend to
Deism and Natural Religion; but in reality he is an Atheist, and so ought to be
esteemed by all Mankind; for as one says, Blount 's Anima Mundi, in Oracles of
Reason, Pref.
that knew very well what an Atheist was, Such are Atheists, as deny God's
Providence; or who restrain it in some particulars, and exclude it in reference
to others, as well as those who directly deny the Existence of a Deity: And
Vaninus Amphitheatr. p. 124.
calls Tully Atheist, on this very account; and in another place, he says,
Page 152.
That to deny a Providence, is the same thing as to deny a God.

This therefore being returned in Answer to the Objection, That there is no
such thing as an Atheist: Let us now go about to examine and consider the
Arguments and Objections that are usually brought by Atheistical Men, against
the Being of a God. And these, one would think, should be exceeding weighty
ones, and no less than direct Demonstrations; for if they are not such
strenuous Proofs as are impossible to be refuted, I Am sure the Atheist ought to
pass for the most senseless and stupid of all Mankind. He slights and despises
that inestimable Offer of being Happy for ever; he runs the risque of being
eternally Miserable; he bids open defiance to the Laws of God and Man; and he
opposes his own Opinion and Judgment, to the sober and considerate Sentiments
of the judicious part of Mankind, in all Ages of the World. Now surely, in such
a case, he ought to be very sure that he cannot be mistaken; and to be as
demonstratively certain, as of the truth of any Theorem in Euclid, that there
is no God, no Moral Good nor Evil, no Revealed Religion, nor any Future State
of Rewards and Punishments. But can any Man have the face to pretend to this?
Will not the common sense of all Mankind pronounce this impossible? and that a
Demonstration of the Nonexistence of these things, is not to be obtained? Can
any one be directly assured, that there is not so much as a Possibility that
these things should be true? And if so, then it is plain, that for any thing he
can directly prove to the contrary, the Atheist may be in the wrong, and
consequently be Eternally damned and miserable. Now would any one, that can
think at all, run this Dreadful Hazard (...) much less sure, one that pretends
to be a Man of Penetration and Judgment, and to Philosophize above the Vulgar:
And yet this every Atheist does; and that too on no other Grounds but the
Strength of some trifling Objections against, and seeming Absurdities in, the
Notion of a God, and Religion, which the Extravagant Wit of wicked Men has
invented and coined to stop the Mouths of those that reprove them, to stifle
and bear down the Stings of Conscience, and to gain some pretense to Reason and
Principles in their Impious Proceedings. But surely these Persons must know
well enough, that it is a very easy thing to start Objections against the most
plain and obvious Truths; They know also, that in other Cases, themselves think
it very unreasonable to disbelieve the truth of a Thing, only because they
cannot readily answer all the Objections a witty Man may bring against it, and
because they cannot solve all the Phoenomena of it. Now, why should not they
proceed so in Matters of Religion? They know that all the great Truths of it,
have been demonsrated over and over, by those Learned and Excellent Persons
which have written in the Defense of it; Nay, they know too, that most of their
Objections have been already refuted and answered, and that they adhere to a
Cause that has been frequently baffled. They know the weight and importance of
the Subject, and that if Religion should at last prove to be true, they must be
for ever Miserable: All this, I say, they very well know; and therefore it
looks strangely like an Infatuation upon them, that they will run this Dreadful
Hazard only on the Strength of a few Objections, and a bare surmise only that
there is no such thing as a God or Religion. These Objections are their only
Hold and Pretense that they can stick to and abide by, and what and how Great
they are, I shall now proceed to Examine. These I shall take in their Natural
Order: And,

1. Consider such Objections as are brought against the Being of a God in
General.

2. Such as are alleged against his Attributes and Perfections.

3. Such as are advanced against the Truth and Authority of revealed Religion.
The Groundlessness and Inconclusiveness of all which I shall endeavor as
clearly as I can to Demonstrate.

And First, I shall consider and refute the Objections and Arguments that are
brought against the Being of God in General; and these are (as far as I can
find) all reducible to these two Heads. It is said,

1. That we can have no Idea of God.

2. That the Notion of a Deity owes its Original, either to the foolish Fears
of some Men, or the Crafty Designs of others.

I shall at this Time handle the former of these, and Refute the Objections
that are brought against the Existence of a Deity, from our not being able (as
they say) to have any Idea or Notion of him. The Atheist alleges, That
whatsoever is Unconceiveable is really nothing at all: that we can have no
Idea, or possible Notion of any thing that is not some how or other an Object
of our Senses; for all Knowledge is Sense: and we can only judge of the
Existence of things by its Evidence and Testimony. Now God is by Divines said
to be Incomprehensible, Infinite, and Invisible; i. e. Something that it is
impossible to know any thing about; that is every where, Leviathan, p. 208.
and yet no where; that sees every thing, and yet no body can see him; nor can
we perceive any thing of him by any other of our Senses: We cannot tell what to
make of such an Account as this of a God; we can have no Phantasm, Idea or
Conception of any such Thing; and therefore we justly conclude, There is no
such Being in Nature. And as for that precarious Notion of a God, that is so
much talked of in the World, it is nothing but a mere Phantome or Mormo devised
and set up by Politic and Designing Men to keep the Rabble in awe, and to
scare such Fools as are afraid of their own Shadows. The several Points of this
Objection, I shall singly consider; and,

As to the First Part of it, That what we cannot attain any Idea of; or, That
what is absolutely Vnconceiveable, is really nothing at all; perhaps it may be
true, taking it in the most strict and proper sense of the words; for though I
am not of Protagoras's Mind, that Man is (...) yet as I think, that That which
is absolutely Unconceivable in its own Nature, is not possible to be Existent;
so what is absolutely so to us, we can know nothing at all of, nor reason, nor
argue about it; since there is no doing of this but from our Ideas. But I
cannot see how this will be advantageous at all to the Cause of Infidelity: For
there is neither any one that asserts; nor is the Atheist able to prove, that
That Being which we call God, is absolutely Unconceiveable. There is a vast
difference between a thing's being Inconceivable, and Incomprehensible; between
our having no Idea at all of a thing, and our having an Imperfect one; and
between our knowing Nothing at all of a Being, and our comprehending all the
Possible Perfections and Excellencies of such a Being. We readily grant that
the Immense Nature of God is incomprehensible to our finite Understandings; but
we don't say it is absolutely Unconceivable, and that we can know nothing at all
about it. The common Notion Sextus Empericus allows, that there is (...),
common Notion or Idea of a God, even when he dispu^es against him. Adv. Math.
p. 333.
which all Mankind have of a God, is a sufficient Refutation of this Part of
the Objection, as it is also a very good Proof of the real Existence of a
Deity; for if there were no such Being, it is impossible to conceive how any
Idea of him could ever have come into any one's Mind, as I shall hereafter more
largely prove.

2. There is implied in this Objection, That we can have no possible Idea, nor
Notion of the Existence of any thing that is not the Object of our Senses: And
from hence these Sublime Thinkers argue against the Existence of a Deity, and
conclude there is no God, because they cannot see him, and because he is not
perceivable by any of our Bodily Senses. Thus one of our Modern Atheistical
Writers asserts, That the only Evidence we can have of the Existence of any
thing, is from Sense. And in another place, Hob 's Leviath. p. 11.
Whatsoever we can conceive (says he) has been perceived first by Sense,
either at once or in Parts, and a Man can have no Thought representing any
thing not subject to Sense. And he defines Sense to be Original Knowledge.
Which is but the Reverse of what Protagoras, long ago determined: for Plato, in
his Theaetetus, tells us, That he defined all Knowledge to be Sense. Now, is
not this admirable Philosophy? and worthy of those that pretend to a sublimer
pitch of Knowledge than the Vulgar? There is no Knowledge, say they, but Sense.
If so, then, as Protagoras says, all Sense must be Knowledge; and
consequently, he that sees, hears, smells or feels any thing, must immediately
know all that is to be known about it: By seeing the Letters of any Language,
or hearing the Words pronounced, a Man or a Beast must needs understand all the
Sense and Meaning of it; and the Philosophic Nature of all Bodies will be
perfectly comprehended, as soon as ever they once come within the reach of our
Senses. This is, indeed, a good easy method of attaining Learning; and perhaps
very suitable to the Genius of these Gentlemen! But I cannot account from this
Notion, how they come to have so much more Penetration and Knowledge than their
Neighbors. Are their Eyes and Ears, Noses and Feeling, so much more accurate
than those of the Vulgar? Yes, doubtless, these are truly Men of Sense! their
Lyncean Eyes can penetrate Millstones, and the least silent whisper of Nature
moves the Intelligent Drum of their tender Ears; nothing escapes their
Knowledge, but what is undiscoverable by the nicest Sense, and can only be
comprehended by Reason. Reason! an Ignis Fatuus of the Mind, whose uncertain
Direction they scorn to follow, while this Light of Nature, Sense, can be their
Guide. Nor will it avail them to allege here, that when they say, we have no
Knowledge but what we have from our Senses; they mean only, that all our
Knowledge comes in that way, and not by Innate Idea's: for the Author I have
mentioned above, is express, that we can have no thought of any thing not
subject to Sense; that the only Knowledge we have of the Existence of all
things, is from Sense; and that Sense is Original Knowledge, And if so, there
can be no such thing as comparing or distinguishing of Idea's in our Mind; but
the simple Idea's of Sensible Objects being impressed upon our Brain, must
needs convey to us, by that means, all the Knowledge that we can ever obtain
about them, and that as soon too as ever the Objects are perceived. But than
this, nothing can be more false and absurd: for it is plain, that by our bare
Sensations of Objects, we know nothing at all of their Natures. Our Mind,
indeed, by these Sensations, is vigorously excited to enquire further about
them: but this we could by no means do, if Sense were the highest Faculty and
Power in our Natures, and we were quite devoid of a Reasoning and Thinking
Mind. This, Democritus of old was very well aware of, (however he comes now to
be deserted by the Modern Atheistick Writers,) for says he, (...), etc. Vid.
Sext. Empiric. adv. Mathem. p. 164.
There is in us two kinds of Knowledges; one Dark and Obscure, which is by the
Senses; the other Genuine and Proper, which is by the Mind.

And nothing can be more plain, than that we have certain Knowledge of the
Existence of many things, which never were, nor perhaps can possibly be the
Objects of our Bodily Senses. Protagoras himself says, Sext. Emp.
(...): Take heed that none of the Uninitiated hear you, who are such as think
nothing to Exist, but what they can lay hold of with their Hands; and who will
not allow any thing that is Invisible, to have a place among Beings.

The Epicurean Atheist must needs grant the Existence of his Atoms, and his
Empty Space; when yet they must be both acknowledged to be no way sensible.
Those that hold a Soul or Life in Matter, Plastically diffused through all
Parts of the Universe, by which all things are actuated and regulated, cannot
deny but this Power is Invisible, and no way the Object of Bodily Sense. Nay,
those that assert a Corporeal Deity, and say, that nothing can possibly exist
but Body; must needs own, that something of this Deity, as his Wisdom, Power
and Understanding, which is certainly the Chief and most Noble of all his
Essence, can no ways fall under our Bodily Senses. Let him that asserts, That
what is not the Object of Sense, is really nothing at all; let him tell me, if
he ever saw that Power, Faculty, Understanding or Mind, by which he is enabled
to make such a Determination? That there is such a Power or Mind in him, it is
impossible for him to doubt or deny: for that very doubting and denying, will
refute him; and must convince him, that there must be something in him of a
Real Nature, that can thus Think and Consider, Doubt and Deny; and at last
conclude, That there is nothing Actually Existent, but what is Sensible; For
what is really and absolutely Nothing, can never Think, Consider, Doubt or
Determine.

Now let him call this Mind or Soul of his what he pleases, I do not here
consider its Nature; let it be a Substance distinct from Matter, be it a happy
Combination of Animal Spirits; or the brisk Agitation of any fine and subtle
Parts of Matter, it is all one to our present purpose, it certainly Exists, or
is; and yet is it by no means an Object of Sense. For Animal Spirits, Motion,
and the finest and subtilest Parts of Matter are no more sensible to us now,
than an Incorporeal Substance is. And as he is thus assured that there is
something real in himself, which yet is the Object of none of his Senses; so he
cannot but conclude the same of other Men that are round about him, that they
also have a Soul or Mind of the same Nature: for he must know and be satisfied,
that they can think, reason, doubt, affirm, deny and determine, as well as
himself. Now, if he must grant that there are on this Account many things
existent in the World, which do no way fall under the cognizance of our Senses,
it will be strangely senseless and ridiculous to argue against the Being of a
God from His not being so; and to deny that there is any such thing, because he
cannot see Him with his Bodily Eyes, because he cannot feel Him with his Hands,
and hear the Sound of his Voice actually speaking from Heaven. For the
Existence of that Divine Being whom no Eye has seen nor can see, is as plainly
demonstrable from Reason and Nature, from his visible Works in the World, and
from the inward Sentiments of our unprejudiced Minds, as the Being of our Own
and Others Minds is from the power of thinking and reasoning that we find in
our selves and them.

3. But Thirdly, it is objected further, Hobb 's Leviathan, p. 51.
That we cannot have any Idea of God, and consequently may conclude, There is
no such Being; because he is, by Divines, said to be Incomprehensible and
Infinite: (That is, say they) something which we can know nothing at all about;
for we cannot have any Phantasm or Conception of any such thing. Thus says
that famous Atheistical Writer, Whatever we know, we learn from our Phantasms;
but there is no Phantasm of Infinite, and therefore no Knowledge or Conception
of it. No Man, (...). Sext. Empir. adv. Math. p. 17. And a little after, he
asserts, that (...).
says he, can have in his mind an Image of Infinite Power or Time: And there
is no Conception or Idea of that which we call Infinite. In another place, he
asserts, Leviath. p. 11, 190.
That the Attributes of God signify Nothing true nor false, nor any Opinion of
our Brain; and are not sufficient Premises to infer Truth, or convince.
Falsehood. And the Name of God (he says) is used, not to make us Conceive him,
but that we may Honor him. And he elsewhere says, Leviath. Par. iv. c. 46. p.
374.
That those that venture to discourse Philosophically of the Nature of God, or
to reason of his Nature from his Attributes, losing their Understanding in the
very first attempt, fall from one Inconvenience to another, without end or
number, and do only discover their Astonishment and Rusticity. This Bold Writer
does in another place tell us, Page 150.
That God must not be said to be Finite; and so being neither Finite nor
Infinite, he must be nothing at all: Which is the very same Dilemma that the
Sceptick, Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Mathem. p. 333.
makes use of against a Deity. Another Modern Author of the same stamp, tells
us, That he that calls any thing Infinite, does but, Rei quam non capit
attribuere nomen quod non Intelligit; Give an unintelligible Name to a thing
which he does not understand. All which agrees exactly with what Sextus also
says, in many places of his Book; and whom these Gentlemen follow pretty
closely in most things, without taking any notice at all of him.

Now to this, I return; That as it is very foolish and precarious, to deny the
Existence of a God, because He is not an Object of our Bodily Senses; so, to
conclude, that there is no such Being, from our not being able perfectly to
comprehend Him, and to have a true and adequate Idea of him, is equally absurd
and unaccountable. For at this rate, we may soon come to deny the Existence of
most things in Nature, since there are very many of which we do not adequately
comprehend the Nature of, and know all that is to be known about them. There is
(...), something Incomprehensible in the Nature of all things. Are there not a
thousand Beings, which we are sure are truly and actually existent in Nature,
the manner of whose Operation and Action we cannot comprehend, and whose
Phenomenon we cannot Philosophically explain? Let any of these Penetrating
Gentlemen try their Skill at Gravity, Light, Sound, Magnetism and Electricity,
and oblige the World with such an adequate Account of any one of them, as shall
make all impartial and curious Men acquiesce in it as satisfactory. Let him
clearly show us how his own Sensations are made; how the Circulation of the
Blood first begins, and continues its Vital Tour round his Body; how
Pestilential and Contagious Diseases first invade and are propagated; how
several Medicines, that may be properly enough called Specifick's, operate; and
particularly, how the Cortex Peruvianus cures an Intermitting Fever: In a word,
let him tell us how his own Body (setting aside Accidents) decays, grows old,
and dies, when the same Digestions and Assimulations are made to Day, as were
Yesterday, and there is no apparent defect in the Nutriment of any one part of
it. He that can account for these, and many other such like things, which are
obvious to every one's daily Observation, will certainly approve himself to be
a Man of very curious and acute Thought, and of very deep Insight into Nature:
and when he has fully convinced me, that he thoroughly comprehends the Nature
of but these few things, I will allow that he has some ground to disbelieve
the Existence of whatever appears to him Incomprehensible. But if a Person will
heartily own, as he that has any Knowledge and Modesty must do, That there are
many things in the History of Nature, of which he cannot meet with a
satisfactory Solution and Explication; he has certainly no manner of reason to
disbelieve the Existence of a God, on the same account; and to say, There is no
such Thing, because his Nature is Incomprehensible to our finite and imperfect
Capacities. We cannot, by searching, find out God, nor discover the Almighty
unto perfection, Job xi. 7.

But again; There is a vast difference between Apprehending and Comprehending
of a thing; between knowing a thing really to be, and knowing all that is
possible to be known about that thing. We cannot indeed perfectly comprehend
the Nature of God, because we have shallow, limited, finite, and imperfect
Capacities and Faculties; and the Deity contains in himself all possible
Perfection. Every one must grant, that it is impossible the lesser should
contain and comprehend the greater, especially too when the Extent and Fullness
of one, Infinitely exceeds the Capacity of the other. From hence therefore to
infer that we can have no Idea nor Knowledge at all of God, is very absurd and
incongruous. It Is a strange Method of Arguing, that I can know nothing at all
of a thing, because I cannot know every particular that belongs to it; and he
would deservedly be esteemed a Madman, that should deny that there is any such
thing as the Sun, because he cannot tell how many Miles he is in Diameter, how
far he is from us, and which way he comes by a supply of Matter to continue his
enlivening Fire and Heat. When some great and advantageous Revolution is
brought about in any Nation; when the Public Good is secured, the Laws and
Liberties preserved, and Confusion, Bloodshed, and Misery of all Kinds,
prevented, by the wise and deep Council and Conduct of Him, or Those that are
at the Helm of Affairs: Would it not be gross Stupidity, for a Man to assert,
That all this came about by Chance, and that there was no Wisdom nor Conduct,
that so opportunely managed all things; only because he cannot penetrate into
all the secret Steps and Methods of it, and see all the hidden Springs, by
which it was moved regularly on to its intended Perfection? There are many
things whose Existence 'twould be ridiculous to doubt of, whose Nature and
Qualities we are very far from being able perfectly to Comprehend and Explain.
And amongst the rest, there is nothing but our own Existence, that we can be
more assured of, than that there is a God. For as to all Objects of Sense, we
may, as Monsieur Des Carts shows, have some reason to doubt of their actual
Existence without us, till we are first satisfied that our Senses do not
deceive us: Till we know this, for any thing we can demonstratively prove to
the contrary, all sensible Objects may be mere Phantasms and Delusions, and
nothing but the internal Configurations of our own Brains, and the result of
Imagination and Fancy. But when once we are assured that there is a God, who is
perfectly Knowing, Wise, and Good, we shall discover that He can be no
Deceiver; we shall find that it is not suitable to the Idea we have of Him, that
He should delude and cheat us with false Appearances; and consequently we may
well conclude, that he has appointed our Senses to be proper Judges of their
own Objects, and that those Things are actually existing without us, whose
Idea's we so plainly perceive in our selves, and which we truly judge to be so.

And if we will impartially consult our own Thoughts, and reason clearly from
those Idea's that we have within us; I think, we may most demonstratively be
assured of the Existence of a God, and that He is such a most Perfect or
Infinite Being, as the Sacred Scriptures and Divines describe Him to be. I will
allow that the greatest Certainty that we can have of the Existence of any
thing, is of our own Being; of which, as I have already said, no one can
possibly doubt: for whatsoever can Think reason, doubt, will, and determine,
must needs be Something, and have a true and real Being. And because we find by
this means, that there is certainly something actually existing; it will
plainly follow, that something or other must always have been so: for if ever
there was a time when there was Nothing, there never could have been any thing
at all: for absolute Nothing could never have done, or produced any thing.
Something therefore ('it is plain) must have been always, or eternally existing,
and which never could have had any beginning. For if it ever had any beginning,
though never so many Thousands of Millions of Ages ago, it must have then began
from mere Nothing, which it is impossible for any Man to conceive. Now, if we
consider our selves, or any things else that are round about us in the world;
we shall plainly find, that neither we nor they, can be this thing that always
was existent, and which we have discovered must have been without beginning;
for we know well enough, that it was but a little while ago when we began to
be, and that it is but a short space before we shall die, and cease to be in
this World any more. Besides, we find in our selves, and discover in things
without us, such Defects, Limitations and Imperfections, as sufficiently must
convince us, that neither we nor they can be Independent Beings, nor indeed the
Cause of one another's Existence. We must therefore in our Thoughts have
recourse to some first Cause or Origin, from whence all things do proceed: And
that there must be some first Cause, or some Being, which produced both our
selves and the things that are round about us in the World, we cannot but be
assured of, for we know, nothing can cause, or make it self to be; and we see
that we cannot make or produce each other; and we perceive that none of our
Forms or Modes of Existence are Indestructible and Eternal; but that all things
are continually flitting and changing: some improving and increasing, while
others are decreasing and dying. The common Matter, indeed, of all Bodies will
remain, and we do not find it to be perishable, as their forms are; But then,
this we may easily know cannot be the first Cause of all other Things; since we
have no Idea of its being an Active, Intelligent, Wise, and Powerful Being, as
that must be; but the Notion we have of it is, that it is (...), purely
Passive, and obsequiously Capable of all variety of Forms and Motions; as I
shall hereafter more largely show. If we farther carefully consider of this
Being, that we have thus found must have eternally been or existed; we shall
find also, that it must for ever continue to be for the time to come; for we
cannot imagine, how a Being that has Eternally existed for the time past,
should ever terminate or cease to be for the time to come; since there is
nothing in its self, or in any thing without it, that can possibly be the Cause
of its Destruction. Such a Being therefore will be properly Eternal, and
necessarily Self-existent, without Beginning or End, or any Possibility of
Dying or Ceasing to be. Such a Being also, must on this Account, be the
Creator, Author, and Cause of all things: because, nothing can be the Cause of
it self; and therefore they must either be Eternal and Necessarily Self
existent, as we are assured they are not; or else derived from, and produced by
this Eternal and Infinite Being. And as the Beings themselves are derived from,
and produced by this Eternal and Self existent Being, so must all their
Perfections and Qualifications too: for they are indeed the most Noble Things
in their Natures. Knowledge therefore, and Wisdom, Thought and Reasoning, and
all the excellent Powers and Faculties that are found in any Creatures, must
come from the same Power that produced those Beings and Natures in which they
are inherent. And if these Excellencies and Perfections are derived from this
Necessarily existent Being, they must certainly be in Him in the greatest
Perfection: for if they were not in Him, they could not be derived from him;
since it is unconceivable that any thing can give or communicate to another,
either what it has not it self, or a greater degree of any thing than it is
Master of. This Eternal and Self-existent Being therefore must have in it, and
that in the utmost Perfection, all the Excellencies that we admire and value in
any other things. It must have the Power of doing all things that are possible
to be done, and therefore be Almighty; it must know all things that are
possible to be known, and therefore be Omniscient: In a word, it must be
All-Wise and Good, Just and True, Merciful and Gracious, and contain in it all
possible Excellencies and Perfections. Now this may very well pass for a
Description of the Deity; and it is such an One as is very Intelligible and
Plain to the meanest Capacity that can but think at all. And it gives us such
an Idea of God, as we see is easily attainable by an obvious and familiar Chain
of Consequences, and which puts our Minds not at all on the wrack to conceive.
As for the word Infinite, which is often applied to God, and which these
Gentlemen quarrel so much at, and of which they affirm, that it is impossible
to have any Conception or Idea; I say, that it is groundlessly and precariously
asserted: and that nothing but the wilful Darkness and Confusion which they
have brought upon their own Minds can make it appear Unintelligible, For as the
Excellent Dr. Cudworth has proved the Idea that we have of Infinite, is the
same with that which we have of Perfection. And therefore when we say, that God
is Infinite in Power, Wisdom or Goodness, we mean by it, that He is most
perfectly or completely so; and that he wants nothing which is necessary to
render Him most Perfect, and Excellent in that Respect of which we speak of
Him. Now a Being that any way is Deficient or Imperfect, and that has not all
the possible Excellencies that are to be had, is Finite, and that in the same
proportion as it is defective. Thus, for Instance, those Beings which endure
but for a time, which had a Beginning, and will have an end, are finite or
imperfect, as to their existence: But GOD, who is, was, and is to come, who is
and will be from Everlasting to Everlasting, He is properly said to be Infinite
(...). Sext. Empir. adv. Math, page 150.
or Perfect, as to Existence or Duration. For there is no Restriction,
Limitation or Imperfection in His Nature, in this respect, as there is in that
of all Creatures whatever. A Being whose Power extends to but a few things, is
very imperfect or finite in Power; and if there be any Possible thing that it
cannot do, it is still so far imperfect in Power. But a Being that can do all
things that are not contradictory to his Nature, or all possible things, is
properly said to be Infinite or Perfect in Power, or Almighty; so a Being that
knows all things possible to be known, is Infinite or Perfect in Knowledge: and
the like of any other Attributes or Perfections: In all, the Comparison or
Proportion is the same. A Being that wants no degree of Excellency or
Perfection is God; Infinite in Power, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness and Truth. But
if a Being want any one, or any degree or proportion of These Things, it is
Finite and Imperfect, and that in the same degree or Proportion. Now, where is
the Inconceivableness, Confusion, Absurdity, and Nonsense of all This? is it
not as easy to conceive or apprehend that a Being may have in his Nature all
possible Perfection, as it is to have an Idea of one that is Imperfect and
Deficient? for how come the Idea of Imperfection into our Mind? how come we to
know that a Thing is Finite, Defective and Limited, unless we have also an Idea
or Notion of Infinity or Perfection? how can we know what is wanting in any
Being, unless we have an Idea of it, that it is in some other Being? Most
certain therefore it is, that we may have as true and clear an Idea of the
Existence of a God, as of any thing in Nature: Vid. Mr. Lock's Essay of
Understanding. P. IV. Chapter X,
and in Fact it is most notoriously true, that a clear and distinct Notion that
there is such a Being, has and does still appear in the Minds of all Mankind;
and it is impressed there, I doubt not, by the peculiar Care of that Divine and
Merciful Being Himself.

And therefore those that assert, that we have not, nor can have any Notion or
Idea of a God, nor of his Attributes and Perfections, and that on that Account
deny his Existence; discover such wretched Ignorance as well as Obstinacy, that
they are really a Disgrace to Human Nature. For pretending to be over-Wise,
they become Fools, they are vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart
is darkened; Their vicious Inclinations have debauched their Reason and
Understanding: And though God be not far from every one of us, since in Him we
live, move, and have our being; yet their Wickedness and Pride is such, That
they will not seek after God, neither is God in all their Thoughts. From which
wilful Blindness and Stupidity, may the God of Truth deliver them, by the
gracious Illuminations of his Blessed Spirit; To whom, with our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, be all Honor and Glory, etc.

FINIS.
Books printed for Rich. Wilkin at the King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MR. Harris's Sermon, Preached at the Cathedral-Church of St. Paul, January the
3d. 1697/8. being the First of the Lecture for that Year, Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire.

-- His Remarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to
the Natural History of the Earth. In Octavo.

Dr. Woodward's Natural History of the Earth, in Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Truth of the Christian Religion, against the
Objections of all Modern Opposers; in Two Volumes. In Octavo.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, for the Advancement of their true and
greatest Interest; Part I. By a Lover of her Sex. The Third Edition. In Twelves.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies; Part II. Wherein a Method is offered for the
Improvement of their Minds. In Twelves.

Letters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies and Mr. John Norris. In Octavo.

An Answer to W. P. his Key about the Quakers Light within, and Oaths; with an
Appendix of the Sacraments. In Octavo.

A Letter to the Honorable Sir Robert Howard: Together with some
Animadversions on a Book, entitled, Christianity not Mysterious. In Octavo.


