THE Popish Proselyte THE GRAND FANATIC.

OR AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST The Poison of Captain Robert Everard's Epistle to the
several Congregations of the Non-conformists.

And many other Signs and Wonders truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book: But these are written that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that in believing
you might have life through his name.

John 20.30, 31. London, Printed for Samuel Tidmarsh, at the Kings Head in
Cornhill, next House to the Royal Exchange. MDCLXXXIV.

TO THE READER.
AN exact answering of the whole Epistle by Paragraphs, would have swelled my
intended little Book into a great Volume; nor did I conceive it needful: and
that because the Captain himself has contracted the pith of all that is
pertinent, into his sixth reason against the Scriptures being a Rule; His
Argument from Heaven for the Roman Church being Judge and Guide; and his six
Queries supposed utterly destructive to, and altogether unanswerable upon, the
grounds of Protestants; and now all these be at large transcribed, examined,
and solved: And yet lest the less intelligent Reader should stumble, or the
Adversary insult; I have in an admonitory prefatory discourse so far taken
notice of all his mostly seeming important conclusions and objections, as to
make it apparent that they have naught else, save ignorance, inadvertency,
selfishness, and strong delusion to support, and give rise unto them. Nor yet
have I made it my only business to pull down (though that must needs be their
great work that have to do with Babel-builders) but have all along ascertained
what I would or should establish, from such common principles of Religion and
Reason, as are assented to by Papists, Protestants, and the Universality at
least of Christians. As for reviling, had not his own guilt put him on to
caution against it, I should never have thought of it; what is of personal
concern is occasioned by his own writings, circumstant to the matter under
debate, and all contained in one single Page; the whole is closed with a
vindication of the Great Saint Augustine from favoring the proceedings of so
grand an Apostate as Robert Everard.

Joseph Harrison.

An Answer to Robert Everard's Epistle to the several Congregations of the
Nonconformists.
I Shall at present suppose Robert Everard to be no Romish Jesuited Priest,
Page 91.
but Quondam Captain to a Troop of Rebellious Soldiers, and do conclude from
his own Printed papers, attended with some obvious circumstances, that four
things did chiefly concur to the shipwracking of his Faith; First, Ignorance.
Secondly, Inadvertency, or Imprudence. Thirdly, Self-interest. Fourthly, A just
judgment of God in sending such strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie.

The man's ignorance appears, First in that he cannot construe, credo Sanctam
Ecclesiam Catholicam, I believe the Being, but renders (as if he had read)
credo Sanctae, etc. I believe the saying, of the Holy Catholic Church; sets
hence in the front of his Book, and urges all a-long, the Churches, and in the
issue the Roman Churches pretended infallible declaration for the foundation of
Faith. When yet the very Creed teaches him

First, To confess, I believe in God the Father, in the Son, and in the Holy
Ghost, as that which must necessarily forego and found his believing first that
there is a Holy Catholic Church, as well as that there is a Communion of
Saints; nor does it give any more ground to conclude the one, than the other
for to be infallible. Secondly, Though the Captain before the closure of the
Book, be so well taught, as to prove the Roman Church infallible in teaching,
from certain stories about Miracles no more than pointed at, out of Breerleys
Index, no more than surmised to be done by S. Francis, S. Dominick, and the
Monk Austin, with such like, to confirm, and that but some few of her
superstitious Doctrins; Nay can chide such, as Persons destroying Faith, Page
78.
taking away all humane converse, etc. that shall refuse upon such fallible
Testimonies to believe stories so extremely improbable; yet is he such a Novice
in the beginning, that he cannot so much as offer an argument for the truth of
Christianity, from all the undoubted Miracles wrought by Christ and his
Apostles, Page 6.
for no other end save the confirming thereof, Heb. 2.3, 4. recorded in Sacred
Writ, that we might believe, John 20.31. not denied by the Adversaries of our
Faith, and most celebriously attested by the unanimous consent of all
Christians in all succeeding Ages. Nor has he a word to say to the Gentleman
that in opposition to the Evangelist, calls Faith thus founded, an opinion, an
humor: But instead of that, gratis grants, that unless we know what ex part
rei is impossible to be known, our selves or those that teach us to be
infallible, Christianity as to us, can be no more than probably, not most
probably true. Jews, Turks, and Pagans may be as well persuaded of their
several ways, as we can be of ours; both upon a fallible certainty: Not knowing
sure, that the Christians [certainty] has no [fallible] save that they may;
the Jews, Turks and Pagans [fallible] no [certainty] save that they do, imagine
it.

And secondly, that it is irrational thus to argue, a Doctore ad Doctrinam,
from the Person to the thing, from what may be, to what is. Euclid may be
fallible, and yet his demonstrations not deceive; we may know our selves, and
those that teach us, to be subject to mistake; and yet know too, that in this
or that particular neither they nor we are mistaken.

Christianity as to us may be certainly true; certainly so demonstrated to
Jews, Turks and Pagans: and yet every Man confessed to be a liar, every Church
ex part sui in a possibility to commit an error in this thing; But,

3dly. The man cannot distinguish betwixt the internal testimony of the spirit
vouchsafed sometimes unto some, and that constant historical evidence which is
afforded unto all. When he was a Quaker, it is like he confounded the original
Cause, and the original Language, and now he cannot make a difference betwixt
the efficient cause of our believing, and the formal object, ground or Reason
of Faith. He discourses with a man sensual, as if he had the spirit; and
imagines, that the Holy Ghost, which is sent to witness with our spirits that
we are the children of God, should in the same manner and measure, witness the
Divine truth of every particular Book and Text of Scripture. And hence instead
of Firstly telling the sensual Lay Gentleman, that he believed the Scriptures
to be the word of God fide Historica, by an Historical Faith, upon the account
of universal Tradition; He talks with him about an inward infallible Testimony
of the Spirit, and makes that spiritual sense and feeling, which is peculiar to
Gods Elect sealing up their interest in Christ, to be the common convincing
ground of that being indeed the Spirits Testimony. And whereas he should have
resolved his faith into the Sovereign Authority, and verity of God himself
speaking in Scriptures as the formal ground thereof, and into the spirits
inlightning, inlivening Power as the efficient cause; He resolves it wholly
into an inward Testimony of the spirit, of which, (for ought appears) neither
of the twain (save by hearsay) knew any thing at all. However instead of the
Spirits testimony, the man might better have said in this case, simply by the
Spirit; by the Spirit (scilicet) as that medium facultatis whereby we are
enabled to see and believe scriptural verities to be Divine. Albeit, as Dr.
Ames well observes, Medull. l. 2. c. 5.
there is a sufficient and certain representation proposed to us in the
Scripture, both of things that are to be believed; and of that Reason upon
which we ought to believe them. See Romans 16.26. Nor yet,

Fourthly, Does he perceive the difference betwixt faith Dogmatical complex,
assenting to the truth of Divine propositions, and that faith which we call
salvifical, incomplex, fixing on, adhering to, and resting in Jesus Christ
alone? That may be various, respect had to its object; the same man knows such
a proposition to be revealed to morrow, which he knows not to day; and
consequently, believe that to morrow, which to day he does not. This, respect
had to the object, varies not: It Is Jesus, the same Yesterday, to Day, and for
ever. Though yet respect had to the subject like as the other, it is sometimes
weaker or stronger, confused, or more distinct. And hence men of different
faiths incomplex cannot be saved; for there is no other name under Heaven
given, etc. Acts 4.12. other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. oneness of Faith, as to this, is commended
and commanded, Ephesians. 4.5. compared with Ephesians. 4.13. unto the unity of the Faith
and knowledge of the Son of God. He that believes on the Son of God, has life
Eternal; and he that believes not, etc. John 3.36. But men may be of different
faiths complex, believe diverse, nay contrary propositions, and yet through
Grace obtain salvation. Some build Gold, Silver, precious Stones; some Wood,
Hay, Stubble; one believes he may eat all things, another who is weak, eats
Herbs, Romans 14.2.

Fifthly and Lastly, the man seems not to know of any difference betwixt an
acquired Habit and a Divine Gift, the requisites to our getting of Science, and
Gods giving of Faith. Science, it is true (as Thomas determines) cannot be had,
unless we first know the certainty of the Medium, or Reason whereby the
conclusion is demonstrated; but it is impertinent to Faith, as Estius well
concludes, by what means we believe the prime Verity, that is, by what means
God uses to bestow on men the gift of Faith. He may do it as well by the
preaching of the meanest Minister, as of the greatest Apostle: for indeed
neither the one nor the other is or needs to be (what he supposes) a foundation
or Argument whereon to build, but simply a medium or instrument whereby is
begotten and brought forth that Faith which is of the operation of God. Page 7.
And therefore in vain does he dispute about the Primitive Christians
believing, either because the Apostles so taught, or Simon Magus so affirmed;
for it was not because, but by the Preaching, whether of Paul, or Apollos, that
they did believe; We have not dominion over your Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. Who then
is Paul? or who is Apollos? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord
gave to every man, 1 Cor. 3.5.

The Captains inadvertency, or imprudence is as evident

First, In that he never calls to mind, that Priests and Jesuits pass usually
under the Notion of Lay Gentlemen, and great Folks Cousins: Trusts, Eve like,
to his own skill, and never makes known either his doubts, or the Gentleman's
objections to any of the Protestant Ministers. He borrows, it is true, a certain
deal of Popish Books; The Question of Questions, Novelty repressed, Fiat Lux,
Infidelity unmasked, or a confutation of a Book published by Mr. William
Chillingworth, but never inquires for Mr. William Chillingworth's own Book, nor
Dr. Hammonds answer to Infidelity Unmasked, in his vindication of the Lord
Falkland. He never sends to Dr. Owen for his animadversions on Fiat Lux, nor
advises with Mr. Baxter about Novelty suppressed: Had he consulted with these
Ministers of ours, and told us wherein they failed in the answering either
these Books, or the Lay Gentleman's Objections, it might have been of some
moment, have startled perhaps some of the Nonconformists; but to make a stir
and a story, how mildly, how profoundly the Lay Gentleman objected; and then
how extremely troubled, how strangely the Horse-Captain was gravelled, argues
nothing, save the Gentleman's cunning craftiness, and the Captains dastardly
weakness: the cause no more concerned, than if they had never had meeting.

Secondly, He never considered that the Gentleman was altogether for asking
questions, Robert never proposes any; for if, when the Captain was gravelled,
and could not certainly prove the truth of Christianity from his own Fanatic
Principles, he had put the Gentleman to it to have proved Christianity
certainly true from the Popish, a hundred to one, but they had both proved
Heathens; the one being no more able to establish it by Miracles upon the
infallibility of the Roman Church, than the other by sense and feeling upon the
Spirits Testimony: the man now knows and finds this to be true enough; and
therefore in the conclusion does he present us with six queries, conjures his
old Brethren to answer them, and withal, warily provides that they shall not
ask him any question at all; but first ascertain what they would establish: for
says he Page 85. Who knows not, if a Man will give himself scope to be bold, he
may raise Arguments against the belief of the Trinity, or any other Mystery of
Faith, that will puzzle learned Men to answer; a piece of cunning and caution,
I could wish all our weaker sort of Protestants to take special notice of.

Thirdly, The man unadvisedly all along confounds endeavors to fix, and find
in the same subject, the Rule, Judge and Guide of Faith; whenas these three are
in their respective Natures, Uses, Ends distinct, and scarcely possible to be
subjected in the same thing or person: The Scripture may be a Rule certain and
stable as Bellarmine, and yet no Judge. Reason may be a judge, or rather that
whereby every man is to judge for himself, as Chillingworth, and yet no Rule.
The spirit may be Guide, to direct, draw and lead us into all truth, and yet
neither rule nor judge, The Church by her Ministry may be subservient to the
spirit in leading, helpful to us in finding out, applying of, and judging
according to the Rule, and yet the Church it self be neither Rule, Judge, nor
Guide; nor will now that grand Sophism [the Spirit is not, Reason is not, the
Scripture is not, the Judge, Rule and Guide, and therefore the Church is] be of
any force: for never to take notice, that it founds an affirmative conclusion
upon negative premises; it supposes that some Presbyterians, Independents,
etc. should hold, the Spirit alone, some Reason, some the Scripture, each
exclusive of the Ministry of the Church, to be the Rule, Judge, and Guide of
Faith; whenas all they jointly, in this business, join all these together, and
look up unto God, according to his command and promise, for his Holy spirit in
the Churches Ministry, thoroughly to direct their understandings in judging of
things according to the written Rule.

Fourthly, The man never perceives that his own vain ratiocinations and
needless concessions are the sole ground that is given for him to bottom his
belief upon; a strong fancy he has, and need on, for his Faith's no stronger.
To evince this I shall instance in these six positions laid down and supposed
as the Basis of his whole discourse. First, Faith is an infallible assent of
the understanding, submitting it self obediently to believe the Revelations of
God. Secondly, There must be some means appointed of God, by which we may know
this one true Faith from all false opinions. Thirdly, These means must be
infallible. Fourthly, The understanding must submit to these means under pain
of Damnation. Fifthly, Two men of two different faiths or beliefs cannot be
saved. Sixthly, Ignorant people by such reasonable diligence as is very
tolerable to Humane frailty, and yet possible for them, may come to the
knowledge (wisely done to leave out certain) of these means. And now if you ask
what foundation he has whereupon to ground his belief of these assertions,
he will tell you, I gathered them from the true interpretation of certain Texts
of Scripture. Page 16.
And if you ask further, how he knows that interpretation to be true? Has he
Divine Revelation for it? According to the tenor of his own first position:
Has he the unanimous consent of the Fathers for it? Or does he certainly know,
beyond all possibility of being mistaken, that the Church in all Ages has, and
the present Church now does give that interpretation accordingly as it is
decreed by the Council of Trent? No, but from hence I thought (says he) it did
very naturally follow: Firstly, 17.
Secondly, and Thirdly, etc. And yet that it may appear, he only says, could
not possibly think, any such a thing, observe from that exhortation, Heb.
10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Hope (so in their own Authentic
Translation) undeclining, does he infer, Faith is an infallible assent of our
understanding: and because the latter part of the verse, for he is faithful
that has promised, founded the confidence, there spoken of, upon the promise
of Grace; and the former Verse fixed faith with its full assurance upon the
High Priest Jesus alone; The man slily passes over both, and leaves the other
part of his proposition ( obediently submitting, etc.) destitute of any proof.
From 2 Cor. 10.5. bringing into Captivity every thought to the Obedience of
Christ; he infers, the understanding must submit, not dispute: all be Damned
that disobey the Authority of the Church; and adds withal, that saving faith is
seated in the understanding, as if Paul had been mistaken when he said, with
the heart man believes unto Righteousness, Romans 10.10. or as if he himself
knew not what he had done in putting [obediently submitting] into the
definition of faith, since all conclude, obedience and disobedience to be
subjected in the will. From Ephesians. 4.5. there is but one Faith, respect had to
the personal object in whom, the Lord Jesus; He concludes, that two men of
differing faiths Dogmatical, or that believe two contrary opinions cannot be
saved; nor is he ashamed, from Isaiah 35.8. plainly pointing at Christ, the new
and living way, first to take out, and the unclean shall not pass over it, as
incoherent, because their unholy Mother admits of such for her children; and
then inferrs, that ignorant people by reasonable diligence, may come to the
knowledge of those means, about which yet their learned men to this very day
could never be agreed. Nor can he himself tell, when it comes to the pinch, how
those means should be certainly manifest, save by miracles, of which we
ignorant folk may often hear, but never come to the knowledge of: however, that
I most admire at, is, That the man designing to prove, that true acceptable
faith consists in believing as the Church believes, a believing that the Roman
Church is infallible, should quote Heb. 11.6. that holds out the faith, without
which it is impossible to please God, to be a believing; not that the Church,
but that God himself is so: he that comes to God, must believe that he is, etc.
And further, that he should stand hafling and pafling, and proving by halfs,
there must be some means appointed by God, by which men may know, etc. those
means must be infallible, the understanding must submit to those means under
pain of damnation; when the very Text quoted, Mark. 16.16. shows plainly, that
there be means, infallible means, and which be the means appointed, whereby
true faith both is begotten, and may be known from all false opinions, and unto
which all that heartily submit shall be saved, and those that do not, shall be
damned: and lest you should mistake in reading, the means be, the word of
truth, the Gospel Preached though by the mouth of never so weak a Minister. Go
into all the World, and Preach the Gospel unto every Creature; He that
believes and is Baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned: A Genere ad speciem affirmat. non valet Argumentum.
nor yet is it unworthy of remark, 1. That means in general is here all along
found in the premises, and Authority in special put after into the
conclusion: there must be, there is an infallible Means, and therefore there
is, there must be an infallible Authority. And 2. That the man seriously
endeavors to found the very foundation of his own faith upon Scriptures, dark
Scriptures privately interpreted, howbeit the main scope of his Book is to
evince that faith, true faith, neither first nor last, can or ought to be
founded thereupon.

That self-interest had a hand in the Captains overturning, seems more than
probable; Page 4.
because, First, The Captain in the late Wars (as his Book relates) had run
through the several forms of Religion, Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist,
etc. and yet never, that we read of, lost his preferment upon any Turn, nor
missed of it for want of timely turning; and since so, the man might easily
foresee, that such a notorious Jugler was never like to be trusted at the Kings
Court: Best for him now at last to turn Papist, do the Jesuits some signal
service, declare against his old friends, and their old enemies, the
Nonconformists, and perhaps by that wile he might in the Queens Chapel come in
time to get advancement. For,

Secondly, If seditions, Schisms, Heresies amongst Protestants, and discourses
with Lay-Gentlemen in their quarters could have overturned the faith of
Captains, never so like to have been done as during the late distractions; but
for all that while, though we heard of some Popish Champions turning Sectaries,
yet of no Sectarian Captain that became a Romanist.

Thirdly, The man's carriage all along makes manifest, that the selfish wisdom
of the Old wily Serpent is yet remaining with him: he knows well enough that
there is nothing more inconsistent with Papal government than the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy; nor any thing more opposite to Popish Doctrine, than
the 39 Ariticles: and yet can he neither be content to say ill, nor say nothing
of our English Episcopacy; but upon occasion is bowing down himself unto it, in
the days of yore; doubtless he got to be a Captain by praying and preaching
like some sort of a Saint, and now time after time, is crying up himself for a
good Subject, leaves the Episcopal Church out of his Catalogue of Sects, and
pretends a great deal of Reverence to any profession that shall be established
by Law.

But above all, the just judgment of God is most remarkable in sending him and
such like, strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, and that because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness: nor need I divine the no love this man had to the
truth; and the great pleasure he always had and now has in unrighteousness is
notoriously manifest by his First, Blaspheming the Spirit; Secondly, Abusing
Reason; Thirdly, Vilifying the Scriptures; Fourthly, Wronging the Church
Catholic; Fifthly, Belying Protestants; Sixthly, Dissembling the Tenets of the
Papists.

The spirit is blasphemed, 1. by giving that glory of Infallibility, which is
peculiar to the Holy Ghost, to the organs or instruments by which he is pleased
to reveal the mind of God. Men speaking from deliberation use free will, may
speak or not speak, speak truth or falsehood, and consequently for that time
cannot but be fallible. And when men speak divinely, yet not deliberately, it
is not properly they that speak, but the Holy Ghost that speaks in them. The
word of the Lord came to me, saying. The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And
in this case it is the word spoken that is infallible, and not they that speak
it. It were not proper for such on that account to say, It seems good to the
Holy Ghost, and to us; but, not we, but the Holy Ghost, not I, but the Lord:
and hence the eternal God is said internally to demonstrate by his spirit, and
externally to confirm by miracles, not the infallibility of the organ through
which he speaks, but the infallible truth of the word that is spoken. And they
went forth every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word
with signs following, Mark 16.20.2. The spirit expressly, 1 John 4.2, 3. makes
the Doctrine Preached the Rule, according to which we are to try the spirits;
Hereby know we the spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: and every spirit that confesses not,
etc. And yet does the man wittingly conceal that, and wrests verse 6. to the
making of the hearing of the Apostle, the only rule of trying of spirits,
without regard had to their Doctrine. Nor does he (...) here, but supposing
[we] verse 6. to denote the same persons as [ye] verse 4. confidently
concludes, hearing of Christ's Apostles then was, therefore hearing Popish
Priests now is, the only rule. The Apostle doubtless saw this mystery of
iniquity beginning then to work; and therefore leaves us a general Rule without
any exception. 2 John ^. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he
has the Father and the Son. If there come any to you, and brings not this
doctrine, receive him not into the House, neither bid him God speed. 3. The man
reviles the Saints, that have received the Holy anointing, tells how they would
have the world believe that they have the spirit, without bringing Reason,
Evidence, Testimony or Authority to evince it: whenas yet if either Reason,
Evidence, Testimony, or Authority may be regarded, the Tree is known by its
fruits, and their having the spirit, manifest by Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Gal. 5.22.
They confess that Jesus is come in the Flesh, as aforesaid, and, that Jesus is
the Lord, which no man can, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. Nor need he
trouble himself with telling, Page 21.
that if it be the spirit of God they have, he is infallible in his teaching,
and both they and all the world are obliged under pain of Damnation to believe
what he delivers as matter of faith, to be true. For 1. Though they say they
have the spirit of God, and that he is infallible in his teaching, yet they do
not say, Pope-like, that they are thereby made infallible in theirs. He
teaches all of them the whole truth as it is in Jesus, for they shall all know
me from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord, Jer. 31.34.
but teaches not any, all the points of Doctrine that be true, for we know in
part, and prophecy in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. according to the measure of the gift
of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7.2. Both they and all the world are obliged under pain of
Damnation to believe whatsoever God says is true, and so many as know that
there is an Holy Ghost, are obliged in like manner to believe whatsoever shall
be delivered by that promised spirit of truth. But as to the particulars he
shall deliver, the case is different. The Saints are severally bound to believe
whatsoever he shall conviningly deliver to any of them; and the world bound to
believe whatsoever he shall convincingly deliver to the World: when he comes he
shall convince, Joh. 16.8. Nor yet, 3. do they look (as some would seem to
suppose) that others should believe what they say, to be true, either because
they say or prove that they have the Spirit, whether of Adoption or Prophecy,
but because when and so far as that same Spirit by undeniable reasons and
testimonies shall make manifest in their consciences the truth of what they do
assert: by the manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2.

Reason is a means whereby we come to know what is, not, what ought to be
revealed; a means whereby we judge of things Divine according to the Rule,
though yet it be not, may not be called the Rule according to which we are to
judge: Reason I say that is thus useful, and ought to be thus limited, the man
one while enslaves, and then anon sets it up for an absolute Lord. When reason
comes to argue against the Churches Infallibility, then must it Vassal-like
submit, not dispute, not wait for an effectual conviction according to Christ's
promise and procedure, And when he is come, he shall convince, etc. but yield
forthwith to what the Church says; nay, to whatsoever an ignorant English
Romish Priest can have the confidence to say, their Church has sufficiently
proposed; or if Reason offer to produce arguments to prove the truth of
Christianity, and evince the Scripture to be the word of God, urge Miracles,
Universal-Tradition, conclude from Topics internal, external, in other cases
cogent and demonstrative, yet then Reason is fallible, subject to error, a
private spirit, a fancy, can make things at best appear no more than probable;
Jews, Turks and Pagans may be as fully persuaded, and upon as good rational
grounds of the truth of their Religion, as we can of ours. But now if reason
will be corrupted, become an Advocate for Rome, her very sophisms shall be
cried up as sufficient grounds for us to found our faith upon. God will not be
defective in necessaries, and therefore there must be an infallible, visible
Judge. Christ is the only absolute, independent head of the Church, but may,
and therefore has appointed a dependent head derived from him. It is most
rational in business of civil concernment, to rely on a Council of wise and
learned men: And therefore in things spiritual, which God usually hides from
the wise and prudent, and the natural man receives not, we ought to rely on a
Council of Popish Prelates. The Eunuch could not understand the Prophecy of
Isaiah, till ministerially expounded by Philip the Deacon: And therefore cannot
we understand that Text though already expounded, no nor any other till
Authoritatively interpreted by the Roman Church. The Apostles, Elders, and
Brethren when sent to, sent out a Temporary Decree about things indifferent,
made then by circumstances in some places antecedently necessary, binding only
in those places, and pressed with an [if] ye do these things, ye do well. And
therefore the Cardinals, Bishops and Abbots may and ought to frame an
everlasting Law about points of Doctrine, make that necessary for all men,
which God never made necessary for any, and press it under the dread of an
Anathema, or pain of Eternal damnation: Nay, though God say, to the Law and to
the Testimony, the Law of the Lord is perfect, the Scripture able not only to
make wise to Salvation, but so far profitable, that the man of God, the Pastor,
may be thoroughly furnished unto every good work; Hominem Dei vocat Doctorem and
Episcopum, ut dixi Ep. 1. C. 6. ver. 11. Cornel. a Lapid.
yet it Reason can find any thing to say against the Scripture's being a Rule,
it shall be heard. The Scripture then must not be a Rule, and why? Has God any
where contradicted himself, and said it must not? Has he any where appointed
another? No, but here is a first reason, and a second reason, and a third
reason, etc. and therefore it must be none, and yet the sum of all no more than
this; Some Christians are dim-sighted, some perverse; many are carnal, walk as
men, will not be ruled; and therefore the Scripture is not the Rule, Ruler sure
he would have said; some people are contentious Lawyers, corrupt, and differ in
their opinions, and therefore the Law of the Land is not what it is; scilicet,
the Law of the Land according to which controversies may and ought to be
decided: and now

The Church, before, under, and since the Law, will she, nill she, must always
have been, and for ever be, this Rule; when as yet it is evident that the Word
was a rule both to Adam and Eve before the Church had Being, it shall bruise
thy head, Genes. 3.15. God said to Abraham, so shall thy seed be; and he
believed in the Lord, etc. Genesis 15.5, 6. Nor was it written for his sake alone,
but for us also, Romans 4.23, 24. Ye shall not add to the word I command you,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it, was given in charge to the Church of
the Jews, Deuteronomy. 4.2. And if any man (says the Apostle) Preach unto you any
other Gospel than that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.9. These
are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and
that believing ye might have life through his name, Joh. 20.31. Nor yet is it
the question, whether the Scripture accidentally taken, or the Word as written;
but whether the Scripture taken Essentially, or the mind of God communicated at
sundry times, and in diverse manners to and by the Prophets, Preached by the
Apostles, Non enim per alios dispositionem salutis cognovimus, quam per eos per
quos Evangelium pervenit ad nos, quod quidem tunc praeconiaverunt; postremo
vero per Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum and
columnam fidei nostrae futurum nobis. Iren. I. 3. c. 1.
and now committed and conveyed down to us by Sacred writing, always has, is,
and ought to be owned for the rule of Faith: or whether indeed (because it
seems you long to have the question stated with that advantage) even in
Abraham's and the Apostles times, others as well as Sarah, Genesis 21.10. and the
Beraeans, Act. 17.11. might not have urged, demanded, and without the just
control of any then visible authority, have believed and acted according to
the prescript of that Rule, your own instances, Page 53. of extraordinary
actions done, and Commands given by Gods directions, by the mouths of several
particular Prophets, submitted to (as you say) without further enquiry, do
plainly evince as much, and also intimate that the will or word of God, which
way soever it be made known, whether immediately or mediately; whether by
Prophecy, Tradition or Writing, is and always has been the supreme Rule both of
Faith and Practice; and its adequation, as to matters of Faith, as now
contained in, and expressed by the Scripture, Sure footing for Christianity.
page 18. 20.
shall be after cleared. However the Church (as your own J. S. well observes)
being a Congregation of the faithful, must needs presuppose the notion of
faithful, faithful, the notion of Faith, Faith, of the rule of Faith, an
evident argument that the Church is and ought to be regulated in believing; and
consequently she her self cannot be the rule of belief, nor any more, save as
the same man says of Fathers, Doctors, and great Scholars, and might as well
have said the same of Tradition too, a means to bring others to the knowledge
of it. But,

Secondly, The man will needs seat authority in the Holy Catholic Church,
notwithstanding that authority Supreme, Magisterial, formally as well as
radically is seated in Christ. All authority is given to me, Matt. 28.18. Nor
is the Church the subject, but the object of the Ministerial Power, He gave
some Apostles, some Pastors, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edification of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. God
has set some in the Church, First, Apostles, 1. Cor. 12.18. and by the way,
[some] in the Church, not [one over] the Church; for the whole, respect had to
its organical frame, form, or Government, is divided into several Churches,
several Congregations, if you will, as well as the world into several Kingdoms.
To the angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.1. We have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. Nor did Paul treating, 1 Cor. 12.
concerning spiritual gifts, relate to a chief in governing, but the choicest
for Prophesying, when he said, nor again, the Head to the Feet, I have no need
of you.

Thirdly, Although the Bishops of Rome, in that very thing (as Gregory well
notes) forerunners of Antichrist, did frequently challenge an Universal
Jurisdiction; yet was it never owned, nor submitted to by the Catholic Church,
as it is evident from S. Cyprian, opposing Stephanus, Irenaeus reproving of
Victor, Jerome's Eugubium, and the sixth Council of Carthage, in which was
Augustine, and Aurelius; as also from the Acts of three of the four first
General Councils, Nice, Constantinople and Chalcedon.

Fourthly, The man in the Close, restrains the Church Catholic to a Church of
one denomination called the Roman, meaning though thereby, not what Paul meant,
the Saints at Rome, Romans 1.7. but all that vastly extended community of
Christians which live in communion with, and in subjection to, the Bishop of
Rome, as to their supreme Pastor, and Governor on Earth in all things
appertaining unto faith, next under Christ, when as yet the Arguments, and
Texts all along produced seemingly militate for the infallibility of the
Church; not this or that Church though never so vastly extended; and above all,
not for the old Roman (and therefore he did wisely to frame a new one) for it is
expressly declared fallible, Romans 11.22. And yet again, page 61. we are
presented with a General Council of Prelates as this Church, this infallible
Rule, which can by no means be identified with all that vastly extended
community, etc. And yet let him take which he will, he will be still at a loss.
For such an Assembly of Prelates is not now in being, nor like to be, nor has
there been any such for a Century of years last past: And as for all the
Christians of that vast community, they are to be judged, ruled, guided, and
consequently not the Rule, Judge and Guide: If exempted from error personal, it
were well. Judicial infallibility concerns not them. In the beginning he is for
submission to the Holy Catholic Church, and now as if by [Holy Catholic
Church] he did not mean the Holy Catholic Church his Mother, nor any thing
else save the Pope his Father, he is for submission and obedience to the Bishop
of Rome. The matter and marvel is, that the man has been tewing and tugging and
troubling himself and us all this while, about an universal infallible visible
Authoritative Church, and now in the issue can neither tell, who, where, or
what it is. However since the Church is such an one, which is truly appointed by
God to be this infallible Judge, must needs (as he says) have this condition,
Page 72.
that she does own her infallibility; It is incumbent upon the Captain in the
first place to make it out, that the present Roman visible Church does plainly
own her infallibility, (for his owning, and inferences we shall not regard,) or
else confess, that in his own account she is not the Church he tells of, truly
appointed of God to be this infallible Judge; nor let him thus think to put us
off and say, unless he evidently prove that she does that by the Pope her
mouth: for the Pope will not be content to be the Churches, but Christ's own
mouth and Vicar, Peter's successor, the Rock upon which the Church is built, at
least next unto Christ.

Of Protestants he says, All that I ever met with seemed to grant, Page 18.
There must be a way or Rule, there must be a means appointed, there must be a
Governing Power to judge and decide all doubts, and teach us the true way to
Heaven with certainty; but who this Judge is, that is the difficulty. Whenas 1.
though Protestants generally conclude, that the Scripture is the rule according
to which every Christian may and ought to judge of doubts with a judgment of
discretion; and Pastors jointly or severally with a judgment of direction: Yet
none affirm that any who on Earth is, or can be, either Rule or Judge, much
less both Rule and Judge Infallible, Universal, Praetorial, such as he (under
the notion of his Governing Power) is at present seeking for. Page 60.
Dr. Fern's expression [indeed such a Judge and Umpire in Christendom if to be
had, would be a ready means to compose all differences, and to restore truth
and Peace,] comes next to any that he can pitch upon, and yet has Dr* Fern
neither wish nor word of any whosoever being a Rule, nor is he so saucy as to
say there must be a Judge or Umpire appointed. But such a Judge or Umpire
would, if to be had, be a ready, neither the best nor the only means to compose
all differences. Of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, p. 6.. 19.
2. Since in those things in which before a General Council has defined, it is
lawful to hold either way, and damnable to do so after. The Lord Falkland
desire to know how it agrees with the Charity of the Church to define any
thing, and so bestow upon the Devil one path more for us to walk in to him.
Against Knot, part 1. c. 2. page 84.
And although, says Chillingworth, we wish heartily that all controversies
were ended, as we do that all sin were abolished; yet have we little hope of
the one, or of the other, till the World be ended: in the mean while think it
best to content our selves with, and persuade other to, an unity of charity and
mutual toleration, seeing God has authorized no man to force all to the unity
of opinion. Neither do we think it fit to argue thus: To us it seems convenient
there should be one Judge for the whole world; therefore God has appointed
one: but more modest and more reasonable to collect thus, God has appointed no
such judge of controversies; therefore though to us it seems convenient there
should be one, yet it is not so. And yet, 3. We who can distinguish betwixt the
scriptural way to Heaven, and the Churches Rule of ^ith; betwixt an external
infallible Governor, and an internal infallible Teacher; betwixt an
unnecessary decision of all doubts, and a full satisfaction of the heart about
the one thing needful: We I say, which have learned thus to distinguish, do
humbly and thankfully acknowledge that there is a means appointed to teach us
the true way to Heaven with certainty. Jesus is the true way, the only way to
Heaven; and that Spirit which he has promised, and gives in the Gospel
ministry, is the means appointed to teach and establish us in that way with
certainty. If I depart, I will send him, unto ^on, and when he is come, he
shall convince the world of sin, because they believe not in me: They shall be
all taught of God, all shall know me, etc. In whom, after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.15. And now you, instead
of reviling such Christians as humbly own their having received the anointing,
or troubling your self and others with that monstrous notion of an universal
infallible governing Church, should examine your self whether you have been so
convinced, taught and sealed by that spirit through hearing the word of truth,
the Gospel of your salvation: received ye the spirit by the hearing of Faith?
Gal. 3.2.

Page 33.
Secondly, It is impossible for any one of these parties (meaning Independents,
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Fifth-monarchy men, Quakers,) which I must now
crave leave to call Sects) with reason to censure or condemn any of the others,
although never so different from themselves, even in points by them esteemed
fundamental, since each of them have their uncontrollable Plea for themselves,
that their faith is in every respect conformable to what they understand to be
the true sense and meaning of the Scriptures, which they agree to be the sole
and only Rule and Judge. Nay, which of these parties can deny the others the
Title of Protestants, or convince them of Heresy? Since to be a Protestant no
more is required (or if it be I would gladly know what it is) than to admit the
Scriptures interpreted according to their best understanding and Conscience, to
be the sole and only rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversies. Is not he that
professes and follows this principle, allowed by all to be a perfect good
Protestant, though never so much differing in Faith from others who make the
same profession.

The Quakers, because your Allies in the grand point of justification, and an
uncharitable sentencing of all, save their own Sect, shall for me stand or fall
to their own Master; but for the rest that you mention, I say that you suppose
what you cannot prove, scilicet, that they differ in points that be, or are
esteemed by them to be fundamental. Do they not all own the Creed called the
Apostles, and all conclude, that therein be contained all the fundamental
points at least? Nay, do they not all own the doctrinal part of the 39
Articles, insomuch that you who would seem to revere the Doctrine established
by Law, dare not say they be Heretics, but are fain to crave leave to call
them Sects.

Secondly, It Is true, they all agree, the Scripture to be the sole and only
Rule, and yet mean the Scripture taken in the sense intended by God, not as
privately interpreted by any of them: nor is their faith or present persuasion
according to their grounds or pleadings, uncontrollable; since what they hold in
a supposed conformity with, or understand to be, the true sense and meaning of
any Text, is humbly submitted unto what can be made out with greater evidence
more nearly to accord with, or be the very sense and meaning intended by the
Holy Ghost. Apollos was ready to yield to Aquila and Priscilla, Acts 18.26. and
they to you, or any else that shall expound unto them the way of God more
perfectly. But,

Thirdly, It matters not much whether these parties can or cannot deny to one
another the title of Protestant, so they see ground for, and do allow to one
another the name of Christian: Protestant is no more to us, than Papist to you,
though yet you seem not well to know, either who or what is meant by
Protestant. And therefore shall Mr. Baxter at your desire instruct you: A
Protestant is a Christian that holds to the Holy Scripture, as the sufficient
Rule of Faith and Holy living, and protests against Popery. Or if this like
you not, take your own definition with some little amendment: A Protestant is a
Christian, that professes with S. Augustine, in those things which are laid
down plainly in the Scriptures, all those things are found which appertain to
faith and direction of life, and further admits of the Scripture where
needing interpretation: as interpreted according to his best understanding and
Conscience that he has, or in the use of lawful means may have: for the entire
Rule of what he, as such, ought to hold and practice. And yet, suppose all
that, and only that required to the Being of a Protestant, which you insert:
The parties you tell of, may at that account convince of Heresy such amongst
them as shall appear to be guilty of it; may they not use means by opening,
alleging and reasoning out of the Scripture, according to Act. 17.2, 3. better
to inform and reclaim such a one? May they not do as the Lay gentleman did with
you, and you now in writing this Epistle do with your old Brethren? or may they
not mind him as Christ did the Sadduces? ye err, not knowing the Scriptures,
Matt. 22.19. and make such a like challenge as Augustine did to Maximinius.
August. contra Maxim. l. 3. c. 14.
But now neither ought I to produce the Nicene Council, nor thou that of
Ariminum, as going about to prejudge, neither am I detained by the Authority of
this, nor thou of that set thing with thing, cause with cause reason with
reason, by authorities o^ Scriptures, not proper to either, but common
witnesses to us both, and i^ after apparent conviction, or stopping of the
mouth by Scripture Testimony, that man will not relinquish but persist
groundlesly to maintain his grossly erroneous Tenet, it is an evident sign that
he does not indeed admit of Scriptures, interpreted according to his best
understanding and conscience, to be the Rule, but obstinately adheres to the
perverse wilful reasonings of his own fleshly mind, is not a Protestant
according to the tenor of your own description; but one that is or ought to be
rejected by them. And although I know well enough you have other means for
condemning, and killing such you please to call Heretics, yet am I to learn,
what better means you have whereby to convince them of Heresy, or discern who
they be. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition
reject, knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned
of himself. Tit. 3.10, 11. However you might have done well to have
distinguished betwixt a Protestant, and a perfect good Protestant. He that
professes to follow this one principle, so diametrically opposite to the
fundamentals of Popery, may perhaps be admitted by all, or most, for a
Protestant; yet if he differ in points of faith, tradited by the four first
General Councils, and commonly received by Christians, or to be of a vicious
life, he is not, at least ought not to be, owned by any of them for a perfect
good Protestant.

To elude these plain and evident Texts, scilicet, Deuter. 17.8. Matt. 23.2, 3.
etc. brought to prove that the Church is the sole infallible Rule and Judge)
you were wont to say that they may have other interpretations, and therefore
this is not the truth; it is a question whether any Texts of Holy Scriptures,
and consequently whether these Texts which speak so amply of the Church, are to
be understood of the Church militant, and visible in this world, or of the
Church triumphant. Ye are willing to agree, that so long as the Church of
Christ teaches conformable to Scriptures she is infallible. Whereas instead of
thus saying, doubting or agreeing, we enquire,

First, To what purpose should you urge us to believe the infallibility of the
Church, or any thing else, upon Scripture grounds, when you tell us aforehand,
that faith founded upon Scripture is not truly faith; for though we should
grant what you suppose, (scilicet) that Christ and his Apostles did urge the
Jews with Scriptures, merely because of their incredulity; yet did they never
tell them as you do us: Faith founded upon Scripture will avail you nothing. It
is not that Divine Faith which God calls for at your hands Or if you yet say,
that it is warrantable to believe the Church is infallible upon your urging;
why not to believe Christ to be the Messiah, or any other point of Christian
Doctrine, upon our Ministers alleging of Scripture for it? But,

Secondly, Be these Texts plain and evident, or not? If not, why do you say
they are? And if they be, these very Texts are a Rule, such as you seek for,
whereby to judge of this Controversy, and consequently the Church is not the
only Rule whereby Controversies are to be judged* But,

Thirdly, The Quaerendum here is not whether we can show with any assurance,
that these Texts are capable of other interpretations; but whether you can
demonstrate like as the Apostle used to do, (...).
Act. 17.3, 18. these your own interpretations to be certainly true; do it,
when you do it, by some infallible medium, and we shall be ready to believe
what you say. But if you bring no proofs; and no other you have brought as yet,
save your own private reasonings. Instead of believing the truth of your
interpretations, we shall make bold to ask you, as you do your self, what
difference is there betwixt judging by your own reason, and judging by a Law to
be interpreted by your own reason? This is to make the Scripture not Gods word,
but the word of every private man. Though yet,

Fourthly, Had you not made a little bold with your own reason, and quite
contrary, both to sense and honesty omitted verse the eight [bebetween blood
and blood, between Plea and Plea] and put down etc. instead of the eleventh
verse ( ubi satis apt sanctus Moses Controversias exortas in Populo Dei ex
Lege Domini judicandas docet, Bellar. de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 2. according to
the sentence of the Law, which they shall teach thee) it would have been
evident from Deuteronomy. 17. That the Controversies there spoken of, were limited to
matters of strife betwixt party and party, like those, Mat. 18.17. and the
Judge in sentencing, to the Rule of the Law, called Moses Chair, Matt. 23.2.
And consequently the first Scripture you cite, which should be the measure of
the rest, partly makes nothing for, in part makes directly against your main
conclusion. Isaiah 35.8. has been already; Isaiah 2.4. Mat. 28.20. John 16.12.
will be hereafter spoken to; Isaiah 43.3.17. Isaiah 26.2.1. and Mat. 16.9.
confirm what we contend for, (viz) the whole Church of Gods Elect, consisting
of lively stones to be firmly built upon that living stone, that Rock Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. And that the Royal seed, the Children of God shall be
all taught and led by the Spirit of God, according to Romans 8.14 John 6.45. 1
John 2* 27. John 14.16. relates only to such as are called out of the world:
love him, and keep his commandments, as it is evident from verses 15. and 17.
concerns neither the Pope nor his Cardinals, unless he or they be first proved
the spiritual man intended, 1 Cor. 2.15. and if Ephesians. 4.11. we may be allowed
to leave out the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and read he will give,
instead of he gave, which must be done ere that Text can have any show of
pertinency, it will respect all and singular Pastors and Teachers that be the
gifts of Christ: For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come to an unity,
not of opinion, form or points of Faith, as you use to word it, but into the
unity of the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: That we henceforth be no
more children tossed to and fro (from confidence in one device, to a dependency
upon another) and carried about with every empty wind of Doctrine, by the
slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. But
speaking the truth in love, may grow up to him in all things, which is the
head, even Christ: from whom without mention or mediation of any other head,
the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplyeth, according to the effectual working of every part, makes increase of
the body, unto the edifying of it self in love: verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Nor is the last with which you flourish, of any more moment: for never to take
notice that by Church, cannot there be meant Roman, or General Council: There
is a Pillar for holding out Edicts, as well as a Pillar for holding up houses;
there is a ground wherein men set Trees, sow Seed, as well as a ground whereon
they erect buildings and recumb. The Church may be a Pillar to hold out the
truth, and yet not a Pillar for you to rely on for all doctrins that be true.
The Church may be that chosen ground, in which the Mystery of Godliness, Christ
the truth is set, and sown, and yet no common ground given for you to found
your faith upon: Tares may spring up together with the good Seed: Truth held
out, and yet error attend it: However the word in the Greek is (...), which
properly signifies a Seat, and you know well how to let Moses Chair alone, and
rely on him supposed to sit therein.

And now Sir, do you not stand astonished at your own impudence in thus
imposing upon the Nonconformists; they do not, they need not limit these Texts
to the Church triumphant, but tell you further,

First, That it will be hard for you to prove from Scripture, that the Church
of God in this world (the Church you speak of, Page 62. which Christ redeemed
with his blood) is a visible body Politic, different from that invisible
Church which is Christ's mystical body: the Texts you cite Acts 20.28. 1 Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Col. 1.24, 2, 5. Mat: 16.18. do import no such thing; for the
four first distinguish betwixt the Church and the Overseers, Officers or
Ministers thereof; seeming thereby to suppose that the Overseers, not as
Overseers in their Politic capacity, but as believers, respect had to their
spiritual Union, be truly members of the Church there mentioned; and for the
fifth, if by Rock might be understood Peter, it would as to this business be of
the same import. Augustine de verbis domini secund. Mat. Sermon. 13.

Chamier Tom. 2. l. 11. chap. 23.


And if by Rock with the great St. Augustine we understand Christ (and so we
ought and may, as is made appear by Chamier, the remoteness of the antecedent
notwithstanding) that Text relates to the Church builded; the Church, which is
Gods own workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. holding out that to be it, against which the
Gates of Hell, whether sin or death, or the power or policy of spiritual
Adversaries shall not prevail.

Secondly, Your Doctors usually blame us, for making two Churches, the one
visible and the other invisible, And now you seem offended because we do not.
However without regard to either, we affirm that the same Holy Catholic
militant Church, is both visible and invisible; invisible, respect had to its
union, and visible respect had to its profession of Faith in Christ.

Thirdly, Yours I think do, and therefore sure should you in this case
distinguish inter Ecclesiam judicantem and docentem betwixt the Church judging
or defining, and the Church teaching, and have pleaded for that, not this to be
infallible: as and for ours, though its true, they do affirm that the Church
while teaching conformable to Scriptures, teaches Doctrine infallibly true,
yet do they never say that the Church, in any sense is, or ought to be
denominated, infallible. No Sir, the Church has other precious privileges,
other benefits by these promises, and the Doctrine of Christ (as has and shall
be made appear) is and may be abundantly otherwise confirmed: you need not for
fear of debasing the Church below the Devil, suppose her thus guilty of
robbery, in making her self equal with God: Equal I say with God, because
infallibility is not an effect or fruit like love, peace, but an essential
attribute of the Holy Ghost, no more communicable to, or predicable either of
you or us, than Omnipresence or Omnipotency: It Is God alone that cannot lie,
Titus 1.2. howbeit, in some cases others through his grace shall not.

Fourthly, The books of Scripture, Page 83.
which you are pleased to accept as Gods written word, and Divine revelations,
were first delivered unto you by Catholics, and accepted of by your Ancestors,
upon the score and word of Roman Catholics, Priests and Monks, together with
the same sense and interpretation, which the Roman Catholic Church now
teaches, and which was then confirmed by miracles as aforesaid.

First, You confess, Page 84.
Querie the third, that there is a Greek Church, and an Ethiopian Church
distinct from yours; and we can tell you out of Reinerius cont. Haeret. cap. 4.
of Leonists or Lollards, that were dispersed into all Countries, have continued
ever since the Apostles, lived justly, and believed all the Articles contained
in the Creed. Our Ancestors might receive the books of Scripture as Gods
written word from Catholics, and yet never be beholding to the Romanists for
it. But be it so, that our Ancestors did as you say, what then? Did not the
Primitive Christians receive the books of the Old Testament from the Jews, and
yet rejected their Traditions, nay, disputed against the Jewish Traditions out
of those very books. How ever,

Secondly, These books were not accepted as aforesaid, upon the score and word
of the Roman Catholic Priests and Monks; for our Ancestors had the Priests and
Monks word for the Apocrypha books, as well as for the Canonical, and yet did
they reject those, and accept these because they found convincing reasons so to
do.

Thirdly, True it is your Priests are sworn not to interpret Scripture against
the sense, which the Holy Mother the Church has held, and does hold: but that
they do so, or ever delivered unto our Ancestors any such an interpretation,
much less any confirmed by Miracles, remains for you to prove, and is a fable
we know nothing of; though yet,

Fourthly, If you, your Priests and Monks, or any body else can bring us to the
certain knowledge thereof, or any other traditions so confirmed, we shall
without further ado accept of, hold them as fast as we can, and in the mean
while no little marvel that you knowing so well of such a sense, should spend
time in troubling us with your own private glosses. Nor yet is the last, the
least sign of a brazen forehead, the Apostate blushes not to tell to all the
world that he has now learned to hate and abhor Rebellion and Treason as much
as Hell and Damnation, Page 86.
notwithstanding that,

First, The general approved Council of Lateran under Innocent the Third,
decrees that if the Temporal Lord being required and admonished of the Church,
shall neglect to purge his Country of Heretical defilments, the Pope may from
thenceforth denounce his Vassals absolved from their fidelity, and may expose
his Country to be seized on by Catholics, who rooting out the Heretics may
possess it without contradiction, and keep it in the purity of Faith. The
Popish Bishops and Priests declare and swear, extra hanc veram fidem Catholicam
non est salus, out of this true Catholic Faith there is no Salvation. The sum
of all the Captain has learned, and would have us to learn, is to believe as
the Church believes: and consequently is so far from having learned to hate and
abhor rebellion, as Hell and Damnation; as he believes all such shall be damned
to Hell, as do not hold it lawful (such procedure first had by the Church and
Pope) to rise up in Rebellion against their Lord and King.

Secondly, The Oath of Allegiance was composed and imposed on purpose to
distinguish the Loyal and disloyal Romanists, the Popes power of
Excommunication not at all therein touched; no point of doctrine inserted, and
yet is the Popish Religion so near allied to Rebellion, that it commands her
Vassals rather to suffer death, than bind themselves by Oath to perform
Allegiance to their Lord and King; though yet to say truth,

Thirdly, The Papists in this deal more heartily than in any other thing that I
know of: for should they take this Oath, as sometimes some of them in policy
may do, it were no better than taking Gods name in vain. The Pope if
antecedently he have not, may yet at pleasure absolve them from it; they may
this notwithstanding, be free to rebel, so soon as there is an opportunity, and
^ill there be an opportunity, it is not likely that men so wise as they, should
ever offer to rebel. Non licet Christianis, etc. says Bellarmine, it is not
lawful for Christians to tolerate a King that is an Heretic, if he endeavor
^o draw his Subjects into Heresy: And if you would know how Christian Papists
in England, and some parts of Germany can be excused from neglect of duty;
Dominicus Bannes will ^ell you, because that generally they have not power to
make such Wars against Princes, and great dangers are ^mminent over them,
however an Apology might easily be framed out of Bellarmine in the place
fore-quoted, quod si Christiani olim non deposuerunt Neronem and Dioclesianum,
and Julianum Apostatam and Valentem Arianum and similes, fuit quia deerant
vires temporales Christianis; If Christians in former times did not depose
Nero, Dioclesian, Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arian and such like, it
was because temporal forces were wanting unto Christians: nor may it with any
color of Justice be pleaded, that Bellarmine, Bannes, Mariana, Suarez, etc. be
but private Doctors, unless it be firstly made appear that the Roman Church
might, and has legally reversed the foresaid Lateran Decree, and anathematised
the persons and opinions of these and such like as Heretical; however, Captain
Robert carries it throughout like a man that is indeed an Heretic: for while a
Protestant, he did act as a rebellious Traitor, and now being turned Papist
will needs profess himself a Loyal Subject, both in their several times
apparently against his own principles.

The sixth reason against the Scriptures being a Rule, examined.
THe sixth reason I meet with, was whatsoever is a sole and sufficient rule,
Page 42.
must be plain and clear in all necessary points, at least, which relate unto
faith, or the Means by which salvation is to be had, which the Scripture is
not; and above all things it must not contradict it self, which the Scripture
seems to do. To prove this, I shall give some few instances, which I think can
never be infringed.

The man comes here home to the point, waves his impertinent sophistical
jumbling in of Judge and Guide; and most industriously endeavors to prove from
the Scriptures deficiency and obscurity, that it is not the sole sufficient
Rule, nor is it any marvel that we find him now so serious and earnest; for if
this argument fail, all his other seven Antiscriptural reasons come to nothing
with it: for though Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, etc. should
disagree in matters of Faith, raise different senses to serve their several
interests, cannot all of them understand, and some of them do desperately wrest
several places to their own destruction, the Scripture supposed plain and clear
in all necessary points, the fault and folly is their own. The Scripture all
this notwithstanding, may and does still remain as it was, a sole sufficient
Rule; or if some Books be lost, all Copies corrupted, and several Texts
mistranslated, yet what is this to the purpose, while we can and shall evince,
that the Books we at present have, are so entire, the Copies so pure, and the
Translations so true, that all points necessary at least be therein plain and
clear; nor will it avail to tell us of the Primitive Christians consulting with
the Apostles, and that it is all one to judge by our own reason, and by a Law
to be interpreted by our own reason: For we might suppose the Apostles with all
their Authority now in being, go and consult with them, or in their absence
with the Pastors of the several Churches as the great Moderators of all
controversies, and yet the Scriptures if plain and clear still remain a sole
sufficient Rule, according to which the controversies might and ought to be
decided: Nor need we in this case be troubled with interpreting of Scriptures
according to our own reason, since it is supposed, and shall be proved, that the
Scripture is so clear in all necessary points, that it needs no interpretation,
though yet you may take notice by the way, that to judge by our own reason as
the only rule, is not the same with judging by a Law to be interpreted by our
own reason as one special means: your Argument would perhaps strike at that;
but this is all that in any case we practice and so do; because Christ bids us
search the Scriptures, and the Apostle adds, judge ye what I say, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual; however, since the faith or means by which
salvation is to be had, is a believing on Christ the foundation, as has been
said, not a believing of just so many as you or others are pleased to call
fundamental points: If the Scriptures be plain and clear, as without
peradventure they are in their testifying of him according to Joh. 5.40. they
are plain and clear in what necessarily relates to Faith, or the means by which
Salvation is to be had according to John 20.31. and consequently what ever
becomes of all the other, whether necessary or unnecessary points, may be a
sole sufficient Rule according to the tendency of this your present discourse,
the seeming contradictions shall after your infringible instances, come now to
be discussed.

Page 42.
That they are not plain and clear, as aforesaid, consider all Christians
generally (except some few) do agree that the Sacraments of the Gospel are
necessary in order to Salvation. Now as to these, the Scriptures are so far
from being clear that they do not so much as denominate what a Sacrament is,
how many Christ ordained, or whether there be any Sacrament or not.

First, All Christians may agree that the Sacraments are necessary, and yet
they not be so; for it is Christ's saying that they are, not at all the
Christians agreeing, that can make them necessary. Did not all Christians
generally agree for six hundred years together, that the Eucharist was
necessary for Infants, and yet now the Church concludes otherwise. But 2. it
is here granted that some Christians deny the Sacraments of the Gospel to be
necessary, and if some may be Christians and yet deny the necessity of
Sacraments, it is an argument sufficient that they are not necessary. Nor indeed
does the man assert that Sacraments be simply necessary, but qualifies it with,
in order to Salvation, and limits it to Sacraments of the Gospel: perhaps he
may think there be two ways whereby God brings his people to Salvation, one
ordinary with, and the other extraordinary without Sacraments; nor shall I say
more of that, but tell him that if Women and Male Children under the Law might,
much more the Catechumeni and Infants under the Gospel may be saved by grace
without Sacraments to confer or convey it. 3. Though it be not the Scripture
mode to observe Logic rules in framing definitions, nor always Arithmetical in
making up of accounts: Yet is the nature and end of these Ordinances we call
Sacraments, described in Scripture so far as is meet for us to know: The number
numbered, Baptism and the Lord's Supper said to be instituted by Christ, and no
more; and sure then the man may count two, and need not complain for want of
the number numbering.

Secondly, It Is necessary to Salvation, to believe all the Books of Holy
Scripture to be the word of God, and to believe nothing written to be the word
of God which is Apocryphal; but by the Scripture it cannot be made out plainly
and clearly, which Books are the word of God, and which are Apocryphal.

First, Your own Doctors distinguish betwixt an affirmative believing and a
negative disbelief; and though they make it damnable to disbelieve any one
point (when sufficiently represented to the understanding as revealed by God)
yet do they not make it necessary, positively and expressly to believe all, or
any of the Books of Holy Scriptures to be so revealed; and suppose they did, it
matters not, since it is evident that the Scriptures themselves make believing in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and not believing all the Books of Holy Scripture to be
the word of God, to be that Vnum necessarium, that one thing necessary to
Salvation. And the Fathers in the Primitive times had differences and doubts
about several Books of Scripture now commonly received for Canonical, and yet
were saved by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, even as we. 2. Christians
convinced by any means whatsoever, that such and such Books in themselves
Apocryphal be the word of God, ought during that conviction believe them to be
so, and it is so far from being necessary to Salvation for them, rebus sic
stantibus, to believ otherwise, that it were obstinacy and interpretatively a
denying of Gods veracity for them not so to believe formally, as Chillingworth,
though not materially an Heresy. 3. True it is that it cannot be made out by
Scripture as by a Testimony, or Argumentum inartificiale, which Books are the
Word of God, and which be Apocryphal; yet may this be made out plainly and
clearly by Scripture, Tanquam per Argumentum artificiale, scilicet, The Divine
Characters that God himself has imprinted on those Books that be indeed the
Word of God: nor need we trouble your Churches Authority, though we confess our
selves much beholding to the Churches ministry for the finding of them out.

Thirdly, It is necessary to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but
there is no Text or Texts of Scripture to prove that the Scriptures which we
have, are Gods Word.

1. It is necessary for you and me to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of
God, because we are persuaded, though upon several grounds, that they be so;
but that it is necessary for all persons so to believe, will not be granted
till you further explain your [necessary,] and add proof for the evincing of
it. And yet however, 2. There is a Text of Scripture to prove that the
Scriptures which we have are Gods Word; For if there be a Text that expressly
declares that the Scriptures which the Jews and Christians had in the Primitive
times, were the Word of God, there is a Text to prove that the Scriptures which
we have, are Gods Word: But there is a Text which expressly declares that the
Scriptures which the Jews and Christians had in the Primitive times were the
Word of God; ergo, There is a Text to prove that the Scriptures which we have,
are Gods Word. The major is evident from universal Tradition assuring us that
the Scriptures we now have, be the same that the Jews and Christians had then.
The minor is evinced from that of Paul to Timothy, whose Mother was a Jewess,
and Father a Greek; all Scripture is divinely inspired, 2 Timothy 3.

Fourthly, It is necessary to know that the Scriptures are not corrupted, for
if they be corrupted they cease to be the Word of God, and then they cannot be
any rule or sure guide to us: But of this we have no assurance in Scripture.

1. It is not necessary, as has been said, to know the Scriptures to be the
Word of God; and therefore not necessary sure to know they are not corrupted.
Scripture or Writing is no more than one special means whereby God is pleased
to make known, and preserve in the World the knowledge of his Will; if he do it
any where by another Medium, that will suffice. Nay suppose, as the man seems
to do all along, that the Scriptures be corrupted, it cannot be necessary to
know that they are not corrupted; unless it be necessary to know that which is
not possible to be known, and so all men be necessarily damned. 2. When we say,
the Scripture is the Rule whereby to judge of Controversies, it is usually
restrained to such controversies as do not concern the Scripture. You will not
allow us to argue, the Church is no infallible Judge or Rule, because the
Church is forced to seek for other and higher proof than her own words to prove
her self to be Infallible; and if so, why should we argue the Scripture to be
no Rule, because we cannot have assurance in Scripture that it is not
corrupted? it will be sufficient that we have assurance some other way. 3.
Scripture may be said to be corrupted in Essentials or Accidentals, in whole or
in part: It may be corrupted in Accidentals, the Words mis-spelled, Sentences
misplaced, Words, or Letters inserted or omitted; and yet the mind and meaning
of God what it is, all that notwithstanding, be evident from thence. Every Book
almost after its most perfect Edition, has Errata's, and yet the Authors
meaning may be plain enough: Nay further, Scripture may be corrupted in some
parts, and yet remaining pure in others, Scriptura per Scripturam, Scripture
may be corrected by Scripture, as a Jesuit of your own has well observed.

Fifthly, It is necessary in order to the knowing of the true mind, meaning,
and will of God, and what he intended by such and such a Text, that we know
when a Text is to be understood literally, when figuratively, when mystically;
but this cannot be understood from Scripture, as daily experience informs us.

1. The Scripture supposes men to have the use of sense and reason; and if so,
they may easily conclude, as sure as God is truth, the Spirit spoke by the
Prophets and Apostles accordingly as he meant; the Prophets and Apostles writ
according as the Spirit spoke; and writ for that end, that the true mind,
meaning, and will of God might be known and understood, which could not be
without perpetuated new Revelation, except we might and ought to take that for
his mind and meaning which the words in their literal construction hold out
unto us. Eum sensum qui ex verbis immediate colligitur, De verbo Dei, l. 3. c. 3
certum est esse sensum Spiritus Sancti. That, says Bellarmin, which is
immediately gathered from the words, is certain to be the sense of the Holy
Ghost. And therefore, 2. vainly does he enquire, and fondly distinguish of
several senses of this or that Text, whenas it is apparent from the very
writing of it in letters, and the confession of our adversaries, that each Text
is to be understood literally. Nor is that he calls figurative, Literalis est
duplex; alius simplex, alius figuratu^. Bellar. ibid.
any other than a species of the literal sense: The mystical, an uncertain
remote intendment of the things, and not the immediate argumentative meaning of
the written Words or Text, which we are now enquiring after. Augustine. (...)
Doctrina Christiana, l. 2. c. 9.
However, 3. In iis quae aperte in Scripturis posita sunt, inveniuntur illa
omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi: In those things which are laid
down plainly in the Scriptures, all those things are found which appertain to
Faith and Direction of Life. Dark figurative Texts, and mystical meaning of
things may in some sense be useful, yet it is not necessary in order to the
knowing of the mind of God, so far as is requisite for us to know, that we
should be able to unfold them; Exponat si cui Deus concesserit: As Cajetan of
the Revelation. And yet further, 4. There is a difference betwixt being
ignorant of such and such a Text, and wresting or wilfully perverting it to a
wrong sense: This even in Scriptures not materially necessary to be known, must
of necessity be avoided. It is Heretical, it is Soul-destructive, 2 Peter 3.19.
that anent Texts holding out points commonly called Fundamental, may consist
with saving knowledge; for it is the knowing the true mind, meaning and will of
God as to such a particular that is necessary, and not just the knowing it by
such and such a Text: you may perhaps know it by one Text, and I by another; or
you by oral practical tradition, and I by writing.

Sixthly, It is necessary to know that the very Copies and Translations of the
Scriptures which we have, and upon which we ground our selves, are certainly
true: for if they are not, we build upon uncertainties, and consequently have
no sure foundation for our Faith; yet we cannot be assured, nor have so much as
any information as to this particular from the Scriptures.

First, The Man does not deny either the being or possibility of knowing, That
there be Copies and Translations certainly true; only he asserts, That we have
not so much as any information as to this particular, from the Scriptures,
which we might, as has been said, easily grant; and yet upon just Grounds
maintain that the Scripture is a rule both plain and perfect, howbeit. In hac
germani textu^s pervestigatione salis perspicue inter omnes constat, nullum
argumentum esse certius ac firmius quam antiquorum probatorum codicum latinorum
fidem, etc. in praefat.
we need not do it: for in the pervestigation of the true genuine Text, says
Sixtus Quintus, There was no Argument more firm and certain to be relied on,
than the Faith of the ancient Books: Nor is there a better way, says a great
Rationalist, for the ordinary sort, whether of Papists or Protestants, than to
compare their and our Translations together, and where there is no real
difference, there to be confident they are right: where they differ, there to
be prudent in the choice of their Guide. 2. There is a certainty Mathematical,
Moral, and Spiritual. Mathematical, either touching Copies or Translations of
Scripture, is not now to be had. Certainty Moral, such as the nature of the
thing will bear, and as much as humane Testimony and industry can afford us, we
have: Nor is the building thereupon a founding our Faith upon uncertainties but
upon most strong probabilities, such as especially in a matter of Fact and
Skill it were extreme imprudence and obstinacy, not to rest satisfied withal.
Certainty Spiritual, whether of Science or adherence, beyond that which the
best rational Evidence can give ground for, is to be had, and sometimes by, but
not from us; you must by Prayer seek unto God for it, every good Gift and every
perfect Gift is from above. And if God vouchsafe to give it you as to this
particular, touching the whole or part, well; if not, for ought I know, or you
are able to evince, you must be content to be without it. However, 3. You do
ill to call the Scripture, qua Scriptura, as copied and translated, the
foundation of Faith; and worse, to conclude from its uncertainty, as such, that
our Faith has no sure foundation: For Scripture under that notion is not the
Material, much less either the Formal or Salvifical object of Faith; nor any
more save choicely instrumental in the producing thereof; and I think we may
safely affirm, That an Instrument in it self fallible, may be mainly
subservient to the supreme Cause, in bringing us both to believe Divine Truths,
because Divine, and to acquiesce in him who is the Foundation indeed, and Truth
it self, Jesus Christ. Your English Priests are fallible, yet instrumental
sure, by Preaching, Translating, Writing, to bring persons certainly to believe
those Proposals, and to fix upon that Authority, which is supposed in it self
to be infallible. How shall they believe in him on whom they have not heard:
And how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10. Not how without an
infallible Proposer. But, 4. I much admire the Man should hold it necessary to
know, etc. since it is evident that in Austin's time, the Latin Translations of
the Scripture were innumerable, nor could any man have said this or that is
certainly true: The Septuagint, said to be used by the Apostles, is confessedly
faulty: and though some of the present Romanists may be arrived at that height
of impudence, as peremptorily to affirm; yet none can rationally make it out,
that they know any one Translation that is perfect, or Copy that is incorrupt.
The Council of Trent indeed did decree, That the Vulgar Translation should be
received for Authentic; but which she meant by Vulgar, or what by Authentic,
no body can yet tell: there was bellum Papale, after, about the Editions,
Sixtus against Clemens, and Clemens against Sixtus. Nor can their Doctors yet
conclude, whether it is better say, the Translation is free from all errors,
or only such as relate to Faith and Manners.

Seventhly, It is necessary that the many manifest controversies about the true
sense of Scripture should be decided, because where two contrary senses are
imposed and urged, and both affirmed to be the meaning of God, and his
Revelation, one only can be true, and he who refuses that which is true shall
be damned: yet these controversies cannot be decided by Scripture.

1. If it be necessary that the many manifest controversies about the true
sense of Scripture, should be decided; sure your Supreme Infallible Judge is
far to blame, that has not yet decided them, but suffers your own Doctors to
controvert the sense of almost every Text of Scripture.

2. We urge, it is true, by Arguments, but it is you alone that Magisterially
impose your own meanings as Divine Revelation: and though of two contraries,
one sense only can be true, and he that refuses that sense which he knows to
be true, does deserve Damnation; yet that God will certainly damn him, or that
the not believing in case he had not known, were a sin damnable, is more I
think than God ever told you.

3. Such controversies as are necessary to be decided in the use of lawful
means have been, are, and may be decided by Scripture, without either
completing it by, or introducing in the stead thereof any other Rule; and for
the rest a mutual forbearance of the Controvertors were far better than your
Pretorial decision of the controversies.

Eighthly, It is necessary to know, what is purely and absolutely necessary to
Salvation to be believed, and what not; that is, as you say, what is
fundamental, and what not fundamental; and to be informed of this plainly, lest
we err and be damned: but in this the Scripture is silent.

1. If it be necessary to know what is purely and absolutely necessary to
Salvation to be believed, and what not, How comes it to pass that your Church
only declares negatively what is not to be believed, or what must not upon pain
of Damnation be disbelieved, and yet never tells affirmatively what is purely
and absolutely necessary for us to believe? True, you will have all believe
affirmatively, implicitly, what ever your Church believes; but that is nothing
to this business, where knowledge of the [what] in an explicit Faith, is
necessarily required. All your Doctors conclude, Somewhat must be explicitly
believed; and you say, It is necessary to know the Particulars; and yet will
not your Church ever be gotten to declare unto us which they be: let her do it
when it shall seem good unto her; in the interim, I shall tell you plainly,
That,

2. So much of the [what] is fundamentally necessary to be believed, as is
needful to bring such or such a person to believe in the [who] and rest on the
foundation Jesus Christ; and consequently more may be necessary for one than
another, and not necessary at all that the particulars should be determined.
For,

3. Saving and Damning depends not upon a precise knowing and believing just so
many points, and no more; but upon a hearty believing or not believing in Jesus
Christ. He that believes in the Son of God, has eternal life: He that
believes not, etc. He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son
has not life, 1 John 5.12.

Ninthly, It is necessary to believe that God the Father is not begotten; that
God the Son is not made but begotten by the Father only; that God the Holy
Ghost is neither made nor begotten, but does proceed, and that from the Father
and the Son; that Christ is of one substance with the Father, and that these
three are one, and that one three. I refer to consideration, whether all these
points be plainly and clearly to be found in Scripture: If they were, it had
been almost impossible for so many divisions to have happened about them, as have
done amongst persons on all sides, admitting the Scripture to be the word of
God.

1. I refer it also to consideration, Whether all these points be not plainly
and clearly to be found in Scripture: And wish you to consult with almost any
large English Catechism, or common Place book concerning it.

2. The Heart of man is desperately wicked, and many are possessed with a
Spirit of blindness: It is one question whether all these points be plainly and
clearly to be found in Scripture? and another, whether all persons that admit
the Scriptures to be the word of God, can or will so search as to find them to
be there? Both Jews and Christians admit the Books of the Old Testament for
Divine, and yet differ about the weightiest, and as we say, the clearest point.
You say the Scriptures are plain and evident for the Churches Infallibility:
and yet the Protestants, that admit the Scriptures for the Word of God as well
as you do, all deny it.

3. Those so manifold divisions in the Primitive Church, make more against the
Churches being a Pretorial Judge, than against Scripture being a perfect Rule.
It had been sure altogether impossible that such and so many points should have
been so long controverted; but that either the generality of Christians did not
then judge a Pretorial decision of controversies necessary, or that there was
none then empowered so to decide them. Howbeit,

4. Is it necessary to believe these points implicitly or explicitly? if but
implicitly; it is not necessary in order to the constituting of Scriptures an
adequate object or rule of believing, than these points should be plainly
contained in them. For plainness respects knowledge of the particulars to be
believed, which this kind of Faith supposes not; and if it be necessary to
believe these points explicitly, knowingly, your own Doctors will not deny but
that the Scriptures do plainly and perspicuously contain and teach them. We
deny not, says Costerus, that those chief heads of the Faith, which are to all
Christians necessary to be known to Salvation, are plainly and perspicuously
comprehended in the Writings of the Apostles. Enchirid. c. 4. p. 49.
Cujusmodi sunt mysterium sanctissimae Trinitatis and incarnationis Filii Dei;
Of which sort be the mystery of the Holy Trinity, and Incarnation of the Son of
God. The Evangelical and Apostolical Books, and the Oracles of the Ancient
Prophets, plane instruunt nos, do plainly instruct us what is to be thought
concerning things Divine. Therefore hostile discord laid aside, let us take the
explication of Questions, from the words, Divinely inspired, says Constantine
to the Council of Nice: And now what think ye does Bellarmine reply? why, See
Bellarmin. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 1.
he takes occasion hence to suspect Constantine for a person unbaptized, that
as yet non noverit Arcana religionis, had not been acquainted with the secrets
of Religion; howbeit better considering, answers, 2. That there be Testimonies
extant in the Holy Scriptures of all the Doctrines which appertain to the
nature of God, and that concerning these Doctrines, we may be plene and plane,
fully and plainly instructed out of the Holy Scriptures.

Tenthly, It is necessary (the Church of England says) that Infants should be
Baptized, and Women should receive the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, and
Christians should observe the Lord's Day; and yet none of these points are
clearly and particularly proved from Scriptures

1. It matters not much what you say, elsewhere, this passage sufficiently
manifests what sort of Nonconformists you write against, scil. not
Nonconformists to the Church of England, but to the Chair of Rome; for if
otherwise, wherefore should you urge them in this case with, The Church of
England says, etc. And yet however, 2. You must know that if the Church of
England say, It is necessary that Infants should be Baptized, it is upon a
supposition that the affirmative may evidently be proved from Scripture; for if
you or any else shall evince that Infants Baptism cannot be proved from the
Scriptures, the Church of England, Article the sixth, has expressly declared
against the necessity of it. 2. You cannot but have heard of haec homo, (...),
Let a Man examine himself, etc. 1 Cor. 11.28. Women as well as Men are there
required, (self examination and not Auricular confession first had) to receive
the Eucharist. Nor, 3. Can you be ignorant that there is a difference betwixt
the Lord's Day being necessary to be observed, and its being necessary that
Christians should observe the Lord's Day: That would imply a Doctrinal; This no
more than an obediential necessity: That if held by any, the Church of England
will tell you, ought to be proved particularly from Scripture; This needs no
more but a general warrant.

Eleventhly, It is a sin, (as the generality of Christians agree) an heresy to
re-baptize any one, which has been baptized by an Heretic, where does the
Scripture say so?

1. Those that hold it a sin and heresy to rebaptize any one, Videtur quod
Baptismus possit iterari; sed contra est quod dicitur, Ephesians 4. una fides, unum
baptisma. Aquinas 3. quaest. 66. Art. 9.
etc. found their opinion upon Scripture, One Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5.2.
Cyprian held, such ought to be rebaptized, dyed in that opinion, and yet dyed
a Saint and Martyr. 3. The Thesis here laid down without restriction is
apparently false, contradicting the Nineteenth Canon of the Council of Nice, Si
quis confugit ad Ecclesiam Catholicam de Paulianist. and Cataphrygiis, statutum
est rebaptizari. If any one of the Paulianists and Cataphrygians fly unto the
Catholic Church, it is Decreed, That they ought to be rebaptized.

And now it being evident that neither your Argument nor instances make
against, but for the Scriptures being a sole sufficient Rule; let us try what
they will do on that account against, or for your Romish Church. Whatsoever is a
sole sufficient Rule must be plain and clear in all necessary points, at least
which relate to Faith: But the Roman Church is not plain and clear in all
necessary points that relate to Faith; Therefore the Roman Church is not the
sole sufficent Rule. The major is your own, nor shall I need to trouble any
body else for instances to prove the minor.

First then it is necessary, you say, to know how many Sacraments Christ
ordained; and yet your Church leaves it doubtful, whether anointing with Oil
was ordained by Christ a Sacrament or not; Insinuated, she says, it was,
Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 1.
Mark 6. but does not, dare not, say, it was there or any where else,
instituted as such.

Secondly, It is necessary to salvation, you say, to believe all the Books of
the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God, and to believe nothing written to be
the word of God which is Apocryphal; And yet as to this, Your Church is so dark
and dubious, See Bellarmin. de verbo Dei, l. 1. c. 7.
that though Bellarmine contend that the Council of Trent did define the
additaments to the Book of Hester to be canonical; Sixtus Senensis believes
otherwise, and brings Arguments against it. Nay, if it be necessary to know
which Books be the Word of God and which Apocryphal, it is necessary sure to
know which Traditions be Dominical or Apostolical, which not; and yet
concerning this your Church is silent.

Thirdly, It is necessary to know that the Scriptures are not corrupted; it is
necessary to know when a Text is to be understood literally, when figuratively,
when Mystically; it is necessary to know that the very Copies and Translations
of the Scriptures which we have, and upon which we ground our selves are
certainly true; it is necessary that the many manifest controversies about the
true sense of Scripture should be decided; it is necessary to know what is
Fundamental, what not: and yet as to none of these your Church is plain and
clear.

Fourthly, It is necessary to believe that God the Father is not begotten; that
God the Son is not made but begotten by his Father only; that God the Holy
Ghost is neither made nor begotten, but proceeds from the Father and the Son;
that Christ is of one substance with the Father, and that these Three are One,
and that One Three: and yet suppose these points not plainly and clearly to be
found in Scriptures, how possibly could the Church for the first three hundred
years be said to be plain and clear concerning them? for during that time there
was no General Council whereby she might explain her self, and if she did
explain her self in General Councils after, that employed her former darkness
and deficiency, with respect to those very points.

Fifthly, It is a sin and heresy, you say, to re-baptize any one who has been
Baptized by an Heretic; and yet as has been said, your Church, that I mean
you take the boldness to call your Church, is so far from being plain and clear
in this, that she has defined the contrary: Nay, plainness and clearness owned
as it is, and ought to be, for an essential property of the Rule of Faith, P.
54, 56.
the whole of what you have said in behalf of the Church (if granted true) will
amount to as much as nothing. For suppose Christ judge the Nations not by his
Word and Spirit in the mouths of his Ministers, but, as you phrase it, by his
Churches Tribunal in passing of Acts and pronouncing Anathema's; suppose the
Church to be what you would have it, and not only led, if she will, but so
drawn that she follow the Spirit into all truth, and sic de caeteris, yet what
were all this to the purpose? For it would not necessarily follow thence that
she is plain and clear in all necessary points: the Apostles sure, if any,
might so judge and were so drawn, Page 37.
and yet you say that they in their Epistles are defective, dark, very subject,
and that in fundamentals, desperately to be misunderstood. Nor do you trouble
us with telling that the Church is always in being, Page 61.
and capable upon demand to explain and declare its own sense; For 1. If we
cannot certainly understand the Apostles, when explaining and declaring their
sense and meaning, how shall we be able certainly to understand your Church,
when explaining and declaring hers, since the Church has no other way to
explain her meaning, save by words most intelligible, which way the Apostles
had, and did make use of as is evident from 1 Cor. 14.2. The question is,
whether the Church be actually plain and clear in all necessary points; not
whether the Church be capable upon demand to explain and declare its own sense:
being plain and clear, and capable upon demand to explain and declare, be
different things; this belongs to an Interpreter, of no concern here, it is that
that is pertinent and the property of a Rule. And yet 3. The Church diffusive
is not capable either of explaining or of being demanded to explain its own
sense: Council or Church representative, there has been none at your own
account for a whole Century of years, nor likely to be any more, and it cannot
be imagined that by Church you should mean the Pope, because, other reasons at
present omitted, you referr to a Church always in being: However, 4. Frustra
est potentia quae non reducitur in Actum: What are we nearer having, or the
Church nearer being a Rule of Faith, for her being capable of doing that, which
by no means she will be gotten to do? Often has she been demanded, I now demand,
and desire you to demand her, to explain her self touching the points
forementioned, as also touching those after instanced in the close of my answer
to the third Querie; and if she do explain her sense as to those points, we
shall conclude that hitherto she has not been a sole sufficient Rule, for want
of that explanation; if she do not, at the best she will be but remotely capable
of being hereafter, and at present be no Rule of Faith; nor yet indeed is she
capable at this account of being hereafter, or rather, would you speak
properly, making such a Rule, because disenabled by the first general Council
at Ephesus from ever making tanquam de fide any such an explanation. Can. 7.


That there are in the Scriptures several places which to common reason seem
contradictions, and consequently some parts of Scripture seem untrue, is easily
proved: And I shall here give you some few plain instances for example, to
which many more might be added.

First, It Is well you distinguish betwixt private and common Reason; for though
you exempt each man's private Spirit or Reason, from meddling about interpreting
of Scriptures, you will sure admit common Reason to be of special use, unless
you will say that Reason ought to be abused for finding out of contradictions in
Scriptures, but must by no means be employed either in unfolding or reconciling
the difficult places that occur therein.

Secondly, Either Reason can judge of things and propositions, when
contradictory, or not: if not, wherefore do you tell stories of several places
seeming to common Reason to contradict one another, so seeming that thereupon*
Scripture must be rejected from being a Rule; and if Reason can thus judge,
wherefore should not your Church be rejected from being a Rule as well as
Scriptures, since her Doctrines seem to Reason, and often to common Sense too,
to be more contradictory than any of these Texts. A Council is above the Pope:
A Council is not above the Pope: hoc this scilicet bread or nothing, is the
body, is really Christ's body at London, at Rome, on Earth, in Heaven, the very
same moment. Every man is a liar; The Pope as Pope is a man, (unless he be
either Accidens or animal irrationale) and yet the Pope as Pope is no liar, in
no possibility to be mistake. Nay further, these very places you say seem
contradictory, your Church teaches to be certainly true in her Authoritative
approval of the Canon of Scripture: so that if upon this account you will reject
Scripture, upon the same account you may, must reject the Church from being a
Rule: and yet rather the Church than the Scripture, for the Scripture barely
presents us with the places; your Church passes sentence, says they are all
true: unless you will tell us your Churches saying can make contradictions true at
once, and warrant you to believe it; howbeit Gods saying cannot do so.

Thirdly, Had you had many more plain instances, it is not like you would have
troubled the Reader with these: your task is to prove, that the Scripture is
not plain and clear in all necessary points: and is it not then for want of
some more pertinent, that you present us with doubts and difficulties about
Chronologies and Genealogies, concerning which the Apostle forbids us to
dispute: you had better have said with the great Master of Reason, Grotius,
afflatu Dei locutos quae locuti sunt, scripsisse quae scribere jussi sunt
Prophetas; de scriptis Historicis and Moralibus Hebraeorum sententiis aliud
puto.

In 2 Kings chap. 8. verse 26. you read thus, Page 45.
Twenty two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one
year in Jerusalem; and his Mothers name was Athaliah, the Daughter of Omri. But
2 Chronicles. chap. 22. verse 2. you will read thus, Forty and two years old was
Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem; his
Mothers name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri. Now against the infallibility
of Scripture, Reason conceives her self to have this infallible demonstration,
viz. No one who speaks two things, the one contrary to the other, can be said
to be infallible in speaking: but to affirm of the same person that he began to
reign when he was two and twenty years old, and that he was two and forty years
old when he began to reign, is to speak two things, the one contrary to the
other; therefore says Reason, the Scripture is not infallible in speaking.

First, I am glad to find you in hand with infallible demonstrations: for if
demonstrations Theological be to be had, and may be owned as infallible, I hope
there will be no great need amongst sober persons, of your judicial Decisions,
unless you can get license to demonstrate against, and we neither for, by, nor
from the Scriptures.

Secondly, Your Major is denied; for heat and cold are two things contrary one
to another, and yet I hope God himself may be infallible, notwithstanding he
has said, Summer and Winter, heat and cold, Genesis 8.22. You would say if you
could speak, No one that delivers two propositions, the one contrary to the
other, can be said to be infallible; though yet this will not do neither, for
you your self might speak and write too these two propositions, Ahaziah began
to reign when he was forty and two years old: And Ahaziah began to reign when
he was twenty and two years old, and yet this notwithstanding, did nothing else
hinder, be infallible. But that it may be sense and pertinent, your Major must
be supplied from your Minor: No one that affirms two things of the same person
that are contrary the one to the other, can be said to be infallible in
speaking: But to affirm of Ahaziah, that he was twenty and two years old when
he began to reign; and that he was forty and two years old when he began to
reign, is to speak two things contrary the one to the other; yes, and more too,
or else nothing to the purpose, scilicet, to affirm of the same person two
things contradictory one to the other, See Light-foots Harmony in ^oc.
which yet this Scripture does not: for the Book of Chronicles in this place
means not that Ahaziah was so old when he began to Reign; but these two and
forty years, have relation to another thing, namely to the Kingdom of the House
of Omri, and not to the Age of Ahaziah; for count from the beginning of the
reign of Omri, and you find Ahaziah to enter his Reign in the two and fortieth
year from thence.

The Original words therefore Ben arbagumi Vshethaiim Shunah are not to be
translated as they be, Ahaziah was two and forty years old, but Ahaziah was the
Son of the two and forty years, as Sedar Olam has acutely observed long ago:
nor should you tell us now of our different translations, unless it could be
made appear that the Church in all ages had, and of necessity ought to have one
authentic Translation. Or,

Secondly, that our Translations do not clearly and with one consent deliver to
us all points necessary to be believed, differing only in some punctilio's of
an inferior concern. Or,

Thirdly, That it may not be as lawful for us to propose what seems agreeable
to Reason for the removing, as it is for you to urge what seems contradictory to
Reason, for the raising of objections against a book of Scripture so
universally received for Canonical: And your Minor thus mended, is denied; for
contradictories must be ad idem, in the same respect, as well as de eodem, See
Peter Martyr* in loc.
concerning the same person. Ahaziah began to reign with his sickly infirm
Father when he was twenty and two years old, and the same Ahaziah was forty and
two years old when he began to reign himself alone: or if this will not
satisfy, you may consult with your own Cornelius de lapide upon the place,
he will tell you of the Syriack and Arabic Translations, both those of Antioch or
Mount Sinai, the Alexandrian or Coptick, that for forty two, have twenty two;
and he that is offended at the other, may use this reading. Nor is it, says
he, the interpreters, but the Scripture it self that corrects it self,
corrupted by the Transcribers: The book of Kings corrects the book of
Chronicles: nor need we go further than Scripture for salving of the other
difficulties; for 1 Chronicles. 3.16. will teach you to insert Joechim or Jachim
betwixt Josias and Jeconiah, Mat. 1.11. and so complete your number of forty
two; and Genesis 10.22. will tell you to put out Cannai from betwixt Sem and
Arphaxad, put in upon special Reason, as is conceived by the Seventy, See
Light-foots Harmony in loco.
and retained as is likely by S. Luke chap. 3.36. the better to win upon the
Gentiles.

The Argument from Heaven, for the Roman Churches being Judge and Guide, solved.
ANd now that I may conclude my whole proof with an Argument from Heaven, Page
74.
and by a Testimony of the highest nature make it evident to you, that this
Roman Catholic Church must be this Church, which God has appointed to be this
Guide and Judge, I shall insist upon the gift of Miracles; this was that
Testimony which our blessed Redeemer did himself produce, as his Letters of
Credence, and as both necessary and sufficient to prove his mission, If I had
not (says our Lord, Joh. 15.24.) done among them the works that no other man
did, they had not had sin, namely, in not believing me to be the Messiah. God
therefore has decreed it as a Law, that whosoever refuses to believe and
submit unto that authority, unto which he sets his hand and Seal, by bestowing
on it the gift of Miracles, that Person commits sin: the reason is given in
the same Text, viz. because he thereby shows that he hates God, namely by
not believing him. Now I urge, But the Roman Catholic Church has done Works
and Miracles amongst us, such as no other Christian Church upon Earth has
done; Therefore if we give credit to any other Church or Churches, and
disbelieve or refuse to believe her, we shall have sin, and show our selves to
be haters of God.

First, You pretend here to conclude your proof with an argument from Heaven,
and yet have you not hiththerto produced so much as one Testimony of the lowest
nature; somewhat you have said indeed, which is already touched, to prove what
we grant, scilicet, that no other Church can be; but have not said a word to
make good what you your self affirm, viz. that the Roman Church is, this
infallible Rule, Judge and Guide. And let me tell you by the way, either you
can prove this your Church infallible, or you cannot: If you cannot, wherefore
should we believe it? If you can, either by Revelation, or by Reason: Divine
revelation, it is apparent, you neither do, can, nor attempt to produce: and as
for Reason, you have already proved it to be fallible; so that at best, how
much soever you may seem to be taken with your own fallacies, your Church can
be proved but fallibly to be infallible. But,

Secondly, There is a difference betwixt the gift, and the power of working
Miracles. You do, it is true, insist upon the gift, but should make it out that
your Church has power of working Miracles, if you will evince her, Christ-like, to
be infallible: this was necessary; that had not been sufficient to have proved
his mission: It is therefore somewhat loose arguing, for you to conclude, the
Jews committed sin, were haters of God, for not believing Jesus to be the
Messiah, who did amongst them the work which no other man did, viz. wrought
Miracles by his own power; and therefore Christians commit sin, show themselves
haters of God in not believing the Roman Church to be infallible, because she
has the gift, can do works (howbeit, none among us) like other men, viz. work
Miracles in the name and power of another. And hence,

Thirdly, We deny Gods having decreed any such a Law as you tell of; 1 Samuel 10.
Numb. 11.
for though an Authority, to which God sets his hand and seal, by bestowing on
it the gift of Miracles, may be rendered thereby (like that of Saul and the
Seventy, by the spirit of Prophecy) more than ordinary venerable; and whosoever
refuses to believe and submit to an Authority, knowing it to work Miracles by
its own power, that person commits sin, and shows himself an hater of of
God: yet may an Authority divinely signed and sealed by having that gift, be
disbelieved (however, submission still due whether it have the gift or not)
without contracting any such a guilt: not disbelieved, do I mean, in a
particular Doctrine, that it shall actually and visibly confirm by Miracles;
but disbelieved, when teaching it self and all other Authorities that have that
gift, to be disbelievable upon that account, or de debito believed in all that
they should dictate forth unto us: That being indeed a Doctrine never confirmed
by Miracles, nor delivered by him that had the power of working of them. Though
yet,

Fourthly, It cannot be made out that Christ did set his hand and seal either
to this or that Authority, by bestowing on it any such a gift; for particular
believers had that gift bestowed upon them, as well as the Apostles; these
signs shall follow them that believe, etc. Mark. 16.17. Nor did the Apostles
work Miracles by virtue of their Authority, but by Faith; If ye have Faith as a
grain of Mustard Seed, etc. Matt. 17.20. And though I have all Faith, etc. 1.
Cor. 13.2. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the People, Ye men of
Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though we
by our own Power and Holiness, had made this man to walk? His name through
Faith in his name has made this man strong, etc. yea the faith which is by
him, has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all, Act.
3.12, 16. And hence sure it is, that in your Minor you leave out Authority,
mention neither Seal nor Gift, but barely urge and assume -- Now the Roman
Catholic Church has done, etc. not now God has set his hand and seal to the
Authority of the Roman Catholic Church, by bestowing upon it the gift of
Miracles: Nor is it any marvel that you do so, for if that gift were bestowed
upon that Authority, the Pope and Council that are invested with it, should
work Miracles, which yet they do not, nor do you insist on any such a thing;
and yet if that gift be not bestowed upon that Authority, it cannot bestow ^t
upon inferior Officers: it wants Gods Hand and Seal, and may according to the
tenor of your own Argument be disbelieved, be disobeyed, without either
committing sin, or showing hatred against God. However, 5. If a Church may
properly be said to work Miracles, when yet indeed it is not the Church, but
some particular believer that works them, and that not in the name of the
Church, but in the name of Christ; Other Christian Churches have done as great
Works or Miracles in former Ages as the Roman Church ever did; witness the
Church of Corinth, that came behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.7. and yet were not
they reputed thereupon either Judges of controversies, or infallible; nor does
the present Roman Church do any greater Works or Miracles than other Christian
Churches now on earth. What does she, what can she do here amongst us, more
than our Protestant Church does (amongst you,) save make louder lying boasts of
what she has done elsewhere? And therefore shall not we refuse to believe them,
or resolve to give credit unto her upon any such account, and conclude our so
doing to be warrantable, and well enough consistent with the love we owe unto
the Lord; wishing you yet withal to remember, That the Question is not solely
or chiefly whether this or that Church ought to be believed or disbelieved in
their Doctrinal teaching; but whether the Roman Church be the infallible Rule,
Judge, and Guide of Faith? Doctrinal certainty will not infer Judicial
Authority, nor e contra: Nay suppose your Church were Doctrinally infallible,
and had universal Jurisdiction, yet would it not necessarily follow that she is
the Rule of Faith. The Prophets of old, you will say, were infallible, and the
High Priests had judicial power, and yet to the Law and to the Testimony,
Isaiah 8.20. It was therefore prudently done of you to alter the Question,
First leave out Rule, and undertake to prove no more by your Argument from
Heaven, but that the Roman Church was Judge and Guide; and then finding after a
while, that that would not do neither, you leave out Judge or Authority, and
tell us of believing and disbelieving, as if it would follow, The Roman Church
ought to be believed in all that she says, and therefore has she plainly said
all that we ought to believe, is a Rule of Faith complete and evident; howbeit
indeed, had she authoritatively and infallibly so said, not she, but her
sayings in propriety of Speech were to be owned for the Rule.

Now that the Roman Church has done these works or Miracles, P. 76.
is a thing so evident both by the testimonies of the Holy Fathers, and
authorities of approved Historians, that those who deny it must show themselves
either not to be Men, or Men who purposely shut their Eyes against the truth;
yea, Heathens and Atheists will be as justifiable in their denial of the
Miracles related in the Old and New Testament, as those will be who deny these.
The Magdeburgenses, who were all professed and known Lutherans, do almost in
every one of their Centuries recount multitudes of Miracles wrought by persons
whom they affirm to have been infected with what they call Popery. Namely, S.
Bernard, S. Malachy, S. Dominick, S. Francis, and the like; as you may
particularly see in Brerely, if you examine the several places to which his
Index at the word Miracles will refer you: By which it will appear, That most
of those Miracles were done not in confirmation of those Points and Articles of
Faith which you hold with us; but even of those Points and Doctrines which you
call Popish Superstitions and Idolatries, as the Sacrifice of the Holy Mass,
the respect and veneration which is given to Saints, Relics, Images, etc.
Certainly there are few amongst you, but have heard and read, how and what
Christian Faith was first brought into England amongst our Progenitors the
Saxons, and by whom brought in: It was by S. Austin a Monk of S. Benets Order,
and his fellow Monks, sent hither by S. Gregory the then Pope of Rome; and it
was the same Faith that Catholics now teach, which was then confirmed by
wonderful Miracles from Heaven, as is testified by our own Writers, Venerable Bede and others; yea and by our Protestant Chronologies, Holingshead's
Chronicle, the last Edition, Vol. 1. Book 5. Cap. 21. Page 100, 102. Fox's Acts
and Monuments, Printed Anno 1576. Page 117. Stow's Annals, Printed 1592. Page
66. Goodwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England, Page 4. Also Fox in his
aforesaid Book, at the Word Miracles in the Index. To this I shall add the
Authorities of our own late Protestant Writers, for proof of undoubted Miracles
wrought in this latter Age. In the Book entitled, A report of the Kingdom of
Congo, a Region of Africa, Printed Anno 1597. Published by Mr. Abraham Hartwel,
Servant to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, mention is made, Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
of the discovery of that Kingdom, 1587. by Odoardo Lopez, and of the conversion
thereof to the Christian Faith, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. and of the great and undoubted
Miracles showed by God in the presence of a whole Army, Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
Insomuch that the said Hartwell, in his Epistle there to the Reader,
confesses, That this conversion of Congo was accomplished by Massing Priests,
after the Romish manner; and says he, this action which tends to the glory
of God, shall it be concealed and not committed to memory, because it was
performed by Popish Priests and Popish means? God forbid. In like manner Mr.
John Pory of Gonvile and Cajus College in Cambridge, in his Geographical
History of Africa, published Anno 1600. Page 410, 413. commends Mr. Hartwel
for publishing the aforesaid Miracles, and acknowledges the same.

1. The common people may, must be deluded by lying Wonders: but since you are
so sober as not to insist upon our English Popish Priests, either throwing in,
or throwing out of Devils; you did wisely, when giving in your Catalogue of
Miracles done by the Romish Church, to leave out [amongst us] and yet suppose
the Roman Church has done these Miracles, and done them [amongst us] it is
little to the point; for if she did them in her own name and power, she is no
more a Church but a God, the Messiah; and if she did them in the name and power
of Christ, it will evince Christ, in whose name and power the Miracles were
wrought, to be the Son of God, and consequently infallible; but leave your
Church subject to mistakes as formerly she was. However, 2. It is one thing to
say, it is evident both by Testimonies of Holy Fathers and approved Historians;
and another thing to produce those Testimonies: and yet if you had, those
Testimonies could be no more than Humane, capable of mistake, in a possibility
of being erroneous, and consequently the thing as to us, be no more at your own
account, than probably true; our belief, or opinion rather, no better founded
than the persuasions of the Jews, Turks, or Pagans; all upon a fallible
certainty. Nor yet, 3. Can it be said either with truth or modesty, that the
Heathens and Atheists will be as justifiable in their denials of the Miracles
revealed in the Old and New Testament, as those Men will be that deny these.
For though the relation of the Miracles in the Old and New Testament be brouhgt
down to us by humane means, yet such as be in no wise (morally) questionable;
and besides, all is ultimately resolved into Testimony Divine: Whereas these
reports of yours, first and last, have no firmer a Basis than the Testimony of
Men blinded, biased by interest, and that could not certainly know a true
Miracle from a lying Wonder, had they stood by at the working thereof. 4. It
may be true that the Magdeburgenses, with some others, writing the Churches
general History, recount as from your own Authors, several Miracles to have
been done by persons infected with Popery: But it is as true that they
themselves account of them all as no better than either illusions of Demons,
or false narrations. And well may we grant with Abraham Hartwell, John Pory,
and some more of ours, True Miracles to have been wrought by Popish persons;
and not conclude with you, Popish, but Christian Doctrine to have been
confirmed by them: For if they did Miracles, it is apparent they did them as
Christians, and not as Papists, in the name of Christ, and not in the name of
the Pope; nor need you stumble at such a distinction. Bellar. de Notis Eccles.
l. 4. c. 14.
For Bellarmin unto the Miracle of Novatianus the Heretic, answers, the
Miracle to have been wrought not for the confirmation of the Faith of
Novatianus, but of Catholic Baptism. And yet suppose Miracles wrought to
confirm the truth of certain Popish Doctrines, what is that to the
infallibility of the Popish Church? that learned Cardinal saw the non sequitur
well enough; and therefore labors by Miracles to prove the verity, not the
infallibility of that Church, and to prove it by them credibly, not certainly.
For says he, before the approbation of the Church, it is not evident or
certain with the certainty of Faith concerning any Miracle that it is a true
Miracle. However, 5. The most ancient Author you or your Index pretend to
quote, is Beda, who flourished Anno 720. the most ancient Miracle-Monger, the
Monk Austin, who came into England about the Year 600. an evident sign that
your Popish Doctrines, if brought forth, yet were not confirmed from Heaven for
the first six hundred years after Christ: Nor were those you instance in,
ratified on Earth by any General Council for a long time after that. The first
pretended for Image Worship is the second of Nice, Anno 705. condemned by that
of Frankford, Anno 794. And the first for Transubstantiation was that of
Lateran, 1215. For the most notorious of the rest you must come down as low as
the Council of Trent, begun since Luther's death. And for a Miracle neither
England, France, Italy nor Spain can furnish you with one; but you are forced
to run as far as Congo, a Kingdom in the Region of Africa, and there resolve
your Faith into a Book, said by John Brerely, Anno 1664. to have been published
Anno 1597. by Abraham Hartwell Servant to the Archbishop of Canterbury
(without any leave from his Master) which Book yet, for ought appears, neither
mentions Miracles done to confirm the truth of any Popish Doctrine, nor the
Infallibility of the Roman Church.

Page 78.
If any of you should chance to say, That this Testimony of Miracles is nothing
to you, because you have never seen a Miracle: I answer, Either you grant what
these Authors report, to be true, or you deny their Testimony, refusing to
believe what you have not seen. If you grant the truth of these things, and yet
remain out of the Communion of the Holy Catholic Church, upon which God has
conferred this Gift, you have sin, and hate God, according to the argument
framed by our Lord himself, which I have before cited. If you refuse to believe
what you have not seen, First, You destroy Faith, Which is an evidence of
things not seen. Secondly, You take away all humane conversation; no man must
believe another. Thirdly, you make it unjust for Civil Magistrates to punish
Transgressors or Felons: for where there is no Law, there can be no breach of a
Law; and if there be no Law to him who did not actually see the very Statute
which was passed in Parliament, and hear the King and both Houses agree unto it
(as in this case there is no Miracle to him who did not see it) how can you
with Justice condemn and execute a Malefactor, who shall urge at the Bar that
he never saw the Statute upon which he stands Indicted; nor had any knowledge
or notice thereof otherwise than by hearsay, and the report of Authors and
Books; which, since they are no sufficient proof of Gods setting his Hand and
Seal to a Law by Miracles, he sees no reason why they should be proofs for
passing that Statute; and consequently, that as to him that Statute is not in
force. What you would reply to one who should give this for his Plea, upon such
an Indictment, suppose as said unto your self in the case of Miracles not seen
by you, but reported by good Authority. Lastly, this would excuse all Infidels
who have been since the Apostles times, even those that lived in their times,
in case they saw no Miracles. But if any of you shall further say after the
learned Chillingworth, That God in his Justice may permit some true Miracles to
be wrought to delude Men who have forged many: I answer, That by this you help
the Jews who refused to believe the Doctrines of Christ and his Apostles,
notwithstanding their Miracles. For why may not they say; God in his Justice
for our sins might permit those true Miracles to be wrought by Jesus Christ and
his Apostles to delude us who have forged many? I hope this Answer will
satisfy any rational person; but if it do not, I have another answer to give
out of Mr. Chillingworth's own words, Page 144. It is impossible that God
should lie, or that the Eternal truth should set his Hand and Seal to the
confirmation of a falsehood; or of such a Doctrine as is partly true and partly
false: the Apostles Doctrine was thus, ( viz. by Miracles) confirmed; therefore
it was entirely true, and in no particular false or uncertain. If you reply,
this contradicts Mr. Chillingworth's former position: I must answer, That if
Mr. Chillingworth be found to contradict himself, relying upon his own reason,
it is not my fault, nor does it make any thing against our Church.

1. If you will have us guilty of Sin, and Haters of God, for refusing to
believe on that account; it is necessary, according to the tenor of your own
law, that the Miracles be done amongst, and seen of, us. If I had not done
amongst them, the works which no other Man did, they had not had sin; but now
have they both seen and hated both me and my Father. And yet I think it is by
chance indeed, if any say, That this Testimony is nothing to them, merely
because they have not seen a Miracle; it is the Testimony it self that they
except against. And yet, 2. There is a difference betwixt remaining out of
Communion, and remaining out of subjection, to that you call the Holy Catholic
Church: Suppose we granted the truth of these things, it might perhaps be a sin
to remain out of her Communion, and yet a duty to remain out of her subjection.
Miracles, as has been said, may evince the truth of such and such a Church;
and yet make nothing at all in order to the proving of her either Supreme or
Infallible: though yet, mistake me not, by Communion, I do not mean a communion
total or local in all her Doctrines and polluted modes of Worship; but partial
Spiritual in those Doctrines and Performances, supposed to be confirmed by
those Miracles. However, 3. It is well you make it no worse with them that
refuse to believe these things they have not seen, than to destroy Faith, and
take away all humane converse, etc. I was afraid you would have charged them as
Christ did the Jews, with sin against the Holy Ghost; though yet, as it is,
your charge is so high, it can never be made good. For may not Faith, think
you, evidence things not seen, upon the account of Divine Revelation, unless we
believe what we never saw, upon the report of Abraham Hartwell and John
Brerely? May not one Man believe another about worldly things with a humane
Faith, unless one Man believe another about Heavenly Doctrines with a Faith
Divine? Or can Thieves and Traitors ever imagine, that a Law publicly
promulged by the King, and practically attested by the whole Nation, may as
warrantably be pleaded against by them, as the private Testimony of a few
ignote Travelers may be excepted against by us, especially when they discourse
largely about Miracles; which, if your own Doctors say true, neither they, nor
any Man else can with certainty distinguish from lying Wonders? We have notice
of the Reigns and Acts of the several Kings and Queens of England, no otherwise
than by hearsay, and by Authors and Books; and we have notice of the Lives and
Acts of Bevise of Southampton, Robin Hood, and Little John, by hearsay,
Authors, and Books; and will any conclude the one is to be credited as well as
the other, because they have seen neither, and both come to us reported by
that, you may have the forehead to call, a good Authority? Your grand Argument
as is before observed, comes to nothing, because we have not seen your
Miracles; howbeit we give a ground for no such inferences as these, but are
ready to proportion our belief according to the worth and weight of the
Testimony, be it Divine or humane. Nor yet will the Infidels be excused, for
that they have not seen the Miracles; for in the Apostles time, Their sound
went into all the Earth, and their words unto the utmost parts of the World,
Romans 10.18. And now in these days, besides the universal Tradition of the
Church, we have reasons and Records undeniable, to evince the truth of
Christianity, and of Miracles having been done to confirm it: Howbeit those who
have not heard at all, or heard no better proofs for the truth of Christian
Religion, than you bring for your Popish Miracles, if excusable for not
believing before; doubtless may yet remain in the same venial condition as they
were.

And now for a close, 4. Give me leave to mind you, 1. That in the beginning of
this Epistle, you would have Faith destroyed, transformed into Fancy, Humor,
and Opinion, if built on any foundation save Divine Revelation, or what we did
certainly know to be infallibly true. And now here you will have a total
destruction of Faith, unless it may be built upon the private Apocryphal
reports of Abraham Hartwell, John Pory, John Brerely, and such like Men, not
only fallible, subject to error, and in a possibility to be mistaken in this
very thing; but Men that cannot be concluded with any probability of reason to
be in a capacity to know the certain truth of what they say, they do affirm. 2.
You can now present us with an argument from Mr. Chillingworth, sufficient at
once both to convince an Heathen of the truth of Christianity, and to prove the
Divinity of the Scriptures. It is impossible that God should lie, and that the
Eternal Truth should set his Hand and Seal to the confirmation of a falsehood,
or of such Doctrine as is partly true and partly False. The Apostles Doctrine
was thus, ( viz. by Miracles) confirmed: Therefore it was entirely true, and in
no particular false or uncertain: And yet in your Discourse with the Lay
Gentleman, you had not a word to say for the truth of Christianity upon
Protestant Grounds; nor any thing for Scriptures being the Word of God, save
that the Spirit witnessed with your Spirit, they were so. 3. The Gospel,
Scripture Doctrines we preach, are like your universal essential predications,
Eternal; once confirmed by Miracles in themselves, or their Principal, they
need no more. This proposition, The Roman Church is infallible, has a personal
mutable individuum for its subject, changes every Age, may change every year;
and therefore still stands in need of new miraculous confirmations: insomuch
that would we give you leave to suppose Miracles wrought in Bede's time, not
simply to confirm the Doctrine taught, but the then Roman Churches
infallibility in teaching; yet would that make nothing at all to prove, either
that the now Roman Church is infallible, or her new devised Doctrines certainly
true. 4. The former position you father on Mr. Chillingworth, will be taken for
your own, till such time as you quote the Chapter, Section or Page, where you
had it; and if then, as much may not be done for Mr. Chillingworth against you,
as Mr. Chillingworth in the like case has done for Bishop Usher against Knott,
we shall confess him a Man; what would you more? and fallible; and yet withal
tell you, that his Arguments remain unanswered, nay unanswerable by your
Church; nor will so wise a man's contradicting of himself make any thing at all
against, but for the establishing the Doctrine of ours, Let God be true and
every Man a Liar, Romans 3.4. Bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.5. Clodius accusat Moechum: You tax Mr.
Chillingworth with contradicting of himself, and yet you are taken in that very
act; you blame that learned Writer for relying too much upon his own reason,
and yet you would have us build our Faith upon yours; we must have reasons
forsooth, without revelation, for conversion and submission to the said Church.

The Six Queries answered.
BUt yet all after this, Page 84.
I fear some of you will blame me for having joined with this Catholic Church,
to which by Gods mercy I am united, and judge me as having taken the wrong way.
To those who shall remain so persuaded, I make this humble request, and conjure
them by all the Obligations of Brotherly Love, and as they have any charity for
my Soul, that they will please to tell me, First, etc.

First, Fear of blame argues a sense of Guilt; you confess your having joined
with [this] Catholic Church, and that implies your having separated from [the]
Catholic Church, the very thing your old Brethren do, and that upon just
grounds, blame you for. And therefore, 2. Do not take Gods name in vain; never
say that it was by Gods mercy, but because of your own sin and folly, that you
are now divided from the communion of Christians, that are all one in Christ
Jesus, according to Gal. 3.28. and are become united to a Sect of Papists, that
center in naught else save three Words, which you cannot construe, Roman,
Catholic Church, without either Christian or Holy.

Thirdly, How can you but judge your self to have taken a wrong way, when as
you know you have left Gods way, an explicit Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ;
and have taken up a way of your own, viz. an implicit believing as the Church
believes? When the poor Jailer enquired, Acts 16.31. What shall I do to be
saved? Pray now, did the Apostle direct him to go that way you have taken, or
that way you have left? Howbeit, indeed you cannot rightly be said to walk in
that wrong way you have taken, or to believe as the Church believes, because
the Church has one manner and Rule of believing, and you another; unless you will
say, what yet I think you will not, that the Church, like you, believes she
neither knows what, nor in whom, and is a Rule of believing unto her self. 4.
Humble requests and Brotherly love we shall let alone till another time, but
out of Charity to your Soul, and tenderness of many others, a solution is
endeavored to all your Quaeries.

First, Whether they themselves are certain, past all possibility of being
mistaken, that the Christian Religion is the only safe way to Salvation: i. e.
Whether they are infallibly sure of this point, and how come they to be so
infallibly assured?

1. It is not so proper to say, Christian Religion, as that Christ is the only
way to Salvation; I am the way, John. 14.6. nor need there should be any
addition of [safe] as if there were other ways to Salvation though somewhat
dangerous: For there is no other name under Heaven given amongst men, whereby
we must be saved; neither is Salvation in any other, Act. 4.12. Bellarmins
saying, tutissimum est, was well for a Papist, yet would ill become the mouth
of a Protestant. 2. Though we shall not say that we are certain of this point
ex part nostri, beyond all possibility of mistaking; for that were to make our
selves Gods pure Acts, not men compounded ex actu and potentia, of what we are,
and what we may be: Yet we say we are ascertained hereof ex part Dei, beyond
all possibility of being mistaken; because God that cannot lie, has declared
it, and taken away the actual hurt of that mist, that yet naturally we are
still prone unto. And hence, 3. Though we do not say that we can infallibly
assure our selves, nor dare say that we are infallibly sure of this or any
other point; Yet we affirm that we are most sure of this point, Historically,
Morally, as men; so sure, as the best Authentic Histories, Universal
Traditions, and the most rational Arguments can make us sure, with a certainty,
cui non subest dubium, exclusive of all doubt: Though yet, this
notwithstanding, as some do, and we may surmise, potest subesse falsum, there
is a possibility of its being otherwise, a possibility of our being mistaken.

2. We are assured hereof infallibly, spiritually, as Christians, finding in
our selves a faith of adherency freely given beyond, and besides that of
evidence by natural means to be obtained; nor will it be either reasonable or
charitable for you to call this our faith fancy: for since we make it out, that
what we believe is true, objective, beyond all contradiction of Reason;
wherefore should you question the goodness of the God of truth in confirming us
subjective, especially when we, who know our own Hearts, if not well enough,
yet better than you, affirm, that from time to time we experience it, are ready
to seal it with our lives, and that Ancient godly Book, called the Bible, has
many speeches and promises of such a tendency?

Secondly, Whether they have the same assurance, and from the same grounds, or
from what grounds, that this sort of Christianity, wherein I now worship God,
is erroneous and damnable?

1. We do not say, that sort of Christianity wherein you worship God, is
erroneous and damnable; but that that sort of Popery wherein you worship
Images, invocate Saints, adore a piece of bread, etc. is so. 2. That this sort
of Popery is erroneous and damnable, we are certain from divine Scripture
ground, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. thou shall not
bow down thy self unto them, Exodus 20.4, 5. When ye pray, say, Our Father which
art in Heaven, Luke 11.2. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, Matt. 4.10. In vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrins
the commandments of men, Mat. 15.9. 3. True it is we have the same grounds of
assurance for all points of Christian Religion, affirmatively, negatively,
respect had to their Verity; and yet have we not the same grounds for all,
respect had unto their Charity; and therefore may we have assurance for all
upon the same grounds, yet not the same assurance. 4. The Spirit is sent in a
special manner to convince the world of sin, for not believing, and to persuade
all the Elect to believe in Jesus Christ. But which, or how many other points
the Holy Ghost will certainly give in evidence for, or against, I shall not
determine.

Thirdly, Suppose I were willing upon their persuasions, to relinquish this
way, wherein I now am; what sort of Christianity ( viz. whether the way of the
Lutheran or Calvinist, of the Greeks Church, or of the Armenian, or Ethiopian,
or whether the way of the English Independents, or Anabaptists, or Quakers, or
of the Fifth monarchy-men, or the way of the new Arrians, or Socinians, or any
other, and what) shall I follow, and why, as the only secure way to salvation?
or is it enough to secure my salvation, if I be a Christian opposing the Roman
Church, and believe, or disblieve what I please, so it be in contradiction to
the Roman Church?

1. I can easily suppose you convinced of the naughtiness of the way that you
are in, and yet at present cannot suppose you willing to relinquish it for any
of those ways you mention; indeed there is another way you seem to be thinking
of, because you say nothing of it; and had not your perfidiousness been such,
that the Chieftains thereof will not allow you preferment, I little question
but they have Motives that might work upon you. 2. The way (as you call it) of
the Lutherans, the way of the Calvinists, Arminians, English Independents, be
not several sorts of Christianity, or several ways to salvation; but several
opinions held out, several forms of Government under which several Christians
live, that are all in the same secure way to salvation, viz. Jesus Christ: and
therefore, 3. I shall not persuade you first or last, to be of any of these
ways, but, as you say well, to become a Christian, believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and him alone for salvation: and then as to other points, believe, or
disbelieve, not what you please, but what God in an humble use of lawful means
shall be pleased to make known unto you; Lord what will thou have me to do?
Acts 9.6. And then though I cannot tell which of the ways forementioned you will
be for, may be for none; yet certain I am you will stand up with me in
contradiction to the Church of Rome: because she above all other Sects, sets
her self most notoriously to contradict our only Lord Jesus Christ; will needs
sit as God in the Temple of God. However, 4. suppose I were willing upon your
persuasions to relinquish this way wherein I now am, what sort of Popery ( viz.
whether the way of the Dominicans, Jesuits, or Franciscans, or the way of the
French or Italian, or the way of your Thomists or Scotists, nominal or reals,
or whether the way of J. S. who makes Tradition, or the way of R. E. who makes
the Church the Rule of Faith, of any other and what) shall I follow, and why,
as the only secure way to salvation? or is it enough to secure my Salvation, if
I be a Papist opposing the Protestant Churches, and believe or disbelieve what
the Priest my Confessor pleases, so it be in contradiction to the Protestant
Churches?

If It be said, that yet for all this you do not differ in points of Faith: We
answer, First, you differ in what is more considerable, the foundation and
Rule: J. S. and his party holding Tradition; R. E. and his party holding the
Church to be the Rule of Faith: And then in a subdivision, the Italians holding
the Pope; The French maintaining that the Council; and R. E. again that the
vast community of all Christians, etc. ought to be meant by the Church. Nor
does it end thus; Bellarmin holds that by Miracles the Church can be proved
true no more than credibly; you will needs prove your Church by Miracles to be the
universal Judge, and the infallible Guide of Faith, and that certainly
certitudine fidei, directly contrary to, and far enough beyond what Bellarmin
ere attempted. 2. The differences betwixt the Jesuits and the Dominicans,
Whether God predeterminate every action, Whether Election and Reprobation
depend upon foresight, be about points of Faiths, and more material than any
point in Controversy betwixt Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists: If
you say you agree in all points your Church has defined to be of Faith, it is
not simply and unanimously, as you pretend to agree in all points of Faith: but
in all your Church has defined or can agree that you should agree in, whose
definitions and politic Arbitration, together with your irrational forced
submissions, be nothing to us, nor to the Question. However you use to tell us
herewithal, that an agreement in the letter or words is worth nothing, unless
there be an agreement in sense. And now you controvert the sense of almost all
your Churches definitions. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25.
Due Honor and veneration, says your Church, must be given to Images, and
then one sort of you conclude the Image in it self must not in any manner be
worshipped, Bellar. de Imag. sanct. l. 2. c. 20.
but only the exemplar be worshipped before the Image: Another sort, that the
same honor is due to the Image, as is due to the exemplar: And a third sort,
that the Images in themselves, and properly, ought to be honored, but with a
lesser Honor than the exemplar it self: and if you urge yet, that you all
agree the definitions to be true in the sense intended by the Church her self,
we reply that you your selves be the Church, that thus falls out about the
sense, do not know what is your own meaning; and add further, that we all agree
the Scriptures to be true in the sense intended by God, yet will not that
content you.

Fourthly, Whether they, who would teach me that sort of Christianity to be the
only Religion, wherein Salvation is to be attained, which they would have me
follow and embrace, be infallible in their teaching of this particular?

We do not tell you of this or that sort of Christianity being the only
Religion, wherein, but of Jesus being the only Christ, through faith, in whom
Salvation is to be attained; and though we dare not say, that we are infallible
in teaching this particular, yet are we certain that this particular which we
teach is true infallibly, and that one infallible according to Christ's own
promise, Matt. 28.20. goes along with us in teaching thereof; your Priests want
such company, and therefore not being able their Ministry powerfully to
evidence in men's understandings, the verity of what they set themselves to
Preach, they labor to set up an infallible visible Authority, unto which they
most impudently aver, that all persons must and ought to yield a blind
obedience.

Fifthly, Whether they are infallibly sure, that all who do not follow and
embrace that fort of Christianity which they would have me follow and embrace,
shall be damned?

1. You are always in hand with your several sorts of Christianity, an
expression ill becoming one, that has Christian for his name, and Catholic
for his Surname, and therefore disclaimed by us.

2. We tell you that all those that embrace Jesus Christ by Faith, and follow
him in love, so far as shall be made known unto them whom we persuade you to
embrace and follow, shall be certainly saved, and those that do not, shall be
certainly damned.

3. Such Sectaries as you, that make several sorts of Christianity, and
maintain it to be necessary to Salvation, in all things to obey and follow this
or that sort of Christianity, do certainly deserve for that very thing to be
eternally damned: But what God will do either with you or them, lest herein we
should be like you, I shall not determine.

Sixthly, Supposing that they are not infallible in these particulars, whether
will it not rationally, and necessarily follow, that possibly I may at present
be in the right way, and they in an error; and if so, what reason can they
give, why I should forsake my present Guide, whom I believe to be infallible,
to follow them who confess they may be, and therefore, for ought they know, are
at present mistaken in what they believe and practice?

First, If we neither did, nor could bring any other proof for these
particulars, save our own Testimony (fallibility on our part supposed) it would
rationally and necessarily follow quoad nos, that possibly at least you might
be in the right way, and we in an error: Though yet, quoad rem ipsam, the
sequel, this notwithstanding, be impossible, because these particulars might be
in themselves infallibly true, and we neither know, nor be able to evince it.

Secondly, You may strongly imagine, but if your own principles abide firm, you
cannot, do not believe, that the Roman Church your present Guide is infallible:
For Faith, according to you, is an infallible assent of the understanding,
submitting it self obediently to the revelations of God: And therefore since you
have no revelation of God for, but one express against, the infallibility of
the Roman Church, Romans 11.22. Your own definition will tell you, it is
impossible that your understanding should exert an Act of Faith about it; nor
yet, suppose you had divine Revelation for it, or that God himself should say
to you, the Roman Church is infallible, were you ere the nearer. For it is
possible you may commit an error, nay err in your understanding of those
words; and consequently your understanding never give an infallible assent to
that which God intended by them. Howbeit,

Thirdly, We can tell you as formerly, that a posse ad esse non valet
Argumentum: it follows not, we may be, therefore we are; or we confess we may
be, therefore for ought we know at present, we are mistaken, etc. for though we
still confess we may be mistaken in what we believe and practice, respect had
to our desert, and natural proneness, yet do we know that God of his mercy,
through the Ministry of his word, has at present fully satisfied us, that as
to the main we are not; and if in some things we differ and wander, yet doubt
we not but God for Christ's sake, will pardon our errors, as well as our other
sins, and cause us to keep the unity of the Spirt in the bond of peace,
Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule,
let us mind the same things. Phil. 3.16. However,

Fourthly, We do not desire you to forsake your present Guide and follow us;
but to forsake your present Guide, us, and your own selfish humor, and follow
the Lord Jesus Christ. You pretend and would have us to believe the Romish
Church to be infallible independently on the Scriptures, because God by
Miracles, as you imagine, has confirmed it so to be; and since so, we would have
you at least allow us to believe Scriptural Doctrines, confessedly so confirmed
independently on that Church, or else excuse your self from being an Heretic,
since you will believe, nay, press others to believe one proposition, and refuse
another equally proposed at your own account: Not may this be retorted upon us
either by Mr. Johnson or you. For,

First, Though we own all the gifts Christ gave unto Men for the perfecting of
the Saints, and work of the Ministry, according to Ephesians. 4.11, 12. yet do we
neither claim nor admit of such a propounding Authority, as you without any
divine warrant pretend unto. Page 9.


2. Though your Church equally impose all her Tenets, respect had to her own
usurped power; yet does she not equally propose all, respect had to the
evidencing of their truth. For some she proposes as Divine, but does not prove
them so to be, as her Doctrines about the real Presence, and Purgatory: Page 81.
others she not only proposes as such, but evidently evinces them to be
Divinely revealed; as the Doctrine of the Trinity and the Incarnation: to these
we assent, those we except against as not sufficiently represented to us: And
yet say,

3. That two propositions may be equally proposed to, and not equally work upon
the understanding: preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, and preaching the
Gospel to the Jews, were both proposed with equal evidence and Authority, Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every Creature, Mark 16.15. and
yet did Peter with a thousand others believe that, and disbelive this without
any crime of Heresy, if of prejudice or inadvertency imputed to them.

If there be any who has any value for the Authority of the great S. Austin, I
shall beseech them to read this following Text of that Saint, and to consider
whether I have not in my proceedings observed his Rule and Method; and let them
but change the word Manichaeus into John Calvin, and how nearly it will concern
them.

S. Augustine against the Epistle of Manichaeus, which they call fundamental,
cap. 5. edit. Paris. Tom. 61.46. If thou shall find any one who does not as yet
believe the Gospel, what will thou do when he shall say unto thee, I do not
believe? But neither had I believed the Gospel, unless I had been thereunto
moved by the Authority of the Catholic Church: Those therefore to whom I
submitted, when they required me to believe the Gospel, why should I not also
yield obedience unto them, when they direct me not to believe Manichaeus? Take
your choice; if you tell me I must believe the Catholics, they give me advice
not to give credit to you; and therefore if I believe them I cannot but refuse
to believe you. If you tell me I must not believe the Catholics; you proceed
ill, when you go about by the Gospel to persuade me to believe Manichaeus,
because it was from the Preachings of the Catholics, that I believe the Gospel
it self. If you tell me I did well when I believed the Catholics praising the
Gospel, but I do ill when I believe the same persons decrying Manichaeus, do
you take me to be so stupid as without any reason given unto me I should
believe or disbelieve what you please? etc. But if you have any Reason to offer
unto me, lay aside the Gospel; if you hold your self to the Gospel, I shall
adhere to those upon whose commands I believe the Gospel, and so long as I obey
them I shall not believe you. But if by accident you should find any thing in
the Gospel most evidently touching the Apostleship of Manichaeus, you will
weaken the Authority of the Catholics in my esteem, who require me not to
believe you; but that being weakened I shall not believe the Gospel, because I
believe that by them: so that whatsoever you bring from the Gospel will be of
no force with me. Wherefore if nothing be found in the Gospel for the
manifestation of Manichaeus his Apostleship, I shall rather give credit to
Catholics than you. But if any thing shall be there found manifest on the
behalf of Manichaeus, I shall neither believe them nor you: Not them, because
they told me a lie of you; nor shall I believe you, because you urge that
Scripture to me, which I believe upon their Authority, who told me a lie in
relation to you, etc.

1. S. Augustine may be considered either as a Witness acquainting us, what the
Church then held, or as a Doctor rationally deducing and proving of
conclusions: had you quoted him under the former notion, I should not have
questioned the truth of any thing that Great Augustine had said, without
undeniable evidence to the contrary. But since you cite him as Doctor, I shall
value S. Austins Authority, as S. Austin had learned to value the Authority of
other pious learned Doctors of, or before his time, not credit what he says,
because he says it, but because he proves it true, either by Canonical
Authorities or probable Reasons. Howbeit,

2. You observe the Rule and Method not of Saint Austin, but Mr. Knot,
substituting John Calvin, for Manichaeus; and I might by the same Rule observe
the Method of Mr. Chillingworth, substitute Arians, as great pretenders then,
as the Papists are now, for the Catholic Church; put Goth or Vandal converted
by them for S. Austin, for Manichaeus write Homousians, and then try whether
the Argument, if but first fitted to your purpose, be not, as he says, like a
buskin that will fit any leg: but I shall wave this, and in a just parallel let
you see plainly how far different your proceedings are from those of the great
S. Austin. First then S. Austin speaks of an Infidel that did not as yet
believe the Gospel; you direct your speech to Christians, Protestants, that do
already believe it, and that upon the account of Universal Tradition, the
Scriptures, and the Divine Attestations of Miracles, far better grounds than
your Popish principles can or will allow. Secondly, S. Austin supposes such a
one to come and say I do not believe, and thereupon seeks to bring him to, and
establish him in the faith: you deal with such as say they do believe, and seek
to overturn their faith established as aforesaid, averring it is no better than
fancy and an humor: thus did not Austin. Thirdly, S. Austin speaks in the
singular number, and preter Tense, Neither had I believed the Gospel, unless I
had been thereunto moved by the Authority of the Catholic Church: You speak in
the plural and present Tense, we must not, do not, believe the Gospel, unless
our Faith be founded upon the Authority and infallibility of that society of
Christians, which is in Communion with, and in subjection to the Bishop of
Rome. Fourthly, those to whom Austin submitted, required him to believe the
Gospel and disbelieve Manichaeus, who held two first Principles, and
consequently two Gods, and maintained several other errous apparently repugnant
thereunto: those to whom you have submitted, require you to believe the Real
presence, Purgatory. Image Worship, with other such like Humane inventions, and
disbelieve Calvin, who teaches the Gospel, and declares against all such
Doctrins as do not accord therewith. Fifthly, We do not advise you to believe
the Romanists, nor did you at the first believe the Gospel by the Romanists
Preaching, but by the preaching of the Protestants: And therefore if you will
adhere to those upon whose grounds you did at first believe the Gospel, so long
as you obey them, you shall not believe the Romanists; and if they say (what
one would think they should) you did well when you believed the Protestants
preaching of the Gospel, but do ill when you believe the same persons decrying
the Romanists, are you so stupid as without any reason given unto you, to
believe or disbelieve what they please? etc. Had you indeed been bred a Papist,
and then could have proved the Papists the only Catholics, and Protestants as
gross Heretics as the Manichees, there might have been some ground for your
parallel with S. Austin; as it is, you proceed upon a threefold disadvantage
and disparity.

FINIS.

