Mr. HARRIS's First Sermon AT Mr. BOYLE's Lecture. School.

Immorality and Pride, The Great Causes of ATHEISM.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, January the 3d. 1697/8.
BEING The First of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's- Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God THOMAS Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Sir
HENRY ASHURST Baronet; Sir JOHN ROTHERAM Sergeant at Law; JOHN EVELYN Senior
Esquire; Trustees appointed by the Will of the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire.
Most Reverend and Honored,
AS I had the Honor to Preach this Sermon by your Kind and Generous
Appointment, so I now Publish it in Obedience to your Commands, and humbly
offer it, as also my ensuing Discourses, to your Candid Patronage and
Acceptance. I have (in pursuance of Your Grace's direction) studied to be as
Plain and Intelligible as possibly I could, and shall, by the Divine
Assistance, prosecute my whole Design after the same manner; which Method of
Treating this Subject, appears very Suitable to the Pious and Excellent Design
of Our Noble and Honorable Founder.

I humbly desire your Prayers to Almighty God, that He will vouchsafe to render
my weak Endeavors effectual to show the Ground^essness and Inconclusiveness of
those Objections which Atheistical Men usually bring against the great and
Important Truths of ^eligion; which is the End they are sincerely ^irected to,
by

Most Reverend and Honored, Your most obliged humble Servant, HARRIS.

PSALM X. 4. The Wicked through the Pride of his Countenance, will not seek
after God: Neither is God in all his Thoughts.
IN this Psalm is Contained a very lively Description of the Insolence of
Atheistical and Wicked Men, when once they grow Powerful and Numerous; for
then, as we read at the Third Verse, they will proceed so far, as openly to
boast of and glory in their Impiety: They will boldly defy and contemn the
great God of Heaven and Earth, v. 13. They will deny his Providence, v. 11. and
despise his Vengeance: And, as we are told in these words of my Text, They will
grow so Proud and high, as to scorn to pay him any Honor or Worship, to Pray
to him or Call upon him; but will endeavor to banish the very Thoughts of his
Being out of their Minds. The Wicked through the Pride of his, etc.

In which words, we have an Account more particularly, by what Methods and
Steps Men advance to such an Exorbitant height of Wickedness, as to set up for
Atheism, and to deny the Existence of a God; for there are in them these Three
Particulars, which I shall consider in their Order.

I. Here is the general Character or Qualifications of the Person the Psalmist
speaks of; which is, That he is a Wicked Man. The Wicked through the Pride, etc.

II. The particular kind of Wickedness, or the Origin from whence the Spirit of
Atheism and Irreligion does chiefly proceed; And That is Pride. The Wicked
through the Pride of his Countenance, etc. And,

III. Here is the great Charge that is brought against this Wicked and Proud
Man; viz. Wilful Atheism and Infidelity: He will not seek after God: Neither is
God in all his Thoughts: Or, as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, with good
Warrant from the Hebr. All his Thoughts are there is no God.

In discoursing on the two First of these Heads, I shall endeavor to show,
that Immorality and Pride are the great Causes of the Growth of Atheism amongst
us: And on the Third, I shall consider the Objections that Atheistical Men
usually bring against the being of a Deity, and show how very weak and invalid
they are.

And first I think it very Necessary to say something of the Causes of
Infidelity and Atheism, and to show how it comes to pass that Men can possibly
arrive to so great a height of Impiety. This my Text naturally leads me to,
before I can come to the great Subject I design to Discourse upon; and I hope
it may be of very good use to discover the Grounds of this heinous Sin, and the
Methods and Steps by which Men advance to it; that so those who are not yet
hardened in it, nor quite given up to a Reprobate Mind, may, by the Blessing of
God, take heed, and avoid being engaged in such Courses as do naturally lead
into it.

I. Therefore let us consider the general Character or Qualifications of the
Person here spoken of in my Text, And that is, that he is a Wicked Man. The
wicked through the Pride, etc.

And this is every where the Language of the Sacred Scripture, when it speaks
of Atheistical Men. David tells us ( Psalm. 14. 1. and 51. 1) that it is the Fool
(i. e. the Wicked Man, for so the word Nabal often signifies, and is so here to
be understood) It Is he that has said in his heart there is no God. It Is such
an one as is a Fool by his own fault; one stupefied and dulled by Vice and
Lust, as he sufficiently explains it afterward; one that is corrupt and become
filthy, and that has done abominable works. So the Apostle St. Paul supposes,
that those Men will have in them an evil heart of unbelief, who do depart from
the living God, and live without him in the world. And indeed, it is very
Natural to conclude, That those which are once debauched in their Practices,
may easily grow so in their Principles: For when once it is a Man's Interest
that there should be no God, he will readily enough disbelieve his Existence:
We always give our assent very precipitantly to what we wish for, and would
have to be true. A Man oppressed with a Load of Guilt, and conscious to
himself, that he is daily obnoxious to the Divine Vengeance, will be often very
uneasy, restless, and dissatisfied with himself, and his Mind must be filled
with Dismal and Ill-boding Thoughts. He is unwilling to leave his Sins, and to
forego the present Advantage of Sensual Pleasure; and yet he cannot but be
fearful too, of the Punishments of a Future State, and vehemently disturbed now
and then, about the account that he must one day give of his Actions.

Now, it is very Natural for a Man under such Circumstances, to catch at any
thing that does but seem to offer him a little Ease and Quiet, and that can
help him to shake off his melancholy Apprehension of impending Punishment and
Misery. Some therefore bear down all Thought and Consideration of their
Condition, in an uninterrupted enjoyment of Sensual Delights, and quite
stupifie and drown their Conscience and Reason in continual Excesses and
Debauchery; and thus very many commence Atheists, out of downright Sottishness
and Stupidity, and come at last to believe nothing of the Truths of Religion,
because they never think any thing about it, nor understand any thing of it.
Others, who have been a little enured to thinking, and have gotten some small
smattering in the superficial Parts of Learning, will endeavor to defend their
wicked Practices by some pretense to Reason and Argument. These will one while
justify their Actions, by forced and wrested Citations and Explications of
some particular Texts of Scripture; at another time they will shroud themselves
under the Examples of the Prevarications of some great Men in Sacred Scripture,
as a License to them, to be guilty of the same or the like wicked Acts; without
considering at all, of their great Penitence afterward. Sometimes they will
dispute the Eternity of Hell Torments, deny that their Soul shall survive the
Body, and please themselves with the glorious hopes of being utterly
annihilated. Now they will argue against the Freedom of their own Wills; and by
and by, against that of the Divine Nature: and from both conclude, that there
can be no harm nor evil in what they do, because they are absolutely
necessitated to every thing they commit. But against all this precarious stuff,
the Sacred Scriptures do yet appear and afford a sufficient Refutation. The
next Step therefore must be to quarrel at, and expose them; to pretend that
there are Absurdities, Contradictions and Inconsistencies in them: To assert
that the Religion they contain, is nothing but a mere Human and Political
Institution, and the Invention of a Crafty and designing Order of Men, to
promote their own Interest and Advantage; but that they are of no manner of
Divine Authority, nor Universal Obligation. And when once they get thus far,
they begin to be at Liberty; now they can pursue their vicious Inclinations
without control of their Consciences, or the Conviction of God's holy Word,
and are got above the Childish Fears of Eternal Misery. By this time, the true
and through Calenture of Mind begins; they grow now deliriously enamoured with
the feigned Products of their own Fancies; and these Notions appear to them
now, adorned with such bright and radiant Colors, and so beautiful and
glorious, that they will rush headlong into this Fools Paradise, though Eternal
Destruction be at the bottom; for now they stick at nothing; They Retrench the
Deity of all his Attributes, absolutely deny his Presidence over the Affairs of
the World, and make him nothing but a kind of necessary and blind Cause of
things, Nature, the Soul of the World, or some such word, which they have
happened to meet with in the Ancient Heathen Writers. But they Profess that
it is impossible to have any Idaea of him at all; and what they cannot conceive
or have an Idaea of, they say is nothing, and by Consequence there can be no
such thing as a God. This, or such like, I Am persuaded is the usual Method, by
which these kind of Men advance to absolute Infidelity and Atheism: And in
this, they are every step confirmed and established by the seeming Wit, and
real Boldness, with which Atheistical Men dress up their Arguments and
Discourses; and of which, if they were stripped and divested, their weakness
and inconclusiveness must needs appear to every one. But the Mirth and Humor,
and that Surprising and Extravagant Vein of talking which always abounds in the
Company of such Men, so suits and agrees with his own vicious Inclinations,
that he becomes easily prejudiced against the Truth of Religion, and any
Obligation to its Precepts and Injunctions: And so he will soon resolve to seek
no more after God, but will employ all his Thoughts to prove that there is no
such Being in the World.

But on the other hand, it appears wholly impossible for a Man to arrive at
such a pitch as absolute Infidelity and Atheism, if he has been virtuously
Educated, and be inclined to live a Sober and a Moral Life. For there is
certainly nothing that Religion enjoins, but what is exactly agreeable to the
Rules of Morality and Virtue; nothing but what is conformable to right Reason
and Truth; nothing but what is substantially good* and pleasant, and nothing
but what will approve it self to a thinking Mind, as certainly conducing to the
good of Human Society, and to every one's Quiet, Ease, and Happiness here in
this Life: And over and above this, it gives us an assurance of a glorious
Immortality in the World to come.

Now, Can it be imagined, that any sober and virtuous Man, and one that is not
prejudiced by the Inducements of Sensual Pleasure, if he seriously considers
things, will not be induced to take upon him the Profession of our holy
Religion: and with all due Gratitude to our Gracious God, accept of so vast a
Reward as this of Eternal Happiness? Especially too when it is for doing that
only out of a true Principle of Religion, which it is supposed he was inclined
to perform without it, by the Principles of Reason and Honor. A Man that is
inclined to live virtuously, justly, temperately, and peaceably in this present
World, will soon be satisfied, if he read the Holy Scriptures, that it is this
which lies at the Bottom of all Revealed Religion, and for whose Advancement
and Propagation among Mankind, all that gracious Dispensation was contrived and
delivered to us. What reason can therefore be possibly assigned, why such a
Person should disbelieve the Truths of Religion? Is not a desire of Happiness
so Natural to us, that it is the great Inducement of all our Actions? and will
not every Man aim to get as much of this as he can, according to the Notion he
has of it? what is there then that can prejudice such a Man's Mind against the
Belief and Expectation of a future Reward at the hand of God? Is it not Natural
to embrace any offer that proposes to us a great Advantage? and are not we very
ready to believe the Truth of any thing that is advanced of that Nature? The
Great Truths therefore of Religion, containing nothing impossible, absurd or
improbable in them, and exhibiting to him Infinite Advantages on such easy
Conditions, must needs be the delightful Objects of a Good and Virtuous Man's
Faith. He, indeed, that has just Grounds to fear that his Irregular Life will
incapacitate him for the Favor of God; and the Joys of another World, may be
willing, and at last infatuated so far, as really to disbelieve what he knows
he cannot obtain. But one that is of a Moral, Sober and Virtuous Disposition,
can never be supposed to be so unaccountably absurd, as to commence Atheist
contrary to his Interest, his Inclination, and his Reason.

And as it is hardly possible to conceive a Person can be an Atheist, without
being first Wicked; so it appears as difficult to imagine, that if he be an
Atheist, he should not continue to be so. I know the Contrary is often
pretended; viz. That one that believes nothing of a God or Religion, may yet
be, and often is guided by a Principle of Reason and Honor, and will do to
others as he would be done unto himself: Such an one ( it is said) will be
satisfied of the Necessity of Humane Laws, and of the Advantages that do thence
arise to Mankind: He will think himself obliged to submit to the Laws of his
Country, and consequently will keep up to the Rules of common Justice and
Honesty; and this (say they) is enough, and all that Religion can pretend to
enjoin. Pensees diverses Ecrites a un Docteur de Sorbonne a l'Occasion de la
Comete qui parut au Mois de Decembre, 1680. Rotterdam. 8vo.
There is a late French Author, that endeavors to maintain by Arguments and
Examples, that the Principles of Atheism do not necessarily lead to Vice and
Immorality. But in the Proof of this, he comes very short of his Design. He
alleges, That some Professing Christianity have always, and do still, live as
bad Lives and as wickedly as any Atheists whatsoever can do: And that some
Atheists have lived very Regularly and Morally. But what then? Allowing and
granting all this; it does not in the least follow that Atheism does not lead
to Immorality and a Corruption of Manners. For it is neither asserted that
Atheism is the only way of becoming Wicked; nor that an Atheist must
necessarily be guilty of all manner of Vice. No doubt very many Men betake
themselves to a sinful Course, without having any Principles to justify
themselves by, as the Atheist pretends to: But are drawn into Wickedness purely
by Incogitancy and want of Consideration. And such kind of Persons, though they
make an outward Profession of Christianity, yet they may be, and doubtless
often are, as Vicious and Immoral as any other Men, without ever arriving at
the Point of Speculative Atheism, or perhaps without ever so much as doubting
of the Being of a God, of the Truth of Religion, or of a Future State of
Rewards and Punishments. No one says also that an Atheist must necessarily be
guilty of all manner of Vice and Immorality: But it is plain enough, that his
Principles lead him to prosecute any vicious Inclination that is suitable to
him, and to do any thing that he can safely, to procure to himself that kind of
Happiness or Satisfaction he proposes to enjoy. Many Sins are disagreeable to
some particular Periods and Circumstances of a Man's Life, to his Constitution,
Genius and Humor. Now it is easy to suppose a Man may abstain from such, for
his own Ease, Health and Quiet's sake. Self-Love will preserve the Atheist from
such open and notorious Acts of Wickedness, as will expose him to the Capital
Punishment of Human Laws; and which will endanger depriving him of his Being
here, where he only proposes to be happy. This Principle also of Self-Love,
will hinder him from exposing himself to Ignominy and Scandal; and will make
him endeavor to keep fair in the Opinions of those whose disesteem would give
him a great degree of Unhappiness. But it does not in the least follow from
hence, that because he is not guilty of all manner, or of this or that
particular Vice, that therefore he is a good Moral Man, and guilty of none at
all: It cannot be concluded from hence, that such a Person will avoid
committing any Fact, be it never so Wicked, when it is stripped of all these
Inconveniences, and can be done secretly, safely and securely: when it is
agreeable to his Constitution and Humor, fashionable and gentile, and
contributes very much to that kind of Satisfaction he is inclined to; for as
one that had considered this Point well, observes, Self-Love, which like Fire
covets to resolve all things into it self, makes Men they care not what Villainy
or what Impiety they Act, so it may but conduce to their own Advantage.
(Preface to Great is Diana of the Ephesians.) And indeed, if he be not
absolutely Stupid, and one that proposes to himself no manner of End at all, he
will certainly do this very thing: He will pursue and practice Indifferently
such kind of Designs and Actions, be they good or bad, as will give him as much
Pleasure and Happiness as he can have here in this short Life, where, Miserable
Wretch as he is, he only has any hope. And nothing can nor will hinder such a
Person from endeavoring to do or obtain any thing he has a Mind to, but the
fear of being exposed to Punishment and Misery here, from those among whom he
lives. Now, this Consideration can have no place in secret Actions, and
consequently nothing will hinder a Man of these abominable Principles from
committing the most barbarous Villainy that is consistent with his Safety, and
subservient to his Desires; that can be either concealed in Secrecy, or
supported by Power. For, as to the Principle of Honor, that such Men will
pretend to be governed and guided by, and which they would set up to supply the
Room of Conscience and Religion; it is plain, that it is the veriest Cheat in
Nature: it is nothing but a mere abusive Name, to gull the World into a Belief
that they have some kind of Principle to act and proceed by, and which keeps
them from doing an Ill Thing: Whereas the Atheist can have no Principle at all,
but that sordid one of Self Love; which will still carry him to the
perpetrating of any thing indifferently, according as it best conduces to his
present Interest and Advantage. They deny that there are any Actions truly Good
or Honorable, or Wicked and Base in themselves; but that this is all owing to
the peculiar Customs, Laws, and Constitutions of Places and Countries: And that
as all Men are, so Actions also, are naturally equal and alike: And how far
such Notions as these will carry Men, it is very easy both to Imagine and to
Observe. One would think nothing could be more Noble, Honorable and Comely,
than for a Man to stick firm and constant to those Principles that he pretends
to, and by no means whatever to be brought to abjure and deny them. Sincerity
is so lovely and desirable a Virtue, that it does approve it self, as it were
naturally, to the reason of all Mankind: and it is equally Useful, nay, indeed
Necessary, to the due Government of the World. But this Noble Virtue, so
peculiar to a Man of True honor and greatness of Mind, the Atheist will
practice no longer than it is for his Interest and Advantage, and while it is
consistent with his Safety. That Men may profess or deny any thing to save
their Lives, is the avowed Principle of one of their great Writers. And the
same is expressly asserted in other words, even in lesser Cases than that of
Danger of Death, by the Translator of Philostratus's Life of Apollonius
Tyanaeus, with a great Pretense to Wit and Humor. But if Men may Lie and
Prevaricate from so base and abject a Principle as Fear, no doubt they may do
so for Interest and Advantage, for that is certainly as good a ground, as
Cowardliness and Baseness; and then what becomes of this boasted Honor that is
so much talked of; this greatness of Mind, that will keep a Man from doing an
ill thing. In reality, 'twill at last amount to no more than this, that he will
forbear doing an Ill Thing, when he thinks it will prove ill to him: he will be
Just, Honest and Sincere when he don't dare be otherwise, for fear of the Law,
Shame, and Ignominy: For all Men of Atheistical Principles would be Knaves and
Villains if they durst, if they could do it safely and securely: such a Man
('it is like) shall return you a Bag of Money, or a rich Jewel you happen to
depose in his Hands; but why is it? it is because he dares not keep it and deny
it; it is great odds but he is discovered and exposed by this means; and
besides, it is Unfashionable and Ungenteel to be a Cheat in such Cases. But to
impoverish a Family by Extravagance and Debauchery, to defraud Creditors of
their just Debts, or Servants of their Wages, to Cheat at Play, to violate
one's Neighbor's Bed to gratify one's own Lust, are things, which though to
the full as Wicked and Unreasonable in themselves, are yet swallowed down as
allowable enough, because common and usual, and which are not, the more is the
pity, attended with that Scandal and Infamy that other Vices are. Thus it is
very plain, that this pretended Principle of Honor in an Atheist or a Wicked
Man, and this Obedience and Deference that he pretends to pay to the Laws of
his Country, is a most Partial and Changeable thing, and vastly different from
that true Honor and Bravery that is founded on the Eternal Basis of Conscience
and Religion; it is an Airy Name that serves only to amuse unthinking and
short-sighted Persons into a Belief, that he has some kind of Principles that
he will stick to; that so he may be thought fit to be trusted, dealt and
conversed withal in the World.

And thus, I think, it is very clear and apparent that Wickedness naturally
leads to Infidelity and Atheism, and Infidelity and Atheism to the Support and
Maintenance of That: And that it is the Wicked that will not seek after God,
and whose thoughts are that there is no God. Which was my First Particular.

I come next to Consider,

II. That Peculiar Kind of Wickedness which the Psalmist here takes notice of,
as the chief Ground from whence Infidelity and Atheism proceed: And that is
Pride. The Wicked, through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek after
God, neither is God in all his Thoughts.

And I question not but this Vice of Pride, is generally the Concomitant of
Infidelity, and the chief Ground from whence the Spirit of Speculative Atheism
proceeds. When Men of proud and haughty Spirits lead ill Lives, as they very
often do, they always endeavor to justify themselves in their Proceeding, be
it never so Irregular and Absurd, and never so contrary to the considerate
Sentiments of all the rest of the World. A Proud Man hates to acknowledge
himself in an Error, and to own that he has committed a Fault: He would have
the World believe that there is a kind of Indefectibility in his Understanding
and Judgment, which secures him from being deceived and mistaken like other
Mortals. Whatever Actions therefore such a Person commits, he would fain have
appear reasonable and justifiable. But he sees plainly that he cannot make
Wickedness and Immorality do so, as long as Religion stands its Ground in the
World. The Sacred Scriptures are so plain and express against such a course of
Life, that there is no avoiding being convicted and condemned while their
Authority remains good: It Is impossible any way to reconcile a vicious Life to
the Doctrine there delivered: And therefore he sees plainly, That one that
Professes to believe the great Truths of Religion, and the Divine Authority of
those Sacred Books, and yet by his Practices gives the Lie to his Profession,
and while he acknowledges Jesus Christ in his Words, does in his Works deny
him; he sees, I say, that such an one stands (...), Self-condemned, and can
never acquit himself either to his own Conscience, or to the Reason of Mankind.
Now this is perfectly disagreeable to the Genious and Humor of a Proud Man; he
cannot bear to be thought in any respect Incoherent or Inconsistent with
himself: And therefore having vainly tried to justify himself in his
Wickedness, by alleging the Examples of some good Men in Sacred Scripture,
that have been guilty of great Sins, but whose Repentance he can by no means
digest: And having also fruitlessly endeavored to rely on the perverted Sense
of some particular Texts of Scripture, which he knows are sufficiently refuted
by the Analogy of the whole; he finds at last that it is the best way to deny
the Divine Authority of the Bible, and the Truth of all Revelation, and so
boldly shake off at once all Obligation to the Rules of Piety and Virtue; and
since Religion cannot be wrested so as to give an allowance to his way of
living, he will take it quite away, Banish that and God Almighty out of the
World, and set up Iniquity by a Law. And nothing can be more pleasing and
agreeable to the Arrogance of such Men than this way of Proceeding: It
gratifies an insolent and haughty Spirit prodigiously, to do things out of the
common Road; to pretend to be Adept in a Philosophy that is as much above the
rest of Mankind's Notions, as it is Contradictory to it: to assume to himself a
Power of seeing much farther into things than other Folk, and to penetrate into
the deepest recesses of Nature. Vid. Jul. Caes. Vanini Amphitheatr. in Titulo
and Epist. Dedicator.
He would pass for one of Nature's Cabinet Counselors, a Bosom Favorite that
knows all the secret Springs of Action, and the first remote Causes of all
Things. He pleases himself mightily to have discovered with what Ridiculous
Bugbears the Generality of Mankind are awed and frighted; he can now look down
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre Errare, atque viam palantes
quaerere vitae. Lucr. lib. 2.
with a Scornful Pity on the poor grovelling Vulgar, the Unthinking Mobb below,
that are poorly enslaved and terrified by the Fear of a God, and of Ills to
come they know not when nor where: He despises such dull Biggots as will be
imposed upon by Priests, and that will superstitiously abstain from the
Enjoyment of present Pleasure, on account of such idle Tales as the
Comminations of Religion. And as he despises those that are not Wicked, so he
upbraids those that are so, with inconsistency with their Principles and
Profession, and for doing the same things that he does, when they have nothing
to bear them out: And thus he doubly gratifies his Pride, by justifying
himself, and condemning and triumphing over others. Nay, the very Mistakes and
Errors of such a Man, we are told, appear laudable and great to him, and he
can please himself at last, with saying, That he has not Erred like a Fool,
but Secundum Verbum. Vid. Oracles of Reason, p. 92. When Men have a while
enured themselves to talk at this rate, and to blow themselves up with such
lofty Conceits and Fancies, they grow* by degrees more and more opinionated,
and do dote more and more on their own dear Notions; and finding by this means
quiet and ease in the Practice of their Sins, they at last degenerate so far as
firmly to believe the Truth of what they perhaps at first advanced and talked
only from a Spirit of Contradiction; and become so stupid and blind, as, like
great Liars, to believe their own Figments and Inventions Vid. Great is Diana
of the Ephesians.
. To such any Extravagant and Inconsistent Hypothesis, so it do but clash with
Sacred Scripture, shall be no less than a real Demonstration; a Bold and daring
Falsity shall pass for undoubted Truth; and a Profane Jest, or a Scurrilous
Reflection on the Character or Person of one in Holy Orders, shall be a
sufficient Refutation of the plainest Demonstration he can bring against their
Principles and Practices. For it is most certain, that though a Proud Man
always think himself in the right, and arrogate to himself an Exemption from
the common Frailties and Errors of Mankind; yet there is no body so frequently
deceived and mistaken, as he; for he does so overestimate all his Faculties and
Endowments, and is so much enamoured of, and Trusts so much to his own
Quickness and Penetration, that he usually Imagines his Great Genius able to
Master any thing without the servile fatigue of Pains and Study: and therefore
he will never give himself Time seriously to examine into things, he scorns and
hates the Drudgery of deeply revolving and comparing the Idaeas of things in
his Mind, but rashly proceeds to Judgment and Determination on a very Transient
and Superficial View: And there will he stick, be the Resolution he is come to
never so absurd and Unaccountable; for he is as much above confessing an Error
in Judgment, as he is of Repenting of a Fault in Practice. And indeed, as the
absurd and ridiculous Paradoxes which Atheistical Writers maintain, show their
shallow insight into things, and their Precipitancy in forming a Determination
about them; so the Pride and Haughtiness with which they deliver them,
abundantly demonstrates the True Spirit of such Authors, and the Real Ground
both of their Embracing and Maintaining their Opinions. Plato describes the
Atheists of his Age, to be a Proud, Insolent, and Haughty sort of Men, the
Ground of whose Opinion was, he says, (...), in reality, a very mischievous
Ignorance; though to the conceited Venders and Embracers of it (...). It
appeared to be the greatest Wisdom, and the Wisest of all Opinions. Lactantius
tells us in his Discourse, De Ira Dei, p. 729. Oxon. that the true Reason why
Diagoras Melius and Theodorus, two of the Ancient Atheists denied a Deity was,
That they might gain the Glory of being the Authors of some new Opinion,
contradictory to the common Notions of Mankind. And of the former of these,
Diagoras, Sextus Empiricus acquaints us, That because a certain perjured
Person, who had wronged him, lived unpunished by the Gods, he was so enraged at
it, that he undertook to maintain there were no Gods at all. Lib. Adr. Mathem.
Edit. Genev. 1621.

The like Pride and Arrogance Lactantius tells us he found in the two great
Writers that appeared against Christianity, in his time, in Bithynia. The
former of these, who, it is probable, was the famous Porphyry, called himself
Antistes Philosophiae, the Chief or Prince of Philosophers; and says
Lactantius, Nescio utrum Superbius an Importunius, pretended to correct the
blind Errors of Mankind, and to guide Men into the True Way; He could not bear,
that Unskilful and Innocent Persons should be enslaved by the Cheats of, and
become a Prey to, Crafty and Designing Men. Lib. de Justit. p. 420, 421. Oxon.

With the like Assurance do the Modern Writers of this kind express themselves:
And though they have in reality very little or nothing New, but only the
Arguments of the Ancients a little varied and embelished, (as I shall have
occasion to observe hereafter more at large,) yet they all set up for new
Lights, and mighty Discoverers of the Secrets of Nature and Philosophy; and all
of the assume the Glory of first leading Men into the way of Truth, and
delivering them out of the dark mazes of Vulgar Errors. This was the pretense
of Vanini, who was burnt for Atheism at Toulouse, A. D. 1619. whose Mind, he
says, grew more and more strong, healthful and robust, as he exercised it in
searching out the Secrets of that Supreme Philosophy, Animus tamen in supremae
and vulgo. Philosophantibus incognitae Philosophiae Arcanis investigandis
validior factus and robustior; ut Physico-Magicum nostrum, quod mox ex umbra in
lucem prodibit pellegens, aequa posteritas facile est Judicatura.
which is wholly unknown to the common and ordinary Rank of Philosophers: And
this, he says, will soon be discovered, by the perusal of his Physico-Magicum,
which was now to see the Light. Vid. Vanini Amphitheatr. in Epist. Dedicat.

After the same manner do Machiavel, Spinoza, Hobbs, Blount, and all the late
Atheistical Writers, deliver themselves; Instances of which, I think, I need
not stay to give, since it is conspicuous through the whole course of their
Writings, and, no doubt, taken notice of by every Reader; only of the first of
these, viz. Machiavel, I cannot but take notice, that Vanini himself says,
that 'twas his Pride and Covetousness that made him deny the Truth of the
Miracles recorded in Sacred Scripture. Amphitheatr. p. 51. Edit. Lugduni, 1615.

And as the Writings, so the Discourses of these Gentlemen do equally discover
this Pride and Vanity: for they do usually deliver themselves with such a
scornful and contemptuous Air, when they either endeavor to establish their
own, or to overthrow their Adversaries Arguments, as sufficiently shows the
Propriety and Truth of the Psalmist's Observation here, that it is through the
pride of his countenance, that the wicked will not seek after God. The LXXII.
indeed render it, (...) Through the abundance of his wrath: and therein they
are followed by the vulgar Latin. As if the Wicked were angry against God, and
enraged at his Presidency over Humane Affairs: as if they fretted under, and
quarrelled at the Severity of his Laws and Government, and scorned to apply
themselves to him by Prayer, and to submit to him by Obedience. But though this
may be a good sense of the words; and though, I doubt not, a stubborn
Frowardness and Perverseness of our Wills against the Will of God, may be a
frequent cause and ground of Infidelity: yet our English Translation appears to
me to be much better warranted from the Hebrew; for there it is properly,
through the Elevation of his Nose or Face. Which, truly, is very emphatical,
and expresses such a proud and scornful gesture of Face, as is the natural
Indication of the Internal Haughtiness of a Man's Mind; or as the Targum, on
this place, render it, of the arrogance of his Spirit. Such a Turn and Air of
Countenance as argues a proud contempt of all the rest of Mankind, who trot on
in the common road, believe and worship a God, and poorly submit to be governed
by his Laws and Precepts.

And thus having dispatched my Two first Particulars, and showed, That
Wickedness and Pride are two great Causes of Infidelity and Atheism; I should
now proceed to speak to the Third thing observable in my Text, viz.

III. The great Charge which the Psalmist brings against the wicked Person here
mentioned, That he will not seek after God; neither is God in all his Thoughts.
But this I must leave for my next Discourse, and shall now Conclude with a word
or two by way of Application.

Since the Case stands thus, That Wickedness in general, and Pride in
particular, do so naturally lead to Infidelity and Atheism; and that it is
hardly possible to imagine a Man can entertain such an Opinion without them:
Let every one then, that has any Inclination or Temptation that way, seriously
examine his own Mind, whether he be not prejudiced toward it by some vicious
Desires and Affections; whether he does not heartily wish that there were no
God nor Religion; whether he has not, by his past Actions, really loaded
himself with guilt, and therefore is disturbed in his Mind with the
apprehension, that the Divine Punishment will overtake him, and light upon him,
for his Sins: Let him search diligently whether he has not recourse to
Infidelity, as to an Opiate in this case, to allay the Pains of his Conscience,
and to compose the Disorder of his guilty Mind, and to gain, as it were, an
Insensibility in Sinning. For if the case be thus, it is plain, he is not free,
and at liberty, to make a just Judgment of the Truth of Things; he is already a
Party, and much more inclined to one side of the Question than to the other;
and consequently, he will pitch on that as Truth, which he would have to be so.
But this is certainly a very partial way of proceeding, and such as no wise Man
would use in a matter of so very great moment, to engage one's self rashly in a
Determination, before a thorough and careful Examination of the Evidence on
both sides: This is to look on things in a false Light, through colored
Glasses, through Diseased and Icterical Eyes; and then to believe them to be in
reality, what our depraved and prejudicate Apprehensions make them.

The Enemies to Religion say, That the Preachers of it are not to be minded;
the Arguments they bring are all forced and strained, because it is their Trade,
and they get Money by it; and their Craft obliges them to cry out, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians! I hope therefore this being so Precarious and Partial a
way of Proceeding, to subscribe to Religion by Implicit Faith, and to take it
up upon trust from those, whose Interest (they say) it is to propagate it in
the World: I hope, I say, that Men will not act so on the other hand, and
embrace Atheism and Infidelity on the same Precarious Grounds. I hope all such
Persons can clearly approve themselves to be truly Virtuous and Moral in their
Inclinations and Practices; and are sure that they have no strong inclinations
to such Actions as the World calls Vicious. For if they have, and do take real
Pleasure in the Practice of Wickedness, it is plain that they must be Prejudiced
and Bigoted to their Lusts and Humors; they cannot be Free-thinkers in the
Case; the Cloggs of ill Custom, and a loose Education bear them down, and they
cannot shake them off. Their present Interest influences and governs their
Belief, and enslaves and Tyrannizes over their Reason.

Let them consider impartially the Arguments for Infidelity, and they will find
them all forced and strained Paradoxes, Invented by Skeptical and Canting
Philosophers, a Crafty and Designing sort of Men, who set up Atheism because
they Get by it, and whose Interest it is that there should be no God and
Religion.

Let not therefore Men be so stupid and blind as to talk of Prejudices on the
side of Religion, and never, perceive that, there are any at all on that of
Infidelity. If they scorn to take up Religion on trust, without examining into
its Grounds and Reasons; for their Own sakes let, them be as Cautious and
Inquisitive on the other hand, and not run Hood-winked into Eternal
Destruction, by subscribing to Atheism in have, and without that previous
Consideration and Regard, which so great and important an Affair requires: For
if they will but strip themselves of those Prejudices which arise from their
Vices, and avoid being impetuously born down by their depraved Inclination;
they will soon perceive that the Grounds and Principles of Infidelity are
abundantly too precarious to afford them any thing like a Demonstrative
assurance of the Falsity of Religion: Without which, surely no Man of Sense,
and that can think at all, will ever run the hazard of Damnation.

FINIS.

