A True and Perfect RELATION OF THAT Most Horrid and Hellish Conspiracy OF THE
GUNPOWDER TREASON. Discovered the 5th. of November, Anno Dom. 1605. Collected
out of the Best and most Authentic Writers, and now Re-published. For fuller
information, and to remember the People of England of Gods VVonderfull Mercies
and Deliverances Vouchsafed them, for his great Name, and for his Churches
sake, in the Defense and Maintenance of the Protestant Religion, Established in
these Nations. With the Names of those Traitors that suffered for that bloody
Plot.

By I. H. Gent.

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, thou alone do mavelous things? The snare is
broken, and we are escaped. LONDON, Printed for Fr. Coals at the Sign of the
Lamb in the Old Bailey. 1662.

A True and Perfect Relation OF THE GUNPOWDER TREASON.
THere is no Nation under Heaven, who have received and enjoyed so many
blessing, both of right and left hand, as the people of England; we have had
sure preventing mercies in times past, and we have been honored and saved by
restoring mercies, as our late experience can sufficiently manifest. God has
had more respect to this Age of the Church, making good all his promises of
love and kindness to it, then to all the several ages before. He has not
dealt so with the people round about us, nor in the Times before us: Wonderful
is his Name, and greatly to be praised.

But to Comply with the Time, and Solemn occasion of our thanksgiving; setting
aside and waving the repetition of all other manifold Deliverances, our purpose
is briefly here to bring to our Remembrance, and set before our eyes those
strange and miraculous merciful dispensations of the Divine Majesty to us and
our Forefathers, in the revealing, discovering, and preventing that most
monstrous and before unheard of mischief, the Plot of the Gunpowder-Treason.

In order whereunto it will be requisite to consider the State of the Kingdom,
deducing it from the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of ever Blessed
Memory: who by the Divine providence escaped not a few dangerous conspiracies
against her Life, and consequently against the safety of the Church and
Kingdom; All these wicked Machavilians Designs were principally laid, fomented
and abetted, and intented to be executed by Roman Catholics, incited
thereunto by the Jesuits and other Emissaries of the Pope and See of Rome. For
which reason diverse Statutes were made by Parliament (for the better security
of her Person and Government) against Priests and Seminaries and such as should
be reconciled, that was, perverted to the Romish Religion; and for breach of
those statutes, enjoining those Priests departure and absence out of the
Kingdom, and for other Offenses several of them were Executed, to the great
Exulceration and Exasperation of the rest of that Persuasion and Religion, who
could by no means endure that Queen or her Government.

She dying, the Papists of England were in great hopes that her Successor King
James of Scotland, whose Mother in their Opinion dyed a Martyr for their
Religion, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; would not only remit and surcease
those rigours they had before suffered, but would also grant them free Exercise
and Toleration of their Religion, and grew very confident and jolly in this
vain expectation: which when they perceived to be frustrated and disappointed,
at that Kings very first coming in and assumption to this Crown, by his
declaring his constant resolution for the maintenance of the Religion here
Established; a conspiracy was entered into by one Watson and Clarke, Priests,
the Lord Cobham and George Brook his Brother, Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir
Walter Rawleih, Sir Griffin Markham, Sir Edward Parham, Bartholomew Brookesby
and Anthony Coply: their design being to surprise the King and Prince Henry,
and securing of them, either at the Tower or Dover, there by violence to obtain
their own pardons, a Tolleration of Religion, and a removal of some
Councillors, etc. And to conceal this Treason the better, Watson devised Oaths
of secrecy, teaching that the Act was lawful being done before the Coronation,
(for the King had deferred that Solemnity till St. Jamse's day, a while after)
because the King was no King before he was anointed and the Crown Solemnly set
on His Head.

This Plot came by the Wise Providence of God to be discovered, and the
conspirators tried for it at Winchester; the Term being adjourned thither,
because of the Plague then in London, where they were all Condemned but only
three of them, viz. George Brook Esquire Watson and Clerk Priests; three other,
viz. the Lords, Cobham and Gray, and Sir Griffin Markham were brought upon the
Scaffold, and by the Kings Grace and Mercy severally Reprieved, Sir Walter
Raleigh, that famous Historian, many years after was charged with the same
Judgment, and Beheaded in Westminster Palace Yard.

This end had these Troublers of the State, whose Grand Minister, such as the
Politic Civil Lord Burleigh, were too wary and jealous to be surprised by such
Devices; and the Nation now seemed to be in a most sweet and lasting peace,
through the wise temperament of the King and his more indulgent hand, the then
Papists for many years had felt; when lo a most Desperate and Infernal
Conjuration was laid, by some Grandees and mad Zealots of that Religion; a Plot
so impiously wicked, that the former was a mere shadow to this intended blaze
and conflagration: the very recital whereof makes the Pen to Tremble with the
thought of those shakings, revulsions, and trepidations this dire Blow would
have Caused.

This Horrid Treason was first thought on in the last year of Queen Elizabeth;
Thomas Winter being sent into Spain by other his Accomplices, to desire that King
in the name of the English Catholics, to send an Army into England, with whom
they and the Male-contented Gentry and Soldiery at the Earl of Essexe's death
would be ready to join: which being assented to, concluded and agreed on by
the said King, Winter returned into England, and gave a welcome account to his
party and Negotiation; but Queen Elizabeth dying, though they would have
persuaded the Spaniard to bold his former Resolution, yet he now would not
further hearken to any such motion.

In the mean while the Jesuits had been tampering to diswade the acceptance of
King James into England, urging it, that death was rather to be endured then to
admit a Heretic; from which principle and other the like stuff out of
Parsons his book, Philopater Sect. 1. Catesby the first in the Conspiracy, took
his ground, it being the then Jusuits position: That if any Christian Prince
shall manifestly turn from the Catholic Religion, etc. he presently falls
from all Princely Power and Dignity, and that ipso facto, before any sentence
pronounced against him by the supreme Judge and Pastor; and that his Subjects
are Absolved from all Bonds and Oaths of Allegiance, etc. By such like fiery
Divinity of their own making the Gunpowder-Treason took strength.

The Parliament then called by the King, was Prorogued from the 7th. of July,
to the 7th. of February: a little before which Prorogation, Catesby then at
Lambeth, sent for Thomas Winter aforesaid, and broke with him concerning this
Powder Plot: who answered, that indeed struck at the root, but if it should
miscarry, the Catholic Cause would be greatly Scandalized: Catesby replied,
the nature of the Disease required so sharp a Remedy, and then demanded his
consent; which he freely gave, but proposed difficulties as want of an House,
the difficulty of the Mine noise in working, and such like, which Catesby
satisfied by telling him, let us begin the attempt, and where it saileth let us
pass no further. Then they agreed that the Constable of Spain, then in the Low
Countries should be dealt withal for assistance, but not the plot to be
discovered, etc. Sir William Stanley and other Fugitives should be underfelt;
chiefly one Guido Fawkes employed about the first overture to the King of
Spain, and then in that Kingdom, should be drawn to the association. Sir
William Stanley declined all general propositions that was, yet hoping to make
his peace in England, but brought Fawkes to VVinters acquaintance, who dealt
together with one Owen about the business. Fawkes was a Gentleman of
Darbishire, resolute in any undertaking for his Religion: and so VVinter and he
returned into England to Catesby, to whom came Thomas Percy, kinsman to the
late Earl of Northumberland; where after a short conference, they agreed upon
an Oath of secrecy; Swearing by the Blessed Trinity and the Sacrament never to
disclose, etc. Whereupon Catesby, who had drawn in one John Wright, discovered
the plot to Percy and Winter, and Jack Wright to Fawkes; and so they resolved
to proceed.

To this purpose Percy was ordered to take the House where to lodge instruments
of Violence and Death, which he hired of one Ferris, who Tenanted it of Mr.
Whineyard, belonging to the Wardrobe; and Fawkes by the name of John Johnson,
as Mr. Percy's man was put in to possess it, and received the keys of the
House. It was also thought convenient to have another House to lodge the powder
and provision for the Mine, from thence to be conveyed to Mr. Percy's; so one
was taken in Lambeth, and one Keys appointed the keeper thereof. Now they fell
to work upon the Mine having store of baked meats with them the less to need
sending abroad.

The chief Conspirators were now in Consultation what they should do when the
deed was done, and agreed to seize upon the Duke that was our late King
Charles, of blessed Memory, and the Lady Elizabeth, (the King and Prince Henry
being devoted to the Flames) and having warned others of the Popish Nobility to
forbear sitting in Parliament to get what number of Horses they could; which
strength, having the Heir apparent with them, would be odds sufficient, in that
general confusion and Consternation, which would attend the Effects of their
Treason.

About Candlemas they brought over in a Boat the Powder which they had provided
at Lambeth, and laid it in Mr. Piercy his House, because they would have all
their danger in one Place. Then falling to their Work in the Mine, they came
against the Parliament House stone wall, which was very hard to beat through,
at which time they called in Christopher Wright to their Company. As they were
thus laboring, they heard a rusling noise, which was the removal of some
Coals, that made them think they were discovered; but Fawks being sent thither
to know the business, understood the Coals were a selling, and that the Cellar
was to be Let, which for its convenience, Piercy presently hired, and put into
it 20 Barrels of Powder, newly provided, and covered them with Billets and
Fagots, provided for the purpose.

Their Work being in such a readiness, Fawks was sent over into Flanders to
give the Oath of Secrecy to Sir William Stanley and get him over and Owen; Sir
William was in Spain, Owen seemed well pleased but said Sir William would not
engage. Whereupon Fawks returned about August, the Parliament having been
prorogued from the 7th of February before-going, to the 5th of November. About
this time Mr. Piercy and Mr. Catesby met at the Bath, where they agreed that
few being yet in the Company, Catesby should have Authority to call in whom he
pleased; who drew in Sir Everard Digby, Mr. Tresham of Northampton shire, who
contributed Money to the carrying on of the Design.

In the interim, Fawks and Winter bought some new Powder, as suspecting the
first to be damp, and conveyed it into the Cellar, and then for ten days
before the sitting of the Parliament, went down into the Country, where by
Enfield Chase, at a place called Whitewebs, they communed with Catesby, who
asked them if there Pince would come to the Parliament, who replying negatively
he said then we must have our Horses beyond the Water, and provision of more
Company to surprise the Prince, and leave the Duke alone.

All things thus laid and fitted, according to their former result of warning
the Popish Lords from the danger, being some ten days before the sitting down
of the Parliament, a Letter was put about seven of the Clock on a Saturday
Evening, into the hands of a Footman of the Lord Mounteagles in the Street by
an unknown man of a reasonable tall stature, with a Charge to deliver it to his
Lords own hands, which he did; my Lord no sooner received it, but perceiving it
writ in an unlegible Hand, he commanded one of his servants to read it, when
perplexed with the strangeness of the matter (think it might prove some foolish
devised story or other) he hasted away with it to Whitehall to the Secretary,
the Earl of Salisbury, who perusing it likewise, commended my Lords care and
discretion, telling him, that whatever the Letter seemed, yet had he received
Advertisements from beyond Sea concerning some practices of the Papists to make
new stirs, to the enabling them to deliver to the King a Petition for
Toleration of their Religion like sturdy Beggars that would force, if they
could not began Alms. The Earl added, that he would presently communicate it
to some others of the privy Council, Mounteagle only desiring that what ever
the issue or meaning of it might be, it might not be imputed to him as
proceeding from his too light and sudden apprehension which his Majesty's
safety had only prompted him to. The Lord Chamberlain was therefore made
acquainted first with it in the presence of the Lord Mounteagle, who likewise
concurred there was some perilous attempt intended against the Kings Person,
which the Lord Chamberlain by his Office was principally concerned to take care
of as well in all public places of Assembly, as in his Majesty's own private
Palaces.

Whereupon the said Letter was by consent communicated to three more Lords of
the privy Council, the Earls of Worcester and Northampton, and the Lord
Admiral, who all concluded it was a matter not to be slighted, and that the
King should be informed thereof, that in the mean time no other noise should be
made about it, that the Design might ripen and be the fitter for Discovery.
According to this determination, the Earl of Salisbury in the Gallery at
Whitehall, on Friday being Allhallows day, delivered the King the Letter,
without any speech or judgment made of it; the Contents whereof were as
follows.

My Lord, Out of the love I bear to some of your Friend, I have a care of your
preservation; Therefore I would advise yoa as you tender your safety to devise
some Excuse to shift off your Attendance at this Parliament; for God and Man
have decreed to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not slightly of
this Advertisement, but retire your self into your County, where you may expect
the Event in safety; for though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say,
they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see
who hurt them. This Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good,
and can do you no harm, for the danger is past as soon as you have burned this
Letter; And I hope God will give you grace to make good use of it, to whose
Holy Protection I commend you.

The King (who was always very fortunate in solving of Ridles) ne sooner read
the Letter, but after a little pause, and the reading it over again, he
delivered his judgment of it as of a matter not to be slighted; for that the
style of it was not like a Pasquil: when the Earl of Salisbury perceiving the
King to apprehend it deeplier then he expected, hinted to the King that by one
clause thereof (that the danger was past as soon as the Letter was burned) it
seemed to be written by a fool or mad man; for what would the notice of the
danger advantage or avail any man, when the burning of the Letter was
sufficient to avoid it? But the King joining and referring that clause to
another (that they should receive a terrible blow that Parliament) did happily
guess that the danger intended there was by some sudden blowing up of powder;
for no other Rebellion or Insurrection whatsoever, could be attempted unseen in
time of Parliament, but by that invisible, nor no mischief take effect but that
speedy way of destruction; and to that sense he rightly turned and construed
(the danger is past as soon) to that of as quickly; and therefore advised that
before his going to Parliament the under-rooms of the Parliament House might be
well and narrowly searched. It must be confessed that God put this
interpretation into the Kings Heart; for though now upon the event appearing,
no other construction can be made of the letter, yet before, the wisest did not
apprehend that meaning: so that next to God the Nation is beholding to the King
their Head, for this his temporal saving knowledge.

The Earl of Salisbury wondering at this strange, yet rational Commentary of
the King, which he knew to be far contrary to his ordinary and natural
disposition that was always averse from or editing due advertisements of
practices against his person; and rightly conceiving this extraordinary caution
of having the rooms searched, proceeded from the Vigilant care he had of the
State, more then of himself: thought fit to dissemble his concurrent
apprehension of the danger, putting it off with some jest or merry discourse,
and so took his leave of his Majesty, but repaired instantly to the same Lords
of the privy Counsel: whom he acquainted with the Kings judgment, and
construction of the Letter, and what had else passed in private; who agreed
that the said Earl should put his Majesty again in mind of the business, the
next day being Saturday, when it was ordered, the Lord Chamberlain being
present; that the said Lord Chamberlain should according to his Custom and
Office, as usually, view both Parliament Houses above and below; and see and
consider what likelihood or possibility of danger might be laid there. But
because they would not have any rumor fly abroad, and also for the fuller
discovery of the plot, if there were really such a thing; it was resolved that
he should not go thither while Monday in the Afternoon, the day before the
setting down of the Parliament: at which time he went thither, accompanied with
the Lord Mounteagle, who impatiently expected the event; Being there, and
having reviewed all the lower rooms, he found in the Vault, under the upper
House great store of provision, of Billets, Faggots, and Coals; and enquiring
of Whinyard keeper of the Wardrobe, to what use he had put those lower Rooms
and Cellers? he replied, that Mr. Thomas Percy had hired the House and part of
the Vault under the same; and that the said Wood and Coal was also his
provision; whereupon the Lord Chamberlain casting his eye aside, espied Fawks
the pretended servant of Percy in a corner, but took no further notice of the
man.

At the naming of Percy, the Lord Mounteagle began to suspect the matter, and
that the Letter might probably be sent from him, and intimated afterward so
much to my Lord Chamberlain: who among the other things he related to have seen
and considered, omitted not the suspicion of Mounteagles, as also the jealousy
he had of such a great quantity of Coals, Faggots and Billets, for a persons
use that had not been, nor yet was resident in the house he pretended to take
for his dwelling: whereupon the King insisted that the House was to be narrowly
searched to the bottom, it being to be suspected that those Faggots were laid
there only for covering of the powder, of which opinion were all the
Councillors present; but the manner of the search was not so well agreed on,
for as the Kings and Kingdoms safety required all Caution for preventing the
danger, so the reputation of the State, and the imputation it would lay upon
the Earl of Northumberland, whose Kinsman and most Confident Familiar this
Percy was, if it should prove but a Fable after a curious and strict search,
made them loath to be too eager therein; the rather because it was known how
much the King detested to be thought jealous or suspicious of any of his good
Subjects. But the Kings resolute persistency for a through search prevayled,
for as he said it could prejudice no man at all that was innocent: and either
they must examine the bottom of the matter, that no possibility of danger
might remain, or else not to meddle any further in it but plainly to go next
day to the Parliament, and leave the success to Fortune, which he believed
they would hardly take upon their consciences.

It was therefore finally resolved to search all places, and upon the pretense
of Whinyards missing some of the Kings goods to view those rooms narrowly for
them. And to this purpose Sir Thomas Knevet, a Gentleman of his Majesty's privy
Chamber, and a Justice of the peace in Westminster, was employed: who according
to the trust reposed in him, went about the midnight next after, accompanied
with such a small number as was fit for that errand; and at his coming near the
House, seeing Fawkes, Percy's pretended man, standing without doors at that
dead time of night, with his Clothes and Boots on, he apprehended him, and then
proceeded to the search. In which after he had caused some of the Billets,
Faggots, and Coals to be overturned; he first found one of the Barrels of
powder, and afterward 35 more, being 36 in all. And searching the fellow he
had taken, he found (...) matches and all other instruments fit for blowing up
of powder (...) his pockets and about him, which made him instantly to (...)
his own Guiltiness, but in such a wicked manner that he said (...) he been
within the House when Sir Thomas took him, as (...) just before (to the ending
of his work) he would not have failed to have blown up Himself, House and
altogether, but it pleased God by this his opportune seizure to prevent every
part of that Divelish Invention.

After Sir Thomas had caused this Caitiff to be surely bound and well guarded,
he returned to Whitehall, and gave notice to the Lord Chamberlain and Earl of
Salisbury of his success, who presently rouzed the rest of the Council that lay
in the Court, to assemble together, who as they soon as they could get ready,
came and forthwith entered the Kings Bedchamber together, where the Lord
Chamberlain could not refrain his sudden gladness, but at first entry told the
King in a confused have that all was discovered and the Traitor bound and in
Custody.

The King arose, and sending for the rest of the Council then in Town, the
Prisoner was commanded to be brought in (having stood without some while to the
gazing and wonderment of the people without any alteration of countenance or
dejection of spirit) when notwithstanding the Horror of his Guilt, and his
sudden surprizal and the terror which the presence of so grave a Council must
needs strike him with, yet he continued obstinate against all manner of
revealing his Accomplices, nor could the Council get any thing of him all that
day as to any discovery, he laying at the blame upon himself, saying he was
moved thereunto only for Religion and Conscience sake, denying the King to be
his lawful Sovereign or the Anointed of God, in regard he was an Heretic: and
the same regardless gesture and countenance he used before the Council, the
same he kept all that day of his attendance, answering with scorn to such as he
knew had no power to examine him and smiling in their faces, nor would he be
drawn to confess any other name then John Johnson. But after two or three days
consideration in the Tower, of the certainty of his Death and the fright of the
Rack which was showed him only, he begun to fail in his resolution; confessing
part and then the whole truth: of which this is the perfect abstract.

The principal Conspirators and that labored in the Mine by this Confession,
were Robert Catesby, Robert Winter, Esquire. Thomas Piercy, Thomas Winter, John and
Christopher Wright, Fawks, and Bates, Catesby 's Man. The accessories to it,
though not personally laboring in the Mine, were Everard Digby, Knight,
Ambrose Rokewood and Francis Tresham, Esquires, John Grant, Gentleman, Robert
Keys.

Upon the spreading of the News, on Tuesday the 5. of November. the Town was all
over in an Ecstasy and a kind of joyful uproar; the Londoners flocking down
toward Westminster, to bless their eyes with those standing structures
designed for the Kingdoms and their own Tomb, while Winter and the two Wrights
(Catesby being gone the night before, and Piercy at four of the clock in the
morning the same day of the Discovery) hastened out of the Town, all of them
flying for VVarwick-shire, where about two of the clock in the morning the same
day, Grant, with other his associates, had broke up a Stable of one Mr.
Benock, a Trainer of great Horses for the Nobility and Gentry thereabouts, and
carried away eight Horses fit for service, and with them met with that Company
which fled out of London at Dunchurch, at Sir Everard Digby his Lodging, who
had appointed a Hunting Match on purpose to draw his party the more
unsuspectedly together. This Hellish Company being thus met, and finding their
Treason discovered, resolved to run a desperate Course, and from close
treachery, run into open rebellion, thinking if more joined with them to save
themselves in the throng; but this Snow-ball wasted instead of increasing, and
therewith the hopes of animating a party by their Example; for they had much
ado to keep their Servants from flying from them; and their whole number made
but eighty, who having wandered a while through VVarwick-shire to
VVorcester-shire, and from thence to the edge and Confines of Staffordshire.
This Rebel Bravado had not the Honor to be beaten with a Kings Lieutenant or
extraordinary Commissioner, but by the ordinary Sheriff of Worcester they were
all beaten and taken. For though their speedy flight prevented the Kings
Proclamation, whereby their Horrid Fact was set forth, yet the County without
any such incentive were ready to suppress them of theie own accord, knowing
that armed concourse could portend no other, then a Rebellion. Upon which
guess, the Country refused to give them willingly so much as a Cup of Drink or
any manner of comfort and support, but with execrations deserted them, and a
poor Smith struck at VVinter, and had seized him, but that he was rescued by
his party: And so at last after Sir Richard Verney High Sheriff of
VVarwick-shire them had carefully and closely chased them to the Confines of
his County, some of the meaner sort being also apprehended by him, Sir Richard
VValsh did likewise hotly pursue them through his Shire; And having gotten some
tice of their taking Harbor in Mr. Littletons House, he sent Trumpeters and
Messengers to them in the Kings Name, to render themselves to him His Majesty's
Minister, and knowing no more of their Crime then what was publicly visible,
did promise upon their dutiful and obedient Rendition to him, to intercede at
the Kings hands for the sparing of their Lives, who received only from them
this scornful Answer, (They being better witnesses to themselves of their own
demerits) that he had need of better Assistance then of those few Numbers that
were with him, before he could be able to Command or Control them.

But here the wondrous work of Gods justice now magnified it self, for while
this message passed between the Sheriff and them, the Sheriff and his peoples
zeal being justly kindled and augmented by their arrogant answer; and therefore
preparing to give a furious assault, and the other party making themselves
ready within the house to perform their promise by a defense as resolute; it
pleased God that in the mending of the Fire in their Chamber, one small spark
should fly out and light upon less then two pound weight of powder, which was
drying a little from the Chimney; which being thereby blown up, so spoiled the
faces of some of the prinacipal Rebels, and the hands and sides of others of
them (blowing up with it also another great bag of powder, which
notwithstanding took not fire) that they were not only disabled and discouraged
thereby from any further resistance, in respect Catesby, Rookewood, Grant, and
diverse others of greatest account among them, were thereby made unable of
defense; but also wonderfully stricken with amazement in their guilty
Consciences; calling to memory how God had justly punished them with that same
instrument, which they would have used before for the accomplishing so great a
sin, according to that sentence, in that in which we sin, in the same shall we
be punished. In so much as they presently (see the wonderful power of Gods
Justice upon guilty Consciences) did all fall down upon their knees, praying
God to pardon them for their bloody enterprise. And after that giving over any
further debate, opened the Gate and suffered the Sheriffs people to rush in
among them, of whom they desperately sought their own destruction. The three
principal of them, Catesby, Percy and Winter joined backs together: whereof
Catesby and Percy, (though the Proclamation directed the taking of him alone if
possible, because the whole Cabol and mystery of the design was lodged in him,
by reason of his great Relations and acquaintance) were slain; VVinter was
taken and saved alive.

And thus those resolute and furious cruel Papists, who dreamed of no less
then the destruction of Kings and Kingdoms, and promised to themselves no lower
Estate, then the Government of great and Ancient Monarchies; were miserably
Defeated and quite overthrown in an instant, falling iato the pit which they
had prepared for others. And so fulfilling that sentence, which his Majesty did
in a manner prophecy of them in his Oration to the Parliament; some of them
being presently slain, others deadly wounded, stripped of their Clothes, and
left lying miserably naked, and so dying rather of Cold then of their Wounds;
and the rest that either were whole, or but lightly hurt, taken and led
prisoners to the Jayle (by the Sheriff, the ordinary Minister of Justice, to
the ordinary prison of the worst (yet compared with these) harmless
Malefactors, where they remained till their sending up to London, being met
with a huge confluence of all sorts of people, desirous to see them as the
rarest and unusuallest sort of Monsters, and as the public spectacle of shame
and Gods fieree wrath, and just indignation. They lived bloodily in
superstition, they practiced divellishly in all manner of impiety, and they
dyed desperately in disgrace and ignominy: And their memory shall be cursed
throughout all Generations.

What Cause have we then, and how many ways are we provoked to trust in God,
and to love and worship him, that so miraculously has defended us; especially
since it is to be feared, that he in his just displeasure for our
unthankfulness, did give us up and our late Blessed Sovereign to the
unreasonable violence of most ungodly and blood thirsty men; and oh that all
the undutiful company who promoted that sad Rebellion, would consider of this
and our late good providence, and repent from their Hearts of the great evil
they have done, lest vengeance overtake them also. Let us therefore lift up our
hearts to God, for he has put a new Song of Joy and Thanksgiving into our
Mouths, and mercifully taught us, to lift up our Eyes to him from when comes
our Salvation. Psalm. 121. Our help comes from the Lord which has made Heaven
and Earth. He will not suffer our Feet to slip, for he that keeps us will not
slumber, for behold he that keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. The
Lord is our Keeper, the Lord is our Defense at our right Hand. Which God of his
Infinite Mercy still stretch out to our Protection, and continue us in Peace
and Quietness, from the treacherous practices of the Jesuited Papist, and the
bold and Rebellious Outrages of Sects and Schism. And let all the people say
Amen.

IN January following a Commission was issued out to several Judges of both
Benches for the Trial of those Traitors: who sat on the 27th. of that month,
and gave sentence of Death upon them: and on the Thursday following, Sir
Everard Digby of Gothurst, in the County of Bucks; Robert VVinter of Hodington,
in the County of Warwick; Grant of Yarthbrook the same County, and Bates,
were Executed at the West end of Paul's; on the next day, being Friday, Thomas
VVinter, Keys, Ambrose, Bookewoood of Staningfield in that County Esquire, and
Fawkes were Executed in the Palace-yard at Westminster.

Sir Everard for his good parts was pitied, the rest were sorrowful for
themselves. It is observable that in Catesby, the Name and Family of that
Counselor and Privado of Richard the Third, who was also the betrayer of his
Patron, the Lord Hastings expired; one sin punishing another in the like Guilt.
Francis Tresham of Northamptonshire Esquire, another of the Conspirators,
remained about Court and fled not, put proffered his ready service for the
suppression of his Fellows, yet suspected of partaking with them, he was
committed to the Tower, where before their Arraignment as aforesaid, he dyed of
the Strangury; Garnet the Jesuit, who concealed this Treason, was executed
likewise in March following, who confessed his Fault.

So ended the Unfortunate Traitors, giving us cause to say, Soli Deo gloria.

FINIS.

