Idea Longitudinis: Being, a brief DEFINITION Of the best known AXIOMS For
finding the Longitude. OR, A more Rational Discovery thereof, than has been
heretofore Published.

By Edward Harrison, Lt.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold by Mr. Sellers, at the Hermitage; R.
Mount, at the Postern, on Tower Hill; and P. Lea, at the Atlas and Hercules in
Cheap Side, at the Corner of Friday-street, 1696.

To the Right Honorable, the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord
High Admiral of England, etc
My Lords,
IT is a saying in the Navy, He that knows not how to obey Command, is not
worthy to bear Command; and another saying I have often heard in the Navy. It
is hard for an Officer to know when he goes too fast or too slow, that is,
whether he is too severe in the Execution of his Duty, or too dull or slow; in
which Cases, it is sometimes difficult to please our Superiors, because of
their different Humors: As it is the Duty of a Subject to be True and Loyal to
his Prince, so it is the Duty of Servants, to be Faithful, Humble, and
Submissive to their Masters. I thought it my Duty, my Lords, Humbly to present
you with this small Treatise, not only as a Servant, but that whereas some part
of it may happen to fall under your Construction, more particularly the Chapter
concerning Magnetic Variation, which I Humbly Commend to your Joint Care and
Consideration, for the Improvement and Encouragement of Navigation, and
Amendment of Faults in the Navy, if I may presume to say there is any Faults
there; an Elegant Style cannot Reasonably be expected from Sea breeding: I am
not willing to seem tedious, if in my Discourse in this Book, you find some
small Faults; I hope your Wisdom will be pleased to Pardon, and Excuse them.

I am, my Lords, Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, EDWARD HARRISON.

PREFACE To the Reader.
AFter Columbus returned from his Discovery of the Land now called America, he
happened into Company with some Spaniards, who had the Vanity to tell him, that
he had done nothing, but what they could do as well as he; Yes, Gentlemen, said
he, now I have shown you the way; he called for a Hens Egg, and desired them to
make it stand on one end, (without leaning,) on a smooth and flat Table, they
all tried, but none of them could make it so to stand; he tried after them, and
made it stand, etc. so could they also, when he had showed them the way: I
doubt not but in a short time, there will be many Pretenders to the Longitude,
and to understand it better then I; be pleased to remember that I showed the
way (or can if I please.) Mistake me not; think not that I am designed in this
small Treatise, to Teach the whole Art of Longitude; Art Mathematick is very
Copious, part of which is Art Longitude, Ingenious and Compendious, requiring
much larger Volumes then this is; I say, I can (if I will,) God willing, show
you the true Principles, the right Radix, and Basis, whereon this Fabric may
be built; one Man might carry a Stone, to St. Pauls-Church in London, and lay
it on the Foundation, give Directions for Building the same, but he alone could
never have perfected, (as now it almost is,) that Stately and Glorious Edifice;
I may begin my work to Day, but what Encouragement I may meet with in carrying
it on, I know not; or if it may please God that I may live to see this Art
brought to such Perfection, as to be fit for Seamens Practice; some Years ago,
I presented a few Lines concerning this Art, to a Nobleman, or Person of
Quality, which Lines he little understood, and less regarded; which one of my
Friends understanding, well compared to casting Pearl before (...) I have been
informed of one who pretended to find the Longitude, and requiring a Gratuity,
was sent to Mr. -- to have his Approbation; I think they might as well a sent
him to a been Robbed; I Discoursed this Art with some Fellows of the R. S. whom
I found too much aiming at their peculiar Advantage; therefore I resolved to
appear on the Public Stage, in Print, Nevertheless, the Description is a
little Veiled, though it is what I thought convenient to Publish; As for my
Style, I understand not how to Express my Sentences, in Topical Syllogisms, or
Sophistical Rhetoric; if you meet with a plain Method, downright Reasoning,
and matter of Purpose, it is what I aim at; I know my Method differs much from
other Writers, I write the Truth to the best of my Knowledge, and value not
Carpels; and in spite of Envy, I presume to declare, That I believe there are
but few Mariners in England, that understand how to keep an Account of a Ships
way on the Sea, as well as I have done, or may do; and if I know more than
others, it is by Divine Authority, by Industry and Experience, by an Inborn
Idea, and Instinct in Nature; it was ordained for me by God Almighty, from my
Mother's Womb. My Knowledge in the Mathematics is but little, therefore I dare
not compare my self to the Learned Dr. Wallis, and many others, who have writ
large Vollumes of Geometry, Algebra, and Cubick Aequations. Brother Tar, there
have been in England, many Pretenders to the Longitude, and some have writ
concerning it: If thou have this small Treatise by thee, thou may find more
in it fit for thy purpose and Perusal, then in any former Book of this Nature;
there have been many Persons, when they have attained some Knowledge in
Cosmography, and Accidentally thinking on some of the ways contained in this
Book, believe they have found the Longitude, and trouble their Brains to little
purpose. Therefore, this Book is very convenient to ease their Brains, from
such Burdens; because it contains all the most noted ways, and Fundamental
Principles, whereby the most Learned of this Age, have endeavored to find the
Longitude; and whereas you may think that this Book does not wholly inform you
of any Practical Method, for finding the Longitude; yet it is hoped that the
said Science will become Practicable, in few Years, (and already is to the
Ingenious, but not to the Ignorant.) Till then I advise you, duly to consider
the Fifth Chapter in this Book, concerning Magnetic Variation, which if you
understand well, you have gained a Science, that for Seamen's Practice, is
little Inferior to the Longitude: How the World may esteem of this Book, I
cannot tell, but I hope it will be as a Safeguard, or means to save many a
Ship, from being Wreckt Ashore, and save many a Seamans Life. Some Blockheads
are apt to say, the Longitude cannot be found; no, no, it cannot Accidentally,
as a Sow does a T -- d in the Streets, but by Care, Diligence, and Industry, it
may be found, without which, it cannot be understood. Though we have been at
the Dutch for Hydrographical and Geographical Draughts; let us not go the to
French to learn their Use. But why do I reflect, I expect no Thanks for my
Pains, but to be reflected on again, as Harrison's Whimsies, or the like; I
pray forsooth, how many such Whimsical Inventions can my Countrymen boast of,
that they have not borrowd? I have often heard them boast of Drake and Candish
Sailing the World about, but not a word of the Portugueses that showed the way.
If any Envious Person pretend I have borrowed most of my Book, may he be
obliged to Quote the Authors, where I have not; I advise some Mathematick
Bookseller, for his and the Public Good, to Re-print Mr. Street's Astr. Car.
with its Appendix and Calendar, and to Add a New and more Easy Theory of the
Moons motion, by Mr. Halley or Mr. Newton; Tables of Jupiters Satellites, and a
Catalogue of fixed Stars, and their true places, by Mr. Flamstead, if they are
to be had; if not, to borrow from Mr. Cassini, and Hevelius. Some of the
ordinary Mathematicians may hate to be outdone by a Tarpolin, if they have
ought to say against him, its because his Practice and Experience may prove him
to be a more Competent Artist in Navigation then themselves: If I have
Committed some Blunders, the Name of Tar, and the Novelty of the Subject, may
Excuse me to the Judicious.

Your Friend and Servant, Edward Harrison.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. COncerning a first Meridian. page 1. Chap. II. A Definition of
Longitude. Chap. III. A Definition of Time, and Aequation of Natural Days.
Chap. IV. Of Automata's or Horological Self-movers. Chap. V. Of or Concerning
Longitude by Magnetic Variation. Chap. VI. Longitude by the Moons motion, by
her Conjunctions or Eclipses, and Apulses to fixed Stars, of her Illumination
by the Sun. Chap. VII. Longitude by Jupiter's Satellites. Chap. VIII.
Conclusion.
(...) Idea Longitudinis: BEING A brief Definition of the best known Axioms,
for finding the LONGITUDE, etc.
CHAP. I. Concerning a First Meridian.
Diverse were the Opinions of the Ancients, about the middle and Center of this
World; before Christianity, the European Heathens esteemed those places as the
Center of this World, where their Gods were chiefly Worshipped; as at Delphos,
for Apollo's Oracle, at Ephesus, for Diana's Temple, etc. The Primitive
Christians, believed Jerusalem to be the middle of the World; Ptolomy who lived
Anno Christi 138. begun his Longitude at the most Western parts, (as he
thought) at the Fortunate Islands, now called the Canaries. Lactantius was of
Opinion, that the Earth was a Plain, and not a round Body, and would not
believe there was any such thing as Antipodes, which is now received and
embraced for a certain approved Truth. Since the Earth's Globular Form has
been discovered, there have been many disagreeing Opinions about a first
Meridian; Geographers beginning at St. Michaels at Gratioso, at Pico; Some
begin at the Lizard of England, others at London, some at Paris: A Spanish
Merchant willing to prefer an Island to this Honor, writes, (viz.) Nullum
inveni inter Auctores, quos legebam concordiam; aliis Hesperides Insulae pro
primario meridiano placebant; quibusdam Corni Insula, pluribus fortunatae
Insulae, non nullis Palma Insula, aliis alia atque alia loca, etc. And a little
further proposes an Island he calls Abroxos, it lies toward the Coast of
Brasile; ought he not, think you, to have been complained of to the Pope, for
not knowing his Duty to St. Peter's Church in Rome. The Reason why many begin
their first Meridian from the Isles Azores, is because it is said thereabouts,
the Compass has no Variation, (concerning which, I shall say more when I come
to write of Longitude by Magnetic Variation.) Methinks they take up too much
breadth for a first Meridian, for suppose I were to draw a large Draught of the
Azores, or of the City of London, where must I place my first Meridian? a
Meridian-Line, in a Sea-Chart, or Map, is no bigger then other Lines, save only
so as to distinguish it from the rest; besides, Astronomers and Astrologers,
pretend to observe and Calculate, to Seconds of Time, and Motion; therefore our
first Meridian ought to be supposed to be a small narrow Line, or Circle. I
could Bafle and Impose on the World as our Predecessors have, false Arguments
for other places, from whence they might account their first Meridian. God
forbid I should be so wicked, Honor and Glory, and beginning of Good, belongs
to God; a first Meridian may be represented, and if the Heads of our Church and
State, think it good, let there be made a Figure, representing a first
Meridian, and Erected over St. Paul's Church in London, with this Inscription,
Glory be to God, good Will toward Men, this presents our first Meridian, etc.
this may be an Ornament to our Church; may it be Sacrilege for any of the King
of England's Subjects, to account any other Meridian a first Merid. save that
which passes right over St. Pauls-Church in London, cutting the Equinoctial at
right Angles, and passing through both its Poles. I hope this Advice may put a
Period to Cavilling about a first Meridian; indeed I may except against wicked
Captious, Atheistical Humors; for there was never any thing by the Wit of Man
so well devised, or so sure established, which in continuance of time has not
been corrupted. It is always Midday or Noon, in some part of the World. Every
Meridian is divided into four Parts, or four times Ninety Degrees, and
subdivided etc. They be Innumerable, but you may reduce them to what number you
please, as to 21600, or half so many, or more, or less, as is most convenient
for your purpose; they are all equidistant at the Equinoctial, and in every
lesser Circle, Parallel to the Equinoctial, but Incline nearer together until
they intersect one another in the Poles: I allow but one first Meridian,
beginning at St. Pauls-Church in London, or if occasion require, you may begin
at any other part of the same Meridian.

CHAP II. A Definition of Longitude.
CIrcles of Longitude on the Earth, have their beginning at any part of our
first Meridian, pass round the Earth, and terminate where they begun, may be
imagined to be infinite in number, but may be reduced to what number you think
most convenient for your purpose: There is but one great Circle, the
Equinoctial; all Circles parallel to it, are lesser and lesser Circles, as they
decline toward the Poles; each divided into 360, and subdivided, etc. and may
be accounted either Easterly, or Westerly, as the Practitioner pleases; it is
our design to measure the Arches of these Circles, by Astronomical
Observations, or otherwise, thereby to know our difference of Longitude from
our first Meridian, when we are either to the Eastward or Westward of the same.

Longitude in the Heavens is accounted on one great Circle, the Ecliptic, (you
may if you please, also Account it on lesser Circles, parallel to the
Ecliptic, but that is needless and not usual,) which has its beginning at the
first point of Aries, or where the Sun will be this Year 1696, March the 9th
Day, 3h. 21 20 P. M. it cuts the Equinoctial in two opposite points, in the
beginning of and its greatest Obliquity from the Equinoctial, (in these our
Days,) is 23 29, it ends where it begins. The Theory of the Planets, and
Stellary Motions, are accounted on the Arches of this great Circle, because in
their Revolution they respect the Ecliptic Poles, as their Center, (and the
Sun also) and not the Equinoctial Poles, (except the Earth only, in her Diurnal
Motion.)

Sydereal Longitude is accouted from the first Star of Aries, on the Ecliptic
also; it begins where the Ecliptic is cut by a great Circle, that passes
through the 1 of and the Ecliptic Poles; the difr. Long. between the 1 point
of, and the 1 of is this Year the 9th Day of March, 28 52 9 which difr. is the
praecession of the Aequinox.

CHAP. III. A Definition of Time and Equation of Natural Days.
Atque in se sua per Vestigia, Volvitur annus.

Virg.
OLD Style, or Julian Year, is our English Account, contains 365d. 6 h. of
Astronomical years, there are diverse kinds, but I shall only mention two, the
Solar, or mean Tropical Year, is 365d 5h 49 1 the Sidereal Year is 365d 6h 8 30
the natural Day in most parts of Europe, is divided into 24h the Suns (or
Earth) mean motion in the Ecliptic in 24h is 59 8 the longest natural Day is
361 1 15 the shortest is 360 57 10 the difr. in one Day is but little, but in a
Months time is considerable; each difference adjusted is called Aequation of
natural Days; the shortest natural Day, will be this Year the 18th Day of June,
when the Sun is in 7 of Cancer, or thereabouts, for then the and are in their
Apogaeon (or Auge, Apoge, Aphelion, Absis, have all one Signification in
Astronomy,) the 17th Day of December, they will be in their Perigaeon, or
Perihelion, or nearest distance; this Inequality of Natural Days, seems to me,
to be the cause why our Summer half Year is (now in our times,) almost Eight
Days longer, than our Winter half Year; as also it is the cause of the
Impossibility of any Clock, or Watch. (though they move very regularly,) always
to show the true time of the Day; Mr. Parker in his Almanac, teaches us when
to Add or Substract the Time aequated to or from the mean time, to accord with
the Apparent Time: In most Books of Astronomy, there are Tables for our
purpose, Vide Astr. Ang. lib. 3. p. 84 and 85. Canones Aequationum Dierum
Naturalium; and Canones Equationis dierum Naturalium, duabus praecedentibus
Composit. and nostro huic Seculo citra errorem sensibilom subservien. And Ph.
trans. N. 214. pa. 248. Tabulas aequationis Dierum, cum Solis loco adeund. etc.
All which Tables you must well understand, before you can attain to Practical
Longitude, (except Magnetic Variation,) it may seem necessary here, that I
show how to find the time of the Day or Night by Observation; there are many
ways Published in several Mathematick Books, but I shall reduce them to one,
(for I think Mr. Molineux's Sciotericum Telescopium, will do us little or no
service) right way, and commend you to Colson's Callender, see his Astronomical
Problems, Prob. 9 and 10. instead of Hours and Minutes, work by Degrees and
Minutes; and whereas I said that 360 59 8 was equal to 24 Hours; you may work
only by 360 for when you observe in the Night, it is supposed you take the
Sun's right Ascension exactly true, at that very Time and Place of your
Observation, allowing for the Suns Diurnal difference of R. A. also allowing
for your difference of Longitude, from our first Meridian, else all your
trouble may prove good for nothing. As yet I have never seen any Universal
Ring-Dial, or other Sun-Dial, that showed the true Time of the Day, (except
about Noon) our Dialists thinking the Suns Refraction not worth their notice,
but those that pretend to find the Longitude, must duly consider Refractions
and Parallaxes.

It seems not proper in this Chapter, but I think it convenient to add
something concerning Instruments; common Practice, and Experience teaches,
that a Forestaff is a useful Instrument, both for backward and forward
Observations; I have also had Experience of it my self. and for forward
Observations, I like it not (and for backward Davis's Quadrant is better;) for
in its use, there happen several Errors, hard to Correct; as the Excentricitie
of the Eye, and end of the Staff; a true Horrizon cannot be found by it in the
Night, but only guessed at; besides the height of the Eye above the Water, and
the great difficulty of seeing two Objects at once, that is the Sun or Star,
and the Horizon; for if the Star be high, whilst you are a looking for it at
one end of the Vane, you loose the Horrizon, at the other end of the Vane, or a
looking for one, you lose the sight of the other; therefore to avoid such
Errors, for taking Altitudes in the Night, I commend you to a Quadrant, with a
Pendulum from its Center; see the Figure of it in Moxon's Tutor to Astr. Prob.
13. p. 48. This Instrument may seem very troublesome at first, for want of Use
and Custom; use a weight of at least two or three Pound, with a small Wire, or
Catts-Gut; for taking small Heights, or Distances, you may use an Almicanter
Staff, for ordinary Uses; but if your Observation requires greater exactness,
Vide Tichonis Brahe, Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica, or John Heuelii
Machinae Caelestis pars prior, etc. instead of Instruments that resolve
Mathematical Questions, as Sectors upon Quadrants, Analemmas, etc. Stick close
to the Doctrine of plain and Spherical Triangles, and to Logarithmical Tables;
but on better Consideration, the Quadrant in Moxons Tutor to Astr. aforesaid,
is not very fitting for Sea Uses, without some Alterations, therefore I have
contrived a Quadrant something like the former, with weights that Commands it,
so that it will always continue in the same position you direct it to; It may
be contrived to hang like a pair of Scales or Balance, having an Axis in its
Center, of Gravity, on which it is equally poised (without the weight) to turn
round, having a Swifle and Ring to hang or hook to any convenient place in the
Ship, or those that please may have a Stand purposely for it; there must be a
small Line, or slippery Cord or Cords fastened somewhat slack, from Corner to
Corner, on the Circumference of the Quadrant, on which Cords hang the weights
of 20 or 30 Pound, or more or less, as you find most convenient for the
Substance or Radius of the Quadrant; from the said weights, or rather from that
part that slides on the Cords, may come two Indexes, one to point to the
Altitude on one side of the Quadrant, and the other, to the Comp. Altitude, if
the Quadrant be reversed on the other side; and those that please may also have
either Pendulum or Indexes, from the Center of the Quadrant, to point either to
the Degrees of Altitude, or Comp. Altitude: It is easily managed in blowing
Weather at Sea, or Ashore, and the Price not above 20 Shilling, I hope, for a
Common one; I am a little Proud of the Invention, however I forbear to Applaud
it too much, and to Print the Figure of it, till I have made further Experience
of it.

CHAP. IV. Of Automata's, or Horological Self-Movers.
MR. Blundeville. from Gemma Frisius, writes of a ready way (as he calls it,
(to find out the Longitude of any place, by some true Horology, or Watch; to
that purpose, Mr. Rook writes, viz: Ad momenta temporis accuratissime notanda
(quod in hujusmodi Observationibus est palmarium) perutile erit Oscillatorium,
ab Ingeniosissimo and candidissimo Hugenio feliciter excogitatum. There have
been some Experiments made at Sea for finding the Longitude by Pendulum
Watches, as you may read in the Ph. trans. N. 1. pa. 13. I know several Seamen
will buy this Book, that are not able to furnish themselves with a Set of Ph.
Transactions, therefore it may be convenient to Insert the following Narrative.

A Narrative concerning the Success of Pendulum Watches at Sea, for the
Longitudes.
The Relation lately made by Major Holmes, concerning the Success of Pendulum
Watches at Sea, (two whereof were Committed to his Care and Observation in his
last Voyage to Guiney, by some of our Eminent Virtuosi, and grand Promoters of
Navigation,) is as follows. The said Major having left that Coast, and being
come to the Isle of St. Thomas, under the Line, accompanied with four Vessels,
having there adjusted his Watches, put to Sea, sailed Westward, seven or eight
Hundred Leagues, without changing his Course; after which, finding the Wind
favorable, he Steered toward the Coast of Africa, North North East, but
having Sailed upon that Line, a matter of two or three Hundred Leagues, the
Masters of the other Ships, under his Conduct, apprehending that they should
want Water, before they could reach that Coast, did propose to him, to steer
their Course to Barbados, to supply themselves with Water there. Whereupon the
said Major, having called the Master and Pilots together, and caused them to
produce their Journals and Calculations, it was found that those Pilots did
differ in their Reckonings, from that of the Major; one of them Eighty Leagues,
another about an Hundred, and the third more; but the Major Judging by his
Pendulum Watches, that they were only some thirty Leagues distant from the Isle
of Fuego, which is one of the Isles of Cape Verd, and that they might reach it
next Day, and having a great Confidence in the said Watches, resolved to Steer
their Course thither, and having given Order so to do, they got the very next
Day about Noon a sight of the Isle of Fuego, finding themselves to Sail
directly upon it, and so arrived at it that Afternoon, as he had said. These
Watches having been first invented by the Excellent Monsieur Christian Hugens
of Zuilchem, and fitted to go to Sea, by the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Kincardin, both Fellows of the Royal Society, are now brought by a New
Addition, to a wonderful Perfection; the said Monsieur Hugens, having been
informed of the success of the Experiment, made by Major Holmes, wrote to a
Friend at Paris, a Letter to this effect.

Major Holmes at his return, has made a Relation concerning the usefulness of
Pendulums, which surpasses my Expectation; I did not imagine that the Watches
of this first Structure, would succeed so well, and I had reserved my main
Hopes for the New ones: but seeing those have already served so successfully,
and that the other are yet more Just and Exact, I have the more Reason to
believe, that the Invention of Longitudes, will come to its Perfection. In the
mean time, I shall tell you, that the States did receive my Proposition, when I
desired of them a Patent for these New Watches, and the recompense set apart
for the Invention, in case of Success; and that without any difficulty, they
have granted my Request, commanding me to bring one of these Watches into their
Assembly, to explicate unto them, the Invention, and Application thereof to the
Longitudes, which I have done to their Contentment. I have this Week Published,
that these Watches shall be exposed to Sale, together, with an Information,
necessary to use them at Sea; and thus I have broken the Ice. The same
Objection that has been made in your Parts, against the Exactness of these
Pendulums, has also been made here, to Wit, that though they should agree
together, they might fail both of them, by Reason that the Air at one time
might be thicker, then at another. But I have answered, that this difference,
if there be any, will not at all be perceived in the Penduls, seeing that the
continual Observations made in Winter, from Day to Day, until Summer, have
showed me, that they have always agreed with the Sun, (I doubt the Truth.) As
to the Printing the Figure of my New Watch, I shall defer that yet a while; but
it shall in time appear, with all the Demonstrations thereof, together with a
Treatise of Pendulums, written by me some Days since, which is of a very subtle
Speculation.

I have read of a Glass Globe, that a King of Persia had, in which he could see
all the Celestial Motions; of the same kind with our Clocks and Watches,
though perhaps more Elaborate and Subtle, was that Sphere Invented by
Archimides, which did represent the Heavenly Motions, the Diurnal and Anual
Course of the Sun, the Changes and Aspects of the Moon. etc. This is frequently
Celebrated in the writings of the Ancients.

Jupiter in parvo cum cerneret aethera Vitro,
Risit, and ad Superos talia dict a dedit;
Huccine mortalis progressa potentia curae*
Jam meus in fragili luditur orb labor.
Jurapoli, rerumque fidem, legesque Deorum,
Ecce Syracusius transtulit art Senex.
Inclusus Vaaiis famulatur Spiritus astris,
Et Vivum certts motibus urget opus.
Percurrit proprium mentitus Signifer annum;
Et simulata novo Cynthia mense redit.
Jamque suum Volvens audax instria mundum,
Gaudet and humana sidera mente regit.
Quid falso insontem tonitru Salmonea miror?
Aemula naturae parva reperta manus.
I have heard from Dutch Seamen several Stories of a wonderful Sphere or Clock
at Strasburgh in Germany, which as they say, has or had a regular and
perpetual Motion, and showed the Celestial Motions, etc. Mr. Newton in his
Idea of Geography and Navigation, page 90 and 91. writes concerning
Automata's, or unerring Clocks, and says, that the nearer you advance within
the Artick or Antartick Circles toward either of the Poles, the Motion is so
much slower then at London; but in his Preface to the Reader* says, This
Paragraph, ought thus to be Corrected, that the further you advance toward
either Pole, their Motion is swisaer, and the further they are carried toward
the Equator, their Motion is retarded, etc. The cause wherefore these
Instruments may move swifter nigh the Poles, then near the Equinoctial, cannot
proceed from the Oval Form of the Earth, as some think; the cause of their
swifter Motion nigher the Poles, in my Opinion is cold Weather, and Frosts; I
believe that in England, in Frosty Weather, our Clocks move swifter then in
Summer, for in Frosty Weather, Springs may contract a little, and grow stiffer,
consequently have more force to make a swifter Motion; and in Hot Weather they
may extend, and be a little more pliable, therefore the Motion may not prove
altogether so swift as in Frosts: There are other Causes also, that may hinder
the regularity of their Motions; see Ph. tr. N. 47. p. 951. and 976. Some may
desire to know my Reasons for Springs, contracting in Frosty Weather, take a
piece of Cold Iron or Steel, one or two Foot long, about or of an Inch Square,
heat it red hot, keep heating and well Hammering it hot an Hour or two, when
you have done, measure its length exactly before it be Cold, lay it aside in
the Air, where the Frost may ting it a Winters Night, and if you measure it in
the Morning, you will find it considerably shorter. Experience teaches, that
there are few Watches that have a regular Motion; for it seems impossible, that
the Springs in all their parts, should be so exactly Hammered, as to draw
always equally, and by what I can learn from Watch-makers, a ballsnce Watch
that requires winding up every 24 Hours, keeps time more exact, than one
that goes a Week, before it need winding up. About Seven Years ago, my
curiosity carried me to Gresham College, when the Assembly was seated, the
President told me, they had caused several Experiments to be made with these
Instruments, and thought fitting not to commend them for Common Practice at
Sea, for fear that the Errors that might happen in their use, should prove
greater then the Errors in the common Practice of Navigation; but now let us
handle our Subject a little more closely, and suppose that three or four of the
said Watches being good work, well made, and carried to Sea in one Ship under
the Command of Ingenious Men, may prove very useful toward the keeping a true
Account of a Ships way on the Sea, not for finding the Longitude from our first
Meridian, but to help to find your difference of Longitude every 24 Hours, or
every two or three Days, as often as you observe the Latitude; provided they be
not too much tampered with, keeping the Indexes always moving, but never move
them with your Fingers, except extraordinary occasion require it; desire not
that they should always show you the true time of the Day, (you may if you
please, keep one for that purpose besides,) but learn by continuance of time,
to find the Motion of each Watch in a Year, or in a Month, or Day, and Hour,
and having the true Theory of each Watches Motion, with their equalities and
inequalities, you may by Calculation, find at what time of the Day or Night the
Indexes of each Watch, (for I suppose, they may not all move just alike,) will
point to such or such an Hour, Degree, or Minute, in any Meridian; keep them
from being hurt by any Violent Motion, as falls, or knocking near them; keep
them from Winds, from too moist Airs, and stinking Fumes; such as are when Salt
Water Casks are emptied on Deck, or in a Ships Well, where Men have been
Stifled; keep them very clean from Salt Water, or any Rust or Filth; let there
be a place in the Ship, properly appointed for them, to hang in Equilibrio. I
find in the Ph. trans. N. 47. p. 937. Instructions concerning the use of
Pendulum Watches, for finding the Longitude at Sea, together with a Method of a
Journal for such Watches, etc. Brother Tar, if these Automata's could speak,
(as the Welsh Man thought,) they would tell thee, they hate Novices; and if
thou art so, they may not bite thee, but they may happen to break thy Head, or
do the some other Mischief; or in a more plain meaning, I dare not approve of
their use for the difference of Longitudes, except only in an East or West
Course, or in Case of some unknown Currents, use thy discretion. The Watches
that are now esteemed most useful, have a Pendulum Spring to regulate the
Motion of the balance; those that desire to know more of these Automata's and
Mechanical Motions, may read Bishop Wilkin's his Mathematical Magic.
Water-Glasses, 24 Hour Sand-Glasses, and such like Self-movers, are of no use
in this Science, though I have mentioned them for Vulgar Satisfaction only; but
of what use Mercurii or Quicksilver may prove in keeping time true by the
regularity of its Motion in Glasses, I cannot yet inform you.

CHAP. V. Of or concerning Longitude, by Magnetic Variation.
THE Variation of the Compass (by which I mean the deflection of the Needle,
from the true Meridian,) is of that great concernment in the Art of Navigation,
that the neglect thereof does little less then render useless, one of the
noblest Inventions Mankind ever attained to; I desire the Ingenious Seamen,
that the Knowledge of Magnetic Variation, may be always in his great Esteem;
for without it, Navigation cannot be perfect. It is my Opinion, that many Ships
have been put by their designed Ports, and more Ships lost for want of knowing
the Variation, then has been lost for want of the Longitude; how many Ships in
Sailing from the South-f^re-land, to the Maese, has been put to the Northward
of the Maese, for want of minding the Variation? for the like cause, some Ships
have missed the Island Barbados, and met with other dismal Accidents. Mr.
Edward Wright, an able Mathematician in his time, in the latter end of his
Correction of Errors in Navigation, did write concerning the Haven finding Art,
by the Variation of the Mariners Compass, but alas he knew nothing of the
Variation of the Variation, or as I call it, of the Increase and Decrease of
the Variation in the same place; therefore that part of his Book proved very
Erroneous, by supposing that the Variation at any place, never Altered, now we
know better.

There are many of Opinion at this present time, that the Longitude may be
found by the Variation of the Magnetical Horizontal Needle; I doubt the
possibility thereof, from our first Meridian, for many parts of the World will
afford us no Practicable proportions for the difference of Variation between
them, according to their distance in Longitude; nor can the quantity of the
Earths Atraction, be easily determined in all places, besides the quantity of
each Polar Atraction, for there are four, at least two, of them lie in the
bowels of the Earth, and not in the Air, as Mr. Pond says; it is probable that
these Magnetic Poles have a Motion from North to South, but whether they move
altogether with one Motion, or with several; whether equally, or unequally;
whether Circular or Libratory; if Circular, about what Center? If Libratory,
after what manner, are Secrets as yet unknown to Mankind; That which I call the
more proper North Magnetic Pole, Predominates at London; and the Period of its
motion, as some say, is about 370 Years; and others write, that the Period of
the Motion of the American Pole, is about 700 Years; some think the Magnetical
Inclinatory Needle, always points directly to one of these Poles, which I dare
affirm to be an untruth, and can prove it by Practice, Experience, and
Infallible Demonstrations. The mean Motion of the Variation here at London, is
about eight Minutes, or somewhat more in one Year; it is my Opinion, that most
places in the World, have not altogether so swift an Alteration of the
Variation, as at London; but in many other places it is a little slower,
especially near the Equinoctial; for the nearer one of these Poles is to any
place, there increase or decrease of the Variation may be swiftest. As the Sun
in the Tropicks, differs his declination but slowly, so the Horrizontal Needle,
is in its slowest Motion, when it has the greatest Variation East or West, at
London; and whereas some places have above 22 or 30 Degrees Variation
North-Westerly, I doubt those places will not have above 22 Degrees. Variation,
North-Easterly, in one Revolution of the said Poles. That all Magnetical
Needles well touched, have the same direction exactly, as Mr. Sellers has
proved by many Experiments, see Ph. tr. N. 26. p. 478. but if badly touched,
they may vary sometimes one or two Degrees from the true Magnetical Meridian,
as often happens at Sea, as our Mariners say, that the Compass in the upper or
lower beetackle, sometimes varies near half a point from each other; I have
often taken notice of their expressions, and tried to find the cause; and when
I found no Iron near them, (or the like Obstructions,) that might draw me off
the Compasses, I have found that one, and sometimes both, had a a weak touch,
or Old and Rusty, and good for nothing, except to throw overboard, etc. Five
Hundred such Compasses, I believe, at this present writing, may be found
belonging to the Navy, etc. A true Knowledge of the Variation is very requisite
in keeping a Sea reckoning; it troubles me to think what Ignorant Persons are
Masters of Ships; it is scarce two Years since, in my company, some Masters of
Ships, complained of a wrong Course steered by their Comodores, who in the
Night by a fair Wind, were carried too near the Borlings, even so near, that
some of them were obliged, (as I was informed) to go between the Borlings and
the Main. This Error happened for want of good understanding Masters in the
Comodores Ships, they knew not the Variation, else forgot to allow for it; for
though the true Course from the Lizard to Cape Finister be S. S. W. the Course
to be Steered by Mariners Compass, at present, is S. S. W. W. and S. W. by S.
It is scarce one Year ago, (to this present writing,) since a Master of a --
Rate Ship told his Captain, that he observed 14 or 15 Degrees. Variation about 6
Leagues off of Malhago by the Stars, (there is about 6 Degrees.) If I may compare a
Man to a block, that same Man knew little more how to find the Variation by the
North Star, or any other Star, than a Buggilug or Bracket on that Ships
Quarter; I doubt whether or no, he ever saw an Azimuth Compass. When you would
observe the North Star, to find the Variation in the Night, consider its
distance East or West from the Pole; a Nocturnal may be of good use in this
Case. England does not know how many losses has happened for want of a better
Knowledge in the Variation of the Compass through only a Pilot of a Ship:
suppoie between the Bunt-Head and the K. K. or Gunfleet, if he understands not
the Variation, he may in my Opinion, as well deserve a Rope, as a Branch. But
the Extra.-Pilots will blame me for mentioning Variation or Course in Pilot
Water, where the Strength and Course of Tides and depths of Water, is of much
more Consequence. My Lord's Commissioners of the Admiralty, etc. You have been
pleased to give us a Form to keep our Journals at Sea; there is in my Opinion
two Columns wanting in that Form, that Column for Longitude. If you please, my
Lords, let it be accounted from our first Meridian; may there be added one
Column called Meridian Distance by plain Chart, and accounted from the last
Land seen; and another for the Variation of the Compass. I have belonged this
War to Six several Rates in the Navy, and never saw an Azimuth Compass Aboard
any of them; my Judgment tells me, that every Ship of War, requires at least
three such like Instruments, to observe the Variation, though they ride only at
an Anchor, at the Nore, or in the Downs; the Commissioners of the Navy have
taken Care to provide such Instruments, and I believe the Masters of Men of
War, may have them for asking for, (for the Boatswains Indent for them.) I
believe they are ashamed, (or ought to be;) for some of them knows not what to
do with them; the Instruments if well used, may be a means to help to save a
Ship, and Ships Companies lives; they are good to be used for the Instruction
of Ships Company and Youth, there is Education in the Navy, (little enough,)
that is good: Navigation seems to decay, or decline; I wish it be not a Crime,
for some Gentlemen in the Navy, to understand it. Now I will say something to
my Honorable Company Masters; little do they know, how many Ships have been
lost for want of a better Knowledge of the Variation; I believe I could name
some, (and several in great danger by report,) but dare not fear of the Law:
Captain William Wildey understood the Variation very well in my Opinion, I
believe it was almost as good to him as the Longitude between St. Hellena, and
any part of the East Indies. When I was in East India, I understood what
Variation there was in most Adjacent Parts so well, that I have offered in
Discourse in Company, to go in a Ship that set Sail from any part of the Coast
of India, bound any way, two three or four Hundred Leagues, I would keep no
Account of her way for a Week or ten Days time, and any fair Day when I could
have Reasonable Observations, I would a told them the place where the Ship was,
as well as they that kept the most exact Reckoning, (almost as well, if you
please) provided they had not seen the Land since I saw it; and this I must
have done by the Lattitude and Variation observed, October the 30th, 1688. in
the Offing at Cape Bona Esperance, the Cape bearing from us about North,
distant 6 or 7 Leagues; the mean Variation by three Azimuth Compasses, and Nine
Observations, was 10 N. Westerly; the same Year, November the 16th, Variation
at St. Hellena, 1 4 N. Westerly, the difference is 8 56 the the Meridian
distance, by plain Chart, is 20, difference of Longitude is 21 54, in Sailing
directly between the two aforesaid places we raised or laid (Sea Terms,) the
Variation somewhat gradually, therefore having the difference of Longitude, and
the difference of the Variation given between the two said places, it may be
supposed that the difference of Longitude between the places, may be found by
Observation of the Variation; I answer yes, it may be nearly guessed at, and I
know how to make proportions for finding the difference of Longitude by the
Variation, not only between the two aforesaid places, but in many other places.
But it is a Method I do not approve of, and advise the Industrious Seamen not
to use it, (except in Cases of great Necessity,) but rather to learn by former
Journals, or from some Experienced Artist, what Variation is at such places
where you are bound to, and all along your Voyage as near as you can,
notwithstanding the Variation of the Variation: I believe the difference of the
Variation between any two places in East India, may be always near the same;
and not only there, but in most other parts of the World (near the Isles Azores
excepted,) that are not above 20 or 30 Degrees distant asunder; this I
recommend as a Secret, worthy Observation. But there are several places that
will not allow of any proportions like the former; as the Downs, the Chanel of
England, and several Degrees Westerly, from Vshant; there is but little
difference in the Variation: The Variation also alters apace in Sailing N. or
S. under the same Meridian, not always gradually, but in some places faster
then in others. It is found by Experience and Practice, that the Morning
Variations are the greatest, as I have found sometimes near 30 Minutes; and my
Opinion is, that this difference happens not from the Oval Form, or Eliptical
Motion of the Earth, but that the Suns Refraction is considerably greatest in a
Morning; if the Suns greatest Refraction be but 34 as our Astronomers affirm;
how came it to pass, that some Englishmen and Hollanders, that Wintered in
Green-land, and Nova Zembla, saw the Sun five Days sooner then was expected,
according to the Latitude of the place; but to prevent the former difference or
Error, substract the Suns Refraction from the observed Altitude, allowing the
Refraction, when the Sun is in the Horizon, to be a few Minutes more in a
Morning; then in the Evening; I cannot at present Certify you how many Minutes
the difference is, because I have lost my former Amplitudal Observations. It is
a Fault in our East India Commanders, that they have not used to Substract the
Suns Refraction, etc. (they commonly take the Suns Declination from the
preceding Noon, which is also a great Fault.) Vide Astr. Ang. page 94. Tabula
Refractionum Triplex. But near the Poles it is probable, the Suns Refraction is
greater, then near the Equinoctial: If the Variation of the Compass were better
known, and Tables of the Variation, for all the most noted parts in the World,
as Headlands, Capes, Islands, etc. The Tables Calculated to a certain Year,
because of the Increase and Decrease of the Variation, and the difference of
the Variation, between those places; then the Knowledge thereof: would be
almost as good as the Longitude known, (some few places excepted,) and if there
be 10 or 20 Years difference, in laying or setting down the Variation in some
places, it matters not, provided the Year be set down, when the Variation was
so much at such places, and whether Increasing or Decreasing, as for Example;
suppose in the Year 1708, one should happen to be 10 or 12 Leagues South, off
of C. B. Esperance, and find the Variation 12 28 as I told you before, the
difference of the Variation between the said Cape and St. Hellena, is 8 56 by
which Rule, when you are at the said Cape, you may know what the Variation is
at St. Hellena, viz. 3 32 both N. Westerly, increasing; the like Examples may
be considered of most other places in the World, that are not above 20 or 30
distant asunder, (except about the Azores.) I present you with another Method,
viz. When we have such or such Variation at London, thereby to know what
Variation there is in any other part of the World; for if at this present
writing, I know exactly what Variation there was in all parts of the World, I
believe it would be no hard matter then by knowing the Variation at London, to
find what Variation there was in other parts, in future Ages. This Method I
recommend to the Consideration of the Ingenious, as also to see, if they can
find the Lattitude and Longitude of each Magnetic Pole; but some People with
think, I have writ nothing to the purpose, if I do not tell them wherefore
there is little or no Variation about the Azores; the quantity of the Earths
Attraction, is but little in some places, two Degrees or three, may be the
most, and in most places at Sea, the more solid parts of the Earth, have no
Attractive quality, for then the Needle is without the Command of the more
Magnetic Vigor of the Earth, as for Example, in the Year 1688, about 8 or 10
Leagues at Sea, in the Offing at C. B. Esperance, when we had about Ten Degrees.
Variation. I was told by Experienced Artists, that there was not above 7 or 8
Degrees. at most Variation Ashore, or in the Harbor at the Cape, which is a very
quick Alteration, for any where thereabouts, above Ten Leagues off at Sea, in
Sailing on any point of the Compass, 10 Leagues, you will not alter your
Variation above 12 or 14 Minutes at most: The like Experiment has been proved
on the Coast of India, and in the Meriterranean. Therefore it is evident, that
Promontories, Capes, and Head-lands, draw the Compass a little, and that only
when you are near them, within 10 or 12 Leagues; besides the Earths quality of
hindering it from pointing to its Poles; there are four Poles (at least) which
have a Sympathetical Virtue, with the Magnetical Needle, to which it naturally
inclines; two of them that are furthest within the Earths Orb, I call its more
proper Poles, and the other two in the Cortex of the Earth, the Magnetical
Poles; these four Poles draw the Needle, some one way, and some another, so
that they hold it amongst them, each requires a share; but that Pole
Predominates most, to which it is nearest: The Isles of Azores I account lies
almost between the two proper Poles, which two Poles always (for ought I know,)
bear N. and S. from those Islands, for there it is without the Attraction of
the Magnetic Poles; but I believe there is some Variation at the Azores, and
will be more in time. If the Magnetic Needle were very high up in the Air, it
would have no respect to the Earth, or to any Poles but its own, or Center;
this is my Opinion. The cause of the quick Alteration, and great Variation, at
New Foundland, and some other places; I would also tell you my Opinion, but I
am afraid of seeming tedious, with Tautologies.

In using Azimut Compasses, take care the Chart Librate well in the Box, and
that the point of the Brass Needle, on which the Chart Librates, be as exact as
may be, in its proper place or Center of the Box; trust not to one Observation,
when you can have the Medium of 5 or 6 or more, nor to one Amplitude, when you
may have the mean of 3 or 4 Azimuths; mind to substract the Suns Refraction,
etc. Suffer no great Guns, or other Iron, too near your Compasses; those are
best that have the quickest Motion, you may try the points of the Needle, by
seeing what Iron they will take up, but be very careful, and use it not often,
for you may spoil the Needle. With a Needle and round Loadstone, may be
perfom'd many Natural and pleasant Conclusions; but to think, that such a
Terrula, (as they call it,) has or represents the like Magnetic Force or
Power, in all Species as the Earth, is a weak and ridiculous Opinion; whereas
it may be thought in these parts of Europe, there is no occasion for carrying
Azimuth Compasses to Sea, because it may be supposed most Masters, knows what
Variation there is in most Adjacent places; it is a mistake, for the Major
part, nay of them, I believe, knows little or nothing concerning it, as I could
prove by manifest Examples; If I were to declare what I know, and sometimes
been an Eye witness to; but Truth ought not to be spoke at all times; besides,
I am not willing to disoblidge some Persons, that might think I reflect too
much on them; those Masters that have understood something of the Variation,
often forget it, for want of Azimuth Compasses, or for not being obliged to
give an Account thereof: I have known some Masters of Ships, that knew, (by
hear say from others,) that in such places, there was about half a Point West
Variation: I have asked them how they accounted it from what point of the
Compass, (pretending my self Ignorant,) they have answered, I might Account it
from N. or S. E. or W. or from any point, it was always Westerly; neither do
they know how to estimate the Variation in their Reckonings; but it may be
objected, how can the Masters be so Ignorant, that go and come well from Port
to Port; I answer Thickie, West-Country-Man, lock zure, Life and Soul Man, can
carry a Ship to New Foundland zure, and near a word a Book zure; this is by
long Experience and Custom, not by Art; I have seen the Blind lead the Blind a
Begging; I knew two Blind Men in Cochin, that would go very readily to any
House in that Town, and I have sent one of them an Errand two Miles into the
Country, but they were both born Blind; therefore by long Experience and
Custom, they naturally know most Adjacent places. As to Masters or Pilots,
their carrying Ships in and out of Harbors, and for the Coasting part, (when
they can see the Land,) I have nothing to say against them: And if a mischance
happens, you will rarely find any of them without a lying Excuse to salve their
Ignorance. But it may be said, the Masters make Observations, and keep a
Reckoning, yes, so they do, and a very bad one oftentimes. I will acquaint you
how they do, that knows not how to allow for the Variation, as they ought; it
is likely they can tell, whether they have Sailed between the South and the
East, or S. and W. or N. and E. or N. or W. having wrought their Days Work by
Log and difference. Lattitude and Departure, they find what did. the Ship has
run by Log. so having that did. and diff. Lattitude by Observation, they can
find, (as they think,) the Departure, without allowing for Variation; and this
kind of Reckoning, is the cause of so many great Mistakes, in their Easting and
Westing; for the Log. is but a false supposition, to find the distance run, as
has been Experienced in one Fleet, where some have had 70 Miles on the board,
some 80, and others about 90, the same 24 Hours, and all the while, not above a
League asunder. Now I will acquaint you with the best known Common Method, for
keeping an Account of a Ships way on the Sea. Be as curious as possibly you
can, in observing the Suns Meridian Altitude, or for want thereof, some known
Stars to find the Lattitude by; if you observe with Davis's Quadrant, see your
Vanes very carefully and exactly placed, especially the Shade Vane; when the
Horizon is very clear, observe somewhat close, when hazy a little more open;
these cautions I give, that you may observe every Day alike, and thereby the
better to Judge of your true difference of Latitude by Observation, then work
your Days work, and find what Course the Ship has made, as near as possibly
you can find it, by allowing for Lee-way Variation, etc. (or lying by, or any
other Impediments, as Tides or Currents, or a great Sea,) and having the true
diff. Latitude by Observation, and the Course given, you may easily find the
distance run, and departure by the common Method, and difference of Longitude
by Mercator, etc. It is my Opinion, that the use of the Log. is good to help to
find the Ships Course, though there are some able Artists that use no Log. but
now to our purpose again, as for Mr. Bond's Longitude found, (as he called it)
he limits his Hypothesis to the City of London, affirming himself (as he had a
great deal of Reason,) that the same Calculus is not sufficient for other
places, whereby it appears, that his Rule is far short, of the so much desired
general one. The following digression may please some Capacities: Famianus
Strada, in the Vein of Lucretius, writes, viz.

Magnesi genus est lapidis mirabile, cui si
Corpora ferri plura Stylosve admoveris, inde
Non modo vim motumque trahent, quo semper ad Ursam,
Quae lucet vicina Polo severtere tentent.
Verum etiam, etc.
Outinam haec ratio scribendi prodeat usu;
Cautior and citior properaret Epistola, nullas
Latronum verita Insidias, fluviosque morantes,
Ipse suis princeps manibus sibi conficeret rem,
Nos soboles Scribarum emersi ex aequare nigro
Cousecraremus Calamum Magnetis ad Oras.
But this Invention is altogether Imaginary, having no foundation on any real
Experiment. The Royal Society in London, have a great Lodestone found in
Devonshire, that will move a Needle, at 9 Foot distance: Some Persons may
happen to Read this Chapter, that understand not Navigation, and think that
most Ships are lost for want of understanding the Longitude, or the Variation;
I say, I believe such Accidents may have happened, but very rarely; for most
Ships have been lost by many other Accidents, as Storms, or the like; Example,
our great Loss by Storms lately in the Streights of Giblaterra, and the late
Hurricane at Barbados, in which Ships I believe, were some as able Seamen, and
Experienced Artists in Navigation, as the World did afford. The finding the
Lattitude by the Inclination of the Inclinatory Needle, is at present thrown
out of Doors, as of little or no account, as well it may, if we will be such
Novices, as to confine the Inclinatory Needle in a narrow Cycloid, as commonly
it is, by which means, it becomes useless at Sea, and not manageable; therefore
it ought to be contrived, to hang in Equilibiro, so that it may have a free
Circular Motion, any way on its Center of Gravity, and then it will much easier
show the Inclination, and Variation also, if need require it; and if the Theory
of its Inclination were known, (all the World over) we might also find the
Latitude by it.

The following words were forgot at the end of the 4th Chapter, viz. Our
Countryman Mr. Watson, who made an Ingenious Clock (for our late Queen) which
shows the Celestial Motions; and Monsieur Didiers Celestial Globe, showing
the apparent Motions from East to West, and from West to East, of the Sun,
Moon, and fixed Stars, see Ph. Tr, N. 136. p. 895. I think a Globe may be
projected, and made like the later, that may show Latitude, Longitude, Sun or
Stars, Horary distance from the Meridian, and Variation, etc. But it would be
too costly for ordinary Uses, and nothing hinder its Truth or equal Motion,
more then the different Temperatures of Air and Weather, though we may
attribute something to the goodness of the Springs and Oils.

CHAP. VI. Longitude by the Moon's Motion, by her Conjunctions or Eclipses, and
Apulses to fixed Stars; of her Illumination by the Sun.
THE Question is yet unresolved, which time ought to be called the true
Conjunction or Opposition, whether when the Sun and Moon are in one Line
perpendicular to the Ecliptic, or perpendicular to the Orb of the Moon, or
when they are equally distant from the Nodes. Mr. Shakerley's Tabulae
Britannicae, precept, 15. page 67.

Let us Correct this Learned Mistake, and agree with most Astronomers, that it
is always New Moon, when the Sun and Moon have both one Longitude, from the
first point of Aries. The mean motion of the Moon, in one Natural Day is 13 10
35 her mean motion from the Sun in one Day, is 12 11 27 but in her motions, she
has many inequalities, for which purpose, Tables of her motions may be
required; I refer you to Astronomia Carolina, Astronomia, Harmonicae,
Astronomica Instaurata, Tabulae Britannicae, Astronomia Anglicana, Cursus
Mathematicus, Rudolphus's Tables, not forgetting Mr. Newton's, and Sir Jonas
Moors Tables; yet amongst them all, the Theory of the Moon's motion, remains In
perfect, and not easy to Calculate; many able Mathematicians have writ
concerning finding the Longitude, by the Moons motion: Mr. Norwood writ
something, but it was never Published; I have been informed, his Method was by
the Moons motion; concerning which, he writ a large Tract of her motion, and
contrived an Instrument for taking her distance from fixed Stars. Mr. Streets
way is unknown to me, but we suppose his way by the Moons motion also, by his
contriving an Instrument, for taking Angles by Reflection; I have seen the
Instrument, but he could not bring it to perfection, which I gather from those
who have had some Cognizance thereof; see his Appendix to Astr. Car. I have
seen a Pamphlet writ by John Herne, wherein his Method for finding the Moons
Southing, is very Erroneous, as also, almost all the rest of it; you may
believe the like of Theakers Book, and Wooden Tools; these I mention, that
Seamen be not deluded by such Foolish Tools and Pamphlets. There is a late
Author says, viz. find the true Moment of time, in which the Moon comes to the
Meridian, and thereby the Longitude of any place may be found after this
manner, etc. in answer thereto, Sir, I assure you, the Longitude is not to be
found after your manner, nor by any of your Methods, till better Taught. I
presume I know better then your self, what belongs to Meridian Altitudes,
especially at Sea; and if you please to learn from me, that when the Sun has
South Declination, 20 or 23; and in North Lattitude, 50 or 60 it is too
difficult a matter to find Noon or Midday, by any usual Sea Instrument, within
two or three Minutes of time; our observers commonly begin to observe a little
before the Bell strikes Seven, and in the aforesaid Latitudes, it is common to
observe till a quarter of an Hour past 12 a Clock, before they can perceive the
Sun falling (as they call it,) but when the Sun is within twelve Degrees of
your Zenith, then be very quick to attend, or else you may lose your
Observation; the like of the Moon, or any Star; any other time of the Day is
more easy and true to be found at Sea, then Noon. An Old Experienced Navigator
pretended to know, how to South the Moon by the North Star, on the Meridian; I
asked him how often he has seen the Moon and North Star on his Meridian, both
at one time, as also how we must do in South Latitude, to North the Moon; and
if it were possible to find the time of Moons Southing or Northing, it is to no
purpose, to expect the Longitude thereby, considering we can have but one
Observation in 24 Hours, besides the Error of accounting her motion in our
first Meridian; there is no Calculation as yet so exact in any Almanac or
Ephemeris, that tells us the true time of the Moons Southing, in any Meridian
without Error. Mr. Newton writes, that from the Error of one Minute of an Hour
in the Moons motion from the Sun arises an Error of 7 12 in the Longitude of
the place propounded, and in the motion of the same Moon, from any fixed Star,
rises an Error of 6 48 and moreover (he says,) it is evident, that if the
Errors of both places be not of the same Denomination, and lesser then one
Minute of time; the Error of Longitude cannot be less then then 13 etc. The
Moons mean motion being but 13 10 35 is little in proportion to 360 therefore
the two Objections are very considerable; however, as I am a Favourer of the
Longitude, by the Moons motion, I will undertake to solve one Objection, and
propose how the other may be solved; then as to the first, I answer, that I
know how to find the true time (when we can have Reasonable Observations) of
the Day or Night, to one or two seconds of time; and if I Err 4 or 5 seconds,
it matters not, others may observe as true as I, if they be careful; in the
Practick part of Navigation, it very often happens, that one Error Corrects
another, as for Example: Suppose we Err 4 or 5 Minutes in the Lattitude, 2 or 3
Minutes in the Suns R. A. (or Dec. in the Day time,) 3 or 4 Min. in the Stars
R. A. and about as many in its Altitude; it is ten to one odds, but these
Errors, (if not much greater,) will so help to Correct one another, that you
will come very near the true time of the Day or Night; and what Blockhead will
trust to one Observation, when he can have the mean of 6 or 8 Observations; I
account him an Ignorant Observer, that Errs above 10 or 12 seconds of Time, Day
or Night; trust not to Mr. Seller's, Colson's, Norwood's, Newton's Tables of
the Suns R. A. for for they are of no use in this case. In observing the time
of the Night, be very careful to find the Suns R. A. true, for want of good
Tables of the Suns place, and R. Asc. Tables of the Suns place and Declination
may serve, with a little more trouble, for Example, Anno 1696, March the 19th,
at 3h A.M. 30 to the Westward of our first Meridian; I desire to know the Suns
R. Asc. The Tables of the Suns place and Dec. in most Books of Navigation,
wants Correction; Mr. Parkers Ephemeris, for this Year, gives the Suns place at
Noon, in our first Meridian, 9 44 Dec. 3 51 N. but 30 to the Westward, the
place at Noon, will in 9 49 and the Dec. 3 53 N. if you consider the Diurnal
difference of the place and Dec. you will find his place at the time proposed,
to be in 9 27 Dec. 3 44 N. then having the present Dec. say, as Rad. to Tang.
Comp. 23 29 greatest Declination, so is the Tang. 3 44 the present Dec. to the
Sine 8 38 the R. A. from at the time and place proposed; but there is a readier
way, having found the place, Vide, Astr. Car. Tabula Ascensionum Rectarum, and
against the place, is the R. Ascension, etc. This Example I thought fit to add
for Seamens Instructions.

In answer to the second Objection, that the Theory of the Moons motion is
false; it is not long ago since Mr. Thomas Street lived amongst us, who said
(as I have been informed,) that he was capable to perfect the Theory of the
Moons motion, so that her place might be as truly found by Calculation, as any
of the rest of the Planets, if he had Encouragement; 'twas ten thousand pities
he had not, but such is our English Ingratitude. There are now living in
England, two Men, that I believe are capable to perfect the Theory of the Moons
motion, which if either of them will be pleased to undertake, as also to
furnish us with large Maps of the fixed Stars, such as Dr. Sprat is pleased to
mention, Hist. R. S. p. 190. I may be capable to Practice and Instruct others
in the Practick part of Longitude at Sea; or the Ingenious may put it to
Practice, without my further Assistance: Tables of the Moons place, right
Ascension, and Declination, would be pleasing Easy, and more Intelligible to
our Seamen, if they be truly Calculated for Noon or Midnight, in our first
Meridian: But I think I can find as great Objections, as either of the former;
it is very difficult to contrive an Instrument (useful at Sea,) for taking the
Moons true distance, from fixed Stars, for if you Err but one Minute of motion
in the distance, it will produce an Error of about 28 in Longitude; and if the
Stars place which you take your distances from, happen to be one or two Minutes
false, the Error will be so much the greater; also Idleness is the root of
Ignorance, and many other Evils: Our Mathematick Schoolmasters, that Teach
Navigation, most of their Scholars when they come to Sea, are half to begin
again; a Seaman has much Night-work, as well as Day-work, it is convenient to
go to School at Nights, to learn to know the Stars, how to find the time of the
Night by Observation, and how to find the Moons place by Observation, I mean to
Practice it, for Examples are best Precepts; many able Mathematicians have writ
concerning finding the Longitude by the Moons Eclipses, concerning which, you
may find many Examples in Ph. trans. of the Royal Society, as also in a new
System of the Mathematics, by Sir Jonas More, in the Doctrine of the Sphere,
to which I refer you. It is more difficult to find the Longitude by an Eclipse
of the Sun, then of the Moon; because that of the Moon happens at one and the
same time, all over the World, but an Eclipse of the Sun appears various in the
various parts of the Earth; the duration of a Solar Eclipse, appears longer in
some places of the Earth, then in others, therefore the end of a Solar Eclipse,
happens not at the same Moment of time, all over the World. The Superior
Planets suffer no Eclipses, when the Earth comes between them and the Sun;
because the Conical Shadow of the Earth cannot reach them.

Anno 1688, October the 14th 12 40 Mer. did. West. (plain Chart) from the
Mauritius, I observed the Sun Eclipsed, at the end of the Eclipse the alt 27 35
Dec. 12 3 S. Lat. 31 6 S. will give the Hour of the Day, 10h 33 48 A. M. In our
first Meridian, the end of the Eclipse, happened by some Calculations, at 7h 15
A. M. the difference is 3h 18 48 converted into Degrees and Minutes, gives 49
41 Longitude East, from our first Meridian. The Penumbra of the Moons Disk,
signifies little or nothing; Astronomers make more ado about it then needs.
Brother Tar, have a care of peeping on an Eclipse of the Sun through a
Telescope, for endangering the Eyesight, as I knew one Captain Norgrave did: I
will tell thee the best way I know for observing Eclipses of Sun or Moon, take
a Looking-Glass, set it before thee, so that thou may see the Sun or Moon by
Reflection on the Glass, then with a Perspective, or two or three Foot
Telescope, look on the Looking-glass for the Sun, etc. or you may have smoaked
or red Glasses, to save the Eyesight. That the Longitude may be found by the
Moons Eclipsing any of the rest of the Planets, or any known fixed Stars, is as
certain, as by Eclipses of the Sun or Moon: If Mr. Halley was capable to
observe the transit of the Sun and Mercury, as appears by these words, viz.
Schema Solis ad ingressum Mercurii St. Hellena, Anno 1677, October. 28th, 9h 26
40 P. M. surely with ordinary Telescopes, we may be capable to observe, when a
Star begins to Culminate and limerge in (or near) the Moons Disk. Of or
concerning Longitude by the Moons Approach and Apulses to fixed Stars, this
some think will be the most Practicable way for Seamen, (yet mentioned) when
the Theory of the Moons motion is better known. Mr. F. has ingeniously written
to this purpose, in his Doctrine of the Sphere, Annexed to Sir Jonas Moors
System Mathematics, to which I advise you. It is said, that the Moon moves
swifter at New and Full, then at Quarters. To find the Moons place by
Observation, the most Ingenious Mathematical way is, by taking her distance
from two known fixed Stars; see Mr. Seller's Practical Navigation. The Doctrine
of the Sphere, problem 20. but few Seamen understand the Affection and Solution
of Spherical Triangles, that way is tedious and troublesome; I know Seamen care
not to take so much pains, besides the trouble of finding the Moons Parallax;
and contriving Instruments for taking her exact distances from fixed Stars; the
Moons place may be found Geometrically, by Scale and Compasses; or on large
Maps of the fixed Stars; first, knowing her distance from any two known Stars
in that Map; but an easier way is, if we could contrive an Instrument to take
her difference of Longitude from any fixed Star, at one distance, which I think
not impossible, especially when she is near the Meridian, or Nonagesima, and
then is the best time of Observing. Illuminatio Lunae per Solemn. see Mr.
Sellers, his Atlas Coelestis, in the Figure taken from P. Gassendi, Institutio
Astronomia, lib. 2 cap. 26. etc. The Moon being a round Body, and receiving its
Light from the Sun, it follows, that always one half of it, yea, somewhat more,
must be enlightened by him; for seeing that the Sun exceeds the Moon in
bigness, and that the bigger Spheres always enlightens above half the less, it
does follow, that above one half of the body of the Moon must always be
Illuminated. And seeing that the Moon alters her position, and in running about
the Earth, does variously Face the Sun; it must needs be, that according to its
various Access to, or Recess of the Sun, less or more of the Illuminated half,
will appear to us; which Variations of her appearances, are commonly called her
Phases. The Moon is never less Enlightened, then when she is at the Full, or in
opposition with the Sun; because when she is Full only, that part toward us is
Enlightened; whereas when New or in Conjunction with the Sun, she is wholly
Illuminated, that part which is then toward us, being Enlightened by the Earth,
and the other part that is turned from us by the Sun. For the Moon does not
only borrow her Light from the Sun, but receives some weak Illustration from
the Earth; because the Earth being an Opake Body, must of necessity reflect
part of her received Light; and forasmuch as the Earth is bigger then the Moon,
consequently more Light must be derived from the Earth to the Moon, then from
the Moon to the Earth. This is confirmed by Experience, because this Secondary
Light, as Galilaeus calls it, after the first Quarter, quite vanishes, by
reason of the Moons being too far distant, and without the bounds, to which the
reflected beams of the Earth reach. Le Grands body of Philosophy, see Fig. 30.
part. 5. Chap. 20.

Now if the difference of the Moons Phases, or the quantity of her Illumination
by the Sun, be mensurable by Instrument, then this Method may happen to prove
good for finding the Longitude. In the Ph. tr. N. 29. p 451. is a Description
of an Instrument for dividing a Foot into many Thousand parts, and thereby
measuring the Diameters of the Planets, to great exactness, etc. Also see Ph.
tr. N. 21. p. 373. concerning a way for taking the Diameters of the Planets,
and for knowing the Parallax of the Moon, etc. The consideration hereof I
humbly recommend to the Ingenious, more especially to the Royal Society of
London.

I had almost forgot; I desire you to take Notice, that one good Map of the
fixed Stars, may serve for ever, without Alteration (save that it may decay in
time, which bad usage, or a little Alteration, of the Suns Declination, which
is scarce worth our notice in one Hundred Years,) provided that either the
Equinoctial, or the Ecliptic Line, (in those Maps) be made to slide upon it,
and then it is only sliding them a little every Year, according to the
Praecession of the Aequinox; the like ought to be considered in Celestial
Globes and Planispheres; also one good Table of the fixed Stars places, may
serve for ever, by adding only the Praecession of the Aequinox.

CHAP. VII. Longitude by Jupiter's Satellites.
GAlilaeus, in the Year 1610, the 7th of January, at the first Hour of the
Night, discovered 4 less Planets about Jupiter, which like so many little Moons
are whirled round him. Those of them which are nearest to Jupiter, move more
swiftly, than those which are more remote. The Revolutions of those Secondary
Planets are thus Calculated; the innermost Satellite, revolves to the Sun in 1d
18h 28 36 so precisely, that in 100 Years, the difference is not sensible; The
Periods of the Revolutions of the other Three Satellites to Jupiters Shade, are
as follows.

d h Period Secundi. 3 13 17 54 3 Period Tertii. 7 3 59 39 22 Period Quaerti.
16 18 5 6 50

The Attendants of Jupiter, whenever they enter the Verge of his Shadow, do
suffer an Eclipse after the same manner, as the Moon does, when she dips in the
shadow of the Earth, and are totally deprived of Light, as being Opake Bodies,
which borrow their Light from the Sun. The 3 first of these in every
Revolution, produce 4 Eclipses; the first, when the Satelles enters into the
Rim of Jupiter; the second, when the shadow of the Satelles, does darken the
Rim of the said Planet; the third, when the upper part of Jupiter, at his
Elongation from us, does hide the Satellites; and the 4th, when the Satelles
dips in the shadow of Jupiter, so as that the first Satelles, within the space
of 7 Days, does effect 16 Eclipses; the second 8, the third, 4; so that all of
them together, produce 28 Eclipses; the fourth, after that he has reached the
Nodes, does make 4 Eclipses in 17 Days; but when near his bounds, he never
suffers a defect of his Light, because his Latitude is so large, that he never
touches the Rim of Jupiter, or reaches his shadow. These Eclipses are of great
use, in order to the determining of the Longitudes of places. Le Grand's
Philosophy. But the Eclipses for our purpose, is only the Immersion or Emersion
of the Satellites, in the Verge of Jupiters Shade. Many there are who prefer
this Phenomenon before others; because the Satellites of Jupiter have no
sensible Parallax; and in every position of Jupiter above the Horizon, (in the
Night, when Weather permits,) are conveniently to be observed, with a Telescope
of 12 or 15 Foot long, a fine danceing Instrument indeed at Sea, especially in
a Gale of Wind, (then not manageable,) to look through a Tube of 15 or 18 Foot
long, which has only two Glasses in it; and I have been troubled at Sea, to
find an Object with a Perspective of 1 Foot and a half long, which has only
two Glasses in it; therefore at Sea, for the better finding an Object, we
commonly use Telescopes with 3 or 4 Glasses in them, of three or four Foot
long, (the Telescopes) through which I have often looked for Jupiter, but never
could see his Satellites through one of that length; and what must we do for
the Longitude, when Jupiter rises and sets Cosmically or Acronically, as in
September, this Year: but we will suppose the best, that the Weather should be
so fair, and Sea smooth, that we may possibly get Observations two or three
times in a Month, indeed it would be a very great help and satisfaction to us,
if the Observations proved good. Mr. Colson, an able Mathematick Teacher, told
me, he had near one Hundred Observation by him, made at Sea, with a Telescope
of 6 Foot long, which he contrived with a convenient apparatus, for manageing
it. I have one 5 Foot long, in which I have seen the Satellites; keep your
Glasses very clean, especially the Object Glass, from Mists or Dews. I desire
to know what we shall do for Tables of Jupiters Satellites, for Years to come,
(always for four Years at least,) Mr. Parker in his Ephemeris, has inserted a
Catalogue of the Eclipses of Jupiters Satellites visible, under the Meridian of
the Observatory, (I suppose he means the King's Observatory in Greenwich-Park,)
or near it in the Year 1696. But what must they do for such Tables every Year,
that are in the West and East Indies; a late Author in his Book Printed Anno
1695, has inserted two Years Tables for the time past, viz. 1693 and 1694.
borrowed perhaps out of some old Ephemeris; it is well he said something of the
time past, its likely he knew little or nothing of what was to come; yet some
of our able Astronomers revile and reflect on our Seamens Ignorance, because
the Seamen, (as they say,) cannot find the Longitude, Indeed I think our Seamen
have most cause to rail at our Mathematicians, that have done nothing, (as I
know of,) to any purpose, for the Encouragement or Improvement of Navigation,
for almost 20 Years past, (except a Tide Table,) as I shall prove by Sellers's
Practical Navigation, the most useful Book for Seamen yet extant, and the
Impression worse now, then it was almost 20 Year ago; compare the Tables of the
Suns place and Declination, in the 7th Edition of the Practical Navigation,
with Tables of the Suns place and Declination in Parkers Ephemeris, for this
Year, and you will find considerable difference; and that the Impression was
better 18 or 20 Years ago, I prove by Page 330, viz. A Table of the Variation
of the Suns Declination, to be applied for Years to come, etc. If the Tables
were the same, as in Anno 1680, or thereabouts, we might by the said Table of
Variation, have Corrected the Tables of the Suns Declination, but there is
imposed on us, new dates of Years, etc. The aforesaid Book wants Correction
very much; there is wanting in it a larger Table of difference of Latitude and
departure, such a one as is in Colson's Calendar; the Tables of the Suns right
Ascension, ought to be more large, and Calculated to Degrees and Minutes, to a
certain Year, etc. Pardon this Digression, now to our purpose again; since we
are unfurnished with fitting Tables of all the said Satellites, I recommend you
to the best I know of, viz. See Ph. Trans. N. 214 p. 237. to 256. Monsieur
Cassini, his New and Exact Tables for the Eclipses of the first Satellite of
Jupiter, reduced to the Julian Style and Meridian of London, etc. But in
Calculating the Eclipses of the Satellite by the said Tables, there sometimes
happens an Error of 3 or 4 Minutes of time, I believe I know how to Correct
that Error, (though it has baffled the Ingenious,) and would a done it here,
if it had no required Figures or Cuts for Demonstration. Saturn has also five
Satellites attending him, but are not accounted so worthy our notice for the
Longitude, as the former, therefore I pass them in Silence.

The Sun, Jupiter, and all the rest, (except the Moon,) of the Planets, have a
Circumrotation in their own proper Vortex, as Telescopial Observations
testify, by several spots that appear in their Phases. Perchance it may be
said, why have not I furnished this Book with regular Tables of the Moons
motion, and of Jupiters Satellites: It would be a very unreasonable demand to
require them from a Man that has wanted both Books and Instruments, (till now)
also conveniences and opportunities, having only a small Cabin, sometimes not
high enough to stand upright in, nor my length to lie down in; insomuch, that I
have been obliged to borrow both Books and Instruments, for the common Practice
of Navigation, besides the Circumstances of my Imploys, and many other
Inconveniences, that might and did attend such Studies and Observations. I
will conclude this Chapter with the following words, which I take, to be the
Ingenious Mr. Flamstead's, viz.

As by Lunar Eclipses, so also by the Eclipses of Jupiters Satellites, the
difference of the observed Moments of the Occultation or Emersion of a
Satellite from his shadow, noted carefully in two distant places, will be the
difference of Meridians, betwixt these two places in time; but I cannot hope
that this Method shall prove of much use to the Ingenious Seamen, because the
Observations require long Telescopes, which in a Ship will hardly be
manageable; nor can we expect to find the difference of Meridians, by one only
Observation of a Satellite Eclipse, as we have hopes we may by a Lunar, by
reason that as yet, the inequality of their motions, and the time required for
the transmission of Light from the Planet to our Earth are unknown; nay, their
mean motions are scarce so exactly stated, but that we may Justly suspect them
Erroneous; omitting these therefore, the best Method for the discovery of the
Longitude, will be in my Opinion, (I am dubious, he is now of another Opinion,)
by the Moons Apulses to, or observed distances from fixed Stars, upon which
Accoun I would recommend the Improvement and Correction of her Theory, with the
Doctrine and Construction of Apulses, to the Study of the Ingenious Astronomer
and Seamen. Humanum est Errare, I had almost forgot, Mr. Newton has contrived
an Instrument for his own use, to see Jupiters Satellites by reflection, on
well polished Mettle; the Instrument is about 15 Inches long, as some say,
other 9 or 10 Inches, and call it a reflecting Telescope; I am informed it is
of little or no use. I have not seen any of them, therefore can give you no
better Description. I also add, To tell some Masters of -- of Jupiters
Satellites, is like telling a Story to a Bear; they know better how to manage a
Cann of Phlip. The setting and well-manageing a Telescope, is of great
Consequence.

CHAP. VIII. Conclusion.
OMnia probate, quod bonum est tenete. That which I have written in this Book,
I designed for the public good of Mankind; in which I hope I have not offended
God. If any Arts or Sciences, Commerce or Trade, be Good and Just in their
kind, then what I have writ concerning Longitude, is Good and Just in its kind,
that is, if it be not Abused: Though there was an Officer in the Navy, (as I
was informed,) who Cursed and Damned the Man that should discover the
Longitude; thou Old, Inveterate, Rusty, Musty, Filthy, Cankered, Carnal Devil,
for Cursing down upon thy Marrow-bones, (if thou have any,) and ask God
Almighty forgiveness for thy Sins, know that it it is not in thy Power to Damn
any Man but thy self: God who suffered the Earth to be Inhabited by Angels, for
an infinite number of Ages, before he Created Adam, and then expelling them
hence for their Wickedness, and turning them to Devils, gave this Globe for a
dwelling place to Men; grant that the enormous Crimes of Mortals, may not
provoke him to Exterminate our Humane Race, and restore the Devils to their
Ancient Habitations, Tur. Spy. Vol. 3. Page 359.

But as for that one Man, (I doubt there is more such,) aforesaid, I believe He
did not speak it then out of Ill Will to me, but to some other Person, or
rather rashly or unawares; I believe his meaning at that time was, that this
ungrateful World did not deserve so great a Blessing, or so worthy a Science. I
am thinking what my Country will be pleased to say of me, if they call me
Astrologer, I give very little Credit to Judicial Astrology, nor do I profess
any such deceitful lying Arts; if Maggoty, its an Expression for Fools, and
their bolt is soon shot; if Star-Gazer, I answer, a Star-Gazer is better then a
Booby; some may Envy me, some Laugh and Scoff at me, (a common Method to solve
their own Ignorance,) others Mock and Ridicule me; so our Predecessors did at
Columbus, when he came hither to offer them the discovery of the World, and
ought not they to have been Recorded for F -- s, as (some say,) the Pope was,
that Anathematized the Bishop of Scrasburg, for writing of Antipodes. But now I
think on it, I have a reserve which they are not like to know yet a while. As I
have heard say, the Venetians have offered Rewards; the States of Holland (as I
was informed,) some Years ago, took this Science so much into their
Consideration, that they offered Ten Thousand Pounds, to any Man that was
capable to discover it; Thomas Axe, an Englishman, left a Legacy of One
Thousand Pound, (never to be paid I think,) to any Person that should discover
the Longitude, within the space of Ten Years after his Decease, if his Wife and
Child died Childless in that time; besides, it is to be approved of by the four
Professors of Geometry and Astronomy, in Oxford and Cambridge, for the time
being, and at least twenty Experienced Masters of Ships, that shall have made
several Experiments thereof in long Voyages. Affidavits are to be made before
the Twelve Judges of England, etc. He dyed in the year 1691, and I think took
care enough, that the said one Thousand Pound should be Irrecoverable; indeed,
I have little better Opinion of either the Venetian or Dutch Gratuities; States
may be mistaken in their Policies; God Almighty never ordained that this
Science should be well known to the World, by fraudulent means, but if their
designs be real, (as you may suppose,) where is the Encouragement? I know not
how to recover my Cost and Charges, though I have laid (and shall the rest by
and by,) most of the ground work at my Charge; where is the Money to raise and
perfect the Work? There is -- Pounds wanting, present Pay, toward the Charge
of making two wonderful Instruments, for the first making of the Instrument,
will be very Chargeable; one of them may prove far more chargeable then the
other, and yet when it becomes common, it may be sold at a low Price, I Judge
under fifty Shillings; yet before the Instrument can be brought to such
Perfection, as to show two or three Examples, may cost several Hundreds of
Pounds, and for ought I know, take up most part of a Year, to accomplish them,
it is an Instrument that must be truly Cut and Polished, a small matter of a
false sweep or stroke may quite spoil it, and make it good for little or
nothing; therefore one Hundred of them may happen to be spoiled before we can
get the right Art of making them; neither of them will suddenly be fit for
Seamens Practice, because the Natural motions that one of them is to show, are
at this present writing, I believe, unknown to the World; therefore reasonable
time is required to Calculate the Theories of those motions. I will give you a
brief Description of one of the Instruments, it is one or two, I know not well
which to call it, it is round, its Diameter about 8 or 10 Inches, may be a good
size, it is not altogether flat nor Unequal, nor Concave, nor Globular, it
contains several Circles exactly swept even, to a Hairs breadth, the Areas of
each Circle, must have their just proportions, but have no visible point for a
Center, nor are the Circles Cut and raked in its Surface, but ought to appear
above it; it has no straight Lines, save only in its Frame of -- which must be
divided into 360 Degrees. and subdivided, etc. it is Scioptrick, Dioptrick,
Catoptrick, P -- S. -- K. and P. -- H -- K. and whereas most Secrets seem most
wonderful before they are discovered; this Instrument will seem most wonderful,
when the best Description is given of it, and when put to common use; to give a
true and perfect Description of its secret properties, like the Loadstone, may
puzzle the Oxonian Sophist, or Parisian Sorbonist; but this I give for one
Aphorism, Natura nil agit frustra; I hope it may answer our designs in the
Longitude, nisi Argentum agit frustra; but all is in the Power of God; it is an
Emblem of Trinity, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. Indeed I have but
little more Knowledge of it, then is in the Idea of my Brain, for the
Experimental part is most wanting, but the World may believe, that I can
produce sound Principles and Evinceing Arguments for my Opinion, else I should
not have made it so public; delays are dangerous, Ars longa, Vita brevis; but
if it please God, I should be glad to live to see this Art come to such
Perfection, as to be fit for Seamens Practice, during the natural Course of my
Life. Reader, believe if you please, that he that writ this, could a writ more,
and more to the purpose, if he would; I think it enough for five or six Weeks
Time and Study, and abundance too much, if for a Gratuity, I may suck my Paw,
or only my labor for my Pains; future Ages may be more Competent Judges, but
my Mind will be easier when this Book is Published, because therein I have done
my Duty, and eased the burden of my Brain. If in this Treatise have seemed to
reflect on any Person, it is my Dialect, I desire their Excuse; I Envy no Men:
Envy and Ingratitude, is most natural to some, whose Duty it is to understand
these things and their Capacities, cannot reach them. If any Person is minded,
or can, or will undertake to Correct or Amend what I have writ, I wish them
good success; I desire them to own what they borrow, and not to reflect without
just cause; it is difficult to write such a Book as this is, (I think it is the
first of this nature,) without Faults; it is likely I my self may find some in
a Years time, that if I were to write over again, I could amend; I dare affirm,
that this Book contains some estimable Expressions and Methods, fit for Seamens
Knowledge and Practice, and such as have not been formerly Published; there are
some Persons in England, whose Duty it is (being paid for it,) to improve
Navigation and Astronomy, and from whom much is expected, and little or nothing
of purpose appears.

It is my Opinion, that the appearances of Comets may be found by Calculations,
if any Person capable, think it worthy his trouble. Concerning this Book, the
common Vogue will be, viz. but will it do, is it the Longitude, I say? Yes, it
is the Longitude begun, and will do with Industry and Encouragement, else not;
for it is contrary to Seamens Vulgar sayings, that when the Longitude is found,
then there will be abundance of Artists, Navigation will be so easy: No, no,
Navigation will not be so easy at present, but much more certain and true. The
Learned Bacon said, the Longitude was worth a Kingdom to a Wise Man; but before
I conclude, to return to my Instrument, the Description I have given thereof,
avails little, without my further assistance; till then, the Reader if he
pleases may compare -- to Foxes staring on Bunches of ripe Gripes, and cannot
get at them; then they are too sour for them: for so my Dream intimates, when
I was among a Crowd of Foxes, awed at my Presence, and after I had looked on
them, they vanished, and left me other Objects. The most Ingenious of Humane
Inventions, is far less facile then the ordinary performances of Truth and
Nature. I love my King, the Church of England, and my Country, and I thank my
God, I know my self capable and worthy to serve them, though too much debased
for want of Friends in Court. If this meet with its deserved Encouragement, the
rest may follow in good time; but I must make haste and conclude, my attendance
and dependence being required in our Navy Royal, which Duty, I dare not
neglect, for fear of being Excommunicated, or which is as bad, Excluded from
Preferment. Quamvis been merenti.

Nil tam difficile est quod non Solertia Vincat.
Te Deum Laudamus.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 9. r. plane. p. 17. l. 8. r. Zulichem. p. 20. l. 6. r. cert is. l.
9. r. Industria. l. 19. r. an Idea. p. 28. l. 3. r. Bond. p. 29 l. 5. r. the
increase. p. 30. l. 3. for me, r. one. l. 17. for by, r. with. p. 31. l. 22. r.
though. l. 23. r. suppose. p. 36. l. 12. add when Northerly. p. 37. l. 10. r.
preceding. p. 59. l. 27. for P. M. r. A. M. add Schema Solis ad Exitum
Mercurii, St. Hellene, Anno 1677. October. 28. 2 h. 4 P. M. p. 55. l. 10. r* will
be. p. 63. l. 27. r. with. p. 70 l. 2. r. Sun and Stars.


