Martii 9no. A. D. 1682/3.
TRactatum hunc, cui Titulus, Pharmacologia Anti-Empirica, etc. Utilem, and qui
lucem publicam videat, Dignum judicamus.

Tho. Coxe Praeses Coll. Med. Land. Sa. Collins Sen. Elector and Regestarius.
Censores. Gualt. Charleton Elector Thomas Allen Nathaniel Hodges Edv. Hulse

Pharmacologia Anti-Empirica: OR A Rational Discourse OF REMEDIES BOTH Chemical
and Galenical. WHEREIN Chemistry is impartially represented, the Goodness of
Natural Remedies vindicated, and the most Celebrated Preparations of Art proved
incapable of Curing Diseases without a Judicious and Methodical Administration.
TOGETHER With some Remarks on the Causes and Cure of the Gout, the Universal
Use of the Cortex, or Jesuits Powder, and the most Notorious Impostures of
diverse Empiricks and Mountebanks.

By WALTER HARRIS, M.D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Fellow of the
College of Physicians.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683.

To the most Noble, and most Illustrious Prince, Henry Duke of Beaufort,
Marquess and Earl of Worcester, Baron Herbert, Lord of Ragland, Chepstow, and
Gower, Lord President, and Lord Lieutenant of Wales, and the Marches, Lord
Lieutenant of the Counties of Gloucester, Hereford, and Monmouth, and of the
City and County of Bristol, Lord Warden of His Majesty's Forest of Deane, and
Constable of the Castle of Saint Briavels, Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
ALL Arts and Professions do Improve, and grow Useful to the World, according
as they receive Encouragement from the Favor of Great and Illustrious
Personages. No Profession that can be thought of (excepting only that which
takes care of our Souls) can possibly be so Useful to Humane Life, as this of
Physic; and no Person whatsoever in these Realms (excepting the Royal Family)
can Honor or Encourage a Faculty so considerably, as your Grace may by
vouchsafing it the Honor of your Countenance and Protection. Your Grace's
Family is but one step below the Royal; for your Genealogy is rightly derived
in a Male Line, not only from John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, fourth Son of
King Edward the Third, but also from Geoffry Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, by his
Wife Maud the Empress, Daughter of Henry the First, King of England, Son of
King William the Conqueror. From the foresaid Great Duke of Lancaster, the
Famous BEAUFORTS, Dukes and Earls of Somerset, have descended, in Memory of
which Noble Ancestors, next to the Consideration of your own Eminent Loyalty
and Services to the Crown, His Majesty has been pleased to create your Grace,
DUKE OF BEAUFORT. Beaufort is a Castle in Anjou.
And it is highly remarkable, in what a constant Series of Grandeur your
Progenitors have all along flourished, under the Title of Kings, Dukes,
Marquesses, and Earls, for above seven hundred years; not one of them in all
that time having descended to any lower Dignity.

Your Grace's Grandfather, Henry Marquess and Earl of Worcester, if well
considered in all respects, and especially as to the Vastness of his Treasure,
was the most Serviceable and Potent Subject who asserted the Interest of His
Majesty of ever Blessed Memory, and who himself made a very signal opposition
to the torrent of the late unnatural Rebellion, both by his own Person, and by
incredible Supplies of Men and Money; insomuch that Ragland Castle, your
Grace's Patrimony, was the very last Strong Hold that submitted to the
Usurper's Yoke; and when it at last did, though there had not appeared the
least prospect of Relief, yet it yielded upon very Honorable Conditions, after
a long Defense, maintained at his own sole Charge.

Your Grace's Father, Edward first Earl of Glamorgan, and afterward Earl and
Marquess of Worcester, not inferior in Loyalty to your Grandfather, did by the
help of his Fathers Purse, raise several Armies, and ran imminent hazards in
the same Service, and therefore both had the Honor to be Excepted Persons in
the Rebels Act of Oblivion, their Estates were sold by the Usurpers, their
Seats defaced, their Woods Cut down, and Ragland Castle, a Sumptuous and Large
Mansion, as well as a Strong one, was absolutely Demolished, to your Grace's no
little damage.

And your Grace treading in their steps of Loyalty (though not in Religion) was
likewise your self in Arms for the late King, even under fourteen years of Age,
and was Prosecuted severely for it, and suffered an Imprisonment in the Tower,
for your Early Endeavors toward the Restoration of our present Sovereign,
wherein you were afterward highly Instrumental, and sent by the then House of
Commons (of which you were a Member, and the first of their Commissioners) to
invite his present Majesty to return to the Exercise of his Undoubted Right,
which he has ever since maintained to the Unspeakable Advantage of all his
Subjects, and the just Admiration of all Foreign Potentates.

Neither is your Grace only Great in such Noble Ancestors, Great in so Loyal a
Grandfather and Father, Great in a most Hopeful Issue, Deservedly Great in his
Majesty's Favor, to the advantage of whose Royal Interest and Dignity you have
so highly contributed by wise and Fortunate Counsels, and by a shining Example
of Loyalty in a most Turbulent Juncture, but also Great in a most Affable
Deportment, and obliging Condescension to all degrees of your Inferiors; so
that your Grace may be truly said to have gained at least as many Hearts for
His Majesty's Service, and under His Majesty for your own, as any Nobleman
whatsoever. Nor can I omit the mention of that most Regular Government of each
part of your Numerous Family, wherein (by the Excellent Conduct of your Grace,
and your most Virtuous Consort) may be seen the Grandeur of a Princes Court,
without any manner of Vanity, and a various multiplicity of Affairs carried on
without any noise, and with the most exact Order and Decency. The Divine
Service is there Solemnly and Daily performed, Sermons frequently Preached, and
the Holy Sacrament according to the Church of England duly Administered; which
Pious Institution of your Family must needs bring down many Blessings on your
Grace, and may be an Excellent Pattern to the rest of the Nobility of England.

How Happy therefore is His Sacred Majesty (whom Heaven Preserve and Prosper)
in so Wise, Faithful, and Pious a Counselor! and how Happy is your Grace in
serving a Prince, who Knows how to value justly the Merits of a Subject never
so Great, His Majesty being not only in years Superior to all the Kings and
Princes in Europe, but indisputably in Wisdom and Capacity. Insomuch that I
have often heard very Judicious persons maintain, that if His Majesty had not
been Born King of these Realms, he would certainly of right have claimed, and
justly carried the Election before all others, who might for any kind of Merit,
have presumed to appear Competitors. Nor is His Sacred Majesty only Supreme in
the Gifts and Accomplishments of Nature, in his Stupendous Prudence in the
Arts of Governing, but he is pleased in his Universal Goodness, particularly to
Encourage the Profession of Physic; and it is well known, and to the Honor of
Physic be it spoken, that His Majesty can better judge between a Physician of
Words, and a Physician of Sense, between what is Physic in reality, and what
only bears the Name of it, than perhaps any man of the Faculty.

The Design of this Treatise, is in some measure to vindicate the Reputation of
this Art, against the Shameless Pretenses or Practices of Illiterate Empiricks,
and to obviate some Errors of no small consequence, which have been apt to
prevail too much of late. Wherefore I presume to hope, that your Grace may
please in this as well as other things to tread in the steps of His Sacred
Majesty, and to be another Patron to a Noble, and most Useful Profession. I
could name Kings and Princes heretofore, who have not disdained to become
Professors, and write Books of Physic. And at this day the Physicians of the
College at Milan are established, Sacri Palatii, Jo. Baptist. Sylvatic.
and Aulae Lateranensis Comites, Aurataeque Militiae Equites, and do wear
Chains of Gold, by the Grant and Patent of Clement the Eighth. And possibly it
would be never the worse for the Public, if there were some apparent
Discrimination between the Legal Professors of Physic, who spare no Pains or
Cost to qualify themselves for an Honest Discharge of a most Serious
Employment; and who (I can speak it certainly of many, to my own Knowledge) are
always ready to do as much Good in their way, as is required of Good
Christians; between those Worthy and Learned men, and the Ignorant Tribe of
Impudent Empiricks, who are as ready to do all manner of mischief. Nor could I
wish any such Discrimination otherwise, than as it might best conduce to the
Real Service, and Benefit of the Generality. Your Grace will Pardon so Unworthy
an Advocate in pleading so Good a Cause. Men that are placed in a Sphere below,
cannot choose but look up sometimes, and make Applications to Greatness: from
which Inclination it is, that I presume upon this Address to your Grace, it
being not only my Greatest Honor, but my Greatest Ambition also to avow, and
to Style my self,

My most Noble Lord, Your Grace's Most Humble, most Devoted, and most Obedient
Servant, Walter Harris.

THE PREFACE.
THE Great Preparations of Chemistry have this last Age so vainly and
extravagantly prevailed on the minds of some men, and they have been so
strangely enamoured, what with the Charming Curiosities of it, and what with
the kind acceptance of Chemical Medicines to the difficult Palats of diverse
Patients, that they have wholly addicted themselves to the Preparations of this
Art, and have beyond all reason undervalued all the good Preparations of
Nature, or the Old Physicians, as if they were most Impure, Improper, and
Ineffectual in themselves. It is very Natural to men in general, to value
themselves more than is needful on the Particular Acquisitions of their own
Industry, and what does likewise carry some Mystery along with it, that is not
understood by every body. What is commonly known, is as commonly despised, let
it deserve of us never so well. And Chemistry had a great advantage accruing to
it, merely on the account of its first Mysteriousness; and the (vain-) Glory of
being an Adeptist in an Art so seemingly Useful, did swell up Operators with a
higher opinion of themselves, than their Pains did really deserve. For it
pretended no less than to separate all Natural Impurities from Remedies, to
Refine and Purify them after a new manner, and to give the true Virtues and
Properties of all bodies, without any superfluous mixture of their Useless,
Disagreeable, or Poisonous Malignant Parts. Herbs and Plants, and the like,
which had been the subject matter of Physic from the beginning of the World
'till then, they ranked in the lowest and meanest Class of the Materia Medica,
if they allowed them any place at all; but Metals and Minerals which Nature had
hid out of our eye, and doubtless for very good reason, were the only things
they thought worthy of essaying their Skill upon, and because they would not
yield out supposed Principles without Strong and durable Fires, much pains,
care, and attendance, they concluded every thing to be so much the better, as
it required Art, Dexterity, and Labor to unlock and resolve them into several
Principles.

It cannot be denied, but Physic has in some respects been improved by the
advantages of this Art, and as it is made a part of Physic, and is used by
Sober Physicians, the World is really the better for it; but as it is
separately managed, and Chemical Medicines do become Exclusive of all others,
it carries greater danger and mischief with it, than every body can imagine.

Physic it self is a most Noble, and most Useful Art, and even in Barbarous
Countries, where for some time they were destitute of Physicians, they never
subsisted without Physic: They had learned of the Egyptians to expose sick
people openly to the view of all passengers, and to deplore the advice of any
body that would bestow it; they served themselves of a fortuitous, casual, and
Empirical way of Curing, where they were not so Happy as to have persons make
it their only business, and join the dictates of an Improved Reason to guide
their Remedies safely through the dangerous adventures of uncertain, and mere
Experiments. The Romans, who had a long time minded nothing but Wars, and
therefore had not that value for Learning, and Learned Arts, which they really
deserved, and who had been destitute of Physicians for many hundred years,
because the Physicians of Greece were said to have sworn among themselves (a
most uncharitable supposition! Plin. l. 29. c. 1.
) that they would destroy all the Barbarians by Poisonous Physic, (and every
body was to them a Barbarian) that was not a Grecian; these Romans nevertheless
did at last acknowledge such necessity of this Art, that Julius Caesar, as
Suetonius relates it, offered the Freedom of the City of Rome, (Civitate
donare) to all Physicians who would come and live among them, and they received
other such great Encouragements, besides that Denization (which was no small
Privilege, all over the World) that the Noblest Romans did soon breed up their
Sons to it. It would be tedious to reckon up the Kings, Princes, Heroes, Great
Men, and Philosophers, who have either Practiced, or at least very much applied
their minds to this Profession. Mithridates I shall speak to elsewhere;
Dispensatories do still retain some Compositions from Sabor King of the Medes,
and Mesue Records more; Plin. ibid.
Evax King of the Arabians, writ a Book to the Emperor Nero (who one while
favored Learning) concerning the great effects of Simples; Mesue was Son (some
say Nephew) of Abdelas King of Damascus, and Avicenna that great Writer, was an
Arabian Prince. But not to mention our Great ones of the World, we have the
Greatest instance, in favor of Physic, that ever appeared, or could appear to
Mankind. Our Savior himself, the Lord and Maker of the whole World, the Great
Governor of all things, was pleased to Honor our Art above all others, by
executing the Office of a Physician, though a Supernatural one, by healing men's
infirmities, and going about thus doing good.

There Is much useful Truth, as well as Wisdom, in that Chap. 38.
Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, as that of the most high comes Healing, v. 2. that
the Lord has created the Physician, v. 1. and 12. and his Medicines, v. 4. and
that his Blessing goes along with them, v. 13, 14. that the employment is
Honorable, v. 1, 2, 3. and absolutely Necessary, v. 12. If a man has any sense
of Goodness, any Humanity in his nature, what can be more agreeable to the
bottom of his Soul, what more delightful in its self, what more worthy of us,
as we are Men, and as we are Christians, than to be thus continually spending
our time, in order to the relief of Mankind in some of their greatest Miseries
which can befall them, their Sicknesses and Infirmities? He that is Sick to
purpose, can be sensible of what I say, and those that are Physicians in
reality, whose Genius and Inclination do go along with their Profession, whose
Pains and Labor in it are their Chiefest Delight, will find their Heart attest
this, and much more.

But it is the unhappiness of this Profession, to be more invaded in the main
by all sorts of People, than any other whatsoever. And therefore that Italian
was much in the right, who maintained that there were more Physicians, than of
any other Employment; and in order to convince his Prince of this truth, he
hudled up his head, and pretended a violent Toothache; but appearing abroad
notwithstanding, every man that he met with, who enquired into his ailment,
very readily advised him to some Remedy or other. He entered their Names into
his Note-book, and in two or three days time, demonstrated to his Prince (who
before thought the Opinion a Paradox) what a number of Practitioners in
Physic, if not Physicians, he had already met with.

A Learned and Real Physician is a Real Happiness to the place he lives in, and
all Ignorant, Superficial, and Pragmatical inter-medlers in Physic, who have
but little inspection into the Principles of this Art, are as much the Bane and
Pest of men's Healths, and do as much hurt to the Public, as those others do
certain good. And whatever for Curiosity of men may flatter them, it is a
greater truth than they are aware, that it is infinitely better for themselves,
and others, that they understood nothing at all of Physic, than only a little;
for the first qualification secures them from committing errors, and mischiefs
of this kind, the other only furnishes them with an unreasonable Boldness, that
is always liable to dangerous hazards.

I know that in favor of Empirical undertakings, the great Charge of Good
Advise is commonly objected. But as far as my Knowledge of others has gone, I
have generally found it to be a groundless Mistake; for in this Famous City,
where the Encouragement of Physicians is very remarkable, and deservedly too,
Eminent and Excellent Practicers do not love to grate on the necessities of
indigent people, but are as free to do good, according to men's own terms and
capacities, as their heart can reasonably wish. They are not the best
Professors, but the worst Pretenders, who squeeze and gaul men without any
Mercy; those in this City who have tried it, do sufficiently know, that there
is as free and welcome access to Eminent Physicians at certain times, by
ordinary people, for their Modicum, or even for nothing, as by the better sort
for a Reward proportionable to the just Merit of the Faculty. And in some other
Countries, where the Common Fees are cheaper than here, I have heard there is a
most Rigid Payment required and made, and those who often escape here with the
Easy Payment of Good Words only, would take it very unkindly, to have their
Friend or Relations body detained by Authority above ground, until their
Physician is satisfied for his Pains, as I have heard is not very seldom done,
in a Country not far from us. It is not in Physic only, but in all other
Professions that our Nation does show its Native, and Inseparable Generosity; a
Peasant here shall Eat and Drink much better than many a Gentleman abroad; and
where Money does Naturally Circulate with a free and liberal hand, upon all
imaginable occasions, it would be very incongruous, that a less value should be
put upon men's Healths, than upon every thing else besides.

The subject of this discourse is handled with so little Obscurity, that there
is the less need of a Clavis to illustrate it, or of Ceremony to introduce you
to it. I wish it may but prove as Useful as I design it. And the variety may
afford some Diversion at least, where the Excellency of men's Judgments may
prevent their receiving Profit, by plain, but wholesome Instructions.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction. P. 1. CHAP. II. Of the Inventors of Chemistry. p.
8. CHAP. III. Of Paracelsus and Helmont on the one side; and of Sir Theodore
Mayern, and Quercetan, on the other. p. 15. CHAP. IV. Of Chemistry and Physic,
and of Philosophy in relation to Physic. p. 30. CHAP. V. Of the use of Gold in
Physic, and particularly the Aurum Potabile, etc. p. 38. CHAP. VI. Of the
Transmutation of Metals, and especially of the Philosophers Stone. p. 49. CHAP.
VII. Of Distillation, etc. p. 62. CHAP. VIII. Of six Great Remedies, too much
magnified by some Physicians, as well as Empiricks: And first of Mercury. p.
88. CHAP. IX. Of Antimony. p. 111. CHAP. X. Of Vitriol. p. 126. CHAP. XI. Of
Chalybeats. p. 145. CHAP. XII. Of the Cortex, or Jesuits Powder, p. 164. CHAP.
XIII. Of Opium. p. 192. CHAP. XIV. Of the Causes and Cure of the Gout. p. 214.
CHAP. XV. Of Simple and Compound Remedies. p. 281. CHAP. XVI. Of Characters,
Charms, Amulets, and Sigills, how they come to Cure Diseases. p. 298. CHAP.
XVII. Of Mountebanks, and other sorts of Empiricks. p. 315.
The Reader is desired to Correct the following Errata.
PAge 88. l. 20. r. six Necessaries. p. 92. l. 15. r. from the foresaid. p.
102. l. 24. r. it is a. p. 132. l. 10. r. I am apt. p. 138. l. 3. r. fresh
butter. p. 205. l. 13. r. calefactam. p. 269. l. 1. r. strictest. p. 286. l.
26. r. (...) and (...).

Pharmacologia Anti-Empirica. OR A Rational Discourse OF REMEDIES, Both
Chemical and Galenical, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Wars between Chemists, and Galenists, very fierce for some time; but end
at last in a Peace. The Design opened. Hippocrates, and Galen, wise, and
excellent, but not infallible. A slavish Expression of a Venetian.

WHen Chemistry began to sound its Alarm, under the Banner of Paracelsus, and
the noise became so great, as to shake the Foundations of Physic, diverse
eminent Physicians took their Weapons in their hands, and with a learned Pen,
did sufficiently vindicate the Honor of Physic, from the bold attempts of
their declared Enemies. But this angry Invader of the Galenick Art, did soon
strengthen himself by a great many Followers, who all conspired together to
carry Fire and Destruction whithersoever they went. Chemistry must be all with
them, or nothing. And all the contemptible scandals, and marks of Ignominy,
that Malice could invent, were very liberally bestowed on all that favored
Learning, or asserted the Ancient Principles of Physic.

So that there was no Parley between the two Parties, in order to a Peaceable
and right understanding; the Chemists, if it had been possible, would have
massacred, and utterly cut off all the Galenick Professors, and the Galenists
with the utmost indignation of injured Persons, decried and condemned all
Chemical pretenses; and many Acts of Hostility and open War, were for a long
time carried on between them. Insomuch, that there was no hopes of an
Accommodation, no signs of Moderation, or Peace, till both Parties had
sufficiently worried one another, till their Weapons were blunted with frequent
Skirmishes, and both grew weary of their unreasonable Contentions.

And then the Foundations of Physic appeared firmer than was thought, and
Chemistry was found to contain some Advantages, that were not to be despised.
The Anger and Venom was pretty well spent on both sides, and after the violent
Storms had continued as long as the Nature of Violent things would suffer, the
Weather cleared up again, and every man leasurely considered what was the real
Matter.

The Physicians of those days did not at last scorn to foul their Fingers with
Coals, as well as Ink. They built them Laboratories, procured Vessels of all
sorts, and were as busy at Chemical preparations, as the first Operators
themselves. In the mean time the passionate Assertors of Chemistry took Books
into their hands again, read, and leasurely considered, and at last found,
those I mean that grew Sober, that a Judicious Administration of Medicines,
would do the best no harm at all, that there was as much dexterity and Art, in
the right use of Chemical Remedies, as in the very Preparations they so much
delighted in. And thus by degrees the Physicians grew Chemists, and the
Chemists became Physicians.

Great Beginnings are naturally imperfect, and attended with Faults; and though
the first undertakers are impatient of Contradiction, yet generally their
Successors make Additions that were not at first thought of. We all know, that
the first Projectors of any thing do seldom thrive, or perfectly attain their
end, but the second Undertakers do often grow rich upon it, and avoid those
manifold Inconveniences that were not foreseen by the first.

Chemistry is now one necessary part of Physic, and a man can no more pretend
to be a Physician without a competent knowledge in it, than a Mechanic work
without his Tools. If it be not elevated beyond all degrees of Modesty, and
arrogantly buoyed up above Sense and Reason, it will be found excellent in some
no mean respects, and add both Pleasantness and Efficacy to some Medicines,
that were more loathsome to the Palate, and more ineffectual in their Operation
before. Out Modern Physicians are now the only Chemists in reality, and all
other small dealers or ignorant Retainers to that Art, will prove Impostors and
Pseudo-Chymists.

The Design therefore of this following Treatise is not to bid defiance to
Chemistry, right or wrong, but to offer a fair Representation of things as they
are in themselves, to give a check to all malapert Pretenders, and to vindicate
Natural Remedies, that are very good as Nature provides them, from being
swallowed up, or over-powred with a Scenical Parade, as if nothing were good
for any thing that had not undergone the Test of Chemical Preparation.

And indeed Chemistry is so bewitching an Art, and so suits with the natural
Fondness of Mankind, who are too apt to admire themselves, and the Works of
their own Hands, that sometimes Ingenuous, and otherwise understanding men, run
farther in it than they ought, and their Reason is often blinded, with giving
too much way to their Affections.

The Subject therefore that I have undertaken, is so Noble, and really useful,
that I wish with all my Heart, some abler Pen would have done it better. I have
rather but hinted at what might have been well performed, than fully decided
the Subjects of this Discourse. And I hope it will be no Disservice to my
Faculty, to do the best that my small Capacity can for them, and to show how
much more is requisite to the constituting a good Physician, besides being
conversant among Fires and Furnaces, besides the best Preparation of Remedies.

Hippocrates, and Galen, will be ever famous to after-ages, because their Works
are full of sound sense, well digested Principles, and undeniable Truths. And
those who keenly speak against them, and rail at their Labors with much
earnestness, either do not understand them, or are very morose in their natural
Tempers.

And yet I am not of Macrobius his mind, In Somn. Scipion. lib. 1. c. 6.
who in a fond rant brake out into this hearty expression concerning our great
Hippocrates, Quod tam fallere, quam falli nesciat, that he was neither capable
of teaching an Error, nor of being in an Error himself. Apol. 3. l. 3. disp. 3.
cap. ult.
And so Massarias passes the same Complement upon Galen, and Aristotle, Quod
nunquam, si recte intelligantur, fallere, vel falli possint.

'Twould be exceeding happy for the World, if it could have been furnished with
such infallible Dictators in Physic. All Doubts and Questions would then have
been laid aside, and an Ipse Dixit would have easily decided all Controversies
that rise in our way. But though Quacks and Idiots can see so far into the
Virtues of a Pill or Powder, that it shall infallibly do every thing they would
have it, and can never be directed to a wrong Intention, yet Physicians we
find, who ought in reason to be presumed to have as good Eyes and Brains, as
conceited Fools, and illiterate Pretenders, are very unhappy men, that all
their Knowledge and Observation should only serve to hinder them from
discovering the Panacea's, and mighty Catholicon's, that lie open to every
careless eye; that they only should continue Pro-ing and Con-ing, whilst every
Blockhead never fails to be in the right.

No, it is the unavoidable condition of Humane Nature, of the wisest men, as
well as Ignorant, to be often subject to Mistake, and much Care, Pains, and
Application, if not Good Fortune too, are requisite to free the very best of us
from being too too prone to our Common Fate.

And therefore that Noble Venetian deserves to be pitied for a poor-spirited
man, who being showed by an expert Anatomist, that the Nerves had their Origin
from the Brain, and not from the Heart, as the great Philosopher Aristotle had
maintained, brake out into that weak, and slavish Expression, If Aristotle had
not said the contrary, I would have believed my own eyes.

CHAP. II.
Adam no Chemist. Nor Tubalcain, the Poets Vulcan, Hermes Trismegistus, in all
likelihood the first Famous Chemist. No certainty of Moses being one, Solomon a
Chemist in the best sense, and indeed the best Galenist. The loss of his Book
of Simples never to be forgotten.

SOme to advance the Honor and Antiquity of Chemistry high enough, have
thought fit to derive it from our first Father Adam, and would needs persuade
us, that no sooner was he endowed with the Knowledge of Good and Evil, but he
soon became a Chemist; that he not only gave unto all Creatures their Proper
Names, but also extended his Dominion over the Mineral Kingdom; that he not
only cultivated the Earth, and labored hard with the sweat of his Brows, but
was profoundly skilled in the deepest Arts and Sciences. He that first found
this out, was doubtless a notable man, and had an Imagination so keen and
searching, that he seems very well qualified for the utmost seize of
Chemistry, for finding out the Philosophers Stone, wheresoever it lies hid.

Others have been a little shorter-sighted, and made Tubalcain to be the first
Chemist, because the Holy Scripture tells us, he wrought cunningly every Craft
of Brass, Genesis 4.22.
and of Iron. But it will hardly follow, to every man's understanding, that a
good Brasier, or Smith, must of necessity be a curious Chemist. A Farrier may
by degrees, it is possible, arrive at strange Perfection; but if he deserts his
Trade, to set up in the ways of Alchymy, it is more than probable, that the man
will at last make but a poor, and beggarly Conclusion. This same Tubalcain is
thought to be the Poets Vulcan; but though they were very well skilled in the
Art of Invention, and he was their God of Fire, and for that Reason might
easily have been conducted from his Forge into a Laboratory, yet none of them
(that I know of) have ascribed to him this Excellency.

Therefore those were somewhat the wiser, who were contented to make Hermes
Trismegistus to be the Man; for from him it is still called the Hermetick Art,
Hermetick Vessels, and the Hermetick Seal. This Hermes, or Mercury was
doubtless ancient enough. And though there were diverse of this Name, the
Egyptian Hermes was the chief, that Diodorus Siculus, Lib 2.
and others, do ascribe the Primacy of Learning to. And this man was as great,
as Learning could make him, or his Name imports. He is said to have written an
infinite Number of Books, and some of Physic. Cicero says, he was not only
Governor of Egypt, 3. De Not. Deorum.
and their Lawgiver, but also their Philosopher in Chief.

Moses being skilled in all the Learning of the Egyptians, was therefore
easily imagined to have no small skill in Chemistry. Exodus 32. v. 20.
But the Text, that is brought for Proof of it, has but an uncertain, and
forced Construction. He is said to have burnt the Golden Calf in the Fire, and
after he had powdered it, to have strown it upon the Water. Now the Hebrew Word
that is interpreted, he Burnt the Gold, does also properly signify he melted
it. And there is no such Mystery in that. But we must allow some Grains to the
over-Admirers of any Art. A small Argument will be a good one, when they are
resolved to make it out.

Solomon indeed was a Chemist to the purpose, having the right Philosophers
Stone, not that which many have in vain sought for, and reduced themselves to
the utmost degree of Pity and Poverty in hopes to attain, but the
inexhaustible Treasure of Gods extraordinary Blessing, the universal affluence
of all that the Heart of man could covet, or Eye could behold. But his
Miraculous Plenty was bestowed on him, as a Reward for his generous Election of
Wisdom and Knowledge; whereas commonly our foolish Philosophers by Fire do spend
their time in quest of the Tincture, purely to gratify a Covetous Mind, and to
make themselves Princes in some new Vtopia, where they hope to take and enjoy a
full swinge of Sensuality.

But again, this Great, this Wisest Man, was in effect a True Galenist; he
treated of the Virtues of Simples from the highest to the lowest, from the tall
Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hysop upon the Wall. We are certain, he knew the
excellency of all those Simple Medicaments, which lie every where ready to our
hands, and our Eye cannot choose but see, but whether he ripped up the Bowels of
the Earth, and examined those Minerals that lie hid and covered in darkness, we
have no such reason to conjecture.

And this very Consideration, that the Wisest man in the World did think fit to
employ his thoughts, and write a Copious Treatise on purpose concerning the
very same Simples which every Physician must, and does study and apply to, does
very much weigh with me to think Metals, and Minerals are not so Properly, so
Naturally, the Sphere of Physic, as Roots and Herbs, and what this Great and
Wise Prince treated of. Not that I would willingly derogate from the real, and
intrinsic value of any thing whatsoever, whether it be derived from the
Mineral, Animal, or Vegetable Kingdom. There is not the meanest thing in
Nature, the most odd, or seemingly improper, but inquisitive men have made
trials, and found some unquestionable Physical use to belong to it.

And now how shall we grieve enough, that a Book of this inestimable Worth was
presently lost, that Mankind should be thus unworthy, of what would in an
reason have conduced more to that great Blessing of men's Lives, Health,
(without which all Honors, Pleasures, and Plenty, become insipid, flat, and
worthless) than any the weaker endeavors of less than a Solomon. It is a sad
reflection indeed, and must especially be so to that Physician, who is heartily
of his Profession, and is concerned in earnest at the good or ill events of
Remedies. The loss of the Sybills Books, and a thousand other things long
talked of, are but imaginary in comparison with this. I am apt to think
sometimes, that the All-wise Providence, which orders things always for the
best, but far above our reach and comprehension, thought fit to snatch these
Leaves away for greater ends than we can fathom, and better Reasons than we
ought to dispute. The Nature of Humane Life consists of a certain mixture of
Good and Evil, as necessary and inseparable to every state of Mankind as their
very Existence and Being. And the necessity of this Mixture, in point of
Health, as well as other respects, is more Certain, than Explicable, as lying
exceeding deep in the inscrutable ways of Providence. I know some men carry
before them a much smoother Brow than others, and you shall hardly perceive any
thing but sweetness and pleasantness constantly in their Looks; but if they do
not sometimes suffer inwardly (more or less, according to the Temper of their
Body, and the Philosophy or Moral Institutions of their mind) either from some
Corporal Infirmity, or some Temporal disadvantages in point of Esstate, or from
the Envy and Misrepresentations of mischievous Men, in point of Reputation, or
from some unexpected rubs, and disappointments in the prosecution of Ambitious
desires, if there is a man to be found that is never (nay and to purpose too)
concerned in some of these Respects, I shall not only wonder how he comes to be
thus privileged above all his Fellow Creatures, that ever I knew or heard of,
but without Pretensions to Prophecy, dare boldly bid him exspect his Turn in a
short time, and prepare his Back to bear a Load somewhat proportionable to his
hitherto undisturbed Enjoyments. And he that will read that excellent Story of
Polycrates in Herodotus, Lib. 3.. 40. and Strab. lib. 14.
will find that Man is not born to be always, and alike Fortunate throughout
his whole Life.

CHAP. III.
Of Paracelsus. His Arrogance, and hard Words. His Debauchery, and his
Railings. His Works in great part borrowed. His Cures of Incurable Diseases.
His incapacity to reside abve a year in a place. A very remarkable Story of his
Cures at Basil. Paracelsus not Immortal, and why. How far Physic may be said
to prolong Life. Of Van Helmont, his Stoicism, his Dream, his Readings, and his
Enthusiasm. His Works fitter to please Ill-natured, than Wise men. A Conclusive
Passage of his own against Mineral Preparations, as not conducive to long Life.
Sir Theodore Mayern recommended for a Chemist. And Quercetan for another.

PAracelsus, as much as he magnified himself for his great store of Arcana, and
despised others for want of the same Pretensions, yet if we state things a
little calmly, we shall find, that he did not so really promote the Honor and
Glory of Chemistry, as he vainly boasted, or would have had the World believe.
For though a Man should tell us a True Story in the main, but could not forbear
interlacing diverse palpable untruths, if we found him affect the most
extravagant Nonsense, and Impertinence, if he delighted to talk as if he were
stark Mad, and coined abundance of unintelligible words, as it were on purpose
not to be understood, but by those who were as Mad as himself, and therefore
imagine they hit his meaning, the man's Folly and Extravagance would be apt to
prejudice us strongly against the Truth of the Whole, and the very telling
would spoil all the Truth and Credit of the Story. It is not impossible, but a
notorious Liar may speak Truth sometimes, but when he does, he will hardly gain
belief.

Paracelsus was born in Switzerland, Ann. 1493. After he had made a good
Proficiency under the best Masters in Chemistry, that were to be found in
Germany, he swelled so big with his Acquisitions in that Art, that the World
could hardly contain him. He chose to write like a Heathen, Paramirum de 5
Entious Morbor. Numer. 10.
and in an Ethnic Style, as he himself tells us in his Works. He called
himself the (most absolute) Monarch of Arcana's, and commanded the World to
follow him, as an unerring Leader. No less could serve to express him, than the
Names, or Titles of Dn. Aureolus, Philippus, Theoplorastus, Bombastus ab
Hoenhaim, or Paracelsus. His Works do all along answer the Conceitedness of his
Name. He styled some of his Books, Paramirum, Paragranum, Pagoyum, Azoth, etc.
He uses the Words, Iliaster, Cagastrum, Euestrum, Cherio, Relollaeum, Lorca,
Tronossa, Zenda, Perenda, Chibur, Archeus, Trarames, Durales, Yleidus, Leffas,
Stannar, and God knows how many more strained, affected, fantastical,
unintelligible, and ill-coin'd Words, that there is need of an Onomasticon on
purpose, to apprehend, or rather guess at his meaning.

His Friend Oporinus, who kept him company two years together, and therefore
ought to be thoroughly acquainted with his Qualifications, Epist. Opor. de
Paracelso.
and good Manners, speaks him to be one of the most drunken Debauche's that
ever lived; that he would tipple day and night, in the Company of Ostlers,
Carmen, and Porters; that he would dictate his Works to the best advantage, in
the midst of his Cups; lastly, that in all that time he never once said his
Prayers, and yet would peremptorily deliver his judgment in the most abstruse
points of Theology; and always with strange Chimaera's, and conceits, that
would hardly enter into a sober man's head. He set upon Reforming Physic, with
all the Malice, and Ill Will, with all the hatred and Contempt, that a Beast
and a Sot could possibly conceive against Sober men, whose Seriousness and
Sobriety was the greatest Reproach, and declaration of Enmity to his dissolute
and profligate Life. He therefore bestows on all University Men the Title of
Confessores Mendaciorum, non Professores Veritatis. He calls them Materiales
and Elementares Ambulatores, Aristotelicos tenebriones, Rabbinos, and Thrasones
Athenienses, Philosophiae Ethnicae Sectatores, qui lucem tenebras, and tenebras
lucem vocant, etc.

This Cacophrastus, or foul-mouthed railer declares himself a Cursed Enemy to
Avicenna, Praef. in lib. Paragr.
Galen, Rhasis, Montagnana, Mesue, etc. to the Parisienses, Monspessulani,
Suevi, Misnienses, Colonienses, Viennenses, to all that inhabit the Rhine and
Danube, to Italy, Dalmatia, Greece, Athens, Arabia, Ibid.
and to all Israel. He Condemns Galen to the Pit of Hell, Abysso Inferni, unde
ad se literas amandarunt, quorum datum erat, in Inferno; to the Infernal Abyss,
whence he received Letters from Galen, by such Messengers as were capable of
bringing them. Nay he threatened no less than to make the Dogs Piss upon them
all. But know bold Wretch, their Names will be Consecrated to after-ages, and
had in good Reputation by Wise, and Sober men, when thy Bombastick Names shall
perish and be despised, when thy frantic folly, and miserable vanity, and
ill nature, shall with thy Dust be trampled upon by all men.

Penotus, a good friend to Chemistry, In sine Libelli de denario Medici.
and one that had beggared himself in pursuit of it, says that this man
Borrowed the greatest part of his Works from former Authors; that he had his
Archidoxa from Raymund Lully, his Gradations of Medicines from Arnoldus de
Villa Nova; and his Surgery from Lanfranc. He was not the first Chemist that
ever was heard of, though he made more Noise than all that went before him.
There were Books written in Chemistry, not only in Ancient times, by Geber,
Lully, Arnoldus, etc. but about his time, or a little before, by Isaacus
Hollandus, Basilius Valentinus, and others; and if he was more beholding to
others, then he thought convenient to acknowledge, he had very good reason to
Treasure up Arcana, which if Chymically Prepared, could not avoid being the
most Perfect, and Universal Medicines, that ever were known before.

His Excellency consisted not only in Chirurgical performances, at which he had
indisputably a very Happy Hand, but also in a supposed Expedite Cure of such as
are commonly esteemed (and that Properly too, when grown to a certain height)
by Learned and Understanding Physicians, to be Incurable Diseases; which if he
could really have wrought Miracles upon, we would have Admired him according to
his Merit, and have Extolled him among the Demy-Gods, if he had not Scorned a
Place among them. He pretended to Cure no less then the Leprosy, Inveterate
Dropsies, Epilepsies, and Gouts, and to Dissolve the Stone. But if we may
credit Crato, a professed Admirer of Chemistry in a Sober sense, and one who
sat at the Helm of Physic, during three Emperors successively, and beyond
question a most Excellent and Learned Physician, as his Works do still declare
him, Epist. ad cast.
this Great Crato does speak of him with much indignity and contempt; as that
by his Medicines he sometimes caused Epilepsies in persons free from them
before, that he Cured some into Absolute Blindness, who before saw tolerably
well, and that he could make the Gout Perpetual, which came before he meddled,
but now and then by Fits: But further, that his constant practice was, when he
had committed any Notorious Errors, and hastened his Patients before their time,
just to Death's door, he usually left 'em to themselves (as the Devil is said
to do Witches) and fled away to seek his Fortune in some other Country.

And this is Confirmed by his Old Crony and Comerade, Oporinus, who left his
Wife and Family to shift for themselves, purely for his Company, and to partake
of his All-powerful Arcana. Oporinus tells us afterward, that he could never
stay above a Year in a Place. For either his Alchymical Fires had made the
Place too Hot for him, Epist ejus ^itae inserta.
or in that reasonable time the People knew his qualifications better then he
desired.

Erastus says, Disp. contr. Paracels.
there were diverse persons then alive, of known veracity and reputation, who
did maintain, that there being a Pestilential, or Malignant Feavour raging at
Basil, when Paracelsus arrived there, it was observed, of all his Patients,
that though they escaped present Death, by the activity of his Mineral
Preparations, yet not a man of them outlived a year; whereas under the hands
of the other Physicians of the Town, many Died of the Disease; but those who
were Cured had no after-reckonings to make, but lived many of them to a good
Old Age. Renod. in Antidot. lib. 4. cap. 16.
The Story more than one have taken notice of, and if True, he had reason
enough never to stay above a Year in a place. And besides, if the Operation of
his Medicines was no better than so, he was a very unlikely person to make a
Man Immortal, as he sometimes vainly boasted. Whatever he could do to others,
as being Monarch of Physic, and all Arts besides, in his own style and fancy,
yet he could not protract his own Life above the 47, or 48th. year. His
constant Intemperance in Wine had so Inflamed his Archeus, that neither his
Laudanum (of which he talked so many wonders) nor any other of his Refined
Arcanum's could make his Glass run longer. We are all born under the same Laws
of Mortality, and whatever some Vain men may now and then pretend, in order to
the recommending either themselves or their Medicines to the World, yet we are,
and always shall be subject to the same certain Fate, and Conclusion of Life.
Some men may Naturally have a larger Glass to run, and some may take good care
that their Glass do'nt break too soon, and so their intended Course of Nature
may not be intercepted in the middle; but every one has an allotted time in his
Natural Principles, beyond which time he cannot go, but before which time he
may, by Accidents, or occasional Diseases. And therefore Physic is of
exceeding good use, to the preventing of Untimely Deaths, which would often
otherwise happen, if God in his Great Pity to our Infirmities had not
appointed, and ordained Physicians. They are great Assistants to Nature, to
help her forward, when she is unable, and to Comfort her when she is Weak, but
they cannot long Strengthen Infirm, and Unsound Principles; Hereditary
Dispositions, and the first Impress of Nature will at last prevail. In short,
an Original sound Constitution may with Physical Care, and the concurrence of
other Circumstances, live to an Extreme Old Age; but where Nature is not kind
at first, where the Foundation is but Weakly Built, the Structure must in due
time Necessarily fall.

To Conclude of Paracelsus, he was a man of very great Natural Parts, as
generally the most Notorious Debauches in all Ages have been esteemed. And if
he could but have contained himself within limits, and not so Pragmatically
Censured, and Proudly Despised all the rest of the World, he would doubtless
have done Chemistry much greater service than he did.

Since him rose up, as another Terror to all Ancient Learning, and with as foul
a mouth as the other, Van Helmont. And this man had an excellent faculty at
finding Faults, Opposition, and Pulling down all that had been Built before;
but was not so good as Paracelsus at Building up New Notions, or at laying out
Practical Platforms. S^dla A^ta^^s Sect. 7, 8, etc.
It seems this Gentleman being once upon a time more than ordinarily disturbed
with Hypochondriacal Fumes, and fallen into a violent fit of Stoicism, he
Dreamed himself converted into an empty Bubble of a vast magnitude, whose
Diameter reached from the Heavens down to the Earth; and at the same time he
beheld nothing but Darkness, an Abyss of Darkness below, and a Grave above him.
When he Waked out of this Frightful Dream, (in which he had seemed to fall into
a Trance, and forget himself, and all things else) he was resolved to make all
the World understand no more than himself. And so gave way to his Stoical
Temper, that nothing in the World could please him, and he would needs Ridicule
all Authors whatsoever, who had bore any sway in Physic. In order to refute,
and baffle them, he says, he read the Medical Institutions of Fuchsius, and
Fernelius, Galen twice over, Hippocrates once, all Avicenna, diverse Arabians,
and Greeks, and hundreds of Modern Authors. But they all proved very unsavory
to his delicious, or rather depraved Palate: He Concluded after all, that there
was no Real Knowledge but by Inspiration, and Enthusiasm, and fancied he had no
less than Raphael to Inspire him.

Indeed he writ like a man of more than ordinary Brains, but his Head was
Heated too much, with his Over-Reading, insomuch that he showed himself a True
Morose Stoic, and the worst sort too, the Cynick, all along his Works.

But notwithstanding all his Bitter, and, I think, Malicious Invectives against
Galen, and all his Followers, he will never persuade Sober men out of their
Sense and Reason, though he may perhaps tickle and delight the Caprichios of
Idle, Flashy, or Ill natured men, who would be glad to be freed from the Labor
of Examining the prolix Works of our Famous Galen, and would fain become
Physicians without Pains, Study and Headache, or such whose nature can incline
them to rejoice to see a Grave Philosopher plucked by the Beard, and a
Fools-Coat forced on the back of a Serious and Judicious man.

It is very remarkable, what Helmont says in his Works, after all his
Contemplations, and Censures, he even destroyed the very Foundation of his own
New Ideas. He finally Concludes, Arcana Paracels. versus finim.
that though Paracelsus his Arcana could Cure Diseases, yet that they did not
conduce to the Prolongation of Life. He found, that Mineral Medicines, though
wrought to never so great a Perfection, yet mere Heterogeneous or disagreeable
to the Nature of the Aliment of our first constituent Principles; because they
still retain the nature of those Bodies they were prepared from: That they
never can be made to part with their Mineral Temperature, and in that respect
are contrary to the tenor of Long Life. Nay farther, that the very Philosophers
Stone, (the Panacea for all Diseases, so much talked of) can have no Vital
union to our Nature, by reason of its Immutable (primitive) substance, and the
absolute impossibility of its Separation, Digestion, or Destruction: Thus, and
more, Helmont, in the place aforesaid. And it is a greater Truth, then we could
easily have expected from a man that was no small admirer of Chemical Mineral
Preparations, in other places of his Works. The Heat of Youth indeed is apt to
precipitate a man upon nothing but Mineral Preparations, but it is a rare thing
to find an Old man, who is not cautious and timorous in their use.

Sir Theodore Mayern, and Quercetan were another-guess sort of Chemists, than
Paracelsus, or Van Helmont. They were Dogmatical or Rational, as well as
Chemical; they did not account Galen a Fool, or Madman; and though their first
zeal transported them farther, in defense of this Art, than was absolutely
necessary, yet they would not despise Reason, though it came from the Mouth of
a Galenist.

Mayern is still flourishing in our own Memory, and his Eminency was
sufficiently proved by an Argument that will easily persuade, I mean, by the
greatest Estate that perhaps ever was got by Physic; so that both Chemistry,
and the Faculty of Physic, may be Proud of so Arch a Patron. His Treatise on
the Gout, which he writ in his Natural French Tongue, is one of the best
Attempts that has been yet made to the Knowledge, or Cure of that Disease; and
his Apology of Chemistry, and himself together, against the Prejudices of the
Doctors of Paris; and lastly his Favor with the Great Henry the 4th. of
France, and his Royal reception here, do all speak loudly his Great Name.

But I would crave leave to Admire him for a Remarkable passage in his foresaid
Apology, which did not speak a Foolish Hot headed Chemist, but a Serious, and
most Excellent Physician. I shall give it you, and heartily recommend it, in
his own words: Soleo ego in Magnis and Chronicis Morbis, qui nobis deliberandi
horas relinquunt, non in arena sumere vel dare Consilium, sed singula meis
Ephemeridibus consignare Symptomata, circa quae mutos meos consulo Doctores, ut
omnibus ad calculum diligenter revocatis, firmam mihi comparen Affectus Ideam;
ex his meas Indicationes sumo, quibus attente perquisitis, Nocente cognito
juvantis cognitionem adipiscor. A man of Parts that does betimes take such an
effectual course as this, cannot choose but go deep in Physic; and I do not
find by his Consilia, writ most in the French Tongue, and since Translated into
Latin, that he was any ways a Slave to Chemistry, but rather its Master and
Comptroler.

Quercetan was one of the greatest, and most Rational Champions of Chemistry.
He much delighted in it, even from his Youth, insomuch that when he was but a
Young man, he writ a smart Book for his Age, De spagyricorum Medicamentorum
praeparationibus, and afterward when the Faculty of Paris fell out grievously
with him, about his use of Chemical Medicines, that very few of them had then
much acquainted themselves with, he writ an Excellent and Learned Treatise,
called, Hermeticae Medicinae Defensio, showing great Mistakes concerning him.
His Pharmacopaea is a Work that showed him very well versed in Remedies, both
Old and New, and that he had Discretion joined with his Affection to Chemistry.
And if such an Artist as he was did a little too much indulge to the over-nice
Preparation of things, whose nature did not at all require it, we ought in
reason to pass over it favorably, and as well to remember the good hints he
has given us, as to look with Microscopes on what he has done too much.

CHAP. IV.
Chemistry Defined. Some of its Preparations Useless; some Useful, and others
Dangerous. Every man to judge as he finds Best. The most Beloved Notions to
submit to Matter of Fact. Diseases to be Cured with Remedies, not with
Eloquence. Fernelius a good Latinist, but not the most Fortunate Practiser. A
Learned Physician at Padua, but a very sorry Practiser, and why. Philosophy
good for a Student, but not to be dwelt upon, in the time of Practice.

Chemistry, as it relates to Physic, may properly be called art Art, that
teaches us how to Separate the Principles and Virtues of mixed Bodies. And
according as it Separates the Virtues of things, either away into the Air, or
into Proper or Pernicious Medicines, becomes Useless, or Safe, or of Dangerous
consequence. If we should make an Extract of Aromaticks, or things of a very
Volatile Nature, we spend our time to no manner of purpose, and make a
Preparation that is good for Nothing. If we draw out the Virtues of some
Bodies, whether Mineral, Animal or Vegetable, in a suitable Menstruum, and by
time and gentle degrees of Heat make an efficacious Tincture, we assist Nature
with our pains, and furnish our selves with an Useful Remedy. Lastly, if by
violent force of Fire, and repeated Rectifications and Cohobations we render
things Corrosive to the highest degree, and that which was Naturally Mild and
Good we make destructive of the Principles of Life, our Remedy proves a Dagger,
and the Experiment becomes Fatal.

So that certainly it is the True Interest of Physic, to have as right a
notion as may be, of either the Goodness, the Vanity, or the Injuriousness of
Chemical Preparations. We ought neither to be Slovens, nor over-nice. And
because people are generally apt to run into one Extreme, and some especially
have Magnified the mere Curiosities of Preparation, so as to dazzle the Eyes of
most, that they cannot see the difference between Truths and Counterfeits,
between Realities and Pretentions, I shall make it the design of the following
Discourse to unvail some things that have been held Sacred, because Mysterious,
and in every thing to deliver my self with as much Indifference, and as little
Prejudice as possible.

And I am so far from offering to Dictate Magisterially, or peremptorily
Imposing my own Thoughts, as a certain Rule in these matters, that I would
rarather beseech my Reader not be of my mind, if he finds better Reason, or
more sufficient Evidence to the contrary. Our main End, that all our Endeavors
ought to aim at, must be the Health and welfare of our Country, and whatever
Notions are contrary to that End, however Plausibly they may be dressed up, how
Learnedly soever represented, we ought to avoid them as so many Rocks, though
the Sweetest Sirens sing, and allure us to them. And if men had more seriously
adverted to this main End of Physic, they would not have been so zealous in
the Justification of their little homebred Hypotheses, they would not have
called Heaven and Earth together to their assistance, and so impatiently have
born any Civil Contradiction to their own Opinions and Mistakes. They would
rather have delighted to be led into the Right way, than to Wander still on,
though an Ignorant Clown should show it. But it is the unhappy temper of
Mankind in general, (though some Countries, as well as persons, do partake of
that Temper more generally than others) that they are most unreasonably averse
to the acknowledgment of an Error; and they esteem it more Honorable and
Glorious, obstinately to persist in an Error they have once Espoused, than to
draw back their Foot into the Right, and hazard the Imputation of Levity. We
often pass the Complement, Humanum est Errare, to others, but would by no means
have it thought, we our selves can fall under a Mistake.

It is not Ornament, or Eloquence that can Cure Diseases; Morbi non Eloquentia,
sed Remediis curantur, Lib. 11
said the Latin Hippocrates, Celsus. Good Practical Observations of Matter of
Fact, and not fine spun, curious Problems; not the Trinkets of Rhetoric, but
the Application of Remedies in a Proper Method, according as the subject
requires, are the things that constitute a Physician. And I am much of the same
Celsus's mind, ibid.
Quod siquis Elinguis usu discreta remedia been norit, hunc aliquanto majorem
Medicum futurum, quam si sine usu linguam suam excoluerit. Fernelius writ
Incomparable Latin, and his Institutions will for that reason, as well as the
Intrinsic worth, be always the Admiration of Young Students in Physic. And
yet I have heard it said, and not lightly neither, that he was no very
Fortunate Practiser, that he made but few Eminent Cures, though he was the
Glory and Ornament of the Schools. And indeed his Method of Curing Fevers, and
other Diseases, is wholly Pathological, and seems to insinuate as if the
Curative part of Physic, by the Application of Remedies, would even drop into
a man's mouth, whether he would or no, if he has but well considered the Method
of Talking Scholastically about Fevers, and other Diseases.

De vulg. error* in Medic.
And this brings into my mind a very strange, but possibly true Story, I have
read somewhere in our Primrose, who speaks of a most Eminent Physician, and
Professor at Padua, that was followed by more Scholars (the greatest sign of
Reputation there) than any other Professor in the University. He taught e
Cathedra with the greatest Applause, and according to the most Learned Rules of
Art: And yet (I am sorry, and very sorry that it proved so) this so great a
Master, and Teacher of Physic, was so Unfortunate in his Practice, that is was
an exceeding rare thing for a Patient in a Fever to escape under his hands. A
sad Consideration indeed! but what must necessarily infer, that something else
was requisite at the Patients Bedside, besides Scholastic Platforms, and
well-couch'd Institutions, to wit, a very narrow Inspection into the
Alterations of Nature there, and the making Method follow, as well as govern,
the Events of Remedies. The Indications were not to be made beforehand in the
Schools, but to be taken as they were, pro re nata, with the Patient. He should
not have scorned to decline his Beaten Roads, if he found they lead to the
Grave. For the difference of Fevers in all places does much depend on the
various Constitutions of the Air; and according as the Season does alter its
Constitution, it makes very different Impressions on our Bodies and Tempers,
and consequently all Epidemical Fevers will be attended with New, or Unusual
Symptoms; and a those Symptoms do differ from one another, the Indications of
Cure must be variously derived. And concerning the rise of Diseases from the
Constitutions of the year, the Famous Cardan has writ an Excellent Treatise,
called, De Providentia ex Anni Constitutione. Nor has Hippocrates been silent
in this matter.

Notwithstanding what has been said, it is not to be imagined that Learning is
any Prejudice to Practice, but rather the best Foundation to build success
upon. Without this solid Foundation, a man can be no more capable of attaining
the Art of Physic, than he can Travel without Eyes or Legs. He must begin with
Philosophy, and School-Instructions, as the first steps he is to make; but if
his Head is always fixed upon Rudiments, and his narrow, or lascivious mind can
never Advance beyond them, he is like to make but a sorry Progress in Physic.
Vbi desinit Physicus, ibi incipit Medicus. Where the Philosopher Ends, there
the Physician does Begin. A Physician without Philosophy will ever be a raw,
and fortuitous Practitioner; and he that in Practice does not End with his
former Philosophizing vein, and apply his mind to diligent Observations from
Experience and Practice, will often find himself overcome in matter of Cure,
even by Idiots and Women, who never understood Philosophy. He that intends for
Sea, does well to Speculate the Principles of Navigation first; but if after he
has been some Voyages, and is appointed Pilot of a Ship, instead of minding his
Duty, he shall rather enter into a deep Study concerning the Causes of the
Tide, and thereby neglect Steering the Ship as he should do, every dirty
Tarpaulin can easily decide the Controversy, what was best to be done by him,
and what will be the Event of his Studious Folly.

CHAP. V.
Chemists given to hard words, and to affect Obscurity in their Writings. The
more Popular Names are given to Remedies; commonly the more Dangerous. Aurum
Potabile, a kind of Panacea. Gold whether a Cordial, or no; and why it has
gained so great an Esteem, in point of Remedy. Some Conceits of its Physical
Excellencies; who for it, and who against it. The Best, or rather safest way of
using it Physically is in Decoction. The Metals Mild and Innocent in
themselves, but through Preparation become most violent. A Story of a Chemist
with his Red Solar Precipitate. Libavius owns several Cheating Rascals to
pretend to the Aurum Potabile. Aurum Fulminans spoken to; and another
Fulminating Powder. The Fulmination of Metals, no good commendation of them for
Remedies.

IT has been a general humor with Chemists, to affect hard and strained Words,
to deliver themselves with a Mysterious Obscurity, to turn every thing almost
into Arcana, and when they do bring them forth, after much Labor and Travel,
the World is hardly big enough to contain them; they would be thought the most
Charitable, and Kindest men alive; and at last after abundance of Ceremony, it
appears before us, with some rattling, new-coin'd Name. If any thing in nature
be Dearer than ordinary, or accounted of greater value, because fetched from
far, be sure that must be drawn in to constitute, or illustrate the Title.
Aurum vitae, sive Hercules Bovii, Mercurius vitae, Aurum Argentum, and Bezoar
Potabile, Vnicornu Minerale, Vnicornu Solare, Bezoarticum Joviale, Aquila
Imperialis, etc. are some of their Illustrious Titles. But this I have often
observed, that the more Precious and Thundering a Name is bestowed on the
Preparation, commonly the more Dangerous and Dreadful it is in reality. If it
be called a Liquor, or Powder of Life, you may the more certainly conclude it
Deadly, as without dispute it will prove it self if you should chance to
mistake the Dose.

A man would think that Aurum Potabile, no less than a Golden Draught, should
be a fair invitation, and a sufficient recommendation to Patients, to Taste a
little of its Goodness. And if you should read concerning it, Arnoldus de villa
nova, Raymund Lully, Isaacus Hollandus, or Bombastical Paracelsus, you would
find, that they did not ascribe more Virtues to all their Emeticks,
Catharticks, Diaphoreticks, Diuretics, Anodynes, Stypticks, Alexipharmicks,
etc. than they did to this single, but Rich Draught or Aurum Potabile. So that
if any thing in nature (the Tincture only excepted) could have obtained the
Reputation of a Panacea, this must in all likelihood have been the very thing.
For Gold must have procured it, let it be what it will; that which will open
all Locks, that which will abate the Rigorous Principles of most Philosophers,
and that which will open an entrance into the secretest Arcana, whether of
Chemists, or others, may be very well allowed to do as many and as great
things, as the best that can be named. This same Gold is the End, and Crown of
Blessings, that our Fiery Philosophers do Labor, and Sweat for; this is the
Cordial they so earnestly contend for, to Comfort their drooping Spirits, after
so many sereval disappointments in their broken Vessels, and fruitless
repetitions of their Experimental Preparations of that nimble Proteus, Mercury.

And yet after all their Calcinations, Solutions, Extractions, Digestions, and
I know not how many different Transmutations of the Glorious Metal; what do
they attain at last in this their Aurum Potabile, but a mere Solution of Gold,
by Corrosive Spirits (whether they do preserve their Corrosion entire, or it be
a little abated by some Alkali Spirits, or Salts, it is no great matter which)
but the Gold is never the better for Physical Use, by this Artificial
Corrosion, nor the Spirits the more Innocent, for being Impregnated with that
Noble Metal.

I cannot easily conceive, what should cause them thus to torture their
Invention upon this Royal Metal, unless basely to impose on the Vulgar, and
adapt their Endeavors to the humors and prejudices of the Common people. For
if an Ignorant poor man finds himself much out of order, what can he imagine
will more Comfort his poor Heart, than what he so much wants, and works for,
Gold? The first thing that either he, or the people about him, can ever think
of, is a Cordial immediately, or else he is quite undone. If they come to make
Applications to a Doctor, or a Good Lady, on his behalf, it is for a Cordial to
Comfort the poor man in his weakness; and if he has but that before he dies,
they are very well satisfied, that he wanted not the Means which were necessary
to preserve him. Now it is easy to persuade most men, that Gold is a sufficient
Cordial, but they are not all Competent Judges, whether it receives any further
advantage from this Ostentation of Curious Preparation, or whether it be not
made worse, that is, more dangerous, than it was before. It is but swimming
against the stream, to tell them, Gold, any ways Prepared is not so much a
Cordial, as it was in their Pockets. And the Apothecaries know very well, what
great satisfaction they give in Gilding their Pille, Bolus's, and Electuaries,
that it is no insignificant Ornament, that is contributed by that Customary
Artifice.

Some persons will Boil Gold in Broths, for Consumptive people, and if a strong
Fancy goes along with it, it may signify something more than a mere Chip in
Porridge; but otherwise unless a Fancy concurrs to help it, I cannot think it
will work any very great Wonders. (...). 5: cap. 7.
Avicenna an Old Author, well known in the Schools, thought there were notable
qualities indeed in Gold, more than every body knows of, as that it was good
against Poison, that it would hinder a Woman from Miscarrying, and especially,
that if it were put into the Mouth of an Infant newly born, it would hinder the
Devil from exercising any power over the Babe: And hence, no doubt, it was that
a Laudable Custom did arise, Of always keeping some Money in the Pocket, in
order, they say, to keep the Devil out. Lib. de Medic. Cordial.
But that same Author in another place does put the Excellency of Gold between
the Emerald and Silver, not so Cordial as the Emerald, but more Cordial than
Silver; as if he had taken out the Virtues of it, and weighed them narrowly in
a pair of Scales. Fernelius thinks fit to commend it, as wholly free from
Metallic Impurities, and that consideration was doubtless no small one, to
others who think no Remedy good for any thing, that is not Artificially Refined
from supposed Natural Impurities. And yet as Pure as it is, Paracelsus thought
it wanted abundance of Preparation, before he would believe it fit to Cure, as
he pretended with it, both Gout and Leprosy. But of his way of Curing before.
Brassavolus, Baccius, Fallopius, Erastus, Rondeletius, and diverse other Eminent
men were quite of another opinion, and thought it better for Coin, than
Physical use.

And yet upon serious Consideration, if there be any way at all of using Gold
Physically, this plain, innocent, and easy way of Boiling it, seems in my
conception to be the very best, and I am sure, the safest, and that which I
would therefore sooner recommend and put to the Trial, than the most (vain)
Glorious Potable Preparation of it, by Paracelsus, Quercetan, Crollius,
Libavius, Antony, or others. For all the Metalls are Innocent enough of
themselves, and in Infusion and Substance, some of them have very Extraordinary
Effects. But if we once come to unlock their Bodies, and by Corrosive
Dissolvents to Change their Nature, the case then strangely alters, and instead
of Mild, Gentle, and Innocent Medicines, we shall obtain the most Violent, and
Dreadful, that Art can furnish us with. The Preparations of Antimony and
Mercury will, in a few Grains be apt to Vomit, or Purge a man into his Grave,
if there be not tender care taken with them; whereas you may Boil, or Infuse in
Water, a Pound of them at a time, as they are in their Natural Principles, and
you shall perceive but little more sensible Difference, than from a Draught of
fair water. Notwithstanding the latter is certainly a most Excellent Remedy in
the Worms, and the first some do magnify for Sweetning the Blood, and other
good effects, but I could never observe any great matters from it. The plain
Infusion of Iron might likewise here be mentioned; but of that more hereafter.

Andreas Libavius in a large account about the Aurum and Argentum Potabile,
Apocal. Hermet. par. prior cap. 19.
tells us a notable Story of a Physician he knew, who was so vainly transported
with a Preparation (of Gold, it is to be presumed) or a Red Precipitate, which
he called the Red Dragon, that with one Grain of it he would undertake to work
Miracles, and Cure any Disease in Nature. But the World soon lost his
Wonder-working Secret; for within six Months at least, ( Semestre was the time)
this notable Chemist happened to Die of an Apoplexy, which the Dragon could not
Conquer; and some of his Wise Admirers fell into such a Rage upon it, that they
Blasphemously taxed the Goodness of God to Mankind, in taking away such
Precious Artists, before they thought fit; and yet perhaps it might be an Act
of the Greatest Goodness to us, to prevent such Desperate men from doing
further mischief; nay, from downright Murdering and Destroying. Those they
Kill, cannot speak or accuse their Chemist, and they themselves are so far from
acknowledging, or being sensible of the greatest Error, that they will put on a
Face of Brass to defend their Miscarriages.

After all, this great Chemist, Libavius, a main asserter and defender of the
Transmutation of Metals, does not forbear to own, that a great many Cheating
Rascals made pretenses to the Aurum Potabile, as well as those Chemists
before-named. And if once Miracles come to be wrought by the mere virtue of
Preparation, whether from Aurum, Argentum, Antimony, or Mercury, etc. without
any Thanks to Methodical Application, Physicians do certainly spend their
thoughts to fine purpose, and a Blockhead that blows the Fire, and learns how
to Dress a great Remedy, may in time fairly come to succeed his Master
Operator, and set up for a mighty Curer without any more to do.

But before I leave this Precious Subject, it may not be amiss to speak one
word of Aurum Fulminans, a Precipitate of Gold from a Solution in Aq^e Regalis.
This Powder is of that prodigious force, that a Grain or two of it, the least
quantity of a thing imaginable, being set to heat in a Spoon near the Fire,
will give a Bounce like unto a Musket, and this in the open Air too without
the advantage of any resistance; and Crollius affirms, that a Scruple of this
Powder will equalize the noise and force of half a pound of Gunpowder.

There is another Powder mentioned in Lemery, in his Remarks on the Aurum
Fulminans; it consists of 3 parts of Niter, 2 parts of Salt of Tartar, and one
of Sulphur. This Powder being likewise heated in a Spoon to the quantity of a
Dram, will give as Thundering a Noise as a Cannon it self. But commend me
rather to the Fulminating Gold. Course of Chemistry.
For Metallic Preparations will be sure to do more than others, and if they
do'nt sometimes appear to do more Good, they will be sure to do more Hurt,
before you are aware. And if Metallic, even Solar Preparations, can thus
Thunder it away, I humbly take it to be no very good Recommendation of them for
Remedies, and where there is occasion for Sweating, would much rather trust to
Venice Treacle, and Sage Posset Drink, than to two or three or half a dozen
Grains of this Dreadful Solar Powder.

CHAP. VI.
The Verity of Transmutation of Metals best judged of by Matter of Fact. Some
Authors mentioned in Defense of it. Yet all pretended Transmutations thought to
be mere Counterfeits. Adulterations to be cautiously treated of. The
Philosophers Stone probably a mere Collusion and Trick. Wenceslaus's point
examined. No one Alchymist ever yet so Rich as to be Envyed. An Argument
against Projection, drawn from Providence. The baser Metals not Transmuted.
That supposing the Truth of Projection, it is the greatest Folly to endeavor
after it. The Process always undertaken different ways, though by the Rules of
the same Author. Penotus a sad Example of what Alchymists ought to fear.

AS for the Metallurgia, or the Art of Transmutation of Metals, it is not a
subject so properly to be decided by Argument and Reason, as by Trial and
Experience. Let our Reasonings be never so strong and cogent, yet if plain
Matter of Fact evinces the contrary, we ought immediately to acquiesce, and
submit to the Real Truth.

Now I must confess, I never was Alchymist enough, to try the utmost that is
Possible to be done in these matters. Libavius, Penotus, Hogelande, etc. do
stiffly maintain the Transmutation, as indubitable, both of Mercury, Lead, and
the like Metals into Gold, and of the viler Metals into one another. Sennertus,
a sober Author, De Chymic. cum Arist. and Galen. consens. ac Dissensu, cap. 2.
is so well persuaded of the possibility, that he thinks it rash, and
imprudent, to deny it. He says, there are Fountains at Smolnitium, a Town in
Hungary, which will turn Iron into the best Copper. Nay, that not only Natural,
but Artificial Vitriolick Waters are able to turn Iron into Copper, a Red
powder sticking to the Iron, which being Melted, will become a good Copper. And
therefore he taxes Nicolaus Guibertus with a greater Impudence than ordinary,
for denying absolutely any Perfect Transmutation.

But notwithstanding we have had so many plausible Stories of this, and that
man's having gotten the Tincture, and almost every body fancies he can Transmute
the Viler Metals with ease, yet I cannot tell how to give up my full Assent,
even to the Possibility in any one. I know things may be Counterfeited with
great cunning and dexterity, but still the most that can be made of them is,
that they are Counterfeits. And I never yet met with, or heard of any such
Collusion, but that if it be brought to a narrow, and Critical Test, it may by
an Able Artist be distinguished from the True kind. Separate two Likes, and you
shall hardly resolve which is which; but bring them together, and try the
difference, according to Art, and you cannot easily be mistaken, or imposed
upon. And it is too well known, that Pseudo-Chymists, the Spawn, if not
Legitimate Issue of the more Learned Alchymists, being bred up, and instructed
under those Masters, have such an admirable faculty of Counterfeiting
Medicines, that it is now become a set Employment, and there is hardly one that
is worth a Counterfeiting, that can escape their Contrivances, and they are as
busy as Bees, 'till they have found out a Cheat for it. I could here extend
upon a great many things, and lay open their base Adulterations, in a great
many particulars, that I cannot so much as think of without Indignation, and
violent Transport; and therefore I had rather pass by the particulars, than
teach wicked men how to do Mischief. And indeed all Authors should be exceeding
careful of showing their Knowledge in those base Impostures. A hint how to
discover the Adulteration does always well, but the other deserves to be buried
in the deepest silence. And for this reason Galen was very averse to the
Writing a History of Poisons, least the World might happen to receive from it
more Harm than Good, and the Woolves, and Monsters of Humane Society might
thereby improve their Art of Destruction.

The World sufficiently rings about Raymund Lully, Arnoldus de villa nova,
Roger Bacon, Kelley, Hogelande, Boethius, and several others here and there, as
if they were all sanctified upon Earth, with the Power of Projection. And our
Cotemporary Wenceslaus had the luck to find out a Treasure of this kind, very
lately, being still alive. The Romantic Story was writ by John Joachim Becher,
and said to be published at the request of the Honorable, and most Eminent Mr.
Boil. Magnalia Naturae Printed in Blackfriars 1680.
And yet we may observe of this Wenceslaus, that he was one of the greatest
Libertines upon Earth in his Moralls, that notwithstanding he had a very large
Pot of this Powder of Projection, enough one would think to have bought Empires
with, yet his Pot had a Bottom in about two years time, and he grew to be one
of the most Wretched Notorious Cheats that ever pretended to Alchymy. He was
dipped over Head and Ears in Debts of all sorts, and was fain to vend Poudred
Cinnabar, Red Lead, and the Caput Mortuum of Aqua Fortis boiled, and such like
Ingredients instead of the Genuine Powder, mixing also therewith some Filings
of Copper, to make it appear the more Glittering and Gold-like. The Grand
Elixir at first hearing of, and after having passed an Ordinary Test, strikes
men with such Admiration and Reverence, that they are as unwilling strictly to
Examine all its Natural qualifications, as to dispute the Existence of the
Deity they pay Worship to, or the Power of a Mighty Monarch that they live
under. If there be a true Transmutation, as I cannot but somewhat doubt, the
Trade shall certainly make a man a Beggar instead of an Emperor, and the
Expense that is employed about bringing it to a Tinging Perfection, shall
abundantly over-weigh the Profit that it is to produce. We have had no small
number of Alchymists in our own days, who were many of them born to fair
Estates, and yet all after much Bragging, Counterfeiting, and Lying, have grown
Contemptibly Poor and Miserable. If ever one of them had born up against the
Stream, and surmounted the necessary consequences of Folly; if one of them all
had happened to appear as Pompous as they aimed, in any other, than the Fools
Paradise, it had been a better Argument for the Reality of Projection, than a
thousand Tricks and Stratagems, that they have been certainly Guilty of, and
which have at several times been discovered to the World.

I shall urge one Consideration more, upon the Supposition of the Philosophers
Stone, that there may be, or has been such a thing unquestionably, and without
disguise: I offer, whether it be consistent with the Established and
Unalterable Providence of God over the World, that one man should have that
advantage over his Fellow Creatures, as to multiply Riches without end, as it
must be supposed that man may, who is Perfect Master of this Secret. I never
understood yet, but we are all born to Toil and Labor, and all subject to the
various Revolutions of Fortune. The Greatest Monarch is subject to the same
Laws of Nature with Boors and Peasants; he is not out of the Possibility of
being Robbed of all his Wealth, of being Despised, or overturned even by his
Vassals. And there are Bounds determined by Providence, beyond which the most
Ambitious Prince can never pass. But granting the conceit of All powerful
Projection, the Laws of Nature are subject to be overwhelmed, by the
Inexhaustible Purse of a Whimsical Philosopher Paramount. So that I cannot but
necessarily conclude, that if the Tinger's Artificial Gold had been Con'd over
again and again, some Flaw or other would have been discovered in the Wonderful
Jewel, and the Philosopher would have been soon tumbled down from his imaginary
Royalty in the Mineral Kingdom.

As to the Transmutation of other Metals into one another, though there is no
such danger of losiing Life or Liberty by being known to do such Feats, yet it
is a rare thing to meet with an Alchymist that will offer to convince us
thoroughly even in those matters. I know some will talk as if they could do
every thing in nature, and say what they will, they will take it very unkindly
to be Contradicted in their Bold Pretenses. But I never heard of any yet, who
offered to set up for the Merchant, and Traffick'd with Copper for Coals. Some
of them perhaps have ventured their Neck to make Pieces of Eight, and will show
you a Medal or two which may pass off much as well, as a Gilded Brass-Ring.
They will make you a Silver at Half a Crown an Ounce, and this Silver may be
worked into a Plate Vessel just as Wholesome as Copper it self. And after all,
the Famous Artist had better have been bred to the Plough, and might that way
have gotten a better, and I am sure, an Honester Livelihood.

But again, supposing the Truth of Projection, as largely as they would fancy,
yet can such a Rarity in an Age, such a Phaenix as Paracelsus calls it,
sufficiently encourage a Sober man to lay aside all other thoughts, and to
dedicate his whole time to the vain hopes of attaining the Grand Elixir? A
Sorry Slovenly Fellow seeing my Lord Mayor in all his Pomp and Greatness, had
much more reason to conclude, This we must all come to, than a fond Alchymist,
because he has seen some Books, which offer to describe this Great Work, and
because once in a long time, and one among an Infinite number of Laborers, is
said to have gotten the Prize, that therefore he must needs be another of those
Fortunate men. There be diverse Books which Teach Magic, and how to Conjure, as
there be also diverse which would instruct us in the Process. And yet I am
strangely misinformed by others, who had as much mind to Conjure, as these to
find out the Philosophers Stone; if all the Arts of Conjuration, that are
taught in Books, can help a too Inquisitive man to Practice Magic, as it is
talked of. A man should no more Believe all that he Reads, than all that he
Hears. A Lie, or a Mistake, is a Lie or a Mistake, whether it be Printed, or
Told. And some Writers have been as Guilty of Falsehood or Inadvertency, as
those that do not Write, but Talk. And the same Al-Chymical Writers, who would
pretend to Teach the World Great Improbabilities, if not Impossibilities on
this subject, do, we find plainly, take a larger Liberty than ordinary, in
recommending the Virtues of their long-winded and long-worded Magisterial
Preparations. Lord, how Happy should the World be in Remedies, if the Hundredth
part of what they aloud maintain, would upon Trial prove Constantly True! Is
there ever a one Great Chemical Medicine, Great I mean in respect of its
Preparation, that Wonders are not spoken of, and long Panegyricks made of, as
if they were all to come within a hairs breadth of the Universal Medicine. And
I cannot but here declare, that upon discoursing the most Eminent Practical
Physicians, (and in this Town we want not Opportunities to do it) I never yet
heard one man, whose Judgment I had reason to value, presume to own, that in
any one Great Preparation he had found Experience fully to answer the pretended
Virtues ascribed to it by Chemical Authors. For if a Remedy has its effect in
some slight and indifferent case, it does not follow, that it must needs
perform the same in greater cases of the like nature. And that which will agree
very well with one sort of Constitution, shall as absolutely disagree with
others under the same kind of Disease.

So that if the Grand Process were to be Learned by Books, it is of no small
moment to be considered, that every Author varies his Hints after a Different
manner, and takes care to wrap up his Information in such Clouds of Darkness,
that I verily believe it is absolutely Impossible for Two Operators exactly to
pursue the same Method from the same Author, without Confederacy, though both
should as strictly as possible follow the Instructions of the same Book. And
most of those very men, who are said to have gained the Tincture, do ascribe it
rather to Chance than Cunning, and their Choicest Rules will hardly enable them
a second time to perform, what upon a former Essay they stumbled upon by Chance.

Now for those that will not be persuaded, who will needs run gadding after
Chimaera's, or Wills with a Wisp, before they are misled into forlorn
inaccessible places, or fall into the Dirt, which they will never afterward
wipe off; I would desire them to read, and consider well the sad Story of their
Predecessor Penotus. He was an Alchymist, Hand and Heart, a man of no
contemptible capacity in other respects, but most wretched and Unfortunate in
his Chemical Adventures. Senuertus tells us, De consens. and Dissensu Galen.
and Perip. came Chymicis, cap. 2.
he received a Letter concerning him from a Friend of his in Berne in
Switzerland, dated November 1617. who writ him word, that at Yverdon, a Town in
that Canton, this Penotus had lately died in the Hospital. He had been a great
Vindicator of Alchymy all his life, 'till toward his latter end; he had spent
all his Fortune, in quest of those Vain Treasures, and after all was reduced to
that Extremity, that an Hospital was the best shelter he could find. A little
before he died, which was in the 98 year of his Age, (and if he had gotten the
Philosophical Idol, that he Worshipped so long, I dare engage he would never
have lived to near that Great Age,) before he Died; Fabritius ab Aquapendente,
the Famous Surgeon makes him a Visit, and pressed the poor man now to impart
his Secrets, for the Good of the Public; to which request he at length
replied, and it is so true, that it is pity it should be a Secret: That if he
had an Enemy he wished ill to, and did not dare to assail by force, he could
wish him no greater a Curse, than that he would give himself up to the Study of
Alchymy.

CHAP. VII.
Of Distillation. Distilled Waters wherein Useful; and how best drawn. Waters
Distilled from Animals, as Capon-Water, Snail-Water, etc. and the D^stillata
Restaurantia, insignificant or ineffectual Medicines. The Juscula Consummata
much more Nutritive. Milk-Waters improperly Distilled, and apt to breed a
Dropsy in Consumptive People. Diverse Fruits, and Plants, etc. which yield not
their Virtues upon Distillation in an Alembick. The Empyreumatical Distilled
Oils rather Creatures of Fire, than Natural Principles of the Plant. Zwelfer's
best way of Distilling Waters; and a Remark on the use of Distillation in
Germany. Distillations in a Reverberatory much more liable to suspicion, than a
Sand-heat, or Balneum. The difference between a Real Physician, and an
Empirick. A Solution of Sublimate Corrosive in Water, given by one for the
Worms. Fire how far useful in the Preparation of Remedies. The Reverberatory
Fire described. Acid Spirits to be tenderly used. Dismal effects from Acid
Spirits recounted by Gaspar Hoffman. Acid Spirits to be given rather Dulcified.
Chemical Oils in some respects Suspicious. An instance in proof of it, from
Sack and Claret; and another from the Dissection of a Notorious Sack-Drinker.
The Eleosacchara one of the best ways of giving Distilled Oils. That Fire can
increase the very Weight of some Remedies. Volatile Spirits are Blessings we
owe to Chemistry, and why. How Volatile Salts do differ from the Spirits. The
Fixing Volatile Salts, and Volatilizing Fixed Salts, are but time lost. No great
difference between one Volatile, and another, nor between one Fixed Salt and
the other. In what uses both sorts do agree. No Natural Alkali Salts; but all
produced by Fire. Natural Alkalis recommended, both in themselves, and in
regard to their Dose. A Safe and Honest Rule.

DIstillation being the most Comprehensive Operation of Chemistry, and yielding
singly a greater number of Preparations than all the rest united together, I
shall be somewhat larger on this Copious subject, and speak both to the Nature
of Distillation in its several branches, and to some of the Principal Medicines
that are wont to be Distilled.

Distilled Waters, whether Compound, or Simple, if they are Fresh, and partake
strongly of the Plant, are doubtless of very good use, in that they are ready
on all sudden occasions, both for the Basis of Juleps, and to serve for
Vehicles to Powders, Electuaries, etc. They will Preserve a good while, which
Decoctions will not, and the Juyces, which are commonly more Effectual, yet are
not so agreeable to the Palate.

Quercetan commends them, and justly enough, as much the better, when drawn in
a Vaporous Bath, or in a Balneum, by which means the Empyreume that is apt to
attend them is wholly avoided, and the Natural Virtues of the Plants are kindly
communicated without any Impression of Fire. And if thus the Plants are
Distilled, without addition of Water, they are things of excellent use.

Waters Distilled from Flesh, as the many sorts of Aqua Caponis, Hirundinum,
etc. as they are commonly performed, the Destillata Restaurantia, Snail Waters,
and the like, seem rather a show of Art, then capable of answering their
Intentions. Some Ingenious, or Leading men, have thought fit to flourish with
their Pen, and show how they can curiously expatiate, and leave the sign of an
Artist behind them, upon every occasion that offers it self. But if they had
Deliberately considered, they would certainly have found, that the Nourishment
of Animals could not this way have been Communicated. An insignificant
Elementary Water may indeed be Drawn off, and such as does sensibly enough
partake of the Aromaticks, or other Ingredients, commonly added to the
Distillation, but the Alimentary Juice of Animals being of a viscous jelly
nature, will not so easily rise, but remains at bottom; and they that are used
to the Distillation of Urine, the Serum of the Blood, or to that of the Blood
it self, will find, that the Spirits though Volatile, will not come, 'till
forced at last by a good Fire, that abundance of Insipid water must first
separate from the Urine, before that Excellent Spirit will vouchsafe to show
its self. Nor will those Spirits free themselves from their Clogs, or be in a
capacity to exert their Activity, to the best advantage, until they have
undergone a second trial by Cohobation, and Rectification.

The Juscula Cousummata, or strong Expressions of Decocted Animals, will
nourish to much better purpose and effect, than such fruitless, and improper
Distillations.

There Is another thing grown into much request of late, and yet as
insignificant as the former, Distilled Milk I mean. Some do prescribe it as
familiarly as any other Distilled water, as if it would keep good for a year
together, and every Apothecary were as well provided with it, as Rose, or
Black-Cherry water. Whereas it is a thing that will be apt to sour sooner than
we are aware, and Apothecaries upon whose hands it has happened to sour, will be
apt rather to use that, such as it is, which they have ready by them, than to
Distill afresh upon every small occasion, or fancy. But if they did, I do'nt see
what great benefit we should obtain. Nay perhaps the best of it does more harm
than Good. For the Water, the mere Water that rises, is so far from being
egregiously Nourishing, that I cannot esteem it so good as Whey, either in
respect of the thin Nourishment, or the Detersive quality, which in some
measure accompanies ordinary Whey. It is indeed a sort of Distilled Water, but
of very little or no advantage in Consumptive cases, and many are of the mind,
that Milk fresh from the Cow, and especially Asses Milk, is another-guess sort
of Jewel, than the Distilled Milk Waters. Besides, it is well known in
Consumptions, and it is pity but it were more thought on, that Milk Waters have
very often brought the Patients into a Dropsy, and so added one Great
Inconvenience to another. From a Weeks taking of it, their Bodies have begun to
Swell, and when a man's once Declining and Pining away, a little help make the
Disease Irrecoverable, but a great deal of care and caution is requisite to set
them up again.

There are a great many sorts of things that will not communicate their Virtues
and Properties, when Distilled in an Alembick, in a Balneum Mariae, the usual
way of the Compound Waters of the Shops; though sometimes they may be also
Distilled in the same Vessel in Sand, or else in a Copper-Vesica, remembering
always then to add some Appropriate Liquor to the Ingredients. For example:
Many Acid, or Sweet-Fruits, as Pears, Apples, Quinces, Dates, Figs, Almonds,
Barberries, Myrobalans; the Roots of Comfrey, Tormentill, Bistort, Burnett, or
other Astringent Roots; also the Roots of Succory, Sorrel, Bugloss,
Marshmallows, and Liquorice; Balaust Flowers, Sloes, Acacia, and Hypocistis;
likewise many Esculent Plants, and also Woods, etc. These upon Distillation in
an Alembick, by pouring Liquors upon them, do yield out none of their Natural
Virtues, and you can obtain nothing else in reality, besides a kind of Insipid
Phlegm, though you should pursue the Distillation for a Week together. And the
same may be said of Distilled Catharticks.

And for the other way of Distilling Vegetables in a Glass Retort Luted, with a
great Fire, and driving out, after the Phlegm, first an Acid Empyreumatical
Spirit, then a Yellowish, and at last a Blackish Oil, I am apt to think they
are rather Creatures of the Fire, than Natural Principles of the Vegetable, and
are fitter for Hysterical Women to Smell to, and to make Frications withal
outwardly, than to take inwardly as Common Medicines.

Zwelfer, an understanding, and through-paced Chemist in the most Rational
Sense, Animad v. in Classs. 15 Pharmac. August.
does after all sorts of trials recommend the most ordinary and common way of
Distilling Waters, with a Body and Head in Sand, to be the very best of all.
And in Germany indeed the Art of Distillation is now so well understood, that I
have heard a Physician, who Traveled lately through it, should say, he was
more certain to find in every House a Still and a Furnace, than a Kettle, or
Drying Pan. So that if ever we have fresh Intelligence concerning any Modern
Philosophers Stone, it must be thence we are to expect it, and with very good
reason too, where all Hands are at Work.

Distillation is usually performed either in a Balneum, or in Sand, or in a
Reverberatory Furnace. The two first, and especially the first of all, are of
exceeding benefit to the good improvement of Natural Remedies, and the first is
therefore advisedly and judiciously recommended in abundance of places in our
Dispensatory. The Reverberatory is the last, and Extremest trial, that it is
possible for the Ingenious Invention of mankind to contrive, in order to
Torture mixed bodies, and force them to Confess or Impart their Real, or
Pretended Virtues. And I am afraid, that as people upon the Wrack do often
Confess Untruths, in hopes thereby to deliver themselves from that Extremity of
Torture, so Natural Bodies though they have no Intelligence of the Chemists
Cruelty to them, in thus Anatomizing or else Analyzing them with the hottest
Fire that can be made, yet that they often reward their pains with Disguises
instead of Realities, and are forced by the Violent Fire to Communicate False,
and supposed Principles, and such as are not Naturally in them, after the
manner that we obtain them.

In a Sand-heat may be drawn Volatile Spirits, as of Urine, Blood, Soot,
Hartshorn; and the Spirit of Sal Armoniack may be likewise so drawn, according
to our Dispensatory, much better and more innocently in my opinion, than
according to others in a Reverberatory. Such kind of Heats are not so Violent,
nor do they contribute that strong Impression of Fire, which must needs be
communicated by the way of a Reverberatory. And the interposition of Water or
Sand, besides the Furnace wherein the Vessel is placed, are very considerable
circumstances to preserve the Distilled Liquors from a too great Participation
of Fire. And howsoever Fond Chemists, or Bigoted Operators may smile at the
imagination, that their Adored, and all-powerful Vulcan can do any hurt to
Remedies, yet upon calm thoughts, and an impartial consideration they will at
length find, that Fire in its full force is a most Destructive Consuming
Principle, and that we ought in Conscience to be very tender and timorous in
the use of such Medicines, as have plentifully received, and I may say,
Imbodied Fire into their very Substance, and Essential Composition.

The difference between a Real Physician, and a Quack-Pretender, does commonly
appear in this, that the first is Cautious, Deliberate, and Prudently Timorous
in all Doubtful cases, or Dangerous circumstances, he does generally to others,
in their several degrees, as he would be content to be dealt withal himself
under the same circumstances; the Latter is Rash, Inconsiderate, and stiffly
heady in every thing he does, his Ignorance makes him Daring, and he always
ventures to Promise Infallible success, from the nicest, most uncertain, and
most Desperate Remedies that are known in Nature, or contrived by Art. If it
were possible for him to give Fire in all its Terror and Flames, you may be
sure he would not boggle at it. The more Suspicious a Medicine is to a Prudent
Considerate man, the more Bold he is in the use of it; as if he had a
Privilege to do what he lists, in no less a matter than Life and Death, from
his Empirical qualification of Ignorance and Impudence inseparably mixed
together. He never exhibits a Vomit with less than Mercurius vitae, Turbith
Mineral, or some subtle Preparation of Antimony; his Purge never fails to be
deleterious, or Mercurial; and as those men do often the utmost mischief by
such Violent Preparations, so they sometimes happen to do marvels, which an
Understanding man cannot, because he dares not safely venture. I have met with
a Story of a Madman, who endeavoring to knock out his Brains, brought on
himself such a Haemorrhage, as immediately Cured him of his Madness; and of
another, who Stabbing a Daggar into his Breast, in Despair, Cured himself of an
Impostume; and yet if others should venture to try the same Experiments, I
would not Promise them a bare Possibility of the like success.

An Unlicensed Practitioner in Physic, in this Town, was once so free as to
acquaint me, as an inestimable Secret too, that he used for a Remedy in the
Worms, a Solution of a small quantity of Sublimate Corrosive its self in Water,
and he seemed Transported with delight at the very mention of so notable a
Remedy. Mercurius Dulcis, its Younger Brother, by three or four Sublimations,
was despised by him as nothing. And Wormseed, Aloes, Burnt Hartshorn, Savine,
Corallina, etc. were fit to be Laughed at as Childrens Remedies, not his.
Sublimate Corrosive was his Delight and Glory, and he could hardly express the
good he had observed from it. I could not but be very Serious, at the hearing
such a Relation, and it affected me with Pathetical thoughts, that the Common
Civility of Conversation made me forbear at that time to urge. For it is a most
Sad and bewailing Reflection, that the Rankest Poisons in the World, without a
mask, should be given inwardly to Innocent Children, whose tender condition can
hardly bear the most Mild, and Gentle things of all, without a great deal of
struggling.

But to return, Fire as bad as it may prove, is the Deity of Besotted Chemists.
They can hardly allow a good Word to any kind of Remedy, that has not past
through the Fiery Trial. And perhaps it may be a main, though an unperceivable
reason, why they so much admire all Metallic Preparations above others,
because they do undergo the greatest degree of Fire. I am no enemy to Fire any
otherwise than as it is an enemy to us. The Providence of God has so ordered
the whole frame of this World, in every particular that I know of, that upon
serious consideration every individual thing in nature will be found exceeding
Useful, in some respect or other, either to the whole in general, or some
remarkable part of it. Fire it self, that is so terrible an Element, when
exceeding its due bounds, when it is our Master, and not our Servant, is
otherwise of as great use and service to mankind, as any one thing that can be
named. And a Moderate Fire will as much help to improve Remedies, as an
excessive one will serve to destroy them. When it is managed as it ought to be,
it opens bodies, unlocks their faculties, and is a very great Assistant to Art
in the right Preparation of diverse Medicines; but if it be driven to Extremes,
and Artificially Reverberated upon Remedies with the strongest Union of heat
that can be contrived, it shall entirely destroy the Radical and Natural
virtues of mixed bodies, and instead of those that Nature ingrafted in them,
shall Create New ones, which whither they be upon second thoughts of greater
service to the World, than what an Infinite Wisdom did, or was able to effect,
I cannot but seriously doubt.

The Nature of a Reverberatory Fire is best considered in a Laboratory; there
you may see the Retort, which contains the Ingredients to be Distilled, placed
in the midst of the most Violent Fire, that Chemical Art and Invention could
tell how to contrive. For many hours, and days together the strongest force of
Fire is experimented, the Retort and the Ingredients in it are all the while
converted into as true a Fire, as the Wood or Coals themselves, only upon
looking into the Furnace, you will see the Coals in form of burning Coals, and
the Retort in form of a burning Retort.

Now there are but very few things in nature, which can endure such violent
burnings, without considerable alterations, if not Transmutations into other
kinds. There may be one Metal, Gold, and one Stone, the Asbestos, or Amianthus,
which will not Consume from what it was, or yield out Chemical Principles, by
this continuance of the greatest Fire; but most of the others will yield out
Spirits, Oils, or Salts, which prove like Swords or Daggers, Fatal in the hands
of Children or Fools, and ought to be used by the Wisest men with great
caution, and circumspection. Those vehement productions of Chemistry have
gained either Reputation or Contempt, according as the Brains of men have been
either hotter or cooler. But in this last Age, the Bellows have been blown with
fuller strength than ordinary, and Furnaces have become Schools, wherein some
men of Parts and Understanding, as well as hot-spurs and flashes, have pleased
to spend the greatest portion of their time, expecting by force of Art to bring
Nature to what they please.

And yet the Paracelsian Phaenix, which lived in the Golden Age, and in the
Kingdom of Vtopia, whither abundance of Alchymists have Traveled, is dead or
wholly lost to Inquisitive Philosophers. The most zealous Chemists can only
talk and write Miracles, but not perform them cleaverly; the most Famed
Preparations, which the Authors have bestowed large Panegyricks upon, and with
a most peremptory assurance have represented as Infallible Catholicons, do upon
trial in Faithful or Skillful hands not answer Expectation, or make good the
Promises concerning them.

As for the Distillation in a Reverbatory, it is found chiefly to produce,
either Acid Corrosive Spirits, or Burning Empyreumatical Oils. The Acid
Spirits, which can so powerfully Corrode, and Dissolve the strongest Metalls,
that they shall be reduced into a clear Liquor, will upon calm reflection to a
considering man appear too too capable of destroying the Tender Principles of
Life. And however they may be useful upon some very great occasions, and
therefore ought not to be wholly Banished out of Apothecaries Shops, yet in
ordinary or common cases, wherein they are now apt to be used much oftener than
is really necessary, I should think it the duty both of a Good Man, and an
Honest Physician, to be exceeding Cautious in the liberal use of these Acid
Spirits, as they ought most certainly to be in all other things, which may in
much Probability be of dangerous consequence.

Indeed for a small time Acid Spirits, (where Acids are requisite, or properly
Indicated) will give a strange check to the violence of some Diseases; but
continue their use a little longer than is fitting, and the Stomach, or some
Principal Part, or the whole Body in general will remarkably suffer in some
respect or other. I shall instance particularly in Spirit, or Oil of Vitriol,
Libello de Thermis Hirsbergens.
which Gaspar Hoffman maintains to have rendered diverse of his Patients
Cachectick, and very infirm, upon the continuance of it, though at first they
did seem to receive sensible Benefit, from its strengthening the Stomach,
creating an Appetite, and allaying the Defluxions; and upon the grounds of his
Particular Experience, he thinks fit to dissuade people from being too Bold
with this Acid Spirit, or from using it too long, least it should be found at
last to destroy the Natural Heat, which is necessary for Concoction; and least
it should bring inconveniences to the Body, which are rather to be lamented,
than afterward The same Author in another place asserts, That he saw some men,
who upon an unadvised long use of this Corrosive Spirit did at last (seem to)
Vomit up part of their Lungs all Corroded and colored like unto Vitriol; that
he saw one whose Liver seemed to come up in Bits; that diverse persons just
before their Deaths did grievously bewail their Error in accustoming their
Bodies to this Spirit, and that they felt their inward Parts all Burnt and
Corroded, and did suffer intolerable pains thereby. Particularly he mentions a
famous Limner, who would needs try an Experiment, and Cure himself of the Gout,
by the use of the Oil of Vitriol, but who instead of that had destroyed his
Vitals, and a little before his Death complained of Pungent Pains, like the
pricking of Needles all over his body. And hence you may see, that such Keen
Spirits are not be played with upon every slight occasion, and when they may,
or are to be used, they must not be insisted on too peremptorily or overlong.
It will not be amiss to remember again and again, that Medicines which owe
their existence to a strong Reverberatory Fire, are rather to be touched, than
dwelt upon; and I do not doubt, but it were much better for the World, if
Physicians had known nothing at all of those Great Chemical Preparations, than
for them to be so fondly in love with them, as never to part with them out of
their thoughts, or to be using them without fear or wit.

Acid Spirits may indeed be Dulcified with Rectified Spirit of Wine, whether by
a Digestive Circulation, or by a New Distillation in Sand, it matters not much.
And when they are so Dulcified, they lose great part of their Sting, and are
doubtless far better, and more Innocent as to Use, then with their Corrosion
entire. So that Prudent men, who are concerned in earnest about the good or ill
consesequences of their Remedies, do now oftener advise the Acid Spirits
Dulcified, of Salt, Vitriol, Niter, etc. than they will the simple Acids, in
their full strength and power. Besides, not only the effects are safer from the
Dulcified Spirits, but the Dose may be that way considerably enlarged, and
hereby we receive the good of Acids without the mischiefs, and they are more
adapted to the Tender Principles of Man.

The Nature of Distilled Chemical Oils may be a little guessed at by the very
Dose they are given in. Two or three drops at a time are generally thought to
be very fair, whither because they are loaded with more Fire than the Acid
Spirits, and are therefore the more Inflamable, or else because of their
sluggish motion out of the Stomach, and so Heating the Part the more
vehemently; Oils being not so nimble as Spirits in dispersing themselves, but
the Effects of Oils are the more durable. It Is certain that these Oils are very
Empyreumatical, and plainly enough discover, how nearly they are related to the
Fire that brought them forth.

Liquors which are impregnated with great store of Chemical Oils, are much more
dangerous to accustom the Body to, than such as are more Spirituous. For
example, the daily loading the Stomach with Sack will prove much sooner Fatal,
then a longer and larger use of French-Wines. Sack is known to yield abundance
of Oil, and but little Spirit, whereas French-Wines yield a great many Spirits,
and little or no Oil. And hence our great Sack-Drinkers do seldom hold out
long, for the Warm Oil continuing some time upon their Stomachs, the
Praeternatural Heat does by degrees Burn, and prey upon their Vitals; whereas
the Spirits in French-Wines do pass off nimbly into the Blood, and a good part
of those Wines is soon evacuated by the way of Urine, the burning force of the
remainder being in a short time equally distributed through the whole body, and
consequently the less pernicious.

To give an instance in proof of my assertion, I shall here offer a very
remarkable passage that has happened in my Practice. A Gentleman of about 36
years of Age had by degrees reduced his body to an insensible necessity of
Drinking Sack for his constant daily Liquor. He was a Dead man, if he had not
his Draughts of Sack several times every day. Nothing else at last could so
much as Warm his craving Stomach, insomuch that he quickly brought himself into
an Irrecoverable Consumption. After he had taken his Bed for good and all, he
sent for me, who soon acquainted his Friends, that it was too late for Physic
to do him any good. And when he was Dead, they desired me to Open his Body, and
see what his Intemperance in Sack had there produced. And I found his Liver so
thoroughly Boiled with the Constant Heat, that a Sound Liver could not well be
more Boiled over the Fire, than his was by his use of Sack. It was in Color
and Brittleness the very same as a long-boiled Liver can be. And though Diet
can qualify the Heat of a Living Liver; yet I am sure no Art can Vnboil it
again, any more than make a new one.

Nevertheless I would not wholly condemn the use of Chemical Oils, as
altogether Unsafe in respect of inward use. The Eleosacchara Cinnam. Sassafr.
Citr. Mac. Faenicul. etc. are not only pleasant and agreeable to the Palate,
but both acceptable and beneficial to the Stomach, and in Delicate natures will
be admitted kindly, where other Remedies breed an aversion. And I take that
Form of giving Distilled Oils to be one of the best that can be thought of; for
the Particles of Oil are excellently well separated by the quantity of Sugar,
an Ounce of Sugar commonly to a Scruple of Distilled Oil; so that hereby the
exception on account of Fire is avoided, and their good safely and pleasantly
in a proper Liquor communicated.

That Fire can really make a more than ordinary Impression upon Remedies, and
that in Distillation even their Weight and Substance can be increased by
admission of Fiery parts, may be seen in the Appendix to Monsieur Lemery's
Course of Chemistry, Page 34, 35 Remarks on Sal Saturni.
a Book wherein Chemistry is discoursed of without Vanity, Obscurity, or
Affectation, and I think I may say, a Chemical Book, that has never yet had its
Fellow, for an unprejudiced account, both of Chemical Remedies, and Chemical
Notions too.

Volatile Spirits are or may best be drawn in a more Mild and Natural Heat,
than that of the Reverberatory. The Spirits of Urine, Hartshorn, Sal Armoniack,
etc. are Blessings indeed, which we owe to Chemistry, and are of excellent use,
where the Spirits are spent or impoverished, or where the Blood is Soured by
Acids, and in diverse sorts of Obstructions. They come the nearest of any thing
to our Conception of the Animal Spirits, the Principle of Motion and Sensation,
and being of so exceeding fine and subtle a texture, that their Impression is
wont to be communicated, as swift as Lightning, from the Nervous Coat of the
Stomach to the Spirits dispersed in the other Nerves of the body, as in
Faintings and Swoundings is most sensibly perceived; without doubt these
Volatile Spirits, so nearly related to the Animal, are the most proper
Instruments in the World to restore and cherish the Animal, when either part of
them are lost, or all weakened by too long duty.

Volatile Salts are of the same nature with the Spirits; they are at first
drawn confusedly together, and afterward separated by Rectification, or
Sublimation. The Spirits are only a Volatile Salt dissolved in Phlegm, and a
thoroughly Rectified Volatile Spirit will not, or cannot dissolve those Salts,
the Liquor must be Phlegmatic that is to receive them. They are both of an
equal use, only they are a variety to please the different palats of patients,
and the different conceits of Artists.

As for the Fixing a Volatile Salt, or Volatilizing a Fixed Salt, with which
Conceits some Authors and Ingenious men have abundantly pleased themselves,
they will at last find that the Mysteries and Secrets have been far greater
than the Effects, that the Mountains bring forth little more than a Mouse, and
that the Preparation after all is nothing else but a mere Incorporation of a
Fixed and Volatile Salt together. Two contrary qualities have remitted their
Contrariety, and by mutual consent have met one another half way, and by the
result of this Coalition do at last compose a kind of Mixed Medicine, that is
neither Truly Volatile, nor Truly Fixed, but Hermaphroditical and Adiaphorous.
So that if you have occasion for a Volatile Remedy, here is an Imperfect
Volatile; and if you have occasion for a Fixed Remedy, here is an Imperfect
Fixed, and if the virtue of Preparation will make an Imperfect Medicine (
Imperfect I say, in order to answer an Indication) more effectual than a
Perfect, it may in time make a stronger degree of Fire to be not so Hot, or not
to Burn so much, as a less Intense degree, nay it may in time do the most
Absurd, and most impossible things in nature. The Volatile and Fixed qualities
are perhaps to draw the Medicine into an Aequilibrium, one to draw it upwards,
and the other downwards, so that it shall neither rise nor fall, but hang in the
middle, as Mahomet's Tomb is said to do, between two Loadstones. But it comes
to be much the same thing, whether we Heat a Cold Liquor, or Cool a Hot, 'twill
either way become Tepid; whether we make an Acid Sweet, or a Sweet Acid, 'twill
either way prove but Insipid. What a vain, but loud noise have some made about
Fixing Mercury into Lead, or Volatilizing Lead into Mercury? The Volatile Salt
of Tartar has been a Jewel that hardly any thing less than the Philosophers
Stone could equal. And yet after all, we buy Wind and Smoke, a Volatile will be
a Volatile, whatsoever it is drawn from; and though there may be some
Difference between Volatiles, as also between Fixed, yet it will prove to be
but a small Difference. They do both agree in helping to carry off serous
humors, where they abound, by way of Sweat; they do both agree in Sweetning
the Humors of the Body, when they turn Acid; both the Spirit of Sal Armoniack,
which is a Volatile Salt, and the Oil, or Salt of Tartar, which is a Fixed
Salt, will serve to precipitate Fluid Acid Salts, either without the Body in
Vessels, or within the Body, by way of Sweat, or Urine, after due preparations
first made.

Fixed Alkali Salts are made by burning the Plants into Ashes, or by
Calcination, then making a Lixivium, which is to be Filtrated and Evaporated,
'till the Salt remains alone. They have a good use in Physic, on diverse
occasions, as before, but being Creatures of the Fire, and having no existence,
as such, in nature, until Art and Fire have given them their Birth, as is at
large proved by Monsieur Lemery in his foresaid Book; a Prudent man ought
always to remember their Original, and not to remain too long in the
Continuation of them, no more than in the use of Fixed Acid Spirits, for the
same reason: For as the Acid Spirits, if obstinately urged, will Corrode and
Burn the tender Principles of Life, so will the Fixed Porons or Alkali Salts
pall and weaken their Tone, if indiscreetly or overlong continued.

There are Natural Alkalis enough, which will very well serve to answer the
Indication of Sweetning Acids, as there are also Natural Acids which will very
well serve to repair the Laxness of the Blood, without an unnecessary recourse
to those Creatures of Fire, Artificial Alkalis, or Acids. Pearl, Oriental
Bezoar, Crab's-eyes, Chalk, Coral, etc. are Alkalis which deserve not to be
neglected or forgotten; and if we would sometimes mend, or fortify our hand,
by giving a Drahm at a time, instead of a Scruple, or a few Grains, I dare be
bold to say, we should find the less need of Alkali Artificial Salts. And this
may be a Rule of good use, not to be too Timorous in the use of Safe, Innocent,
and Natural Remedies, as we cannot easily be Timorous enough in the use of
Dangerous, Uncertain, or Great Artificial Preparations. Some have said, and
perhaps well too, that Poison is not Poison in the hands of a good Physician,
and so Fire, or Fiery Medicines, may not be Fiery, or of a destructive nature,
in the management of a Cautious, and Understanding man. Yet still Poison,
though Corrected, or under-dosed, though exhibited by a Son of Art, and by the
best Physician in reality, will notwithstanding all our Care and Cunning, be
apt to exert its Primitive Radical faculties; and a good man ought always to
remember the Essential qualifications of a thing in dispute, or justly liable
to some Suspicion. Too much Boldness in Suspicious Medicines, and too much
Timerousness in those that are by all granted to be Safe and Wholesome, are
equally Extremes, and deserve to be blamed. Experience, the true Touchstone of
what is Reasonable, and what not, what is Safe, or Unsafe, will at last reduce
a Considering Serious man from either Extreme into the Middle way, which
instructs us to lay aside that Passion and Prejudice by which men are apt to be
led into Errors, and with an Impartial judgment, and mind grown steady in the
Right, and Flexible from the Wrong, to weigh and determine the inherent
Excellencies of Natural, and the adventitious Imperfections of Artificial
Remedies.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Mercury, why used by Chemists more than Gold or Silver. Why it were to be
wished that no Mercurial or Antimonial Preparations might be Bought or Sold
without Public Allowance. Mercurius Dulcis, a common Remedy, sometimes
Prepared from Arsenick, instead of Sublimate. The way of distinguishing True
Sublimate Corrosive from the Adulterate. The Quack-Pills universally Mercurial.
Argentum vivum, or Quicksilver why so called; and why Mercury. Chemists and
Alchymists, why Liars and Cheats. Mercury whither a Poison or not. The
Universal Pox in all probability never thoroughly Cured without it. In what
Diseases Mercury is now used. Six Great Remedies thought capable of answering
the whole Design of Physic. Hippocrates his Six Nessaries in order to make a
Physician, opposed to that Opinion. Unprepared Mercury recommended both in
Infusion and Substance. Hart-man prefers it before the Preparations. How it is
injurious to the Nerves; as also the Mineral Vapors to those who work in the
Mines. Notwithstanding diverse Sad Stories of Mercury, yet not concluded to be
an Essential Poison. A Caution in the use of it.

ANd now I have thus spoken to the main Operation of Chemistry, Distillation,
the Chemists Delight, and Theater, their chief Occupation and Trade, I shall
immediately descend to some Particulars, the Subjects of their usual Labors
and consider some of them as Impartially as I can, and with as much Brevity as
may be.

The first that commonly recommends it self to a Chemists Trial is Mercury, the
Materia Prima of Metals, nay if you will believe the Adeptists, the Materia Prima
of the very Philosophers Stone. For though Gold and Silver are more Precious
Metals, yet being very untoward as to Distillation, and yielding as good as no
Chemical Principles of Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, they are made to truckle
under Mercury; which pliant, tractable, but very uncertain Mineral is capable
of undergoing more different disguises, and receiving more different Forms,
than any thing else excepting Antimony, which two do in a manner equally divide
the Regency of the Mineral Kingdom, yet in Subordination to their Solar King,
to whom all the Philosophers by Fire do pay their Hottest Devotions, and submit
as to the End of all their Labors. They hope indeed at last to find Mountains
of Gold, which the Philosophical Mercury is to lead them to, but as to their
Operations upon Gold and Silver, they can only Dissolve them with Corrosive
Spirits, and then Precipitate them into Powders, of which how one will Thunder
it, I have treated before. Mercury will find work enough for the most Curious,
and Indefatigable Operator, it will yield diverse sorts of Precipitates, and
Sublimations, Salts, Spirits, Sulphurs, Oils, Liquors, Tinctures, etc. which
you may read, or satifie your Curiosity concerning, in Schroder, and diverse
other Authors.

Now although Mercury and Antimony, under the hands of Sober, and Expert
Physicians, may be Prepared into Remedies of Greater Use than ordinary, and
therefore may not deserve to be utterly Banished from the Province of Physic,
yet being at best some of the most uncertain, strongest, and most Dangerous
Medicines that are to be invented, and this when Prepared the most Artificially
and Care fully that may be, it were much to be wished, that no Preparation of
them were to be Bought or Sold, but what was derived from persons appointed to
make them by Public Authority, and that no Quacks, or Illegal Pretenders to
Physic, should be allowed at all to deal in them. If our hand or thoughts are
never so little Careless, either in the Dose, the Preparation, or the
Administration of many of those Medicines, the consequence is no less than
Certain Death, or the greatest hazard imaginable. There is hardly a man alive,
who is conversant at all in the World, in places where they are commonly used,
but he has met or heard of some lamentable instances of this nature, in
Confirmation, and too true Testimony of what I say; insomuch that I cannot but
sometimes wonder, that the Public Authority does not think this a matter
worthy their most Serious Consideration, and that Apothecaries and Druggists
are not as strictly prohibited from Dispensing or Selling Medicines of such
Nice and Dangerous consequence, as they are or ought to be Cautious in the
vending of downright Poisons. Mercurius Dulcis is now as commonly Sold, as
Rhubarb and Aloes, and yet we all know that Mercurius Dulcis is a Preparation
from Sublimate Corrosive; nay farther, that Sublimate Corrosive is often
counterfeited with Arsenick, one of the rankest and most dismal Poisons that is
to be met with. The way of knowing the true Sublimate from Arsenical is by
rubbing a little of it with Salt of Tartar, for if it then proves Yellow, it is
true Sublimate, if it proves Black, it is most Certainly an Adulteration with
Arsenick. Now I am afraid, that all persons who deal in Sublimate Corrosive, in
order to prepare Mercurius Dulcis, are not so thoroughly instructed in the way
of distinguishing this Adulteration. So that if the sweet Sublimate, happens to
be prepared from foresaid Arsenical Sublimate what a Pernicious and Destructive
Remedy must this be for tender Children, or others, to whom it is often
administered for the Worms, and many other Distempers! But besides, the Town
ever now and then rings with an account of some strange Accidents from a single
Dose of Mercurius Dulcis; they shall have the same Symptoms, as from Real
Poisons; and though the Dispensers of the Poison do always excuse themselves
upon the account or a mistake of the Corrosive for the sweet Sublimate, yet I
am apt to impute it to that other mistake of Preparing the Mercurius Dulcis
from Arsenical, rather than True Sublimate. And now what a lamentable
consideration must it be, that the whole herd of Quacks and Empiricks do
conspire as one man to give some Preparation of Mercury in all their Pills that
are exposed to Sale! as if no Credit were to be got, no good to be performed,
without throwing the Dye for All, without downright Killing or Curing upon a
most uncertain, nay Dangerous Chance.

Argentum vivum, or Quicksilver is so called from its vivid motion, Quick in
the old Saxon Language signifying Living, and its Color approaching to that of
Silver. Scaliger calls it the Tyrant of Metals, as Gold is said to be the
Lawful King. Renodeus esteems it to be the Monster of Nature, as Fallopius does
the Miracle. The Alchymists do call it the Sperma Metallorum, the Seed of
Metals, the Seed from whose due Cultivation does spring that Blessed Stone,
which is thought capable in convenient time of making an Adept as Rich as
Midas: And hence in complement to their vain hopes they please to call it the
Parent of all Wonders, as also Lac Virginis, Aqua vitae, Serpens semetipsum
gravidans, Cervus Fugitivus, etc. Lastly it is called Mercury, from its
Mercurial qualifications, being so active, unconstant, uncertain, and often
mischievous in its Operation. Liars, Thieves, and Cheats, are signified by the
Caelestial Mercury; and every man of Understanding and Experience is by this
time too well satisfied, that not only Pseudo-Chymists, but even the most
Celebrated Chemical Authors do often deliver to us many palpable untruths in
setting forth the Praises and Virtues of many Elaborate Preparations; and the
generality of Alchymists, if not the whole Tribe, after spending their Fortunes
in vainly refining and Philosophizing their Mercury, and in the most uncertain
hopes of attaining Projection, do at last betake themselves, by the strong
compulsion of an Absolute Necessity, (whose Laws are commonly irresistible) to
the Art of Cheating and Counterfeiting, as thinking by that means in some
measure to repair their Great and Certain Losses.

Not only Galen, Avicenna, Aetius, but most of our Modern Authors have esteemed
Mercury to be a Poison, though indeed Galen does ingeniously declare, Lib. 9.
de Simpl. Med. facult.
he never made trial of it either inwardly or outwardly, whether it be
effectually a Poison or not. Our later timer have been more competent Judges of
that matter. For the Venerial Disease which was brought from far Countries
among other Traffic about the year 1493. into Europe, has occasioned trials
enough upon Mercury, whether it be a Poison or a Remedy. And happy it is for
those who have unfortunately fallen into that Foreign Disease, that Europe is
so plentifully furnished with such a Remedy as Mercury. I know that some
persons of note have pleased to maintain, that they have Cured a Radicated Pox
without Mercury, and that Sarsaparilla, Lignum Sanctum, etc. have thoroughly
performed the Cure in these Countries, as they do in Guiny, and America; but I
am apt to think, upon the best inquisition I could make, that they are under a
great Mistake, or have been guilty of too much Vanity in that Pretension. A
Palliative Cure shall sometimes in this Disease impose upon men of judgment
instead of a True one; and it may sometimes happen, that persons who have been
very Ungrateful to their Physician, and upon a Relapse have applied themselves
to another, as is common enough, shall conceal their Relapse, and their second
Application, from the First, whom they diligently avoid, and would perhaps have
done so, though they had been never so thoroughly Cured, upon the score of
Reward. It Is hard to determine certainly, upon another man's Experience; but
whatever some Physicians, as well as Empiricks, may pretend, in order to
ingratiate themselves with Patients, or make themselves appear to be some Body,
I am sure that Physicians among one another will hardly ever pretend to such a
Super-eminency in this Cure, or if they do, we may conclude them probably
enough Mistaken for the Reason aforesaid.

But whatever may be Pretended, the great effects of Mercury in allaying, and
powerfully conquering Venerial Symptoms, were doubtless a main and considerable
reason for the Experimenting its Virtues upon many other occasions. And now it
is not only exhibited in Venerial cases, but in the Worms, in inward and
outward Ulcers, in diverse sorts of Pains, and Defluxions, in the Iliaca Passio
commonly called the Twisting of the Guts; and especially the Preparation
Mercurius Dulcis is now become with many persons a kind of Panacea, and is
given often in Dropsies, Jaundies, Gout, Leprosy, Kings Evil, and in all
Putredinous, or foul Humoural Diseases.

Nay farther, Mercury and a few other Medicines have of late gained such a
Monopoly of Repute in Physic, above the rest of the Materia Medica, that an
Ingenious Physician declared to me in Discourse, as his Opinion, that if Six
only, of those many Medicaments which are recommended in Pharmacy, were to
supply the the whole business of Physic, he thought the rest might well enough
be spared. The six were these: Mercury, Antimony, Vitriol, Steel, the Cortex,
and Opium. If those six Remedies could really have performed all that is
expected from a Physician, I would heartily have thanked God, and Him, for the
Information, and would have been glad in earnest that so short a Cut had been
found out for the Curing an Infinite number of Diseases, which miserably
afflict Mankind. But I do not find that the most Popular and Eminent Practisers
are any of them come over to that New Opinion. A great variety of Roots, Herbs,
Woods, Barks, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Gums, Rosines, Balsoms, Concreted Juyces,
Liquid Juyces, Fungus's, Animals, and their different Parts, and Excrements,
Marine Productions, Salts, Stones, Metals, and other Minerals, have still, and
in all likelihood ever will have a proper place in the Materia Medica. Let our
Remedies, whether simple, or Compound, be as few, or as many as men please, the
Cure of Diseases will ever to the Worlds end depend as much, if not more, upon
Right Indications, and accurate Diagnosticks, as upon the best Remedies of
whatsoever nature, or kind.

But because such Opinions are of more than ordinary consequence, to the
animating Illiterate Empiricks with a few Receipts to all manner of
Undertakings, and to the slackning the strings of Industry in the Study of
Physic, I shall designedly treat of every one of those six Remedies, and with
as much brevity, as the nature of this small Treatise does require.

And before I proceed farther, it may not be amiss to call to remembrance those
six Necessaries which our Great Master Hippocrates very strictly requires,
Hippocr. Lex.
to constitute a Good Physician. They are these: (...). That is, Nature,
Learning, a Proper Place to Study in, Education from a Child, Industry, and
Time. And in another place he speaks much to our purpose: (...), Lib. de veter.
Medic.
(...) etc. The Art of Physic is a thing of great Antiquity, and the beginning
and way are a long time chalked out to us; by which many excellent things have
come to be invented in diverse Ages of the World; and other things will still be
found out hereafter, when an Able man, who is well acquainted with what we have
already attained, does from those known rules proceed to farther enquiry.
(...), etc. But whosoever he be, who rejects and despises all those former
things, who will needs try his skill after another way and method, and boasts
as if he had found out Extraordinary matters of his own, he is a mere deluder
and Impostor. For it is utterly impossible, etc. Thus Hippocrates, whose
incomparable works are like to the Worlds end to contain in reality, what we
are of late made believe concerning Mercury, Antimony, and the like.

The truth on it is, though I am no despiser of those six great Remedies
mentioned before, so far as they are really useful to the Practice of Physic,
yet I have in duty been a little concerned, that all the Acquisitions and
Observations of the Ancients should come to be so extravagantly undervalued,
that half a dozen kinds of Medicines should be thought, even in the Opinion of
an ingenious Physician, capable of answering so many several Indications, and
of suiting to such variety of Diseases and Constitutions. And I did immedietely
resolve within my self, that I would some time or other use my small endeavor
to oppose the dangerous effects of such Opinions. If I have now but rather
touched upon what might have been much more Excellently and more Learnedly
performed, yet I hope it will be no Disservice to so Useful a Faculty, to do a
little in its Vindication. For if once the Profession it self degenerates into
Empiricism, as the Pretension of a few Catholicons and Panaceas, if favored
too much, must make it, the Method will soon seem Dull, and the Diagnosticks,
and Prognostics will by degrees be laid aside; and a man who mis-spends all
his time in the Study of Insects instead of Men's Bodies, and in little
Curiosities of no moment, instead of the Actual Cure of Diseases, shall with a
few neat and plausible Preparations throw the Dye upon men's Lives, as a Spanish
Empirick is recorded literally to have done. But whatever may be pretended, we
shall certainly find at last, that all Authors are not therefore necessarily
Dull, because they are Long, as Long as the subject might properly enough
require; that the Shortest Cutts are not always the Best, to inform an Inquirer
in a Long Art, (...); that the Ancient Principles of Physic are not now more
Impertinent, or false, than they were in the days of old, for what is once True
in its self is always True; and lastly, that no man who has not thoroughly
imbibed those Ancient Principles, can ever be properly esteemed to Cure any one
Disease, unless merely by Accident, by coming upon the Declination of the
Disease, or after a Regular use of Universal Evacuations by some Legal
Physician, or in some slight indifferent cases. Lib. de. vet. Medicin.
For the same Hippocrates does take notice, that Ill Physicians, or Ignorant
Pretenders to Physic, cannot be sufficiently discovered in Trivial Distempers,
but that the Certain Test of a True or False Practitioner is only to be made in
Great and Dangerous Diseases. A very sorry Pilot, and one that understands his
business but little, can tell how to Steer a Ship in Fair Weather, and out of
Danger; but when the Winds blow violently, the Seas Roar, and Rocks or Sands
are near, the Ignorance and insufficiency of the Pilot is then notoriously
betrayed, when perhaps it is too late to redress their folly, in exposing their
Precious Lives to the most uncertain Conduct of an Ignorant Pretender.

Lib. 5. cap. 110. edit. Saracen.
But to return, Dioscorides, as those others before, did think Quicksilver taken
inwardly was a Destructive Poison. (...). And most of the first Opposers of
Chemistry in later times did run into the same Extreme. But we find upon better
grounds, that they were under a great Mistake, and that Crude Mercury is often
times a Good Remedy both in Infusion, and Substance. Its Infusion in fair
Water, is not only a pretty and suitable, but an innocent, nay useful Remedy
for Children in the Worms, as Baricellus recommends it, In hortulo geniali.
and most Physicians are now convinced concerning. And in Substance, not only
Brassavolus, Matthiolus, Horatius Augenius, etc. have thought fit to approve of
it; but a great many of our most Eminent Modern Practisers have concurred in
its exhibition, upon the like, and other accounts. And therefore it a very odd
Story, which Scholtzius communicated in a Letter to the Famous Schenkius of a
certain person who had accustomed his Body to the use of Mercury ofner than
ordinary, Schenk. Observe. Med. lib. 7. Observe. 6.
and it seems upon lifting up, or letting fall his Arm, the Quicksilver did
appear to slide up and down his Arm, as if it had been in a Tube-Galss. Now
Scholtzius had given him great relief for a time with the Juice of Burnett, but
notwithstanding the man made a Tragical End with a violent Flux at the
Hemorrhoids. Hartman a late Famous Chemist, who was sufficiently Skilled in the
Preparations of Mercury, and would hardly have derogated from the virtues of
such considerable Preparations, to recommend a Drug with all its Natural
Impurities, if Experience as well as Reason had not taught him; he treating of
the Cure of Worms has this remarkable passage; Praestantissimus est Mercurius,
vivus, vel per se Crudus a Scrupulo uno ad Drachmas aliquot devoratus, vel cum
succo Limonum prius Mortificatus; sed dosis sit, minor, quia Mortificatus
diutius in corpore manet.

That Mercury is injurious to the Nervs, and consequently to the body, if too
much accustomed to it, may be more than imagined from the consideration of
those who use to work in its Mines, who can live in that occupation not above
four years at most, as Agricola relates. Lib. 9. de re Metal.
And we know that those who work Quicksilver among us, can venture themselves
at it but a few hours in the day. Tremblings, and Convulsions, and Palsies, and
the like Nervous Diseases, are the certain concomitants of it; let them hold as
much Gold as they please in their Mouths, or take what quantity of Crystal
Boett de Boodt prescribes, the Nervs will infallibly suffer in some degree or
other.

Lib. 6. de re Metal.
And Agricola is very full in recounting diverse Diseases, both Asthmatical and
Paralytical, that the Laborers are very subject to, who work in most Mines;
that the Women who dwell about the Hill Carpathus do some of them use to have
no less than seven Husbands successively, the Mineral Fumes either
suffocating, or else vitiating their Vitals; that upon making strong Fires to
the rending or opening the hard Rocks, there perspires a most pernicious Fume,
and Poison, that few can resist, from this rude Chemical Exaltation of the
Mineral Vapors; that at Aldebergum in Misena, there is a black Mineral
Pompholix, which corrodes Iron so powerfully, that they are fain to have Wooden
Locks and Keys to all the passages; and lastly, that in the Silver Mines they
are not only pestered with abundance of Batts, of which if they should chance
but to sit upon one of them, they are presently smitten with the Pestilence,
but that they are often terrified with dreadful Apparitions, and Specter: Lib.
de Animant. Subterran.
as if the Infernal Spirits were enraged, that Covetous men should presume to
disturb them in their own Kingdom of Darkness, or should come to Rob them of
those Treasures which perhaps of right belong to their God Pluto, the God of
Mineral Riches.

And yet notwithstanding that Petrus Apponensis, Cardan lib. 1. cap. 20. de
venen.
the Conciliator tells us a Story of a drunken Apothecary, who blundring in the
night between sleeping and waking, and mistaking a Pot of Quicksilver for the
Botle, drank his last in a too hearty draught of it; Lib. 2. de venen. cap. 2.
though Penzettus tells us of a Silly Chemist, who trying some curious
Experiments upon Quicksilver, and keeping it close shut over the Fire for some
Weeks, did upon the opening his Vessel take such a strong Whiff into his
Nostrils, that he sunk down dead immediately, without speaking one word by way
of repentance of his Folly; though Fernelius tells us another lamentable Story
of a Painter of Angiers, Lib. de Lue Vener. cap. 7.
who had thumm'd the Cinnabar so carelessly in his Drawings, that it got in at
his Fingers ends, made the Articles Paralytick, thence run to his Wrists, so to
his Arms, and at last into his Stomach and Head, and made him a most miserable
object of pity, and at length dispatched him into the other World; though he and
diverse others do muster up a whole bed-roll of Ill Accidents from an indiscreet
use of Quicksilver different ways; yet I cannot think it so Intrinsecally and
Essentially a Poison, as some of them would thereby insinuate. The Irregular,
or Accidental misuse of a thing, is always extraneous to its Intrinsical
Nature. It may be bad enough, without being the worst of all; with the help of
Chemistry, indeed it may be Prepared, or Sublimed into a Poison as bad as the
worst; but unless you help it to prove Pernicious by Rules of Art, unless you
presume to take it as boldly as Aliment, and forget that it is, or may be a
Medicament, which is not to be played with; lastly, if ignorant people do'nt
venture upon it of their own head, without the Advice of some Able Physician, I
cannot tell how to mark it with so black a Coal, or condemn it absolutely so
much as some Worthy Authors have pleased to think fit. In the general, I
conceive the same Rule may serve for the use of Mercury, as I said before of
Acid Corrosive Spirits; this, as those, may prove of good use upon some Great,
and Proper occasions, if administered cautiously, and soon disused again; nay
Mercury shall upon many urgent Symptoms plainly enough work wonders, if its
effects be not again spoiled by an unreasonable, and overlong continuation.

We all know, that Sublimate Corrosive, a Preparation of Mercury, is one of the
Rankest Poisons that Art can furnish us with; and though four parts of this
Poison joined with three parts of Crude Mercury, may be Sublimed into Mercurius
Dulcis; and this Mercurius Dulcis, otherwise called the Mild Dragon, or
otherwise the White Devil, may be so often Sublimed, or Dulcified, 'till at
last it shall lose all its Purgative quality, and will not so naturally tend
downwards, as toward a Salivation; yet let it be Prepared how we will, or
Sublimed as often as we please, I am very apt to believe, it will never prove
so Innocent, and perhaps Effectual a Medicine as the Unprepared Quicksilver.

Paracelsus asserts concerning Mercury, Tom. 6. lib. 3. fragment. de vit. long.
cap. 8.
that he could Prepare an Elixir from it by the Spagyrick Art, which is able to
make a man Immortal. And in the same place, that all Tinging Preparations by
how much they are Exalted into the most Acute and Subtle degree of Poison,
they become so much the more Excellent and Efficacious to the Prolongation of
Life. Spoken like himself, and like a man of true Chemical Metal! and without
doubt those Tinging Preparations so Exalted will put a man into a state of
Immortality, and Prolong Life to Eternity in another World, though not in this.
And to this Metaphysical Exalted Fancy I only offer, whither he were not a very
unhappy man that he would not spare so much time from his Cups, as to Prepare
the foresaid Elixir, but would suffer himself to trip off at seven or eight and
forty: And whither such Refined Poisons were not much more proper for the
Author, than for his Unfortunate Patients.

The generality of Chemists do merely scorn this, as all other Metalls and
Minerals, in their own Nature, but can immediately believe the grossest Lies
that are told of their Preparations. Commend me therefore to those bold
Fellows, who can venture to give a grain of Sublimate Corrosive in the Pilulae
Barbarossae, as if not Mercury, but a Mercurial Poison, were to be the Antidote
of the Venerial Poison. There is hardly a good Purgative, but they will make it
Poison by over-dosing it; for they despise all True, or Ordinary Cures, and
think to perform Extraordinary things, by always using Extraordinary means.

As for Mercurius Dulcis, rightly Prepared, it is a Proteus at the best, and
therefore ought not to be administered without good Advice, and Deliberation.
For besides what I have urged already, Sennertus delivers us one remarkable
passage, concerning its Uncertain Operation, which happened in his time and
knowledge. He says, he was acquainted with a very Learned Physician, De
Medicam. and meth. med. cap. 18.
who having given Mercurius Dulcis to diverse of his Patients, without any
visible harm, would needs at last try its effects upon his own body, and the
very first Dose presently raised such a Salivation upon him, that his Throat,
Face, and Gums did Swell beyond measure, his Tongue grew Black, and he was fain
to feed upon nothing but Broths for a whole Month, before this (...), and (...)
would give him any respite. In Praefat. de Lithetom. vestcae.
And Fabritius ab Aquapendente writes of a certain Prince, who was so Bewitched
with a French Chemist, as to believe that his Preparation of Mercurius Dulcis
was so adapted to his particular Constitution, that it would prove to him a
certain Panacea. The Prince upon his loud Commendations tried the Experiment,
and though he was ready to Die upon every Dose, yet he persisted in following
the Villains direction, 'till he brought himself from a Sound Habit of Body
into an irrecoverable condition, and unfortunately in his Youth was thus
Chymically Murdered.

But this Medicine more remarkably disagrees with some Bodies than others; and
commonly a Thin, Lean, Hot Temper of Body will not find it so Sweet and Gentle,
as its Name does bespeak it. A Cold humid Constitution or Disease will be apt
to blunt the edge of its activity, and not so easily rarify or Sublime it, as a
Hot Complexion will do.

CHAP. IX.
Of Antimony. Quercetan and Paracelsus, their immense commendations of it.
Others as much against it. Its use once a Case of Conscience. Those Physicians
vindicated, who would formerly have absolutely rejected it. That Physic is
indebted to the Preparations of Antimony and Mercury; and yet considering all
things, perhaps it had been better for the World, never to have known them at
all. Other strong Emeticks and Catharticks besides Mineral or Metallic. A very
remarkable difference between the strong Vegetable, and the strong Mineral
Emeticks. That the Primitive Form of Minerals cannot easily be destroyed by Art,
so as to lose the power of Reduction. The nature of Minerals a very Serious
Subject. Crude Antimony an Innocent Remedy. Minerals improperly called Crude,
as we have them in the Shops. The Antimonial Cup, and the Perpetual Pill so
famous heretofore, now laid aside for others. The Aqua, and Vinum Benedictum.
Why some Remedies have been called Blessed. The other Antimonial Emeticks
mentioned. Antimonium Diaphoreticum, the Cinnabar of Antimony, and Bezoar
Mineral, how far to be esteemed Safe. A Remark out of Lemery concerning the
Nitro-aerial Spirit. A case out of Sennertus to the praise of Antimonium
Diaphoreticum. Vehement Remedies how or when to be used; and decided by
Hippocrates.

ANtimony is a Subject that has furnished entire Discourses, being that which
produces a greater abundance of Chemical Remedies, In tatrad. cap. 51.
than any thing else besides. But I shall confine my self to a few
Considerations about it. Quercetan says, there are no less than Six Hundred
admirable properties belonging to this Mineral; De vit. long. lib. 3. cap. 6.
and Fragment. lib. 3. ca. 6.
and another may perhaps fancy at least Six Thousand. Paracelsus asserts its
virtues to be inscrutable, and innumerable; that the Archeus of the Earth could
not bestow more upon it, than it has; and that this is the only watery Mineral,
which escaped the Destruction of the Flood, the virtues of all other Natural
Bodies being considerably impaired by that Universal Deluge. And yet
notwithstanding these flourishes of an admiring fancy, there were many Wise and
Sober men, who thought it to be full as bad; as these could think it good.
Fernelius, Riolanus, Gesner, and all the Faculty of Paris, rejected the use of
Antimony with great passion and indignation. Its Preparations were found to be
such Violent Emeticks, and Catharticks, that most Good men did think it better,
both in Prudence and Honesty, never to use them at all, than to experiment the
effects of such Medicines, as might likely enough through their great strength
and force have very Dangerous, if not Fatal consequences. And Sayrus therefore
urges its total omission, Lib. 1. clav. reg. cap. 10
as matter of Conscience to his Readers; and that we ought not upon any account
to use such Vehement Medicines as are thence Prepared. And for this reason
those Worthy Physicians, who upon the first great noise and Fame of Antimonial
and Mercurial Preparations, were Zealous Opposers of them, and would not have
admitted them at all into Practice, if they could have helped it, are not to be
blamed so much as some will rashly judge of them. They showed themselves rather
Honest, than Morose, and no doubt they did their Duty at that time, in showing
the Rocks and imminent dangers that men were likely to split upon. Can any man
think it would have been proper for those Physicians, who were placed in the
most conspicuous Posts, who were generally acknowledged by wise and impartial
men to have deserved the highest station in Physic? would it have been proper
for them to have sat still and quiet, folded their hands and only sighed, when
the first Violent Experiments were made on those Subjects? No, it was time to
Toll the Bell, when one Foot was in the Grave, when the strongest Emeticks, and
Catharticks were cried up upon all occasions. For those first Chemists, who
brought Antimony and Mercury into Play, were as absolutely Opposite to all
Galenical Remedies, as the Physicians were against the Chemical. The Chemists
fancied all the Remedies, which had served the World before, to be Unclean and
Impure, and 'till they had been Purified, Refined, Distilled, Separated from
gross parts, and the virtues some way or other Extracted, none of them were to
be used. Now considering the amazing effects of Antimonial Preparations, that
they did generally run into the most Vehement Emeticks, and that those Emeticks
were recommended on all occasions, as if all former Remedies of that, or other
kinds were dull, insignificant, unsavory, and improper, we ought not to
condemn too much those Learned and Eminent men, who stoutly defended the
Ancient Physic, and Zealously opposed Innovations of so great consequence.

It is not to be denied, but that the Art of Physic is now very much beholding
to the Preparations from Antimony and Mercury; I mean, while they are confined
to the hands only of men of judgment and understanding. For as for the use
which Quacks and Empiricks do make of them, it is too too certain, that under
their hands they do far more Mischief than Good. Nay farther, considering the
frequent miscarriages which commonly happen from an Empirical use of Antimony,
it is no Paradox to maintain, that it had been much better for the World, if
that Mineral had still remained within the Bowels of the Earth, and had never
been fetched out of the Darkness it was born in, than to have given it so
Universal, and so Supreme a place, not only in the Mineral, but the Physical
Kingdom.

Nevertheless for the same reason that Extreme Remedies are thought necessary
to be used sometimes, Metallic or Mineral Medicines may seem to claim justly a
place in Physic. Hellebore, Coloquintida, Elaterium, Scammony, etc. are
Purgatives of sufficient strength; and yet were known a long time before
Mineral Preparations came into request; and where strong Emeticks were
requisite, and Carduus and Asarabacca were thought too Mild, the Decoction of
Fox-glove would answer the most violent Indication. Now there is a very great
difference between the Vegetable, and the Mineral extreme Remedies: Though they
are both dangerous in their Nature, and may be alike mischievously used, yet
they are not both equally subject to do mischief. For it is to be noted
concerning Minerals, that both as they are in their Natural Impurities, and as
they are Purified by Chemical Preparations, they do perpetually (some say) or a
long time at least communicate their Properties to such Liquors as they are put
into: as in the Crocus, and Regulus of Antimony, in Quicksilver, and the
Filings of Iron. Their virtue is not soon spent in Infusion, but will with much
the same, some say with the very same force impregnate diverse Liquors one after
another, as they did at first. And thus all Antimonial or Mercurial Emeticks,
being received into the Stomach, and fixing their Mineral particles within the
Plicae or folds of that Part, though by frequent irritations or provocations to
Vomit they may seem to have spent great part of their force, yet they will for
that reason a long time continue their Spasmodical Irritations, until Nature
has lost all her strength, and therefore ends in a final cessation from Action,
and the Light is extinguished in irrecoverable Darkness. When the Body of a
Mineral is thoroughly opened by Preparation, and the irritating Sulphurs let
loose, and urged to do their worst, it will be harder then we are aware to Tame
such Powerful Enemies, and the skill of the greatest Physician must be often
forced to yield.

And that Minerals are not easily transformed into other kinds, nor can by Art
be compelled to lose their Primitive Nature, may be plainly enough perceived by
the assistance of Microscopes; for though the Precipitates of Mercury, and the
Sweet, and Corrosive Sublimate, do look more like fine Sugar than Quicksilver,
and one would think the Acid Spirits had fairly divided the Mercurial parts,
when they had quite disappeared in a clear Liquor; yet upon view of those
Preparations with Glasses, they plainly enough appear in their Primitive
Natural Form, and discover that all that the Preparation could do, was to make
them Dangerous Hypocrites. And besides, how easy is it to reduce all the
Preparations of Mercury into Quicksilver as at first, those of Saturn into Lead
again, and so of Antimony, and the rest? There is great skill indeed required
to destroy in them the power of Revification, but very little Art will serve to
Revive them.

The bold and frequent use therefore of Mineral Medicines can never be too
seriously considered and weighed. Even Tautology might be excused on so
important a subject. For things of so great consequence will not, cannot sink
equally deep into every man's head. One perhaps does regard but little what
becomes of his Patients, all his thoughts may run along with his Profit or
Ambition; another enslaves his judgment to such Authors as agree best with his
own Inclination, and this man can no more determine Truth in doubtful matters,
than a man plunged in Love can give an impartial Character of his Mistresses
Beauty; a third perhaps has been bred up with strong and groundless Prejudices
under such or such a Master, and at a venture he is passionately and
unreasonably for or against Chemistry, or for or against Method, as he has
happened to be taught. But I dare be bold to say, that London is now as happy
in sincere, unprejudiced, and profoundly judicious persons in the Faculty of
Physic, as any one place now in Europe, and consequently in the World. And
therefore though an Empiricks Skull be thick, and his temper most obstinately
perverse, though you may sooner knock out his Brains, than beat Reason into his
Noddle, yet our Men of Art and Abilities are generally willing to receive a
Rational hint, let it come from whence it will, whither from France, or
Germany, or even from among our Selves.

But not to deviate too far: Crude Antimony is so far from being Emetick,
Cathartick, or any ways deleterious, that both in Infusion and Decoction it has
hardly any sort of sensible operation. Some do esteem it to be a Mild
Diaphoretick, and others do conceive that it will serve to Sweeten the Blood.
It is probable enough, that it might make some good Alterations in bodies, if
it were more frequently tried on some proper occasions. But the numerous
Preparations from it have very much prevented a right judgment of the effects
of Crude Antimony, and where it has been tried, it has commonly been among a
Rhapsody of other Ingredients, so that no Certain Determination has yet been
made concerning the thing simply in it self. Indeed some have magnified it as a
very notable Arcanum in Venerial Cases. But Mercury has been so great a sharer
with it in the Cures, that it is hard to distinguish truly how much, or rather
how little it has contributed.

I call it Crude, rather in compliance to the vulgar acception of it, or in
opposition to the Preparations from it, than in regard of a supposed real
Crudity. For the Antimony of the Shops, such as only is used, is Melted down,
and Separated from the Earth that is Naturally mixed with it. A little of the
Mineral Antimony may be sometimes found at the Druggists, and seen for a
Curiosity, as likewise the Mineral Cinnabar, Iron, Vitriol, etc. But they do
first generally undergo, a Fusion, Sublimation, Decoction, or Crystallization,
before they are conveyed about for use.

The Regulus of Antimony is usually the first trial upon it, and from the
Regulus Melted again, and cast into Moulds, did proceed the Antimonial Cup so
famous in former days, and the Perpetual Pill, so called because it was a
Medicine for Life; the Pill swallowed, and washed twenty several times, or as
long as they pleased, was thought to lose nothing of its Emetick virtue: and so
the Cup with a Glass of Wine filled into it for a few hours, was a ready and
constant Vomit. But those days are now pretty well over; it is now as rare to
meet with the said Cup, or Pill, as heretofore it was common. Whither the
Regulus was thought at last not to be Pure enough, for a delicious Chemical
Palate; or that it was not thought strong enough, after the Glass, the Flowers,
the Sulphur Auratum of Antimony, etc. came to be better known. However it took
its turn, and gave way to the Next, according to the Chemists pleasure.

From the Crocus Metallorum, or Liver of Antimony, we have the Aqua Benedicta,
or Vinum Benedictum, the Water, or rather Wine, which has been found to produce
Happy and Blessed effects in diverse Stubborn and Chronical Distempers,
especially when managed with that Caution and Tenderness which Good Physicians
are wont to observe in the use of Remedies of this nature. The Ancient
Physicians had their Hieras as well as our Modern Chemists; but those of the
Ancients, if they contained any stronger Purgative than ordinary, were
Sanctified with excellent Correctives, Cordials, and Aromaticks, which served
as much to keep up the Strength and Vigor of their Patients, as the Purgative
was apt to Weaken them. Whereas those Chemists who first Christened Violent
Emeticks with the Title of Blessed, and the like, did quite forget those
Cordial Correctives, which were heretofore thought necessary, in order to
deserve so Glorious a Name. Nor has our Dispensatory been wanting in this
particular, in our Emetick Infusion, called Vinum Benedictum.

The Glass of Antimony, the Red Flowers, the Golden Sulphur, and the Powder of
Algarot, or Mercurius vitae, deserve to be writ rather in Red than Golden
Characters. But they are the chief Arcana of an Empirical Treasury; the more
Dangerous, and Violent a Medicine is in its self, the more acceptable it is to
a heedless Empirick, and he shall set forth its Praises with the greater
earnestness.

Antimonium Diaphoreticum, the Cinnabar of Antimony, and Bezoar Mineral are
Diaphoreticks which have been highly commended. The first is the more Innocent,
but the two latter have been more Celebrated, because they owe their Original
to a most Corrosive Caustic, the Butter of Antimony. The two first, if
carelessly kept, grown a little stale, and suffered to partake of the
Nitro-aerial Volatile Spirit, will be apt to turn Emetick instead of
Diaphoretick, as also the Cerusse of Antimony; and the Bezoar Mineral I have
sometimes known to turn Cathartick. For it is in a manner impossible to make a
Mineral not to be a Mineral fundamentally, and to incapacitate it from
returning into its Mineral nature. Nor is it a little remarkable, Course of
Chemistry in Remarks on Spirit of Salt.
what Monsieur Lemery assures us, that after he and Monsieur Seignette had
Distilled Spirit of Salt from Common Salt, he exposed the matter remaining in
the Retort after Distillation several times to the Air, and it re-impregnated
with New Spirits, which were again Distilled off to half the quantity of the
matter. And Seignette affirmed he had done it nine times one after another.

Now those Preparations of Antimony, which are only esteemed Sudorifick, and
perhaps are little else, if carefully Prepared, may doubtless be used with
greater liberty than others. And Sennertus tells us of a Girl, that he knew of
12 years of Age, who being sadly afflicted with Malignant Ulcers all over her
body, and especially about the Joints, he thought fit to order her 12 Grains of
Antimonium Diaphoreticum to be taken almost every day for above a year
together, and the Maid grew perfectly well again, notwithstanding that he had
in vain tried diverse other Remedies before. But a year was a great while, and
the Maid but Young, and consequently her Infirmity the less Incurable. However
I shall leave the Story to others to muse upon, and at leisure to pass their
censures. The Preparation being made of Crude Antimony and Niter, I take to
consist of more Innocent Principles, than the Bezoardick Mineral productions
from Butter of Antimony, though that Bezoar (as it is called) be much
recommended by Excellent Authors, and particularly the Incomparable Riverius in
many places of his Practice.

Notwithstanding what has been said, we must sometimes allow the use even of
Vehement Remedies in Vehement Cases. And the Irregular, or Indiscreet use of
them by Ignorant Empiricks will never be a sufficient Plea to Bar them, when
there is Great occasion. In many Cephalic, Epileptick, and sometimes
Arthritick Distempers, Lenitives will prove to be but ineffectual, and even the
strong Antimonial Emeticks may with due Caution and Consideration have a
remarkable place in Medicine. But wherever they may be thought needful, a Good
Physician is a much more proper Judge, when, and when not, what, and what may
not be used, than a Bigoted Pretender to Chemistry. We may conclude with our
Great Hippocrates his Judgment in those matters, in his Excellent Book de Locis
in homine, he thus delivers his mind: (...), etc. Versus finem.
That we ought to administer strong Medicaments in strong Diseases, and that we
must not think to make a strong Remedy weak, by giving it in a smaller quantity
to tender feeble persons. That Medicaments are not suddenly to be judged of
according to their Dose, but that both sorts ought to be administered according
to the temper and condition of the persons; to those that are Naturally weak,
Remedies of a weak nature, and to those who are naturally strong, Remedies of a
stronger nature.

CHAP. X.
Vitriol thought capable of supplying the Fourth part of the Materia Medica.
Paracelsus his Vitriolick Riddle. Mayern's Praise of Vitriol, how to be
understood. The unhappy Fate of many Chemists. Vitriol why so called. A great
Mistake about the Crudity of Vitriol, and its Depuration. Native Vitriol hard
to obtain. The Sal Vitrioli, and Vitriolum album Depuratum, how probable it is
that they are confounded one for the other. The most Unprepared White Vitriol
that we have, no bad Vomit; and in what respects better than others. Impure
Native Vitriol not to be despised. Vitriolick and Martial Mineral Waters
recommended. Mineral Waters, and Natural Remedies proved to be Blessings we owe
to Heaven, from a considerable relation out of Brassavolus; and some other
matters of the like nature. Whether Vitriol be a Poison, or not. A Caution in
the use of Vomits. White Vitriol how most safely exhibited. Although Vitriol be
no Poison, yet it may be Prepared into a strong one. Spirit of Vitriol
excellent in Haemorrhagies. Bovius his Panacea. And that of Rabel remembered.
The Crudest Vitriol, we have again recommended. The Sympathetick Powder made of
Vitriol described, with the manner of its use. Remedies, never the less to be
esteemed, because easy to come by. The Simple, and Compound Sympathetick
Powder, both described. The infusion of Green Vitriol in water. Our English
Vitriol the best, and why,

VItriol is the next of our six great Remedies, and was esteemed so great and
excellent by Paracelsus, that he thought this alone with good Chemical
management was able to supply sufficienly the Fourth part of the employment of
Physic; Tom. 7. de rebus Nature. cap. 8.
and that its Preparations do thoroughly contain the Complete Cure of the
Jaundies, Gravel, the Stone, all sorts of Fevers, Worms, Falling Sickness,
etc. And that was a pretty fine-contrived Riddle of his, in order to recommend
it the better to our Admiration: Lib. Auror. Philosoph.
Visitabis Interiora Terrae Rectificando Invenies Occultum Lapidem Veram
Medicinam, the first Lettesrs of all which words do form our present Vitriolum.

Sir Theodore Mayern says for the Honor of Vitriol (and it was an Honor to
Vitriol, that he should say so) that we may find in it that which is Hot and
Cold, Attenuative and Incrassant, In Apolog.
Aperitive and Astringent, Coagulative and Dissolvent, and that which is
Corroborative, Purgative and Sudorifick. But this must be understood of him, as
he was a Chemist, and an Assertor of Chemistry, rather than as he was a
Physician. And it must be remembered, that he said it in his Younger days, when
his Fancy was praedominant, and his Passions had the government of his
understanding. But when Practice and Experience had Fixed his Volatile
Imagination, he never Counseled any of his Patients to seek for an absolute
relief in the Preparations of this Mineral. He chose rather to prescribe them a
Regular and Proper Diet, and put the stress of his Cures on a Methodical
Administration of different Medicines, both Chemical and Galenical, as he found
the cases did require. Again, a man of Parts and Ingenuity may be apt sometimes
to dote on Particular Preparations abundantly more than they deserve. And it is
a certain Fate peculiar to Chemists (and for ought I can see it may be so to
the Worlds end, unless Preparations do strangely lose their credit)
extravagantly to admire, what they have taken great pains to compose, and their
thoughts shall be far more intense in the Furnace and the Laboratory, than in
the Sick body, or the house of Sickness.

Vitriol is so called from its Transparency, like unto Vitrum, Glass. There are
several sorts of it, but the White is by all esteemed the Milder. And the White
Crude, or as Crude as we have it from the Druggists, without any farther
Preparation, is a very Excellent, because Mild and Safe Emetick. Physicians in
general do rather choose to Prescribe the Sal Vitrioli, and Vitriolum album
Depuratum, as having a better opinion of them upon the account of their being
Preparations, and possibly some may quietly go along with the stream, without
much reflection on the matter. But whenever they are Prescribed, how properly
and knowingly soever, they are rather a shot at random, as it happens, than any
Certainty to the Prescriber. For most of our Apothecaries, if not all, who
dispense these Medicines, are in a great Mist, uncertainty, and confusion about
them. The Common, White Vitriol, as it is had from the Druggists, is accounted
Crude, and therefore, as such, is but little esteemed for inward use; although
in reality, that, and all other Vitriols are Depurated, before ever they are
Bought and Sold. It is a very rare thing indeed to meet with the Native, really
Crude Vitriol of any sort; it is dug out of the Mines in a Vitriolick Earth,
and sometimes they meet with a Lump of Vitriol even as Pure as they Prepare it,
and when they do, they keep it by them for a Rarity to show to Strangers.
Therefore all our Vitriol is made by Artificial Solution, Coction, Filtration,
and Coagulation, and consequently it is Depurated before we have it, nor can we
obtain any of the more Impure or Crude, unless we send on purpose for it.

The Sal Vitrioli is made either from the remaining Colcothar, after
Distillation, or else by Calcination of our English, or the Hungarian Vitriol,
in a Crucible, than Solution, Filtration, Evaporation, and Coagulation. And
this same Salt is a stronger Emetick, than our Depuratum, or supposed Crudum.
The Depuratum, which differs but a trifle from our foresaid Crudum, and is a
second Purification, by Solution, Filtration, etc. But by that second
Purification little more than actum ag itur, very little or no Earth is
separated; this Depuratum Vitriolum album is that which is commonly Sold to
Apothecaries, and by them Dispensed, through mistake, for the Sal Vitrioli. The
reason I have to think so, is this: I could name the place and Person, from
whom a great many Apothecaries have bought up Pounds of the Depuratum for the
Sal Vitrioli, and the Person who so vended it to them, did Confess it in my
Ear. And besides I have enquired at some Eminent Apothecaries for the Vitriolum
Album Depuratum, and they have, not many years since, acknowledged they never
Sold any of it, but of the Sal Vitrioli they had enough. Whereas if I had
demanded the Salt, it is probable enough they would readily have brought me the
second Depuratum. And this being the state of our present Huddle about Vitriol,
I hope it is not amiss to show whereabouts we are, and what an uncertainty
those are in, who Prescribe these Preparations of Vitriol.

Therefore that I might be sure what I do, and do no more than I willingly
would, (for the Sal Vitrioli, and the Depuratum, do not so little differ in
strength as that it is not worth the while to mind it) I have a good while
confined my self to the Plain, Crudest we have, and among us Unprepared
Vitriol. For I would neither be imposed upon, with Calcined Salt for the
Depurated Vitriol, nor willingly miss my aim, if I had occasion for a Vomit as
strong as the Salt. The Vinum Benedictum is ready, where we cannot be sure of
the Salt; and in Bodies or Diseases, which do not require a strong Vomit, the
plain White Vitriol is a very good one, and I apt to think abundanly the
better, for being one of the Mildest in nature, at least of those that are
Mineral. And it is not a little Material, that a Physician may manage
Vitriolick Vomits, and especially this last, even how he pleases himself; which
is not so, of the stronger, those that are Mercurial, or Antimonial. He will
hardly lose much time, if in ticklish cases he vouchsafes to stay with his
Patient from the beginning to the end of its Operation. It may be urged with
successive Doses, as he thinks it most convenient, or the Dose or Doses may be
remitted, and the Operation made to desist in good time. And Vomits are a sort
of Remedy, which requires more than ordinary care and caution. They are so
exceeding Good a Remedy, where they are proper, and do in many cases so far
excel the power of other Purgatives, that it is a very happy thing to have such
Vomits in a readiness, as where they are needful, we never need fear the
consequence of, and yet may reasonably expect no small Benefit from.

And that the very Native Vitriol, with its supposed Natural Impurities, and
without any Chemical Purification, or Preparation, is no Bad Medicine, we may
reasonably imagine, partly from the Mild Operation of the Vitriol that we have,
and partly from those Admirable effects that are known and granted to proceed
from Vitriolick Mineral Waterss, advisedly and properly taken. Those waters
which partake of Martial, or Vitriolick Principles are generally by Physicians
recommended above all others. And hence our Tunbridge-Waters are come to be so
Famous. They are both of them very nearly related, Iron consisting of a
Vitriolick Salt among its other Principles, and Vitriol being thought capable
of turning Iron into Copper. Tract. de Consens. and Dissens. cap. 2.
Sennertus maintains this last, with greater earnestness than ordinary; as that
there are (Vitriolick) Fountains in the Hill Carpathus near the Town Smolnitium
in Hungary, into which if you put a quaintity of Iron, it will soon turn into
the Best Copper. Nay, that not only Natural but Artificial Waters will do it,
and that if you put but Iron into a made Vitriolick Water, a Red Powder will be
found in it, which being Melted proves to be Copper. To the truth of those kind
of Experiments I have spoken before, in Chap. 6. But as for the Mineral Waters
which chiefly partake of Vitriolick, and Martial Principles, they are happily
found to produce excellent effects in diverse stubborn Chronical Distempers. And
as they are Unprepared by Art, according to Natures plain and often wholesome
way, they are no despicable Medicine for the greatest persons among us; whereas
the Curious Preparations of the foresaid Minerals are rather said, than granted
to work wonders on the generality, and Wise men have ever been tender and
Suspicious at least of Experimenting their effects upon their own bodies.

And for the Excellency of Natural Remedies, and Natural Mineral Waters, that
they are Blessings from Heaven, which good use may be made of, when directed to
by Physicians, I shall here insert a very remarkable story out of Brassavolus,
which we may the rather believe to be True, because he delivers with it the
Royal Authority he had for the Relation. This Eminent Author speaking of Manna,
In Exam. Simpl. de succ. praedens. and concretis liquor. page 432.
the Calabrian Manna of the Shops, gives us an account that not long before his
time, a King of Naples (still called the Kingdom) in a Covetous design did
Fence in all that ground where the Manna did especially fall, and chiefly a
part of Oenotria, which derives its Name from the delicate Wines that grow
there, but where is also gathered the very best Manna of all; when the King had
thus Fenced it in, and set a Guard round about it, in order to raise thence a
considerable Gabel, or Tribute, he says the Manna failed, and continued lost,
until the Avenues were opened again to every body. Moreover, upon the return of
the Manna, some Covetous Counselor would needs advise the King to try once
more whither this were not a thing of Chance; so that the passages were again
blocked up as before, and the Customs carefully appointed. Upon that, the
Heavens withheld their Treasure as before, all the Manna was gone, and their
base Infidelity a second time convinced. And yet when the Blockade was fully
removed, and all things free as at first, they were not punished, as they
deserved, with an absolute Deprivation of that Sweet Caelestial Dew; but (such
was the Goodness of Heaven!) in the Morning toward Daylight it misled down
again as before on the Leaves and Branches of the Trees, and upon the Herbs of
the Field, where it soon becomes a Concrete, and hardens like a kind of Gum.
Ibid.
And this strange Story Brassavolus there says was seriously communicated to
him by Isabella Queen of Naples, Wife to King Frederick, at a time when every
body should be supposed to speak Truth, I mean on her Deathbed, he being her
Physician, and she Dying of a Fever, Ann. D. 1533.

I have been at a Well in France, where they confidently tell such another
Story, of a certain Governor's Guarding it, and setting a Tribute on the Water,
at so much a Gallon, that it immediately dried up, and returned again upon a
free passage. In some places in England they have much the same Tradition. And
I have read somewhere of a Salt, in Epirus, which when Lysimachus had laid a
Tax upon, it was not to be found; when the Tax was taken off, it returned
again. But if any of them all be True, it will be an unanswerable Argument for
the Goodness of Natural Remedies, as Providence provides them, and should a
little check the Pride of a Chemist, who disdainfully scorns them as too Impure
to be used, and as if his Art were above the Wisdom of Nature.

To return to our subject, Vitriol: Sennertus treading in the footsteps of many
Ancient Authors, reckons it to be no less than a Poison, Lib. 6. Par. 5. c. 2.
in his Catalogue of such Poisons as are taken from Minerals and Metals; and
because it moves a Nauseousness, and Vomiting, he thinks it to contain some
Malignity in its nature. Whereas some of the most Innocent things of all, as
Lukewarm water, will do the same. But if it be taken in an immoderate
quantity, and happens not to work at all upwards, it may indeed, as he says,
Corrode the Stomach, cause a Dysentery, and a great Thirst with it; which
rather shows, that care must be taken to provoke a Vomit after them, if they
will not work of themselves; and good store of Posset Drink, or at last a
Feather in the Throat will easily enough enforce where there is occasion. For
generally it happens, that the first Dose of Vitriol dissolved in Posset Drink
is as soon rejected as swallowed; but all Emeticks, and especially strong ones,
ought some way to be provoked upwards, if in convenient time they do not move
of themselves.

If the said white Vitriol be made up into Pills, about a Dram, or four
Scrupules of it with French Butter, and given upon a Stomach not too empty, it
will work gently enough with most People, and we never need fear any Venomous
Corrosion from it.

Or Aq. hord. iiij. Vititol. alb. iiij. Sir. viol. j. M. J. haustus.

But though Vitriol in its self be far from a notorious Poison, yet it may be
prepared into a Poison of the first rank. Vitriol with Niter, both innocent in
themselves, will with the help of a good Fire, and the Spagyrick Art, yield
forth Aqua Fortis, which is able to destroy and Corrode into the most minute
particles all the Metals excepting Gold. The Caustic Oil of Vitriol, and
Spirit of Niter, are singly keen enough, but joined together, and uniting their
destructive forces, nothing but Gold, the King of Metals, can stand before them.

Spirit of Vitriol, though upon immoderate use (as in Chap. 7.) it may fire the
Blood, and corrode the Vitals, yet upon great occasions, and for a certain
convenient time, it may prove a most excellent Medicine. In dangerous.
Haemorrhagies, etc. this Spirit dropped into Fountain water, is more effectual
than can be easily imagined. And yet I am far from being of Bovius the
Empiricks mind, who would needs have it be an unparrallel'd Remedy against all
Diseases, only by mixing it with Appropriate distilled waters, with Balm,
Marjoram, or Bugloss water, it must be a certain Remedy for the Headache and
Vertigo's; with Rost-water it is to Cure Continued Fevers; with Fumitory
water, the Itch; with Fennil water it must restore a decayed Memory; with
Plantain water it is to stop a Diarrhaea; with Lettice water it is to be a
Narcotick; and lastly, with a Proper Water to any Disease, it must cure any, or
all that the Empirick had a mind to. A rare Fellow beyond question, and one
that deserved justly to be called not only Bovius Empiricus, but for his
incomparable Impudence, or Ignorance, Bovius the Prince of Empiricks. For he
found out abundantly more in this Spirit, than Paracelsus the Monarch of Arcana
could do in all the Preparations from Vitriol. Paracelsus was Modest in
ascribing but the Fourth part of Physical Remedies to the Preparations, or
Arcana of Vitriol; but Bovius was a Hercules indeed, who with the assistance of
this one Spirit, instead of a Clubb, would undertake to Conquer the manifold
Hydra of Humane Diseases. We had a prating illiterate Monsieur swaggering among
us not long since (the now forgotten Rabel) who, if it were possible, would
have put down Bovius, and did peremptorily pretend to Cure Pox, Plague, Scurvy,
etc. with this same Spirit, or rather Caustic Oil Dulcified, and exhibited in
Appropriate Liquors, or Decoctions. But he soon quitted our English Stage,
having over-Acted his Part; for some of his Patients, from Adorers of the
Harlot Venus, in whose Service they had been secretly wounded, became Sons of
Mars against their New Undertaker, Monsieur Rabel; and I have heard, if he had
staid longer, would have revenged their Sufferings severely, which it seems
they doubly underwent, both from the French Disease, and the French Pretender.

Again, Crude Vitriol is by the Germans and Hungarians esteemed a very good
Remedy even in the Plague; and perhaps to the Stomach may be a better
Preservative, by freeing it from Offensive Humors, which often occasion the
Sickness in Pestilential times, than Spirit of Vitriol in Conserves or
Electuaries. The Emplastrum Diapalma, or Diachalciteos Galeni, of which Vitriol
is a good considerable part, is a sufficient recommendation of its Use and
Benefit outwardly, being certainly a Plaster not more common than excellent,
and one that has few fellows in goodness.

And lastly, for the Praise of Vitriol in its more Natural, or less Artificial
shape, the Sympothetick Powder, so famous and seemingly Miraculous among some
does deserve to be remembered. It is only Green Vitriol Calcined, or rather set
to Dry in the Hot Sun, until it becomes White. This plain, easy,
untroublesome, and even Natural Preparation, powdered, and kept for use, is
that which helped to make Sir Kenelm Digby so Famous over Europe, and being to
mankind so Useful and Extraordinary a Remedy, in the Cure of Wounds, by the
easy care of a Bloody Linen Cloth dressed with this Powder, and preserved in
a Temperate place, free from Air, and either wrapped up in Paper, or put into a
Glass, or Box, and so carried, if you please, in your Pocket, it being, I say,
so Easy, and probably enough effectual a Medicine, it is strange that more
trials are not made with it. If men could be really cured of such imminent
dangers as wounds do commonly cast them into, with a Whistle, with a touch, or
a stroke, I think he is a mere Wretch, that pretends to have any relation to
Physic, and would not heartily rejoice at so sudden a dispatch of men's misery
and affliction. For what can a private man's little gain signify, if compared
with the unspeakable good and benefit of the generality? Heathens could
downright Sacrifice themselves, leap voluntarily into Gulphs, and boldly look
through the face of Death it self, to serve or save their Countries or Cities;
and we that Profess such strict Rules of Morality, and have the most undeniable
Rewards of another Life continually before our eyes, cannot, or can very hardly
arrive to their Contempt of Superfluities. The efficacy of the Sympathetick
Powder has been confirmed with other Authorities, besides those of Sir Kenelm.
It is a Styptick even above our Wishes or Expectation, and it is great pity,
that the easiness and efficacy of a Remedy should be the main, if not only
Argument for its disuse. Some to spare their pains of Drying the Vitriol in the
Sun, to a Whiteness, have chosen rather to Calcine it over a Fire, in an
earthen Pot unglazed, as thinking the Fire of a Laboratory must needs be as
good as the vivifying Heat of the Sun; and perhaps the ineffectual or weak, or
Antipathetical performances of that Calcination, has been one means to derogate
from the real Sympathy. But as there are two sorts of Wounds, so there are two
sorts of the Sympathetical Powder, the one Simple, in Simple Wounds, described
before; the other Compound, in Compound Wounds. The Compound is made of equal
parts of the Simple Powder, and Gum Tragacanth mixed together; only when diverse
other things are thought convenient to be added, there must be the more Gumm
used, and the Wounds are to be treated with this, as with the other before.

The mere Infusion of Green Vitriol in Fountain Water, is none of the Worst
Remedies that a Chyrurgion might use, or else the People themselves, in green
Simple Wounds. But it is to be observed, that our English Green Vitriol is the
very best that is to be met with. The German sort does draw toward a Blew, and
contains more Copper, and is therefore the better for the making Aqua Fortis;
but our English Vitriol, which consists more of Iron, is therefore the better
for inward use, and for making Spirit of Vitriol, as also for Infusions, and
Sympathetical Preparations.

CHAP. XI.
Of Chalybeats. Iron preferred before Steel in Physic. A word of its Chemical
Principles. Impurities, or the very Faeces of Metals, prove to be Good
Remedies. The Excellency of Crude Mineral Iron, and Natural unprepared
Remedies. Dr. Willis's Preparation of Steel, hitherto a great Secret, now
communicated and described. Why Crude Tartar was preferred by him before the
Crystals. The true state of the case of Cream, or Crystals of Tartar, as they
are now used. Doctor Willis's Preparation how administered. How dangerous it is
to meddle with Chalybeats without due preparation of the body. Whence some
peoples Prejudice against Chalybeats has proceeded. A good Aperitive Crocus
Martis, and preferred before the Sal or Vitriolum Martis. That Art imitates
Nature, not Nature Art. The Sal Chalybis why so much esteemed; and how used.
That neither Iron, nor its Rust, do contain any Venomous quality. A word by the
by concerning the excellency of Saffron. Why Iron might Mystically signify
Wisdom. The Physical Properties of Iron. During Chalybeate Courses, the Purging
between whiles vindicated, so that a Condition be added.

CHalybeats are another of our six Celebrated Remedies, and perhaps not
inferior to the best Medicine we have in the Cure of Chronical Distempers. A
great part of lingering Chronical Diseases are reducible to Scorbutic,
Hypochondriacal, or Hysterical Affections; many Diseases in fieri, which are
not yet perfectly formed in Regular, Distinctive, and Pathognomonical Symptoms,
are soon determined to be either Scurvy, Melancholy, or Vapors, and in those
cases powerful Alteratives and Aperitives, such as Chalybeats, are of no mean
use.

The plain Filings of Iron powdered, or infused, though a much better Remedy
than Steel, yet do usually go under the denomination of Chalybeats, or Steel,
these last being more Popular Names, both among the Vulgar, and former
Physicians. Steel is esteemed to be more Purified than Iron, and indeed it is
abundantly more Pure, as to Common Uses, but as for Physic, it is more Refined
than it should be; for it is by Calcination dispossessed of great part of that
Aperitive Salt, which we are so very much beholding to for the powerful Opening
of Obstructions.

A Critical cognizance of its Chemical Principles, is of no great consequence
to the intrinsic efficacy of the Metal Simply in it self. And therefore though
Albertus Magnus, Schroder, and others, do think it to consist of a more Impure
Mercury, and Sulphur, yet this supposed Natural Impurity is no good prejudice
to the Physical Excellency of Iron. If it had consisted of a Purer Mercury, it
might possibly have been much the worse, because more Dangerous as to use, with
its more Mercurial qualifications. But if I may give my opinion in this matter,
it seems to consist of a Vitriolick Salt, and some Sulphur, and Earth, not ill
Digested together.

And that Impurities themselves, or the very Faeces of Metals, are no such
Contemptible things, the admirable endowments of Litharge, and its temperate
Sarcotick nature, may sufficiently demonstrate. Hence the Vnguentum Nutritum,
(and de Minio) the Emplastrum Diachylon Simplex (too much neglected, or
forgotten) the Empl. de Minio Comp. and the Diapalma, are much beholden to our
Impure Litharge. And in inveterate Ulcers I should rather suspect the Sal
Lithargyrii, sive Alumen Saturni, or the Oleum Lithargyrii rubrum, than the
plain recrement, Litharge. I could inculcate the same Argument with the virtues
of Pompholix, another Recrement of Metals. But the present subject Iron,
without any nice Preparation, besides its first Fusion, and separation from
earth, will appear proof enough, how exceeding kind Nature has been unto us, in
providing us even the best sort of Remedies ready Prepared to our hand, and
whereof excellent use may be made, if we will not spoil them, to gratify
Fancy, or a Proud Wit, by unnecessary Preparations. Dr. Sydenham, Dissertat.
Epistolar. p. 144.
And a late Worthy Author has insinuated, that the Crude Mineral Iron, as it is
dug out of the earth, is more efficacious in stubborn Diseases, than the
Iron, which has undergone but the first Purification, or Preparation, Fasion.
And in cases where Prepared Chalybeats do prove ineffectual; the Tunbridge
Waters, which do mainly partake of the Mineral Iron, are commonly recommended,
and that properly and often effectually too, as a last and no mean Refuge. Id.
p. 156.
His enim Ferrum videtur inesse in principiis solutis, unde illarum virtus
Chalybeata intimius sanguini permiscetur, and potentius morbos expugnat, quam
Ferrum quocunque demum artificio nobilitatum, ut volunt Ciniflones
imprudentiores. Again, the same Excellent Author, in justification of this
subject, discourses thus: Quod vero nativa quidpiam bonitate praestans and
efficacia, mirandos edat effectus, quacunque demum forma ingeratur, testes hic
adduco Par illud nobile, Papaveris lacrymam sive Opium, and Corticem
Peruvianum. Neque enim tantum in medicamentis praeparandis medica cernitur
peritia, quam in iis seligendis appropriandisque, quae Natura, suo igne
elaborata atque evecta, liberali manu porrigit, etc.

The best Preparation of any, and one of the plainest too, that Iron can yield
us, is a Secret of Dr. Willis, hitherto a great Secret, and sold at a great
Price, called his Preparation of Steel. Having had the good fortune to be
acquainted not only with the Mystery of the said Preparation, but with its
incomparable effects in Diseases which proceed from Obstructions, I hope it may
be no unacceptable piece of Service to the Public to communicate this
Masterpiece of that Eminent, and ever Famous Man. And yet here is no strained
stately Magistery, no Sublimation, or Salification, no Calcined Crocus, and
lastly no kind of Chemical Mystery (in all which he was known to have been a
most expert Artist) but an easy, plain, and Natural way of Opening its hard
body, in order to render it the fitter to Open ours.

. Limatur. ferr. tartar, alb. crud. a p. ae. M. and redig. in pulverem, qui cum
aq. pur. qs. formetur in Massam humidam, in vase terreo vitreato. Ponatur in
leni calore, sive foci, sive arenae, stercoris equini, sive Solis; vel etiam in
loculo circumgeratur. Massa exiccata rursum madifiat, atque exiccetur ut antea;
idque repetatur quater vel quinquies. Thus you have the best Preparation of
Mars, for your use, that perhaps is extant in nature.

He preferred Crude Tartar before the Cream, or Crystals, no doubt, for very
good reasons. He could not be ignorant, what a Cheat the Cream of Tartar
commonly is, when bought at the Druggists; and especially of those
circumforaneous Distillers, who make a livelihood of Counterfeiting Medicines.
Prax. Med. lib. 11. c. 3.
And the Excellent Riverius mentions this imposture with a great deal of
Emphasis and concern; and his hearty complaint and full detection of the abuse,
might well make his Successors wary and timorous about it. In short, the very
Cream of Tartar may be bought of those accursed Pseudo-chymical Distillers at
much the same price as Crude Tartar; there is hardly two pence a pound
difference between them. The Crude Tartar may be bought for six or eight pence
the pound, and for eight pence the Crystals are bought of those Cheats. The
Druggists sell the Crystals for twelve, fourteen, sixteen pence the pound; but
whence they have them, whither of those rake-shames, or else from about
Montpellier, I cannot determine. But if they came from France, we have as much
reason to be apprehensive of them, as the French Riverius, bred up at
Montpellier, and well acquainted with their wicked Preparations of them there.
Ibid.
He says the Cream of Tartar is sold in France, septem vel octo assibus the
pound, and that it may be bought cheaper than made; that Alom is used in the
making them, more than Tartar, because the Alom shoots all into Crystals. Now
the Apothecaries Laboratory being provided on purpose to furnish the Town with
Faithful Chemical Preparations, and therefore a very Excellent and Honest
design, the true Cream or Crystals may be obtained there (unless we make a
doubt of Public Faith) at three shillings, or three and six pence the pound. I
have as nicely as I could, examined their Crystals, and those bought from the
Druggists, and I cannot perceive any Sensible or Remarkable difference between
them in the Taste. Therefore those that Counterfeit them, are to be supposed
Artists in their Trade, and they choose an insipid sort of white Alom, to mix
with their Tartar. And this farther you may know, that those at the Hall are
very sensible, how little of their True Crystals they vend to the Company, in
proportion either to the largeness of this City, or the use that is commonly
made of Cream of Tartar.

Therefore for fear the Apothecary I happen to Prescribe to, may not be the
Honestest in his Profession, I have commonly used, and thought it most
convenient (of two Evils, both being not evitable, choosing the least) to order
a dram, or a dram and a half of Crude White Tartar to be dissolved in hot
Broth, or Posset Drink, when I judge it expedient to accelerate or whet the
operation of a Purge. And although some may thence imagine me so Ignorant, as
never to have heard of Cream of Tartar, yet I shall always in that, or any
thing else, run the hazard of the Apothecaries good opinion, than let my
Patient suffer a contrary effect from Astringent, Aluminous Crystals, either
through their Error, or my Inadvertency.

Dr. Willis's foresaid Preparation of Mars, or Steel, may with White-nine, or
some Proper Distilled Water, and Sugar, be made into a Chalybeate Syrup; or
with the Syrupus e 5. radic. aper. or Syrup. de absyn. be made into Pills; or
else given in Electuary, or Bolus; or with Rose Water, and fine Sugar, adding a
few drops of Oil of Cinnamon, be made into Lozenges; to be used, or continued,
according to the judgment of the Physician, after precedent Evacuations, and
requisite Preparations of the Body.

For if the body be gross, or very full of Obstructions, which have been a long
time a ripening, and are become Inveterate, a man may almost as properly take a
Sword or a Dagger, as any sort of Prepared, or Unprepared Mars, to Open them
with. I have read of some, who upon Errors of that kind, upon a rash and
unadvised use of Chalybeats, have immediately fallen into Rondel. meth. cur.
morb. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Palsies; but those who escape best, under such irregular management, will
suffer great Inflammations about their Hypochondria, violent Pains and
Head-achs, and diverse Feverish Symptoms. Whereas if their Ignorant Undertakers
had Prepared the bodies of their Unfortunate Patients with some dissolving
Aperitives, and proper Evacuations, those miserable Accidents would easily have
been avoided.

And it is to the terrible Consequences of those imprudent administrations of
Chalybeats, that we must impute that violent and unreasonable Prejudice which
some People have taken against the trial of a Chalybeate Course. The very
naming a Steel Course shall frighten a sort of People from doing any thing
which might be for their good, and they will presently think upon new measures
in regard to Physic, and obstinately neglect the greatest, if not the only
means to do them good. They had perhaps tampered before with some Ignorant
Pretender, or had seen how ill their neighbor fared, from this desperate
Adventure, and therefore they choose to keep themselves as they are, in a
Cachectick and very Infirm disposition, rather than run hazards (they think)
they had good reason to dread.

Next to the aforesaid Preparation of Steel, which for its freedom from
affected artifice, and for the effectual assistance it receives from that
excellent Aperitive, Tartar, as well as for the esteem so good an Author set
upon it, does deserve no mean commendations; next unto this, I shall recommend
a yet plainer Preparation, if possible, than the former. It is only the Filings
of Iron wetted with Water, rusted, and powdered. Lemery modishly styles it a
Crocus Martis, and perhaps for its Want of Art and Simplicity, it better
deserves to be called Crocus in one sense, than the Astringent Crocus Martis
does in another, being made by a strong Reverberatory Calcination for several
days, until it comes to a most Red, and Saffron color. And this easy,
inartificial Medicine will prove much more Innocent, if not Beneficial to all,
and especially to all Acid, Melancholic temperaments, than any Sal, or
Vitriolum Martis, prepared with the Oil of Vitriol, or Sulphur, although they
be Dulcified. For let Sowrness, or Acidity, be contrary to the temper of a man,
he shall be sure to find the effects of its Acid nature, though it be sweetened
with good store of Sugar, or else with a Sweetning Spirit. And Acids, and
Preparations with Acids, are very contrary to the depraved temper of
Hypochondriacal and Hysterical persons, whose Blood is too much Sowred already,
and that makes it Stagnate in so many different places of the body, and
consequently produce such an Infinite variety of Symptoms, as often use to
puzzle very Able Physicians in the true nature of the Disease, unless they
please to Examine it with all their Wits about them.

But the Salt, or Vitriol of Mars, is in far greater vogue among us, than such
Despicable, because easy Medicines, as the Rust of Iron powdered. And how
Willis's Preparation of Steel, one of his choicest Nostrums, may fare with some
men's liking, now it is freely exposed to their censure, it is not hard to guess.
They would perhaps rather have admired it, if it had been really worse, and had
partaked more of Art, than Goodness. But it is better those fond men should be
sometimes disappointed, than have their fancies always tickled. Let them give
themselves as much needless trouble as they please, and think nothing can
withstand the Power of Alchymy. They will find at last, unless the light of
their reason be strangely Eclipsed, that the power of Nature, and Natural
Remedies, is much above Art, and Artificial Remedies; and that non artem
natura, Cardan. de simpl. med. nocument.
sed naturam ars imitatur, it is not Nature that must imitate Art, but Art
Nature; and according as any Art comes nearest to a lively imitation of Nature,
by so much we esteem it the more excellent; which truth is palpably evident and
indisputably notorious in a great many Arts. Why therefore should a Chemical
Artist fondly imagine, that the more Natural any thing is, the more Impure it
must necessarily be, and that the greater distance there is between Nature and
his Preparations, they must needs be thought so much the more Refined,
Purified, and Exalted? but he that will prefer an Artificial before a Natural,
a False before a True Diamond, merely because it is the product of his own
skill, will betray his folly sufficiently, and though he may be an Artist, will
prove to be no Crafts-man.

The Sal Chalybis is in the greater request, both because it is a Chemical
Preparation, and because it is a more palatable Remedy. Three or four or more
grains of this Salt to a spoonful of Syrup, and this Chalybeate Syrup,
exhibited in a pleasant Medicated Wine, Julep, or other agreeable liquor, must
needs be more popular and acceptable to the generality of Patients, than any
more gross, or sensible, though more effectual, Chalybeate. But because in some
bodies the Sal Martis may be a good Medicine, and will sometimes have very good
effects, I shall offer a Description or two that are none of the worst:. Aq.
raphan. comp. lumbric. comp. a lbss. sacch. alb. lbj. f. Syrupus sec. artem,
addendo Sal. Chalyb. iij.. Syrup. e 5. radic. aper. de Pom. alterant. Capill.
ven. utriusvis x, vel xij. Sal. chalyb. a ij. ad iij. M. f. Sir. Chalyb. It may
be likewise made into very Pleasant Electuaries, or given in a curious Bolus.
But to proceed.

Sennert. l. 6. par. 5. c. 12. Aldrovand. lib. 1. c. 6. de serro.
Some Authors, and those no mean ones, have been of the opinion, that in Iron
its self, its Rust, and Scories, there is contained a Venomous quality, and
they do reckon up for Symptoms of this Poison, vehement Pains, and Inflammations
of the body, with Headache, Dry tongue, etc. But we may rather judge those
grievous Symptoms to proceed from an irregular, precipitated, and unadvised
Administration of them, than from the things themselves. The most Innocent, and
some of the wholsomest Remedies we have, if played with at random, and
indiscreetly taken, will alter their nature, and become destructive. Not to
mention Wine, and strong Liquors, Lettice is esteemed justly to make an
excellent Sallade, and yet four ounces of the Juice are said by Sennertus to
become a Poison, as much a Poison as Hemlock and Henbane. Saffron, and
especially our own English Saffron, is a Cordial of the first rank, and will
effectually do the Heart more good, than a thousand Precious, or not precious
Stones, whither they come from the Indies, or are trod under our feet. The
Stones are said to be Cordials only Accidentally, and not Essentially; as
Natural and good Alkalies they serve to absorbe that Acidity in the body, which
sometimes causes grievous Pains, and Oppressions. But Saffron is intrinsecally
and in its proper nature an Admirable Cordial, and it is very unhappy that the
Turks, and Barbarians, and most Nations abroad should generally as one man have
a better opinion of Saffron, than we, who are beholding to Providence for the
best Saffron in the whole World growing among us. Nay it is so exceeding good a
Cordial, that Dodonaeus is of the opinion, it can bring back Consumptive People
for several days to Sense and Life again, when they are just dying, and in
their last Agony, if half a scruple, or a scruple of it be given in Wine. And
yet notwithstanding, if it be taken immoderately, it will be very injurious to
the head, and pervert the functions of the brain, and it will so dissipate the
Spirits, River. Instit. Med. l. 4. c. 22.
ut in magna quantitate sumptus mortem infer valeat, that it will Kill, like
a Poison, when used beyond measure. Some say two drachms at a time will not
fail to dispatch a man, and the common People think a small Sprig of Saffron
will do the work, if it should chance to get to the Heart; which is true enough
in a sly sense, for when that which is impossible is done, when a sprig has
passed through the Concoction of the Stomach, through the small passages of the
Venae Lacteae, and the Ductus Thoracicus, into the Veins, and has slipped through
such Valves, as will only receive a certain sort of Liquor, when all this is
done, it will be a Poison sure enough, as also when the Sky falls, great
matters may be done. The notion or many things, to which men have had great
Prejudice, have by degrees cleared up, and lost their frightfulness: and diverse
Remedies have been found upon second thoughts, to be very Innocent and Useful,
which upon their first introduction to trial were condemned as hurtful or
Pernicious, for want of a right understanding the manner of giving them, and
the necessary circumstances which ought to be concomitant. And this is the
knowledge which always distinguishes between an Artist and a Bungler, between a
True Physician, and a Quacking Experimentator.

Iron among the Jews did Mystically signify Wisdom, and the Poets Pallas,
their Goddess of Wisdom, was usually Painted with Armor, and Iron
accoutrements. Whither it were that Wisdom is Hard to attain, or that the Key
of Knowledge, which unlocks all Mysteries, may have some Mysterious resemblance
to this Metal, this being the most Useful of all to the common offices of life,
as Knowledge is the most Excellent of qualifications.

Neither is Iron of greater benefit to the Public, than in the Province of
Physic. It is both the greatest Aperitive, and the greatest Astringent, and in
Scorbutic anomolous cases is one of the Chief Remedies we have. The Simple
Infusion of it in Wine or Water, with some little assistance, is oftentimes as
good a Medicine, as it is cheap, and easy. And if we would not haughtily
overlook diverse things, which always lie ready at our hand, I verily persuade
my self, we should oftener, than we do, perform Cures which are otherwise
Despaired of.

Before I leave this subject, I shall add one reflection more. Dr. Sydenham
Dissert. Epist. p. 146
It has been of late observed by an Eminent Modern Author, that the usual
custom of giving a Purge once in five or six days, during the time of
Chalybeate Courses, has been rather mischievous to the design in hand, than any
ways advantageous; that the Purging between whiles does really undo as much in
one day, as the Chalybeats could do good in a week, which if true, is a thing
of no small moment. But I can hardly conceive, that all our Predecessors should
in a thing so obvious trifle to so little purpose. Therefore to reconcile the
matter a little, I offer to Consideration, whither it may not be better to mix
Chalybeats with the Purgatives in those intermediate days, than wholly to
decline Purging from the first beginning of Chalybeats to the end of all, and
even then too to forbear it. For hereby the Chalybeate Intention is not at all
intermitted, and that Undoing things again is avoided, which is laid to the
charge of Purging. And besides, if Patients were apt to be Regular in their
Diet, and took such care as they should do as to Heats and Colds, during the
progress of their Steel Course, there might probably enough be the less need of
Purging between whiles; but because they are generally apt to be Irregular, and
Careless of themselves, it may in my opinion be more Proper, if not Necessary,
to administer a Purge in those usual intervals, so that Chalybeats be mixed
with it.

CHAP. XII.
The Cortex, or Jesuits Powder, now a kind of Panacea. That all Great Remedies
have a Natural Succession in point of Reputation. The Cortex the Prince of
Plants. In what Agues it is Admirable. The Reproach, that Physicians could not
Cure Agues before the knowledge of the Cortex, examined, and refuted. Riverius
his famous Febrifuge before that time. That Fevers and Agues are properly
Cured different ways, in different places, and at different times. Whither
Women could heretofore Cure Agues better than Physicians. Men's Partiality to
Physicians. That the nice and exact knowledge of Riverius his Febrifuge, is of
no great moment to us. The Authors way of Curing many Agues, with more Safety,
and no less Certainty, than with the Cortex. This more properly adapted to some
of the Autumnal Agues, rather than to any of the Vernal. Why other ways of Cure
ought in Prudence to be sought. Some Old Febrifuges named, and recommended. Why
the Cortex may not be so Proper, or Effectual a Remedy in all Agues, as only in
some. Some ill Accidents from its liberal use. The difference between True, and
Palliative Cures. That other Remedies have been as much in vogue as this; and
yet it has been but for a certain time. A true conclusion from it. The Fame of
the Cortex not like to last for ever. How it came into Reputation. Diverse
Diseases wherein it has been tried. A considerable circumstance to advantage
its use. A Distinctive sign to distinguish the True Cortex from Adulterates. A
word to the old way of giving it. The Bark in Substance better than the
Preparations.

THE Famous Cortex, or American Bark, commonly called the Jesuits Powder,
because some of their Society first introduced the use of it here in Europe, is
now grown into that request and reputation, that the supposed Physical Uses of
the Philosophers Stone are hardly thought to be greater or more diffusive, than
some would have us believe concerning this plain Simple Bark. It is now the
greatest Catholicon, or Panacea extant, and is accommodated to more variety of
cases, than the most Bezoardick, Solar, Jovial, or any ways Chemical
Rhodomontade.

That man must be very Ignorant in Modern Practice, or very Sour in his
Natural Temper, or must wish but little to the good of People, who will still
deny the Cortex to be a very Extraordinary Remedy, or would be willing to
derogate from its Real Excellency. But it is, and ever has been, the Common
Fate of all Great Medicines, to be lifted up for a certain time into greater
heights of Admiration, and to run into more Universal Use, than is consistent
with the nature of any one Drug never so Good, or than deliberate Experience
can truly confirm. If we had lived in former times, and seen how diverse things
successively were once the Wonders of the World, and yet at last gave place to
New ones, notwithstanding the loud and full cry which for a time had raised
them on high, we should now the less admire to see what a large and
uncontrollable Empire this present Remedy has gained in Physic. That which is
Past cannot affect us with that life and sense, as what is Present; nor will
succeeding Generations be more concerned at the Greatness of our Prevailing, or
rather Ruling Remedy, than we are now at many of those which our Forefathers
were pleased to admire. Our Wisdom, Excellency, and Admiration, according to
the course and revolutions of things, lies Naturally one way, as their Wisdom,
Excellency, and Admiration did lie another, and our Childrens Faculties will as
certainly lie some other. Vnicorn's Horn, the Oriental Bezoar, and other
Precious Stones, nay Betony among the Italians, Sage among the Spaniards
particularly, Mercury and Antimony among the Chemists, many Preparations which
lie scattered in ours, or other Dispensatories, and diverse Arcana of Eminent
Physicians, have for a certain time made such a Noise, that other Medicines
could hardly be minded; and yet by degrees every one draws off into a lower
Station, to give way for its next Successor. At first when they appeared in
their highest Exaltation and Splendour, the Eyes of men were apt to be Dazzled,
and they could not discover any faults; but when afterward the Curtain was
drawn, and they could and would leasurely and attentively consider the Object
before them, the true Dimensions were not so great, nor the supposed
qualifications so conspicuous as they at first imagined. Do'nt we discover
Spots even in the Sun, by the late invention of Telescopes, and why should we
expect a durable Perfection in any thing under the Sun? one man may indeed be
much wiser than another, but if we once come to make an Idol of him, or think
him to be more Infallible than is consistent with Humane Nature, we shall be
found at last effectually to depretiate him, and occasion a lower esteem of
him, than perhaps he really deserved.

The Cortex is now as much the Prince of Plants, as Gold the King of Metals.
And therefore a man had need have a more than ordinary care, what he says
concerning his Prince; it is our Duty, as well as Wisdom, rather to hide, and
pass by, than expose or magnify his faults. Wherefore being conscious to my
self of my own Loyalty, and Well-wishes to the Right Successor in Physic, I
shall be very tender of derogating from its real, and justly admirable
properties, but must hope to be excused, where Life and Death is concerned, if
with due Respect and Deference I speak some Truths, which are of great
consequence to us when well known and considered.

Diverse excellent Discourses have of late been published concerning the Cortex,
some to explicate its nature, and others to instruct us in its use. And yet we
are all of us still in the Dark, more or less, as to a great many particulars
about it; neither Honest Physicians, nor Judicious Patients, are so clearly
enlightened, or fully satisfied in several circumstances which do use to attend
it, or in some cases wherein it is now administered, as we might fairly desire,
or they ought in reason to wish.

In Quartans, and Autumnal Tertians, it is a Remedy of greater Certainty, and
Specific propriety, than perhaps Physic was ever furnished with before,
either upon those, or any other accounts. Those Tedious and most Obstinate
Diseases were generally esteemed to be Opprobriums, or just reproaches even to
the Art of Physic, and every humoursome censorious person, who had not Grace
to acknowledge the Mercies of God in providing so many Worthy men to be ready
on the greatest exigencies of humane Life to succor and relieve them, who
could willingly overlook all the other excellent and indisputable Cures daily
performed by Physicians, would be ever now and then throwing this Dirt on the
Faculty, that Physicians could not Cure an Ague. And yet this very Reproach, if
well considered, was an unworthy Taxation, and a most Notorious Untruth. For
there were thousands of instances, wherein Physicians did acquit themselves
with good success, even in Autumnal Agues, before ever the Cortex was known
amongst us. And yet it must be granted, that there were many persons, who
miserably lingered a long time under Agues, notwithstanding the endeavors of
the best Physicians. But of them who were so Unhappy, it may be considered, how
many were very Irregular in point of Diet, and the use of Medicines, what
unfair and disingenious dealings Physicians do too too often privately meet
with, from fantastical Nurses, and conceited Attendants, who will needs mix,
and often prefer their little skills, to very Rational and Advised
Prescriptions; how often those Assistants, or other pretended Friends, have
shamefully prevaricated with the Physician in their false accounts of many
Medicines being duly taken, which were officiously conveyed out at the Window;
and lastly, how many giddy Patients have been soon tired with a Course of
Physic in one week, which might probably enough have had sufficient effect, if
they had but persisted a Month, or two.

Again, there were diverse Febrifuges, which Sober Authors have delivered with
great assurance, that have performed enough and enough to vindicate the
Reputation our Art deserves. I shall mention but one, and that was Riverius his
famous Febrifuge, which consisting of manifest Evacuations both upwards and
downwards, and being therein diametrically opposite to the Operation of the
Cortex, which is imperceptible and insensible in its operation, this was enough
to silence that common Opprobrium of unreasonable men, and to demonstrate what
the Power of Art, and a Skillful hand could do, when together joined. Moreover,
Agues in all Countries will not admit the very same Method of Cure, nor would
the same Medicine be to all alike effectual, any more than the same Method, or
Medicine can be esteemed proper to all Countries in Continued Fevers. We may
observe, that although Hippocrates, and Galen, and other excellent men's Works,
be Studied, and taught in all places of the World, where Learning is esteemed,
although the same Principles of Truth do every where prevail, yet every Country
does very differently modifie and apply those very same Principles to each
places particular Temper. The Method of Cure shall diversifie, as the places
differ, and in one and the same Country, according as the Constitution of the
Season does alter; the nature of Epidemical Fevers will necessarily vary, and
as the Fevers do alter, so must the Method also; which successive alteration
of Diseases, and even of Agues as well as others, might very well occasion a
less Certain or Constant Cure of all sorts of Fevers, until the New
Constitution were thoroughly understood.

And yet although Physicians were said to be so Unskillful, as not to be able
to Cure a Quartan, before the arrival of the Cortex, all Illiterate and
Ignorant people had abundance of Infallible Remedies; one would lay a Plaster
to the Wrists, another to the Feet, a third to the Belly or Stomach; one would
have a Charm, or Amulet, and Others other sort of Knick-knacks, all which would
never fail to Cure Agues, if men had but Faith to believe it, the Mountains
would then Certainly be removed; and thus every place was well provided with
Insurers, who could all Cure Agues, besides the Physicians. Only this was the
difference; if a Woman's Remedy did happen at any time to do it, or did appear
at least to do it, then all mouths were open to Proclaim it, and the Country
must presently Ring of it from one end to the other, and for the present the
Noise would prevail, and puff her a while up into Infallible Promises, 'till
upon farther and frequent trials, her Courage comes to flag, her Remedy is
known, or despised, and she found at last to be no more than a Woman. But if an
understanding Physician is called upon in the like case, either he performs the
Cure with expedition, and then it is no more than another would have done as
well, or it was but what ought to be expected from a man of his Abilities; or
if he misses the giving full satisfaction immediately, and the Disease is more
untoward than to submit to a few Directions, then presently all Physicians are
by general consent condemned, and to their shame be it spoken aloud, not one
can Cure an Ague.

It is a sad thing to consider the Partiality and Ingratitude of a great many
men to our Profession, and if the more Gentile and Judicious sort did not
sometimes make amends for what we undeservedly suffer from the worse and lower
sort, I believe few men's Zeal to serve the Public, would sufficiently
encourage them to take that pains and thoughfulness, and to be at that Expense
which is Necessary to qualify a man as is requisite for an upright and
Conscientious discharge of this most Useful Employment.

Observe. Centur. 3.
Riverius, that Excellent Author, gives us so many instances of Certain and
speedy Cures of Agues by his Famous Febrifuge, that one great part of his
Observations is nothing else but Relations of that nature. He was a man of that
Eminency and Integrity, and lived so lately, that we have no manner of reason
to doubt the Truth of his repeated Experiences. He Printed his Observations
while he was yet alive, and the Persons and Times being so exactly named, we
must have easily discovered him, if he had given any false accounts. So that if
his were not so Natural and notionally True a Specific in the Cure of Agues as
the Cortex, yet if his were made as Certain, we had good reason to be well
contented. And his Cures being that way performed by Manifest Evacuations of
the Febrile matter, and consequently not liable to those after-accidents and
Exceptions, which now many Sober men, as well as the Ignorant, do sometimes
urge against the Cortex, his Remedy may still deserve a very great Pre-eminence
in Physic, and sufficiently baffle that unworthy Reproach to our Art, which
was mentioned before.

There are several Descriptions extant of that Noble Medicine, but the effect
being plain Purging, and sometimes Vomiting, I do not think there is any great
necessity of being overcurious in the reaching to a hairs breadth the
Particular Preparation in all its circumstances. If it were Mineral, and in
part Mercurial, as we have reason to imagine, it was a greater Honor than
ordinary to the Mineral Kingdom, and shows that Chemistry may be sometimes
improved to very excellent purposes, under the hands of a Good Physician. The
Mercurial part was no doubt sufficiently Dulcified, and if a less Elaborate
Cathartick were Prepared to work as that did, with the addition or assistance
of the Mercurial Sweetner, and this Purgative well timed in respect of the
Paroxisms, and well applied in respect of the Patient, there is no reason to
despair, but an Ague might still be Cured without an absolutely necessary, and
constant recourse to the Cortex. The reason that I presume to say so, is not a
bare supposition and ungrounded possibility; for I have diverse times Cured both
Tertians and Quartans with the following Purge, and Potion, and that sometimes
upon the very first exhibition; only the Circumstance of Timing it is of no
small moment. And yet this was no Hercules with his twelve Labors, nor any
ways beholding to Mercury. It was thus, or to this purpose.

. Antimon. diaphor. crystal. tartar. a j. diagryd. gr. xij. croc. opt. pulv.
gr. iij. vel. iiij. Misc. f. Pulvis in cochleari vin. alb. vel aq. alicujus
Cardiacae, v. vj. vel viij. horis ante Paroxismum exhibendus.

De Compos. Officinal. in specie. Sect. 4.
You may read much the same sort of Powder in Margrave's Materia Medica
contracta, and called Pulvis Febrifugus egregius, which he advises to give two
hours before the Fit in Chicken Broth. But I have rather chosen five, six, or
eight hours, before the time of the Fit, that the Purge might just have
finished its Operation before the expectation of the Paroxism. The Pulvis
Comitis Warvicensis, or Pulvis Cornachinus, are much of the same nature, and
ingredients.

But not trusting to this Powder alone, and considering how requisite a Cordial
often is, after a Purge of this strength, and especially at such a Critical
time as that of the Paroxism, so soon succeeding, I have generally thought it
Necessary to give some such Cordial, or Febrifugous draught, as is mentioned in
the Notes of the Ingenious Deckers upon Barbett's Practice. Deckers his Potion
is this:

. Aq. card, bened. ij. theriacal. simpl. ij. sal. absyn. ss. spir. sal. armon.
ss. sir. papav. errat. iij. M.f. haustus.

This, or some such draught I do use to give about the time of the Fit, or an
hour before. And I cannot remember, that I have once failed to Cure the Vernal
Tertians, and Double-tertians, by this easy Method. And it is but seldom that
it will fail in the Autumnal, especially if repeated two or three times. It is
to be noted, that the Physical Spring and Autumn, in respect of Agues, must be
so understood, as to divide the year equally between them; from the beginning
of February to the end of July, the Spring must be computed, and from the
beginning of August to the end of January, does reach the Autumn.

The nature of the Cortex seems to be more properly adapted to the Melancholic
temper of the Autumn; and if other ways will be found to prove effectual, in
the Vernal Agues especially, it is our part both in Prudence and Honesty,
rather to use them oftentimes, than the Cortex. For the Cure by the Bark does
contraindicate all Evacuations for a considerable time; the Cure by it is a
more than ordinary charge to many people, who cannot so well undergo it, and to
them it is a second and very heavy Disease; and lastly there are very strong
Prejudices in many persons against this Bark, insomuch that if any odd accident
does happen to those that are Cured by it, within six months after, or more,
they are easily induced to believe, that all is owing to this Bark, and instead
of acknowledging afterward their grateful testimony of their Physician, they
shall shake their heads at him, though very undeservedly, and be ready to
repent both their knowledge of him, and the Jesuits Powder. Now where the
Patient has a high opinion of his Physician, it is happy for them both; and the
Physic shall have the better effect; but where the Patient is very much
Prejudiced, whither justly or not, is not now the question, where he strongly
imagines that his Physician is giving him Poison (let the thing be never so
good in its self) and when nevertheless for fear of provoking his indignation,
or in obedience to the importunity of his Physician, or his Friends, he at last
forces himself to take it, with a heavy heart, and despairing mind, that Remedy
must not only be an Incomparable, and Powerful, but even a Miraculous one
indeed, that can do any great good against such Prevalent Prejudices. Nay as
insignificant Charms and Amulets shall strangely impregnate the mind of those
that wear them, and make them think they are Preservatives, when indeed they
are very Ridiculous, so Prejudiced persons who are Cured by the Cortex, shall
upon every occasion and fancy, revolve in their mind over and over, what an
Enemy they now have within their own breast, and if some carelessness or other
does not chance to bring a Disease upon them, their Sick Fancy, and dreadful
apprehension of their (safe) condition, shall serve to disorder them again, and
whatsoever happens must be sure to be imputed to this Jesuits Powder.

Therefore although this Powder be oftentimes a Safe and Innocent Medicine, and
in Quartans the most Absolute and Certain Specific that ever has yet been
known, yet other Medicines also, which heretofore have been so Famous, and are
still really Excellent in their kinds, ought in Prudence and Justice to have
some place in our Memory. Succus Plantag. cum Methrid. vel Theriac. Androm.
Succus Chamaedr. vel Quinquenervii cum eisdem. Spir. vin. succ. limon. cum aq.
rosar. rubr. Aq. rosar. rubr. succ. aurant. cum sacch. alb. Rad. pentaphyll.
gentian, caryophyllat, pulv. summit. centaur. min. (quod Febrifugum veteribus
dictum) sem. card, bened. fol. chamaedr. pulv. Epicarpia, and Supplantalia, in
Infantibus, vel teneris naturis, are all Febrifugous Remedies, which deserve
not to be wholly forgotten in the Cure of Agues. The frequent Vomiturition does
very properly Indicate Emeticks, and if they be given a convenient time before
the Fit, and either Venice Treacle, Mithridate, or the like, or the Potion
before mentioned, be administered about the time of the expected Fit, there will
be the less need of a Precipitated, and often unwelcom recourse to the Cortex.
Galen says he Cured diverse Quartans, Lib. de Theriac. ad Pison.
by this Method: the day following the Fit he gave a Vomit, the next day a
draught of Juice of Wormwood, in order to sweeten and contemperate the Choler,
and two hours before the Fit, he gave them a dose of Theriaca Andromachi; from
the use of which Method, he found wonderful success, insomuch that diverse of
his Patients this way treated, missed the very first Fit, and were troubled
with no more.

In Double-tertians, Quotidians, and Semitertians, some of which have been so
frequent of late, I could never yet observe any such Excellent Effects from the
use of the Cortex. On the contrary, as far as my small Observation has gone in
those cases, I do verily believe, there is hardly a more Improper and Contrary
Remedy to the nature of those Diseases. And as in Quartans, and Autumnal
Tertians, we have reason to esteem it the best Remedy in the World, and where
Proper Evacuations have preceded, or the Disease has pretty well spent its
force by length of time, as really Safe as any, so in those other sorts of
Intermittents, it is effectually one of the worst. And those who are of another
opinon, I would calmly ask the reason, why one and the same Medicine should
necessarily be thought more Proper, and accommodated to all sorts of
Intermittent Feavors, than one and the same Medicine to all sorts of Continued
Fevers. Are not there degrees of danger, and difference of Cure, between the
Febris Ephemera, the Synocha Simplex, the Hectic, the Febris Putrida, Maligna,
and Pestilens? and why therefore should not that variety of Intermittents as
well require some variety in their Medicines? if there were in earnest as
Universal a Medicine, as some men have lightly imagined, we should have reason
to Bless God for it, and embrace it with open arms; but considering that
infinite variety which abounds in the World in all manner of respects, every
individual of the same Species having some remarkable difference from others,
and this being the necessary Law of every thing in the Creation, it may rather
be wished than expected, that one and the same Remedy should properly be
subservient to a great many ends and purposes. And I doubt, if there were such
things in reality as Universal Medicines, there would be but very little
harmony between Providence and the Medicine, as might plainly enough be made
appear, if there were occasion.

I know great loads of the Cortex will stop the course of many Fevers, almost
in spite of Fate, and if it be given constantly for a Physical Diet, to the
quantity of two or three ounces a day, for many days together, which I have
heard an Ingenious Physician boast of, as a smart performance, it will be apt
to force a stop to the nimble Circulation, but withal will be apt, if I am not
strangely mistaken, to make a perfect Blockade in the Brain; it may likewise
cause a settled Coma, or Frenzy, or fix an untoward Headache, or prepare
matter for some violent Defluxion; all which whither they be consistent with a
True and Perfect Cure, is easily enough decided. But again, it may sooner than
ordinary remove the fears of Death, and so give present Reputation to the
Physician; its Universal and over-liberal use by men of understanding may
encourage Ignorant, Illiterate meddlers to much greater undertakings, than they
would otherwise presume to venture upon; and lastly it may in diverse cases
Palliate, and Cloud strongly those Nitrosulphureous particles, which being for
a time closely imprisoned within the body, shall at last be apt to break out
with the greater force, and raise grievous Tumults and Combustions, that are
not easily to be appeased or extinguished.

But this is not the nature of a True, and Appropriate Cure. It is not enough
to tickle, or divert an Enemy, or to lay him asleep, or to gain a short Truce.
We ought to disarm him, or destroy him, or at least to Disenable him from
rallying again. Aphor. Sect. 4. N. 43.
And howsoever safe, and free from danger, Intermittents were all esteemed in
Hippocrates his time, we do not find but they, as well as Continued Fevers,
can sometimes Kill, when either left wholly to themselves (which indeed very
rarely happens) or imprudently tampered with by trial of every Neighbors
Remedy. Wherefore we must not think to secure men against the future Attacks of
these Enemies, by only blunting their Weapons for the present. A Methodical
treatment by thoroughly Eradicating the Efficient Cause, is like a Man, and like
a Physician that understands his business; but the putting the whole of the
Cure, in great variety of cases, and without necessity, upon any one Empirical
Remedy (for Remedies as merely such, whither they are administered by Physicians
or Empiricks, are really and properly Empirical) must argue a dissatisfaction
in the Principles and Method of Physic, and will strongly insinuate, as if
very much less than what is pretended, were sufficiently requisite to qualify
a man for Practice.

There are a great many Remedies described by Authors, whereof they have said
as much to recommend their Certainty to our trial, as it is possible for men of
Sense and Integrity any ways to contrive. One thinks the Length, and Curiosity
of his Preparation has Refined it, and Exalted it above all before; another has
amassed a great number of Simples, and by taking something of every thing
pleases himself to imagine, that his Medicine is good for all things; a third
has chanced to Experiment some New Conceit of his own, and this being a Child
of his own working Brain, he fondly dotes on the sorry Child, and boldly
vouches it for the most Absolute, and Perfect Pattern, that ever yet was
Conceived. And yet after all, when the Mystery comes to be narrowly scanned,
when the thing is leasurely and soberly examined, and Time has determined the
truth of the point, the Project miscarries, the Building is esteemed Folly, and
we come to be where we were before.

Now if any mere Remedy had been possibly capable of Curing Diseases, and a
right application of one thing after another, and each thing with its due
circumstances, according to the Rules and Principles of Physic, had not been
full as Necessary as the things themselves, it is impossible, I say utterly
Impossible, but by this time we should have been all as abundantly satisfied
concerning the uncontrollable power of diverse other Medicines, as some do now
imagine concerning the Cortex. And forasmuch as we are not so thoroughly
satisfied concerning the unlimited or irresistible power of other Medicines, of
which diverse have had as many Eulogies, and as eminent Patrons, as now the
Cortex has, I must needs conclude, that whoever expects to conquer Great
Diseases by mere Catholicons or Panaceas, or by any Simple, or Compound, never
so Popular, and so to reduce Physic to a lazy and superficial performance,
will certainly find himself deceived in his hopes, if he be either an Honest,
or Judicious man.

And considering what has been said, I am very apt to imagine, that the Cortex,
as Excellent a Remedy as it is, in some cases, may not flourish the Age of a
man in that height of Reputation it has now manifestly gained. In its Infancy
it was soon checked and laid aside, by reason of ill effects from its Irregular
Use, but being brought into play again, and men understanding how to use it
better, it has ripened so exceeding fast, and gained so High a Station above
all other Remedies ever known before, that I cannot but much doubt its very
long continuance in so Supreme a Place among us, it being the nature of all
Bodies and Beings whatsoever, that the sooner they arrive to a state of
Maturation or Perfection, the sooner they Decline again, and fall by the same
steps they rose. We are now about the eight and twentieth year, since the
Cortex was brought into Europe; near the first twenty years, it either lay
obsolete, or struggled against many difficult Prejudices, but about the latter
end of that term, it happened to meet with more than ordinary Encouragement
from the wisest Prince in Europe, our Great and most Judicious Sovereign, whose
Word is enough to promote, and whose Will is not wanting to encourage, either
the Improvement of Excellent Medicines, or whatsoever else does with reason
appear to be for the Good of his Happy Subjects.

The Cortex has of late been used, or rather tried, in all sorts of Fevers, in
Consumptions, Epilepsies, Periodical and Inveterate Head-achs, Rheumatisms,
Gouts, Obstructions of Women, the Retention of their Menses, and to prevent
their Abortion, being like Steel administered in the contrary Indications both
of Opening and Binding; it is likewise esteemed a Sovereign Remedy in
Hysterical and Hypochondriacal Affections, which two do comprehend a great many
Sub-divisions. It were endless to name all the several cases, wherein Curious
and Ingenious men have essayed their skill with this Bark; it is harder perhaps
to invent a Case, wherein it has not been tried, than to draw up a long
Catalogue wherein it has.

The proper use of the Cortex in Agues has been excellently well delivered by a
late Worthy Author of our own, Dr. Sydenham.
partly in his History of Fevers, and especially in the first of his Epistolae
duae Responsoriae, to which little can be added. Only one thing I have observed
in the use of the Bark, perhaps of as much advantage to it in the allaying
Febrile Fermentations, as Aperitive Salts are found to be convenient in order
to promote the Energy of Catharticks. It is the addition of Acid Juices, of
Lemmons, Oranges, or the like, to the Wines, or Liquors which are impregnated
with the Cortex. Those Acid Juices were known long ago to the vulgar, to be
oftentimes of very good use in the Cure of Agues, when mixed with Wine, Brandy,
or Cordial Waters, and Sweetened to please the Palate. And the use of those
Acids with the Cortex, being as yet known to very few Persons, I hope this hint
will not be altogether unwelcome to the Public.

Before I conclude this subject, it may not be amiss to give a Signum
Pathognomonicum, or Distinctive Sign, by which the true Cortex may be discerned
from Adulterates. For a Remedy cannot be very Good, and very Precious, but
there are a sort of Pseudo-Chymists, the Scum and Degeneration of Mankind, a
sort of Poysoners which really deserve the utmost Severity of the Law, these
Wretches, I say, use all their artifice and cunning to Counterfeit, and
resemble it. And that very particular, when known, is of no small moment to the
bringing the said Remedy, though very Excellent in its kind, into neglect and
disuse with Considerate men. I have advised some Apothecaries, and others,
whose Interest it is to Know well, what they pay so Dearly for, and whereupon
oftentimes all hopes of Life do depend (other Remedies being laid aside, and
this used as a last Refuge) that they should go to the Druggists while the Sun
shines, and then choose a good quantity at a time, for their future use; for
holding it in the Sun, and breaking the Bark asunder, if they perceive Nitrous
shining particles in the inward substance of the Bark, they need not then doubt
the goodness of the Drug. Those shining Nitrous particles, or resemblances of
Pure Niter, can only be seen in the Sunshine, and though they may be
Counterfeited without, and an English Bark can be Tinctured and Imbittered, yet
it cannot by Art be thus impregnated within.

It is not out of our Memory, when two drachms only of the Cortex, given an
hour or two before the Fit, would as certainly, or rather more certainly put
off the Fit for a Month, than an ounce will now upon our Modern exhibition
ascertain it off for a fortnight. Whither it be, that our Cortex is in great
part, though not wholly Adulterated; or whither the Timing of that Remedy could
make such an alteration in the effects; or whither we are yet fallen upon the
Best Method of giving it, may perhaps be a Problem that deserves good
consideration. I have tried but a dram sometimes, mingled with a Purgative,
to be given as before directed, and have found it Succeed. And I have known
some Physicians promise and undertake as Certain Cures in Agues, with as few
drachms as others would do with ounces.

It Is certain, that the Bark in substance is a Remedy of greater force, than
any fine Preparation that an Artist can make of it; the Extract, the Fixed
Salt, or the Tincture, are found to be much more Imperfect Specificks, than the
Bark, as Nature provides it.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Opium. How it came to be esteemed a Cordial. An Advice of Sir John
Micklethwait concerning Bleeding, and the use of Opium. Of the French way of
Venaesection. Of the first qualities of Opium. Whither it be a Poison, or not,
largely debated. Crude, and Uncorrected Opium, more Narcotick, and also not so
Safe, as the Prepared. A description, and recommendation of the Pilulae
Pacificae. A Substituted Opiate, instead of our Laudanum, in some private, and
particularly Hysterical cases. The Torrefaction of Opium vindicated. In what
intentions Opiats may be Useful; and in what respects. An admirable (...) in
the Cholick. That Opiats have of late been extravagantly used. Idiosyncrasia's
to be observed. Septalius his judgment of Narcoticks, and Galen's of Anodynes.

NAtural Sleep is so great a Refreshment in its self, and even that which is
forced by Art, has oftentimes so good an effect toward the quieting great
disorders of the unruly Spirits, that Opium, the chief and most powerful of all
Soporiferous Medicines, is asserted by a late Eminent Author to be Optimum si
non unicum Cardiacum in natura, the best if not the only Cordial in nature,
which whither it be in reality, I shall somewhat examine in the following
discourse.

But before I enter into that disquisition, it may not be amiss here to relate
a very remarkable piece of Advice of our late Worthy President of the College,
Sir John Micklethwait, to a Young Student in Physic. This Young man being
recommended to him, Sir John soon gave him this wise, and wholesome advice, the
effects of much Experience, and many Sober thoughts, to serve for a Foundation
to his future Practice; that he should always have a great care of Letting
Blood without good cause, and of being over-bold in the Use of Opiats.

Venaesection upon very slight occasions, or as the French, and other Hotter
Countries do now Practice it, would be a great Abuse here in England, if it
were generally imitated. I have known some Frenchmen agree with their
Surgeon, as they do with their Barber, to come so many times a year, and at
a venture at certain times to let put some of their Hot Blood. And the Ladies
have so little apprehension of Bleeding, or put so great a value on a Good
Face, that they will commonly be let Blood, and take a Cooling Glister, for
nothing else but to make 'em Fair. Now though even here in England, and every
where else in some proportion, this be a most Excellent, and Absolutely
Necessary Remedy, in all Inflammatory Diseases, in violent Defluxions, and the
like, and is often a good Preliminary before Purging, and especially Vomiting,
yet Blood is said truly to be the Life of a man, and is the main storehouse
from whence Nutrition and Sensation do derive their continual supplies; and
therefore on every little ailment, every wandering Pain, or ordinary
Hypochondriacal disturbance, which a Dose of Pills or Manna could have
conquered, we ought to be exceeding Tender in exhausting that, whereon the Life
of man does so very much depend.

As for Opium, I shall rather consider what relates to its Use, and the Safety
or Danger of it, as it now is, or may be used, than spend time in the
explication of uncertain Suppositions, or Problematical Notions. Wherefore I
shall leave the different Authors to enjoy their differing opinions about its
first qualities, as whither it be Cold, or Hot, whither Galen, Dioscorides,
Trallianus, Avicenna, Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius, Garcias ab horto, and
lately Olaus Borrichius in a Treatise, de Somniferis, who all held it was Cold,
from its powerful fixing the Animal Spirits, and disabling them for a time from
Duty, from the Stupefaction it causes, like other Narcoticks which are granted
to be Cold, from its effects in Cold Sweats, and last of all in Cold Death,
when taken but a little too liberally; or else whither Matthiolus, Platerus,
Bauchinus, Gesner, Sennertus, Doringius, Wedelius, etc. who held it was Hot,
from its Bitter Taste, penetrating Smell, and Sudorifick effects; whither of
these two strong Parties be in the right, I shall not now determine; or whither
it may not be Cold in the fourth degree, and Hot also in the third, De morb.
occult. and venen. l. ^. cap. 6.
as Eustachius Rudius maintains, making Opium to consist of a Mixed and
imperfect temperature, not uniform, and exact, as Lentils and Coleworts are
said both to loosen, and bind the body, according to their different parts; and
as Roses, Succory, and the like, do consist both of Cool, Watery, and insipid,
and Hot bitter parts, mixed together: Galen affirming that Nature, Lib. 1. and
2. de alim. facult. propr.
as well as Art, does often Compound medicaments of Dissimilary, and
Heterogeneous parts.

Opium has been numbered by Authors, with one consent, in their Catalogues of
Poisons, and being of so very nice a nature, that a few Grains will dispatch
most men as certainly as a Dagger, there seems to be some good reason for that
Opinion, whatever now some Sober men may think to the contrary. Lib. 7. Observe.
3.
Schenkius in his Observations (a very Curious Collection) delivers us several
instances of Persons suddenly destroyed, not only by swallowing it into the
Stomach, but by application of it to the Anus by way of a Suppository, in
Cholick Pains, Tenesmus, the Inward Haemorrhoids, etc. Nay it has been known to
Kill, upon an indiscreet application even in the Toothache. Jacobus
Justinianus, Alexand. benedict. lib. 6. c. 13.
a Nobleman of Venice, died of that Experiment. So that I am afraid, more hurt
would be apt to ensue, if Opium were removed into the number of Cardiacks, and
thereby silly ignorant People should blunder upon trying it, when they wanted a
Cordial to comfort their Spirits; more hurt, I say, would be apt to happen from
that Promotion of Opium, than can in probability, whilst it is ranged among the
Poisons.

Wherefore because a very Considerable Author has lately pleased to represent
it as the Greatest Cordial in nature, I shall more particularly consider it in
that Great respect.

Our Famous Dr. Willis speaking how Opium does use to affect the Animal
Spirits, when it causes Sleep, Pharmac. ration. Sect. 7. c. 1.
says, that it does it, Non vapores in caput elevando, nec Cerebri poros, quo
materies vaporosa, aut alias soporifera admittatur, aperiendo; at solummodo
spiritus quosdam animales perimendo, sive profligando, propterea ut caeteri,
aut consternati, aut interius compulsi, aut saltem ab effluxu in parts nerveas
solito revocati, pensa sua derelinquant aut aliquantisper remittant. by killing
or destroying some of the Animal Spirits, so that the rest do either in a
Consternation fly, or are driven before it, or else being restrained from their
usual excursions into the Nerves, do quite forsake their employment, or let it
alone for some time.

And I do not doubt, but a moderate dose of Opium does as certainly kill some
spirits, as a greater quantity will Kill them all, and lay their Master in an
irrecoverable Sleep. According to the greatness of the dose, the Pulse
diminishes, and shows a proportionable weakness, or diminution of the Spirits,
which are to actuate and govern the Motion of the Heart, whose weak or strong
performance of the Circulation of the Blood does regulate and determine the
Pulse of the Arteries, all which do derive the Blood directly from the Heart.
And hence there is a very great difference between Natural Sleep, and that
which is provoked by Narcoticks. In the first, the Spirits are not Killed, but
Quieted, they have a kind and agreeable Cessation from action, but the Vital
Principle is not destroyed; but in the latter many of the Spirits are
absolutely deadned, all are Stupefied, and many are truly Murdered. That the
first is not Killing, our sudden and immediate lively Waking from a knock at
the door, a call, or other outward accident, does sufficiently evince; that the
latter does Kill, the weakness and sudden imperfection of the Pulse is an
irrefragable argument. And that therefore Opiats are far from being Cordials,
must inevitably follow. For the nature of Cordials, is to enliven and
invigorate the Pulse, to strengthen and magnify the stroke, and to comfort and
cherish the Spirits; but the nature of Narcoticks does prove to weaken and
infeeble the Pulse, to lessen and diminish each stroke, and, to say no worse,
does render dull, and stupifie the Spirits. Nihil aeque cordi, Tract. propr.
cap. 1
innatoque calori adversatur, ac magnus faetor, ob quem subito spiritus vitalis
a cord recedit, said Avicenna. And Opium will give a sort of whiff to the
nostrills, that is far from being pleasant and agreeable; whereas Aromaticks,
which are truly Cordials, do immediately raise up the dejected Spirits, and do
rejoice, and dilate them. But even ill, faetid, and loathsome smells have a good
use too sometimes, not as Cordials to revive the Spirits (which is the
intention of Cordials in Syncopes) but as instruments to repel their luxuriant
motions, when they dilate too much, and threaten Suffocation through their
immoderate expansion, as is evident in Hysterical cases.

The Turks liberal use of Opium will no more make it a Cordial, and will no
less render it a Poison, than the Psylli, Lucan. l. 9.
a People of Africa, their feeding upon Venomous Serpents, can make the
Serpents to be a Wholesome Food. Indeed their Opium is the first running of the
Poppy, and this they esteem to be too good for Christians, and we can never
have so much as a taste of that better sort. We must be contented with their
Meconium, or the Expression of the Poppies. The Turks upon first using even
their better sort, do find it to be much such a Cordial, as we do Tobacco. By
degrees they can make Opium habitual to them, as we can do Tobacco. And both
have a strange fascination upon men's inclinations, so that neither they can
live contented without their Narcotick, nor most of us without ours, when
either of them is once accustomed to. The Africans, and Asiaticks, who so
habituate themselves to the use of this Juice, do always look Sottish, Stupid,
and Furious, and in their eye it may plainly be perceived; but use, a second
nature, does cause them to take great quantities of it, without any
considerable or very sensible harm. Garcias ab horto in his Book of Aromaticks,
and Medicinal Simples which grow among the Indians, says he knew one man, who
would make little or nothing of eating ten drachms or more of it, Lib. 1. c. 4.
every day, and licet stupidus and dormitabundus semper videretur, aptissime
tamen and docte de omnibus disputabat; tantum potest consuetudo. Although he
always appeared to be Stupid and Drowsy, yet he could dispute pertinently and
learnedly of any subject before him; such a power is there in Custom.

But that even the Turks, and others, who from their youth do use their bodies
to Opium, do not find it altogether Innocent, much less a Real Cordial, Prosper
Alpinus may determine, De Medic. Aegyptior. lib. 4. cap. 1.
who says that those who addict themselves to a customary use of Opium, have
their (Animal) functions much depraved, that they appear drunken and sottish,
that they become Comatosi, stupid, inconstant, that they lightly affirm a
thing, then presently deny it, and behave themselves with that levity and
inconstancy of mind, that few People will willingly converse, or have any thing
to do with them.

But that the true cause why the Egyptians and Turks do receive no more
prejudice from, or are not absolutely Poisoned with it, Fallopius declares to
be this, that they accustom their bodies to it, De Medic. purgant. simpl. c. 6,
even from their Childhood, beginning with a lesser quantity, and so by degrees
rising to a greater; that those who neglect the beginning betimes with it,
cannot afterward fall to it without imminent danger; nay that even such who
have accustomed to it from a Child, and have happened to abstain from it for some
years, if they should again venture to return to it, they receive great
prejudice from it. Exercit. 175.
And J. C. Scaliger asserts, that those who neglect it in their younger years,
and in their adult or riper years do offer to use it, will find it Mortal.

And therefore Dioscorides, Galen, Avicenna, Pliny, Sennertus, and others, had
no small reason to esteem Crude, and Uncorrected Opium, as a Poison; not by its
manifest, but Occult properties, as most other Poisons, which have not so
sensible an Excess as to Cold, and Heat, and yet prove most Destructive of our
nature. The Bitterness of Opium shows it not to be so Cold, as to deserve the
name of Poison merely upon that account; the destructiveness of it in so small
a Dose as will serve to Kill most people, does prove the best Demonstration of
its Venomous nature. One grain will destroy an infant, and a few grains will
destroy a man. And that which Johannes Leo in his Description of Africa tells
us, of a certain Poison in Nubia, was always esteemed as a very great and
remarkable rarity; that it was of so subtle, (but Occult) nature, that one only
Grain of it divided into ten parts, and distributed to as many men, would in a
quarter of an hours time dispatch them all into the other World; but if the
whole grain were given to one man, he would fall down Dead immediately.

I know Crude, and Uncorrected Opium has of late years gained a greater
Reputation as a Narcotick, than any Preparations of Opium; and indeed has
deserved it in that respect. For one grain of the Crude is known to be
equivalent to several grains of the Prepared. Chymia experiment. curiosa.
And Jo. Helfricus Juncken in a late treatise measures the proportion, upon his
Experience, to be one grain of the Crude to six grains or more of the Prepared.
And yet notwithstanding this efficacy of Stupefaction in the Crude, the other
has obtained a far greater Superiority of Title, being called Laudanum, quasi
Laudatum vel Laudandum medicamentum; as if it were the most Praiseworthy
medicament of all others; and this not only by Paracelsus, but by all
Physicians with one consent. Nevertheless the Laudanum will keep its footing,
though it cannot maintain it with that strength to mischief, as the Unprepared
Opium. The Saffron, Castor, Spirit of Wine, and the Aromatic Species will be
apt to do as much good in one kind, as the Opium can do in another. And it
should seem to me to be a very great convenience, if not advantage, to be able
to give it in a greater quantity, and to keep the Enemy safe under a good
Guard. And thus in the Pilulae Pacificae, I have observed the quantity of four
or five grains of Opium, as it is corrected in that Pill, hardly to answer the
Stupefaction of more than one grain of Crude Opium, at least not so suddenly.
For in that Excellent, and perhaps Incomparable Narcotick Pill the edge of the
Opium is blunted by the Salt of Tartar, its Volatility taken off by an
indissoluble union with the Oil of Turpentine, and its operation rather Fixed,
or Precipitated downwards with the Hellebore joined unto the others. The Pill
is made thus.

. Sal. tart. cum nitr. praep. iiij. affund. ol. terebin. viij. stent simul in
loco humido ac frigido ad menses viij, ix, x, vel amplius; tamdiu scilicet
(saepius interim agitando, atque plus Olei, quoties opus sit, addendo) usquedum
Sal plane triplum Olei absorbuerit, inque unam massam, instar Saponis, spissam
ac homogeneam, conspiraverit. Tum

. Sapon. hujus perfect incorpor. vj. Opii Theb. opt. ij. Helleb. alb. and
nigr. subt, pulv, glycyrrh. a ij. M. exactissaddendo Ol. terebin. qs. ut f.
Massa pilul. q. toties bumectetur ol. tereb. quoties exarescit.

And because the Laudanum of our Dispensatory, though an Excellent Composition,
yet may be observed to disagree with the temper of Hysterical Women, by reason
of the Musk and Ambergreese, I shall substitute for private use, or for such
particular occasions the following Opiate, or Mass for Pills, as none of the
worst.

Opii opt. supra laminam ferream parum calefactum exiccat. and pulv. ij. myrrh.
ss. Croc. opt. N.M. a iij. f. pulv. subt. cui addend. ol. st. cinnam. N.M. a j.
Sapon. cum sal. tart. and ol. tereb. praep. qs. f. Massa pilularis.

I know that the Torrefaction of Opium is nowadays, much exploded, as being
thought to deprive it of its Volatile parts, by reason of which it is said
chiefly, if not only to be Narcotick. But the exhalation of the more faetid,
Crude, and even more Narcotick, as well as Malignant Sulphur, does not so
mightily deprive it of its Somniferous quality, as to render it any ways
insignificant to answer those Indications wherein it is required. If it be not
so very Stupefactive as it was before, if it will not so suddenly ascend up to
the Brain, and inviscate the Spirits so powerfully, it is so much the better
for use, the more Dangerous parts being separated, and those that remain being
sufficient for our purpose.

Opiats are recommended in violent, and intolerable Pains; in excessive
Vomitings, and Diarrhaea's; and in great Disorders of the Animal Spirits; and
in those three cases there is no doubt but they sometimes produce Extraordinary
effects, and change the face of things, even in the midst of Despair. In
Extreme Diseases, Extreme Remedies are most properly Indicated, and so Opiats
may and do upon such Extremities prove strangely Successful. And it would be
too partial, and disingenious to deny them the good they sometimes do in
Physic. But still it must be remembered, that they are an Extreme Remedy, and
ought not to be used upon every slight account. It may be an Error of
consequence, either wholly to disesteem them, or to magnify them too much. But
this last will prove most Fatal, if all things be rightly considered.

And I should have urged the less concerning the Danger of Opium, if the abuse,
or over-use of it were not of late years grown more prevailing, than ever was
known before, or than is, I conceive, consistent with the True and Rational
Cure of Diseases. Opium has with some been made both the beginning and the
ending, both the first and last thing in many cases, nay as much a Catholicon
with some men, as the Cortex has been with others. And thus they have for a
time allayed Symptoms to admiration, and conjured a Calm before it was
necessary, or truly expedient. But the Patient notwithstanding remains crazy
and chachectick, and it is seldom long but he relapses into as bad, or worse
Symptoms than before. Where Proper Evacuations have not preceded, but immediate
recourse has been made to the Opium, as if nothing could be done without it,
and that alone were able to do all things, I have known, and experienced, five
or six strong Doses, one soon after another, signify as good as nothing;
whereas in the same Circumstances, or upon the very same persons, where
Evacuations have led the way, one single Dose has attained the End designed.

In Cholick Pains, in Hypochondriacal and Hysterical distempers, frequent
repetitions of great quantities of Opium have indeed, though with much
struggling and difficulty, at last conquered the most Violent Pains, and
reduced the disordered Spirits into Peace and Quietness; but oftentimes in
reality the Enemy is only laid asleep, or forced to give some respite, the
Disease will soon again recollect its strength, in the same, or some other
manner. But in the Cholick, a most grievous and Epidemical distemper, I must
affirm, that I have often Experienced a thousand times more Success from a
plain but strong Infusion of Choice Rheubarb in Cinnamon, or Aniseed Water,
than from all the Opiats I ever had recourse to. And this Medicine being so
excellent an (...), and being capable of proving so Extraordinarily Useful in
this Town, where the Griping of the Guts does every year sweep away abundance
of People, I shall farther declare, for the encouragement of those who have not
tried it, that I never yet failed of Conquering the Gripes by it, with a most
sudden, and seemingly Miraculous expedition. You may Infuse two, three, or four
Ounces of Choice Rheubarb, a Remedy so Excellent in it self, that it has
deserved the Name of Anima hepatis, the Soul of the Liver, you may Infuse of
it, more or less, according as you would have the Infusion Stronger or Milder,
in a Quart of one of the Waters beforementioned. You may give five or six
spoonfulls of it at a time, and repeat a second Dose an hour or two after the
first. In the more Melancholic, and Phlegmatic bodies, I commonly use the
Infusion of Rheubarb, and Gentian root together. I have given it to Women with
Child, attended with Signs of Miscarrying, who have happened to fall into the
Cholick, and it has always given them Immediate Relief, more Safely and
Suddenly, than ever I could find from the best Preparations that are known. And
therefore though it be but an Infusion of some weeks, and a very plain one too,
yet I dare recommend it over and over again, and I doubt not but the admirable
Efficacy of the Medicine, will Apologize sufficiently for its Simplicity, and
want of show. And that Cheerfulness of Spirit and Temper, which does usually
attend a Cure by Proper Evacuations of the Turgid humors, is of no small
moment, if compared with that Heaviness and Sottishness, that Stupidity and
Disorder in the Eye, which do ever follow a plentiful administration of that
Soporiferous Juice.

The Cure of Diseases by Opiats has Extravagantly prevailed in this Age, and
whereas heretofore, when they were esteemed Malignant, and contrary to our
nature, they were sometimes used toward the End of Diseases, but with due
Correction of the reasonably appearing Pernicious quality, they are now
commonly, but yet very improperly administered, even at the Beginning of
Diseases, being esteemed not only Innocent beyond measure, but even Cordial
super-eminently above all others. But whoever designs to force by a strong hand
the Cure of Diseases, even in spite of nature, whither by Opium, the Cortex,
or by the uncontrollable Power of any other Celebrated Remedy, he will upon
calm reflection, find himself unhappily mistaken, if he be not too much
addicted to his pre-conceived Opinions, and slavishly chained to his own
thoughts. Besides, there are Idiosyncrasia's, inexplicable Antipathies in many
bodies, both to Meats, and Medicines, and we ought with a great readiness, and
flexibility of mind to attend unto the Juvantia, and Laedentia, upon all
occasions. One hates the sight, and smell of an Apple, and to him it would be
very Tyrannical to urge Pippin-posset-drink tool severely in a Fever. Some
have died outright with the smell of Roses; I have known Rheubarb it self
absolutely to disagree with the temper of some persons, Wormwood particularly
with others, and so others have had very different, and unaccountable
Aversions; of which you may read diverse Instances, both as to Diet, and
Remedies in Schenckius his Observations. And it has been observed, that one
sort of Opiate has absolutely disagreed with persons, to whom another sort has
been as acceptable; the Diacodium agreeing, or disagreeing with this man, and
the Laudanum Liquidum with another. Wherefore we ought to be exceeding careful
of urging an Opiate too far upon this account, as well as the other before, the
Intrinsecal Danger from the thing it self. And a good Physician ought to be as
really tender of what he does to his Patient, as he would desire to be served
himself, if his own Life were at Stake. He must never give Dangerous,
Empirical, or Uncertain Remedies, where he thinks Safe, Innocent, and Approved
ones are able to perform the Cure. And above all, he must be very wary in the
exhibition of Narcoticks. Animadv. medicar. Aphor. 43.
Ludovicus Septalius gives excellent counsel about them. Narcotica quae
stuporem sensui inferunt, ne temere in usum ducantur, sed non nisi in
vehementissimis doloribus, ubi vires concidunt, ut cessantibus doloribus vires
recolligant. Adulatoris vero Medici erit, aut auram popularem captantis, ea in
levibus doloribus in usum ducere. De Methodo medendi l. xii. c. 1.
And Galen does warn us to be exceeding careful, even in the use of Anodynes:
Physicians ought to avoid Excesses, as in many other kinds of remedies, so
especially in those that are called Anodynes, which are made of the Juice of
Poppy (Opium or Meconium) or the Seed, or the Root of Mandrake, or from Storax.
For those who desire to Gratify their Patients (more than is fitting) do go
beyond all bounds in the use of such Medicines, and those who are unseasonably,
and beyond measure Timorous, do suffer their Patients to dye with the acuteness
of their Pains, whilst they altogether neglect the use of these Anodynes.
Wherefore as in every other action and concern of our lives, so in this matter
let that wise Saying take place with us, Ne quid nimis, always proposing the
Good of our Patients for our End, in all we do. And if we have any hopes or
likelihood of Curing them by other means, we must be sure to abstain from
Anodynes. But if, through immoderate watchings, or consumption of the strength,
the Sick is threatened with danger of death, then indeed we ought seasonably to
use this kind of Medicaments; but then not forgetting that the habit of the
body is like to be injured by it, and yet that hurt from the Anodyne must
rather be born, than life lost for want of it. Thus Galen on this subject; and
thus I have finished my discourse on the Six Great Remedies mentioned before. I
could have extended upon each of them, if the design of this small Treatise
would have admitted it. At present it may be sufficient, thus to have shaken
the Foundation of Chemical Babels, to show that Nature has not been wanting, or
unkind to us, in her Medicinal Provisions, and that an Empirical use even of
the Best Artificial Preparations well never constitute a Perfect Practiser of
Physic.

CHAP. XIV.
That it was a Custom heretofore, for Physicians to apply themselves more
particularly to One Disease. That this Custom was not so absurd, as may at
first be imagined. How the Genius and Opportunities of men do lie different
ways. That Reputation, is procured by Artifices, as well as Merit. That the
wisest men have had but a mean opinion of their own Knowledge. A more particular
Application of the Author to the Cure of the Gout, why no hindrance to his
other performances. This his Particular Application vindicated. A Hearty
Profession of the Author hereupon. The Gout described, and distinguished from a
Fit. The Cure of the Gout, and the Cure of the Fit, to be differently
managed. The Pain why to be cured by Outward Applications. That the leaving the
Pain to Nature is a gross mistakes, and why. How Topics have come to be
suspected by Prudent men. That Repellents and Astringents, and even Cold
Applications, are justly to be suspected in all Gouts whatsoever. That
Narcoticks are as bad as the others. The Quacks Oils, Waters, and Plasters for
the Gout considered. Proper Topics of what nature they ought to be. That in
the Declination, whether suddenly procured by Applications, or leafurely
attained according to the Course of Nature, Catharticks have a good use. Why
Bayrus his Caryocostinum happened to be so successful to him, even in the height
of his Fit. Venaesection in the Gout, to whom useful, and to whom extreme
dangerous. Emeticks why so Excellent a Remedy in the Cure of the Gout, as well
as in other cases. A word of Sudorificks. The Cure of the Gout properly
Prophylactick. How that is to be managed. The Cure by Nervous Medicines a long
time continued, none of the best. That by Evacuations why preferred. Whither
Bacchus and Venus be the common Causes of it. Three Aphorisms of Hippocrates in
favor of Venery's causing it, distinctly considered, and explicated
differently from Galen, and the Commentators. The preceding opinion, as to Wine
and Women, proved unjust and uncharitable. The Cure by Diet examined. Some
instances in favor of Diet afterward answered. That those who are subject to
the Gout, are seldom men of Common Understandings. The most Universal Cause of
the Gout hardly yet taken notice of. The Milk-Diet oftener injurious, than
beneficial.

HErodotus, an ancient Author, tells us that Physicians before his time were
wont to apply themselves more particularly to the Study and Improvement of some
one Disease; his words are these: (...), Lib. 2. Sect. 84.
(...). Every Physician should have One Disease for his Province, and no more;
and in this respect there is no want of Physicians neither; for some are
Physicians to the Eye, others to the Teeth, and some to the rest of the Head;
others again take are of the Belly, and some apply themselves to occult
Diseases. But every one chose some Particular Part or Disease, wherein he
thought fit to employ his utmost Industry for the good and service of Mankind.
And Baricellus to the same purpose: Hortulo geniali page mihi 170.
Erat apud Aegyptios inviolabile decretum, ut singulis morbis singuli
adhiberentur medici, etc.

Now this old Custom, as narrow as it may seem, and liable rather to our
Censure and Merriment, than Imitation, yet was more commendable and beneficial
to the Public, at least in those times, than may appear upon first thoughts.
Indeed it ought justly to be acknowledged, to the present Honor of the Faculty
of Physic, that the Professors of this Art are generally men of as Universal
Learning, and as Real-Learning in the best acceptance of it, as any Faculty
whatsoever. And therefore it should seem very hard and improper, to confine men
of so Universal Capacities, and diffusive abilities, to such narrow limits, as
those Ancients could be well contented with. But notwithstanding, if in so
large a place as London, which is so happily provided with great variety of
most Able and Ingenious men in our Profession, every one would please to use a
more particular diligence, in order to improve his Faculty in some one Disease
above others, I cannot conceive any Absurdity, Ridiculousness, or even
Derogation from their other performances, by this more Particular Application.
And I do verily believe, that if Learned men, after a complete acquisition of
the Universal Method of Physic, and a necessary search into the Nature and
Cures of those manifold Infirmities and Diseases, which, with a kind of
infinite variety, do afflict Mankind, would with their utmost vigor and
resolution prosecute the knowledge of some one Disease, eminently above others,
they would most certainly find a Particular Providence attending and assisting
them in so good and honest a Design.

Every man's Natural Genius must needs Incline him to make more absolute
Observations, and to Delight especially in some kinds of Cures rather than
others. As Complexions do notoriously differ, so must their Inclinations to
this and that; and they are not so easy to describe, as to observe, every man
for himself, upon Sober Consideration. One man shall happen to have abundance
of Patients in this Disease, and another in that; and therefore after a
reasonable Practice he will be able to determine, and suit his Observations
best both to some Particular Disease, and some Particular Inclination. I have
heard a very Eminent Modern Physician declare to me in discourse, that he never
had a Patient in an Epilepsie all his lifetime, and yet a man of as Universal
a Practice, and deservedly too, as most that can be named. In the mean time
some others of perhaps ten times less Experience may compute Scores of Patients
that have been Epileptick. Time and Chance do happen to us all, and as the
Wheel of Fortune turns round, it raises a man in some respects, and is apt to
depress him in others, and it is our part in Prudence to submit our concerns
peaceably and without frowardness to the irresistible and necessary Laws of
Nature and Fortune, or rather Providence. It is in our power not to neglect our
Duty, and to be careful that we diligently acquit our selves as we ought, but
it is not in our power to regulate and oversway, as we think fit, the future
determination of Contingents.

The Field of Medicine is as large as the Field of Nature; and though a man may
read, or write of all sorts of things in the general, yet it is as impossible
for him to give an accurate and certain judgment of the virtues, uses, and real
intrinsic faculties of all sorts of Natural Subjects, as it is for one and the
same man to lay his foot upon every turf of the earth, or to number the sands
on the Seashore. He may be diligent in the examination of one thing, and shall
be negligent in the examination of others. No doubt but the Physicians of
former times were sufficiently satisfied in their profound skill in Anatomy,
and yet our Modern Anatomists, standing upon their shoulders, have seen a great
deal farther in that Art, and Posterity, I do not doubt, will upon farther
prying into those matters, discover more and more to the Worlds end. It is
perhaps as convenient to the Designs of Providence, that one man should busy
his head in Useless, as that others should in Useful things. There is as much
need of Servile minds to perform Servile offices, and of Asses to carry
Burdens, as there is of Liberal Spirits, and of Liberal Arts and Sciences. And
therefore it is but Natural for some men, who pretend to Physic, to pursue
Curiosities of no moment to Practice, with all the eagerness imaginable; they
had much rather be trying some fine and pretty Experiments to gratify the Eye,
or the Fancy, and to be highly admired by those that are altogether Ignorant in
Nature, than spend any time or thoughts in the loathed habitations of Poor Sick
people; where nevertheless, if they were Wise, they would gain better
Experience, and more to their true purpose, than from the little Experiments
they took so much Delight in. Thus again others can dedicate the chief of their
time, if not their whole time, to the Critical knowledge of the Figures and
Descriptions of all sorts of Plants in nature, and of Exoticks especially; and
these shall ride. as many Miles to see a New Unknown Plant, brought from the
Indies, or elsewhere, as another man would to make a Good Purchase, or to gain
a considerable Sum of Money; whereas in the mean time they are but little
concerned about the Use and Application of our Domestics; the Cure of Diseases
by the admirable endowments of our Commonly Known Plants, they altogether
despise, as a subject too inferior for their Inquisitive temper. Others again
do acquire a good hand at Dissections, and value themselves only thereupon;
there is not a Fish in the Sea, or a Bird in the Air, or even a contemptible
Insect that moves upon the ground, but these Gentlemen make it their Chief
business to obtain, and Compare all the different fabrics which Nature has
distinguished them by, but in the mean time do overlook the Alterations of
Diseases in Humane Bodies, as if they were insignificant; they had much rather
be Curious Anatomists, than Expert Practicers.

Now I cannot deny but such men may make a considerable Figure in Physic, and
may perhaps be admired with greater height, than those who better understand
the Cure of Diseases. For men are more apt to gain esteem in the World, by
Artifices, by Show, and by Appearances, then by Real worth. Wise men, the best
judges of things, are much fewer in number, than the weak, and half-witted. A
competent and reasonable knowledge, even in Curiosities and Niceties, may not
be amiss for any; but a continual addiction to any sort of subjects, which do
little relate to Use, in a most Useful and Practical employment, whatever some
may think, does deserve a real Censure.

Wherever a man's thoughts are intent and fixed, wherever his Genius does
Naturally incline, and all his aims and application do continually tend,
whither it be to pertinent or insignificant matters, whither it be to Useful,
or else merely Curious things, if he has but tolerable parts, and Education
corresponding, he can hardly ever miss, it is hardly possible he should miss,
the becoming Eminent, and in great measure Perfect (I mean Perfect according to
the Modulum of Humane Capacity) in that one point. Do'nt we every day see many
a dull heavy creature, who has only Wit to keep his Shop, and mind his
business, only his business, and his Natural Inclination runs only that way he
is pitched in, come to gain a very good Estate from nothing, in some ordinary
Servile Trade, whilst a man more refined and accomplished, a man of far more
Sense, and a more Liberal mind, who was by some accident Chained, or driven to
a Trade he never fancied, takes no Delight in, this man can hardly keep things
even, and instead of advancing, rather declines in the World, until some
Accident or other at last Blows him up, and he disappears from the Station that
he was very unfortunately placed in.

I should be very glad, if one man's head were able to contain all that
Knowledge which is stored up with much luxuriancy in a very large capacious
Library. Some Heads indeed are much larger than others, in Capacity, as well as
Dimensions; and Diligence, and Industry, vivacity of Apprehension, and strength
of Memory, may fill one Head much fuller than others; but after all, we must
remember, that the most Eminent and Wisest Philosophers, who might justly have
been thought the most Knowing of all others, were not ashamed to acknowledge,
that they knew little, or Nothing in reality, Nothing, I say, not in companion
with other men, but in regard to the multiplicity of things themselves, or what
might possibly come under the Sphere of our Imperfect Knowledge. Nay if we
state the Extent of Humane Knowledge upon the determination of the most
Celebrated Wise men in former ages, we shall at last find, that the Proportion
of man's Knowledge of Nature to the infinite multiplicity of Natural subjects,
is not perhaps much greater, than the Proportion of our Body to that of the
Globe of the Earth. A man that can speak and write great variety of Languages,
shall sometimes prove but a very indifferent Headpiece in things of ordinary
Discretion. We know that sometimes one and the same Author will furnish us with
a whole Encyclopaedia, and set himself forth as if he were skilled in every
thing imaginable in Nature. If he had as many Eyes as they say of Argus, and
could read with every pair distinctly, and also Digest his Readings at the same
time, he could hardly know more than some Empty men will pretend. And yet we
say, and truly enough, Aliquis in omnibus est in singudis nullus. He that has a
Smattering in every thing, is thought to be Good in Nothing. A few things well
known, and to a man's proper purpose, are worth a great many more Superficially
known, and extraneous to his real business. (...); said Aeschylus well. A man
is wiser in one Useful thing, than in a great many impertinent, or really
Useless.

Now because the World is so wide, and a man's Knowledge cannot be so dexterously
and so efficaciously applicable to all Infirmities which attend Humane Nature,
as it may be more Particularly to some, whereto his Genius may Incline him, and
his Fortune may have been most Assistant, it may be obvious enough to demand,
whither I have any Particular Reason, or Experience, for the urging that
obsolete, and unwelcome Custom of the Egyptians, and other Ancients, who took
one Disease for their sole, or at least more Particular Province? And I am not
ashamed to acknowledge, that I have taken some more than ordinary Pains in one
Particular Disease, which is now grown more General and Epidemical, than it was
in former times, and does more especially afflict the most Useful, and Eminent
men in all Professions, Nor do I find that the time I have spent in searching
more nicely than ordinary into the Nature and Cure of that Grievous Disease,
has at all spoiled my hand in the treating of other Distempers. For as there is
a Connection of Virtues, in the Foundation of Prudence, as the Schools do
determine, and a man cannot therefore be truly said to have attained the Habit
of any one Single Virtue, unless he has likewise Habituated himself to the
Practice of all the rest; so it may in some proportion be likewise said of the
Cure of Diseases, that there is a Natural Connection of Curing Diseases, in the
Foundation of Method, and Prudent Management of Medicines; and he that is not
acquainted, as he should be, with the Universal Method of Physic, and is not
thereby Prepared to obviate all Accidents which may happen, and to answer
variety of Indications, with proper and suitable Medicines, can never be truly
said to Cure any one Disease, let his Remedies or Receipts be never so choice
and good. He may indeed happen to do what is the part of an Understanding
Physician, though he be an Ignorant, or an Empirick, but then it must be
considered, that the Cure was an effect of Chance, not this man's Skill; and
that although the Chance did then hit right, yet it must be expected that it
will much oftener hit very wrong. And thus if a good Physician does prove so
Fortunate as to Perfectionate his Method of Curing any one Great Disease, with
more Accuracy and Certainty, than others, (who nevertheless may in other things
as much excel him, as he does them in this) he shall be the better able, and
not the worse, to steer his course in the prosecution even of other Distempers.
Though it be reasonable enough to imagine, that if he did Absolutely Confine
himself to the Management of no more than one only Kind of Disease, he would in
all probability Adorn and Improve that Particular Province much better, than by
letting loose between whiles into variety of other matters. Nor would one Kind
of Disease be so narrow and small a task, as some may think. For every Kind has
a great many different Species under it, and the various Constitutions of men,
ways of living, circumstances of Age and Sex, the frequent Alterations of the
Air, and consequential impressions on men's bodies, and lastly the Complications
of it with other Diseases, do continually diversifie every Kind of Disease into
a great many several sorts.

To be plain, I have for some years past applied my mind more particularly to
unriddle the Nature, and, as much as lies in my small power, to perfectionate
the Cure of that Opprobrium to most Physicians, the Gout. I beheld with much
regret, that Worthy and Excellent men, the Prime and Glory of our Faculty,
after all their Trials and Endeavors in this most lamentable Disease, have
thought it prudent, if not necessary, to advise many of their Patients to let
Nature take its free course, and remain as contented with their misery as they
can, and so not to meddle with Physic, for fear of doing more hurt than good.
But some Comfort being expected from the very Presence of their Physician, he
is not altogether wanting in that point, to give them Joy very courageously, as
if they were now more surely entitled to the Happiness of a long, though in
great part miserable, Life. And thus they come to pass over diverse Fits as well
as they can, doing nothing at all, until at last an habitual, knotted, and
immoveably fixed Gout gains upon them, and they just live a life that is really
worse than Death it self.

Now some may account it vain, others arrogant, or, if they will, ridiculous,
that after the fruitless attempts of such Eminent and Able men, any one man of
the Faculty, much less so indifferent a person as I have reason to acknowledge
my self, should presume to make another Attempt, in a case that has baffled the
Greatest Champions of our Art. To which I can without Arrogance, and with Truth
enough answer, that the most Celebrated, and perhaps Best Physicians, may be
sometimes overseen in a Particular Method, wherein another of less noted
qualifications may either by a Particular Providence, or by a more intense
application acquit himself with abundantly more Success; that if it were not
so, upon many occasions, the Excellent Observation in Diseases of many very
Acute, and very Fortunate Physicians, must be neglected or despised, because
forsooth they are not in the First and most Conspicuous Classis; that if Great
Diseases were not capable of Greater Improvements than we yet have from the
most Eminent Ancient, as well as Modern Physicians, we should now without any
manner of doubt have more Certain and more Complete Methods in abundance of
cases than we yet have; and lastly that undeniable Matter of Fact, and the
Observation of all ages (and herein I appeal to the Present) do unanimously
testify and evince, that the most Celebrated, and justly Famous Physicians
have been commonly taken notice of, as more Eminent in some than other cases,
and more Dangerous, or less Fortunate in some rather than others.

As I am in my Natural Temper far from being subject to the over-admiring my
self, and my own slender performances, so I have no reason to Despair, but my
hearty and earnest desire to be truly serviceable to Mankind in my Profession,
may be attended with the doing something which I may Hope will not prove
altogether unacceptable, or to no purpose at all, even in the foresaid Disease.
And if I know my self a little, I can farther declare, that the very Act it
self, of Doing some unexpected Good to those who are afflicted with it, will be
a greater Comfort and Pleasure to my own mind, than any consequential Profit,
Honor, or other Satisfaction. It is very true, that the Providence, which
governs the World, does not leave us so destitute in the Cure of Diseases, as
some men's fears may suggest. And if we would not haughtily overlook sometimes
plain and obvious Medicines, which are not less Excellent than Common, and
would but expect less from the ingenuity and subtilty of our own Preparations
and beloved Contrivances, we should much oftener than we do find Admirable
Remedies ready provided for our use, which when rightly managed by an
understanding man, would do wonders that are often vainly expected from the
Indies, and remote parts.

I shall not now design a full History of the Gout, or enter deeply into the
Nature, the Causes, Signs, and Cure of this Disease, but content my self with
making a few Transient Remarks, which are rather Practical than Notional,
relating to it. And in the first place we ought diligently to distinguish,
between the Gout, and a Fit of the Gout, as we do at other times between the
Stone, and a Fit of the Stone. The Gout is an habitual, or long-contracted
Disposition of nature to throw off offensive humors upon the Joints, as often
as upon any remarkable irregularity, or a gradual collection of such matter as
is like to prove injurious to the Stomach, or the Vitals, the Principal Parts
are threatened with danger. The Fit is a subsequent act, or present discharge of
the offensive humors, upon either one, more, or even all the Joints, according
to their greater or lesser weakness, or else the greatness of the Prepared
Disorder in the body. Now a man may have a Gouty Disposition of body, even when
he is quite free from any Actual Fit; and thus another may have a Stone lodging
quietly in his Kidneys or Bladder, and may even then be properly said to have
the Stone, though he is not at all troubled with any sensible Fit.

The Cure of the Gout, and the Cure of the Fit, are also two very different
things, and ought in reason to be diversely managed according to their different
circumstances. If therefore a Patient in a Fit of the Gout sends for a
Physician, he must then only expect to be Cured of his Fit; and if instead of a
Fit that would according to the course of nature hold him six, or eight weeks
in Pain, and weakness, he shall be relieved of his Pain in a few hours, and
delivered of his weakness in a few days, he has reason to Thank God for this
Assistance of Art, and to embrace it with Joy.

The first thing therefore, and the chief that is to be done of the Fit, is to
take away the Pain each part, where the Defluxion has fallen, by Proper Outward
Applications, and to free the parts as well as may be from that load which
within swells and dilates preternaturally the Nerves, and which frets and
exagitates the Spirits there inhabiting. For although the Defluxion does at
first appear Spirituous, and Insensible, yet in a little time it turns to be
Humoural, and palpably evident. And a great many little disputes about we know
not what, and what we never can know, but only pass a Learned Guess concerning,
are no ways material to the True Cure of the Gout any ways considered. We are
certain of a precedent disorder in the body, we are certain of a subsequent
Pain in the Joints, and upon a Metastasis, or translation of the foresaid
disorder from within the trunk of the body to the outward parts, we are
certain, that the diseased persons do find themselves much relieved within, and
as much aggrieved in the outward parts. And the settling Notions nicely,
whither it be a vapor, or humor, wind, or spirit, either or neither, which is
the Matter or Form of the translation from within outwarldly, would indeed make
a divertive discourse, but will be very insignificant in reality to the laying
a good Foundation for the Cure of this Disease.

The Pain being often so great as to cause a Symptomatick Fever with it, we
ought diligently to apply our selves to remove this Grievous Pain, and a man
may as well maintain, that it would be injurious to the body to part with a
Quartan Ague, before it has been shook with it for a full year, as that it
would not be safe to lose the Pain, before so many weeks are over, and Nature
it self has as it were in Pity to the Diseased at last given them a convenient
respite. The Cause of the Pain being Conjunct in the Part, or Parts affected,
why may not the removal of the Conjunct, and even Continent Cause, be a proper
stroke to the Cure of the Pain, as well as the removal of the Antecedent Cause
Prevent or Cure the Gout? the same Natural Principle, which threw the disorder
upon the Joints, would doubtless, if it had been able, have thoroughly
discharged it even from the Outworks of the body. Unless we will think, that it
is delightful, and some ways convenient to Nature, to have an Enemy remain so
near it, as the Hands, or Feet. Possibly it may, by way of a Spiritual
Exercise, and to help Contemplation; but whoever thinks himself altogether
secure in the main Fort, because the Enemy is driven into the Outworks, may be
surprised before he is aware, and come to lose Possession of the whole.

The Benefit of Outward Applications, when properly and safety administered, in
a raging Fit of the Gout, is a great, as the freedom from Pain in any other
part is ease and comfort in respect of that part. But the unhappiness of them
is, that they have been generally managed by Quacks and Idiots, rather than by
Physicians; that diverse instances are to be met with, wherein Outward
Applications have proved unhappy, and have perhaps directly threatened the Life
of the Patient; but still the irregular use of any sort of Medicine, is no just
exception to the thing it self. For otherwise we must lay aside Vomits, and
Purges, and Opiats; nay we ought as well to abstain front every sort of Meat,
and Drink, because Gluttons and Sots have abused the use of them.

Repellents and Narcoticks are favored too much, as well by the generality of
Authors, as by Women and Empiricks. And though abundance of Formulae are
described by Excellent men, in this Disease, yet upon the Experience that I
have had in it, I can hardly conceive any Arthritick case, which necessarily,
or property requires them. Upon a considerable Declination of the Fit, they may
happen to be used, when no great hurt may ensue, and some good may appear to
follow, but the mischievous consequences will even then be durable, and in time
convince them of their Error. It may suffice to give one instance out of
Trincavellius, De Rat. curand. partic. hum. corp. affect. lib. 12. c. 1.
concerning the Fatal effects of them in one, and the terrible danger of them
in another Nobleman of Venice. The first upon the application of them to his
Knees, and Hands, repelled the Arthritick humor into his body, and fixed him
into an irrecoverable Asthma, which soon concluded his life: the other by the
same Method fell into a most grievous, and vehement Fever, accompanied with a
Paralytick Trembling of all the parts of his body, and Stupor of all his
Senses, but his Gentleman had the good fortune to escape immediate Death, and
with a great deal of difficulty, by the help of his Physicians, made a shift at
last to recover. Repellents are so directly contrary to the Invention of
Nature, that I cannot but Wonder, how Learned and otherwise Able men, could
either recommend, or at any time have recourse unto them, in many other
Defluxions, or Discharges, besides the Arthritick. For if Nature, or Art, in a
Malignant Fever, do happen to throw off great part of the Morbifick matter
upon the Inguina, the Alae, or behind the Ears, or else into some other place
which is not so proper an Emunctory of the Principal parts, use but Repellents
a little to the Tumor, and strike it back upon the Vitals, and I dare leave
the person to a Dismal, if not inevitable Prognostic. Nature does exceeding
kindly in freeing the Vitals from a considerable part of that which caused the
Fever, and if we presume to return it upon her again, she will take it very
unkindly, and is presently overcome, being not able to make a second Defense
against an Enemy, that she had much ado to struggle with before.

But the use of Repellents and Astringentopicks, is rather recommended by
Authors in Hot, never in Cold Gouts, called Hot and Cold, from the visible
Complexion of the Parts affected, or else of the body in general. Now even in
those Hot, Choleric, or Sanguine Gouts, I can never approve of Repellents; for
though they may sometimes give great ease and satisfaction, in point of their
Pain, and in the Declination, or after Evacuations (a Method with some) may
happen to be attended with no sensibly ill consequences; and though the
Astringents may seem properly to answer to the Weakness of the parts, yet if we
consider the nature of the Nerves and Tendons, whose weakness it is that
primarily occasions the Pain, we shall find, that Cold Repellents and
Astringents are very contrary to the nature of the Nerves, and consequently
cannot be of such benefit in Arthritick cases as we ought to contrive. For Cold
things are by all held to be injurious to the nature of the Spermatick parts.
The Spermatick, exanguious, and Nervous parts are Cold in their Temper, and
affected or hurt by Cold. In Art parva, sive Art Medicin. cap. 59.
And Galen gives this as one common Sign of distinguishing the temper of any
part, that if it be offended by Cold things, it is Cold, if by Hot things, then
it is Hot. And so Hippocrates says, that Cold is most offensive of any thing to
the Bones, the Teeth, the Nerves, the Brain, and to the Medulla Spinalis,
because those parts are Cold. But on the contrary Hot things are acceptable to
them. Aphor. Sect. v. n. xviij.
(...). Wherefore I very much suspect even the affusion of Cold water upon the
parts affected, which our Great Hippocrates does sometimes recommend in Gouts,
Aphor. Sect. v. n. xxv.
and from him Vander Heydon in his not contemptible Discourse of those three
not contemptible things, Whey, Cold water, Synopsis Discursuum, etc.
and Vinegar. And Bathings with Milk, or the like, do seem to be alike
improper, notwithstanding that a person now and then may appear to have
received sufficient Benefit from them. And upon these grounds, I cannot but
admire that so Learned and Eminent a man as Fernelius was, should find out no
better, nor more proper an Anodyne, for such a person as the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, than the mucilag. sem. althaea cydon. Consil. 14.
a ss. extract. in aq. stillat. Solan. and Plantag. a iij. Addendo si lubet,
acet. j. to be applied, even at the beginning of the Fit, and before Purging.

As to the weakness of the Nerves in the Joints, this chiefly depends upon an
universal weakness of them, derived from the Brain, not as Fernelius maintains,
in his Pathological considerations on the Gout, Patholog. lib. vj. cap, xviij.
by bringing a Defluxion of thin phlegmatic humors from the outward parts of
the Cranium, along under the Cutis down to the Joints (which may rather be
accidental, and is not always perceived before the Fit) but by the universal
weakness of the Spirits, from Procatarctick Causes, as shall more fully be
explicated in the following discourse. In order therefore to take a right
Indication of Topics, we must restore the weakness of the Spirits, not by Cold
Astringents, but by such things as shall Comfort and Cherish the Spirits, and
will that way Strengthen them Safely; and the humors which the Pain has drawn
thither must be rather let out, not driven back, nor Stupefied with Narcoticks.

And as for Narcoticks outwardly applied, or inwardly given, they must
certainly Fix the humors in the parts affected, and the Ease that the Patient
for the present receives, can bear no proportion to the inconveniences that he
must afterward be liable unto, when the Gout shall hereby come to be Knotted,
when those Salts which were fluid and moveable before, shall hereby come to Fix
and settle, and the Disease grows to be in a manner Perpetual, which had some
reasonable Intermissions, before the Opiats were applied. Besides, I have
sufficiently showed in the precedent Chapter, that Opiats are in their natural
tendency injurious to the Nerves, and for the reason that they are so injurious
to the Pulse and Respiration, by diminishing and weakening them, if not
extinguishing their functions, they will be found to communicate very easily
their hurtful, if not Pernicious effects, unto the Nerves.

Among the Ignorant Retailers of Physic, those silly Ignorant people, who for
want of something else to do, or because they could do nothing to purpose in
their several Trades, and Employments, will needs be a trying their small
Skills, some in one Disease, and some in another, in order to get a Penny, we
have abundance of ordinary Creatures that run about, one with an Oil, a second
with a Water, and a third with a Plaster for the Gout. And these shall give
strange, and absurd assurances from their several Receipts; which all
Physicians do know can never be rightly appropriated to all sorts of Gouts, any
more than one sort of Purge to all Conplexions and Diseases.

As for the Oil, it is to be remembered, that the Gout is chiefly occasioned
from the weakness of the Nerves in general, and particularly in the Joints. And
this makes the Joints so subject to receive Defluxions, when the body happens
to be disordered. The Vitals being Strong, and the Limbs being rendered Weak,
Nature like a Skilful Physician, throws the offensive humors from within (the
place of most danger) to the Outward parts, where the danger is less; and thus
those parts are very subject to receive them, when men are Disposed to this
Disease. And for the same reason it comes to pass, that persons who have any
Natural weakness about them, whither it be in the Kidneys, the Glandules about
their Throat, their Lungs, or in any other part, shall as Naturally receive
into it the effects of any disorder, either by Intemperance, Colds, or the
like, as those who have a weakness in the Joints, do prove subject unto the
Gout. Now the Parts being already weak, and the Joints relaxed from their
Primitive Tone, any Remedy which is of a Relaxing quality (as Oils most plainly
are) must of necessity do as much mischief, by its additional Relaxation, as
the Ingredients joined to it can be conceived to do good.

As for the Water, if the Basis of it be a Water, it must needs be near as bad
as the Oil, being also of a softning emollient nature, and thereby tending
toward the farther Weakening of the already enfeebled Joints. I know how famous
the Aqua Antipodagrica Rulandi, described in that excellent Treatise of
Loselius de Podagra, and in his Secreta Spagyrica, Printed lately Jenae; the
Aqua Quercetani Antipodagrica, and others, have formerly been. But there is a
great deal of difference between Waters of this, or any other kind, in the
hands, and under the management of such Able Physicians, and the Waters of a
Woman, or an Ignorant Empirick, who know not how to suit them to their proper
uses, and who are continually subject to mistake, both in the quantities and
the qualities of the Ingredients, which enter into them. One Water can be no
more proper for all sorts of Gouts, than one Habit, and one kind of Diet, agree
to all sorts of men. For there is a considerable difference in Gouts, according
to the different Complexions of men that are afflicted with it, according to
the recency, or inveterateness of the Disease, and according to the continual
variations of nature in the same person, insomuch that Good Authors have
described a great many kinds of Medicines, both Outward, and Inward, to be
interchanged, and altered, according to Discretion, as they are observed to be
Juvantia, or Laedentia, agreeable or disagreeable, upon Particular occasions.
Nay the same Remedy has been observed to have admirable effects at one time,
and to be insignificant at another, even in the same person.

Lastly as for the Plaster, I Will grant it may be an Excellent one, as there
are Formulae enough of some few Good, and many more Bad, and that this Plaster
may be sometimes accommodated to very good purpose in one sort of Gout; but
when an Idiot comes to manage it, who can no more distinguish in reality
between Gouts, than a Blind man between Colors, who uses his Plaster at
random, as a Gamester throws the Dice, it must certainly happen to do as much
hurt sometimes, as it may happen to do good at others. And therefore what a
Blessed condition must those Gentlemen be in, who in such ticklish points as
neither themselves, nor their Quacks can possibly understand, will run the
hazard of a Plasters, doing either Good or Hurt, as mere Chance directs it! I
have often observed the very Form of Plaster, though an Excellent sort, the
very Form, I say, of Plaster, notoriously to disagree with this Disease. The
Form of Cataplasm is much more likely to answer an intention thoroughly, and
safely, than any other that I know of; it may be impregnated with proper
Medicines more Strongly, or Mildly, as the Physician judges it most convenient,
and as the Case appears before him.

When proper Topics, not Cold or Hot, according as the Gout is supposed to be
either Hot or Cold, but Milder or Stronger; more or less Searching and
Evaporative; and more or less Temperate in respect of Heat; and more or less
Strengthening, not by a Cold Astringency, but by a Comfortable, Nervous, and
invigorating way of Strengthening, according to the weakness of the Parts, the
duration of the Disease, and the frequency or fewness of Paroxisms: when, I
say, Topics thus proper have taken away the Pain, and thereby brought the Fit
into a Sudden Declination, Inward Remedies may then as Safely and as
Effectually be used, as if the Patient had, to his great Prejudice in diverse
respects, waited the Cessation from Pain, or Declination of the Disease, for
diverse weeks, according to the Course of Nature. Before the Declination is
obtained, one way or other, Catharticks or the like, cannot be so Safely
administered, although here and there an instance may be brought in defense of
them. And though Solenander, Consil. Medicin. Sect. 4. Cons. 24. and 25.
a very good Author, does allow of Catharticks, even at the beginning of the
Fit, while the Pain is raging; and Bayrus, one well acquainted with the Gout,
maintains the same opinion, yet most Authors, and Experienced Patients are of
another mind, and will not allow them so soon, by reason of ill accidents which
do, or may often happen from that untimely administration of Catharticks. For
whilst the Pain is much predominant, it is not an Easy Purge that will work at
all, and Lenitives are generally granted to be more hurtful than beneficial in
any sort of Arthritis, and if the Purge be of a Vehement kind, and should
happen not to work, or to work but little (which often happens, when exhibited
in dolorifick Distempers) the Symptomatick Fever must needs be attended with
additional danger, the Choler burn, or fret more violently, and the Thirst grow
more intense. In Vehement Pains we know that an ordinary Dose of Opium shall
have no operation at all, nay that it is sometimes requisite to give such a
quantity of it, as would certainly Poison the same man in Health and Ease, and
yet at that time, under the circumstance of Vehement Pain, it might have a
Good, at least no Bad effect.

Prax. Med. l. 18. c. 1.
Bayrus gives us a very famous History of himself, how by the use of his
Caryocostinum, an Excellent Purging Electuary, when he was brought so low with
the Gout, that he could move neither Hand nor Foot, nor any part of his whole
body, besides the Tongue, yet upon taking half an ounce of the said Electuary,
after it had given him but four or five Stools; he found himself so mightily
relieved, that he was able to go of himself to and from his place of Ease, and
could take a walk freely into his Study, although upon the first operation of
it, he was fain to be carried, or lifted upon the Stool by no less than four
men. Nay the very next day he was perfectly freed from his Distemper, which you
may read more at large in his own Words, and was a just reason for his high
Commendations of the Caryocostinum, Ibid.
to be Electuarium mirabile ad auferendum dolores Juncturarum, subito solvens
sine molestia, ignitum calorem extinguens, and contemperans membra patientis in
tantum, ut a sella redeat ad locum proprium sine alterius auxilio. Bayrus does
not arrogate to himself the entire invention of the Caryocostinum; he
acknowledges that the Species of it, in form of a Cathartick Powder, were
mentioned by Galen, 2. ad Glanc. cap. de Podagr. call.
only he thought it convenient to alter the Form of it, from a Powder into an
Electuary, with a Syrup made of Honey, and White Wind. Our Dispensatory retains
it under the name that Bayrus gave to it, Caryocostinum, making it up with a
triple quantity of Mel Rosatum, omitting the White Wind. But Daniel Horstius, I
know not upon what grounds, Pharmacop. Galen. Chym. Cathol. l. 11. de Elect.
and consec. liquid.
calls it Electuarium Caryocostinum Horatii A^genii, described after the same
manner as by Bayrus, But if we can have such excellent effects from it, as
Bayrus asserts, both upon his own Experience, and what he found in others, it
is no great matter to us, who was the Author of it in part, or in whole.

But now as for Bayrus his case, there is no such wonder that this Purge, or
even a Purge in general should prove so Safe to him at that time, or that he
from thence should take occasion of urging the benefit of Purging at any time
of the Fit. For he had no Acute Pains in one or two Parts more remarkably, but
his Pain, and Disease together, were in a manner equally dispersed all over his
body. And when the Gout comes once to this Extremity, they seldom feel much
Pain to complain of in one certain place, and consequently Pain was not capable
of hindering, or much retarding the operation of a Purge, as it may be apt to
do in other kind of Fits; so that for reason it worked as well with him, cum
(...), as it would have done upon a less or another occasion. Wherefore it will
not follow from this Famous Story, (what I asserted at first) that Purging
about the Beginning, or in the height of the Fit (while the Pain is very
Acute) is a safe and commendable Method. But bring the Disease into a
Declination, that is truly, take away the Pain, let it be done in an hour or
two, or in longer time, and there ought to be no farther dispute, but Proper
and Judicious Evacuations may be as Beneficial, as if the Declination had been
tediously expected, for diverse long weeks, according to the Course of Nature.

And as for Bleeding, although in Younger persons, who are more than ordinarily
addicted, or accustomed to a Glass of Wine, and in the First Fits, where there
is a plain Plethora, and the Defluxion falls violently like a Torrent, it may
sometimes be a Proper Preparative to other Medicines, yet this can only prove a
Revulsion from the Parts affected, and it may qualify the Heat and Ebullition
of the Blood, but must still leave the Parts (if other Methods succeed not) in
a future weakness, or disposition to this Disease. Bleeding, where proper, may
allay the present Symptom or Paroxism, but is apt rather to impair the tone or
strength of the Nerves, than to take away their imbecility. The Eyes, and the
Optic Nerves are very sensibly weakened by Venesection, the very day that it is
performed, and though in Younger people that weakness is soon enough repaired
again, yet it plainly shows that in all Diseases which proceed especially from
a weakness of the Nerves, this Remedy ought to be used with very great caution,
and not without some Necessity, on account of the Fever, or Inflammation.

In Elder persons, or in Habituated Gouts, the use of the Lancet is almost as
much to be dreaded, as a Dagger stuck to the Heart. The loss, and inconvenience
of one single Bleeding shall perhaps never be made up again as long as the
person lives. Consil. Medicin. Sect. 4. Cons. 24, 25.
Solenander, a Sober and Good Author, reckons up two persons that he knew, who
upon unadvised, or unfortunate Bleeding in the Fit, did one grow quite
Paralytick, and lost the use of his Arm afterward, and the other made his Gout
Knotted by that means. And Examples of that kind are not rare. Galen indeed
advises Bleeding Spring and Fall, as a Preservative against the Gout. But they
must be very Young, and Sanguine, and they must not have suffered the Gout
long, to whom that Remedy can be safe and Good.

Emeticks indeed are a Noble Remedy, both by way of Preservative, and sometimes
before the Fit is over. One Vomit shall oftentimes do more than diverse Purges,
as making a Strong Revulsion from the Parts affected; as clearing the Stomach
(the depravation of whose Functions is a main original cause) of those humors
which pervert its Chylification; as also freeing the Principal Parts adjacent
to the Stomach, which do all by Consent unburthen themselves thither, during
the operation of the Vomit; and lastly as wonderfully freeing the Head, and the
Nerves of Phlegmatic, or Serous matter for defluxions. And in many Cephalic
Distempers, where the Nerves, or even the origin of the Nerves are threatened,
every body knows that little is to be done without Emeticks, and that very
strange things may be done with their help. It is an Eradicative Remedy, and I
wish it were as easy to bear, and as easy to persuade unto, when Proper, as
it is Excellent in its kind. The Great Effects from Vomits made the Chemists
even Mad in their use, and because some Stubborn Chronical Diseases did beyond
expectation yield unto their Vehement Antimonial and Mercurial Emeticks, they
would needs be using the same, in Infirm persons, and in Mild Diseases; and so
the Credit they one while got, when they were rightly appropriated, they soon
lost again by Apparent Miscarriages under their improper Administrations. For
let ignorant men say what they will, and defend it with a Face of Brass, we and
our Posterity shall always find it true, that only Extreme Diseases require
Extreme Remedies, that Great Remedies are to be accommodated to Great Diseases,
and so Mild to Mild. He that will think otherwise, let him try Beef and Pork to
Infants, and Milk to Plow-men, and Laborers. For there is certainly as much
difference between Medicines to strong and weak Diseases, as between Aliments
to Men and Children. I have spoken more to the Matter of Emeticks before, in
the Chapter of Vitriol, and elsewhere; and the smallness of this Treatise will
not admit that variety which this Particular Disease deserves.

Sudorificks may in some have a proper and good place, and in Phlegmatic
natures, and Phlegmatic Gouts, may serve to consume any remaining superfluous
humors about the internodia, where sufficient Topics have not been used. De
Curat. admirand. Cur. xv.
Cardan would make us believe that he had done mighty things in Arthritick
Diseases with the Decoctum ex Ligno cum Betonica, adding but the Pilulae ex
Hermodactylis; and Observe. l. 2 in habitus corp. dolor.
Platerus runs very much upon the same strain. But though these Sudorificks may
seem to finish completely the Cure of the Paroxism; yet they will be found to
do but little toward a future Prevention of the Disease.

The Cure of the Gout is truly, and chiefly, if not only Prophylactick. And he
that is once subject to this weakness of the Joints, and Nerves, and when he
finds himself hearty and stout, bids defiance to all Physical Care, and
refrains now and then Medice vivere, will as Certainly again Misere vivere, and
fall into the same woeful condition he was in before, sooner or later, according
to his course of life, and the prevalency of the former weakness, as the Tide
ebbs and flows, or the Laws of Nature are Fixed and Certain. Man's body is
always in a fluxibility and motion, and either a good or ill habit is ever
gaining ground upon him. Neque enim in humano corpore quicquam quiescit, Cardan
de Curat. admirand. Cur. xvi.
sed si non in melius proficiant, necesse est ut in deterius prolabantur. And
therefore none of us have reason to think our selves too secure; for when we
are in the greatest Athletick vigor, then commonly we are in greatest danger.
It Is easy enough (through the Blessing of God) to Prevent Dangers, if we look
to it in good time; but when once Diseases have gotten a strong hold upon us,
and fundamentally altered our Tempers, we must be contented to run greater
troubles, and uncertainties too, than could before have entered into our
thoughts.

The Prophylaxis of the Gout must be so managed, as to divert Defluxions from
falling on the Joints, by a timely care. According as the Distemper has gained,
either by its inveterateness, or else by the frequency of Paroxisms, or by
their Universal affection of the parts (for I have known in some, near every
Joint in their body Sensibly affected, even in the first Fit, and not only a
Toe, or an Instep) I say according to those, or the like circumstances,
Universal Evacuations must be more often, or seldom administered; and oftener at
first, afterward more seldom, until at last Spring and Fall, or even one of
them may be a sufficient Preservative. Among Evacuations, Emeticks will claim
the first, and chiefest place; neither always need we have recourse unto the
Strong ones; there are as many Degrees of them, and some in a manner as Mild,
as of the Catharticks; but where violent prejudices are taken against all the
Kind of Emeticks, we ought not to force them too much, but rather make up the
good we might have expected from them, by a more frequent administration of
Proper Catharticks. The Dutch have a Natural, and Endemial aversion to all
Emeticks, and if some of ours have a Sporadical Antipathy to them, we ought in
prudence to avoid obtruding them with a Magisterial command, as much as we
should this or that sort of Aliment, to which they have a Strong and
Uncontrollable aversion.

All Authors do lay a great, if not an Absolute stress upon Nervous Medicines
inwardly taken, and continued daily for a long time, no less than a Year or two
together, in order to Prevent, or Cure the Gout completely. Aetius an old,
Tetrabibl. 3. Sermon. 4. cap. 47.
but no bad Author, recommends several Electuaries of this nature, to be taken
for a year together: his Antidotus ex Hyperico, Antidotus Anastasii, and Doari
Episcopi, all three appointed for a full year; his Tetrapharmacum, otherwise
called Mysterium, for a short one, and Philagrius his long one, etc. Our Modern
Practicers keep rather to the pulvis fol. chamaepit. salv. beton. and the like.
Observat. l. 2. in habit. corp. dolor.
Platerus tells us of an Ancient Gentleman of 70 years of age, who had been
Arthritick for diverse years, and by the use of Betony alone, taken several
ways, as in Conserve, infused in Wine, boiled with his Meat, etc. Cured himself
so perfectly of his Gout, that he lived afterward to 80 years, and free from
it. And in my opinion it was a pretty Cure, and such as deserves not to be
passed by in silence. But notwithstanding that Nervous Medicines inwardly taken
for a long time be very Rational, and oftentimes Useful at the long run, if
other care goes along with them, yet it may be considered, that by reason of
the Heat which attends Nervous Plants, and the other Hot Aromaticks and Spices,
which are commonly added to the Recipe to make it appear with greater luster to
the eye, whither or no they may not in length of time have the effect of Wine
immoderately drank. Wine in its self Soberly used, is perhaps the greatest
Cordial in nature, and consequently a little of it may be as good for the
Nerves, as Cordials are thought primarily to be for the Heart; but if men
cannot forbear overcharging their body with heavy loads of that Spirituous
Liquor, or if once there grows a Thirst which nothing but Wine can quench, it
will prove a Poison instead of a Cordial, and by degrees burn, and consume the
necessary Principles of life. And thus even Nervous Remedies imprudently, or
over long used, may ('it is more than possible) with their attending Heat so fret
and Inflame the Blood, that the disorders from the very Remedy, upon this
account, may in some occasion or accelerate an unexpected Fit.

Wherefore Evacuations, suitable to the temper of every person, or as the
(...), the present circumstances of Particulars do require, do seem in my
conception to claim a just precedence to Alterative Nervous Remedies, and will
do abundantly more alone toward the Prevention of the Gout, than any Nervous
Medicines can without Evacuations. The great use, and exceeding benefit of
Evacuations, was not only Indicated, but Demonstrated, by the Natural Crises
which have often determined Fevers, sometimes Critical Haemorrhagies at the
Nose, at the Haemorrhoids, and by the Menses, at other times by Diarrhaeas,
Vomitings, profuse Sweats, and Discharges by Urine. Evacuations in Diseases
have thus as Naturally been Indicated, as one Contrary has been by another.
Indeed a due order both of Evacuations and Alteratives, is the part of a Good
Physician, and if either Chemistry, or any fond whimsical Fancy does instigate
a man to be at defiance with Bleeding in general, or with Purgations either
upwards or downwards, as if they might altogether be spared, and other Remedies
would do better without them, these men, let their pretenses be never so
Chemical, ought as strictly to be Banished from the Province of Physic, as a
notorious Traitor from a well-governed State.

And now I have thus spoken to some of the most Material circumstances relating
both to the Cure of the Paroxism, and the future Prevention of it, it may not
be amiss to obviate one great Error, about the Cause of the Gout. Authors with
one consent, and people in general, have favored the Opinion, that immoderate
or unseasonable Bacchus and Venus, are the only Legitimate, and Necessary
Parents of the Gout, where it is not Hereditary. The Greek Poets have sung
aloud, that the Gout is the Daughter of Bacchus and Venus, that the Gout is a
Luxurious Goddess, and esteemed (...), a hater of Poverty, and Poor people. And
it was a pertinent Apologue to this purpose, which Mouffet relates, Theatr.
insect. lib. 11. cap. 13.
of a Spider and the Gouts taking a small Journey together: That at night the
Spider happening to take her lodging in a Rich man's house, was quickly driven
away, and spoiled in her weaving Cobwebs, that the Gour happening to take up in a
poor man's Cottage, was almost starved with his Brown Bread and Herbs; that
meeting the next day again, they agreed to change their Quarters, each
complaining very much of their former Landlords, that the Spider was kindly
entertained, and unmolested by the Poor, and the Gout upon coming to the Rich,
Luxurious person, and falling at his Feet, was presently welcomed with Downy
Pillows, rich Tapistrys, and all imaginable care and tenderness; the Kitchen
grew Hot, the Table spread with all manner of Dainties, and the best Wines that
were to be had, went merrily about, etc.

Neither were Poets, and Merry men only of this opinion, but even our most
Judicious Hippocrates has Aphoristically dictated the same. Aphor. Sect. 6. n.
30.
One of his Aphorisms is (...). That a Youth never has the Gout before the use
of Venery: Ibid. Aph. 28.
and another is, (...). That Eunuchs are never troubled with the Gout: 29.
and a third, (...). That a Woman never has the Gout, before her Menses have
left her. After a word to these Aphorisms, I shall speak to the Rationality of
the thing. Lib. de affectionib.
Hippocrates makes a difference between the Morbus articularis, and the
Podagra; and grants that even Youths and Eunuchs, may be subject to the Dolor
articulorum, before Venery, though not to the Podagra. For in the end of
Fevers, Defluxions do sometimes fall upon the Joints, either by reason of the
moisture and relaxation of the Ligaments of the Bones (the humors flowing to
them, and a Dry Cough accompanying it) or by reason of the exanguious macilent
condition of the Junctures after Fevers; and therefore Oxen, about the end of
Winter, when they grow to be very Lean, are apt to slip the Bones in the
Joints. And thus to this sort of Arthritis, the Dolor articulorum, which is
made per modum Puris corrumpentis, (never so the Podagra) even Youths and
Evnuchs are subject as well as others. Ad Aphor. 30. lib. 6.
And Brassavolus relates how Alphonsus Tasso, or Dassonius, and Claudius
Rangonus, two very fine Youths, were troubled with the Gout at fifteen years
old, in his time and knowledge. Hollerius says upon the same Aphorism, that he
knew some at ten years of age troubled with it. Ad Aphor. 28.
Brassavolus also tells us, that he saw at Venice an Eunuch Turk, forty years
old, afflicted with it. And relations of Women are less rare.

To all which we answer, that Hippocrates must mean the Podagra, which so much
differs from the Dolor articulorum; and Cardan excellently well defends the
truth of these Aphorisms, In Aphor. praedict.
against the misinterpretation of Galen, and other Commentators, by allowing
that they may, and are sometimes subject to the latter, but never properly to
the former. I remember one Contemporary at Winchester School, who was very
Arthritick, and whose case might probably be the same with Tasso, and
Raengonus. If we will understand a sentence in a large sense, which is meant
only in a strict sense, we may easily enough find a flaw in the truth of it.
And this seems to me to be a much more genuine interpretation, than to say I
cannot tell what, that the time Hippocrates lived in, was so exceeding Temperate
and Abstemious above ours. I don't doubt but they knew the taste of a Glass of
Wine as well as our times, and as few of them were Women-haters as now. We may
talk of Golden Ages, and Iron Ages, to comply with the humors of some men,
whose temper inclines them to dislike and censure every body, and every thing
that they see, and to admire all that is dead and gone; but upon the best
reflection that I can make, I am very well persuaded, that there ever was, is,
and ever will be a Golden Age, in respect of some Particular persons, whose
Virtues do preserve the very Being of the World, and an Iron Age in respect of
others, I fear much the generality, whose Vices would overwhelm the Order of
the World; and bring a sudden dissolution upon it, if the first did not uphold
it, by a powerful hand.

As for Eunuchs being now sometimes troubled with the Gout, notwithstanding
Hippocrates his assertion to the contrary, we must know, that in all
probability our Master did mean such Eunuchs only, as either were born without
any Necessaries for Coition, or were entirely deprived of them soon after they
were born, as is now the manner of the Turks, and not concerning those Eunuchs,
who were deprived only of their Testicles, but had their Virga, and Scrotum
remaining, upon which sort Martial was a little pleasant in his time, in that
jocular Distich:

Cur tantum Eunuchos habeat tua Gellia, quaeris
Pannice? vult -- Gellia, non parere.
And if they are still capable of doing in private such feats of activity, as
gave occasion to the Grand Seignor to make a through Exection of their
Generative Principles, and besides can swill a Glass as freely as those who are
not Castrated, nay and can impair the tone of their Spirits upon other
accounts, what should hinder them from becoming Arthritick as well as others?
There are four things requisite to breed the Gout, according to the opinion of
the Ancients; an imbecility of the Joints, an expansion, or dilatation of the
Veins about them, Crude matter to flow that way, and an impelling principle,
chiefly a Flatus. Now if a young lusty Fellow happens to be made an Eunuch only
in Martial's sense, after he has sufficiently known what is what, and thereby,
as well as other ways, weakened the Natural strength of the Joints, and dilated
the Veins about them, certainly he is afterward capable of disordering his
body with Intemperance, thereby furnishing Crude indigested matter, and Wine
will provide him with an Impelling Principle.

The third Aphorism will likewise hold true, if we consider it a little
attentively. No Woman is ever known to have the Gout, before her Menses have
left her; (...) is the word, and (...) does not only signify derelinquo,
leaving absolutely, and for good and all, but also desum, and deficio, to be
wanting, and defective. So Xenophon takes the word when he says, In Oecon.
(...). And so the Sun and Moon are said (...), deliquium pati, and there is a
great deal of difference between an Eclipse, and a Natural incapacity of ever
shining again. And thus it is true, that a Woman is never known to get the
Gout, before her Menses (...), have been wanting or defective to her, either in
quantity or quality. This therefore seems to me to be a much more proper
Interpretation of that Aphorism, than to say, that the Women were all Saints in
Hippocrates his days, and that they are nowadays all Beasts, and for that
reason are now subject to the Gout more than formerly. Women were always Women,
as well as Men Men. Wherefore I shall still have the same honor for
Hippocrates his Judgment, in these Aphorisms, as well as his others. And I
think it is better thus to understand his meaning, than to suppose him to be an
Idiot in these Sentences, who is accounted an Oracle in the rest. A wise man
may be mistaken in his Notions, as well as a Fool, but he would be very unwise,
who would Determine so Positively notorious untruths in Matter of Fact, as
those three Aphorisms commonly misunderstood must insinuate. An Aphorism is a
final and well-weighed determination of a matter, in few words; it is the
result of long Experience, and a Wise man can never be so Ridiculous, as to lay
down for a Rule, and a Conclusive Rule, what every half-witted body must needs
know to be False, and this in Matter of Fact.

And now for the Rationality of that vulgar opinion, that Wine, and Women, are
the adequate, and most general Cause of the Gout, it is very Censorious,
uncharitable, injurious, and improbable, I do not doubt but it is in some the
True, and main Cause, but in abundance of others has a very small, if any share
in its production. Whatsoever is capable of weakening, and impairing the tone of
the Animal Spirits, will claim properly a title to its Generation. A Sedentary
life full of Study, and deep thoughtfulness, in persons who feed high, and
Digest ill, by reason of a continual and unseasonable application of the mind,
shall cause it in Sober persons, who drink but little Wine, and use little or
no Venery; sometimes too much Exercise, as well as in others too little, shall
weaken the Spirits and Joints; the continual use of a Coach, and disuse of
Legs, I do very believe is a more General Cause, than can be easily imagined.
We may further observe, that many Sober, Temperate, and eminently Virtuous
persons, upon whom Malice its self can hardly fix a Suspicion of Debauchery,
shall miserably labor under this Disease, whenas thousands of the rankest
Libertines in nature, who never deny themselves any sort of Sensuality, do
escape all their lives free from being Arthritick. Nay of those who are
afflicted with it, sometimes the most Temperate, Regular, and Abstemious men
shall happen to fare the worst; and I have known some upon the stricted
observance of Diet, fall suddenly into a Pit, and the same as soon recover
again upon taking a little Liberty. So that there can be no adequate Cause of
this Distemper, but this: whatsoever is capable of weakening, and impoverishing,
or afterward of disordering and irritating the Animal Spirits, in persons
disposed to this Disease, whither it be by an Hereditary Necessity, or by a
Luxurious, or Sedentary, or sometimes Laborious course of life.

In point of Diet, that Aphorism of Hippocrates ought to be well remembered, and
especially in Arthritick cases. (...), etc. Sect. 1. number. v.
That Sick people are apt to do themselves injury, by following too spare a
Diet, and this is the more injurious to them. For whatsoever Error is
committed, is more considerable under a spare Diet, than under a liberal, and
therefore very strict rules herein are of dangerous consequence to those that
are in Health, because they suffer the more from it. And for this reason a most
exact, and slender Diet is generally more dangerous, than that which is
stronger and fuller than it should be. Thus the wise man. Notwithstanding which
advice, the generality of Physicians have been apt to debar Arthritick persons
more than is really requisite in point of Diet. And they have thought they have
had good Authority for it. For Authors on this subject have recorded diverse
instances of persons desperately afflicted with the Gout, who by reason of
Poverty, Imprisonment, a forced or voluntary abstinence from Wine, and the use
of Women, have been as it were Miraculously Cured of it, to the astonishment of
all who knew them. Porphyry tells us of Rogatianus a Senator of Rome, In vita
Plotini.
who upon hearing Plotinus a Platonic Philosopher, grew to an absolute
contempt of the things of the World, forsook all his Honors, dismissed his
Servants, and spent his time in Philosophical entertainments, and eat but once
a day, and that very sparingly. And it seems by this change of life, he that by
reason of the Gout could not go one step, but was at first carried every where
in his Chair, got strength to his Legs again, and also recovered the use of his
Hands, as well as ever, who before was absolutely disabled. In Appollinis radio
primo in descript. elect. Diacorall.
Franciscus Alexander of Vercellae, a Town in Piedmont, relates the Story of a
Rich Gentleman there, who being privately surprised, and cast into Prison, and
there living on the Bread and Water of Affliction, recovered so strangely of
the Gout (that he had been troubled with 'till fifty years old) that when the
Castle he was kept in was taken by the French, he had lost his Distemper quite,
and could walk without a Staff, who before could not so much as walk with it.
De rat. errand. partic. hum. corp. morb. l. 12. c. 2.
Trincavellius relates of an old Physician at Venice, who had been exceedingly
troubled with the Gout, that for five years he debarred himself from drinking
so much as a drop of Wine, and by this means quite freed himself of his
Distemper to a Decrepit old age, and even to his Death. And many places do ring
of Hydropotae, or Water-drinkers, who by that means have got rid of their
several sorts of Arthritis. Guainerius speaks of several Vxorious people, De
aegritud. junctur. c. 27.
who had been forced to keep their Bed the greatest part of their time through
the violence of their Gout, and upon burying their Wives, were very seldom
afterward attacked by it, and when a Fit did come, they were very quickly rid
of it.

To the substance of all which Stories I shall make some Answer, and show, that
notwithstanding these Relations, Diet is no adaequate, or certain Cure of the
Gout, that though Temperance be good in all men, and especially in this
Distemper, yet we ought to be very Cautious how we recommend it too strictly to
persons who have habitually, and a long time indulged themselves to greater
Liberties than they ought to take; that it must needs be a matter of more than
ordinary consequence for a man to grow exceeding regular, nice, and scrupulous,
in eating or drinking many Innocent, and accustomed things, who had always used
himself to a free Scope, and could or would never debar himself from indulging
to the Dictates of his Appetite. For Sudden Alterations from things Accustomed
to the contrary Extreme, though to the better, ought carefully to be avoided.

It is to be observed, that of those who labor under this Disease, the
generality, if not all, are men of great Sense and Brains, and their Spirits
are much, if not always employed in very intense thinking. And if Fools do
chance to come by it, as well as Wise men, it is to be imputed to their Foolish
Extravagancies, whereof some will exhaust, and impair the Spirits, as much as
Immoderate Studies, and long fixedness of thoughts. But I dare appeal to any
man, who has known the World, whither it be not exceeding rare to meet a man of
weak, or very ordinary intellectuals, much afflicted with this Disease. Now the
Animal Spirits, which more immediately perform the functions of Reason, being
in these thoughtful men upon very constant and hard Duty, do call in to their
assistance those Spirits, whose part is properly designed to help the business
of Digestion. So that the Stomach finding its self destitute of those necessary
helps which it uses to receive in order to Regular Concoction, can therefore do
its work only by halfs, and so heaps up Crude and indigested humors in the
body, which Nature finding at last to grow very offensive, and threatening to
attack the main Forts of Life, the Vital parts, does in great kindness to them,
throw them off upon the Outward. We know that an Error in the first Concoction,
cannot be rectified in the second or third. Let but the Spring of a Watch flag
in its due force, and though the Wheels and other parts be never so curiously
and exactly wrought, yet the Watch can never go right, because all the rest
depends upon the first-Elastick motion of the Spring. And thus the Stomach
being the main Spring of Digestion, and upon whose regular, or irregular
functions, do absolutely depend all the subsequent acts of Sangnification in
the Blood, and Assimilation in all the parts of the body, if the Spirits at due
times are not sufficiently relaxed from intense Meditation, and the Stomach
assisted with as many of them as are requisite to the first Concoction, or
Chylyfication, there is like to be a most natural inlet to such Diseases as the
Constitution of the body inclines to, and particularly the Gout in those whose
other circumstances do concur toward its production. Hence therefore it is
that the most Eminent and Useful men in all Professions, and in all Stations in
the World, are so subject to the Gout more than others. A continual hurry of
business does fill their heads, they are neither before, after, nor even at
their Meals sufficiently disingaged from Serious Thoughts; their Industry and
Application does commonly provide them with great plenty and variety of Food;
they Eat well, and Digest ill, for the reason aforesaid; their Spirits with
continual exercise, and fatigue, are as much tired, and therefore weakened, as
Arms or Legs can be on other occasions, where there is not sufficient
intermission. And therefore the having the Gout is very often a Good Sign, a
Sign of Sense and Reason, a Sign of Industry, and a man's minding his business,
as well as sometimes it is a Bad Sign, a Sign of Irregularities, and previous
looseness in some respects.

Now though this may in all probability be a more general Procatarctick Cause,
than others, yet no Author, that I know of, has made any words about it. They
have all in general gone in a stream, and assigned the more Popular Causes
mentioned before. Sir Theodore Mayern indeed, who has written a short but
judicious Treatise of this Disease, makes the Stomach (not the Head, or Liver)
to be the primary Fountain from whence those Defluxions are derived to the
Joints. And therefore Diaeteticks are in his opinion a main instrument in the
Cure. The Stomach is doubtless first of all affected, and it very often comes
to be so, by reason of the Spirits being too much employed in the Brain. For
whither Wine, or Women, or Corporeal, or Mental Exercise of the Spirits do
weaken their natural crasis, it is certain that they are weakened, and being so,
the Nervous Parts must on that account be as subject to receive morbid
impressions, as Infirmities and Weaknesses in other parts do likewise become
attractive. But that a very Spare Diet is the most proper course to restore the
strength of the Spirits, or to prevent disorders from falling on the Joints, I
cannot but very much question. For let immoderate Venery, or any other
immoderate exercise, or consumption of the Spirits take place, and we shall
find a strict Abstinence repair them again but slowly. Therefore the true
Prophylactick Cure of the Gout must be so adapted to most people, as to let
them live in great measure as they did before, and not to make a Baby of a man
of Sense, and feed him with nothing but Milk and Spoon-meats. Crato, an Eminent
and Learned Physician, was yet no wiser than to observe, Consil. 246.
that Capons flesh is very injurious unto, and ought mightily to be avoided by
Gouty people. Whereas if he had lived out of the Courts of Princes, where
Capons are a Dish which comes under every days Animadversion, he would have
found, or might as well have observed, that Mutton, and Veal, and any thing
else that is taken for Nourishment, is apt sometimes, as well as Capons, to
disagree with Arthritick crazy bodies. It is easy enough to misobserve, that
the present Diet, let it be what it will, was a previous cause of the Paroxism.
Though there is no doubt, but gross, hard to be concocted, Saline, and too
Fermentative Food, is always more in fault, to a vitiated Stomach, than a
clean, easy, agreeable, and Digestive sort of Aliment.

Now as to the Stories beforementioned, in vindication of the power of Diet, I
answer to the first, that of the Roman Platonist; that he had separated himself
from business, and had reduced his mind into a Philosophical Tranquillity, that
his Animal Spirits finding ease from their hard labors, could now be more
intent in contributing their assistance to the functions of the Stomach, and
upon this new remission of them from continual and tiresome Cogitations, they
could very well help the Stomach to perform exceeding well its Duty in
elaborating or digesting the one Meal a day, much better than it could before
frequent Meals, when their strength was enervated. The consequence of which
change of life was naturally enough a change of Temper, a change from Sickness
to Health. To the second, that of the Savoyard in Prison; that though the
Imprisonment might at first be attended with a great consternation of mind, yet
in some time it grew easy enough; and we may find abundance of Prisoners,
after a little inurement to that unhappy life, grow very well contented in the
condition which they find cannot be helped; that there no multiplicity of
Affairs, no cross disappointments in business, could wrack or distract his
mind, so that Bread and Water, or any other ordinary Diet, sparingly allowed,
could not choose but be well-digested, and so his Natural strength being
recovered, was a necessary means to the strengthening his Animal. To the third,
that of the Gouty Physician; that if the loving a Glass of Wine too much, had
been a main Cause of his Gout, he did very well in drinking a glass less than
perhaps he needed. For after Sixty was no such proper time for him to renounce
Wine indispensably. Wine immoderately, or unseasonably used, is remarkably
injurious to the Nerves, and in general to bodies subject to Crudities and
indigestion, is rather a hurtful vehicle of them, than a Cordial any ways
beneficial. The benefit of Water to those that are Arthritick, cannot be enough
recommended. And yet to such whose Brains are continually traveling with
important business, there is no absolute necessity of debarring one Glass of
Sack now and then. Consil. Medicin. Sict. 4. Cons. 24.
Solenander considered well, when upon reflecting how hurtful Wine is to the
Nerves, he says, Non tamen ego propterea cuilibet temperamento, cuilibet
constitutioni, aetati, consuetudini, suadere auderem, nec utile putarem,
omnimodam vini abstinentiam. As for that Physician, we have not so very full an
account of his case, as might require a more punctual Answer. His forbearance
of Wine, and use of Water alone, might be no more the True and Complete Cause
of his losing the Gout, Plin. secund. Nature. Hist. l. 22. c. 24.
than the eating of Honey might be the only true cause of Pollio the Roman's
living to above a hundred years old, as it seems he affirmed to Augustus, when
he was asked the question. To the last, the case of Vxorious Peoples finding so
much relief upon surviving their Wives, that the being Vxorious, or keeping
truly and constantly to their Wives, is a very unlikely means to procure the
Gout, though when once it is Confirmed upon a man, a small excess even of that
kind, shall help very much to promote it, and so that Adjutant Cause being
removed, the Disease may abate in its force; that the greatest Rangers and
Libertines in Town do often escape the Gout, being rather subject to Venerial
than Arthritick Diseases; that Women, as Wine, immoderately and unseasonably
used, by enervating the Animal strength, do sometimes, but not always, cause
the Gout; and that when they do it, it is not so much in Sots, and Silly
People, as in men that can be at other times over-thoughtful, serious, and
melancholic.

Now we cannot deny but Diet is of great concern in so considerable a Chronick
Distemper, and especially to those persons who think fit to quit themselves of
their Physician, so soon as they are got a little rid of their Paroxisin, or
those who over-wisely leave all to the Course of Nature. Seasonable and proper
Evacuations carefully followed at certain times, will leave the less necessity,
perhaps none at all, of being Curious in this respect.

Before I dismiss this subject, I cannot but speak one word to the Milk Diet,
that being oftentimes the Last Refuge, and having gained greater Fame than any
other. Some indeed have had the good Fortune to receive benefit from it, or to
think so at least, for a time; and the recommendation of this Diet, in some
particular cases by Eminent and Worthy Physicians, where they have had
sufficient Experience of the Idiosyncrasia, or peculiar Tempers of their
Patients, has encouraged some others to venture upon it of their own head, and
they have paid dearly for their Rashness, by its absolute disagreement. For
Milk is a contrary to those men, whose Habit of body is Acid, and Melancholic,
(and Thoughtful men are very apt to degenerate into that State) and as contrary
to such who have inured themselves to the constant service of Bacchus, as Beef
and Pork to the Stomach of a little Infant. These men's Stomachs shall sour and
curdle Milk, as certainly as Vinegar or other Acids, when set over the fire.
Besides it is very unnatural, and heterogeneous to make Children of Men, and to
accommodate the proper Diet of the one to the other, unless it be upon some
particular occasions weighed and deliberated with the utmost care and nicety,
and with the Advice of some Good Physician. And in this case the Aphorism of
Hippocrates, respecting Diet, that was mentioned before, ought well to be
remembered.

Thus I have been longer than I intended, upon this Disease, and I hope some
Hints may not be altogether Useless. If I have been guilty of the common
Infirmity that attends Mankind, and have Notion'd it wrong, I shall be always
ready to hearken to better Counsel. Though upon these Principles, such as they
are, I could Magnify my self, if it were proper, in Particular Performances,
and could both as to the Fit demonstrate Experimentally how Suddenly and Safely
the Pain can be, and has been quite removed beyond Expectation, and the
consequential Cure made easy and soon dispatched; and as to the Preservative
part, could sufficiently evince how by Proper and Suitable Evacuations, the
Gout, though confirmed by abundance of Fits, and many years continuance, yet
may very well be kept off from time to time, until the Nerves have regained
their pristine strength, and the Habit of body altered into a better State. But
I shall forbear.

CHAP. XV.
Simple Remedies preferred by some before Compounds. Why Compositions are as
Necessary as Simples. Venice Treacle one of the first rank. That Venice Treacle
ought to be administered in larger quantities than usual, in other Cases besides
Poison. How the True sort may be distinguished from the Adulterate, according
to Galen. The benefit of Correctives with Catharticks strongly urged. Of
Mithridate, and its Inventor. How little those Antidotes are used in France.
Some account of the Old Hiera's, and more particularly the Hiera
Diacolocynthidos. The Hiera's, not the better, or more Sacred, for the Aloes
they contain. Aloes deservedly Censured.

AS it was a Custom in old times, for Physicians to apply themselves chiefly,
if not solely, to one Kind of Disease, so there were others full as Zealous,
that they should keep themselves strictly to one sort of Simple in their Cures.
Nor were good women, and Country people the only persons, who had a great
opinion of Cures being wrought by Simples, but even Physicians of the greatest
note and honesty have very much favored it. Dioscorides, who lived in Julius
Cesar's time, described the Virtues of Simple Plants, with an excellency that
few have since imitated, and Matthiolus his justly admirable Comments upon him,
writ a long time after, has improved, and is like to perpetuate our Necessary
Knowledge of Simples. And the substance of both their works has been reduced
into a most easy and applicable Method, by Justus Mollerus, in his Fasciculus
Remediorum ex Diofcoride and Matthiolo. In Epistol. ad lib. de comp. medic.
Seribonius Largus, who flourished in the times of Tibertus, and Claudius the
Emperors, did prefer Simple Medicaments before Compounds. And Octavianus
Horatianus Rerum Medic. l. 1. c. 1.
, under Valentinian the Emperor, did condemn both Compounds, and all Foreign
Remedies, and maintained, that in every Country Nature had provided a
sufficiency of Simples to answer all Indications, and for every Age, Disease,
lib. 24. c. 1.
and Occasion whatsoever. Pliny, a little before Horatianus, a most eminent
Naturalist, is more keen, than was requisite, on this subject. Galen,
Oribasius, Paulus Aegineta, Aetius, and others both Ancient and Modern, have
trod in the step of Dioscorides, and delivered the Virtues of Simples much
from, and after the same manner with Dioscorides; only Galen was the first more
particular weigher of the first qualities, and Author of the Graduations of
Plants.

That Simple Medicaments have proved singularly Good in the Cure of diverse
Diseases, it would be unworthy to deny. For otherwise Kings and Princes would
hardly have vouchsafed to Honor Plants with their Names. Telephium (Orpine)
was so called from Telephus King of Mysia, whose wounds received from Achilles,
and grown in a manner desperate, Pliny lib. 25. c. 5.
were Cured by this Plant. Teucrium from Teucer King of Troy, and from whom the
Trojans Teucri, but called also Chamaedrys, or Germander, by Dioscorides. So
Lysimachia some say from Lysimachus, etc. And the Names of a great many Plants
have been attributed, and settled, as it were, by the general consent of
Mankind, for their eminent and appropriate Virtues.

Some Authors do make us to be very much beholding to Beasts for our Knowledge
of Plants. And thus the Weazle being to encounter the Basilisk, is said by
Natural Instinct, to defend it self with Rue. The Serpent, when grown old, is
said to have learned the Cunning to apply its self unto Fennil, in order to
clear her eyesight. And the Swallows to Celandine, on the same account. The
Stag, when wounded, is thought to run immediately to Dittany, as if the Arrow
could stay no longer in his body, when touched with that Specific. I could
with more reason speak to the Cortex, to Gentian, Rhubarb, Eyebright, and the
like. But it is certain, that the right use, and application of Simples, is of
as great consequence to the performing Great Cures, as the things themselves
can be; and Proper Evacuations will always have a due place, before the Remedy
can be truly Specific.

I have showed before, that Nature does Compound Remedies, as well as Art, and
as Diseases are Complicated, the Medicines must be so likewise. And therefore
to decry all Compositions as Unnecessary to use, seems to be rather a piece of
Wit, or Gallantry, or Perverseness, or at least a Mistake, than founded either
in Reason, or Experience. For the World does not feed upon Herbs, nor much like
the drinking of Water; the Abstemious Philosophers that are spoken of in Books,
are now very rare to meet with; Cookery is become no contemptible Art, and the
days are gone and forgot, when Acorns was a Dish of Dainties, when Men and Pigs
fed promiscuously together, and little else besides an articulate, and
inarticulate note did serve to distinguish the one from the other. If the World
were as good as it should be, there would be little need of Physicians, or of
either Simple, or Compound Remedies. But because we must be contented to find
it as it is, and not as we would have it, mankind is not a little beholding to
those Excellent Physicians, who set their Wits to work to frame admirable
Compositions, which have effectually served to answer the Prolifick, and
multifarious results of a General Luxury.

Among the rest the Theriaca Andromachi, or Venice Treacle, a Composition of no
less than sixty odd Ingredients, will claim a preference before most others. It
was first contrived in the days of Nero, that inhumane Emperor, by his Chief
Physician Andromachus, as if Providence had ordered that no Time should be so
bad, but some General Blessings should make good amends to the World for what
it must sometimes suffer from inhumane Wolves, and Destroyers, and from General
Calamities. Vid. Galen. lib. 1. de Antid.
The Composition so pleased the Author, that it Inspired him with a Poetical
strain, and he presented a Copy of Verses to his Master, wherein he at large
set forth the Praises, and Excellencies of this Incomparable Antidote. Lib. de
Theriac. ad Pisonem.
Galen, who lived not long afterward, writ a Treatise on purpose concerning
it, wherein he magnifies this Famous Antidote to be of such wonderful efficacy
against the Venom of all sorts of Creatures, that he says it was never known to
fail in the Cure of any of their Poisons. Ibid.
Siquidem nullum a feris quae hominem solent interimere commorsum, hac statim
epota antidoto; periisse memoriae proditum est. For at that time the World was
not furnished with Aqua Fortis, Sublimate Corrosive, Oil of Tobacco, and other
such Chemical Preparations, but the Poison of Beasts, Insects, and Herbs, was
thought to be bad enough of all conscience. I shall not dispute, whither the
Venom of many Creatures, does proceed from the Essential nature of the
Creatures themselves, or from the inflamed Madness of their Rage and Passion.
It is enough that we have so good a provision against it, and this Theriaca was
so called from (...), Aeol. (...), accus. (...), unde fera, a wild Beast,
either because it was so exceeding good against the Poison of wild Creatures,
or because of the Vipers flesh, which is a great and principal Ingredient in
its Composition. And by the By it is a great deal of pity, that the common
people should be so abused, as they often are, with Orvietans, and the like
Quack-Compositions, as if the mingling great store of Honey, and a few Hot
Spices, to a little of our present Theriaca, would answer the general occasions
of Antidotes, better than this Great and a long time justly Approved Antidote.
But if the people will needs be Deceived, there is no help, but they will
always have such Deceivers ready. Galen asserts, that he Experimented the
Alexipharmick nature of this Electuary upon wild Fowl, as being of a drier
temperament than the Tame or Domestics, and of those Fowl he made some to take
liberally of it, and mingled others in their company, which had pot tasted of
this Preservative. He then put Venomous Creatures among them, who assailed and
Bit every one of the Fowl, and soon found, that all those who had not the
fortune to take of this Antidote, perished immediately, but those who had,
escaped free and found. Others before him, it seems, had tried the same
Experiment upon Malefactors, and it proved alike Successful. So that we have
reason to Bless God for so Admirable a Composition, and not to mind what
Captious, or Fanciful men have indiscreetly vented against all manner of
Compositions. Plin. l. 20. c. 24.
And this, in my opinion, did deserve much better to be Cut at large in Stone,
at the entrance of the Temple of Aesculapius, than that of the great King
Antiochus, though a good one too against Poisons. But it must be remembered,
that if we would have it Cure those many Diseases which Galen esteems it so
good for, we must not think that the Tasting a small quantity of it will ever
do such wonders. In diverse cases, where there was no thought of Poison, I have
given three and four drachms at a time, and it has immediately stopped the
violence of the Distemper, and rendered the rest of the Cure as easy as may be.
For this is always a Rule with me, and I wish it were with others more than it
is, that we may Safely be sometimes Bold in the exhibition of such things as
are Safe in their own nature, but that we can hardly be too Timorous in the
prescribing or advising such things as are Dangerous in their Use, or
Consequence. Nor is half an ounce of Treacle so Bold an enterprise as some may
think. Zwelfer, a most Acute and Excellent Physician, whose ability in judging
of the use of Remedies, is sufficiently evidenced by his Impartial
Animadversions on the Pharmacopaea Augustana, as well as by his other works,
this Eminent Modern Author affirms, Animadvers. in integram Classem xj. de
Confec. aromat.
that in the beginning of Fevers, or even when they are Confirmed, and in
Diarrhaea's, and the like Diseases, he had taken himself, and had given to
others, half an ounce, six draohms, or more at a time, of this Treacle, and
never without great success, nunquam non faeliciter, and summo cum fructu.
Nevertheless this ought to be understood with very great caution, even by
Physicians, and especially as to Younger Patients, and in respect to
Inflammatory Diseases.

The True Venice Treacle, Lib. praedict. ad. Pisonem.
or the True Preparation of it, is said by Galen to be thus distinguished from
Adulterates; that if a man should take a solution of Treacle after a Purge, and
the Purge does prove not to work at all, that this is a certain sign of the
goodness of the Antidote, or its not being Sophisticated, and by this Test, he
says he was never deceived in distinguishing the true genuine sort from the
Adulterate. Which if true, and we have so great a man's word for it, I conceive
that from hence maybe urged a very good Argument in behalf of Correctives
accompanying the Stronger Purgatives, which are generally esteemed to be in
some sort Poisonous in their nature. For certainly the Poison must do less harm
to men's bodies, when its malignity is abated or conquered by the Corrective
Antidote, than when it is entire, and in its full acrimony. We have hereby the
Purging benefit, without the Poisonous effect. And the power of Correctives
with Scammony, or the stronger Purgatives, I have so far experienced my self,
that I have given twelve or fifteen grains of Scammony in substance, with
Correctives, and it has not worked more than the third part would in all
probability have done without them. And hereby not only the Griping which
attends ordinary Purging is avoided, but the Strength of the Patient strangely
Preserved; insomuch that oftentimes a man shall run less hazard of catching
Cold, when he walks abroad, after Catharticks that way managed, than by keeping
at home, when he takes them without Cordials or Correctives administered
together. And farther, I do take this to be one reason, why the Elixir Salutis,
and other Empirical Remedies, have gained so great a Reputation as they have
among the Vulgar. For Spirit of Wine, and the like vehicles, or other Cordial
Impregnations do manifestly agree with the generality of our English bodies,
much better than other ways of Purging, let the contrary be maintained by never
so great Authority.

Mithridatium Damocratis, or Mithridate is another Famous Composition, superior
to most others, and second only to the former. It was first invented by
Mithridates King of Pontus, a man that could speak readily no less than two and
twenty Languages, solus mortalium, the only mortal that could do it, says
Pliny; Lib. 25. c. 21
and of all the Nations which were subject to him, he never spoke to one of
them by an Interpreter in fifty six years. This Great and Learned Prince, did
particularly apply his mind to the Knowledge of Alexipharmicks; and he did not,
like Galen, make his trials on Inferior Creatures, but as he had by his Regal
Authority abundance of opportunities, he tried the power of all manner of
Poisons, and their several Antidotes on forlorn Malefactors, and after all did
terminate his skill in this Famous and Excellent Composition. The Virtues of
which he had so proved himself, by continual taking of it Fasting in the
morning, that when he was overcome by Pompey, and like to fall into his hands,
and so to be led Captive to Rome in Triumph, he endeavored in vain to dispatch
himself by Poisons, and Venomous Creatures (his Constitution being rendered
Poyson-proof) and was at last forced to Command one of his Slaves to run him
through, that he might not survive his Empire. More concerning this Excellent
Prince may be read in Plutarch, Appian, and other Historians. But the Receipt
of his Antidote, written with his own hand, it seems, was found and seized by
Pompey searching among his Coffers, and Damocrates a Good Physician, but a
little addicted to the Poetical strain, put it afterward into Verses, Lib. 2.
de Antidot.
which you may read in Galen, with its Description, from whence our
Dispensatories do receive it, with some little Variations. It is certainly a
most Admirable Antidote against Poisons, and not Inferior to Venice Treacle, in
a great many respects, but in the Bitings of Vipers the Treacle is to be
preferred.

There are a great many other justly celebrated Compositions, derived from
Antiquity. But it being the fate of all Remedies, though never so Good in
themselves, to lose their Reputation in time, and others of an Equal, perhaps
less Intrinsic worth, succeeding in their place, in order to please, and suit
with that unavoidable humor of all Ages, the Love of Novelty; their disuse,
and neglect, must not be supposed necessarily to infer the introduction of what
is really better, but what is more agreeable to the present humors and fancies
of men. At this time in France, even Venice Treacle, and Mithridate, are so
universally laid aside, that it is a rare and strange thing to see so much as a
single Dose of them prescribed by any of the French Physicians. I remember
whilst I lived at Paris with Monsieur Lemery, one of the Kings Apothecaries, I
could not observe so much of those Compositions dispensed in a whole
twelvemonth, as many of our Apothecaries commonly do in one day. They do with
one consent esteem them too Hot for their Warm Tempers, and do put a far
greater value upon a Cooling Glyster, and a Cooling Purge of Cassia, or
Tamarinds, than on those, or any other kinds of Hot Medicaments.

Nay the Blessed Hiera's that were thought do deserve so Sanctified a Name for
their excellent qualifications, are many of them now laid quite aside, or
rarely used, having given way, according to the course of things, to others
whose turn it was to succeed. Our Dispensatory has retained only the Hiera
Simplex Galeni, and cum Agarico, the Hiera Logadii, and Diacolocynthidos, and
even some of them do prove rather an Ornament to the Book, and an effect of
some Veneration to Antiquity, than Medicines now in use. Those Hiera's of
Antiochus, Archigenes, Trallianus, Ruffus, Justus, Constantinus, etc. are in a
manner devoured by time, their Monuments being only left in Ancient Writings,
and rather read privately, than publicly used. The Hiera Pachii (the same with
our Hiera Diacolocynthidos) is an admirable Electuary, and I shall give it,
what it deserves, a Good Character, that it may not be forgotten like the rest.
It was so Famous, and esteemed of so highly in Pachius his time, that men would
have given him any Money for the Receipt, and he had great offers for it, but
whither in Covetousness, or because he was not the True Author of it himself,
(and that might be a reason with him,) he refused them all. When Pachius was
dead, where he Practiced Physic, at Antioch, the Proconful under Tiberius the
Emperor, upon searching his Library, found his True Receipt described in a Book
Dedicated to the Emperor himself, which being transmitted to Tiberius, and by
him imparted to Scribonius Largus his Chief Physician, it appeared to be much
the same as the World had been acquainted with before. Lib. 7. cap. 8.
Paulus Aegineta, and Mesue, do both refer it to Archigenes as the true Author.
Nicholaus Myrepsus in his Cap. 22.
Section of Antidotes, calls it Hiera Marrhubii. And In lib. de Comp. medic.
cap. 23.
Scribonius Largus gives a full account of this matter. Ruffus, and others do
make it Purge a little more, and then call it by their Names, as Pachius did by
his before them.

But this I shall say of most Hiera's, excepting this of Pachius, Tetrabibl. 1.
Sermon. 3. cap. 114.
or rather Archigenes, Aetius also esteeming it to belong to Archigenes, that
notwithstanding their Promising and Inviting Title, they are very mischievous
to many people, by reason of the Aloes that enters into them. For Aloes, let it
be the best Succotrina that can be chosen, I have known as absolutely to
disagree with diverse Peoples Temper, Schenck. Obs. Med. l. 7. de Idio syncrasia.
as the smell of Roses did to Oliverius Caraffa, a Cardinal of great fame, who
was fain in Rose-time to set a guard on the doors of his House and Gardens,
that no Visitant, or Friend, might chance to bring a Rose into his Presence: or
as Bernardus Bovius a Nobleman of Ragusa, Amat. Lusitan. curat. 20. cent. 6.
had an universal aversion to all Sweet things, whither Honey, Sugar, Figs,
Grapes, Pears, Apples, Quinces, Pomegranats, Peaches, Plums, or other Acid
Fruits, which partaked of Sweetness. Aloes being of so Hot and Corrosive a
nature, is as contrary to most Thin Macilent bodies, as any one Remedy which
can be used. And therefore I should be glad to see that disagreeing Drug turned
out of that Favor which it has so Eminently gained, both in ours, and other
Dispensatories. For of Nine and twenty several sorts of Purging Pills, which
are described in our London Dispensatory, there are but Two which have escaped
Aloes, and those are the Pilulae Mechoacannae, and e Duobus, whereof the first
is very seldom used, or Prepared by Apothecaries, and the other is too strong
for many Constitutions, and for Mild occasions. It is now, and has been a long
time reckoned, in the same Class of Purgatives with Rheubarb, whereas there is
a very considerable difference between them two in many respects; as much as
between Mild and Corrosive, between a thing justly Excellent, and justly
Suspicious. Nay Aloedaria or Aloeticks I have known to prove worse to some,
than, ever I could observe Scammoniates carefully administered (although, in
Authors they have had so bad a name) to any Constitutions. Indeed the Tincture
of Hiera Picra, the Pilulae Ruffi, Elixir Proprietatis, etc. have oftentimes
produced excellent effects, in some bodies that can well enough endure the Heat
and Corrosion of Aloes, and perhaps Poison it self so powerfully Corrected,
might lose or abate its nature, and become in some measure Innocent. But this I
must add, that whatsoever Remedy is of a destructive tendency to diverse
persons, although in some others it may be a good Medicine, yet it does not
deserve so remarkable a place as Aloes has obtained in so many Common, and
those otherwise Good Preparations. Which Consideration I shall with a fitting
deference leave unto Better Judgments.

CHAP. XVI.
of Characters, Amulets, and Sigills. The true Method by which Charms do happen
to perform diverse Cures; and that particularly in Agues. That Strength of
Imagination is the Real Cause, proved by an apposite Instance. Some Charms
mentioned. Sigills, and Magical Images considered. A remarkable Observation of
the effect of Charms among the Moors. Paracelsus his Sigills fond Delusions. In
what respect there is Virtue in Words, and in what there is none. The
Impostures of Conjuration, why more prevalent heretofore, than now. Diverse
sorts of Superstition mentioned. All sorts of them, why most carefully to be
avoided. The Power of Imagination; and the Diseases caused by it, how Cured.
How Roots worn about the neck, have performed Cures sometimes, and so how
Bezoar, and the like, inwardly, have been esteemed Cordials of the first rank.
That Conceits have their use in Physic, as well as Physical Remedies.

IT may not be amiss to speak something to the Physical, and other pretended,
or accidental effects of Sigills, Characters, and Amulets. For it cannot be
denied, but that many People, and especially the more weak and simple, have
found strange, and, to their seeming, Miraculous Cures, from such really
Ridiculous Artifices. It would be endless to name the Conceits, whereby Agues
particularly have been removed. And the Mystery in reality is this; a bold,
impudent, or else strongly deluded person has got a Charm imparted to him with
a great deal of Ceremony, and with wonderful assurance of its Infallible Power,
and at last whispered for a Secret that is in its self worth both the Indies;
the man believes all that is told him, cracks it aloud immediately, and offers
his assistance wheresoever he can find occasion; his motion is rejected by the
wiser sort of Patients, who have too much Wit to try such Knacks, and too
little Faith to believe them, but at last he meets with some weak harmless
Soul, who hearkens to him with both ears, and whose heart leaps for Joy, that
he has met with such a Heavenly Doctor, who can Cure him without a Penny
charge, and without the trouble of taking Slops; the Empirick offers his life
to his Patient, that he will certainly Cure him, and commonly uses desperate
expressions to gain a full belief, the Sick man is thoroughly satisfied in his
Imagination, makes trial of the Charm, and finds immediate Success, as he
thinks from the Charm, but really and truly is beholding to the Strong Delusion
of his own Imagination. Upon this the Empirick is more confident (if possible)
than before, and another, and another Neighbor, all as wise as the first, do
fall to try the same Experiment, and, to the Honor of the Charm, it has the
same admirable effect in them all. And thus they shall go on a good while,
until at last the Fame of this Easy Remedy flying far and near, a man of
deeper sense and understanding, is over-perswaded by his Friends to try this
Infallible Remedy, and he does it, but with such a desponding mind, and so many
Doubts arising from the ordinary dictates of Reason, that the Charm becomes
ineffectual, the Ague continues, and the Empirick begins to be confounded.
Nevertheless others try their fortune, and the strength of Imagination losing
its force, by degrees that Charm is silenced, and the Cure of Agues returns
into the hands of Physicians, as they did before, until some other New
Artifice, of the very same Virtue, and with the same Pretensions, for a while,
amuses the minds of men. And in confirmation of what I say, I could name a
remarkable City of England, where it is well known, and generally acknowledged,
that for almost one whole year, a Silly Charm did Cure Agues with a kind of
Infallibility, and yet the very next year was attended with so much
Fallibility, that not one, as I have heard, was Cured by it.

Now that the Imagination, and Strength of Fancy, is the Real Cause, that the
Charm, or be it what it will of the like nature, did at first prove successful
in the Cure of Agues, might be proved from its great power in other respects,
which I shall urge more anon, and at present will give one instance, that is
not a little to our purpose. An Ingenious Gentleman of my acquaintance, making
a visit to a Good Family, found the Beloved Daughter most sadly altered with a
Long and Violent Ague; he being a man of Address, and experienced knowledge in
the World, was pleased, without hesitation, to deliver himself to this effect
unto the Mother, in the presence of the Sickly Daughter: Madam, I am glad that
I came so seasonably to serve you in this particular, it has been my fortune to
be well acquainted with a certain Jew, who had one of the most Infallible Arts
in Caring Agues that ever yet has been known, he learned it in the Indies, and
after much Conversation and Kindness, and a great Sum of Money, that I paid him
for the Secret, he imparted it unto me; it is only the wearing a Powder that he
brought from the Indies next the Heart. At this they all rejoiced, and
consented immediately to try it; he goes into another room, takes a little of
the Ashes that he found in the Chimney, and Seals it up in a Paper, the young
Lady did wear it next her Heart, and was thereby freed from her Ague, without
any more ado. And thus, no doubt, upon the same operation of Fancy, not only
thousands of Agues at different times, but other Diseases have happened to be
Cured, to the great astonishment of Bystanders.

Authors do affirm, and possibly with truth enough, that this Amulet has Cured
the Toothache, Galbes, Galbat, Galdes, Galda: That Fluxes of Blood have been
stopped by these wise words, Charat, Cara, Sarite, Confirma, Consona, Imaholite;
or otherwise by the word Socnon, Socnon, repeated seven and twenty times, or
until the Blood stops, and also touching the part with the Ring Finger. Who
would think that a man should brag of being Cured of an Ague, by this Amulet,
St. Peter and St. Paul Cure this Fool, and another by this, Rapiat eum demon,
and similes ejus. I could reckon up abundance of the like Ridiculous Characters
in the Cure of Diseases, but shall rather refer you to Marcellus Empiricus,
Trallianus, Albertus Magnus, Arnoldus de Villa nova, and of late years
Fernelius in his Book de abditis rerum causis L. 2. c. 16.
.

As Characters, so Sigills, Images, or Impressions of several sorts are thought
to be wonderfully effectual, both in the Cure of Diseases, and on diverse other
accounts. Those Magical Images, or Sculptures in Stones, said to be derived
from Ragiel, Chael, Thetel, Solomon, Hermes, and other Authors, are mentioned
at large in Camillus Leonardus his Speculum Lapidum, and in Zimara's Antrum
Magicum. But why the Image of an Ass, rather than any thing else, engraven in a
Chrysolite, should impregnate the wearer's mind with a Prognosticatory and
Predictory temper, and be so efficacious to the making a good Fortune Tellers, I
cannot well understand, if seriously put. That the Figure of a Frog cut in a
Berill should be able to reconcile Enemies, and to beget Friendship; that the
Figure of a Bear in an Amethyst, should prove such a Bugbear, as to frighten or
drive away the Devil, nay and besides should be able to preserve a Sot from
being Drunk; that the figure of a man sitting with a Candle lighted in his
hand, in a Chrysolite, and set in the purest Gold, should necessarily make a
man Rich, in spite of his teeth, whither he sits still, works, or Plays away
his time; that Galen should become so great a Physician as he was, by wearing a
Ring with a Jaspar Stone, wherein was cut the figure of a man carrying a bundle
of Herbs at his back, is very hard to conceive in the way of Natural Causes and
Effects. But that these, or any of the like nature, may be able strongly to
impregnate the Imagination of the wearer, and may accidentally advantage him;
in his affairs, by helping to give him that assurance and resolution of mind,
which in many cases is requisite to the bringing things to a good Conclusion, I
shall not dispute. And thus the Figure of Jupiter, or a Prince sitting in his
Throne with his Crown upon his head, and with four men standing before him, and
Jupiter's hands lifted up toward Heaven in a Jacinth, etc. may possibly help
and encourage a man to make his Addresses to his Prince with such advantage and
dexterity as may render him so highly acceptable, that he may obtain what he
desires. And thus the Figure of a Lion, an Eagle, or the like, may help to
persuade some people, that upon an occasion they shall prove as strong as a
Lion among Beasts, and as fierce as an Eagle among Birds.

It is very remarkable, that of the Moors, and other Mahometans, among whom
Charms and Amulets are as commonly sold, as among us Empirical Elixirs, Pills,
Powders, Spirits, etc. whenever any of them are taken or do take Captive, their
Custom is to search diligently about the wretch, whither he has not a Charm
somewhere about him; for whilst he has his Charm safe, he proves so stubborn
and refractory, that there is no possibility of Governing him, he will be as
Dogged and Surly as the Master himself, and will almost defy him to beat out
his Brains if he can or dares; but find out once his Charm, and disarm him of
that Defensive Weapon, and his Strength and Courage is gone, he proves as tame
and gentle as a Lamb, and is as Humble as may be; you may then do what you will
with him, his Heart is changed, and he takes himself to be another Man.

Among the Germans there are many Pretenders who will undertake to make a man
invulnerable, although neither Arnoldus de villa nova, nor Paracelsus himself,
could find out a Sigill that was able to do it. Paracelsus was so great an
assertor of the power of Sigills and Characters, that he writ his Archidoxa
Magica, on purpose to instruct us in their use, at least he illustrated the Art
from Arnoldus. He says there is as much reason that Sigills worn about the
neck, should have a Medicinal effect on the body, as that Cantharides only held
in the hand, (he might rather have said, applied by way of Plaster) should
affect the Bladder, and make a man Piss Blood. But whatever he thought, there is
as much difference between them, as between a Fancy and a Reality. Nevertheless
for those who will be of his mind, and admire such Knick-knacks, he furnishes
them with Words, or Figures, joined with Metallic Preparations to be made
according to the Rules of the Starry Science, upon which Magical Impressions
are to be diligently wrought, and one of these Sigills, (...) ibid (...)
Magi(...)
bound to the Head, is designed to Cure an Epilepsie, though of thirty years
standing; another will serve for diverse Diseases of the Head and Brain, only
worn about the neck; a third for Palsies and Apoplexies; others for the Stone;
for Impotency, a very pleasant description; for the Gout; Convulsions,
Leprosies, Vertigo's; and for Fractures of Bones; nay and one to make a Horse
live thirty or forty years longer than ordinary. He has Sigills also Lib. 2.
for every Constellation of the Zodiac, all which are to do wonders in a great
many respects. He is not wanting by the same Art to Preserve Lib. 3.
Sheep, Oxen, Pigs, and all other Animals, from the casualties they are subject
unto.

Helmont also maintains, in verbis, herbis, and lapidibus est magna virtus,
that in Words, Herbs, and Stones, there is great (Physical) Virtue; he joins
them together, as of an equal virtue, and puts words in the first place. Now as
Words do prove Good Advice, I grant there is great virtue in them, but as they
are a Dead Letter, as they are either Insignificant in themselves, or
unintelligible, or as they are confined to a Paper, or a Bag, it will be very
hard to give us clear satisfaction, as to their Virtue. And therefore the Story
of Cornelius Agrippa's leaving a certain Book open in his Study, and a Friend
of his prevailing upon his Wife to get the Key of the Study in his absence,
though strictly forbid by Agrippa, and that the man's mere Reading in a
Conjuring Book, should raise the Devil to come and choke him, Disquisit. Magic.
l. 2. quaest. 27. Sect. 1.
will be a Romance to me, however Martinus del Rio sets forth the relation. We
ought to consider, that heretofore the World was involved in a dark and dismal
ignorance, and then it was no strange thing for a thousand Stratagems to amuse
Credulous people. Cunning Knaves could in those days do a great many tricks,
which would astonish the vulgar, and even puzle wise men, but now the World is
enlightened, those Arts are all certainly vanished, and nothing but
Superstition, a deluge of gross Superstition can revive them again.

For although the World in general is as Naturally inclined to Superstition, as
to any one Vice that can be named, yet it is never like to over-whelm Europe as
it has done; we have now greater advantages to discover double-dealing, than
they had in former times, and it is now a very hard matter to contrive a
Confederacy, which may avoid being discovered.

If the World did not love Superstition, as much as their very Meat and Drink,
so many Pseudo-mancys as there are would never have prevailed upon the minds of
men. Not only Negromancy has been an Art, but even Pyromancy, Hydromancy,
Geomancy, Oneiromancy, Icthuomancy, nay Capnomancy, Alphitomancy, Belomancy,
Axinomancy, etc. Predictions, and Prognostications have been made from Fire,
Water, Earth, Fishes, Dreams, nay from Smoke, Meal, Arrows, the Ax; from Birds,
particularly Crows, from inspection of the vertebrae of a humane body, as well
as from the Hand, the Face, etc. There have been Divinations by a Sieve, by the
burning of Frankinsense, and lastly from the Stars. I do not think there can be
a thing so Ridiculous in nature, let but Chance and Casualty (a sure way of
judging!) attend it, and men may reduce it into as Good an Art, as most, if not
all those abovenamed. But if men ever expect to be Happy in this World,
according to the Capacity that they may enjoy Happiness in, if they desire to
pursue their affairs vigorously, and without perplexity; if they would avoid an
aching heart, and a desponding mind; lastly, if they would expect, or reasonably
hope for the Blessing of God to attend them, they ought, and it is their
Certain Duty, to avoid all kinds of Superstition, with as much care, as they
would the Greatest Enemy they can propose.

But again, if we will but consider the sad effects of a mere Imagination, when
perverted, or strongly agitated, how far it is capable of transforming the
whole man, we ought in prudence to avoid as much as may be all occasions which
may contribute to its perversion. Lib. 2. hist. med. mirabil. cap. 1.
Marcellus Donatus tells us of one who Imagined his body to be grown so big,
that it could not pass through the door of his Chamber, without squeezing him
to death; and his Physician was no better a Politician, than to order him to be
drawn through the door immediately, in order to convince him of his brainsick
Error; the man was drawn through the door by force, and complained of such an
inward crushing of his poor body at that time, that he was not able to survive
it, so in earnest he Died to convince them of their Folly. He that has to deal
with a Melancholic Imagination, strongly perverted, may as well think to
persuade them that they do not think at all, as that they are not Sick thus and
thus, when once they are so persuaded. The Cure must be accommodated, and
proportioned to the Case. If the Disease be merely Imaginary and False, the
true Cure must be likewise False and Imaginary. A False Imagination may also
create, by degrees, a Real Disease, as the Sickness it self sometimes, and in
those cases, the Imagination as the Cause, ought to be first, and chiefly dealt
with. Sometimes Diversion of the mind, shall Prevent a Disease, and at other
times a Compliance with, or good management of the Fancy, shall be able to
perform a Cure. And the Story that Thomas a Vega tells us, In commentar. in
artem Medic. Galen. c. 84
was more like an Artist of a Physician, than that other before of Donatus; it
seems a certain man was grown Delirious in a Causus, or Burning Fever, and he
most earnestly pressed his Physician to let him Swim in the Pond before him,
pointing to the Floor of the room, that if he were suffered so to Swim, he
should certainly escape his Disease; the Physician granted him his desire, and
after he had a while tumbled on the floor, he said the water was risen to his
Knees, soon after he declared that it came up to his middle, and at last with
very much Joy, said it was now risen up to his Chin, and that therefore now he
was perfectly Cured. So the Fever immediately left him, and he grew Really
well, upon this satisfaction of his Delirious Fancy.

It would be endless to recite the strange Impressions of Pregnating Women on
their Foetus in the Womb, by the force of Imagination. This may suffice to
show, what a power there is in mere Imagination to the Causing or Curing of
diverse Diseases. And therefore if Paeony root or Seed worn only about the Neck
has been a Specific to one person in an Epilepsie, and not to another, it is
to be imputed to the different operation of their more or less strong
Imagination. The same may be said of Viscus quercinus, and ungula Alcis in the
like case, or of the ungula vel Calvaria asini, which Trallianus so much
recommends for a Precious Secret that he learned in Spain. This may make a
Neck-lace of the root of Houndstongue to Cure the Canker of the mouth, and
another of Solomon's Seal to stop the Flux of the Haemorrhoids. This may make
the Lodestone held in the hand to help the Chiragra, and the Podagra, and the
Eagle's Stone worn about the Breast of a Breeding Woman, may thus be a means to
Preserve her from Miscarrying. For if there were an Inherent Virtue really in
the things themselves, why should this Virtue fail of its force in one person,
rather than in another in the same condition? a dose of Bezoar has been a
Wonderful Cordial in some, and yet wholly insignificant in others. And so the
Lapis e Goa, and abundance of the like nature, brought from far, have gained
great repute in one place, and lost it as soon in others. As Natural Alkalis
they will be sure to absorbe Acid humors that are offensive to the Vitals, and
especially if administered in a good quantity, a dram at a time; but whither
they will prove Directly Cordial, and not by accident, on that account, must be
left to the Event.

And because diverse things of this nature have been known to do visible, and
undeniable good, at certain times, and on certain persons, it would be very
imprudent and indiscreet to deny them upon all occasions, and morosely to tell
the very truth, where a person's Fancy is strongly impregnated on their behalf.
We ought sometimes to do as we can, when we cannot, through men's Prejudices, do
as we would. A depraved Fancy may have its Irregular Appetites, as Naturally as
a depraved Stomach, and will as much expect to be satisfied, in its own way.
Aetii tetrabib. 2. Sermon. 2. c. 9.
And therefore Philotimus did very perperly as well as cunningly consider the
case, when a Patient of his could not be persuaded that he had his Head
remaining upon his shoulders, but gave it over for lost, by advising a heavy
Leaden Cap to be made for, and put upon his Head, the great weight of which Cap
soon convinced the Melancholic person, that he had a Head on still. The Poison
of a Tarantula is more properly Cured with Music than Medicine. And in many
cases Dexterity and Artifice, Common Prudence and Discretion are much more
requisite, and prove more beneficial, than the best Remedies which can be
Prescribed.

CHAP. XVII.
The Excellency of Physic, and how it becomes Contemptible. Of the Honor
ascribed to Hippocrates by Greece. Of Quacks in general. Mountebanks how
despised in other Countries, and how Respected in this. How Pontaeus his Man
took Aqua Fortis before the Physicians at Oxford; and of the Mountebank in
Covent Garden, his taking Arsenick. The consequences of such Impostures. How
Pontaeus his Man did wash his hands in Scalding Lead. Two Stories showing the
ridiculousness of the common Divinations by Urine. How far, and in what respect
the Inspection of Urines is to be allowed. A Statute of the College concerning
Urines. Linacer's way of scoffing at the Urine-messengers. A Divination by
smelling at the Shoe. Of the Polonian Quacks knowing the Pox by three hairs of
the head. Of the Prognostication of Life and Death by an Astrological Figure.
The Conclusion.

I (...). Hippocr. Lex.
Physic is (in reality) the most excellent Art that is; but by reason of the
Ignorance of many that (pretend to) Practice it, and by reason of the rude, and
false estimation which the common people do make concerning its Professors, it
is now (in some Countries) become one of the Vilest of all others. Since
Hippocrates his time, that Great Hippocrates, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 37.
who by his admirable Skill, foresaw a dangerous Pestilence like to fall upon
his Country, and therefore did in good time disperse his Scholars over Greece,
with instructions how to oppose it with seasonable Remedies, and for that
remarkable Service, all Greece did consent to bestow the same Honors upon Him,
as had been given before to Hercules, since that time, I say, the World has
been pestered with many different broods of Empiricks, which have made greater
Desolations of Mankind, than ever the Plague could have done to Greece. They
have been not only a shame and scandal to the Profession of Physic, but even a
Reproach to Humane Reason, that those who are esteem Rational in their nature,
as they are Men, should nevertheless degenerate into a more than Brutish
Stupidity, by not at all distinguishing between a True Physician, and a grossly
Ignorant Quack, between the Real Preservers of their Health, and their both
Secret and Open Murderers. No man can be Free of the most Servile Trade, but he
must Serve an Apprenticeship for diverse years, and yet there is not a Mechanic
so mean, so ignorant, so simple, or so good for nothing, but when Idleness and
Laziness have disenabled him from Living by his Trade, he shall in one Minutes
time, without any other Preparation for his New Calling, besides a Receipt, and
a Stock of Impudence, set up for some Retailer to the Art of Physic. His
Extreme Ignorance is his very best qualification, and that which shall more
Certainly recommend him to the peoples Favor, than if he understood Greek and
Latin, than any Laborious and Necessary Education to Physic. For the more
grossly Ignorant the man is, the better (they think) his Receipt must needs be;
having nothing else to recommend him besides his mere Remedy, they will the
less doubt the Intrinsic Goodness of that.

Mountebanks in other Countries are despised as the very Dirt, they are not
only the Scum, but even the Scorn of the common People, and though possibly
they may get Money enough abroad, and upon that account may be allowed to hold
up their heads, yet their very Profession, being esteemed the most palpable
Cheating and Lying, gives them a contempt, which they can never afterward
surmount. But here in England the case is altered, many a Mountebank has not
only fleeced the poor people of their small Sums, which they most freely
contribute for the pleasure of being thus deluded, but they have the peoples
Hearts in kindness, and their Caps in reverence to them; they shall Honor a
pitiful Mountebank equally with a Physician, nay some are so Sottish as to
give the Impostor even a precedence of favor.

Therefore that the World may know a little of these men, which they have not
heard of perhaps before, I shall revive the Memory of our Famous Pontaeus;
Famous not only for the Sums he picked up by this kind of Artifice, but for the
Reputation and Honor which he gained to the Mountebanks base Trade, and who
alone may be thought to have had more Real Knowledge, as well as Cunning, than
whole Shoals of our Modern Tribe. I shall describe both the manner of his
giving Rank Poisons, and the Method of his Man's washing his hands in Scalding
Lead, and leave you thereby to judge, whither his Antidote, which he
recommended by the one Exploit, were in reality the better for it, and whither
his Ointment or Balsom, which he recommended by the other, were the more
Excellent against Burns, for what he showed upon the Stage.

It is known, that Pontaeus, the first Mountebank that ever appeared on a Stage
in England, made a Challenge to the Physicians at Oxford, to prepare for one of
his Servants, the Rankest Poison that they could contrive, and he should
venture to take it before them all, publicly upon his Stage. The Physicians
upon Consultation agreed to give him a quantity of Aqua Fortis, as thinking
that his Stomach must be a good one, which could resist so Powerful a
Corrosive, a Corrosive that could dissolve all Metals besides Gold, and could
eat through an inch-board. Pontaeus his man takes it cleaverly off, to the
amazement of all Spectators, and to the unspeakable praise of his Masters
thereby Popular Antidote.

Now the Mystery of all was thus: Pontaeus Prepares the Fellow, with forcing
down no less than two or three pounds of the Freshest Butter that could be
made, and after he had thus sufficiently greased his Gullet, and his Mouth was
armed against the Poison with a good gobbet of Butter, he swallows it down
almost as Innocently as a Glass of Wine. But he was taught to fall down as
Dead, and as such was carried off the Stage, to be put into a warm Bed, and to
experience his Masters Antidote; when he was once in private, he soon
discharged up the Aqua Fortis; for having good store of Warm Water, and more
Butter ready provided, the first did serve to dilute, and the other to blunt
sufficiently the force of the Corrosive Spirit; and so after a few minutes
Vomiting, the man was as sound, and heart-whole, as another, and had little
need of other Antidotes, than what he had taken already. But nevertheless the
next day he appeared on the Stage again, the people behold him as a man Risen
from the Dead, their hearts yearn to see him again, and joyfully congratulate
his Recovery. The Antidote is then magnified with a stronger Argument than
Reason can answer, and let Physicians say what they will against it, people
will, and think they may safely enough believe their own Eyes. Whereas in
reality this Antidote proves but a piece of Legerdemaine, and Black-cherry
Water would have been as much a Preservative against the Poison, as the
Antidote its self. For the Butter and Water were the true Alexipharmick; the
one kept off, and the other washed off the powerful Corrosive Spirit. But he
was not so dull a Hocus, as to let his Trick be seen through. It was the man's
Part to Act and show to the best advantage, it was the Peoples Part to See, and
to Wonder.

Another Mountebank very lately in Covent Garden, and Lincolus-Inn-Fields, did
alarm the Wonderment of the common people, by the taking of Arsenick, in order
to the vending an Orvietan. It seems he could not be persuaded to venture upon
Aqua Fortis, as probably not understanding so well how to Prepare his body, as
the Italian Pontaeus had done before him. But that this German did proceed in a
like, though not so good a Method as Pontaeus, may be judged from this, that so
soon as the Mountebank had taken his dose of Arsenick, and retreated to his
Chamber, in order to take a Nap (as he said) during the rencounter of the
Poison, and his Orvietan; so soon as the people were dismissed, the Neighbors
in the next House heard such a noise in the Quacks Chamber, as plainly
discovered the Operation of an Emetick, rather than any design (as he
pretended) of Sleeping.

Now it is a thing well worth the consideration of Public Authority, whither
such gross Delusions, upon the Simplicity of the common People, deserve to be
rewarded with Countenance and Profit, and whither fatal consequences may not be
apt sometimes to follow, if a Credulous, or Ignorant, or over-bold person,
should in his Drink, or in a ridiculous Frolic, make trial of the Virtues of
this man's Orvietan, with a much smaller quantity of Arsenick, or if one that
has happened to take Poison by some accident, should neglect the proper means of
Physic, and put all to the trial of his Mountebank's Remedy.

Again, if a man should have seen Pontaeus Acting the following Force, who
could have doubted the Goodness, and more than ordinary Excellence of his
Ointment against Burns, and Scaldings? He causes a fire to be brought upon the
Stage, and a Vessel placed upon the Fire, full (they say) of Melted Lead. One
of his Fellow is appointed to wash his hands in the Lead, as it is poured out
upon them. The Fellow understands his Part very well, makes sower faces, and
roars and squalls as if he were to be killed outright, but flinches not from
the matter, until every body has seen enough; and that he might be sure not to
flinch from his Office, the man's hands are manacled together, that he might
not, if he would, seem to draw off, but yet left in such liberty, that he might
wash them freely. Then (poor man!) he must appear a very lamentable Spectacle,
but the Ointment is soon applied to his Scalded Hands, and they are swathed up
very deliberately, as if his Wounds were little less than Mortal. And yet after
all, this Counterfeit is no more hurt than you are, and the Ointment might as
well have been applied Behind, as where it was put; and the whole Mystery was
thus; a quantity of Quicksilver was just set over the fire, in a Ladle painted
Red round about, as if it were Red-hot, and something added to raise a little
steam, which was to appear to be derived from his Scalded Hands, the man holds
Vermilion concealed in each hand to give them a Scalding Color, while he
washes, and what through his trembling and woeful behavior, and what through
the great consternation that appeared in the whole Crew, one would almost Swear
the man were half killed. But every body minds his Office, the Ointment being
applied, the parts carefully swathed, and the Fire and Lead being taken off the
Stage, Merry Andrew entertains the Spectators, and the rest of that day goes on
at the usual rate. In the mean time the Counterfeit washes the Red off from his
hands, he greases them a fresh with the Ointment, and they are swathed up as
they were before. Next day he appears again upon the Stage, mingles with the
jovial Company, and truly finds himself much better already, which encourages
his Master now to see how it does, when all of a sudden, a manifest Miracle is
discovered to the people, the Green Ointment has Cured his hands already.
Proclamation is aloud made, and so now it is high time to recommend the
Precious Medicines, the like being never known to the World before, and all is
merely for the good of people, which all Mountebanks wish abundantly more to,
than to what they (good men!) despise, their own Profit and Interest. These two
Relations an Inquisitive Friend of mine communicated unto me, and assured me,
that he had them from Pontaeus his own mouth; who being Ancient, and incapable
of going on with his Old Trade, grew so free, as herein to open his mind
without any Reserve. This he did privately unto two of his Familiar Friends,
the one a Physician not long since deceased, the other a very Eminent
Surgeon now living.

Nor have Mountebanks on Stages been the only Physical Impostors, there have
been as bad a race of Deluders, both Men and Women, who will, or have
undertaken to tell all things from the Urine, and the poor people, who hardly
know, quid distant era lupinis, are thoroughly convinced of their Skill, by
some cunning Stratagem or other. Forestus writ an Excellent Treatise, De
incerto ac fallaci urinarum judicio, to undeceive the World in this respect. I
shall give you a Story or two out of that Good Author.

A couple of Quacks, De incert. urin. judic. lib. 2. c. 4.
being grown very indigent, and wanting a present Sum to supply their
extravagancies at Dort in Holland, agreed thus; the one was to imitate the
Doctor, and to give judgment upon Vrines, the other was to haunt the Taverns,
and thus to proceed among the Tippling Companions; he tells them of a rare
Artist that was come to Town, who had such profound Skill in Vrines, that he
could tell how many several people should piss in the same Pot, that if he did
not do it exactly, he would willingly pay all the Reckoning, but if he did, he
then desired to escape scot-free. They all agreed, and join their Symbola
together in the same Pot, and while they were finding out an old woman to carry
it, the Confederate Rogue makes six marks in the Pot, as signifying the number
of persons. The Woman carries the Urine to the trial, and the Piss-prophet very
gravely declares the persons to have been Sir. The Fame of this egregious Skill
soon fled round about the Town, and there was hardly a Person but had some
question to ask over the Vrinal, his Chamber was flocked to from morning 'till
night, and in a few days they did the business they came thither about.

Lib. 2. c. v.
A Country Fellow carries Urine to a Physician, who presently inquires, whither
it were not his Wives Urine; Yes, says the Countryman, but do you see nothing
else in it? look well Sir. The Physician peering upon it, and seeing it was
sound and good, said he suspected some outward pain in the body. You have hit
right, Sir, says the Countryman, but whence did she get the pain in her side,
which is now black and blew with it? the Physician hearing that, and imagining
the part could not be so affected, but with some blow or fall, asked whither
she had not fallen? the man wondering how he should know that, says he, Master,
if you can but tell me from what place she fell, I shall account you the
bravest Doctor that ever I met with; the Physician admiring the man's
stupidity, and thinking what kind of Houses such dull Souls lived in, said that
she fell from some Beam, or else down Stairs. Ay me, says the Clown, but if you
could tell me how many Stairs she fell, I would cry you up above all the World.
Here the Physician could not forbear smiling to purpose, at the man's
Simplicity, and thinking such kind of Animals do'nt use to have Stairs very
high, says he, she fell perhaps twelve Stairs. To whom the Clown, look well
Sir, for there must be more. The Physician then recollecting himself, that the
weather was very Frosty, told him, the way he came was slippery, did not he
stumble as he came, and so spill some of it? The man, wondering at the Skill of
the Prophet, cried, Sir, I did fall by the way and spill some. The Physician
then very gravely and stemely concluded: Friend, in the place where you fell,
you must look the rest of the Stairs, for in the Pot I cannot find'em.

It would be too long to insist on the simplicity and folly of those who carry
Vrines to and fro, and the Knavery of those Quacks, or Ill men, who give
countenance to their fond opinions. The Inspection of Vrines in some Diseases,
and in the Patients house, where other Signs and Symptoms can be thoroughly
considered withal, is one part of a Good Physician, and what he ought not to
be ignorant of; but the mere Inspection of Vrines, carried about to Impostors
and Diviners, without the concomitancy of other circumstances highly relating
to the true knowledge of a Disease, is a gross Prevarication, and most unworthy
of the Profession of Physic, and that sincere dealing which ought to be
expected from men of such excellent understanding, and so Good an Education as
our Art requires.

The Statutes of our College are most Candid and Ingenious in this point: Cap.
de Converfat. morali.
Statuimus, and ordinamus, ut nemo, sive Socius, sive Candidatus, sive
Permissus, consilii quidquam impertiat veteratoriis, and impostoribus, super
urinarum nuda inspectione, nisi simul ad aegrum vocetur, ut ibidem, pro re
nata, idonea medicamenta ab honesto aliquo Pharmacopola componenda praescribat.

And the Juglings and Artifices, by which Quacks and Empiricks do delude the
Vulgar, in pretending to know all Diseases by the mere Inspection of the Urine,
have been excellently well laid open in a small, but smart Treatise, Printed
for Ben. Thrale in Cheapside.
called the Piss-Prophet, or certain Piss-Pot Lectures.

Linacer a famous Physician, David Edguardus de judiciis and praecognitionibus.
who lived in the time of Henry the Eighth, was even then so much concerned at
the ridiculous humor of Nurses, and other Women, who upon every ailment both
great and small, were too too ready to carry about the Patients Urine,
expecting they should be told all things from the mere speculation of it, would
often advise them in ridicule, to bring the Patients Shoe, instead of the
Urine, and he would Prophecy full as well over that. Nay farther, there were a
sort of Knaves in his days, who considering how well the Vulgar would relish
any thing of Novelty, though never so Absurd, would undertake to make
Discoveries of Diseases from the Smell of the Patients Shoe, as Solemnly and
Seriously as others from the Urine.

But to manifest how grossly our present Age can be imposed upon by the most
Absurd Pretensions, we may call to mind a late exploit of a certain Polander,
as he called himself; for he thought his own Country, Ireland, too near to be
enough admired, and therefore than a Polish undertaker would sound better among
us, because more Rare and New. This man for a short time, made Noise enough
with his trudging to Westminster Hall in a Scarlet Gown, with Outlandish
Whiskers, and Red-ink Bills, cut after a new fashion. He pretended to tell
people whither they had the Pox or no, by looking on three hairs of the Head.
And this so grossly absurd, and most ridiculous contrivance, by the great virtue
of its being New, did presently carry the day from the other Quacks, and he was
followed by a great many people to know whither they had not what they had
often, it seems, deserved. Nay, they say that diverse Persons, who had escaped
perhaps too well in their Adventures, were so over-wrought upon by this bold
Impostors Lying, that they could venture themselves into a brisk Course of
Physic, to Cure their deluded Fancy. Now I have happened to be in company with
some of those very persons, who set up this man with so strange a contrivance.
It seems he being with others over the Bottle, complained very heartily that he
must needs in a short time go for Ireland or Scotland, but had not Money to
defray his Journey. Come, says a man of Cunning, I Will teach thee how to get
Money; and with that this egregious Mystery was put into Mood and Figure, and
too exactly suited to the humor of our People, some of which can love Novelty
as much as their Meat and Drink.

The way of determining both Life and Death, by the uncertain Rules of an
Astrological Figure, has sometimes more fatal consequences, than we are
commonly aware. I have known some Patients of mine brought even to Death's
Door, by a Bold Positive Sentence from the small evidence of an Ill Figure, who
might otherwise have escaped sending for me, to know the event of their
overruling Prognostic. The Artist, upon view of the Scheam, has Positively
determined, that they must dye. And if they had not found the Heavens more
Propitious, by Inclining them to send for Better Advice, they might fairly have
quitted the Stage of the World, before the Stars did really intend it. I have
dispossessed their foolish Fancies of the grounds of that False Sentence, and
by the Application of proper Remedies, have set them up again as they were
before, notwithstanding the Saturnine menaces, and malevolence of the Horary
Questions.

Now it may properly be said to all these Deceivers, In Rudente Act. 5. Scen. 2.
what the Comaedian Plautus did formerly in one of his Plays: Gr. Quid tu, number
Medicus quaeso, es? La. Imo aedepol una litera plus sum quam Medicus. Gr. Tum
tu Mendicus es? or if you will, Mendax. La. tetigisti a^^u.

Reason and Argument will never be able to silence the false Pretensions, or to
hinder the Practices of the Emepirical Tribe. It is now their Trade, and they
will follow it as long as they can; for thus they can live lazily without
Labor, in an Art that is in reality most difficult to attain, but which these
men have acquired, like Beasts, by mere Instinct. Authority indeed may
effectually interpose, and relieve the Public in these Extreme cases, with
proper, and those Extreme Remedies. And we have no reason to despair, but the
due Execution of our Good Laws on all Offenders of this nature, which is now of
late followed by our College with a more than ordinary care and vigor, will
in a short time sufficiently discourage all pretended Physical Impostures.

THE INDEX.
A
ACID Spirits, p. 75. Dismal effects from them, 76. Those Spirits dulcified,
78. Agues whither not Cured by Physicians before the knowledge of the Cortex,
167. How Idiots could Cure them before that time, 172. How many of them are
often Cured more safely than by the Cortex, 176, 177. How they are sometimes
Cured by diverse silly things, 299. Galen's way of Curing Quartans, 180. That
one and the same Remedy cannot be a proper Cure to all sorts of Intermittents,
181. Alkali Salts, 85. Natural Alkalis recommended, 86. Aloes censured, 295.
Antimony over-commended by whom, 112. Undervalued by others, 113. Those
Physicians, who at first did so, vindicated, 114. Physic though indebted to
it, and Mercury, yet considering all things, might have done better without
them, 115. Crude Antimony its virtue, 119. Improperly called Crude, 120. Its
Emeticks, 121, 122. Its safer Preparations, 123. That Antimonium Diaphoreticum,
and its other Diaphoreticks, do in time turn Emetick, or Cathartick, 122. Aurum
Fulminans, 47. Aurum Potabile, what place it ought to have in Physic, 39.
B
BEzoar how a Cordial, 313.
C
CHalybeats, 146. Preparation of the body before the use of them how necessary,
153. How people come to be prejudised against them, 154. Sal Chalybis, and
Chalybeate Syrups, 157, 158. Dr. Willis's Preparation of Steel described, 150.
How used, 153. Another excellent Preparation of Steel, 155. Preparation of it
without Acids better to some, than with them. ibid. whither Purging ought to be
omitted during a whole Chalybeate Course, 162. Characters and Charms, how they
come to Cure Diseases, 298, 302, 307. A remarkable Observation concerning their
effect among the Moors, 305. Chemistry defined, 30. Its Inventors, 8. Cholick,
an excellent Remedy in it, 208. Compound Remedies, why necessary, 284.
Conjuraton, its Art why to be esteemed a mere Imposture, 308. Correctives with
Purgers, their benefit strongly urged, 290. Cortex now the greatest Panacea,
165. The Prince of Plants, 168. In what Agues it is admirable, 169, 177. And in
what Agues an improper Remedy, 181. Why other Methods ought in prudence to be
sought, 178. Ill accidents from its over-liberal use, 182. Not like to last for
ever in the same Reputation, 186. In what Diseases it has been tried, 187. Its
virtue how promoted, 188. A Distinctive Sign to know the true Cortex from
Adulterates, 189. Best given in substance, 191. Crocus Metallorum, 121.
Curiosities to be avoided, 220.
D
DIstillation, 60. Distilled Waters, 62. What things yield not their virtues in
Distillation, 66. Distillations in a Reverberatory, whither they urge forth the
true and natural virtue of things, 68.
E
ELeosacchara, 81. Emeticks, what difference between the strong Vegetable, and
the strong Mineral Emeticks, 116. Why so good a Remedy, 251. Empiricks their
best qualification, 317. The Polonian Empirick, 329.
F
FEbrifuges of diverse sorts mentioned, 180. That of Riverius spoken to, 174,
175. Fernelius not the best Practicer, though one of the best Galenists, 34.
Fire how far useful in the preparation of Remedies, 72. The Reverberatory Fire
described, 73. That Fire can add to the weight of some Medicines, 81.
G
GOLD whither a Cordial or not, 41. Gout, 227. Imprudently left to the course
of nature, 228, 233, 234. The Author's vindication of himself in this
Particular Disease, 228, 229, 230. The Gout, and a Fit of the Gout,
distinguished, and described, 231. The Cure of both to be different, 232. In
the Fit what to be first done, ibid. Why men are prejudiced against outward
Applications, 235. Repellents and Narcoticks their danger urged, 235, 236. that
Repellents and Astringents are not good in any kind of Gout, nor even Cold
things ever safe, 237, 238. Parts how weakened, 239. Narcoticks most Dangerous,
240. Empirical Oils considered, 241. Their Waters, 242. And their Plasters,
243. Proper Topics of what kind they ought to be, 244. Catharticks when to be
used, 245. And when not, 246. Bayrus, the supposed Author of the Caryocostinum,
his case considered, 246, 248. Venesection in the Gout, to whom sometimes
Useful, and to whom always Dangerous, 249, 250. Emeticks why so good a Remedy,
251. Sudorificks, 252. That the Proper Cure of the Gout is only Prophylactick,
253, 254. What to be thought of Nervous Medicines, 255. The Cure by
Evacuations, why preferred, 257. Whither Bacchus and Venus be the common Causes
of it, 258, 265. Three Aphorisms of Hippocrates hereunto relating, commented
upon, 259. The Cure by Diet considered, 267, 273. Relations in favor of Diet,
268. Answered, 275. That those who are troubled with the Gout, are seldom men
of common understandings, 270, etc. Over-thoughtfulness a general cause of it,
ibid. Of the Milk-Diet, 278.
H
HElmont, 24. A conclusive passage of his against Mineral Preparations, as not
conducing to long life, 26. Hiera's their kinds, 294. Hiera Diacolocynthidos,
its excellency recommended, 294. Hippocrates how honored, 316. His judgment of
Vehement Remedies, 125.
I
JEsuits Powder, vid. Cortex. Idiosyncrasia's to be observed, 210. Imagination,
its force in Curing Diseases, 301, 312. Its force in causing them, 310. Address
in Curing them, 311, 313. Iron preferred before Steel in Physic, 146. The
Mineral Iron no bad Remedy, 148. That Iron, and its Rust, have no Venomous
quality, 158. Its use, 161. Why it Mystically has signified Wisdom, 161.
K
HVmane Knowledge how really little, 223.
L
LItharge commended, 147.
M
SIR Theodore Mayern recommended for a Chemist, 27. An excellent custom of his
worth our imitation, 28. Mercury, 89. Whither a Poison or not, 94, and 105.
Whither the Pox may be Cured without it, 95. In what Diseases it is used, 96.
The unprepared recommended both in Infusion and Substance, 102. Its Mineral
Vapor how injurious to the Nerves, 103. It preferred before Mercurius dulcis,
107. Mercurius Dulcis sometimes counterfeited with Arsenick, and the
consequences of it, 91. No Panacea, 109. To what bodies it agrees, or disagrees
most, 110. Metals more Innocent in themselves, than after Preparation, 44.
Milk-diet in the Gout, 278. Milk-waters improperly distilled, 64. Minerals
never divested of their primitive nature, 177. That we cannot be too cautious
in their use, 118. Mineral-waters natural Blessings, 134. Mithridate, 291. How
little it and Venice-Treacle are used in France, 293. Mithridates how excellent
a Prince, 291. Mountebanks, their mean condition abroad, 317.
O
Opium, why thought by some to be a Cordial, 192. Advise of Sir John
Micklethwaite concerning Opium and Venaesection, 193. Why esteemed Cold, or
Hot, and why both, 195. Whither a Poison or not, 196, 202. That it actually
destroys the Spirits, 197. The Turks use of it no vindication of its Innocence,
199. What ill effects it has, and how even upon them, 201. Whither the Crude
ought to be preferred before the Prepared, 203. A good Succedaneum to our
Laudanum sometimes, 205. the Torrefaction of Opium commended, ibid. In what
cases Opiats may be useful, 206. Their abuse, 207. Septalius his good counsel
about them, 212. And Galen's decision about Anodynes, ibid. Oils Distilled, 67,
78. Their danger, 79.
P
PAracelsus, a short account of his achievements in Physic, 15. His Remedy to
make a man Immortal, 107. Philosophy, how far useful to Physic, 36.
Philosophers Stone, whither possible to attain, 52. whither Rational to seek
after it, 56. Penotus an instance of its Folly, 59. Physicians applying
themselves to one Disease, a Custom heretofore, 216. How far followed by the
Author, 225. The Custom descanted upon, 217, etc. How happy 'twould be for men,
if they followed their true Genius, 222. Difference between a Physician and a
Quack, 69. Physic, its excellency, 315. Pilulae Pacificae, a good Preparation,
described, 204. Pontaeus, how his man did take Aqua Fortis, 319. and how he
washed his hands in scalding Lead, 322. The consequence of such Imposturs,
ibid. Preparations why called Benedicta, or Blessed, 121.
Q.
QUercetan a good Chemist, 29.
R
RAbell's drops, 140. Regulus of Antimony, from which the Cup and Pill so
famous heretofore, 120. Remedies, how they come to succeed one another in point
of Reputation, 166. That mere Remedies cannot properly be said to Cure
Diseases, 185. Though they be never so Powerful, 210. Of Simple and Compound
Remedies, 281. Six Great Remedies too much magnified in Physic, 97. The
Natural preferred before the Artificial, 156, 157. The Providence of God, in
those that are Natural, urged from a remarkable Story concerning Manna, 135.
Diseases to be Cured by Remedies, not by Eloquence, 33.
S
SAffron, an excellent Cordial, 159. Whither much of it will Kill, 160.
Sigills, and Magical Images considered, 303. How they may contribute to the
doing great things, 304. Paracelsus his Sigills, 306. Simples, why to be
esteemed the more proper subject of Medicine, than Metals and Minerals, 12.
Sleep, the difference between Natural, and the Artificial, procured by Opiats,
198. Snail-waters not well Distilled, 63. Solomon had the true Philosophers
Stone, 11. Sublimate Corrosive how it has been given inwardly, 71. and 108.
Superstition its prevalency, and its inconvenience, 309. Sympathetick Powder,
both Simple and Compound, described, and how used, 141, 143.
T
TArtar, the present state of its Cream or Crystals, 150. Why more prudent to
prescribe the Crude, than the Crystals, 152. Theriaca Andromachi, or Venice
Treacle, 285. Its excellency, 286. That it may be administered in greater
quantities, than usual, in other cases besides Poison, 288. Galen's way of
distinguishing the true sort from the false, 289.
V
VEnaesection, how lightly used in France, 193. Vitriol, its Praise, 127. A
great mistake about its Crudity and Depuration, 129. The Crudest Vitriol we
have, no bad Vomit, 131. How given, 138. It virtue, 140. The Mineral waters a
good commendation of Native Vitriol, 133. That it is no Poison, 137. Its Spirit
no Panacaea, 139. The infusion of Green Vitriol, 143. Volatile Spirits, 82. Of
the fixing Volatile Salts, and Volatilizing Fixed Salts, 83. Urine, the common
Divinations by them exposed, 325, 329. In what sense the inspection of Vrines
is to be allowed, 328. The same confirmed by our College, ibid. Useful things
better known than many things, 224.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol. Dr. Cary's Chronoligical
Account of Ancient Time. B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.
Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis. Hobbs's Leviathan. Lord
Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Sir Will. Dugdale's Baronage of England, in 2
Vol. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Guillim's display of Heraldry with large
Additions. Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in
2 Vol. -- Account of the Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire
Thynn. Herodoti Historia Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons
with his Life. The Laws of this Realm, concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
Recusants, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, explained by diverse
Judgments, and resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by
Will. Cawley Esquire. Josephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Figures.


QVARTO.
Dr. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English. Bishop Nicholson on the Church
Catechism. Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of
Nature and the Christian Religion. Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections.
Bibliotheca Norfolciana, sive catalogus Lib. Manuscript. and impress. in omni
Art and Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Norfolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro
scientia naturali promovenda donavit.


OCTAVO.
BIshop Wilkin's Natural Religion. Lord Hollis's indication of the Judicature
of the House of Peers in the case of Skinner. -- Jurisdiction of the House of
Peers in case of Appeals. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of
Impositions. Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological History continued on Roots. Dr.
Brown's Religio Medici: with Digbies Observations. Dr. Tillotson's Rule of
Faith. Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient, in reference to
Physic and Physicians. Organon Salutis: or an Instrument to cleanse the
Stomach. With diverse new Experiments of the Virtue of Tobacco and Coffee: with
a Preface of Sir Hen. Blunt. Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in
Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account of all his Works, by
Dr. Tho. Tennison. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of
England. Sir John Munson's Discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right. The
History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York, Octavo.


DVODECIMO.
An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason, written by M. Clifford Esquire.


VICECIMO QVARTO.
Pharmacopoeia Collegii Londinensis Reformata.


Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons, never before extant. Dr. Crawford's serious
expostulation with the Whigs in Scotland, Quarto. An Historical Relation of the
Island of Ceylon in the East Indies: By Capt. Knox, a Captive there near 20
years, fol. Alphonsus Borellus de motu Animalium, In 2. Vol. Quarto. Sir James
Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military Essays of the Ancient, Grecian, Roman and
Modern Art of War, Fol.


FINIS.

