A Strange Relation Of the Sudden and Violent TEMPEST, Which happened at
Oxford May 31. Anno Domini 1682. Together With an Enquiry into the probable
Cause and usual consequents of such like Tempests and Storms.

Printed for Richard Sherlock Booksellour in Oxford. ANNO. DOM. 1682.

Animadversions upon the late sudden Tempest, which happened at Oxford on the
Thirty First day of May last past.
THose Accidents which are least expected, are either most dreadful, or most
admirable: That which is common is contemned; and familiarity makes men disgust
the most Noble, because Usual, works of God. The Occurrence of unexpected
Casualities breed Terror; of unfrequent Wonder: This overjoys the Ears: That
overwhelms the Mind. Here then I have a Subject will exercise the faculties of
both Soul and Sense; If you have a mind to hear what former Ages have been
seldom acquainted with, if to understand what later times may justly
deprecate; I shall faithfully publish the Relation, and seriously examine the
Events, of a late Accident, which may respond to both your desires. It Is
pleasant to scann the variety of Natures operations, but grievous to pry into
her Cryptick Machinations. The Tempest was amazing in facto, but will be
terrible in futuro; 'twas repentine and violent, but will be significant and
notable: But to the business.

Upon the 31 of May last. The Morning was calm, serene, and clear, at Ten of
the Clock an uncouth and intense Heat of the Sun seemed to scourge the moistened
Plains, as if He would have redeemed in a moment the continued Bathings They
had been so long plunged into, by the quick and penetrating strokes of (...)
redoubled Beams. This continued till about a quarter of an hour after Noon;
when presently a steady and soft Wind seemed to dislodge from his Back,
South-VVest, or South-west by South.
and hoord up several Clouds and Vapors not far from our Zenith; Having
obser'vd this, I forthwith erected a Scheme, and beheld the Position of the
Heavens; from which I had no sooner learnt the impending Event, but immediately
the presaged Storm came out of hand to attest the veracity of my judments.

A miraculous, dismal, and hideous Storm followed: First, a Cataegis, or
rushing murmur was heard in the upper Regions, which anon was felt in the
lower: A huge, blustering, and boisterous Wind descended with such vehemence
and irresistible force, that it proved inimical to ancient Trees and antique
Edifices; was dangerous, if not destructive, to Wayfaring Men, and out-laying
Cattle; 'twas thick, and black, and with such violence reflected upon the
Ter^^^^ous Globe, that thereby it wheeled, and contorted it self into such
windings, that it hoised up, and as it were absorbed, the more subtle, light,
pulverized and dry particles of the Terrestrial bodies, which had been divided
and separated by the preceding Ardour of the Sun's scorching beams; these
opacous particles were so gross and many, and so variously tossed in our
Atmosphere, they denied Us our Meridian Luster of the Sun; for thse beams the
upper Clouds transmitted, They terminated: So that without a contradiction, we
might have asserted a Solar Eclipse, at two Signs Elongation of the Luminaries.
Whereas other Subitaneous and Erratick Winds (as they call them) are usually
distinguished into three Species, Arist Meteor.
The Typhon, Prester and Ecnephias; This Thyella or Storm is reducible to none,
but includes them all; The first blast was like the Ecnephiae, which are the
effect of distracted and shattered Airy Clouds; Typhon proceeds from the
Fumigation of the clashing Vapors; and Prester is a Whirlewind intermixed with
Fire, which were all visible in the time of this Storm's continuance. And the
concomitant Thunder was no less astonishing, then the described Wind: for
besides the frightful Claps at every Eruption, the Lightening was deadly,
ruinous, and powerful* the Fulgur quick and Crispisulcant, and appeared several
times to compose and distort its self to the Form and similitude of an Oxe's
Horn* otherwhiles to the likeness of the Pyramidical flame of a burning Torch,
or indeed not much unlike the Spiritual Cloven Tongues: This Coruscation
comprehended those three Kinds of ominous and pernicious Sceptoe's: viz. Arist.
Met.
The Psoloes, fuliginous; killing and destroying the tender Herbs: Arges,
rapid; blasting and smutting the hopeful Fruits: and Elicias, morbiferous; and
lineally composed according to the forementioned Figures. Lastly, the Rain was
thick, strong, and ponderous; its fall caused the tender Scions as it were
reverence it, and bow to its presence; several of the Drops were extended to
the full Breadth of a Six-penny-piece, which also followed one another so
closely that They seemed one continued Spout or Stream; so that in less then
half a quarter of an hour, these pouring Cataracts raised the water in a round
and uniform Vessel of about 4 foot Diamiter, near two Foot higher then before,
without the asistance of any other interfluent Rivulet, or commixing water.
Hesiod in his Theogonia decyphers a fictitious Tempest ad amussim, with all the
expressive Terms that Horror and Amazement can invent: But Truth delights in a
plain Dress; such in Reality was This, as I have here described it; whose more
immediate and direful effects, are sadly evident in several Instances, as in
the Subversion of Bridges, the Discussion of Walls, and Demolition of Houses;
the Despoliation of some Trees of their Boughs, and others of their Fruits, the
Eradication of newly sown Seeds, the Exsiccation of those more deeply rooted,
and a general either Deprivation or depravation of the Radical and vivificating
moisture of all Trees, Herbs, Fruits and Plants: what the Wind left, the Rain
beat down; and what That spared, the Lightening struck: these are Tokens too
evident.

Again, it was easy by a slight Animadversion to understand the Malitiousness of
this Tempest, even from sensitive perceptions: You might have smelled the
Vapors in their Descent, abounding (and therefore infecting subjacent Bodies)
with Stench and Corruption: You might have beheld an unusual Proreption of
Animalcles out of the Bowels of the Earth, hunting and searching about for
Food, as sensible of some convenient Aliment, which they commonly extract out
of corrupted matter: You might have tasted a vicious juice or moisture
adhereing to the leaves of Vegetables, afterward incorporated therein, and
remaining a sure Ground for the Generation and Nourishment of Insects,
Caterpillars etc. When the Vivific Energy of the Sun shall more powerfully work
upon Them.

Now because such Events, with the vulgar, are usually sealed immediato Dei vel
Daemonis Digito, with the immediate Finger of God or the Devil, I shall essay
to demonstrate this Phenomenon to be the mere Result of Secundary Causes, and
to salve it from the common Observation of such like Contingencies, and the
plain Operation of Physical Causes.

For consider: I suppose the Integral parts of all Sublunary Bodies, as the
mixed Bodies of Earth, Water etc, to be minute, slender, slight, and slippery,
and accordingly as these parts are mingled and intertexed one with another. The
Body is constituted Fluid or Solid etc: But I conceive, the Fluid Bodies are
composed of Oblong, Solid Bodies of variously figurated, Particles; Now these
Parts or Particles being Themselves compounded (according to the Corpuscularian
Philosophers) of Self-moving Atoms, are either continual Movents or feasible
Movables: However, it is certain that by the diversely qualified Irradiations of
aspected Planets, and chiefly of the two Luminaries, these Minute Particles are
actuated or put in Motion; by which Motion or Agitation They are caused to
ascend Upwards, without any inclination of their own; Because They find no
other place, Cartesius Meteor.
To or By which they may more easily continuate their Motion, for their Natural
Downwards is obstructed by the Earth; Just as the Dust being trampled upon, and
put in Agitation by the prancing Feet of Coursers, assays Upwards, although it
have much more of an Internal Principle to retard such Motion. Those which are
called Vapors are the parts of Fluid and more light Bodies, wherefore their
Ascent is easily soluble; But the Exhalations, which are parts of Solid and
more gross Bodies, I suppose to be wheedled Upwards, being complicated in the
Embraces of Ascendant Vapors. These Vapors then, being, as I said, agitated
by the Influence of Celestial Bodies, are yet more forcibly struck and moved by
the Intense Sun beams, as is manifest by Their then more frequent and apparent
Ascent: And although they be Oblong, yet in Their Ascension seem Globular, because
of their ready and quick circumgiration, whereby They impel one another; till
at length this Motion begin by little and little to languish and decay, when
once, above the Atmosphere, they lose the Sun's reflex beams; and so at last,
by the cold of the middle Region, cohere and stipate more close together; yet
not altogether destitute of Motion, but retaining a Self-inflecting Activity,
effectual to the conglomerating and reducing Them unto mutual Amplexes;
whereby, together with contrary Winds assistant to the Unition and Conjunction
of their Vagabond parts, They concresce into Clouds. Whence it is evident, there
are these causes prerequir'd to the Generation of Clouds, viz. The Superlunary
Influence to exhale Vapors; gentle Winds to conjoyn Them; and sufficient
Frigidity to congeal Them: which must all be duly contempered; and which never
so jointly and proportionally concur, as in the Spring, and hence proceeds the
frequent Alteration of Weather in that Season.

But because I said, that Exhalations were carried aloft by their Adhesion to
Vapors; it is to be noted how they are separed in the Superior Regions; for We
observe that some Clouds are wholly Airy, others Watery, others Fiery, etc.
which manifestly denotes That Exhalations and Vapors are sometimes separated:
Which will appear if we consider their Gravity or Levity; for it is plain that
often times the Gravity of Exhalations may stop their Course, and stay them
behind, while the Light Vapors ascend higher; or sometimes They may be left
alone, while That impells Downwards the more Volatile Vapors from them, which
is not effectual to the moving of Them; or lastly They may be distinguished by
the constant Agitation of the Winds, like Butter from Milk.

Now therefore these Airy, Fiery, and Watery Clouds have large Superficies's
considering their Matter, as Sense can testify; and therefore are suffulted by
the Air's Resistance, lest they should descend, even against their own
Inclinations: but by the supervening Heat, and perhaps other Qualities of
Celestial bodies, some (or all) of their Particles are Liquefacted, or
otherwise prepared, and thereby unite the rest together more closely and
compactly, and consequently become more Heavy (for ponderosity proceeds from
the smallness or Paucity of Pores) till at length their own weight press and
force them downwards; being adjuted sometime by an Impulse of the superior,
sometime by a Recess of the inferior Air; through which they are strained, and
as it were sifted, so that accordingly as That is more laxe or presst, the Rain
or Wind are greater or less; or as They connect with Analogus Vapors or
Exhalations occurring in their Descent.

Thus you have seen in brief, the Manner of the Ascending and Cohereing of
Vapors, the Impending and Descending of Clouds. All this happened to this
Storm by a signal and sudden Concurrence; it was Signal, because Boisterous;
Sudden, because Vnobserved.

The preceding Serenity, Clearness and Emptiness of our Air, was the Reason,
why the brisk, quick, and stated Southern Winds disburthened themselves here so
fast of their Clouds (collected, exhaled and concreted in Foreign Countries)
because of that Resistance was in the stuffed Air (circumscribing this pure Air
of ours) less capable of admitting such grossly-coherent Clouds, being cloyed
with such like before: or perhaps several opposite Winds blowing at the same
time from opposite Plages (as has not been seldom observed) might terminate in
Ours, and so Impell hither, dislodge themselves, and pile up, in our Vertex,
several Clouds of different Contextures and Composures: and hence the Storm was
made up of the Extremes of Wind, Thunder, and Rain.

Amongst these Clouds being thus comping'd and penned up (on the South and
West, by their proper Winds, on the East and North by the Closeness of the Air)
the Celestial Powers bred intestine broils, and tumultuous Strivings, whereupon
Each meditated their Exit downwards, through the Lower Regions of the Air,
being less Stipated, and more yiedling, then the other Circumambient: And This
with the more Impetuosity, because of the more agitated (not rarefied*)
Particles, As the Peripateticks. assert.
conspiring all to a Motion Deorsum, both by Natural Tendency, and Influential
Impression; and with Difficulty overcoming obvious Remora's.

So, the Whirlwind was caused when an Aerial and Superior Cloud was dilated,
(that is when his little, long Particles put on a brisk and circular Motion,
which required more Room then when they were almost quiet and still) by
Superlunary Agents, and forcing his way through some narrow chink of an
Inferior Cloud, where it found least resistance, descended as it were
perpendicularly and from the Zenith; The manner whereof may be rarely exhibited
in an Eolipile.

The Thunder was generated by a Tabulated and Compiled Order of Oblong Clouds,
the Superiors of Which, being forcibly condensed by Celestial Beams, and by
that Condensation gravitated, and by that Gravity violently detruded upon those
subjected Clouds, caused a mighty Sound by their Impinging and Atrition
thereupon, which rebounded in the Atmosphere; And because the Exhalations were
partly inflammable (such are the Spirits of Metalls, the Effluvia's of Sulphur,
Arsenick, Nitre, Ammoniack, Bitumen, Mercury, Camphire, Vitriol, Antimony and
such like, abounding in the Bowels of the Earth and emissed by Subterraneous
Fires) therefore, I say, by this Elision and Attrition of the Clouds, Fire or
Flame was accended; which Flame has us^^lly those Effects, which are consequent
to the Natures of the Exhalations or Vapors, whereof the Cloud is composed.
The forementioned Variety of the Shapes of this Flame or Coruscation, I
conjecture, to have born some Analogy, with their respective parts of the
Superior striking, and clashing Cloud.

The Rain was generated by the hasty Resolution of an Inferior Cloud, whose
ponderous Ingredients promoted its Descent; The largeness of the Drops
proceeded partly from the other Vapors which coupled with them in their Rode
to the Earth; but chiefly from the compactness of the Cloud, which may be said
rather to have been broken in pieces, then resolved into parts: or perhaps,
what is very probable, one watery Cloud fell upon another; so that in joint
Forces both mutually conspired to a Descent, and the drops of the one, mixed
with those of the other.

Lastly, the ready Cessation of this Storm was caused by the few, but forcible,
strokes of the Superior upon the Inferior Clouds, which presently either
totally dejected, or dissipated Them.

Here suffer me to take a short digression, and make a parallel. We had a
great, mighty, rushing Wind a few days before, the Apostles on the very day of,
the Pentecost; That was Defluxus Caeli, This Exhalatio Terrae; That really came
down from Heaven, This apparently; That filled only one place, This especially
one; That happened where the Apostles and Disciples were gathered together,
This where God's Ministers, Christ's Disciples are chiefly resident; That when
men of different Nations were dwelling at Jerusalem, Foreign Ambassadors.
This when men of different Countries were commorating in England: That brought
Cloven Tongues, This their Similitude; Those represented (with the Prophet) the
Tongues, the best Member we have, Psalm. 108. 1.
These (with the Apostle) the worst Member we have; James 3. 6.
That filled the Disciples Hearts with the Holy Ghost, This the Peoples Hearts
with Holy Thoughts; That caused Amazement, This Terror; That was a certain
Seal of his first comeing in the Flesh, This may be a probable Sign of his
second comeing in Glory; That was a Token of the plentiful Harvest of the
Gospel of Christ, This of the scarce Crop of the Fruits of the Ground: The Sum
of all is; That as the Spiritual Tempest was God's Ordinance and Method to
prepare men for the Reception of the Holy Ghost, So this Natural one to awaken
them to the Work of Repentance.

Thus I have endeavored to trace out, and solve the unexpectedness of this
Tempest; In all which I do not recur to that self-moving and subtle matter,
which the Cartesians so much dote upon; but allow the Celestial Influences to
be the Principle Efficient, and Primary Movent in all such Accidents. For the
Position of the Heavens did evidently manifest this Tempestuous Weather; and
it was only the promising Sudum, made it unaccountable to the Vulgar, and the
precedent Serenity of the upper Regions in our Zenith; which was permitted
until the more effectual and continued darting of the Stellar beams upon the
suddainly-coagulated Mass of Vapors; which after due, prepared, and sufficient
operations, dissolved, disheveled and hurried Them downwards; And the more
forcibly, because the more perpendicular Rays of the Planets produced this so
repentine Effect.

We find Mars, Sol and Mercury were pofited in Gemini, where they had all some
Essential Dignity just without the Cusp of the tenth house in the South South
West Plage of Heaven, whence all this Storm arose; and we had all the rest of
the Planets in or about medium Caeli in such an Hubbub and confused manner, as
it was impossible but some notable Effect should quickly follow; Observe the
Congruity of this Position with the Storm, which seems to have been governed by
the Influences of the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Houses: The beginning of the
Tempest was Wind, wherefore in the Ninth House we had the two Planets hot and
dry by Nature, together with Ambiguous Mercury, in an Airy Sign: The middle was
part Thunder, but most Rain, wherefore in the precise Tenth House we had a
moist Planet in a Watery Sign; The end was most Thunder and part Rain, so in,
and upon the Cusp, of the Eleventh House were the Planets (some of an hot and
dry, others of a moist Nature) in a Fiery Sign; So that in all things the Storm
was consonant to the Triplicities then possessed by the Planets.

But as the Storm was rare, so its Effects, or rather Events, will be no less
admirable: The Summer, I judge, will be pestered with many Showers, and
abundance of disturbing Southerly Winds; Expect Diseases more rife; an
universal Scarcity of wholesome, but Plenty of Noxious Fruits. Autumn will
abound with Rain unusual, and Sickness Epidemical; a Soultry, Dark, Cloudy and
Unwholesome Season; and such unconstant Weather, that the Husbandman will find
it difficult to make the profit recompense his Labor this year: And to gather
empty Husks will be as great a Loss to him, as Grievance to the whole Nation.
The Fields will be either scorched by interfering Ardour, or drowned by
continual Moisture.

These are my Sentiments upon this unusual Accident; which seem to be more
Ratified, by the preventional Comet, and postventional Conjunction; of the One
I have already spoken, of the Other I intend to treat.

Search the Annals, and you may find what has been the usual Consequents of
such like Tempests. Such an one happened in the Sixth of Hen. 3. Raph* Holins.
whereupon followed a Dearth, an Earthquake, and a Comet. So in the Fifteenth
of Richard 2. March 5. a sudden and terrible Tempest arose, with the violence
whereof much hurt was done, after this ensued great Mortality by Pestilence, so
that much Youths died every where, in Cities and Towns in passing great
Numbers, herewith followed a great Dearth of Corn, so that a Bushel of Wheat in
some places was sold at Thirteen-pence, which in those days was an exceeding
great price: So in the Sixteenth of the same, were several such Tempests,
whereby the Corn was spoiled, a Plague followed in Essex and a Dearth in
Cambridge; And in the Fifth of Q. Mary was a signal Tempest of Wind, which
Our's equaled in violence not in continuance, and thereupon followed a great
Mortality in the next Harvest, by Quartanes and other Epidemical Rotts. But
more Instancies would be as unnecessary as tedious.

This therefore is the Flagellum Dei, to scourge the People's pride by blasting
their Felicity: This is the denounced Wrath of God, to bring down their high
minds by lopping of the Staff of their Bodies: But oh what Energy, what
prevalency might a sincere Ninivitical Humiliation have against the Powers of
Heaven! How might it wrest and extort Mercy from God, and avert these impending
Catastrophies! which that you may all speedily set upon, is the hearty Desire,
and earnest Prayer of

Your Friend and Servant --


