APHORISMS POLITICAL.

The Second Edition Enlarged, BY James Harrington.

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the Sign of the three Gilt
Cups in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

APHORISMS Political.
I. THe Errors and Sufferings of the People, are from their Governors. II.
When the Foundation of a Government comes to be changed, and the Governors
change not the Superstructures accordingly, the People become miserable. III.
The Monarchy of England was not a Government by Arms, but a Government by Laws,
though imperfect or ineffectual Laws. IV. The Later Governments in England,
have been Governments by Arms. V. The People cannot see, but they can feel. VI.
The People having felt the difference between a Government by Laws, and a
Government by Arms, will always desire the Government by Laws, and abhor that
of Arms. VII. Where the spirit of the people is impatient of a Government by
Arms, and desirous of a Government by Laws, there the spirit of the people is
not unfit to be trusted with their Liberty. VIII. The spirit of the people of
England, not trusted with their Liberty, drives at the Restitution of Monarchy
by Blood and Violence. IX. The spirit of the people of England, trusted with
their Liberty, if the form be sufficient, can never set up a King; and if the
form be insufficient, (as a Parliament with a Council in the Intervals, or two
Assemblies coordinate) will set up a King without Blood or Violence. X. To
light upon a good man, may be in Chance; but to be sure of an Assembly of good
men, is not in Prudence. XI. Where the Security is no more then Personal, there
may be a good Monarch, but can be no good Commonwealth. XII. The necessary
Action or Use of each thing, is from the nature of the Form. XIII. Where the
Security is in the Persons, the Government makes good men evil; where the
Security is in the Form, the Government makes evil men good. XIV. Assemblies
legitimately elected by the People, are that only Party which can govern
without an Army. XV. Not the Party which cannot govern without an Army, but the
Party which can govern without an Army, is the Refined Party, as to this intent
and purpose truly Refined; that is, by Popular Election, according to the
Precept of Moses, and the Rule of Scripture: Take ye wise men, and
understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over
you. XVI. The People are deceived by Names, but not by Things. XVII. Where
there is a well-ordered Commonwealth, the people are generally satisfied.
XVIII. Where the people are generally dissatisfied, there is no Commonwealth.
XIX. The parties in England declaring for a Commonwealth, hold every one of
them something that is inconsistent with a Commonwealth. XX. To hold that the
Government may be managed by a few, or by a party, is inconsistent with a
Commonwealth; except in a Situation like that of Venice. XXI. To hold that
there can be any National Religion or Ministry without public Indowment and
Inspection of the Magistracy, or any Government without a National Religion or
Ministry, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth. XXII. To hold that there may be
Liberty, and not Liberty of Conscience, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth
that has the Liberty of her own Conscience, or that is not Popish. XXIII.
Where Civil Liberty is entire, it includes Liberty of Conscience. XXIV. Where
Liberty of Conscience is entire, it includes Civil Liberty. XXV. Either Liberty
of Conscience can have no security at all, or under Popular Government must
have the greatest security. XXVI. To hold that a Government may be introduced
by a little at once, is to wave Prudence, and commit things unto Chance. XXVII.
To hold that the Wisdom of God in the Formation of an House, or of a
Government, goes not universally upon natural principles, is inconsistent with
Scripture. XXVIII. To hold that the wisdom of man in the Formation of an House,
or of Government, may go upon supernatural principles, is inconsistent with a
Commonwealth, and as if one should say, God ordained the Temple, therefore it
was not built by Masons; He ordained the Snuffers, therefore they were not made
by a Smith. XXIX. To hold that Hirelings, (as they are termed by some) or an
endowed Ministry, ought to be removed out of the Church, is inconsistent with a
Commonwealth. XXX. Nature is of God. XXXI. Some part in every Religion is
natural. XXXII. An Universal Effect, demonstrateth an universal Cause. XXXIII.
An universal Cause is not so much natural, as it is Nature it self. XXXIV.
Every man, either unto his Terror or Consolation, has some sense of Religion.
XXXV. Man may rather be defined a Religious, then a Rational Creature; in
regard that in other creatures there may be something of Reason, but is nothing
of Religion. XXXVI. Government is of humane Prudence, and humane Prudence is
adequate unto Man's Nature. XXXVII. The Prudence or Government that is
regardless of Religion, is not adequate nor satisfactory unto Man's Nature.
XXXVIII. Where the Government is not adequate or satisfactory unto Man's Nature,
it can never be quiet or perfect. XXXIX. The major part of mankind gives it
self up in the matter of Religion unto the public leading. XL. That there may
be a public leading, there must be a National Religion. XLI. Where the minor
part takes away the National Religion, there the major part is deprived of the
Liberty of Conscience by the minor. XLII. Where the major part is deprived of
the Liberty of Conscience by the minor, there they will deprive the minor of
that Liberty of Conscience which they might otherwise enjoy. XLIII. In Israel
there was an endowed Clergy or Priesthood, and a National Religion under
Inspection of the Magistrate: whence the Christians in Apostolic Times,
defraying their own Ministry, could have Liberty of Conscience; whereas if the
Christians by going about to take away Tithes, and abolish the National
Religion, had endeavored to violate the Consciences of the unconverted Jews,
these being far greater in number, must needs have taken away the Liberty of
Conscience from the Christians. XLIV. Paul in Athens could freely and
undisturbedly convert Dionysius and others; therefore in Athens there was
Liberty of Conscience: but if Paul and his Converts had gone about to drive
Hirelings, or an endowed Priesthood or Clergy out of that Church, who sees
not that the Athenians would have driven Paul and his Converts out of Athens?
XLV. That there may be Liberty of Conscience, there must be a National
Religion. XLVI. That there may be a National Religion, there must be an endowed
Clergy. XLVII. Commonwealths have had their ways of Union. As the Athenians,
by bringing their Confederates unto Subjection. As the United Provinces, by an
equal League. Or as the Romans, by an unequal League. The first way is
tyrannical: In the second, one Commonwealth under the League, is no more then
another, and each one as to her self has a Negative: which kind of Union, is
not only obstructive, but tends (as we have seen both in Holland and Switz)
toward Division. In the third way, the Commonwealth uniting other
Commonwealths, retains unto her self the leading of the whole League, leaving
unto each of the rest her own Laws, and her own Liberty. XLVIII. Till a
Commonwealth be first framed, how such a Commonwealth should make an effectual
Union with another Nation, is not possible to be seen. XLIX. The new,
unpractised, and heretofore unheard of Union, (as it is vulgarly spoken) with
Scotland, by uniting Deputies of diverse Nations, not in a Council apart, or by
way of States General, as in the United Provinces, but in the standding
Councils of some one Commonwealth in the League, is destructive to Liberty both
in England and in Scotland. L. If the Commonwealth of England receive Deputies
from Scotland in a greater number then that of her own, she receives Law from
a foreign Interest, and so loses her own Liberty. LI. If Scotland be received
in an equal number, it obstructeth the freedom of both, or occasioneth War or
Dissension. LII. If Scotland be received in an inferior number, she receives
Law from England, and so loses her Liberty. The like is understood of Ireland.
LIII. Whereas a well-ordered Commonwealth should give the Balance to her
Confederates, and not receive it from them. The Councils in which diverse others
are thus united, though in a far inferior number of Deputies, yet if these lie
in wait, or lay their heads together, may be overruled, obstructed, or
over-balanced by foreign interests. LIVE. Where Countries are diverse in their
Laws, and yet are to receive Laws one from the other, neither the Commonwealth
giving Law, knows what to give, nor the Commonwealth receiving Law,
understands what she receives: in which case the Union returns unto Force
or Confufion. LV. The best way of holding a Nation different or not different
in Laws, is the Roman, that is, by way of Province. LVI. A Province, especially
if she have strong holds, may by defraying of a small guard, be kept unto a
just League, and for the rest enjoy her own Laws, her own Governmeut, and her
perfect Liberty: other ways of Union, will be found more chargeable, and less
effectual, on both sides: for if England have no Army in Scotland, Scotland
will receive no Law from England; and if England have an Army there, her hold
consists not in the Union, but in the Force. The like is to be understood of
Ireland. LVII. If a Country be very small, and not able to subsist of it self,
as Wales, it may be safely united and held: but the advantage that Wales has
in participation of all Magistracies and Offices, is not that which England is
able to afford unto such a Country as Scotland, without subjecting her neck
unto the yoke. LVIII. The order of a Commonwealth requires, that it consist,
first, of a Civil; secondly, of a Religious; thirdly, of a Military; and
fourthly, of a Provincial Part. The manner of uniting Provinces or different
Nations, appertains unto the last part; and in the formation of a
Commonwealth, to begin with that first, which is naturally last, is to invert
the order, and by Consequence the Commonwealth, which indeed is nothing but
order. LIX. Where there can be any other Government, there can be no
Commonwealth. LX. Where there can be a Commonwealth, what tumults soever there
happen, and which soever prevail, there can be no other Government; that is to
say, without foreign invasion, which throughout, I must be understood to
except. LXI. If Sir George Booth had prevailed, he must either have introduced
a Commonwealth, or have restored a King. LXII. If a King were restored, he must
either govern by an Army, or by Parliaments. LXIII. A King governing now in
England by an Army, would for the same Causes find the same effects with the
late Protector. LXIV A King governing now in England by Parliaments, would
find the Nobility of no effect at all. LXV. A Parliament where the Nobility is
of no effect at all, is a mere popular Council. LXVI. A mere popular Council,
will never receive Law from a King. LXVII. A mere popular Council giving Law
unto a King, becomes thereby a Democracy, or equal Commonwealth; or the
difference is no greater then in the imperfection of the Form. LXVIII. A
Commonwealth or Democracy to be perfect in the Form, must consist especially of
such an Assembly, the result whereof, can go upon no interest whatsoever, but
that only which is the common interest of the whole people. LXIX. An Assembly
consisting of a few, may go upon the interest of one man, as a King; or upon
the interest of one party, as that of Divines, Lawyers, and the like; or the
interest of themselves, and the perpetuation of their Government. LXX. The
popular Assembly in a Commonwealth, may consist of too few, but can never
consist of too many. LXXI. In every Commonwealth there has been a popular
Assembly. This in Israel at the least consisted of twenty four thousand, upon a
monthly Rotation. In Athens, Lacedemon, Rome, it consisted of the whole
Citizens, that is, of all such as had right in the Commonwealth, whether they
inhabited in City or Country. In Venice it consists of about two thousand. In
the Province of Holland only, which contains eighteen or nineteen
Soveraignties, the Popular or resolving Assemblies consist at the least of five
hundred Persons: these in the whole Union, may amount unto five or six
thousand; in Switz I believe they come unto a greater number. And the most of
these Assemblies have been perpetually extant. LXXII. If the popular Assembly
consist of so few, and so eminent persons as are capable of any orderly debate,
it is good for nothing but to destroy the Commonwealth. LXXIII. If the popular
Assembly consist of so many, and for the greater part of so mean persons as are
not capable of debate, there must be a Senate to help this defect. LXXIV. The
Reason of the Senate, is, that a popular Assembly rightly constituted, is not
capable of any prudent debate. LXXV. The Reason of the popular Assembly, is,
that a Senate rightly constituted for debate, must consist of so few and
eminent persons, that if they have the result too, they will not resolve
according unto the interest of the people, but according to the interest of
themselves. LXXVI. A popular Assembly without a Senate, cannot be wise. LXXVII.
A Senate without a popular Assembly, will not be honest. LXXVIII. The Senate
and the popular Assembly being once rightly constituted, the rest of the
Commonwealth will constitute it self. LXXIX. The Venetians having slain diverse
of their Dukes for their Tyranny, and being assembled by such numbers in their
great Council as were naturally incapable of debate, pitched upon thirty
Gentlemen who were called Pregati, in that they were prayed to go apart, and
debating upon the Exigence of the Commonwealth, to propose as they thought good
unto the great Council; and from thence first arose the Senate of Venice, to
this day called the Pregati; and the Great Council, that is, the Senate and the
popular Assembly of Venice: and from these two arose all those admirable Orders
of that Comwealth LXXX. That a people of themselves should have such
understaning as when they of Venice did institute their Pregati or Senate, is
rare. LXXXI. That a Senate or Council of Governors having supreme power,
should institute a popular Assembly, and propose to it, though in all reason it
be the far more facile and practicable, is that which is rarer. LXXXII The
diffusive body of the People is not in a natural capacity of judging; for which
cause, the whole judgment and power of the diffusive body of the People must
be entirely and absolutely in their collective Bodies, Assemblies or
Representatives, or there can be no Commonwealth. LXXXIII. To declare that the
Assemblies or Representatives of the People have power in some things, and in
others not, is to make the diffusive Body, which is in a natural incapacity of
judging, to be in a political capacity of judging. LXXXIV. To bring a natural
incapacity of judging, unto a political capacity of judging, is to introduce
Government. To bring a natural incapacity of judging, to such a collective or
political capacity of judging, as yet necessarily must retain the interest of
the diffusive Body, is to introduce the best kind of Government. But to lay any
appeal whatsoever from a political capacity of judging, to a natural incapacity
of judging, is to frustrate all Government, and to introduce Anarchy. Nor is
Anarchy, whether imposed or obtruded by the Legislator first, or by the People,
or their Demagogues or Incendiaries afterward, of any other kind whatsoever,
then of this only. LXXXV. To make Principles or Fundamentals, belongs not
unto Men, unto Nations, nor unto humane Laws. To build upon such Principles or
Fundamentals as are apparently laid by GOD in the inevitable necessity or Law
of Nature, is that which truly appertains unto Men, unto Nations and unto
humane Laws. To make any other Fundamentals, and then build upon them, is to
build Castles in the Air. LXXXVI. Whatever is violent, is not secure nor
durable; whatever is secure or durable, is natural. LXXXVII. Government in the
whole People, though the Major part were disaffected, must be secure and
durable, because it waveth Force, to found it self upon Nature. LXXXVIII.
Government in a Party, though all of these were well-affected, must be
in-secure, and transitory, because it waveth Nature, to found it self upon
Force. LXXXIX. Commonwealths, of all other Governments, are more especially for
the preservation, not for the destruction of Mankind. XC. Commonwealths that
have been given to cut off their diseased Limbs, (as Florence) have brought
themselves unto impotence and ruin. Commonwealths that have been given unto
healing their diseased Limbs (as Venice) have been healthful and flourishing.
XCI. Athens under the Oligarchy of four hundred, was in finitely more afflicted
and torn with Distraction, Blood and Animositie of Parties, then is England;
yet by introduction of a Senate of four hnndred, and a popular Assembly of five
thousand, did thereupon, so suddenly, as if it had been a Charm, recover Might
and Glory. See the eighth Book of Thucydides; A Story in these Times most
necessary to be considered. XCII. To leave our selves and Posterity to a
farther Purchase in Blood or Sweat, of that which we may presently possess,
enjoy, and hereafter bequeath unto Posterity in Peace and Glory, is inhumane
and impious. XCIII. As certainly and suddenly as a good state of health
dispelleth the Peevishness and Peril of Sickness, does a good state of
Government, the Animosity and Danger of Parties: XCIV. The Frame of a
Commonwealth having first been proposed and considered, Expedients (in case
such should be found necessary for the safe, effectual and perfect introduction
of the same) may with some aim be applied or fitted; as to an House, when the
Model is resolved upon, we fit Scaffolds in building. But first to resolve upon
Expedients, and then to fit unto them the Frame of a Commonwealth, is as if one
should set up Props, and then build a House to lean upon them. XCV. As the
chief Expedients in the building of an House are Axes and Hammers; so the chief
Expedient in the building of a Government, is a standing Army. XCVI. As the
House, which being built, will not stand without the perpetual noise or use of
Axes and Hammers, is imperfect; so the Government, which being formed, cannot
support it self without the perpetual use of a standing Army. XCVII. While the
Civil and Religious Parts of a Commonwealth are in forming, there is a
necessity that she should be supported by an Army; but when the Military and
Provincial Parts are rightly formed, she can have no farther use of any other
Army. Wherefore at this point, and not till then, her Armies are by the
practice of Commonwealths, upon slighter occasions, to have half pay for life,
and to be disbanded. XCVIII. Where there is a standing Army, and not a formed
Government, there the Army of necessity will have Dictatorian power. XCIX.
Where an Army subsisteth upon the Pay or Riches of a Single Person, or of a
Nobility, that Army is always Monarchical. Where an Army subsisteth not by the
Riches of a Single Person, nor of a Nobility, that Army is always Popular. C.
The English Armies are popular Armies. CI. Where Armies are popular, and
exercise Dictatorian power in deposing Single Persons, and Monarchical
Assemblies, there can be no greater, nor needs any other Expedient for the
introduction of a Commonwealth. Nevertheless unto this may be added some such
moderate Qualifications as may prune the Commonwealth, not lop off her
Branches. Whom these will not satisfy, it is not a Commonwealth, but a Party,
that can. CII. If the late King had freely permitted unto the People the
exercise of the power inevitably devolved upon them by the change of the
Balance, he had not been destroyed. If either of the late Single Persons had
brought the People into an orderly exercise of the power devolved upon them, he
had been great. What Party soever shall hinder the People from the exercise of
the power devolved upon them, shall be certainly ruined: who or what party
soever shall introduce the People into the due and orderly exercise of the
power devolved upon them, shall be forthwith secure, and famous for ever. CIII.
A man uses, nourishes and cherishes his Body, without understanding it; But
he that made the Body, understood it. CIV. The reason why the Nations that have
Commonwealths, use them so well, and cherish them so much, and yet that so few
Nations have Commonwealths, is, That in using a Commonwealth, it is not
necessary it should be understood: but in making a Commonwealth, that it be
understood, is of of absolute necessity. Caput Reipublicae est nosse Rempub.
Cicero. CV. As the natural Body of a Christian or Saint can be no other, for
the frame, then such as has been the natural Body of an Israelite or of an
Heathen; so the political Bodies, or civil Governments of Christians or Saints,
can be no other, for the frame, then such as have been the political Bodies or
civil Governments of the Israelites, or of the Heathens. CVI. It shall be as
foon found when and where the soul of a Man was in the Body of a Beast, as when
or where the Soul or Freedom natural unto Democracie, was in any other Form,
then that only of a Senate, and an Assembly of the People. CVII. In those
things wherein, and so far as Art is directed or limited by the nature of her
Materials, it is in Art as in Nature. CVIII. That Democracie, or equal
Government by the People, consist of an Assembly of the People, and a Senate,
is that whereby Art is altogether directed, limited and necessitated by the
nature of her Materials. CIX. As the Soul of Man can never be in the Body of a
Beast, unless GOD make a new Creation; so neither the Soul or Freedom natural
unto Democracie in any other Form whatsoever, then that only of a Senate, and
a popular Assembly. CX. The right Constitution, coherence and proper Symmetry
of a Form of Government goes for the greater part upon Invention. CXI. Reason
is of two Parts; Invention, and Judgment. CXII. Judgment is most perfect in
an Assembly. CXIII. Invention is most perfect in one Man. CXIV. In one Man,
Judgment wants the strength which is in a multitude of Counselors. CXV. In
a multitude of Counselors, Invention is none at all. XCVI. Through the defect
of Invention, the wisest Assemblies in the Formation or Reformation of
Government, have pitched upon a sole Legislator. XCVII. It is not below the
Dignity of the greatest Assembly, but according unto the practice of the best
Commonwealths, to admit of any man that is able to propose to them, for the
good of his Country. CXVIII. Unto the making of a well-ordered Commonwealth,
there goes little more of pains or charge, or work without doors, then the
Establishment of an equal or apt Division of the Territory, and the proposing
of such Election unto the Divisions so made, as from an equal Foundation, may
raise equal Superstructures; the rest being but paper-work, is as soon done, as
said or voted. CXIX. Where such Elections are proposed, as being mad by the
People, must needs produce a well-ordered Senate and Popular Assembly, and the
People (who as we have already found by experience, stick not at like work)
elect accordingly; there not the Proposers of any power in themselves, but the
whole People by their peculiar and natural Right and power, do institute and
ordain their whole Commonwealth. CXX. The highest earthly Felicity that a
People can ask, or GOD can give, is an equal and well-ordered Commonwealth.
Such an one among the Israelites, was the Reign of GOD; and such an one (for
the same Reason) may be among Christians the Reign of CHRIST, though not every
one in the Christian Commonwealth should be any more a Christian indeed, then
every one in the Israelitish Commonwealth was an Israelite indeed.
Septem. 12. 1659.
FINIS
ERRATA.
Aphor. 47. line 1. for their ways, read three ways.


