REMARKS ON THE Affairs and Trade OF England and Ireland. Wherein is set down:

1. The Ancient Charge of Ireland, and all the Forces sent thither from 1170
until the Complete Conquest thereof in 1602 with the Returns of Forces and
Treasure which have been made thence to England, toward the Conquests of
France, Scotland and Wales.

2. The peculiar Advantages which accrue to England by Ireland: As also those
made in the Course of Trade.

3. The State of the Trade, Revenue, Rents, Manufactures, etc. of Ireland, with
the Causes of its Poverty. -- And the State of the Trade, and Rents of Lands in
England from the Reign of Ed. III. unto this time, with the Causes of their
increase and Abatement.

4. The only sure Expedients for their Advancement, with the Necessity and
Utility of the Repeal (as well as Suspension) of the Laws against Dissenters;
and the Test.

5. How the Reduction and Settlement of Ireland may be improved to the
Advantage of England, and Increase of their Majesty's Revenue; 1500000 l. may
be raised by Ireland, to the ease of England, expediting of their Majesty's
Affairs -- And how Ireland may be rendered Useful toward the retrenching the
Power of France.

By a hearty Well-wisher to the Protestant Religion, and the Prosperity of
these Kingdoms.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel, 1691.

To His Grace James Duke of Ormond, The Right Honorable, Richard Earl of
Burlington and Cork, Lord High Treasurer of Ireland, William Earl of Portland,
Sir John Lowther Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain to Her Majesty, Lords of Their
Majesty's Treasury. Richard Hambden Esquire, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Lords
of Their Majesty's Treasury. Sir Stephen Fox Knight, Lords of Their Majesty's
Treasury. Thomas Pelham Esquire, Lords of Their Majesty's Treasury. Sir Henry
Ashurst Baronet, And Sir Thomas Clergis Knight.

My Lords, and Honored Gentlemen,
THese Papers which were writ with a more private design, yet chiefly intended
for the Service of Their Majesty's and the Public, are now addressed to your
Lordships to render them the more useful to those Ends; the several Eminent
Stations in which all of you are, gives you the opportunity of improving
whatever is herein proposed to that purpose. The unhappy management of the
Affairs of Ireland on every Rebellion, has made the Charge of their Reduction
to England ten times more than needed. Cambden observed that by long usage it
was grown a mischievous Custom in Ireland, that Rebels might with part of the
Plunder they took from the English procure Pardon: Whereby, and the Lenity of
England, Rebellions were nourished there. This is most certain that the Papists
have always had such Influence on the Councils of England, as on the conclusion
of every Rebellion, they have been left in a condition to renew them at
pleasure; to the great Charge of England, and Ruin of the English Planters in
Ireland, and of their Improvements. And now, they, the French K. and the late
K. J. have their Instruments at work to that end. But five Rebellions having
been raised there betwixt 1567, and 1642. and now a Sixth, (of which two
formidable and chargeable ones having happened within the memory of many yet
living) will, if we be not doomed to Infatuation, instruct us in the necessity
of breaking their power, and utterly disabling them for future Rebellions.

There are a Party of Men who while the late K. J. was in Ireland magnified
both it, and the Force of the Irish, but upon the Tidings of the happy progress
of His Majesty's Arm, (to detract from the Glory of His Acquisitions) they
represent that Kingdom as chargeable and useless, nay as disadvantagious to
England. It has however to their Mortification already yielded Laurels to
incircle His Royal Brows, and will do Treasure to His Coffers, with a rich
Return to this Kingdom of the Charge laid out for its Reduction; if the
Settlement thereof be duly attended. It is enough for His Majesty to Conquer,
it ought to be the Care of His Ministers to settle and secure. There is indeed
a great measure of Wisdom required to improve Victories, as well as Courage and
Conduct to Atchieve them. It has been observed to be the Fate of the English
to lose that by Treaty, which they gain by Conquest; Five Hundred Years
Experience has verified it (in great measure) as to Ireland. The Affairs and
Trade of that Kingdom, its Vtility and Importance to England, and the Influence
it has on the Trade and Rents thereof, seems to have escaped the observation
of most of our Statesmen and Merchants; I have in these Papers attempted to
rescue them from that obscurity, and to lay them before Your Honors. Now that
the Affairs of that Kingdom are before You in Parliament, Councils and
Committees: For which presumption nothing can Apologize, but the Zeal for the
Public, with which they were written. I am in all humility,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most Humble Servant, W. H.

SIR, The Substance of the First of the Inquiries you Propose, concerns
Ireland; which I take to be this;
First, Whether England has been Loser, or Gainer, by the Conquest of Ireland,
the Charge considered that has been Expended thereon?
YOU are pleased to require my Answer to this and the other Queries which you
propose, presuming that my Acquaintance with that Kingdom, etc. does Capacitate
me to satisfy you therein. I confess I have made Observations that would at
least have Contributed thereunto: But my Absence from Papers that would have
enabled a more distinct and satisfactory Account of those matters, might have
excused my Disobedience, at least for the present: But being you admit not
thereof, but use the Power you have over me in commanding a speedy Compliance;
I will in Obedience briefly set down what occurs to me on that Subject; though my
Sentiments in this matter being different from many others, I foresee the
hardiness of undertaking to contradict Common-Fame, or to rectify a vulgar
Error. I have heard several, and among them some of the Famed Statesmen of the
Age, wish there were no such place as Ireland, and fault its nearness to
England as detrimental or unprofitable. As if had they been consulted, they
could have rectified the Creation, by leaving, it out, or placing it better
elsewhere. The Error lies in not apprehending its usefulness to England. Others
gravely tell us (both in Discourse and Print,) that the gaining and keeping
Ireland has cost England more than the purchase of all that Kingdom is worth.
But these are like him who paid Ten-Shillings for an Ewe, kept her Five Years,
paid Twelve Pence per Annum for her keeping, though he Yearly received her Lambs
and Fleece, yet believed he was Fifteen Shillings the worse by having her. I
confess I was once half of the mind, that the Expense of England in Blood and
Treasure about that Kingdom had been vast: My Curiosity led me to examine
whether it were so or no; and I will here faithfully impart what I have met
with on that Subject, which will at least lead toward an Answer, if not
satisfy your first Inquiry.

Know then, that the English footing in Ireland did not Commence upon a
public, but private undertaking.

For Mac-Murogh King of Leinster, having been driven from his Kingdom, gave his
only Daughter in Marriage to Richard Strongbow Earl of Chepstow and Pembroke,
and with her his Kingdom after his Death, on condition he should assist and
restore him. The Earl pursuant thereunto, encouraged his Relations
Fitz-Stephens and Fitzgerald to join in that undertaking, who with near 400
brave Men, put off from Milford, and Landed near Wexford in Ireland in May
Anno. 1170. They were soon followed by Legross with 130 more; and in August
following by Strongbow himself with 1200. Many of these Parties were Persons of
good Quality, great Valor and attended with wonderful success: For
notwithstanding the smart opposition made by the Natives, Strongbow in a short
time restored Mac-Murogh, and enlarged his Dominions to such a Degree, as
rendered him suspected by Henry II. who by Prohibiting all Commerce with
Ireland, etc. constrained the Earl to yield him all his Acquisitions in that
Kingdom. The King granted back to Strongbow the Principality of Leinster,
reserving all the Port-Towns, and certain Tracts of Land about them to the
Crown.

King Hen. himself, some write with 4500, others that were amongst 'em say but
with 500 Knights, Landed in October 1172. near Waterford; his Presence and
Fame, with the Terror and Success of Strongbow's Arms, so intimidated the
Natives in Leinster, Munster, and Conaught, that Five of their Kings on Notice
of his Arrival did him Homage; and became his Tributaries.

The greatest part of his Charge was spent in Royal Entertainments; and his
time (for the five Months he stayed there,) in endeavors so to settle matters,
as wholly in future to cut off from France the usual assistance afforded by the
Irish when Attacqued by the Arms of England. He had experimented the benefit
the Crown received without Charge by Strongbow's private undertaking; Therefore
he wisely resolved by like Methods to make that part he had gained, bear the
charge of Conquering the whole. To that end he distributed large Scopes of Land
to the great Men that attended him. As to Hugh Lacy, the Kingdom of Mead,
finding 100 Knights for his Service for ever, etc. About four Years after the
Irish yielded him, (or the King imposed) a Tax of Twelve Pence on every House,
or Yoke of Oxen there, which amounted to no small Sum in those days.

After the Death of Strongbow, the King at Oxford made his Son John King of
Ireland, and as our own Writers tell us, he divided the Lands of that Kingdom
to his Subjects, as well of England as Ireland, to be held of him and his Son
John; he gave Miles Cogan and Robert Fitz-Stephens the Kingdom of Cork to whose
Relief soon after Arrived there, Richard Cogan with a Troop of Horse and a
Company of Foot.

Anno. 1184. Philip de Breos as forerunner of the young King, went into
Ireland with a small Party of Horse and Foot; the next Year the young King
followed with no Army, yet Honorably attended, and with some Treasure. This
young Counceller (like Rechoboam's,) handled the Irish Princes that
Congratulated his Arrival, so roughly, that they were provoked to Rebel:
Whereupon Eight Months after his Arrival he left that Kingdom in a much worse
condition than he found it. King Henry's Wars in France, the unnatural
Rebellion of his Sons, and his other troubles permitted him not to relieve it;
yet to pursue his former Method, he committed the Government of that Kingdom to
the Renowned John de Courty, and gave him a Grant of the whole Province of
Vlster, then unsubdued; the Irish Princes thereof, having not hitherto owned
any subjection to England.

The Valiant Courcy with 3 or 400 of his friends and followers with the Forces
then in Ireland, not only reduced the Rebels in the other three Provinces to
their former subjection; but also brought Vlster under the English Yoke.

Richard I. was so taken up with his expedition to the Holy Land, the perfidy
of the French King, and his unhappy detention by the Emperor; That he concerned
not himself with the Affairs of Ireland, that I find; further then that he
Married Isabel, the Sole Heiress of Strongbow to William Maxfield Earl-Marshal
of England; who was also (in right of his Wife) made Earl of Pembroke and P. of
Leinster.

This Earl left Issue of that Marriage five Sons, (who succeeded each other to
their Fathers Honors and Estate, yet Died Issueless) and five Daughters, whose
Fortunes in Ireland and Wales recommended them to the greatest Pears of
England. As Joyce the Eldest to Earl Warren, who had with her the County of
Wexford, of whom came the Earls of March, etc. Matilda the second, had the
County of Catherlow, and Married Hugh Bigod, Earl of Norfolk; Isabel, the third
Daughter, had the County of Kilkenny, and Married the Earl of Gloucester and
Hereford; Sybilla, the fourth had the County of Kildare, and Married William
Ferrars Earl of Ferrars and Darby: Eva the fifth Daughter had the Manor of
Dunmas (now called the Queens County,) and Married the Lord Bruise of Gower;
whereby the Revenue of those five Counties became transmittable annually into
England. These Ladies, Cambden tells us, enriched their Husbands with Children,
Honor and Possessions.

King John having received 1000 Marks from Volois Lord Justice of Ireland, to
discharge him without account for the Revenue he had received of that Kingdom;
Soon after committed the Government thereof to Walter and Hugh Lacy, who abused
his Authority, not only to the Oppression of the Irish, but to the subversion
of many of the best English Families also, to that degree, that (our Writers
say) their Exactions, Oppressions, and Tyranny (Murders might be added) was
intolerable; yet King John instead of easing those Pressures, (if we believe
Grafton and Fabian) imposed Taxes on the People of Ireland toward his Wars
with France, much greater than they were able to bear. So that by
overstretching, he cracked the strings of the Irish Harp whereon for sometime
after was only heard the discordant sound of Revolt, Rapin and War in every
Corner. To quell which, the 25th of May 1210. The King himself landed near
Waterford with an Army (their number no where given us.) The Irish Kings, and
great Lords immediately appeased him by Submissions, Homage and Tributes. He
granted the English Subjects in Ireland the benefit of Magna Charta, and the
Laws of England. He settled twelve Counties, appointed Courts, Judges, Circuits
and Corporations as in England; he granted vast Scopes of Land to his great
English Lords, in Knight Service for small Rents. For 2500 Marks, he restored
Walter Lacy, and for 4000 Marks, Hugh Lacy, and returned into England in August
the same year. In the year 1213, being threatened with an Invasion from France,
he received from Ireland 500 men at Arms well appointed, and a great number of
other Horse, who came to his assistance at Barkham Down.

Henry III. during his 56 years Reign, was so fully employed by the French in
the Bowels of England, the Welsh and Scotch on his Borders, and his great Lords
at home, That he neither assisted, nor minded Ireland, further than to draw
powerful Assistances of men thence, which he received against France Anno 1230,
and 1254; and against Wales in 1245, in 1256, etc. as he had done of Victuals
in the beginning of his Reign, having received thence 1000 Bacons, two Ships
load of Corn, and one of Oats. The Clergy of Ireland granted him a Subsidy, and
he received Aid thence toward paying a Debt to the Dauphin of France. He made
his eldest Son Edward Lord of Ireland. The 17th of his Reign the King of
Conaught exhibited a Complaint, That although he had ever since King John
subdued him, duly paid his annual Tribute of 5000 Marks, yet he was disturbed
by John de Burgo.

Edward the First being in War with Scotland, and the Irish generally in
Rebellion, the Scots invaded Ireland, and committed all manner of Barbarities;
but were not only expelled, but followed by the English of Ireland, who
severely revenged the Injury they had received, and therein did acceptable
Service to the Crown of England.

In Anno 1293. The King drew Succors from Ireland against the French, as he
did against the Scotch, when Balliol, the Chair and Marble were taken, and the
two latter brought thence. Two years after another considerable Army from
Ireland met the King near Edinburgh, and tendered him considerable Service; as
did a third Army from thence at the Battle of Falkirk. Soon after which Tho.
Bissel with a party from Ireland invaded Scotland, and possessed himself of the
Isle of Arrain, which the King gave to him and his Heirs as an acknowledgment
of his good Service. This King received the whole Tenth of all Ecclesiastical
Revenues in Ireland for seven years, and one Fifteenth of the Temporality
toward the holy War: Also Aid toward the Marriage of his Sister, and several
times pressed them for other Aids.

The Scots soon after they had given Edward II. that great defeat at
Bonoksborne, (encouraged by that Kings Maladministration) took the
opportunity to revenge the Mischiefs they had received from Ireland in the
former Reign.

Edward Bruce twice invaded Ireland, and notwithstanding the opposition he met
with, overran and sacked a great part of it, destroyed Men, Women and
Children, Towns, Churches, and all that came in his way, and excited the Irish
to almost a general Rebellion, while the Scots King made a like havoc in all
the North parts of England.

This Edward Bruce was Crowned King of Ireland, but, though his Rage was great,
his Reign was short, it being but one year. The Cruelties committed by the
Scots were so many, as caused even the Irish to abhor and abandon them, who
therefore joined with the English, who at last defeated Bruces's Army, cut off
his Head, and as an acceptable Present sent it to King Edward.

In this War the Scots lost 30000, and the Irish-English 15000 fighting men,
besides others. The whole Land was almost wasted, impoverished and depopulated;
yet the King was so far from relieving or succouring it, That he required, and
received th^nce the ^th Penny from all the Temporality toward defending
England against the Scots.

In his 16th year, he was attended at Curlee by the Earl of Louth with 6000
foot and 300 men at Arms, and 1000 Hoblers, all well appointed; and by the Earl
of Ulster with 300 men at Arms, and in the 17th year of his Reign he was
supplied thence with 5000 Quarters of Corn sent him to Aquitain.

I do not find that there was any standing Army in pay in Ireland. When Edward
III. first ascended the Throne (nor for several years after) the whole charge
of the Civil List then amounted but to 308 l. 2 s. for a year, and it was
because the chief Governor was a great Favorite, that he had 500 l. per Annum
for his Entertainment, out of which he was to maintain twenty or thirty
Horsemen.

In the 6th year of this Kings Reign, the Lord Darcy with a potent Army from
Ireland, invaded Scotland. So that (as our Writers express it) what by the King
on the one side, and by the Irish on the other, Scotland was subdued, and
Baliole placed on the Throne. And two years after the same Lord Darcy overrun
part of Scotland, and the Isles, which he might have possessed had they been
worth keeping. Notwithstanding which, this King, the 15th year of his Reign,
recalled all the Royal Franchises and Liberties; and resumed all the Lands and
Signories that had been granted by him, or his Father; which put the English
born there, into almost as bad a Condition as the Natives, and tended to unite
them as fellow sufferers, and laid the Foundation of innumerable Mischiefs. Yet
an Army went thence to help the King then in France, and did him good Service,
and were with him at the Battle of Cressey, as did another party from Ireland
go to him, to the Siege of Calais, Anno 1347.

In 1353. Sir Tho. Rokerby carried over into Ireland ten men at Arms, and
twenty Archers* In 1361 the King made his third Son Lionel Duke of Clarence,
Lord Lieutenant; he married Elizabeth de Burgo, whose Fortune was 30000 Marks
per Annum. In her right he was Earl of Vlster, Lord of Mead and Conaught. Here
I must dissent from a truly worthy learned and scrutinous Enquirer into the
Affairs of that Kingdom; who will not allow her Fortune to be above the Moiety
of that Sum, because that what thereof lies in Vlster, being seized into this
Kings hands from the 5th to the 8th of his Reign, (by an odd account) yielded
but about 0900 l. But he neither considered the Frauds of Concealors and
Collectors, nor remembered the late devastations made by Bruce, whereby not only
all Vlster, but a great part of Ireland was laid waste and unpeopled, and the
English by Dissentions in Arms against one another, in those very years; so
that the instance affects not the Case, for those Rents and Profits were of
very great value, and might have been a thousand times more in settled times,
notwithstanding there was received no more in those three years.

This Duke carried over with him 1500 men, chiefly to recover his Wifes
Inheritance; yet he was so far from using them solely to that purpose, That he
only recovered part of Mead, and of the Seaports of Vlster; for the Condition
of the Kingdom requiring, he employed them (with good Success) in Leinster, and
Munster, therein, as in many other Respects, he preferred the public good to
his particular Advantage; in acknowledging of which, and other good Services,
the Clergy and Laity gave him two years full Profits of their Tithes and Lands.

William Winsor was sent Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and with him a party of
men; but their number (being as I suppose but small) is no where given us. He
undertook for 11213 l. 6 s. 8 d. per Annum, to bear the whole Charge of that
Kingdom both Civil and Military. During his Government he obtained 5000 l. of
the Parliaments of that Kingdom toward maintenance of the Kings Wars, which I
presume was those with France.

Richard II. Anno 1384. committed the Government of Ireland to Robert Vere,
Earl of Oxford, and Duke of Ireland, during his Life, with Power to receive the
whole Revenue without Account, and to keep an Army of 1000 Archers, and 500 men
at Arms for two years. But I do not find that either he or his men went
thither, for the Kings Affections to him were such, that he would not bear his
absence. Yet he continued Lord Lieutenant seven or eight years, during which he
constituted several Deputies, and received most of the Profits of that
Government to his own use.

The King being reproached abroad, That he could neither rule England, keep his
part in France, nor finish the Conquests of Ireland, he resolved to retrieve
his Reputation in respect of the last; To that end he took Shipping in October
1394, and landed at Waterford with an Army of 34000 Men, but to little purpose;
partly for that he suffered himself to be cheated (as were his Predecessors) by
the feigned Submissions of most of the Irish Princes, and great Lords, who on
his arrival humbled themselves Some of whom quitted all Title to their Estates
in Leinster, and conditioned with their Swords (under the Kings Pay) to carve
out Estates for themselves in other parts of the Kingdom; with which the King
was constrained to be satisfied, by reason of the Clamor and Importunity of
the Clergy of England. Whose constant hatred of Reformation, and fear that the
Enormities of their Lives, and Corruption of their Doctrines should be exposed
by the Wickl fits, caused them to send the Bishops of York and London to hasten
the Kings return. The truth is, they wanted the Royal Authority for persecution
of the Innocent, and suppression of the Truth.

To gratify their Importunity the King returned at Shrovetide or Easter
following, having sufficient Power, but not time to do any thing considerable.

At his departure he left Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, his Lord Lieutenant
who, (in right of his Wife) was Earl of Vlster, Lord of Conaught, Mead and
Clare, and next Heir to the Crown. He was murdered there four years after.

It was customary until near this time, for the Lord Chancellor to pay annually
2000 Marks into the Exchequer, for the use of the great Seal, which went a
great way toward bearing the charge of that Kingdom in peaceable times. But
the Fees being much abated, that branch of the Revenue did so too.

In Revenge of the Murder of the Earl of March, King Richard went thither again
in April 1398. with such an Army, as with their Necessaries and Followers took
up a Fleet of 300 Ships. The Irish generally mollified him by their old Method
of Submissions. The obstinate he intended to have subdued. But the Tidings that
the Duke of Lancaster (afterward Hen. IV.) was landed in England, and claimed
the Crown, called him back; so that he landed in England the 24th of June
following, and soon after (for his Maladministration) lost first his Crown
and Liberty by Order of Parliament, -- and then his Life by the hands of
Villains. The Clergy nor Parliaments of those times had not imbibed the
Doctrine of Non-resistance, or Passive Obedience, or that the Crown could not
be forfeited by Maladministration, or that it could not for the good and
Preservation of the Community be transferred, or that any Legal Possessor of it
might disseize the Subject of his Liberty or Franchises, or take away and
dispose their Estates at Pleasure.

You must know that from the time of King Hen. II. his Expedition into Ireland,
until this time, Ireland was of the same use to the Crown, that Tangier, and
the pretense of a War with France was to Charles II.

Richard II. had often, and now Hen. IV. began to desire Money from the
Parliament of England for supply of Ireland, and had a Subsidy granted for
three years of 50 s. for every Sack of Wool Skins and Woolfels from every
Denison; and 4 l. from every Stranger. Also one Tenth, and one Fifteenth for
support of his War with Scotland, relief of Calais, and Ireland; but he found
so much use for it in England, that I do not find that one Penny of it went
thither.

But on the other side, being in War with Scotland, the English of Ireland
fought the Scots in his quarrel at Sea, where many of the first were killed and
drowned.

In 1405, They took three Scotch Ships, and their Commander; and twice in
Favor of England invaded Scotland with good Success; and the same year invaded
Wales, did much harm to the Welsh, and carried away good Booty.

This King made the Duke of Lancaster Lord Lieutenant of Ireland for seven
years. He went thither in 1401. and returned into England in 1403. his
Entertainment or Salary was but 666 l. 13 s. 4 d. per Annum. And it was because
he was the Kings Son that it was so much.

So inconsiderable were the Armies that were kept up in Ireland, that it was an
honor placed on this Duke, that he was permitted to have an Army of 1500 men
in all Ireland, though many of the Irish were in Rebellion, and so frugally
were the Affairs of that Kingdom managed, that this Duke was limited to keep up
that Army but for three years.

About Lammas 1408. The Duke Of Lancaster went into Ireland a second time, and
narrowly escaped being killed by some of the Rebels. At his arrival there he
compelled the Earl of Kildare to pay him 300 Marks for his Maladministration.
He had a Tallage granted him by the Parliament of Ireland, and returned into
England next March after his landing in Ireland. Whoever looks into the
Troubles of this Kings Reign, will see that he could supply Ireland neither
with Men nor Money.

Hen. V. was so fully taken up with his Conquests in France, that he minded
Ireland no further than to draw Supplies thence, which he did Anno 1412. under
the Earl of Ormond. And in 1417 the Prior of Kilmainham with 1600 in Mail, with
Darts and Skeyns, all tall nimble men, arrived at the Camp before Rouen, and
joyfully accepted the most dangerous Post, wherein they so acquitted
themselves, that our Writers tell us no men were more praised, nor did more
harm to their Enemies: For by their Agility of Body, and swiftness of Foot,
they did more mischief the Enemy, than their barded Horses did hurt to the
nimble Irish. And in the seven years of his Reign, the French Historians tell
us, that the Irish did overrun all the Isle of France, did innumerable damages
to the French, and daily brought Victuals and Preys to the English Army, which
so terrified the French about Paris, that they fled and left the Country
desolate. The Parliament of Ireland granted this King 1700 Marks at several
times toward the maintenance of his Wars.

The English in Ireland being wasted with the Supplies they had yielded to
England against Scotland, Wales and France, and the frequent Rebellions there,
the Parliament there represented the ill Condition thereof in 1442, to Hen. VI.
and that by reason thereof, the Public Revenue was 1456 l. per Annum less than
the necessary Charge.

The Cardinal of Winchester, the better to engross the King, and that he might
rule at Pleasure, caused Richard Duke of York, Earl of Vlster to be sent Lord
Lieutenant thither; to induce his Acceptance, he gained the King to promise the
Duke all the certain and casual Revenue of Ireland, and 2666 l. 13 s. 4 d. for
the first year (to be paid out of of England,) and 2000 l. sterling per Annum
for seven years more; but this was ill paid. However he had several Successes
against the Rebels, gained the Hearts of the English, made good Laws, and
governed so worthily, That out of Gratitude and Inclination to him, he was
assisted in his Pretentions to the Crown by Kildare, and several great Parties
out of Ireland, as was the King by another Party thence under the Earl of
Ormond in the 34th and 38th years. A great Party thence was cut off, and fell
with him at the Battle of Wakefield, as many from Ireland did on the other side
at Mortimer's Cross; these great Losses furnished the Natives with
opportunities to enlarge their Borders, and streighten the English.

About Anno 1474. the 14th of Edward IV. The Parliament of Ireland erected the
Fraternity of St. George, consisting of Thirteen Noblemen, who were yearly to
choose of themselves a Captain of the Brotherhood, who for his year was to
command 120 Archers on Horseback, at 6 d. per diem, forty Horsemen at 5 d. per
diem, forty Pages at four Marks per annum, to be paid out of a Subsidy of 12 d.
per pound, laid on all Merchandise Imported or Exported. And these were all the
standing Forces in pay at this time. Six years after, Richard Duke of York
being Lord Lieutenant, the Earl of Kildare his Deputy did undertake to keep
that Kingdom in peace with eighty Archers, and twenty Spearmen all on Horseback
for 600 l. per annum.

The Infancy of Edward V. gave his unnatural Uncle the opportunity of
Murdering him, together with his Brother in the Tower, whom he succeeded under
the Title of Richard III. Anno 1483. but a period was put to his Tyranny,
Usurpation and Life in 1485.

Henry VII. held himself under no obligation to do much for Ireland, because
two walking Specter thence, (Lambert and Warbeck) disquieted a great part of
his Reign, yet in 1487. he sent over 500 Men under Sir Richard Edgcomb, (some
write that he carried no Forces with him) and about fifty more Anno 1492. The
next year after, the King by Act of Parliament there, resumed all the Crown
Lands that had been granted away since the first of Henry VI.

In the Ninth year of his Reign, he sent over Sir Edward Poyning his Deputy,
and with him 940 Men. He (by his Policy rather than force) did more Service to
his Prince, and good to the English there, than any of his Predecessors, by
gaining that Parliament to Enact, That all the Public Statutes of England,
made before that time, should be in force in Ireland, That no Parliament be
held there until the Bills be first certified to the King under the great Seal
there; and those Bills be affirmed by the King and his Council to be expedient
for the Land, and Power be given under the great Seal of England to call a
Parliament; and many other beneficial Statutes. He gained the King a Tax of 26
s. 8 d. out of every 120 Acres Arable Land, in Lieu of Purveyance, and a
Resumption of all Grants made since the first of Edward III. which in Anno
1409. was followed with a Subsidy of 12 d. per pound on Imported Commodities,
and a Subsidy from the Clergy and Laity; and in Anno 1508 he had 13 s. 4 d.
granted him out of every 120 Acres Arable Land.

In Anno 1515. The Parliament of Ireland granted Henry VIII. a Subsidy. In Anno
1520. The Earl of Surry was sent Lord Lieutenant with 200 Men, (some say 900
more) but whatever the number was, they all returned for England with him the
next year. The Soldiers pay at this time was 4 d. per diem.

In 1524. The Earl of Kildare undertook the Government, and to defray the whole
Charge of the Kingdom with its own Revenue, which he and his Deputy held with
little interruption for near ten years. Anno 1529. Sir William Skeffington
carried over 200 Men, according to some 500. In 1534. he carried over 750 to
suppress the Rebellion of the Fitz-Geralds; as did the Lord Gray 200 more the
next year, who ended it; upon which, 750 of the Army was disbanded. This
Rebellion is said to cost the King above 20000 l. The Revenue of the Kingdom by
reason of that Rebellion being but 5000 l. per annum. To repay which, or
prevent the like charge in future, The King had the first Fruits, then the
twentieth part of all Ecclesiastical Livings, then the first Fruits of all
Abbeys, Priories and Colleges, in that Kingdom given him. Kildares Estate of
893 l. per annum, and many great Estates of those concerned in that Rebellion
were all given to the King, as also all Lands belonging to all Abbeys, Priories
and Colleges there. And the Estates of many Absentees.

Hitherto the Wars in Ireland was mostly between the English, and Native Irish,
on the Score of Civil Interest. But from the time of this Kings first Divorce,
and Kildares Rebellion, the degenerate English joined with the Irish, and
pretended Religion for their subsequent Rebellions, which thenceforth became
more frequent, and more formidable, being fomented and abetted sometime by the
Emperor, sometime by France, sometime by Spain, mostly by the Pope; especially
from the time of the Kings assuming the Supremacy. Henceforward they have been
no longer Loyal, than whilst they have been compelled to be so.

In 1539. Sir William Brereton carried over 250 Men. In 1542, the Parliament
gave Henry VIII. the Title of King of Ireland, all his Predecessors having only
had the Title of Lord thereof.

In Anno 1543. the Irish Revenue (besides Customs, First Fruits, Tributes --
and some other particulars) amounted but to 8700 l. per annum, and the whole
charge to but 10500 l. The Chief Governor upon all Warlike Expedition (by an
ancient usage in that Kingdom) did Tax each County with a certain Sum of Money
to defray the charge thereof: So that it is not easy to apprehend that Ireland
at this time could be a charge to England. The standing Army was but 375 Horse
and 150 Foot. In 1544. 700 Men were sent from Ireland into France, who greatly
damnified the French, and by pretty Stratagems, contributed to the supply of
the Army with Provisions. And in obedience to the Kings commands 3000 Men were
sent from Ireland against Scotland.

In 1547. Edward VI. to secure that Kingdom (upon the Reformation of Religion)
sent thither 600 Horse and 400 Foot under Sir Edward Belingham, who with the
Forces there, subdued the Demseys, Connors, and Moors then in Rebellion,
whereby Offailie and Leixe were forfeited to the Crown.

This King being encumbered with Wars with France, and Scotland, and many
Rebellions at Home, did (as Haywood tells us) draw much people from Ireland to
serve him in his Wars. To replenish which, in the fourth year of his Reign, he
sent thither 400 men and 8000 l. And the next year the English from Ireland
Invaded the Isles of Scotland.

In 1556. Queen Mary committed the Government of that Kingdom to the Earl of
Sussex, who carried Sir Henry Sidney with him, (and 25000 l. in Cash) by whose
assistance he finished what Belingham had so Worthily begun, in breaking the
power of the Demseys, Connors, Moors etc. whereby Leixe and Offailie were
Vested in the Crown, and English Plantations settled in those parts, now called
the King's and Queen's Counties. The Irish Parliament then gave the Queen a
Subsidy of 13 s. 4 d. out of every Plough-Land for ten years, which was a great
addition to the Revenue. In 1558. This Earl had 500 men out of England, with
whom and the Forces of that Kingdom, he Invaded the Isles of Scotland, took
some, and sacked several others of them; the standing Army there, in this Reign
when most, was less than 1700. and sometimes less than 1100.

In 1560. which was two years after Q. Elizabeth's Accession to the Crown,
there was 500 Foot sent into Ireland to recruit the Army.

In 1565. The Army in the Queens pay was but 1200 Horse and Foot. The Charge of
the Civil List about 1500 l. per annum. The Revenue of Ireland surmounted 10000
l. per annum, besides large Sums frequently gained from the Irish Lords on
their Submissions and Tribute imposed on them, so that the Queens Charge could
be but small, considering that all the Freeholders on every occasion of
Marching the Army against any Rebels, were obliged to send certain numbers of
Horse and Foot, with Provisions to attend the Chief Governor, or Commander in
Chief of the Army.

This Parsimonious Queen to avoid Expense, and the sending men for Ireland,
ordered that every Tenant there that paid her 40 l. per annum Rent, should be
obliged to find a Horseman, and every one that paid 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. per annum a
Footman, Armed for her Service, to be ready on all occasions.

About this time O Donnel submitted to the Queen, and conditioned to pay 200 l.
per annum, and to attend her Army on all occasions with a number of Horse and
Foot; as did many others of the Irish, who submitted on like conditions of
Compositions, and Assistance; which not only augmented the Revenue, and
lessened the Charge of the Army, but helped much toward paying for their
Fetters. This O Donnel five years after paid the Queen 1200 l. for Delinquency
and Arrears of his Composition.

In 1565. The Valiant Captain Randolph Landed at Derry with a Troop of Horse,
and 700 Foot to settle a Plantation; he did great Service, although at last he
lost his Life in the Improvement of a memorable Victory which he obtained
against the Rebels. In 1569. Captain Ward with 400 Soldiers were sent into
Ireland; he landed at Cork.

The Queens great Study was to enlarge and firm her Conquest in Ireland,
without Charge. In order thereunto she attempted to tread in the steps of Henry
II. and several of his Successors, who gained most of their Interest in that
Kingdom, at the charge of a few of their Subjects, with little charge to the
Crown or Kingdom of England: In order thereto, the Queen in 1572. encouraged
Sir Tho. Smith at his own Charge to settle an English Colony in the Ards. She
granted every Footman 120 Acres, and every Horseman 240 Acres (which then was
as much as 500 Acres in England) paying her one penny per Acre per annum. And
the year following she Lent the Earl of Essex 10000 l. on a Mortgage, and gave
him half the Clandeboys, on condition that he should Plant 200 Horse and 400
Foot; each Horseman was to have 400 Acres, and each Footman 200 Acres, paying 2
d. per Acre Quit-Rent. Where that Noble Lord did perform many brave Exploits,
and had done much better had he not been countermined by the enmity and
opposition of several Great Men both here and there.

In 1576. An Ancient Tax called the Cess (of five Marks on each Plow-Land)
which had been discretionarily levied by the Chief Governors there, from
Edward III's. time to this, (under pretense of Prerogative) had by this time
been Arbitrarily stretched to eight or nine pounds a Plow-Land; being now
complained of as a public grievance, was reduced within its first Bounds. Yet
notwithstanding this, and other Regulations, the worthy Sir Henry Sidney who
governed there, augmented the Queen's Revenue 11000 l. per annum above what he
found it.

Until this time (according to the best of our Writers) England gained and
maintained its footing in Ireland, with very inconsiderable Charge to the
Public. But henceforward the Charge became much greater, mostly occasioned by
the Queens great Parsimony, who always employed incompetent force for subduing
the Rebellions that were raised, whereby they were lengthened to trebble the
time and charge that would else have served. I know not whether it ought to be
reckoned as expended for the Conquest of that Kingdom (though that was the Issue
of it) because the greatest part of it was occasioned by the King of Spain.

The Queen, to divert that King from attempting England, employed and fought
him in the Netherlands, mostly at the cost of the Dutch, and he to divert her
from assisting the Dutch, or Invading his Dominions, fomented Rebellions in
Ireland, and assisted them with Men, and some Money, yet fought her mostly at
the cost of the Irish.

In 1579. There was 600 Men sent out of Devonshire into Ireland, yet they made
up the Army there in the Queens pay but 1100 Horse and Foot. But the Rebellion
of Desmond and others, (and the Spaniards that joined them) did require the
augmentation of the Army. To that end three Companies were sent from Berwick,
and 150 Horse under Capt. Norris. And in 1580. Six Companies under Capt.
Berkley, and 150 Horse under C. Russel, which in 1582. were followed with 400
under the Earl of Ormond. These with the Militia of that Country, killed
Desmond, destroyed his Confederates in that Rebellion, expelled the Spaniards,
and restored such measure of Peace to the Kingdom, that the public Revenue of
it for the year 1583. amounted to about 24000 l. and thenceforward it increased
mightily, by the firm Settlement of Estates, and Enlargement of Trade, insomuch
that in 1584. the Lord Deputy proposed to the Queen, that if she would add but
50000 l. for three years, to the Irish Revenue; he would engage with both to
defray the whole Charge of the Kingdom, maintain 2000 Foot and 400 Horse, Wall
Seven considerable Towns, Erect Seven great Bridges, and Build Seven strong
Castles: But she complied not therewith.

However in 1585. In order to put that Kingdom into a good posture of Defense,
and of little Charge to the Queen; the Lord Deputy appointed a gross Survey to
be taken of the Province of Conaught and Thomond, whereby they were found to
contain 8095. Plow-Lands profitable, the Proprietors of which agreed to pay the
Queen a chief Rent of about 4000 l. per Annum, and to find 1254 Foot, and 264
Horse for the Queens Service within that Province, and 347 Foot and 108 Horse
at any time for 40 days in any part of Ireland.

A Militia also was settled in Munster of 4500 Bill-Men and 900 Shot. And the
Queen being Entitled to near 600000 Acres of Land by the Forfeitures of
Desmond and his Accomplices (his particular Rents being above 7000 l. per
Anmum) She granted those in Kerry, Conilagh and Limerick, together at 2 d. per
Acre. Those in Waterford and Cork at 3 d. per Acre per Annum Quit-Rent. Every
300 Acres finding a Horseman, and every 200 Acres a Footman Armed for her
Service.

A Militia being thus settled, the Queen in 1587. Remanded 1000 Soldiers out of
Ireland, which she sent into Holland, and that Kingdom enjoyed a kind of
tranquillity for above Twelve Years.

In 1597. Tyrone and others broke but into Rebellion: Whereupon General Norris
with 3000 Men were sent thither. But the successes of the Rebels required
greater Forces, so that 100 Horse and 2000 Foot more, were sent thither Three
Years after.

In 1598. The Government of that Kingdom was committed to Robert Earl of Essex,
with Power from England to increase the Army there (which were about 8000 men)
unto 20000 Horse and Foot. Yet this Brave, but Unfortunate Earl effected little.

The Lord Mountjoy succeeded in that Government, who with 15200 Horse and Foot
that he found there; and 2000 Men that were sent him in 1601. from England;
expelled the Spaniards, suppressed the most general and formidable Rebellion
that until then had happened in that Kingdom. And therewith finished the
entire Conquest of that Kingdom, wherein this Queen employed more Forces, and
spent more Treasure than all her Progenitors: For we are told that it cost her
Eleven Hundred Ninety one Thousand two Hundred Forty Eight Pounds Sterling,
besides the Revenue of that Kingdom.

Cambden suggests, it was the ill choice of Officers, Lenity, and Parsimony of
the Queen, and some about her, that occasioned her great Expense, for that had
the work been effectually set upon with competent Force and Treasure, it might
have been perfected with a quarter of the Charge.

The English in Ireland at this time being generally Papists, were very
backward in granting Supplies against such as broke out into Rebellion. For
though by the vigilance of the Government, many of them were awed, and hindered
from joining with those in open Rebellion, yet were their Hearts so much with
them that they not only obstructed the granting of Money to the Queen, but
parted with much to Rome, where they purchased Pardons for not Actually and
Openly joining with the Rebels. The Principles of that Religion, Teaching them,
that it was Sin not to Rob, Murder and Rebel. However the chief Governor and
Protestant Party prevailed so far, as to gain their Parliaments in the Second
of the Queens Reign, to grant her the First Fruits and Twentieth Part of all
Ecclesiastical Livings. In her 11th. Tear a subsidy, as also a Custom on Wines;
and at several times many large Scopes of Lands on the Attainders of
Arch-Rebels. The chief Governor there indeed by Ancient usage did on every
March of the Army, etc. Cess the Country discretionarily for their support,
which was some help.

The Result of what has been hitherto said is this.
That Strongbow Conquered most of the Province of Leinster. Hugh De Lacy
Conquered Mead. Cogan, Fitz-Stephens, Bruce and Poer, the Province of Munster.
Bourke and De Claro, part of Conaught and Thomond. Sir John De Courcy Conquered
much of Ulster.
That all this was done with little or inconsiderable Charge to the Crown (for
the first 400 Years, which reached to the middle of Queen Elizabeth's Reign
except in those expeditions of Henry II. King John, and Richard II. the last of
whom only, carried over an Army capable of doing any considerable Service.

The most part of that, there was no standing Army kept in that Kingdom (at the
Charge of England) except what was paid by the Irish Revenue.

That when Armies were Raised, they seldom exceeded a Regiment or two, and were
only kept up during the chief Governors being upon Service against some
particular Rebels, for at his Return to Dublin, or in the beginning of Winter
they were usually Disbanded.

That the whole Charge of the Civil List (of which I have the particulars) in
Edward III. his time, was but 308 l. per Annum. Toward the latter end of whose
Reign (in a time of Rebellion) when an Army was sent thither, the whole Charge
of both Civil and Military Lists were but 11213 l. 6 s. 8 d. per Annum.

That in 1442. That Kingdom being weakened, drained, and impoverished by the
supplies afforded thence to England; Their Parliament represented it to Henry
VI. as a mighty evidence of the deplorable condition of that Kingdom: That the
expense thereof (in that wasted condition) surmounted the Revenue 1456 l. per
Annum.

That in Edward IV. his time, that Kingdom was Defended only by the Fraternity
of St. George, who were wholly paid out of the Customs there.

That in the latter end of that Kings Reign, the Earl of Kildare did undertake
for 600 l. per Annum to keep the whole Kingdom in Peace.

That in 1543. The standing Army was but 525 Horse and Foot, and the whole
Charge of the Kingdom but 10500 l. per Annum. The certain Revenue thereof was
then 8700 l. per Annum, besides Customs, First Fruits, Tributes, etc. which
could not but make up the Revenue, so as to surmount that Charge.

That considering the numerous and frequent Supplies of Men, Provisions, and
Money that our Kings from time to time received from Ireland against France,
Scotland and Wales, it is not easy to determine whether Ireland received --
much more from England, than England received from the English Planters of
Ireland.

That for a great part of the first 400 Years, the Revenues were great; that
our English Landlords Yearly drew thence, for the Rents of the vast Scopes of
Land that they were seized of in that Kingdom.

That Ireland being almost from the first Conquest to the end of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign in a State of War, was wholly supplied with all Commodities in
a way of Trade from England, whereby this Kingdom received considerable
advantages.

That if we Allow that the Government of England has been at Ten Thousand
Pounds per Annum Charge for the Support of Ireland, from the first Conquest
thereof unto the time we are upon, (which no way appears probable) yet if the
Kingdom did Annually give Fifty or one Hundred Thousand Pounds by Trade and
Rent of Lands, (which our great Men were Seized of in Ireland;) England was
however a considerable Gainer by Ireland.

If upon the whole matter it does not plainly appear, that England has been
profited by Ireland, yet I conceive it is evident that the Conquest of that
Kingdom has not cost England the Tenth part of what most imagine, and that
through this whole Tract of time, the English there have readily, powerfully,
and nobly assisted England against all its Enemies.

Here I will conclude my Answer to your first Enquiry; in doing whereof I have
Trodden in an unbeaten Path, which rendered it the more troublesome and
difficult. I have diligently searched, and faithfully set down all the Forces
and Treasure that I find mentioned in any of our, or the Irish Writers to have
been sent into Ireland from Anno. Dom. 1170. to the Year 1602. which concluded
the entire Conquest of that Kingdom, and the Life of the Famous Queen Elizabeth.

The Second Query is, In what Instances (if any) does it appear, that Ireland
is Beneficial or Necessary to the well-being of England?
HEre, Because Generals prove little, or are liable to Cavils, I will for the
clearer Illustration instance only in such particulars shall be undeniable.

I. Consider, that England being an Island, our outward strength for Defense
against Invasion, for offense of our Enemies, and for security of our Trade,
lies in the numbers of our Ships and Seamen. That Trade that employs, also
enables the increase of these, and is necessary to our well being.

That Money that we gain purely for our Ships let to Freight to Merchants of
other Countries, is one of the clearest profits to the Kingdom, and as
advantageous to the Public as any other, not only in the forementioned
respects, but also for that we part with nothing in Lieu of this Money, but the
Labor of our Men, and the Wear and Tear of our Ships; yet hereby at the Charge
of others we increase and employ our Shipping, breed and pay Seamen. Thus the
Netherlanders by being the Carriers of Christendom have in a great Measure
raised themselves to their present opulence.

Now that I may make it evident, that Ireland Contributes to our Strength,
Security, the increase of our Shipping and Seamen, and that we are yearly
considerable Gainers in other respects also by that Kingdom; you must know that
the People of Ireland have but few Ships of their own; That at least two thirds
of their Exportations and Importations are made in our Bottoms.

In the Year 1668. I was in that Kingdom, and did see a Computation that was
delivered in to the Council of Trade there, by one of the Members thereof, who
made it out, that though the Exportations of that Kingdom about that time
amounted but to 450000 l. per Annum that yet most, or all their Commodities
being Gross or Bulkey, they paid for Freight to Ships of England for the
Exportation of them, and for Importing the Proceed thereof, 130000 l. per
Annum, which seemed incredible to the other Members of that Society. Yet being
strictly examined, it was found to be near 10000 l. short of what our Seamen
received yearly thence.

But this Scale of Trade between this and that Kingdom, having suffered a
considerable alteration by our Folly in Prohibiting their Cattle, and forcing
them to carry several of their Commodities to Foreign Markets, and thence to
supply themselves with many things that till then they wholly derived from us,
whereby they have increased their Foreign Trade and Shipping, (yet so as that
there is not Ten Ships belonging to Dublin their Metropolis)

I will now present you with a small Scheme of the Trade between England and
Ireland as it stood about 1685. before the less-considering, scented the Game
that was playing for 29 Years past for introducing Popery and Arbitrary
Government, and drew in their Stocks from Trade. There was about that time and
before constantly employed to and from Ireland, and usually Fraighted by the
Merchants of Ireland these Ships following, which belong to England.

Ships belonging to London, Plymouth, Apsom, or Exceter and Cornwall, and the
Ports between these 15 Ships belonging to Barnstable, Biddiford, Comb,
Minhead, Bridgwater, Bristol, Forest of Dean and the Ports between 70 Ships
belonging to Swansey, Milford, all South and North Wales 20 Ships belonging to
Chester, Dawpool, Nesson and Mosson 30 Ships belonging to Liverpool-water 150
of which employed in the Trade of Ireland 110 All the Coast of Lancashire and
Carlisle 5 Ships belonging to White-Haven and Workington 60 310

That you may the better comprehend the benefit we Annually receive by this
Article of the Irish Trade, I will set before you how these Ships are usually
employed in, and by the Trade of Ireland; and will set down but one Voyage in a
Year, for such as they send to America, Spain and France, though to the two
latter they frequently make two Voyages in a Year.

20 Sail employed yearly to America, one with another of 60 Tuns, besides the
Ships Store, at 5 l. per Tun, out and home is 300 l. per Ship 6000 l. 20 Sail
yearly to Spain of 60 Tuns, at 3 l. per Tun, out and home 180 per Ship. 3600 20
Sail yearly to France, of 60 Tuns at 2 l. per Tun, out and home 120 l. per
Ship. 2400 12000 l.

70 Sail of 50 Tuns each in the home Trade, out and home Passengers, these make
20 s. per Tun 50 l. per Voyage, these frequently make 8 Voyages in a Year, but
I reckon but 6 that is 300 l. per Ship. -- 21000 l.

180 Sail are yearly employed in the Coal-Trade between England and Ireland,
and that the Computation of this Article may be beyond contradiction, I will
keep to an Estimate given in to the King and Council in June last, by the
White-Haven and Workington Men, viz. That they have 60 Ships continually
employed in the Coal-Trade to Ireland, from 70 to 150 Tuns, (but I reckon them
at 80 Tuns one with another,) which for one Turn is 4800 Tuns, and for Eight
Turns in a Year, is 38400 Tuns at 12 s. 6 d. per Tun is 24000 l.

They Allege that they pay Colliers, Carters, Porters, Carpenters,
Rope-makers, Smiths, Seamen, etc. per Annum -- 7443 l. -- 1 -- 8.

And I allow they pay otherways, -- 2556 -- 18 -- 4.

Both which is 10000 l. which deducted from 24000 l. they receive 14000 l. per
Annum Freight for their 60 Sail, and reckoning proportionally for 120 Sail
more, employed in the same Trade from other parts of England and Wales, it
makes 28000 l. and for the whole 42000 l. Sterling paid yearly by Ireland for
Freight of the Coals. They take off, besides 30000 l. for the before mentioned
particulars. Here you see we Gain 75000 l. yearly from Ireland by our Shipping;
and it is evident, that whatever Trade constantly employs them, tends to their
increase, and the increase of our Seamen.

II. That Trade that Annually takes off a good proportion of our natural
Products, Manufactures, and of the Foreign Commodities that we Import (for
which we can have no Sale, or Vend elsewhere,) is necessary for keeping up the
Rents of our Lands, enriching our Husbandmen, employing our Manufacturers at
home, and our Shipping and Seamen abroad.

I have in the former instance showed you that Ireland takes off above 100000
Tuns of our Coals yearly: And if our Custom-House Books be examined, it will be
found, that that Kingdom has taken off yearly 240000 Bushels of our Salt 3541
l. of our Hops, 120 Tuns of Cider, 30 Ships Loading of our Apples, 3000 Tuns of
Iron-Oare and considerable quantities of Tin, Lead, Saffron, etc. These are
part of those I call our natural Products, which are yearly spent in Ireland,
which enable the payment and keeping up of our Rents.

That kingdom likewise takes off yearly a good proportion of our Manufactures,
as Fustians, Ticking, Haberdashery, Sadlers ware, Pinns, Needles, Knives,
Gloves, Fanns, Cutlers ware, Belts, Laces, Stockings, Fine-Cloath, Stuffs,
Iron-ware, Brass, Pewter, Glass, Earthen and Wooden-ware, Books, Castors.
Hereby our Manufacturers are kept in work, and our Tradesmen that sell these
to the Irish Merchants enriched. Besides all which, Ireland yearly takes from
us considerable quantities of the Goods which we Import from other Countries:
As Oils, Grocery, Druggistery, Raw-Silk, Cotton-Wool and Yarn, Dying Stuffs,
Paper, Whalebone, Train-Oyl, Hollands, Ozenbrigs, and Hamburg-Linnen,
Callicoes, Spices. By this Trade our Ships and Seamen (for so much) are
employed, and our Merchants enriched.

In these respects Ireland is not only useful, but necessary to England, for
were there no such place (as some foolishly wish) we could have no Employment
for the Ships lately used in that Trade. For our Merchants and Mariners being
Numerous, Wealthy, Knowing and Studious of their own profit, do supply all
known Markets, with as much of our natural Products, Manufactures, and Imported
Commodities, as they will take off at any reasonable profit; for we want not
hands, nor stock in Trace, but Trade to apply them to with any moderate
advantage.

Every days experience, or a walk in Blackwell-Hall, Exeter, Norwich Leeds,
Wakefield, etc. Markets, would make it good beyond contradiction, that the
hands at present employed in our Natural Products and Manufactures, do as Trade
now stands, more than sufficiently supply our home Consumption, and Foreign
Trade; and that, if more of these were raised in quantity, it would by glutting
all Markets, rather prejudice than enlarge our Trade; and were there no such
place as Ireland, or were it cut off from its dependence on England, and
supplied from elsewhere, we could no where Vend the Commodities that Kingdom
yearly takes off.

And a little Voyage from London Bridge to Graves-End, (even in times of open
Trade) may satisfy the doubtful, if not convince the incredulous, that we have
more Ships than all our share of the Trade of the World does constantly employ,
and a view of the Ships (formerly employed in the Irish-Trade,) which now lie
by the Walls at the Ports before named, since the Trade between us and Ireland
has been shut up, and which may be had at Freight, at little more than half
Freight; do show, that neither our Merchants, nor Seamen, know how otherwise to
employ them.

III. That Trade that supplies us with Materials for our Manufactures, (and
thereby employment for our People) especially such as we cannot have, or not so
Cheap from other Parts, is necessary to our wellbeing. In the former instance I
showed you, that Ireland takes off a good proportion of our superfluities: In
this you will see that in Lieu of part of them, it supplies us with useful and
necessary Materials for our Manufactures, and that Cheaper than we can have
them from elsewhere. We do some Years receive 6000 l. Weight of Linnen-Yarn for
Warps for our Fustians, to make into Course-Linnen, Thred-Buttons, Tapes,
Inckles, etc. 137300 Cony-Skins for Hatts, 1200 Dozen of Calf-Skins, 40000 Raw
and Dressed Hides, 373600 Goat, Sheep and Lamb-Skins, and Pelts for Glovers,
and many other uses; Tallow, 38000 l. Weight, etc. All which serve for many
uses, both Domestic and Foreign. Some Years we received from Ireland 210000,
some Years 254000 great Stones of Wool, at 18 Pound to the Stone, which (as was
made out to the last Parliament, by a West Country Member of the House of
Commons,) employs 180000 of our Wool-Dressers, Combers, Carders, Spinners,
Weavers, Dyers, Fullers, Dressers, Shears-men, Tuckers, Knitters, Calenders,
Pressers. And whereas it may be thought that the Wools of England would yield a
better Rate, were none Imported from Ireland; it is certain that the Pasture
Ground in England could not supply the quantity brought in from Ireland: And
were the quantity less than now is, work would be wanting for the Poor; or were
Wool dearer, the Price of our Manufactures would be raised, and we should
thereby be in danger of loseing our Foreign Markets for them.

IV. That Trade that furnishes as with Commodities for Foreign Markets, which
we cannot have elsewhere, is in some sort necessary for us, both for employing
our Stock, our Ships and our Seamen. The chief way whereby the Dutch greatly
enlarge their Trade, and augment their Wealth, is by buying up the Commodities
of other Countries, and carrying them in their own Ships to proper Markets.
Ireland furnishes us with several Advantages of this kind; for our Merchants
have had shipped off thence for their own Account in one year, 800 Tuns of
Salmon, 700 Tuns of Pilchards, 12000 Barrels of Herrings, 120 Tuns of Eels,
900000 Hake-fish, 1040000 of Barrel, Hogs-head and Pipe-staves, 3600 quarters
of Rape-seed, 300000 yards of course narrow-bandle Wollen-cloth, 38000 l.
weight of Butter, 1000 l. weight of Cheese, 43000 raw Hides, 800 douzen of
Calf-Skins, 25000 Barrels of Beef, 1000 Barrels of Pork, besides Leather,
Caddows, Bacon, Corn, and several other Commodities, few of which, if any,
could be supplied them from any other part of the World, or at least not so
cheap, or so conveniently as from Ireland; for our Ships in their way to
foreign Markets frequently touch, or call in Ireland for some of these
Commodities to complete the Cargoes of other Goods they carry hence, which is
of much greater advantage to our Trade than is apprehended at first view.

V. We are gainers by Ireland, in that they take our Money and pay us Interest
for it; Suppose we have but 40000 l. in Money at Interest in Ireland, (Interest
there being 10 per Cent.) it yields us 4000 l. per Annum, continued there ten
years, we have drawn thence 40000 l. for Interest, and at last we receive our
entire Principal also. But considering that Ireland takes off more of our
Commodities yearly than we do of theirs, they are obliged to send us Money, and
we having the advantage of the Exchange, we receive in Ireland 106 l. or 108 l.
for every hundred Pounds we part with in England: So that at 6 per Cent. for
exchange, we part but with 37600 l. and yet receive 4000 l. per Annum Interest
thence.

Of the same Nature and Advantage is the Rent that our Noblemen, Gentlemen and
Merchants yearly receive for their Lands in Ireland, which are yearly
transmitted thence hither. Instances of this kind are too many to be
enumerated. I will set before you some considerable Instances of Profit that we
receive from Ireland, and which that Kingdom particularly yields us in three
Schedules.

First, by Rent of Lands in Ireland, belonging to Persons that wholly, or for
the most part live in England, and are therefore frequently transmitted hither.

per Ann. Rents of the Lands posssessed by the Duke of York the late K. 7000 l.
City of London, and the 12 Companies 6000 l. Erasmus Smith 2400 l. Ald. John
Smith deceased 400 l. Sir Charles Lloyd 0800 l. Sir Will. Barker, Brewen and
others 2500 l. Maurice Thomson 400 l. Several Adventures 5000 l. Sir Will.
Temples Estate and Office 1400 l. Heirs of Earl of Essex 1200 l. Sir Will.
Courtney 2000 l. Lord Fitz-Harding 1000 l. Lord Berkely 800 l. Lord Arlington,
etc. 2000 l. Earl Anglesey 4000 l. 36900 l. Earl Strafford 1800 l. Darcy of
Platton 700 l. D. Albemarl 1500 l. Lord Conway 2000 l. D. Buckingham 2500 l.
Sir (...) Wandesford 1200 l. Mr. Pugh 250 l. D. Ormond 17000 l. Lord Ranelagh
and Lady Dowager 3000 l. Sir James Shane 500 l. Lord Lisburne 2000 l. Earl
Thomond 3500 l. Sir Edward Scot 300 l. Earl Cork 14000 l. Earl Londonderry 1000
l. Earl of Kildare 3500 l. 54750 l. 36900 l. 91650 l.

The second List of Persons resident in England, that did receive Pensions out
of the Revenue in Ireland in 1685. and since.

per Ann. Lord Lisburn 300 l. Earl Sunderland 5000 l. Lady Fr. Keightly 400 l.
Countess of Portland 500 l. Mrs. Hublethorn 100 l. Earl of Rochester 1600 l.
Earl Dorset and Tho. Felton 800 l. Sir Edward Scot 500 l. Tho. Sheridan 550 l.
Cha. Laburn 100 l. Capt. Beversham 117 l. Mrs. Knight 200 l. Mrs. Cusels 200 l.
10367 l.

The third List is of other Advantages that we receive by that Kingdom.

per Ann. For Students that come thence to the Universities and Inns of Court
8000 l. Attendants and Expectants at Court, and Travelers hither 8000 l.
Profit made by the Chief Governors that are sent hence thither, above their
Expense 6000 l. We usually have three Commissioners of the Revenue there, that
are sent hence at 1000 l. per Annum each, allowing 1000 l. for their Expense
2000 l. Profit by the Post Office 6000 l. Interest of 40000 l. that is put out
by our People, in Ireland 4000 l. 34000 l.

The Revenue there in 1686 was in the total 334575 l. 17 s. 6 d. Allow for
Insolvencies 10912 l. 11 s. 3 d. 323663 l. 6 s. 3 d.

Total of the Establishment, viz. the Charge of that Kingdom 243663 l. 6 s. 3
d. Remains 80000 l.

This overplus was transmittable to England.

The overplus for Anno 1683. was but 40000 l. Insolvencies allowed as above in
Anno 84. and 85. but 60000 l. I will therefore reckon it communibus Annis but
40000 l. Brought from above 34000 l. 74000 l.

If in the first List the Estate of any man be over valued, it is most certain
that many of the others are under-valued; and that there are several Persons of
less quality not named, whose Estates are in Ireland, and that spend them in
England I have not wilfully erred. I have a List of Particulars in my Hands
drawn up by the Council of Trade in Ireland in 1672. whereby the Absentees
Estates then living in England, are valued to 116040 l. per Annum. Nor is this
a late Advantage that England reaps by Ireland, for both the Histories and Laws
of this and that Kingdom do complain, That from the first Conquest they have
been impoverished by their Nobility, and Gentry's, spending their Estates in
England.

As to the Second List of Pensioners, I do not find that there has less than
10000 l. per annum been paid for many years past to Persons in England. Upon
the Establishment Anno 1676. The Pensions then payable to Persons in England
was 10500 l. per annum. All the Persons mentioned in this List but three, were
certainly in England, and I am informed the other three were resident here
also. However the Sum payable to those three amounts but unto 5^0 l. in all.

As to the Third List, it depends on Estimates, wherein as to the two first
Articles, and the fourth, fifth and sixth, I have been careful to keep much
within what they really are. As to the third Article it is certain that the
Annual Profits our Noblemen make of that Government does much exceed what I
have set down.

And as to the last which concerns the Surplusages of the Revenue, whoever
consults the Establishment of that Kingdom, will find, that for many years past
there has been an Article in it appointing a considerable Sum to be returned
Annually into England. In 1676. it was but 20000 l. per annum.

In Charles II. time, there was great Sums raised in that Kingdom, that never
came into the Exchequer there; nor as I am informed is there any account how
they were disposed. Whether they were distributed to Irish Rebels as a reward
for cutting Protestants Throats in 1641, or transmitted for England, I cannot
say, but possibly it may one day prove worth his present Majesty's Enquiry,
when once that Kingdom tends toward a Settlement, if he thinks good, to have a
retrospect so far. Here I am likewise to take notice, that when Forces have
been sent from Ireland hither, or to Tangier, they have constantly been paid
thence.

By the particulars of this last instance, it is evident, That we not only reap
the common advantages usually made in the course of Trade between one Kingdom
and another; but that we also make many other considerable ones by Ireland,
which that Kingdom peculiarly yields us, and is like yet to do to a greater
degree, if we put it into a better condition of Trade and Improvement, which I
shall hereafter make out.

The three Lists I have set down before you do show, That we receive 176017. l.
per annum, in those particulars, 75000 l. that they pay us annually for Freight
of our Ships, which makes 245017. enough of itself for ever to Cure us of our
Jealousy, That that Kingdom will be prejudicial to us in point of Trade, for
these very Out-lets of their Treasure will infallibly keep them low. And the
very increase of their Trade and Consumption will increase the Revenue there,
and make them liable to send so much more as that shall happen to be, annually
to England, which helps to support our Charge and Enrich us. For whatsoever the
Revenue of Ireland amounts to yearly above the Charge of that Kingdom, has
been, and will be transmitted into England, and is so much clear profit to the
King and this Kingdom.

They are yearly liable to us for more than we receive in Commodity thence; and
therefore much of what their Merchants send to France, Spain, etc. on their own
proper Accounts is returned by Exchange, or brought in Foreign Coyns into
England, so that they seem to subsist by Miracle. However they were in a
thriving condition when King James II. Ascended the Throne.

Nor is the advantage small to England, nor to our Nobility and Gentry, that
whilst the elder Brothers, Gentlemen of Estates here, justle and scuffle for
Offices and Preferments, and think all too little for them, That their younger
Brothers have Ireland to repair unto in Shoals (on every change of Government
there, which usually happens every three or four years) where they meet with
Offices, Employments and Preferments both of Honor and Profit, Ecclesiastical,
Civil, and Military; and frequently arrive at considerable Estates, or a way of
Livelihood, whereby they live as plentifully and contentedly (though perhaps
not so splendidly) as their Elder Brothers here.

Nor is this advantage limited to the Nobility and Gentry only: For England
breeds more Mechanics, than it can maintain. The Surcharge of these, that by
their stay here would but impoverish the rest, find Work and Livelihood in
Ireland. As do many decayed Families that repair thither yearly for Bread, and
are received there with great Humanity, and Kindness.

It is Ignorance, Envy, French Gold, or Wicked and Treacherous Designs that put
Men upon Quarrelling with the Trade, Situation or Improvement of Ireland as
prejudicial, or inconvenient to England, for the fair, spacious, and safe
Harbors on the South, and South-West Coast of Ireland, furnish our Merchant
Ships in their Voyages to Asia, Africa, and return from America, and most part
of Europe, not only with commodious shelter and refreshments in Storms,
Tempests, and other Extremities at Sea, but also retreat, refuge, and security
from Pirates, and Enemies in times of War.

And Ireland by its Situation lies conveniently, not only for Security and
Advice for our Merchant Fleets in time of War, but also to intercept and
interrupt the Trade of our Enemies.

And how lightly soever these advantages may be past over by those that
possibly for French-gold, would cut, untwist, or weaken our Threefold Cord, yet
they are obvious enough to all considering, unbyassed Statesmen, Merchants and
Navigators.

For let it be considered, That the great current of Trade runs between England
and France, and that were the Ports of Ireland and France in one hand or both
in War with us; That either, much more both, would shut up, and damage, if not
ruin our Trade, in that in the latter case, it might be done merely by
Privateers without the Expense of a great and chargeable Fleet, as our
Merchants already find in part to their great cost and loss.

Thus you see that Ireland is beneficial to England, by employing above 300
Sail of Ships constantly, together with the Hands and Trades that depend on
them. That it takes off considerable quantities of our natural Products, of our
Manufactures, and of our Imported Commodities, which yields Employment to our
People, contributes to keep up the Rents of our Lands, and Enrich our Merchants.

That almost all the Commodities we receive thence, are not only useful, but
necessary to us, to enable our Manufacturers, and employ multitudes of our
People.

That our Foreign Trade is increased by the Commodities our Merchants Ship off
from Ireland which they can have no where else, and lies there conveniently for
our Ships to take in in their way to their proper Markets.

That we receive thence yearly above 240000 l. besides many other advantages.

That many younger Brothers, and supernumerary Artizans, and Families that fall
to decay, and that cannot subsist here, are received and entertained with
kindness in Ireland, where they grow Rich, or at least Subsist.

That the Situation of that Kingdom is so far from being prejudicial to
England, That it is commodious for the shelter, security and enlargement of our
Trade.

That were there no such place, we should want Employment for at least 300000
of our People, and Sale for a good part of our Products and Manufactures.

That should Ireland continue in the hands of our Enemies, many of our People
would be beggared, most of our Foreign Trade be greatly endangered and
obstructed, if not ruined.

So that without further consideration of this matter, I do conclude, That as
Ireland is the antientest, so it is the most noble, and profitable Acquisition
that ever England made, though it is but little more than twenty years since
the standing Revenue of that Kingdom did considerably surmount the Charge of
it; yet our Kings ever since King John's time have drawn large Supplies not
only of Men, but also of Money, from Ireland. K. James and K. Charles the First
received several Sums of Money thence, which with the advantages by Trade, and
most of the forementioned particulars have rendered Ireland considerable to
England for near 500 years past.

You take notice that our Nobility, Clergy and Gentry have imbibed a Notion,
that the abatement of the Rents of Lands in England for twenty six years past
have been occasioned by the Improvements of Ireland in that time: And thence
you raise your

Third Query, Whether the Improvement of Ireland was not the cause of the
Abatement of Rents of Lands in England? Or whence else has it come that Rents
of Lands have fallen one Fifth part since the Year 1662.
TO set you right in this matter, it is expedient that I lay before you the true
state of that Kingdom and its Trade, whereby you will be able to see the folly
of our suspicions, and the difficulty, if not impossibility of receiving
prejudice by the Improvement of Ireland, at least in this or the next Age,
unless we enforce it by bearing too hard on them, as we did in the business of
Cattle, and compel them to better Husbandry at home, and to more Foreign
Trade, than they are any way disposed to, or prepared for. And then I will show
you whence it is, that our Lands have fallen so much in their Rents.

Ireland is indeed an Island, that for extent of Acres, richness of Soil,
salubrity of Air, numerousness of good Rivers and Havens, variety of Fishings,
native Products, and materials fit to be improved into Manufactures, Situation
for Trade, etc. comes behind few Islands in the, World. Yet it has hitherto
advanced but very little in Trade, Riches or Improvement. Although it has for
518 years owned Subjection to England, and been in great measure Inhabited by
Britains, to that degree, That three fourths of the present Papists there, are
of British Extraction, who yet by the influence of that pernicious Religion,
are as much disposed to Mischief and Barbarity, as the native Irish; yet I say
the Trade and Improvements thereof are inconsiderable. The Causes whereof I
apprehend to be these.

1. That the Popish Religion is retained by about five sixth parts of the
Inhabitants; which not only enjoins about 26 Idle or Holy Days more in a year
than our Church; by expense on which, the loss of so much time, and of what
might be gained therein, the ill habits, and indisposition to labor contracted
by such Idleness, and the spungings of their Clergy, by which, and the
displeasure of God on that Religion, (being that abomination that causes
desolation) they are kept Poor. Hereby they are liable yearly to send much
Money to Rome to purchase Absolutions Pardons, etc. and they actually do so;
And are also at the Charge of training up their Youth at St. Omers, Doway,
Valadolid, and the Jesuits Colleges in France, (which is a real drain to
their Treasure) where they are fitted for all Villainy, and instructed how to
trouble Church and State. And by Gods just Judgment for permitting that
Religion, (whilst without compulsion it is so easy to reform them;) they are
made Thorns in our sides. These (I say) make up one cause of the Poverty of
that Kingdom, and will remain so, as long as their Idolatry is connived at.

2. The Second Cause of the Poverty of that Kingdom, is, the paucity of the
Inhabitants, the whole number being reckoned to be but 1200000 Souls, whereof
300000 are Children, many by their quality exempt from Labor, and the rest are
few enough for Tillage and Husbandry, there being Ten Acres, of Land English
measure profitable, and five unprofitable in that Kingdom for each Soul in it.
Hence it is, that in the Fishing Season, the Merchants of that Kingdom pay
20000 l. per Annum, to Scotch Fishermen, that go from Scotland to take the
Herrings and other Fish, that present themselves to their Netts in the Irish
Harbors. To which may be added, the poor and mean way wherein above three
fourths of them live, their Food, (though they live the midst of plenty) being
mostly Milk and Potatoes; their Clothing, Course Bandle Cloth and Linen,
both of their own making. A Pot, a Griddle whereon to Bake their Bread, a
little Snuff, Salt, and Iron for their Plows, being almost all that they
trouble the Merchant or Shopkeeper for. A little Hut, or Cabin to Lodge in,
is all that the generality of them seek, or have Ambition for.

3. A third Cause of their Poverty (which is also an evidence of it,) is, the
Raw and Unmanufactured condition of the Commodities they Export. The Bulk of
their Exportations besides Fish; is Wool, Raw-Hides, Flax, Linnen-Yarn,
Cony-Skins, Sheepskins, Pelts, Hogsheads and Barrel Staves, etc. Add hereunto
the few Markets that they have for these. They are Prohibited, carrying their
Wool and Yarn to any Market but England. The Carribbe Islands were their best
Market for Beef, Pork, and Provisions, which though we have left them Freedom to
carry thither, together with Servants and Horses, yet it is under such hard
conditions, that they are in a manner wholly cut off from that Trade. These
being so Bulkey, and of so little Value, that it requires two or three Cargoes
of them to Lade one Ship back with Plantation Commodities. And we have
Prohibited them to carry any of their Manufactures (which would have helped in
this Case) thither, except they enter, and pay the Duty for them in England,
which on some Goods is twice, on others the whole value of the first cost.

4. The small quantity of Coin that is in that Kingdom, and the great
disproportion between that and the Payments of the Kingdom. To clear this, I
will give you a rough, yet near and probable computation, what the Rents,
public Payments and Trade there does require, or of what Money is necessary to
put that Kingdom barely into a thriving condition.

1. There ought to be in it as much Money, as one Years Rent of near Eight
Millions of Acres profitable Land which are in that Kingdom, and the Houses
does amount unto, which suppose to be 1100000 l. This is the Landlord and
Tennants share of the Cash of the Kingdom.

2. It is necessary there be also so much Coin as one Years value of the
Natural Products of the Kingdom does amount unto, at least as the Commodities
Exported in that time do come to. This is the Merchants and Trades men's share
of the Money, and in Ireland should be about 500000 l.

3. So much Money as one Years Revenue and Taxes does amount unto; which in
Ireland is about 300000 l. or at least so much as is the Charge of the Kingdom,
which including Pensions was 243663 l.

4. So much Cash as the Tithes and Church Livings amount unto, which for 27
Bishoprics, Deanries, etc. and about 2200 Parishes; I Will reckon 200000 l. per
Annum.

5. It Is needful that there be Manufactures in a Kingdom to employ the
Indigent, and keep them from Rapin and Violence; and if so, it is necessary
there should be so much Money for that use as one Years Manufacture does amount
unto; for which (because they are so few in kind, and little in quantity) we'll
reckon but 40000 l.

These five make up a necessary Capital of two Millions and 83663 l. Now did
the Cash of the Kingdom equal these requirements, Rents, Taxes and Tithes might
be well and duly paid, the Scale of Trade move nimbly, and some Manufactures
be carried on.

But where the Cash of a Kingdom does not exceed the first, third, and fourth
forementioned uses, such Kingdom is incapacitated to advance in Trade,
Shipping, Manufactures or Improvements.

Such Deficiences of Cash, (according to the Degree of it) occasions cheapness
of the Natural product of such Kingdoms, ill payment of Rents, and Debts, and
necessarily impose a low value upon Lands both in purchase, and Rent.

The Passant Cash of that Kingdom in its most flourishing condition, was never
estimated to be 400000 l. but grant it be so much, yet that is less than one
Fifth of what is necessary to enable the payment of Rents, Taxes, and Tithes,
and to carry on the small Trade of that Kingdom.

Here you may see the Fundamental Cause of the ill payments, Cheapness of
Lands, smallness of Trade, and Poverty of that Kingdom, though not the only one.

The want of Stock in Trade, is the reason why the most of the products of that
Kingdom are Exported by our Merchants, and not by the Merchants of that
Kingdom, whereby the profit made on them in Foreign Market accrues to England.

5. Another Cause of the Poverty of Ireland, is, the high interest that Money
is at there, being by Law 10 per cent, besides Procuration, and Continuation
Money, etc. which the needy pay also. This is a consequent and proof of the
former, and that which cuts the Nerves, and Hamstrings of Industry. For as
Scarcity of Coin, keeps the Natural Products of a Country at a low rate; so
high Interest both hinders their being Manufactured, and advances the price of
them when Manufactured, that they cannot be afforded so Cheap at Foreign
Markets, as the like Manufactures raised where interest of Money is low.

If here it be Objected, that the Cheapness of Wool (as to the Woollen
Manufacture) will countervail the disadvantage of high interest: It Is answered,
that it will not, for 12 Pound of Wool which costs but two Shillings dearer in
England than there, will make a piece of Serge that may stand some in 3 l. some
in 4 l. or two pieces of Stuff that may together stand in as much; the price of
the Wool being so small a part of the Disburse, will not countervail the high
interest on the rest. But besides this, there being but little Manufacture
there, and not full work for Tuckers, Dyers, Dressers, Calenders, Hot-Pressers,
etc. there, as there is here, the rate of these there, is double to what it is
here; and so is their Oil, Dying Stuffs and Foreign Materials, most of which
they carry from England, for which at a high value they pay 10 per cent. for
Customs and Excise on their Importation.

It is the least skilful of our Workmen that go thither, and even the skilful
there meet with a great inaptitude in the People to Manufacture, though they
ought to be content with them for their own use, yet they cannot perfect them
so as to be able to Sell them as to any Tolerable price in the same Market with
ours.

A pregnant Instance whereof we had a few Years since. Some of our Merchants
thought to make considerable advantage by Buying Bays (like those of
Colchester) in Ireland, and gave Commission for large quantities which were
bought up, whereupon there was a great spurt of Trade for that Commodity for a
little time. But notwithstanding Colchester Bays is the easiest part of the
Woollen Manufacture to be made, imitated and perfected, yet when those made in
Ireland came to be compared with the true Colchester Bays in Spain, they
differed so much for the worse, that on a sudden the Irish Weavers lost their
Trade, and some of them were Ruined by those that were left on their hands, not
being able to find a Market for them. Here you also see one reason why they
Export most part of their Commodities Raw and Unmanufactured.

6. A sixth Cause of Irelands Poverty, is, the Cheapness of Lands in that
Kingdom, and easiness to subsist, with the difficulties that attend Trade
there, which makes their Merchants turn Purchasers as soon as they have gotten
as much as will maintain their Families; whereby the stock in Trade there is
small. For it is observed, that though many there gain a Livelihood by Trade, yet
very few of the Merchants of that Kingdom have acquired considerable, or
competent Estates, for the reasons before mentioned, and because of the many
Cloggs that lie on this Trade, which will herein after be observed.

7. Add to these their improvidence, the prodigality and excess of the English
there, in the Consumption of Foreign wares, mostly superfluities which they
might well be without. As fine Cloth, Stuffs, Silks-Laces, Haberdashery, and
the rest that I have before enumerated, which they derive wholly from England.
As also some that they have from other Countries: Above 3000 Tuns of Wine and
Brandy have been Imported and Consumed in that Kingdom in one Year. Some Vices
and some Virtues seem to adhere to the Soil of most Countries, however the
Inhabitants are changed. Thus Luxury and Hospitality to most plentiful
Countries; and so to Ireland, especially in Housekeeping, wherein they exceed
us as far as we do the Frugal Dutch, and so are no Savers by the great Plenty
of the Country.

8. The uninteressed (and frequent change) of the chief Governors who are
mostly sent them from England, who transmit all that they get above their
necessary Expense into England.

9. The frequency of Rebellions in that Kingdom (which discourages and destroys
all Improvements) occasioned by the folly and negligence of England, and the
influence the Papists have always had on our Councils; so that on their
reduction they have constantly found such Favor as to be left in Condition to
renew their Rebellions at Pleasure.

10. Cause of Irelands Poverty is the Clogs and Restraints on their Trade,
partly by England, partly by their own Parliament, who, by a perpetual Law,
have incapacitated the growth or increase of their Trade, especially so as that
it cannot interfere with the Trade of England.

The Truth is, both Parliaments have been imposed on, partly by some
Commissioners of the Customs here; who to fix themselves the better in their
Seats, and at once to ingratiate themselves at Court, and with the English
Merchants that deal to the Plantations, pretended they could greatly increase
that branch of the Revenue by imposing hard things on Ireland. Partly by two
sets of Men who designed the farming of the Customs and Excise in both
Kingdoms; and actually did Farm part of them here. These by their Creatures in
that Parliament, wherein were some Pensionaries; under pretense of advancing
Trade, and the Rents of Lands in England, etc. gained several Acts to be passed
very disadvantagious to Ireland, and the Plantations, and of little or no
advantage to England. Particularly those that bar the People of Ireland from
carrying any Asian, African, or European Commodities to any of the Plantations,
but Provision, Servants and Horses, except they be brought into, entered, and
pay Custom in England, and be bound to return hither with the proceed likewise.

As the Plantations heavily complain of these Acts, so do the People of
Ireland. I have seen certain Reasons drawn up in Ireland against those Acts,
too many and too long to be here inserted. Yet being they fall in with the
present Subject. I will mention some of them, viz.

That as Ireland is the Antientest and noblest, so is it the most beneficial
Acquisition of England. Not only by taking off annually great Proportions of
the natural and artificial Commodities thereof: But also of Asian and African
Commodities; (two thirds of the Importations of Ireland being from England) by
employing considerable numbers of English Ships, by the yearly Rents of the
Estates of such as live in England, and of Absentees transmitted hither, by the
Charge of Students at the Universities and Inns of Court, Income of the
Post Office; Sums carried away by chief Governors, the surplussage of the
Revenue, etc. much of all which is carried into England in Cash.

That the Commodities exported from Ireland to England are all necessary or
useful to England. But that the Commodities imported thither from England, are
superfluous, and such as Ireland may, or must be without, (to the prejudice of
England) except there be a relaxation of the present Severities put on that
Kingdom.

That Ireland being planted with English, or those of English Extraction, under
the same Sovereign, under almost all the same Laws with England, in some
respect under the same Legislative Power, (for Laws made in England, wherein
Ireland is named, bind Ireland, etc.) Ireland is by these, and several other
ways in a manner Incorporated, and become one Body with England.

In those Acts they note two things; the ends of them, and the reasons of them

The ends of them are, to keep the Plantations in a firm Dependence on England,
to appropriate the Trade to, and from them to England. And that England may be
a staple for the Plantation Commodities. They say all these Ends (save in one
little particular of small moment to England, but of great Importance to
Ireland) are infallibly secured to England without these Acts of Restraint, etc.

As to the first, they say, That the Merchants of Ireland are generally
English, or of English Extraction; and having many Plantations in these
Islands, are part Proprietors; that it cannot be imagined that their Trade and
yearly sending many of his Majesty's Subjects thither, can weaken, but rather
firm their Dependence on England, which confessedly in those Acts cannot be
supplied from, or not without great Prejudice to England. And which else must
be supplied with more Negroes, to the Hazard, if not Ruin and loss of those
Plantations

As to another End, which is, That England may supply those Plantations with
all Asian, African, and European Commodities. They say that Ireland has not
been accustomed to send any of these, except those of the Growth, or
Manufacture of Ireland to the Plantations, nor can they send any other if they
had full Liberty. For by the Act of Customs in Ireland, all Wines, Tobacco,
wrought Silks, all Haberdashery Wares, and all sorts of Grocery Wares imported
into Ireland, pay a great Custom, and draw back no part of that Duty on
Exportation. The Law there denying the Merchant that Privilege. By which
Clause England is secured that the Merchants of Ireland cannot supply the
Plantations with any Wines, Silks, Haberdashery, or Grocery. And by another
Clause in that Act, the Merchants of Ireland are rendered incapable to supply
the Plantations -- or any other part of the World with any Commodities
whatsoever, which is once Imported into that Kingdom; The Clause is this; That
all Foreign Commodities, except Wines and Tobacco, and those of the English
Plantations imported into Ireland by a Denizon from any the Parts or Places
beyond the Seas, other than England or Wales, shall for ever pay one third more
in Subsidy over and above the Subsidy payable for the same according to the
Book of Rates, and every Stranger double, etc. It is to be noted, That most
Commodities but what Ireland constantly derives, or are supplied with from
England, are valued in the Irish book of Rates, at a higher value than the same
Commodities are valued in the book of Rates in England. So that according to
the intrinsic value of the Commodities, all Foreign Goods pay almost 10 per
Cent. Custom on Importation into Ireland, except what they have from England.
Therefore, say they, he that reads the Acts for Customs and Excise in Ireland,
will imagine that the Parliament of Ireland was in the Conspiracy to ruin the
Trade of that Kingdom. For though it is known, that these and other severe
Clauses in those Acts were added in England when the Bills were sent into
England for Approbation; yet they were allowed and passed into Acts by the
Parliament of Ireland. So that upon the whole, they conceive it clear as the
light at Noonday, That England can furnish the Plantations, and all the World,
with Asian, African, and European Commodities, 6 if not 8 per Cent. cheaper
than it is possible for the Merchants of Ireland to do it; which is a full
security of that Trade to England.

As to the third End of those Acts in England, that bar their Trade to the
Plantations, which is, That England may be a Staple to all the World for the
Plantation Commodities.

The Merchants of Ireland say, this also is infallibly assured to England,
though Liberty should be allowed them to trade to the Plantations. As to all
the World, Ireland only excepted; Not only for some of the reasons given under
the former head, which take Place likewise here; but also because, although
Plantation Commodities (since the additional Duties were added) pay a higher
duty on Importation into England, than they pay on Importation into Ireland.
Yet on Exportation out of Ireland, they leave much more of the Duty behind,
than they do on Exportation from England. To instance only in two of them.
Ginger on Importation into Ireland pays 12 d. per hundred weight Custom, and on
Exportation draws back no part of that duty. Ginger exported out of England
leaves behind.

Tobacco (which is the most considerable of all the Plantation Commodities)
Imported into Ireland, and again exported thence, leaves in the Kings hands one
penny per pound behind; but exported out of Engand, it leaves but a half penny
behind, which is the eighth or tenth part of the value of that Commodity. So
that England will certainly remain a Staple for these Commodities to all the
World, except Ireland, notwithstanding full Liberty of Trade to the Plantations
should be, allowed the Merchants of Ireland. For that the English Merchants can
sell Tobacco 10 or 12 per Cent. at least, and Ginger (...) per Cent. cheaper
than the Merchants of Ireland, and so likewise all other Plantation Commodities.

The second thing they note in those Acts, that prohibit the Merchants of
Ireland to trade to the Plantations, but through England, etc. is the reason of
them, which forms the Equity of them, viz. That the Plantations are Peopled
with his Majesty's Subjects of England, and that England has and does daily
suffer great Prejudice by transporting great numbers to those Plantations for
the Peopling of them.

To this the Merchants of Ireland say, That in Fact it is most certain, that a
full Moiety or near it, of all the working Whites, and many of the Proprietors
in all the Caribbe Islands, and at least three fourths of the Whites on
Montserat are of the People of Ireland.

And that if those Plantations had not for many years been supplied with
People, cherished and furnished with Victuals at low Rates from Ireland, they
had perished, or not come to what they are. For had they been necessitated to
have paid English Rates for Food, they could not have subsisted. So that, (say
they) If Ireland has not only in a great measure sustained them, but also are
part Proprietors, and have in a great measure Peopled them, and are daily
sending People thither, where they are needed; then Ireland is within the
Reason of those Acts, and (as they conceive) ought not to be debarred Commerce
with them, at least for their own Products, and Manufacture, which is all that
they desire Liberty for.

They say, it seems to be a great Severity, (being they are of the People of
England) that they should be treated as Foreigners: And were the Tables
turned, and their Brethren of England in Ireland, the Legislators would think
the Laws at least unkind.

That it seems hard, that an English man, because he goes to inhabit in
Ireland, or is sent thither to help to secure that Conquest to England, should
therefore lose a great part of the Privilege of an English man, and be treated
as a Forreigner.

That these Restraints tend toward untwisting or weakening our threefold Cord,
by alienating (if it were possible) the Hearts of the People from England, and
seem rather to be designed by France, than to flow from the generous temper of
an English Parliament.

That the same Parliament that Enacted those Laws, were so sensible of the
Advantages England reaps by Ireland, and that it is the Interest of this
Kingdom to cherish That, that they comprehended Ireland in the Act of
Navigation; and allowed the People and Ships thereof the same Privileges as to
the People and Ships of England. As an acknowledgment whereof, the Parliament
of Ireland by their Act of Navigation, granted all the like Privileges to the
People and Ships of England as to their own.

That as to the Virginia Trade, which brings greatest Advantage to his Majesty,
the Merchants of Ireland are in a manner wholly cut off from that Trade, except
they will drive it to the utter Ruin of the Kingdom. (which they resolve not to
do) For neither Provision, nor Horses will go off at Virginia, nor are Servants
to be had to such numbers as to enable that Trade; And the Export of their
Manufacture is prohibited. So that if they will drive that Trade, they must do
it with Cash, and turn all the little Money they have into Smoke, or be at the
excessive charge, double hazard and expense of time, to come unto, and return
through England with that (as all other Plantation Commodities) which has
occasioned frequent loss of Seasons, and of Ships and Cargo's to the loss of
the Duty to his Majesty, and Ruin of many Merchants, as they made appear in
very many deplorable Instances, too long to be here inserted.

They say, That whereas by an Act of the 25. Car. 2. For better securing the
Plantation Trade, It is Enacted, That if any Ship or Vessel, which by Law may
Trade in any of the Plantations, shall come to take on board any Plantation
Commodities, and that Bond shall not be first given, with sufficient Surety to
bring them to England, Wales, or Barwick, That there shall be paid there on
white Sugars 5 s. per Cent. on Muscovados 8 d. per Cent. on Tobacco 1 d. per
Pound, etc. which afforded some ease to the distressed Merchants of Ireland in
returning, without being necessitated to come to England to enter. Yet that
door also has been shut against Ireland by the Artifice of the Arbitrary
Commissioners of the Customs in England. For contrary to the plain Import of
that Law, There was a Ship of England which paid that Duty in the Plantations,
seized and condemned, under pretense that that Act was only intended for the
Trade between Plantation and Plantation, although there is nothing in the Act
that gives Countenance to that Construction.

That though the Manufactures of Ireland are few, and that the most considerable
of them is Linen, which interferes not with the Manufacture of England, and
that the quantity exported in times of Free Trade to the Plantations was but
small, yet the Sustenance of a good number of the most necessitous of their
People depended wholly on that little, and that they cannot subsist barely by
Air, more than the People of England.

That by reason of the easiness to subsist in Ireland, the Restraints on.
Trade, the difficulty, if not impossibility (now) to grow rich by 'Trade, and
the cheapness of Land; Merchants are inclined to purchase rather than Trade.
That from hence; and the mean way of living of the Natives, paucity of
Inhabitants, little demand of the Native Commodities in Foreign Markets, the
want of any peculiar Commodity, as Tinn is to England, etc. It appears there is
little reason why the Gentry and Merchants of England should be so jealous as
they are of the Improvement of Ireland, or the growth of its Trade, and less
why they should bear so hard on it.

That albeit Liberty is granted to the Merchants of Ireland, to send
Provisions, Servants and Horses to the Plantations; yet Provisions and Horses
being of great stowage, and small value, It requires two Cargoes of them to
lade one Ship home. And it is not to be expected that the whole proceed should
in the same Voyage be turned into Commodity for return. Hence it becomes
absolutely necessary for them to carry some small parcels of the Manufacture of
Ireland with Provisions, Servants and Horses, to enable a Cargo for the Ships
return, or to return half or one third empty, which doubles the Charge of
Freight, and Charge on the Commodities returned. Or if they will not do this,
they must carry Money to England to buy, and take in some Manufacture there,
which doubles the hazard and charge, and by loss of time, and contrary Winds
occasion loss of Seasons, and often of Ships and Goods. And if any of the
Woollen Manufacture of Ireland be brought to enter here (in order to send them
to the Plantations) the half duty on them in England, is in some the whole, in
others the half of their first Cost. Which how hard soever, yet they must not
(as the case stands) upon any easier terms trade to those parts, though part of
the Dominions of their natural Prince, and in a great measure peopled and
supported by themselves.

That since the Prohibition of Cattle to England, and as an effect thereof, the
Merchants of Ireland have in return for Beef, Tallow, Hides, etc. supplied that
Kingdom with many Commodities from Foreign Parts, which before that
Prohibition, were brought only from England. And that if the restraint be
continued on their Manufactures to the Plantations, They will be necessitated
to truck their Manufactures in Spain, Portugal, etc. for Plantation and other
Commodities which they used to have from the Plantations, and from England.
Where if once their Manufactures be brought into demand, the prejudice to
England will be a thousand times greater than can arise from their carrying
small quantities of them to the Plantations.

That the Condition of Ireland in the forementioned respects is very
deplorable. For notwithstanding the English there are liable annually to
England for those vast Sums before mentioned, yet they are prohibited to send
their Sheep, Cattle, Beef, Pork or Butter (the product of their Land) hither.
Nor can they send their Manufacture, the only Employment of their People
hither, nor to any of the Plantations, no, not so much as Clothes for their
Servants. If they send Servants, they must not send Clothes with them for one
year, nor so much as handsomely to recommend them to a Market; nor Brandy
sufficient for their Voyage, lest any should be left at their Arrival. If they
send Horses they must not send a new Bridle. If they do in any of these Cases
transgress, they are sure to be ruined by the Commanders of the Ships of
England that watch that Trade, as many have been. They are by England
prohibited to Plant Tobacco to employ their Lands at Home that is laid waste.
All which (say they) renders Ireland and the Merchants thereof fit Objects of
his Majesty and the Parliaments Compassion, which they hope will in due time be
extended to them, the hard Circumstances in which they we being once understood
by their Brethren of England.

It is some Relief to those that imagine themselves under pressures to be
permitted to utter their Complaints. Thus I have (out of their own Mouths)
given you part of the anxious reasonings of the Merchants of Ireland, about the
Cloggs laid on the Trade of that Kingdom by England. Whereunto I shall add one
more, which by reason of the weight and importance of it to England, I am not
willing to omit; and it is this.

That if these Restraints be intended to compel them to take off more
Commodities from England, or that they should Trade only with England, They are
ill designed: For that according to the State, into which England has brought
the Trade of that Kingdom, (as is before set forth) it is impossible for the
people of Ireland to enlarge their Trade with England. For should they buy more
of England than they do, and have done for five years past, they are (by these
Prohibitions) rendered incapable to pay for it. Bat on the contrary, England
has (by these Restraints) laid an absolute necessity on Ireland to take off
less of the Product and Manufacturies of England than they have formerly taken
off. For when they enjoyed liberty to carry their Manufactures, as well as
Provisions to the Plantations, they usually brought the Product of them into
England, which they Trucked for English Commodities, or therewith paid their
Debts here; or if they paid Duty, and Exported them to Holland, etc. they
returned the proceed of them into England, and applied it to the uses
beforementioned. But seeing England has not only shut, but fast locked this
Door also against them, they must now (though with much regret) to the
prejudice of England, necessarily seek new Trade, and supply themselves for
future from Places where they can vend their Native Products, and Manufactures.

Whatever there is in their former reasonings, I am of Opinion, that this last
deserves due consideration, as being of importance to the Trade of England. But
here I Will put an end to the exercise of your patience as to that particular.

As to the Cloggs laid on their Trade by their own Parliament, they have fallen
in, and been mentioned with those laid on them by England, the most
considerable being that Clause in the Act of Customs, which imposes one third
more Subsidy on all Commodities Imported into Ireland, except those Imported
from England or the Plantations. This they say was added to the Bill in
England. However it was passed by their own Parliament, and is in effect, or
was intended by those which added it, as a Prohibition of their Trade with any
part of the World, but England.

Another discouragement which they allege, is the exorbitant Fines in the Act
for Excise in Ireland, as loss of Franchises, Imprisonment, and the Barbarous
Corporal Punishments to be inflicted thereby, etc. which are such, That
Merchant and Slave in Ireland are convertible terms; and had indeed been fitter
to have been imposed on Slaves at Algier than on Freeborn English Men.

If the view I have given you of the Trade and Condition of Ireland has not
satisfied you, that it is not the Improvement of that Kingdom that has
lessened the Rents of Lands in England, I presume the answer to the second part
of the Inquiry we are upon will fully do it.

The second part of the Query, is, What have been the Causes that have
occasioned the Rents of Lands to have abated or fallen one fifth part, or
considerably since the year 1662?

This Query supposes, That Lands generally throughout England did in 1662. or
thereabout, yield considerably more Rent than now they do. I was desirous to
inform my self as to the certainty of it, lest this unhappiness should have
been only particular to your self and some few about you, I had the curiosity
to inquire in Survey (fifteen Miles from London) whether like Abatements had
happened there as in your parts of the Country; and I had many Instances given
me where several parcels of Land which in 1662. and 1663. yielded 50 l. per
annum, are now set (upon the Rack-rent) at 22 l. per annum, and so
proportionably for greater and less quantities of Land: So that being confirmed
in the Truth of the matter of Fact, I have therefore the more studiously
enquired into the causes thereof.

To resolve this Query to satisfaction, it is necessary that we retrospect the
Condition of England unto the time when Lands were at a very low and mean value
as to the Rents of them; and if we can find what it was that raised them to
those high Rents they yielded about 1662. it is probable that that will direct
or help us to find the true causes of their Abatement.

To go no further back than the Reign of Edward III. we shall find, That
England had no Manufactures, few Ships, little or no Exportation but a little
Leather, besides Wool, and Wool-fells, of which sometimes 30000, at other times
10000 Sacks was Annually Exported (for Custom of which that King received 25000
l. per annum.) England neither had nor affected Trade further than in our own
Seas, and to the Netherlands, or not to any purpose; but lived wholly, or
mostly by Tillage, and Pasturage of Cattle. So that being destitute of
Manufacture and Trade, Lands yielded less Rent in England at that time, than
they did in Ireland thirty four years ago (which was soon after that Kingdom
had been depopulated by the Rebellion of 1641.) when good Land was set at 12 d.
per Acre.

This is evident by the low Rate of Provisions in London in this Reign, where a
fat Ox was sold for 6 s. 8 d. a fat Sheep 6 d. five Pigeons 1 d. a Quarter of
Wheat 2 s. a fat Goose 2 d. The products of the Fields being so cheap the Rents
of Lands must needs be very low.

Stow tells us that in this Kings Reign, a Tax of 5 l. 16 s. 8 d. being laid on
each Parish in England. That 112 l. was abated to Suffolk, and the like Sum to
Devonshire, because of-the extreme Poverty of those Counties: But since they
have become the Seat of several Manufactures, the Case is much mended with them.

This Wise and Warlike King being as Masculine in his Councels, as Valiant in
Arms, projected at once the enlarging of his Dominions, and the enriching of
them. He observed that his English Wools were Transported to the Netherlands,
wrought up there, and part of them returned in Draperies, etc. with vast
advantage to the Manufacturers and to those Provinces. And understanding that
some of the Corporate Cities and Towns where the Weavers had Seated themselves,
had by hard and unkind Impositions and usage, disgusted many of their Brethren
that dwelt in Country Villages. The King took the advantage thereof, and by the
offer of many large Immunities and Privileges, invited several of them to
remove into England, where they were sure to Buy Wool Cheap, and Sell Cloth
dear. For their further encouragement, the King paid the Charge of their
Transportation, gave them Freedom in Corporations, with many peculiar
privileges, House-Rent free for some Years, defrayed the Charge of their
Families out of his Exchequer, until their Labor brought in a competency for
them; and Prohibited the wearing of any Course Foreign Cloth. This had its
desired effect, for thereon many of the Clothiers with their dependents removed
and settled in England. Whereby the Scale of the Trade of the Kingdom did much
alter for the better by the 28th. Year of that Kings Reign, for by that time
Cloth was made in England, not only in good measure for home supply, but also
some Course sort for Exportation, as appears by the following Balance of the
Trade of that Year Recorded in the Exchequer. By which we may see as the State
and smalness of the Trade of the Kingdom, so also the great Parsimony of those
times.

Exportations.
l. s. d. 31651 Sacks and a half of Wool at 6 l. per Sack 189909. --. --. 3036
Hundred 65 Fells at 2 l. per Hundred of 120 006073. 1. 8. Custom of both
amounts to 81624. 1. 1. 14 Last, 17 Dicker and 5 Hides of Leather at 6 l. per
Last 89. 5. -- whereof the Custom amounts to 6. 17. 6. 4774 Clothes and a half
at 40 l. per Cloth 009549. --. --. 8061 Pieces and a half of Worsteds at 16 s.
8 d. per Piece 006717. 18. 4. The Custom of both amounts to 215. 13. 7. The
Sum of the out-carried Commodities in value and Custom amounts to 294184.
17. 2.

The Importations into England 28th. Ed. 3.
l. s. d. 1832 Clothes at 6 l. per. Cloth 10992. --. --. whereof the Custom
amounts to 91. 12. --. 397 Quintals of Wax at 40 s. per Quin. 795. 10. --.
whereof the Custom amounts to 19. 17. 5. 1829 Tun of Wine at 40 s. per Tun
3659. --. --. whereof Custom 182. 19. --. Linen Cloth, Mercery, and Grocery
wares, and all other Merchandise 22943. 6. 10. whereof the Custom 285. 18. 3.
Sum of the in-brought Commodities in Value and Custom 38970. 3. 6. Sum of the
in-plusage of the out-carried above the in-brought Commodities amounts to
255214. 13. 8.

The bringing in of these few Manufacturers instantly put the Kingdom into a
thriving condition; for although it added but 16266 l. 18 s. 4 d. to the
Exportations of this year, yet it so far decreased the Importations, as that
there was 255214 l. 13 s. 8 d. added to the Stock of the Kingdom.

Thus was the Foundation first laid of the Succeeding Trade, Wealth and
Opulence of England. Henceforward this Kingdom increased in Trade, Shipping and
Wealth; Lands yielded better Rents, and the products of it a better price, for
in 1520. the beginning of Henry VIII's Reign, a fat Ox in London was commonly
sold for 26 s. a fat Wether 3 s. 4 d. which allowing for the different value of
the Coin is twice as much in the first, and above three times as much in the
last. For Silver and Coin was 20 d. per Ounce in Edward III's. time, and was
advanced to 40 d. per Ounce and no more in 1520.

The second step was the dissolving of Abbeys and Monasteries. By this, and the
casting off the Popes Supremacy, the power of the Clergy, and their concern in
Civil Affairs abated, to the great benefit of the Kingdom. Until this was done,
the Drones sucked most of the Honey, and starved the industrious Bees. But when
those Livings came into Lay-hands, the Rents and Money which before was hoarded
up in Coffers came into the Public Stock of the Kingdom, and circulated. I am
against stripping the truly worthy reverend painful Clergy, I think they
deserve good pay and double honor. I would not have the laboring Oxen
muzzled, nor the Laborers hire lessened; Let them preach the Gospel, prosper
and live honorably by it. Yet I am of Opinion they do always best and are most
happy where they keep within their own Province. There is more required to
accomplish a States man than School and Book-learning; the retired Education of
the generality of the Clergymen begets a temper unfit for Civil Government.
Christ was so far from committing that to his Disciples, that he cautioned or
prohibited their intermedling in it. Not only the Subjects, but even the
greatest Princes in the Land have been shocked and made unhappy by the Pride
and Ambition of Popish Prelates, ( Becket and others.) But now that Yoke, and
the Popes were in a great measure cast off to the unspeakable advantage of
Prince and people.

In most places where Clergy men share in the Government the people are
unhappy, as in Italy and other Kingdoms, but where ever they govern Solely, the
people are miserable, as in the Popes Dominions If the pregnant Instances
hereof given by Mr. Bethel (in his present Interest of England stated) do not
convince all Mankind of this Truth, surely the late Improvement of those
Instances by Dr. Burnet in his five Letters will do it.

The third happy step toward the enriching of this Kingdom, was the
Reformation of Religion, for this contributes to the enriching a People, not
only by the Blessing of God, which has always attended the National receiving
and conscientious practice of the true Religion, but also in that the nature of
it is to civilize and moralize Men; to make them sober and diligent, and so
tends to enrich them.

The Protestant Religion as it makes men more diligent, sober and industrious
in their Callings than the Popish Religion, so it tends more to the enriching
of them, in that it enjoins (as has been observed) fewer Idle days, which
expose men to expense, breeds and begets ill habits, and an inaptitude to
business and labor, etc. which are the Companions of Superstition and Idolatry.

Suppose the working people of England to be but four Millions, and that the
Labor of each Person be valued but 6 d. per day, their work for one day
amounts to one hundred thousand pounds; which for twenty four days that they
keep -- in a year more than the twenty nine days observed by the Church of
England, amounts to Two Millions and four hundred thousand pounds Sterling per
Annum, which of it self is sufficient on the one hand to impoverish and on the
other to enrich a Kingdom.

Another advantage we received by entertaining the Christian Religion, and
casting off of Popery, was, That the greatest part of that Money which went
yearly to Rome for Pardons and Indulgences was saved to the Kingdom; which was
no small Sum.

The fourth step toward the enriching of the Kingdom accompanied or
immediately followed our breaking off from (that Mother of Abominations) the
Church of Rome, and was sent us as a Blessing from Heaven for that Separation,
was the Serge, Say, and Stuff Trade, with all our new Draperies, which have
vastly contributed to the Wealth of the Kingdom, and raising the Rents of our
Lands.

Antwerp had for a long time been, and now was the greatest Seat of Trade in
the whole World, and the Netherlands of Manufacture: Thence we were supplied
with all sorts of new Draperies, and Fabric of Silks, etc.

Although Trade be the best humoured Lady in the World, yet she is so great a
lover of quiet and repose, and so sensible that she carries her welcome with
her wherever she goes, that she expects to be Courted and Accommodated with
Peace, Liberty and Security; where either of the two latter are denied, or
taken from her, she frequently removes, and carries Plenty, Wealth and Honor
along with her.

Ignorance is the professed Mother of the Devotion of the Church of Rome,
Slavery and Poverty her two Daughters: Covetousness, Cruelty and Ambition
inseparable from that Hierarchy.

The Lords Inquisitors, and Bishops of Spain, observed that Merchants and
Manufacturers were not only a Richer, but also a more sober, thinking, knowing
sort of people than others, more curious about what they entertain in matters
of Religion, than the Debauched part of the Gentry, and common people; nor so
much Priest-ridden, nor so easily cheated out of their Souls and Money. They
longed to be fingering their Wealth; But the distance of the Netherlands from
Spain did not permit them singly to strip this sort of People. Therefore these
Hamans resolve the Destruction of all that dissented from their Ceremonies and
Canons in those Provinces; And rather than fail of their extirpation, the
moderate men, though of their own persuasion, must go to Pot. Having gained the
Sole Direction of Philip the Second of Spain, they had as it were both Swords
put into their Hands; and the World has seen how they used them. They put
those Provinces into such Convulsions as enfeebled the Monarchy of Spain, which
from that time may date its Declension. These Right Reverend Fathers appointed
Duke D' Alva Governor General of the Netherlands, a Man of a fierce, cruel,
bloody inflexible Temper, (a fit Servant for such Masters) yet they thought it
too great an Honor for him being a Layman, solely to engross so great a Stock
of Merit as was to be acquired by the Ruin and Murder of such Multitudes, as
were then to be Sacrificed to the Roman Cruelty. To Sanctify the Villainy, the
Clergy must share in it. They therefore appointed fifteen new Bishops to be set
up in the Netherlands, who should be free from all Secular Power and
Jurisdiction, even in case of Treason.

That all Commerce, Negotiations, Liberties and Privileges should be
overthrown. That all (in the Netherlands) should be reduced to extreme Poverty,
that thereby that Country should be assured to them, and to Spain.

That no Man of all those Countries (except of their Faction) should be held
worthy to live: And finally all to be rooted out, and all Possessions, Arts and
Trades, and all Orders to be taken away, until there should be a new Realm and
Nation.

That none Suspected be Employed (though of the Blood Royal) but to be removed
and dispatched.

That no Contracts, Rights, Promises, Oaths, Privileges and solemn Grants made
to the Netherlands, shall be of any Force for the Inhabitants as being guilty
of High Treason.

These things will cause the Subjects to Revolt and move Sedition.

Thieves and Spoilers of Churches and Images should be hired, and sent among
them whose Offenses should be imputed to the Rebels.

These were part of the Instructions given by the Holy Fathers to Duke D' Alva
and the new Bishops, who acted their parts to purpose in this Tragedy, for on
D' Alva's return into Spain, he boasted that he having done the best he could
to root out all Herefie, he caused 18000 persons to be put to death in Six
years by the ordinary Ministers of Justice, besides numbers that had been cut
off by the Soldiers.

It had been happy for these Kingdoms if these Instructions had been confined
to those Provinces, and had not in part been copied, and followed here, as well
as in the Netherlands. I will not intermeddle with the direful effects of these
Ecclesiastical Politiques further, than as to the influence they had on the
Netherlands, which were the greatest Seat of Trade and Manufacture in the whole
World.

As soon as the peaceable Merchants and Manufacturers began to be tossed and
teased between the Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts, when once the ingenuous
industrious Artizans and Traders could no longer quietly enjoy the fruits of
their Labors, nor (as much as by connivance) be permitted to serve God
according to his own Command and Will, nor yet (though they continued
Idolaters) be safe, except they would be active and instrumental in plucking up
the Foundations of Liberty and Property, to set up a Tyrannical and Exorbitant
power in Church and State, they thought it high time to remove; and this
Persecution in the Netherlands happening about Anno 1566. and contemporizing
with the Establishment of the Protestant Religion in England, and the Liberty
given in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth 's Reign; very many Manufactures were
thereby allured over into England, and settled in several parts of the Kingdom,
as London, Canterbury, Norwich, Colchester, etc. where both French, Walloons
and Dutch had several Privileges granted them, were allowed Churches, with
Liberty to serve God in their own way, according to the Primitive Simplicity.

A great part of them removed into Holland, and the other United Provinces,
when once they undertook the defense of their just Liberties and Privileges,
and allowed Men to serve God without the imposing of Ceremonies, etc. Others
that were of the Popish Religion removed, some into Italy, but most into
France, and laid the Foundation of the Wealth and Greatness of that Monarchy:
For from that time that Kingdom has mightily increased in Manufacturies, but
England much more, because we had store of good Wool and Matter for them to
work up, of which France was in a manner destitute.

From this time forward all the Cities and Towns in England, where these new
Manufacturers seated themselves began to be enlarged, and regulated in their
Buildings, and Rents of Houses and Lands advanced. The Prosperity of this sort
of People, and the Liberty and Immunities that were granted them, allured many
more of them over to us, and as their Servants and Apprentices grow up to be
Masters, the new Manufactures spread into several parts of the Kingdom, and
wherever they seated themselves, they furnished multitudes of the poorer sort
with Work, and comfortable Subsistence; they grew rich themselves, and enriched
their Neighbors, greatly lessened the Importations, and augmented the
Exportations of the Kingdom, and added to its Wealth abundantly.

Thus Persecution greatly impoverished the Spanish Netherlands, and gave the
first Blow to the greatness of the Spanish Monarchy; and Liberty enriched
several parts of Europe, but England especially: The Gospel spread, the Church
flourished, and the Trade and Wealth of the Kingdom continued on the Increase,
until there sprung up a generation of Men in the Nation very zealous for the
observance of Forms and Ceremonies, not so much regarding the necessary Duties
of Religion, as Love and Charity, who too much favored the Spirit of
Persecution. In all Ages, and amongst all Parties, those men that have
violently, and rigidly been for Imposing particular External Modes and Forms in
Religion, have least advanced the Power of it, and run most counter to the
Civil Interest of the Kingdom.

In Edward the 6th time, the Worthy Pious Bishops that first departed from
Rome, differed about the degrees of distance they were to go off from the
Mother of Abominations; some of them (upon Political considerations) that the
change might be less sensible, and in hopes of alluring the common people, were
for retaining the less Gross part of the Ceremonies, and the most plausible
passages of their Liturgy, Canons, and the way of ordering Priests and Deacons.
Others of the Bishops were for casting off Rome, and all her Ceremonies at
once, and for returning to the Primitive Simplicity of Worship instituted and
practiced by Christ and his Apostles, as several Foreign Churches had done
with good success. But reason of State (with a good meaning and honest design)
prevailed; yet those that were for retaining those Ceremonies, seemed to intend
them but for a time, and only until (as they say in the Preface to the
Commination against Sinners, etc.) That the Godly Discipline used in the
Primitive Church, could be restored. But what these first Reformers retained,
or admitted merely by way of Expedience, (judging the things indifferent in
their own nature) their Successors some time after Imposed with more rigor and
strictness than the observance and practice of necessary Duties; as if they
thought the Canon of the Scripture incomplete, and that Christ and his Apostles
had not sufficiently directed or instructed the Church how to worship God, and
that the Christian Religion was deficient without this supplement of new
Institutions.

Archbishop Whit gift was the first that began to Impose these about 1583. By
doing whereof, he disgusted and disquieted the generality of the Pious Divines
and Communicants of the Church of England at that time, who disrelished them as
unwarrantable, and uncharitable, gave a check to the Trade, and a stop to the
Manufacturers who were flocking into the Kingdom from all parts.

To come to the matter in hand; these Impositions, and the Severities
afterward used by A. B. Laud, put the Church into terrible Convulsions, and
the State into a Bloody Civil War, expelled multitudes of our sober wealthy
people, some to New England, some to Germany, some to Holland, many chose
rather to live in desolate bowling Wildernesses; others in strange Lands, among
people whose Languages they understood not, with Liberty to serve God, than to
live in England their Native Country, and be exposed to hardships at home, and
to be fleeced and stayed by a set of -- Tormentors. Nor was this all, but
besides, many of our industrious Manufacturers were driven into Germany,
Holland, and other of the United Provinces, insomuch that (as was evidenced to
the Parliament in 1643.) The Clothiers, who (for Liberty of Conscience, removed
hence, and) settled in Holland, made there in one year 36000 pieces of
Broad-cloth, to the unspeakable loss of this Kingdom; for hereupon Trade
greatly decayed, and the Rents of Houses and Lands abated sensibly.

And that I may help you a little to estimate the Advantage the Kingdom reaps
by these Manufacturers, and the great Damage sustained by their Expulsion; I
will give one Instance of the vast numbers of people they employ, which are
mostly of the poorer sort, and another of what the Kingdom lost by having those
36000 pieces of Broad-Cloth made beyond Sea.

As to the numbers of people employed in our Manufactures; take the Instance
from Q. Elizabeth's Reign, who being informed, (that in a time of Dearth and
Scarcity) several Clothiers in Gloucestershire were fallen to decay, whereby
the Poor wanted Work; she required their condition to be reported to her; and I
find part of the return to the effect following; viz. That in the six Hundreds
of Berkly, Cumbalash, Thornbury, Longtree, Whitstone and Bislely, there
inhabited 40 Clothiers, who employed 338 Looms; to each of which Looms did
pertain eight persons; viz. Weavers, Winders, Dyers, Dressers, Warpers, etc.
which was (to the whole) 2704, besides 4500 Spinners; so that by the decay of
these 40 Clothiers, 7204 persons in that small Circuit were left without Work
and Sustenance.

As to the Instance which respects our Profit, you must know, that particularly
in White Clothes, all that we make of them above the cost of the Wool and Oil,
is raised upon the Labor of our People, and is clear Profit to the Kingdom. As
suppose the Wool and Oil for one piece of Cloth cost 3 l. and that the Cloth
yields 13 l. then 10 l. is raised by the Labor and Workmanship of the
Manufacturers, etc. The Wool of some Cloths cost much more (but then the Cloth
will yield a better price, etc.) But I pitch upon that price as a mean Rate:
According to which value, this Kingdom lost 360 thousand pounds sterling, which
it had gained if those Cloths had been made in it, and sold hence. And about
13000 of our People were thereby deprived of the Work and Wages that the making
those Cloths would have furnished them with.

In this single Instance you see the Kingdom lost 360000 l. per annum in the
old Drapery, and the loss could not be less than double so much in the new
Drapery, etc. and all this for those Trumperies; a mighty loss indeed to the
Kingdom! Yet, had the Church gained thereby, there had been some pretense for
retaining and imposing them; but instead of promoting the Edification, Peace,
or Unity thereof, they have served only to rend and divide it.

The fifth step toward the advance of the Rents of Lands, was the Liberty of
Conscience granted by the Long, or Rump Parliament, and Oliver from 1642. to
1660. or 62. during which time all Prosecutions for nonobservance of
uninstituted Ceremonies, etc. were suspended.

Indeed, never was there a more pregnant Instance of the Benefits which Liberty
of Conscience, and Encouragements to Manufacturers brings to a Kingdom, than
what that short space of time furnished. For notwithstanding Civil-Wars in the
bowels of these three Kingdoms for a great part of that time, whereby
multitudes of the Inhabitants were cut off; yet Trade, and the Rent of Lands
increased, and advanced even miraculously.

I deny not but the removal, and taking off of all Monopolies, the bringing
down Interest of Money to 6 l. per Cent, and the Act of Navigation, (which were
also Acts of that Parliament) were concurrent causes of the increase of the
Wealth of the Kingdom. The first took off those Restraints that were on Trade.
The second enabled the greater Emprovements of our Land, and making our
Manufactures cheaper than before. And the last encouraged and increased our
Shipping and Seamen, and saved great Sums of Money to the Kingdom, which the
Hollanders were accustomed annually to carry from England for their Ships let
us to freight. Yet the chief cause hereof was the Liberty given to People to
serve God according to his own Word. For this Liberty invited multitudes to
return with their Families and Stocks from New England, Germany, Holland, etc.
but especially many of our Manufacturers, ( who had been driven away by
Archbishop Laud 's Persecution, etc.) tho too many of them (by Purchases and
Marriages that they had made in those places) were detained to the unspeakable
damage of the Kingdom. However, the return of the rest greatly increased the
Home-consumption of Provisions, our Manufactures and Trade, and employed our
Poor, which together advanced Lands in Purchase and Rent to that great height
they were at about 1660, and 1662.

Thus I have faithfully set down the means and steps by which England arrived
at that high pitch of Wealth and Strength, which rendered her the Terror and
Envy of all Europe. And having done that, it will be easy to answer the Query,
to assign the true Causes of its Declension, and the abatements of Rents, etc.
since 1662. The most material I conceive to be these that follow; viz.

The principal Cause thereof, was that violent Storm of Persecution, raised
against the Non-compliers with Ceremonies, Liturgies, etc. pressing the Act of
Uniformity, whereby ten thousand persons since 1662. perished in Gaols, and by
hard and cruel usage, and very many thousand Families, (mostly sober, useful,
industrious People) have been ruined and exposed to beggary, or compelled to
seek that Liberty in Foreign Countries, which was denied them in their own.

How the Dissenters have been used, the World has seen, but if the doubtful,
curious, or inquisitive desire to be acquainted with some of the particular
methods by which so great a number were ruined; they may find a Specimen of
them given by a good Samaritan, in the fourth part of the Conformists Plea for
the Nonconformist, beginning at page 29.

It has been one of the great infelicities of the Kingdom during the three
last Reigns, that a sort of Men (few of whom have had Title to one foot of Land
of Inheritance) have assumed to themselves a power to dispose Liberty and
Property, our Lives and Fortunes at pleasure. They have indeed been very
liberal of them to those Kings, in whom they Vested the whole, in hopes they
would bountifully reward so good Benefactors, either with high -- Preferments,
or large Portions out of that great Stock. But as ill-gotten Goods seldom
continue long with the Possessors, neither did these with those to whom they
were given; for as the great Lord Falkland observed to Charles I. That never
did Prince lose more by this Pulpit-Law than he. Yet all this exorbitant Power
which that sort of Men cloth Princes withal, is only that it may be employed
for their use; and that they themselves may have such shares as may enable them
to domineer, to fleece and flay, all that dissent from them.

I have, as I presume, clearly demonstrated, That it was our Manufacturers
chiefly that raised the Kingdom to its late opulence and greatness, and that
our Manufacturers were at first attracted hither by Liberties, Immunities and
Privileges. Things being best increased, nourished, and preserved by the means
by which they are gotten, obtained, or gained; we ought to have continued all
those unto that sort of People. But that part of the Imposing Men I have been
speaking of, have been no less pernicious to the Kingdom, than to those Kings
whom they seemed to Idolize by their flattery: For they have by falling on our
Manufacturers damnified the Kingdom to a greater degree than I am capable of
estimating. After-Ages may possibly be better able to do it: Yet to give you a
little light into this matter, consider, that one pound of Wool sold for
fourteen pence, and one pound of Iron sold at first hand for two pence: If they
be thus Exported, the Kingdom gains little by them: But if the former be
wrought up (as it may be) into three pair of fine Women's Hose worth 18
shillings; and the latter into fine Scissars, Locks, etc. they may yield three
or four shillings (according to the Workmanship) and that they be Exported the
Kingdom, gains fifteen times the first value in the first, and twenty four
times the value in the latter, besides the much greater Duty to the King,
Employment of our People, our Ships and Seamen, etc.

By what has been said, you may see the usefulness of this sort of People to
the Kingdom: Now if by a modest computation we reckon that only 40000 of the
forementioned number that were driven out of this Kingdom, were Manufacturers,
it requires greater skill in Manufactures, and knowledge in Arithmetic than I
am Master of, accurately to assign the vast damage the Kingdom has annually
sustained thereby. However, the Effects are visible in the Abatements of Trade
and Rents; The losing of our Trade to other Countries, who have thereby gained
upon us in those Manufactures whereon we mostly value our selves, and which
were in a manner (until these Persecutions began) peculiar unto us. And all
this only to support and please a Party, and keep up the use of two or three
unnecessary Ceremonies.

The lesser concurrent Causes of the Abatement of Rents since 1662. were the
two Dutch Wars (which were fomented by the Papists, Abetted and carried on by
the Tantivy Party:) and the Destruction made by the Burning of London, which
Ruined many Merchants, Tradesmen, and Manufacturers: Yet had not the same Party
by Stifling the Discovery thereof discouraged, and by Persecution, driven great
numbers of them out of the Kingdom, we had easily (by our Manufactures and
Trade,) retrieved those disadvantages. For the Woollen Manufactures being then
in a manner peculiar to Us; Foreign Countries must have been Supplied from
hence, had not our Merchants, Tradesmen and Manufacturers been denied the
Liberty and encouragements at home, which they were Courted to, and did receive
abroad. Hereby we laid the Foundation of the decay of Trade, and Abatement of
Rents, by making other Countries sharers with us in our most profitable Trades.
Thus I have set down as the means whereby Rents were advanced to what they were
about 1662. So likewise the unhappy Causes of their Abatement since; which
concludes my Answer to the third Query.

The Fourth Query is, Whether the State of Trade through Europe considered as
it stood before the present War, it be the true Interest of England, that Rents
should generally advance above what they were about 1662. and by what Methods
may they be advanced?
HAD we duly improved the advantages we had of Trade and Manufacture about
1662. and carefully kept our Manufacturers, Skill, and People to our selves, it
is difficult to say what advancement might have been made of Rents by this
time. But now that by our own Folly, the Netherlands, some parts of Germany,
and even France it self are become sharers with us in our most profitable
Manufactures, not only for their own Supply, (which they were wont to derive
from us;) but also to that degree, that they Vie with us in many Foreign
Markets; it is high time seriously to consider, what is the true interest of
the Nation, both in respect of Trade, Rents, and Manufactures.

In Order hereunto, let it be considered, that the Strength and Security of
England next under God, consists in its Navy: Its Welfare and Prosperity
depends on its Trade, Natural Products and Manufactures. The Strength of its
Navy depends on Foreign Trade; and the profitable part of Trade to the Kingdom
results solely from our Exportations. It is therefore the true Interest of the
Kingdom by all due Methods, carefully to preserve, encourage and augment all
these.

Those who get their Livelihood by Trade and Manufactures, are many more than
those who live by Cattle, Pasturage, Corn, and Fruits. Our Natural Products,
which we Export, are not computed to be above one Fifteenth part of our
Exportations; and though they that live by these must not be neglected, but
encouraged; yet our main care ought to be laid out for our Manufacturers, as
those that have raised the Kingdom to its present Wealth and Greatness, which
supports it, and makes up the Bulk of our Expectations.

Now the Trade of England being mostly carried on by its Manufactures, should
the Rents of Land here advance; suppose one fourth part above what they were in
1662. and Lands in Germany and France, etc. do not rise proportionably, I
suppose it would be very prejudicial to the Kingdom in general: For I am not
here speaking of what would for a time gratify the humor of our Nobility,
Gentry, or Landed Men, but what would be their, and the Kingdoms true Interest.

If Rent of Land should advance one fourth part, or more, above what they were
in 1662. The Fruits and Products of the Land ought to rise in their price
proportionably, one fourth above what they then were, or the Farmers would not
be able to pay their Rents. And were the Natural Products thus advanced for a
continuance, Provisions being so much Dearer; it would be but reasonable, that
the Labor of the Working People should advance also. And were this so, our
Manufactures would be Dearer, which in the present State of things (as has
been observed) would be pernicious to the Kingdom: For by such advance of
Rents, and the Price of our Natural Products, and Manufactures, we should,

First, Lose all our Foreign Markets, for that part of the Natural Products of
our Lands which we Annually Export to other Countries, which could in that Case
under-sell us.

Secondly, We should for the same Reason lose all Foreign Markets for our
Manufacture; and thereby the means of employment for our People at home, and of
our Ships and Seamen abroad, which would yet be more mischievous to us. The
Kingdom affords no Commodity that I call to mind peculiar to us but Tin, nor
are we sole Masters of that neither, though we have more and better of that
Commodity than any Country in Europe. Therefore all things considered, it is
the Interest of the Kingdom that we raise both our Natural Product and
Artificial Commodities and Manufactures so Cheap, as that we may be able to
furnish all Foreign Markets with them (their quality considered) some small
matter Cheaper than any other Country can: For thereby only can we secure
Foreign Markets for our Surplusage of both, and employment for our People.

The Dutch and Venetians, etc. do in some sort Vie with us at Foreign Markets
as to Fine Cloth, and some costly Fabrics of Manufactures, but they are not
able so to do in Course Cloths, and Course Manufactures, because of the much
higher Prices of Food and Labor among them than us, which with the different
Price of Wool there and here, enables us to make great quantities of these
Courser Manufactures much Cheaper than it is possible for them to do. But if
now that we have cast out so considerable a part of our Manufacturers into
other Countries, and that by raising our Rents, Provisions, Wool, Labor and
Manufactures should be advanced much in their Price; we should be in danger of
losing a much greater part of our Trade to other Countries than what we have
already lost. So great and ticklish is the difficulty of Regaining any part of
Trade, or bringing it into it is former Channel when once lost or turned out of
it.

If against what has been said, it be objected, that experience tells us, that
our Manufactures are raised Cheapest in Years of Dearth and Scarcity; I answer
that extraordinary accidents do not constitute a standing Rule: That it is true
in such years, the Poor are constrained to Work Harder and Cheaper than at
other times: Yet in those years they are constrained to run in Debt, and often
Sell even the very Clothes which they Earned in times of Plenty, etc. and did
Provisions advance for a continuance, Labor must do so too, or many of the
Poor would perish, and the rest be reduced to live on Herbs, wear Wooden Clogs,
or Shoes, and like the Peasants of France, look like walking Ghosts, which I
hope will never happen in England.

It is the undoubted Interest of the Kingdom to recall, and allure as many of
our Manufacturers home as possibly we can, to set up and encourage new
Manufactures for the employing of our People, for the augmenting of our
Exportations, and the increase of the Revenue, to improve the opportunity put
into our hands, by cherishing the French that are already amongst us; and
inviting in as many more as we can get; They live more hardily, and therefore
can work much cheaper than ordinarily our People can. Their labor may be
applied and directed to some new Manufactures, or new Fabrics which we have
not yet, which we were wont to bring from France; and which may not interfere
with those we have, or with the present labor of our own People. A prudent
management of these things would conduce more than a little to the regaining
and enlarging of our Trade to the enriching of the Kingdom, and advancing
Rents, by increasing the home Consumption, the lessening our Importations, and
augmenting our Exportations.

There are several things that may by accident, and for a spurt advance the
Rents of Lands: But it is only the lessening our Importations, and the
augmenting our Exportations that can keep them up.

In order to these great Ends, we should remove all those Bars and
Discouragements which lie in the way. It Is true, the King and Parliament have
in their Wisdom by an Act of Indulgence suspended the Execution of those severe
and unkind Laws with which Dissenters have been so long plagued, and which have
been so prejudicial to the Kingdom; Yet they are not repealed, but seem to be
kept like Rods in pickle; and the Instruments of our past Miseries, and which
procured them, are many of them still in being; longing, endeavoring, and
daily threatening the Repeal of that Act of Indulgence and Suspension. In such a
State of things, no man of sense, that is tolerably settled abroad, will be
induced by a Liberty that is so precarious to return home; especially when he
observes, that if he do return, and that he has not stretched his Conscience
larger than it was at his going abroad, he must be content to be a Slave in one
of the freest Kingdoms in the World, incapacitated to serve God or his Country
in any Office Civil or Military; and like Issachars Ass be used only to bear a
greater share of the public burden and charge, and do a greater part of the
public drudgery than his Neighbors; but must not be employed in any place
either of Honor or Profit, but be like the Silkworm, permitted to spin out
his Bowels for others.

It is a scandal to our Nation and Religion, and a thing abhorred by very many
sober Christians, That the receiving the Sacrament, the most solemn Ordinance
-- of our Religion (in a mode never instituted by Christ, nor practiced by his
Apostles) should be made a qualification to the bearing of Office or Arms,
selling Ale, or keeping a Victualing-house.

The great end of his Majesty's glorious undertaking being to restore Liberty
to every of the oppressed Protestants in these Kingdoms, he seems in Interest,
as well as Inclination, concerned to take off all these Incapacities from the
Dissenters, and legally to put them into as good, or a better Condition than
they were in under King James, who arbitrarily compelled them to take Offices,
etc. upon them, seeing the most criminal and culpable part of the Kingdom have
been pardoned, indempnified, and at least rendered capable of bearing Office,
etc. There can no good reason be given why so great a part of the Nation that
contribute so much to its Prosperity and Welfare, and bear so great a part of
the public charge should stand exempted from the Privilege of Subjects;
unless their greater Enmity to France, their firm adherence to his Majesty's
Interest, to that of the Kingdom and Protestant Religion bs made one; and that
our Divisions (in favor of France) ought to be perpetuated, be made another.
Until those Clouds which intercept the benign Rays of Government from shining
indifferently upon all Protestant Subjects are removed; the King seems to be
only King of a Part, and not of the whole of his Subjects.

As it is the Interest of all the Princes of Europe to join against France; so
it is no less the Interest of all the Protestants (of every Persuasion) in this
Kingdom, to unite for their common defense against that Enemy of Mankind, the
French King. For if he has for so long a time withstood or kept the united
force of almost all Europe at a Bay, what are we to apprehend, if any occurrent
should dissolve the Confederacy, and that he should have opportunity to attack
us singly in the divided, distracted Condition in which we are? especially
considering how great a Party he has already amongst us.

But his Majesty's Interest and Honor falling in so aptly with that of Europe,
the Safety and Prosperity of the Kingdom, and the Advantage of our Landed men,
it will undoubtedly put him and them upon removing these Stones of stumbling,
and Rocks of Offense in a Parliamentary way, and that the rather because had
not this sort of People in the two last Reigns (to the Irritation of the Court
against them, and the Ruin of many of them) joined with the sober part of the
Church of England in electing such Members for Parliament as boldly asserted
our Religion, Liberties, and Properties, we had in all probability long before
this been made Slaves to Popery and Arbitrary Government. And had they not
fallen in to do the like in this last Revolution in Electing Members for the
late Convention or Parliament, the Crown and Kingdom had in all likelihood been
unsettled until this day.

Thus you see the sure way to advance the Rents of our Lands, depends on the
taking off all Restraints* and giving due liberty to Manufacturers, and
alluring them Home; in encouraging and improving those advantages which are in
a manner peculiar to us; in discourageing and clogging those Trades which draw
away our Treasure: In keeping a good Correspondence with those Kingdoms and
Countries whence we derive Materials for our Manufactures, and those which take
off our Natural Products, Manufactures and Artificial Commodities. All which
are things worthy the consideration of the Great and Sage Council of the
Kingdom, the Parliament.

The Fifth Query. How may the present Rebellion in Ireland, and the Reduction
thereof be improved to the future Security, and Increase of the Advantages
which we receive by Ireland, and of Their Majesty's Revenue; future Charge
thereby to England be avoided, and that Kingdom rendered useful toward bringing
down the Power of France?
IT has already been demonstrated, That besides the Supplies of Men and Money
which Ireland Anciently yielded us toward the Conquest of France, Scotland and
Wales: That we did Annually (before the present Rebellion) utter considerable
quantities of our Natural Products and Manufactures (for which we had no other
Markets) into that Kingdom. That we were furnished thence with several
necessary Materials for our Manufactures, and Commodities for Foreign Trade,
which we could not have elsewhere. That some of their Ports are of great
consideration to us; (the want of which, our Merchants to their great loss have
in this War experienced.) That besides the profit which we make by Ireland in
the ordinary course of Trade, we do receive thence yearly above 200000 l. All
which Advantages had been much more, had we not (by prohibiting their Cattle,
and debarring their Trade to the Plantations interrupted the course of Commerce
between the two Kingdoms) compelled them to more Foreign Trade than they were
otherways disposed to seek. However you see, that what remains is well worth
the securing and improving; and if we be not under Infatuation, and still fond
of our Errors, the present Conjuncture of Affairs furnishes us as with the
opportunity to rectify them; so also to secure and improve them; in order to
which it will be necessary,

First, That the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the Protestants in that
Kingdom be well secured. Whilst these remain at uncertainties, both public and
private Affairs will drive on but heavily. It has been the hard fate of the
Protestants of Ireland (as has been said) that the Papists have had such
favor in, and influence on our Council in England on the conclusion of every
Rebellion, that they have been left in a condition if not wholly to extirpate,
yet at pleasure to annoy and ruin the Estates of the Protestants. I wish Their
Majesty's Councils may be more happy. It is indeed high time to grow wise; dear
bought Experience instructs the weak, much more the Wise. Two very chargeable
Rebellions having happened within the memory of many yet living, will, if any
thing, instruct us what measures ought to be taken for preventing Rebellions
for the future; for it is not reasonable that every thirty or forty years
England should be at the Charge of Reducing Ireland; nor that the Protestants
there should be exposed to the Mercy or Barbarity of those who think they Merit
Heaven by cutting their Throats. I am as much against Cruelty and Severity as
any Man; but to what end does God give us Victory over his and our Enemies, if
we have not common wisdom to improve it for security from future danger by them?

As the safety of the People is the highest Law, so is it a great Encouragement
to Industry. For who will lay out his care and pains for obtaining that which
he has no prospect of enjoying? Until the Lives and Estates of the Protestants
of Ireland be put into some good way of future security we can rationally
expect neither advantage by them, nor assistance from them.

The People of Ireland have been accurately computed to be about twelve hundred
thousand Souls, of which the Papists are one Million, and the Protestants but
two hundred thousand (Women and Children included;) so that there being five
Papists to one Protestant in that Kingdom, the Protestants must therefore have
many advantages put into their hands, and the Papists be laid under several
incapacities, or else the Protestants can never be secured, as 130 years sad
experience has verified. And it must be considered, that now the Irish are
fallen in with the French Interest, and lie under the influence of so Potent
and Restless a Monarch, they will for this Age be more dangerous and apt to
Rebel than ever. Therefore we ought to have, as the more jealous Eye, so also
the stricter hand over them.

For which end their Landed Men having by their present Rebellion forfeited
their Estates; The whole forfeiture ought to be taken, as well for reimbursing
part of the Charges of their Reduction, as the better to incapacitate them for
new Rebellions. This though it lessen not their number in general, yet it will
in great measure the Interest and Influence of this Party on the People.

They are seized of above 2800000 Acres of profitable Land, whereof, if 200000
Acres belong to Minors and Innocents there will remain,

300000 Acres, which may be lest to His Majesty to gratify such Officers as
have Merited in that Service.

200000 Acres may be applied to the Reprisal of the poor Protestant Farmers who
have been plundered, and ruined by both sides. And

2100000 Acres to be sold to Adventurers at an encouraging price, at six or
seven years purchase; near two Millions may be raised to reimburse the charge
of the Reduction of that Kingdom, to the ease of England, and expediting of
Their Majesty's Affairs.

Some pretended Well-wishers to Their Majesty's Interests, but real Engines for
K. J. and the French K. are at this time endeavoring to hinder the Attainder
of the Rebels, and the Selling of their Estates, under pretense that the value
of them is inconsiderable, the Right of Innocents, Minors, Protestant
Mortgagees, and Creditors being preserved, whereas in truth it is otherways.
For,

1. As to Innocents, that is, such as have all the time of this Rebellion been
in England, they are very few; upon inquiry I do not hear of three, and those
of no considerable Estates neither; as for those who have continued in France,
(that being an Enemies Country,) it seems but reasonable that they should be
accounted Rebels and Agents for the rest.

2. As to Minors, they are few also; I mean those under Age whose Parents were
dead before the commencement of the present Rebellion. As for the Children of
those in Rebellion, their Parents have ruined many thousands of Protestant
Minors, and Children, in their Fortunes, and if any Consideration ought to be
had of them, it seems Equitable that rather the Children of Rebels than of
Loyal Subjects, should be made the Sufferers.

3. As to Mortgages and Encumbrances on the Papists Estates; where they are
between Papist and Papist it seems but Just that the Forfeiture should be
taken, for the Rebellion is general: As for those between the Papists and
Protestants they are not the sixtieth part of what is pretended, though
possibly many Mortgages, and Encumbrances are now in forging, etc. but a course
may easily be taken for their detection, if it be not already thought on; but
allowing all that can reasonably be taken off upon the foregoing pretenses,
there may demonstrably 1500000 l. be raised by those Forfeitures, if they be
rightly managed, and their Majesty's Revenue be augmented by the Quit-rent that
may be reserved on those Forfeitures.

The Irish Lawyers, (for whom the People have great veneration) have in all
times by mischievous Constructions of the Laws, disposed the Irish to
Rebellions; whilst they remain amongst them they will hinder the Settlement of
that Kingdom; therefore they ought also to be expelled.

It is likewise necessary that the Soldiers that have taken Arms for King
James should also be transported to the Plantations, or to Hungary, or be
Banished: For they have lived so long by Rapine and Plunder, that they can
never be reduced to live regularly; if they be permitted to continue in that
Kingdom, they will always disturb the tranquillity thereof.

If His Majesty would keep that Kingdom from Rebellion, it is necessary that
their Priests, Friars and Clergy of every sort be banished from amongst them:
They have been the chief Incendiaries to Rebellion in all Ages. The Author of
the Politics of France suggests to that King the facility of distracting
England at pleasure, by setting the Popish Clergy upon fomenting Rebellions in
Ireland. And we must remember, that that Prince seldom neglects any means so
obviously serviceable to him. And whatsoever may be suggested to His Majesty
concerning the Innocence of the Secular Clergy; yet it must be allowed, that
they are only less mischievous than the Regular, because of less skill to do
evil: For according to their ability they have always disquieted that Kingdom:
They have the Conduct of the Consciences of that poor blind bigoted People,
and are under Oath blindly to obey not only the Pope, but their Diocesans: Had
they no disposition to move Rebellions of themselves, yet if they be commanded
thereto (as undoubtedly they will be) they must and will readily obey: For the
Irish, as all other ignorant People, are Priest-ridden; and their Priests make
them believe that they shall be damned if they do not lay hold on every
occasion to destroy the Heretics, and that they shall certainly merit Heaven
if they do. In Queen Elizabeth's time, those that had not the opportunity to
Rebel, did purchase Pardons, at dear Rates, from Rome, for their not having
actually Rebelled. And we have had a pregnant Instance of the Empire these
Priests have over the People in the present Rebellion; for notwithstanding
Their Majesty's have by three gracious Declarations invited that People to
submit; yet I hear not of one Gentleman that has hitherto submitted; and the
People generally have chosen rather to quit their Habitations, and wander
through the Kingdom, than to sit down quietly under Their Majesty's gentle
Government, with the enjoyment of all their Possessions.

The Toleration of the Popish Clergy, and their pernicious Religion, as it
would be sinful in Their Majesty's, so it would be destructive to that Kingdom,
whatever the favorers of the French, or King James's Interest may suggest to
the contrary. For the Toleration or conniving at Idolatry, is a Land-destroying
sin. Ireland has found it to be so. Our Church in her Articles and Homilies
has declared the Mass to be the grossest Idolatry: And God, who in Scripture
appears so tender of the life of man, that he appointed even casual Homicide to
be punished with confinement or banishment until the death of the High Priest,
has nevertheless positively commanded that Idolaters, and even the secret
Enticers to it, should be put to death without mercy, and the places defiled
thereby to be destroyed. And where Princes do not duly execute his Laws in this
case, he usually executes Vengeance on them, and their Posterity. Most of the
Kings of Israel, and their Posterity, were rooted out for this sin, and the Ten
Tribes for it have remained in Captivity and Obscurity for 2400 years. And this
sin was one of the chief causes of the Captivity of Judah, and the connivance
at, or toleration of it has twice in this Age proved destructive to poor
Ireland, and pernicious to those Kings that granted it. When King James the
first granted a Toleration of Popery in Ireland, famous Bishop Usher, did
publicly before the State foretell, that for that sin God would within forty
years raise up those Papists to cut the Throats of the Protestants there; and
God fulfilled that Prediction in 1641. and that King never prospered in any
design or undertaking after that Toleration. And when his Son Charles I. would
not be warned, but in 1629. renewed that Toleration, ten or twelve of the
Bishops and Archbishops of that time had the honesty and courage publicly in
the Pulpit to protest against the sinfulness of it, and also under their hands
to declare,

That the Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous; their Faith
and Doctrine erroneous, and heretical; their Church (in respect of both)
Apostatical. To give them therefore a Toleration of Religion, and to profess
their Faith and Doctrine, is a grievous sin, and is to make our selves
accessory, not only to their Superstitious Idolatries, Heresies; and in a word,
all the Abominations of Popery; but also (which is a consequent of the former)
to the perdition of the seduced People which perish in the Deluge of the
Catholic Apostasy, etc. And as it is a great sin, so it is a matter of great
consequence, etc.

How fatal it proved to him, and also to Charles II. and the late King James,
the World has seen. Nor will it be less so to any of their Successors, who
shall connive at, or tolerate the same. For the same sins and degrees of it,
brings like Judgments in every Age. Not only the Law of God, but those of the
Land also are against indulging this Religion; and Interest of State, the
safety of the Protestants in Ireland, and the quiet of England requires, That
all the Roman Clergy, their Landed men concerned in this Rebellion, and that of
1641. together with their Lawyers, should be banished, and not to return on
pain of Death. We may wish for Advantage by that Kingdom, but we cannot
rationally expect it, whilst these three Parties, or any of them are permitted
to remain there, for they will be fit Tools in the hands of the French King to
foment Rebellions, to which their joint and several Interests, (the hope of
regaining their Estates, the Church Livings, and their Practice,) will prompt
and dispose them; and nothing less than their Banishment, or Extirpation will
divest France of the means of distracting us at pleasure, now that they are
joined with that Enemy of Mankind.

As for the rest of the Papists who shall be permitted to abide in that
Kingdom; it is but reasonable that they be excluded from living in the Cities,
Walled Towns, and Corporations, which are the strengths of the Kingdom. I am
well aware that this latter, though as considerable as any other means for the
security of that Kingdom, will meet with much opposition from many of the
Protestants of Ireland themselves, who (like too many in England) prefer their
particular (the Advancement of their Rents in those Towns and Cities) to the
Public Safety, to which their Private Interest ought ever to give way. The
Papists are already excluded from Purchasing any of the Houses in any
Corporation which were forfeited by the Rebellion in 1641. But this without the
other is not sufficient, and indeed there is no other way to deal with them.

If His Majesty imagines that the Possession of their Estates, Liberty, for
their Religion, a share in the Civil-Justice will oblige and restrain them from
Violence and Rebellion, he will (I fear) in the issue find it otherways; for in
1641. they had their titular Archbishops and Bishops, their Fryaries and
Nunneries; their Secular and Regular Clergy; they were Justices of the Peace,
Sheriffs of Counties, Members of Parliament, Mayors and Bailiffs of
Corporations, etc. They were seized of three fourths of all the Lands there:
All the Laws against them were suspended as to their Execution; they had all
their Grievances redressed, even to the release of the forfeiture of whole
Counties. In a few months after which, they broke out into that horrid and
barbarous Rebellion, wherein they Massacred 150000 Protestants in cold Blood
without any provocation, besides as many more that perished by Famine and Sword
in the prosecution of that Rebellion; which is demonstration to all the World,
that these People are not to be retained in obedience by Immunities,
Privileges and Kindnesses, nor restrained from Rebellion and Massacres, whilst
their Clergy, etc. are permitted to abide amongst them.

If against what has been proposed, the favorers of the French and Popish
Interest do object, That such Severity toward the Irish, will disoblige the
Catholic Princes of the Confederacy.

I answer; That the chief end of the Confederacy is to retrench the Power of
the French King and his Adherents, as Enemies to all the rest of Europe. That
the Papists in these Kingdoms having above all others contributed to that Kings
present Greatness (all the Irish, and many of the English, and Scotch Papists
being actually in Rebellion, and in Conjunction with his Forces) Their
dependence being on him, and expectations from him; it is as much the Interest
of the Confederates, that they be rooted out or banished, as was the taking of
Mentz or Bonne. That those Princes are very sensible that these are they which
have diverted His Majesty's Arms from their Assistance the two last Campaigns,
and that they will do so for the future, if their Power be not broken. That
there cannot therefore be the least danger of disobliging them, by the
Banishment or Extirpation of the aforementioned Parties; especially being it
is of service to them, upon Reasons of State, and is done for the quiet and
security of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, etc. and because they are
Rebels, Incendiaries, and of Party with France, and not because they are
Papists. -- In a word, Lenity to the Irish who have been in Arms, is downright
Cruelty to the Protestants of Ireland and their Posterity.

2. As Restraints on the Papists are necessary to the quiet of Ireland, and the
other ends proposed; so is Freedom and Immunities in Corporations to all
Protestants that shall go to inhabit there, with Liberty of Conscience to
Protestants of all Persuasions that are there, or that shall go thither to
abide. There being five Papists for every Protestant in that Kingdom, it is the
Interest of the latter in point of Security, to add to their number as much as
may be. If to the Cheapness of Land there be added Civil and Religious
Liberties, they will together probably allure Foreign Protestants to
transplant thither.

The Protestants until about 1670. kept the Papists out of Corporations, by
tendering them the Oath of Supremacy, when they claimed admittance, but there
being a Clause in the Act of Settlement or Explanation, which empowered the
Chief Governor and Council in Ireland to make Laws or Rules for Regulation of
Corporations, and that the Rules so made should be of the same force as if they
had been enacted by Parliament, etc. under color thereof some well-wishers to
Popery and Arbitrary Government, framed certain Rules and Orders which Charles
II. caused the Lord Lieutenant and Council to pass into an Act of Council, and
to enjoin them on all the Corporations of that Kingdom, etc. one of which Rules
requires all Officers of Corporations to take the short Corporation Oath lately
used in England, which seemed to have been calculated for setting up Arbitrary
Government, (for Imposing of which in Ireland, there was not until then any
color of Law;) thereby all Protestants who were not willing to for-swear that
Self-defence which the Law of Nature, and those of the Land allows them, were
turned out of Office; nor was that all, but by another Clause in those Rules
the Chief Governor is empowered from time to time to dispense with such as
were not willing to take the Oath of Supremacy. -- Hereupon whole shouls of
Papists were admitted into the Corporations and Fraternities of that Kingdom,
and qualified for Offices, and Choosing Members of Parliament. -- It will
therefore be needful that the Corporations of that Kingdom be restored to the
condition they were in in 1668. and that those Rules be vacuated, or declared
to be void, as those who think that the Legislative Power cannot be
transferred, conceive them to be.

I am told, that to hinder many Protestants from returning, for discouraging
Foreigners and others from going to inhabit, the better to divide those
already in Ireland, and to prevent the Improvement of it; there are some of K.
J. his Creatures (who might be named, and who pretend to be of another figure,
and to be well known in the Affairs of that Kingdom) that are now using their
utmost endeavors to have the Sacramental Test imposed on the People of that
Kingdom; under pretense that it will keep the Papists out of Office, etc.
though that be no part of their design, but to incumber His Majesty's Affairs,
hinder the Sale of the Rebels Estates, or render them of little value: To
alienate (if possible) the Hearts of that people from Their Majesty's, by
causing His Majesty (contrary to the import of his Declaration) to put them
into a worse condition, than they were in under a Popish King. These Men well
know that the Security and Improvement of that Kingdom, and of Their Majesty's
Revenue there, depends on its being peopled with Protestants, and that full
Liberty and Encouragements to Protestants of all Persuasions, is the most
effectual means to those Ends: And that the planting thereof being hindered; the
Papists will be kept in a capacity (at pleasure to favor K. J. and the
pretended P. of Wales 's Title, to countenance a French Invasion, etc. They
know, if it be not planted with Protestants, the Revenue will never defray the
necessary charge of that Kingdom, but that it will be a continual and
insupportable charge and drain to England, and require greater Forces to be
kept up there, and thereby obstruct (at least) in great measure the prosecution
of the War against France, which is their chief aim.

The promoters of these designs are well aware that the imposition of that
Test, would send many Protestants out of that Kingdom; and that where it would
bar one Papist from Office, it would hinder a hundred Protestants from going
thither. They know the injoining of the Oath of Supremacy, or an express Order
or Law for their Exclusion, would more effectually bar Papists than the
Sacramental Test; for that many Papists have been dispensed with by their
Priests for Receiving the Sacrament in the manner required; and therefore it
would never answer the end for which they pretend it, though it would the
others for which they intend it. But that imposition which has proved so
inconvenient to England, will, if laid on Ireland be pernicious to the
Protestants there, be a Bone of Division amongst them; and seem but an ill
requital for their Sufferings, and firm adherence to the true Interest of
England.

There was about 1664. one or two French Ministers, who having some Benefices
conferred on them, and Stipends allowed by the Government, translated the
Common Prayer Book into French, and procured a Chapel for the use of such
French as would join with them in that Service. About sixteen or eighteen years
after, many of the persecuted French Protestants, with some of their Ministers
fled to Dublin, and set up the beginnings of several useful Manufactures; and
being averse to join in that Service, a certain Charitable Peer lent them his
House to Worship in, where they served God according to the manner of the
French Churches. Whereupon their Minister was Seized and Imprisoned, etc. until
for obtaining his Liberty, he consented to quit or abjure that Kingdom. Surely
the usage was as Unchristian as Impolitick toward those poor distressed
Refugees, who had fled thither in expectation of that liberty (which was
publicly allowed the Papists and) which was denied them in their own Country.
And it was Impolitick; for thereupon they abandoned the place, and that Kingdom
lost those profitable Trades which those Men would have set up there. Not that
this Severity proceeded from the temper of the Protestants of Ireland (who are
certainly the kindest People on Earth to Strangers, that either Travel, or
abide amongst them) but from the Bigottry of a few, who too much favored or
advanced the Popish Interest. And however I doubt not but that the usage those
Favorers of Popery received from K. James, has opened their Eyes, and
possibly rectified the Judgments of such of them as are living; yet I believe
this Sin, this Severity to the distressed French, did help forward the
dispersion and calamities which have since happened to the Protestants of
Ireland, for sins of this kind being committed by Authority, the Guilt becomes
National.

There are not those Laws in that Kingdom against Dissenters, that are in
England, nor any that I have heard of for imposing the Sacramental Test; and if
it be the Interest of England to have those Laws, and that Test taken off, it is
certainly no less the Interest of Ireland to encourage all sorts of
Protestants. (Like Liberty with what is here proposed, was one means which has
so abundantly peopled and enriched Holland.) And as there are not those Laws
against Dissenters there, as here, neither are there those Animosities among
Protestants of different Persuasions as there are in England; nor those
Prejudices against their Majesty's Government. So that a perfect Union among
Protestants there is much more feasible than here. And if all parties of
Protestants be indifferently admitted to places of Honor, Profit, and Trust,
they will then jointly and cheerfully promote the welfare of the Public, to
the great increase of their Majesty's Revenue, of the Church Livings, and of
the Advantages which England receives by that Kingdom.

Thirdly, The Militia of that Kingdom ought to be settled in the hands of men of
Courage, Conduct, and Integrity; such as will not connive at, underhand
countenance or abett the Enemy, give Intelligence, or secretly share in
Robberies and Plunderings with them, See Nash and Murphy's Informations
concerning the Popish Plot.
etc. So that the Arms of the Kingdom may neither be diverted from their
Defense, nor turned against them. It is indeed the folly of English men that
they are too little distrustful, too unapprehensive of dangers, and too remiss
in providing against them. Care should be taken that all that are able should
buy Arms, and that those that are not able may be provided with good Arms, and
be duly exercised. That Kingdom is well furnished with brisk active men, whose
native Courage and Knowledge of the Country qualifies them for Service, of
which they have given good proof at Derry, Inniskillen, Limerick, etc. as also
of their forwardness and zeal for their Majesty's Service, even beyond what
England did, (if I may be permitted to say so.) The Protestants in England were
more than 200 to one of the Papists, yet when his present Majesty had landed
with a powerful Army to rescue us from Popery and Slavery, the Nobility and
Gentry, etc. stood at gaze, and it was some time before any of them appeared to
own his Cause, until the Lord Delamere first, and then the Earl of Devon,
slighting all dangers, appeared for the defense of the Religion and Liberties
of their Country. Whereas in Ireland, although the Papists were five to one of
the Protestants, and had all the Garrisons, Magazins, Army and Revenue of the
Kingdom in their hands, yet the Protestants there, first in the North, then in
Connaught, and afterward in Munster, did expose themselves to the utmost
Perils; took up Arms and declared for their Majesty's, when no Succors
appeared for them, nor were indeed provided. And had they then been timeously
owned and supported, or afterward employed according to their Merits, for the
Reduction of that Kingdom, they had shortened that work, and saved England two
or three Milions of what has and will be expended therein; which was too well
known to some Persons. But those who wish well to King James's Interest, and
they whose uselesness would appear, were the Kingdoms once settled, were, and
are for doing every thing at the utmost charge, that by great and continued
Taxes they might if possible alienate the Hearts of the People from their
Majesty's, and perplex their Affairs, etc. And to that end, no doubt,
misrepresented both the Affairs and People of Ireland; who, notwithstanding all
the Contempts and Reproaches cast on them, and the Temptations, not to say
Provocations to the Contrary, have almost to a man, firmly adhered to their
Majesty's Interest. For among 200000 of them (upon a strict enquiry) I do not
hear of sixty Protestants that have taken up Arms for King James, or abetted
his Interest, notwithstanding his Presence among them, Power over them, and
their great Necessities; which possibly (if truth were known) might be the true
cause of their being slighted by some sort of men, etc.

If the present Wars in Europe continue, and that Ireland be once wholly
subdued, the putting of the Militia of that Kingdom into a good posture will
save much Money to England, by giving his Majesty the better opportunity to
employ a greater proportion of his Army against France, which otherwise must be
kept in Ireland to keep the Irish in Subjection.

Fourthly, Notwithstanding the Militia should be settled as has been proposed;
yet considering the odds the Papists have of the Protestants, their present
Inclinations to France, the Ferment that is on their Spirits, etc. it will be
absolutely necessary for the retaining them in obedience, to keep up a
competent standing Army in that Kingdom. Yet when the Militia shall be well
settled and Armed, the Popish Clergy, Lawyers, and forfeiting Persons banished,
and the rest excluded from inhabiting in any of the Cities, walled Towns, or
Garrisons, the less force will be requisite: For in that case the Forces which
were kept up about 1680. (in times of Peace) will be sufficient to secure the
quiet of that Kingdom, which consisted only of 1363. Horse, Officers included;
viz. 24 Troops, each consisting of a Captain, at 19 l. -- 12 s. each Calendar
Month. A Lieutenant 12 l. -- 12 s. A Cornet 9 l. -- 16 s. A Quarter Master 7 l.
Three Corporals and one Trumpet 3 l. -- 10 s. each; and 45 private Horsemen at
2 l. -- 2 s. each, making in all per Mensem for each Troop 157 l. -- 10 s. per
Annum 1890 l. which amounts for the whole Pay of the said 24 Troops, unto 3780
l. per Mensem, which is per Annum 45360 l. --

Allowed to the Lord Lieutenant's own Troop five Horsemen and three Trumpets
more than to other Troops, making per Annum 252 l. -- -- An additional pay of 3
d. per diem to each private Horseman of the four Troops, doing Duty at Dublin
756 l. -- -- A Company of Foot-Guards Armed and Clad as the Yeomen of the
Guards, consisting of a Captain at 15 l. each Calendar Month; A Lieutenant 9 l.
An Ensign 7 l. and 60 Yeomen at l. -- 1 s. each, making per Mensem 94 l. and
per Annum 1128 l. -- -- A Regiment of Guards containing 12 Companies, each
consisting of a Captain at 11 l. -- 4 s. each Calendar Month. A Lieutenant 5 l.
-- 12 s. An Ensign 4 l. -- 4 s. Three Sergeants 2 l. -- 2 s. each. Three
Corporals, two Drums 1 l. -- 8 s. and 90 private Footmen at 18 s. 8 d. each;
which for each Company comes per Mensem to 119 l. -- 6 s. per Annum 1419 l. --
12 s. and for the whole per Annum 17035 l. -- 4. -- For the Field Officers,
Chaplain, Adjutant, Quarter Master, Surgeon, and Mate, Drum-Major with a
Sergeant and ten private Footmen to four Companies, per Mensem 111 l. -- 15 s.
-- 4 d. per Annum 1341 l. -- 14. -- Seventy four Companies of Foot, each
consisting of a Captain at 11 l. -- 4 s. each Calendar Month. A Lieutenant 5 l.
-- 12 s. Ensign 4 l. -- 4 s. Two Sergeants 2 l. -- 2 s. each. Three Corporals
and a Drummer 1 l. -- 8 s. each, and sixty private Footmen at 14 s. each,
making in all for each Company per Mensem 72 l. -- 16 s. per Annum 873 l. -- 2
s. per Annum for the whole 64646 l. -- 8. --

They were in the whole 1363 Horse and 6210 Foot (the Officers, etc. included)
besides the Company of Yeomen of the Guards. The Annual charge of the Horse was
46368 l. -- and of the Foot 83023 l. 6 s. which charge was with ease defrayed
out of the Revenue of that Kingdom. Although these will be sufficient to
prevent or repress all Insurrections of the Papists in Ireland, yet they will
not be sufficient to secure the Kingdom against Invasion, which is that we are
to apprehend from France; unless with the help of the Confederates, we
constrain the French King to employ his whole Force for Defense at home.

And here it may be considered, that although the War against France should be
ended, yet whilst our Neighbors round about are Armed, and keep considerable
Forces on Foot, it would be Prudence to keep up such an Army as may secure us
and our Neighbors from being surprised, etc Now the Body of such an Army may
better be kept up in Ireland than in England: For the People of England have at
all times been justly jealous of a standing Army in times of Peace at home, and
never will be easy whilst they are among them.

Such Army may therefore more conveniently, and with less charge be kept in
Ireland, where, by reason of the plenty of that Kingdom they can subsist with
less Pay: For as you may observe, the private Horsemen receive there but 2 l. 2
s. each Calendar Month, whereas they receive in England 2 s. 6 d. per Diem,
which is upwards of 3 l. 10 s. per Month, and all the Foot (except the Regiment
of Guards) receive but 3 s. 6 d. per Week, which is one fourth, or 14 d. per
Week less than is paid the common Soldier in England, so that 20000 Men may be
kept there as cheap as 15000 in England, which is great odds.

Fifthly, As the Sword is to Defend a People from violence and injury in times
of War; so ought the Laws in time of Peace. Therefore it will be requisite to
settle the Civil Justice of that Kingdom in such Hands as may duly and truly
Administer it, etc. To place such Judges and Justices of the Peace as have not
been concerned in the corrupt Administrations of that Kingdom; such as may not
pack Grand Juries, or Menace, Hector and compel them contrary to their
Consciences to find Bills, or raise Money against their Judgments, or where the
Law does not require it; or to Tax the Country with more than is necessary for
the occasion, to subserve the Interest of particular persons, or for supply of
the Greedy or Indigent, etc. But above all, such as may duly punish Murderers;
for Life being the most valuable thing which we possess, and the security of it
being the Principal end of the Law, it ought primarily to be regarded by the
Judges, etc.

The remiss Execution of the Laws against Murder in Ireland, has been as a
great hindrance to the Peopling and improvement of it, so also a great Reproach
to it: And therefore remedy ought to be provided in this particular on this
Settlement. I have heard some judicious persons in Holland say in derision of
Ireland; that the Cattle, and the Mares of that Kingdom are better secured by
the Laws, or usual Administrations thereof, than the Lives of the People. It is
indeed the Honor of the United Provinces, and a Blessing to the People, that
seldom, if ever, any person of what quality soever, that wilfully Kills the
meanest person, escape Death: Whereas they say of Ireland, that only the
Money-less and Friendless are Executed for Murder, whilst Sheep-Stealers or
Mare-Stealers Rarely Escape. Murder is by Law in Ireland made Treason; and
because the punishment is so great, during the two last Reigns, few of any
Interest have been Executed for it. Which if true, is indeed sad; for where
Judges or Juries neglect to do Justice in this respect, or that Princes grant
Pardons to Murderers, the guilt becomes National. Wonderful is the care which
God in his Law expresses of the Life of Man; and many and Critical are the
inquisitions which he appointed to be made for the Discovery of Private Murder
before the place where it was committed could be deemed acquit, etc. And his
command is positive, that whosoever takes away the Life of another, should be
put to Death, and none may hinder, let, or stay him, etc. And the reason is
given, because that Blood is a Land-defiling Sin: And that the Land cannot in
any wise be cleansed from the guilt of it, but by the Blood of the Murderer.
Therefore great care ought to be taken to prevent future abuses of this kind,
and to supply and rectify the defects and abuses of the Laws in this
particular.

It is dangerous to the Community to suffer Criminals to Escape with impunity;
but the worst and most intolerable Robberies and Murders, are those which are
committed by the Abuse of the forms of Laws, when through the corruption of
Judges, the Laws made for security of Life, Liberty and Property are perverted
to the Destruction of any of them.

Sixthly, What has hitherto been proposed, has been for preventing future
charge by Ireland, and for the securing the advantages which comes thence to
England. I am now to show that it is the Interest of their Majesty's, and of
England, to put that Kingdom into a thriving condition, and how that may be
done.

That it is the Interest of England and their Majesty's, is evident by what
has been already observed. The Revenues of Ireland before the breaking out of
the present Rebellion, did surmount the charge of the Kingdom: And the
Surplusage was transmitted yearly into England. Now if by Trade, or otherwise,
the Revenues of that Kingdom had been augmented or doubled to what it was in
1685. Then the Annual advantage to England, or to the late King, would have
been so much more: As suppose for the Year 1685. The Revenue had surmounted the
charge by 40000 l. more or less; and that in 1686. it had amounted to 150000 l.
more than it did the preceding Year: In that Case there had been 190000 l.
transmitted thence to England for that Year, etc. In this respect you see it is
the Interest both of the King, and this Kingdom, to put Ireland into a
condition of continual improvement.

Our Trade with France being the greatest outlet of our Money, and France
being the only Kingdom of the World capable of Annoying us; We ought long since
to have stopped that yearly Drain. But it has been our infelicity, that during
the two last Reigns, our Councils being Influenced by France, we ran Counter to
our Interest in Trade, as well as Politics: For instead of regulating our
Foreign Trade, in preserving, and gaining more Markets for our Natural
Products, and Manufactures; the hindering and abating the Importation of
unnecessary Commodities, and encouraging our Manufacturers (which are the
industrious Bees of the Nation;) we have been put upon driving the latter from
us, and restraining the Intercourse and Commerce between us and Ireland, and
the Plantations and Ireland; to the advantage of a few, but great detriment to
the Public, not to say oppression of our own People abroad, while we have
given France the opportunity of drawing away our Money, and to run away with a
considerable part of our Trade; and have thereby paid his Pensioners amongst us
at our own cost. But his Present Majesty being come to deliver us from such
Malevolent Counselors, it is to be hoped he will not by employing the
Instruments of our past Calamities, furnish them with fresh opportunities to
Betray the Kingdom, or Ruin himself.

It is the endeavor of almost all the Princes of Europe, to Retrench the Power
of the French King; and it is no less the concern of England. And if I mistake
not, the present conjuncture of Affairs does furnish us with some special
advantages above the rest to that end.

It is certain that in times of open Trade France did yearly Gain one or two
Millions Sterling by Trade with England, which was so much clear loss to this
Kingdom. Neither was that all, but we did thereby yearly strengthen and enrich
our mortal Enemies. To give some evidence to this: I find by a Balance of one
Years Trade between England and France. said to be drawn out of our
Custom-House Books, for the House of Commons about October 1675. That by the
certain Balance thereof, we Imported from France 969105 l. 2 s. 8 d. Sterling
more in Commodities than we Exported thither; but by the supposed or probable
Balance 2105255 l. 6 s. 8 d.

I find likewise that about 1676 or 77. That King having some thoughts to
Prohibit all our English Manufactures from being carried into France, the
Balance of Trade between both Kingdoms being laid before him, it did thereby
appear that the yearly Exportations of France to England was 2640000 l.
Sterling, and that the Importations from England to France, did not exceed one
Million. So that by their own showing, France Gained 1640 Thousand Pounds
Sterling by England, which being the Overbalance of Trade, went out in Cash.
Amongst the particulars (in this last Balance of Trade) said to be Imported
into England, the Tissues, Velvets, Sattins, Armozines, Tabbies, Ribons,
wrought Silks, Stuffs, Laces, Serges, Hatts, Fans, Cabinets, Pins, Combs, etc.
which we bring yearly from France, are valued to amount to 1140000 l. Sterling.
All which may be Supplied by the Labor of our own People, and the French
Protestants that are and would come amongst us, were due Liberty and
Encouragement given and care taken to put things into the right way, etc.

For the doing things of this Nature, I am persuaded it would be of singular
use, if His Majesty would by Order of the Council, etc. constitute a standing
Council of Trade consisting of a great number of the most knowing experienced
Merchants of London; who, (or a Quorum of them) might meet weekly in some one
of their Halls, (having a Secretary, Doorkeeper, and Messenger allowed them)
where they might consult how to remove all obstructions of Trade, how to
regulate it; what Manufactures may be set up to the best advantage of the
Kingdom, and how others may be improved, etc. Which, as they shall have
matured, may be represented to His Majesty and Council, or to both Houses of
Parliament as occasion shall require.

Now as the Idle hands of the Kingdom, together with the French Refugees may
profitably, and agreeably be employed in the forementioned Fabrics of Silk,
and other Manufactures which we were wont to bring from France; so may the
People of Ireland, (even the very Natives) be aptly employed in the Linen
Manufacture for which that Kingdom is in several respects much more proper than
England.

1. For that Land is Cheaper in Ireland, and where good Seed is had, the
Country yields excellent Flax.

2. The Female Natives who are averse to any Robust Labor, are much inclined
to the Spinning of Flax, which they can do with their Rocks, or Distaves as
they sit at their Doors, or under a Hedge tending their Cattle.

3. They are a People that live on a courser and cheaper Diet, nearer the
manner of France, than the English do or can; and therefore can afford their
Work cheaper, which is a particular of great weight in an Affair of this
Nature. For except the Commodity be made at least as cheap as we have it from
France, it will be brought thence in spite of all Prohibitions.

4. This is a Labor to which they have been greatly accustomed; for before the
Commencement of the Present Rebellion, there was a considerable quantity of
Course Linen, Diapers and Damasks made in Ireland, much stronger than those
which we usually have had from France.

5. There is an Act of the last Irish Parliament still in Force, for the
raising of Money to set up a Bleaching Yard in each Province of the Kingdom for
the Encouragement of the Linen Manufacture.

If we consider the concurrence of these things, viz. the cheapness of Land and
Labor, the aptness of the Soil, Inclination of the People, etc. There seems no
place so proper for this Manufacture as Ireland.

Many thinking men of good Sense have been jealous that Ireland by reason of
the plenty and cheapness of Wool, would in time fall into the improvement of it
into Manufactures, to the prejudice of England. And though their fears (at
least, as to this present Age) are groundless, yet it is Wisdom to provide
against even remote possibilities of detriment, etc. This may be done
effectually in this Case, by setting up and encouraging the Linen Manufacture,
and such others in Ireland, as may fully, and profitably employ that People,
and yet not interfere with the Manufactures of England.

Now if this can be done in a way which will lessen the French Kings Revenue,
and keep a considerable part of our Money from being carried into France, it
ought to be the more acceptable to us.

In the forementioned Balance of our Trade with France drawn up by the French,
they do compute, That Linnens, Canvas, Diapers, etc. which we yearly import
from France, do amount to 400000 l. But by the Balance drawn out of our
Custom-house-books in 1675. we find the imported Linen from France in one
year, did amount to 528248 l. -- 16 s. whereof the Particulars are as
follows, viz.

l. -- s. -- d. 60000 pieces of Lockrams and Dowlas at 6 l. per piece 360000 --
00 -- 0 17000 hundred Else of Vitry and Noyals Canvas at 6 l. per C. 102000 --
00 -- 0 8000 hundred Else of Normandy Canvas at 7 l. per Cent. 56000 -- 00 -- 0
2500 pieces of Quintin at 10 l. per piece 1250 -- 00 -- 0 1500 pieces of dyed
Linen at 20 s. per piece 1500 -- 00 -- 0 7600 yards of Diaper Tabling at 2 s.
per yard 764 -- 00 -- 0 33896 yards of Diaper Napkening at 12 d. per yard 1694
-- 16 -- 0 1376 pieces of Buckrams at 50 s. per piece 3440 -- 00 -- 0 2800 pair
of old Sheets at 5 s. per pair 700 -- 00 -- 0 1200 bolts of Boldavis at 15 s.
900 -- 00 -- 0 528248 -- 16 -- 0

Now were these Linnens raised in Ireland, as they easily may be, although the
whole value of them should be transmitted thither in Cash, instead of sending
it to France, it would yet be of greater advantage to his Majesty, and to
England.

First to his Majesty, By augmenting his Revenue, not only by the Duty on
Exportation of them out of Ireland, which in that case might be the same which
the French King lately received out of them in France; but also in the increase
of the Inland Excise in Ireland, by enabling a greater Consumptioh of Liquors,
Tobacco, etc. the Irish being a People that spend freely when they have
wherewithal.

Secondly, To England, In begetting a greater intercourse of Trade between the
two Kingdoms. The Irish are naturally prodigal, and love Gaities, and were they
enabled, they would soon be induced to take off more of our Manufactures and
natural Products; so that there would be no need of parting with our Money in
Specie to Ireland, as now we do to France. And whatever advance it would
occasion of the Revenue above the charge of that Kingdom, it would be
transmitted hither to lessen the Taxes in England, and yearly add to the
Capital Stock of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, It would be advantageous both to the King and Kingdom, in lessening
the Revenue of the French King, and impoverishing his Subjects.

As the Manufactures of England have enriched it, and yielded a great Revenue
to the Crown to enable the keeping a powerful Navy at Sea; so the vast
quantities of Manufactures which is yearly exported out of France into many
parts of the World, and especially to England, do as well by the Duty paid out
of them, enable that King to keep up several formidable Armies, etc. as employ
and enrich his Subjects, and enable them to pay other Taxes. Now so far as we
divest France of its Manufactures, and lessen the Exportations, so far do we
abate its Power, and disable the keeping up of such powerful Armies, etc. The
Events and difficulties of War are great and uncertain; but this is a sure way
to weaken any Prince, and to bring any Country into a languishing Condition.

If to what has been here proposed any shall say, That it will be more the
advantage of England to have this Linen Manufacture set up here than in
Ireland. I answer,

That the other Manufactures before mentioned, with which we are supplied from
France, will much more profitably and agreeably employ our People than the
spinning of Linen, which in this case must be done at a very cheap rate, or it
will not prevent the bringing of them from France. And Ireland in the
forementioned respects seems much more proper for that purpose than England.
And if we would prevent their growing into the Woollen Manufacture, it is but
just they should be encouraged in some other which may employ and maintain
them: for they can no more than our People, live only on Air, though they are
content to work cheaper, and fare harder.

To avoid Prolixity, I forbear to set down the proper way in which the Linen
Manufacture may be set up, and the Improvements which may be made of the
distinct Branches of their Majesty's present Revenue in Ireland.

Thus, Sir, I have in answer to your Queries, set down, as the Ancient Charge
of Ireland, and Forces sent from England thither, from our first footing there,
until the complete Conquest thereof: So likewise the considerable returns of
both that have been made thence: Some of the Advantages we receive by Ireland,
and the usefulness of that Kingdom to England. The State of its Trade and
Revenue; and showed that the Improvement of Ireland for thirty five years past
has been none of the Causes of the abatement of Rents in England, but the
contrary; with the true Causes of the advancement and abatement of Rent and
Trade in England, with the best Expedients for their Improvements: The Methods
by which our Advantages by Ireland may be secured and augmented, to the greater
benefit of England, Increase of his Majesty's Revenue in Ireland, and to the
retrenching of the Power of France. In doing whereof I have with my accustomed
bluntness, freely imparted my thoughts, yet without designed Prejudice, against
any Person or Party.

I doubt not but you will excuse the harshness of the Style, and the other
Defects of these Papers, seeing, that although they were hastily written, your
impatience for them did not admit them to be reviewed; and that I have elected
rather to expose my own weakness, than to deny you this Testimony of my being
unreservedly,

SIR, Your very Humble Servant.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 22. line 14. after 38000 and 1000, instead of l. read Hundred. Page 29.
line 27. after live add in.

There have several other Errors happened in the Press, which the Reader is
requested to excuse.


