Renatus Harris, Organ-maker, his Challenge to Mr. Bernard Smith, Organ-maker.
IT might seem odd that I should make the public defiance to Mr. Smith, which
hereafter follows, if I did not inform the World of the occasion. The sole
Motive is the Justifying my Self and Organ in the Temple-Church, against his
Scandalous aspersions; and of the making it public, that I may (if possible)
provoke him this way to answer my Challenge, since he has already declined it,
when sent him privately. I could have rested Content under my great loss with
the Decision of the two Houses, and the acceptance of Mr. Smith's Organ by the
plurality of four Voices; and the rather, for that it was declared, at the same
time, that notwithstanding that Determination of theirs, mine might be as good
or a better Organ then Mr. Smith's; And indeed it could not be expected, that
those Gentlemen could be such Critics in Music as to be the proper Judges
which were the better Instrument. But when my Reputation in my Profession is
called in Question, and his detraction might be injurious to me in the
Employment I have under his Sacred Majesty, and otherwhere; I hope I Am
Excusable in taking this method for my Vindication: All my fear is, that Mr.
Smith, who (during the whole Contest about the Organs) could never be brought
to a trial of them before Masters of Music, though several times there were
appointments made for that purpose, will decline this Challenge,
notwithstanding it is proposed so much to his Advantage; Yet if he be that man
of Art he pretends, and Values his Reputation or Profit, he will accept it.

Now my Challenge to him is this. Organ against every Stop of his, of the like
Denomination, for ten pounds each stop; and that if he Values one or more of
his stops more then the rest, to double upon that or them. I propose that the
Judges be Skillful Organists, who being by us equally Chosen, may, if there be
occasion, elect an Umpire. That they be requested to take a Voluntary Oath, to
declare their Opinions, without favor or affection, according to the best of
their Skill; and we be obliged to stand to their Determination. Lastly, that we
Article as far as shall be Necessary to render this Proposition Complete.


