INFANT BAPTISM God's Ordinance: OR, CLEAR PROOF That all the Children of
Believing Parents are in the Covenant of Grace; And have as much a right to
Baptism the now Seal of the Covenant, as the Infant Seed of the Jews had to
Circumcision, the then Seal of the Covenant.

Romans 16. 17, 18. I beseech you brethren mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them: For they
that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by
good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. By MICHAEL
HARRISON, Minister of the Gospel in P's P.

LONDON: Printed for Thom. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. 1694.

To all into whose hands this may fall; especially those who sit under my
Ministry.
Dear Friends,
THERE are two things which do most evidently prove man by nature a lost
Creature.

The one is the exceeding propensity and inclination in the heart of every man
to actual sin, Psalm. 58.3. Job 15.16. Though every man is not actually guilty
of every sin, yet is there not a sin in the world, but is seminally and
vertually in every one's Nature.

The other is that strange infatuation the Understanding lies under, and its
proneness to mistake darkness for light; damnable and deformed Errors for
beautiful and saving Truths: And that which is saddest of all, a tenacious
adherence to, and a resolved perseverance in, these bypath of Error, is very
often a mournful consequence that follows them.

Now as these two things do show the fearful ruins and miserable condition of
all by Nature: So there are two things which all Gospel Ministers should
vehemently urge upon their people as effectual remedies against so dangerous
and pernicious a malady.

The one is the absolute and indispensible necessity of the new birth; Joh.
3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This new
birth is no less than a renovation of all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul,
a putting off the old man, and a putting on Christ; a changing that heart into
a new gracious tender heart, that was by nature an old unbelieving stony heart;
any thing that persons rest in short of this new birth, is short of Salvation.

The other is, soundness of judgment in the Doctrine of Christ; it is not like
that the Life should be holy, if the Understanding be corrupt; there are
damnable Principles as well as damnable Practices, 2 Pet. 2.1.

Indeed all Erroneous Opinions are not alike dangerous; such as strike at the
fundamental Articles of Christianity are most deadly; such as err in lesser
Points, are not in so much danger.

Therefore, as the more fundamental and noble a Doctrine is, the more earnestly
should we contend for it; so the more directly any Erroneous Opinion subverts
same fundamental Truth, the more zeal and indignation we should show against
it; as also the greater care to antidote our selves and others against it.

Now amongst those Erroneous Doctrines that have been like pricking Briars, and
wounding Thorns, ever since the beginning of the Reformation, to the Protestant
Churches, those wild and Erroneous Doctrines that have been broached by the
Antipedo Baptists, on Anabaptists, have not created the least trouble to the
Church of Christ, but have been a perpetual vexation and trouble to all our
godly Reformers, as is evident by the sad complaints of those godly men in
their Books, as who will but read the Works or Lives of Calvin, Luther,
Zuinglius, Melancton, Oeculampadius, Musculus, etc. and our English Divines,
may be abundantly satisfied. The danger many of you were in of being sucked in
among the Anabaptists, or at least to join with them in excluding your Infants
from Baptism, the Seal of the Covenant, was that which first put me upon
preaching upon this Subject; and it is the earnest request of several of you,
that makes me consent to the Printing of it. The Sermons you have lately heard
upon this Text, have been (glory to Free Grace) of admirable use to establish
and settle those of you that were staggering in this Doctrine; that whereas
there was many scruples in many persons about Infant Baptism, yet now there are
very few, if any, of those that constantly frequent this Congregation, but have
attained great satisfaction.

As God that knows my heart, can testify for me, that it is not yours, but you,
that I seek, your present holiness and eternal happiness; so my greatest joy
amongst you will be to find that my labor is not in vain; that you are gained
to Christ, and joined to him by so firm a faith as the gates of Hell may never
prevail against.

I bless God for that encouragement I have had amongst you, many of you that
sprung from Parents of the opposite Persuasion, having so cheerfully listed
your selves in Christ's Service, and by receiving Christ's Press-money, have
more solemnly engaged your selves to be his Servants for ever. And that so many
of you, and many even of adult age, have thought it their honor to be
catechized in the Public Congregation, which, I hope, will be followed by many
others.

In short, Your exceeding willingnss to wait on the Ministry with those saving
impressions which, I hope, God has made on many of your hearts, are to me a
ground of hope, that what is so hopefully begun amongst you, will be as
comfortably finished in the glory of God, and your Eternal Salvation.

If any demand a reason, why one who willingly acknowledges himself to be the
unfittest of a thousand, has attempted this work, which has been so well
performed by several abler Pens? I only answer, That what others have done,
being either too voluminous, or Answers to other Books, were therefore not so
proper: Besides, they that know my Circumstances, the confident repeated
Challenges, the restless Insinuations of the Anabaptists, together with the
various Attempts that the Persons of that Persuasion have made to ensnare and
draw away my Hearers (though I bless God with no success) to their own way;
will see that I lay under a kind of necessity for what I have done.

Christian, study thy own heart, love all that fear God, though differently
persuaded in some lesser things. And pray for him who desires to serve thee in
our common Savior,

Michael Harrison.

INFANT BAPTISM GOD'S Ordinance.
GENESIS 17.7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, To be a God unto
thee, and thy seed after thee.
GOD having in Genesis 12.3. promised Abraham, that in him all nations should be
blessed; comes now in this 17th Chapter in a more express and formal manner to
establish his Covenant with Abraham: In which observe three things.

1. The Persons covenanting.

1. Ex part Dei; God stands on the one side of the Covenant: O the Infinite
Condescension of the Great God, to take any notice of lost Sinners! that when
we had broken the First Covenant, that he should condescend to make a Second
Covenant, a Covenant of Grace with lost Sinners!

2. Ex part Abrahami; Abraham and his Seed stand on the other side of the
Covenant; with thee and thy seed after thee: This Seed of Abraham is to be
limited according to Scripture; not in Ishmael, nor his Seed by Ketura, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called, Genesis 21.12.

Abraham had a twofold Seed.

1. A Natural Seed by Generation, which are Abraham's Seed by promise; Romans
9.7, 8. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children,
but in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

2. A Spiritual Seed; and these were either the Proselited Gentiles under the
Law, who did believe in, and worshipped the God of Abraham; and so were by
Circumcision, the then Seal of the Covenant, taken into Abraham's Family; or
else all Believers under the Gospel; who though they are not of Abraham's
Natural Posterity, are yet Abraham's Spiritual Seed; Romans 4.16. Therefore it is
of faith, that the promise might be sure to all the seed, not only that which
is of the law (viz. the Jews) but to that also which is of the faith of
Abraham, who is the father of us all; i. e. the Gentile Believers. So Gal.
3.29. By both which places the Apostle assures the Gentiles, That if they are
by faith transplanted into Christ, then were they Abraham's seed, and might
claim all the Promises and Privileges of the Covenant made with Abraham, as if
they had been Abraham's Natural Seed by Generation from Isaac.

2. Here is the duration of this Covenant; an everlasting, a perpetual, or an
eternal Covenant; a Covenant to last for evermore; so the Hebrew word (...)
Gnolam properly signifies: This Covenant was not to be taken down by Moses, no
nor by Christ, but was that everlasting Covenant which was ratified and sealed
with the Blood of Christ, Heb. 13.20.

3. Here are the Conditions of this Covenant; on God's part, I will be to thee
a God, which carries in it all manner of Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal
Blessings; as Pardon, Sanctification, and Eternal Life, Psalm. 144.14, 15.

And on Abraham's part; he and his Seed were to be the Lord's peculiar People,
to walk before God in holiness, and sincere obedience, Genesis 15.1.17.8, 9, 10.

Doct. That Covenant of Grace which God made with Abraham, of which
Circumcision then was, and Baptism now is the Seal; is a Covenant in which all
Believers and their Children are comprehended.

In speaking to this Doctrine, I shall by Divine assistance do these five
things.

1. Briefly show you the nature of the Covenant of Grace.

2. Prove this Covenant made with Abraham to be a Covenant of Grace.

3. That Circumcision then was, and Baptism now is, a Seal of this Covenant.

4. All Believers are in it.

5. That all the Infants of Believing Parents are in this Covenant, and have as
much a right to the now Seal of the Covenant, which is Baptism, as the Infants
of the Jews had to the then Seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision.

1. The nature of the Covenant of Grace.

The Covenant of Grace is God's gracious Promise of delivering from a state of
Sin and Death, and bringing into a state of Salvation by Jesus Christ, all that
by faith fly to, and lay hold on him.

In which Covenant we may take notice,

1. The Parties in covenant; God is on the one part of the Covenant, and
Believers and their Children on the other part, as has been proved.

2. That on our part Christ is the principal Head and Representative in this
Covenant; for this Covenant was made with Christ as the Second Adam, and in him
with all the Elect, as his Seed, Gal. 3.16. Romans 5.15. to the end. Isa. 53.10,
11.

3. Jesus Christ is the Mediator of this Covenant, 2 Timothy 2.5.

4. Herein God promises Life and Salvation to all Believers, 1 John 5.11, 12.

5. The Condition of the Covenant on our part is Faith, Mark 16.16.

6. Herein the Holy Spirit is absolutely promised to work Faith and all other
Graces in us, Prove. 1.22. Ezekiel. 36.27. and the first graces of Conversion is
absolutely promised us without any respect to the will of man, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.

This Covenant God made with Abraham was a Covenant of Grace; it must either be
a Covenant of Works, or a Covenant of Grace; but a Covenant of Works it is not,
for that requires personal perfect Obedience from all; and in case of sin lays
the Sinner under an curse, Gal. 3.10, 12. Romans 10.5.

It is a Covenant of Grace, as is evident.

1. This Phrase, I will be thy God, and you shall be my people, is never found
but in a promise of the Covenant of Grace; as Genesis 15.1. Exodus 29.45. Jer.
24.7.31.33.32.37, 38, 39. Ezekiel. 11.18, 19, 20.34.22, 23, 24, 25.37.23. Zech.
8.8. 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 21.3.

2. It was the Covenant of Grace; for it is an Everlasting Covenant, which is a
property of the Covenant of Grace, 2 Samuel 23.5. Heb. 13.20.

3. It Is a Covenant of Grace; for we find that in all After-discoveries and
Repetitions of the Covenant of Grace, the Spirit of God has respect to this;
as Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 105.42. Acts 2.39.

4. It was a Covenant of Grace; for Circumcision, the Seal of it, was a
Gospel-ordinance; Romans 4.11. it was a Sign and Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, i. e. of Christ.

5. It Is a Covenant of Grace; for that Phrase, I will be to thee a God,
contains all Gospel-blessings in it, Heb. 11.9, 10, 13, 14. Gal. 3.18.

6. Many Scriptures testify it was so; Micha 7.19, 20. Luke 1.72, 73, 74.

3. That Circumcision then was, and Baptism now is, the Seal of this Covenant:
That Circumcision then was a Seal, is evident, Genesis 17.10. Romans 4.11. Whoever
would be a visible Churchmember must be circumcised.

Circumcision is now abolished by Christ, Ephesians. 2.15. 1 Cor. 7.19

And Baptism now serves to the same purpose; whoever will be a Member of the
Christian Church, must be baptized; there is no change in the Covenant, only the
Rite of admitting Members is changed, Matthew. 28.18, 19. Acts 2.41. Col. 2.10,
11, 12.

4. All Believers are in this Covenant; this is abundantly evident, Romans 4.11,
12, 13, 14, 15. Gal. 3.29. The Covenant was made with Abraham as a Believer,
and with all Believers as well as him. Persons may be said to be in covenant in
a twofold respect.

1. Internally and invisibly; as united to Christ, living Branches, knit to
Christ by a vital union; and thus only the Elect are in covenant: The Covenant
thus considered is not the ground of Baptism; if we must baptize none but such
as are vitally in Christ, then must we baptize none; because tho we see the
outward profession, we do not know who belong to the Election of Grace.

2. Persons are externally and visibly in covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13.
Thus all who profess Christ, Tares and Wheat, wise Virgins and foolish, Matthew.
25.1, 2, 3, 4. This is the ground of Baptism; we do not baptize persons as the
Elect of God, or Infants as the Infants of the Elect, but as making a visible
and credible profession of Religion; so the Apostles did presently baptize such
as did profess repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ;
Act. 2.41. Simon Magus, in barely professing to believe in Christ, was baptized.

Thus all those who visibly profess Christianity, and are baptized in the name
of Christ, and do not scandalous Sins, notoriously contradict their Profession,
are to be accounted Believers in Covenant, and their Children to be baptized,
Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.

3. That all Infants of such believing Parents are in the Covenant of Grace,
and have as much a right to Baptism, the now Seal of the Covenant, as the
Infants of the Jews had to Circumcision, the then Seal of the Covenant.

This is the principal thing designed from this Text.

There are, you know, a sort of restless people amongst us, who are perpetually
letting fly, and with great indignation spurning at Infant Baptism; telling
you, your Infants have no right to the Seal of the Covenant, and thereby tempt
you to be cruel to the Children of your own Bowels, setting them among Pagans
and Infidels.

Therefore I hope it will be an acceptable service to plead the Cause of your
poor Infants, who cannot yet speak a word for themselves; to assert and prove
their right to the Covenant, and the initiating Seal thereof, which is Baptism.
I hope to find very few amongst you who will join with the Enemy of Infants,
but rather put to a helping hand to restore them those Privileges God allows
them. In speaking to this, I shall

1. Lay down some Conclusions to clear the Doctrine of Infant Baptism.

2. Prove the Doctrine by several Arguments.

3. Show the dangerous Consequence of denying Infant Baptism.

4. Answer Objections.

5. Prove that Dipping over head in baptizing in these cold Countries, is no
Ordinance of God, but a grievous Sin.

CHAP. I. Containing five Introductory Considerations, very needful for the
right understanding the Controversy of Infant Baptism.
1. COnsider, that a Doctrine or Practice may be proved to be of God two ways.

1. By the express words of Scripture; as the Resurrection of the dead may be
proved from such a Text as cannot be denied by any that own the Scripture to be
God's Word; as John 5.28. All that are in the grave shall come forth.

2. Or from Evident Consequences drawn from Scripture; then have we the mind of
Christ, when we have the right meaning of Scripture; thus Christ proves the
Resurrection to the Sadduces, Luke 20.37, 38. Now that the dead are raised,
even Moses showed at the bush, when he calls the Lord, The God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living.

Now this Scripture does not prove the Resurrection in direct terms, but
remotely, and by consequence. How little satisfaction would this Text have
given our Modern Anabaptists, if they had been present at the Dispute between
Christ and the Sadduces; would they not have reproved Christ for his
Impertinence? We will not believe the dead will rise, unless we have a plain
Text; would not these men have reported abroad that Christ could could not
prove the Resurrection?

Thus they deal with us at this day; We challenge you, say they, to prove
Infant Baptism to be God's Ordinance; bring us a plain Text, and we will
believe.

Now if we prove Infant Baptism as plainly as Christ proved the Resurrection,
then it is certainly God's Ordinance; and we are bound to own it.

Most we believe nothing but what we have totidem verbis, in just so many words
in Scripture? then how shall we prove the first day of the Week to be the
Christian Sabbath? That a Woman may come to the Lord's Table? That a Christian
may be a Magistrate?

2. Observe, That a mind prepossessed with Error and Prejudice, that is, not
seeking Truth, but only something to defend their present Embraced Opinions,
will not be satisfied, let the Text be never so clear, or the Argument never so
firmly built upon Scripture; but will still be inventing some shift or other to
ward off the force of any Text or Argument.

This is evident in the Example of the Sadduces beforementioned; we find indeed
Christ silenced them, but we do not find so much as one of them convinced, and
brought off to a sound mind.

Men are generally so fond of their Errors, that when they are beaten out of
one hold, they fly to another.

3. Those Doctrines which were clearly revealed, and fully confirmed in the Old
Testament, though little or nothing be said of them in the New Testament, and
were never repealed, are yet to be owned, received and believed, as if much had
been said of them in the New Testament; the whole Scripture is God's Word, and
what need of proving the same thing twice, unless the Authority of the Old
Testament were questioned? this is evident in the lawfulness of a Christian
Magistracy, in an Oath before a Magistrate, and making war upon a just
occasion: There is so little said of these things in the New Testament, many of
the Anabaptists have denied them; yet these being fully settled and confirmed by
God in the Old Testament, are to be owned, though little be said of them in the
New.

Now this is the case of Infant Baptism.

The Question is not by what Sign, but at what Age, persons are to be admitted
into the visible Church?

Now this was fully determined in the Old Testament, That Infants at eight days
old were to be admitted Members of the Visible Church; and suppose little be
said of it in the New Testament, it is because there was no need of it; this
truth having been once settled in the Old Testament, and never repealed.

4. Those Doctrines which were once thoroughly settled in the Old Testament, and
never called in question by any in the New, there was no occasion given to
speak of them again.

We find, that what was but darkly hinted in the Old Testament, and much
questioned in the New, is fully cleared; and much is said of it, as that
glorious Doctrine of Justification by the imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ: This was very darkly hinted in the Old Testament, and very much opposed
by Legal Preachers in the New Testament, therefore much is said in the New
Testament to clear it.

But Infants right to the Covenant, or to Church Membership, there was much
said of it in the Old Testament, and it was never denied or called in question
by any in the Apostles days; they were settled, and had had peaceable possession
of their Privileges ever since Abraham's time.

Had any in the Apostles days scrupled in Infants Right, very much would have
been said of it; for the Jews, who tenaciously adhered to their old
Privileges, would never so silently have suffered their Children to be cast
out of covenant, without taking notice of it.

A Doctrine may be very clear, the Scriptures brought to prove, and the
Argument thence deduced clear and convincing; and yet it may remain dark to one
that is incapable of discerning it. An Object may be very obvious, and yet not
well discerned, by reason the Eye is clouded. How plain are the Doctrines of
the Trinity; the Divine Nature of Christ; Justification by Imputed
Righteousness, etc. and yet many are so blind as not to see these things?

So the matter in debate, viz. That the Infants of believing Parents have a
right to Baptism, is as clear to me as the other, yet many will not see it. The
generality of Christians are but Babes in knowledge, have but dark and confused
apprehensions of the clearest Truths in Religion, and must needs be much more
at a loss in what has not that clearness and perspicuity in it.

CHAP. II Containing the First Argument for Infant Baptism.
IF God does own the Infant Seed of Believers as his, then they ought to
receive the Token of his so owning of them.

But God does own the Infant Seed of Believers as his, therefore they ought to
receive the Token of his so owning of them, which is Baptism.

Now that God does own the Infant Seed of Believers as his, I prove by these
Four Arguments.

1. If the Children of believing Parents are God's Children, their Sons and
Daughters his Sons and Daughters, then God owns them.

But the Children of believing Parents are God's Children, as is evident, Ezekiel.
16.20, 21. Moreover, thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have
born unto me, and these have thou sacrificed to be devoured: Thou have slain my
children and delivered them to pass through the fire for them. These Idolatrous
Israelites were at this time much degenerated, but yet God had not given them a
bill of Divorce, the Covenant was not dissolved; and therefore these Children
born within the Covenant, were God's Children; and his, not merely by right of
Creation, so all are his but by right of Covenant. There was little reason to
believe the Parents were gracious; but however, being visibly in covenant, God
claims their Children as his own, as belonging to his Church and Family by a
Covenant-Right.

2. If the Children of such Parents, who are one or both of them Believers, are
federally holy, then God owns them: but the former is true, 1 Cor: 7.14.
therefore the latter, else were your children unclean; but now are they holy;
the question was, Whether when the Husband was a Believer, and the Wife an
Unbeliever; or the Wife a Believer, and the Husband a Pagan, they might yet
continue to live with the Unbeliever: To this the Apostle answers, they might,
and gives this reason for it, viz. The unbeliever is sanctified by the
believer: Sanctified in Scripture usually signifies either

1. Savingly sanctified by Grace and Spiritual Life infused into the Soul by
the Spirit of God: or,

2. Setting Persons apart for some holy Use or Office; as the Priests, Sabbath,
Tabernacle, and all the Utensils thereof, and all the People of Israel who were
circumcised; but the unbelieving Husband or Wise here were sanctified in
neither of these respects; therefore it is otherwise to be understood.
Candidatus est fidei, say some, they are in a fair way of being won over to the
Faith of Christ, or prepared by God for such a use; so sanctified signifies in
Isa. 13.3. but the meaning is plainly this: That in regard that all the
Faithful are Heirs of the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17.1. I will establish my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations,
for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
Acts 2.39. The promise is to you, and to your children: This Promise being to
believing Parents, and their Infants, this Covenant the unbelieving Party
cannot undo by his or her unbelief; hence their Children were holy.

1. Not merely legitimate; for so they would have been, had both the Parents
been Pagans; to say as the Anabaptists do, they are not Bastards; is, says
Doctor Featly, a Bastard Exposition.

2. Nor can it be meant, that they are saved, justified and sanctified by the
Holy Ghost, (though if that were the sense, it would not contradict but confirm
the Doctrine of Infant Baptism; for whoever has Justification and
Sanctification, the thing signified by Baptism, has undoubtedly a right to the
Sign and Seal.

3. Then by holy must unavoidably be meant federally holy; i. e. within the
Covenant; as the Infants of the Jews were a holy Seed, and had a right to
Circumcision; so the Infants of Christian Parents, though but one of them a
Believer, had a federal holiness and a right to be baptized, as if both the
Parents had been Believers.

4. If the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to little Children, then Christ owns them;
but the Kingdom of Heaven does belong to them, Matthew. 19.13, 14. Then were
there brought little children unto him, that he should put his hands on them,
and pray, and the disciples rebuked them; But Jesus said, Suffer little
children, and forbid them not to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of
heaven. Here Christ declares the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to them. By the
Kingdom of Heaven is meant, either the Kingdom of Glory in the next World, or
the Kingdom of Grace here; the latter is most probable, for so the Church is
called, Matthew. 22.1, 2.

Now be it the one, or the other, its evident Christ owned them as his.

5. If the promise of the Covenant of Grace may be made to the Infant Seed of
Believers, then Christ owneth them; but the promise of the Covenant of Grace is
to the Infant Seed of Believers, as well as to their believing Parents; Genesis
17.7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee
in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and
thy seed after thee. And this Promise the Apostle recites as belonging to all
Believers, Acts 2.39. The promise is to you, and to your children.

Now from all it is abundantly evident, that God does own the Children of
believing Parents as his: Therefore they ought to receive the Token of his so
owning them, which is Baptism. The conclusion is unavoidably; If it be evident
God owns a Person, that Person ought to be baptized; let him show, that can,
any reason why a Person so owned by God should not be admitted into the Church
by Baptism.

CHAP. III. Containing the Second Argument for Infant Baptism.
IF the Infants of believing Parents ought to be received and admitted visible
Church Members, then such Infants ought to be baptized; but the Infants of
believing Parents ought to be received and admitted visible Church Members,
therefore they ought to be baptized.

Now that such Infants ought to be received into the visible Church as visible
Church Members, I prove by these Arguments.

Argument 1. If by the merciful Gift and Appointment of God, not yet repealed,
some Infants were once to be admitted Members of the visible Church by virtue
of the Covenant of Grace; then it is certain some Infants are still to be so
admitted: but the former is true, therefore the latter.

Two things must here be done to show,

1. That some Infants were once admitted Members of the visible Church.

2. That this Church Membership was never repealed.

1. Some Infants were once so admitted by virtue of the Covenant of Grace. If
any deny this, thus it is proved.

1. Infants were part of them that entered into covenant with the Lord God, and
into his Oath, that he might take them to be a peculiar People to himself; Deuteronomy
29.10 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your
God; your captains of your tribes, your elders with your officers, with all the
men of Israel. 11. Your little ones, your wives, etc. 12. That thou should
enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath which the Lord thy
God makes with thee this day. 13. That he establish thee to day for a people
unto himself; and that be may be unto thee a God, as he has said unto thee;
and as he has sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. 14.
Neither with you only do I make this covenant, and this oath; but v. 15. with
him that stands here with us this day before the Lord your God; but with him
that is not here with us this day.

This was not a new Covenant, but a renewing the Covenant made with Abraham, as
v. 13. Into this Covenant their little ones present were taken, and their
little ones yet unborn.

2. Infants were engaged to God by the Seal of the Covenant, which was
Circumcision, Genesis 17.10. Circumcision was not a mere politic Rite, as some
Frantic Anabaptists have dreamed; but a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, Romans
4.11. He received the Sign of Circumcision as a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith: That is, Circumcision was 1. a Sign; of what? of the Circumcision of the
heart by the Spirit of Christ; of the mortifying and killing the old man; of
the sad effects of Sin, both original and actual; and the way of recovery by
Jesus Christ. 2. It Is a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; that is, of the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to the Believer, and received by faith; this is
a Periphrasis of the Covenant of Grace, wherein righteousness is promised, and
made over to us in a way of believing.

3. Infants were baptized to Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.1,
2, 3. And Stephen calls that Assembly, whereof they were Members, the Church in
the Wilderness.

From hence it is evident beyond rational contradiction, that Infants were
sometimes taken into the visible Church, as visible Church Members, by virtue
of the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, That this Infant Church Membership was never repealed.

For if Infant Church Membership be repealed, then that repeal must be either
in Mercy or Judgment; but it was in neither, therefore it was never repealed.

1. Infant Church Membership was never repealed in Judgment; for God never
revokes his Covenant to any People, till first that People break covenant with
him, which Infants never did; therefore being once taken into covenant, it is
certain God did never cast them out.

Now it was a mercy to have Infants taken into covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12.
therefore if this Privilege be revoked, it must be in Judgment; for as it is a
great Mercy to be in the visible Church, so it is a sore Judgment to be out of
it, to be cast out of covenant.

Now if Infant Church Membership be repealed, then the Infants of Believers
under the Gospel are in a much worse condition than before Christ's
Incarnation; certainly Christ did not come to make our Children miserable, or
to put them into a worse condition than they were in before; this would make
Christ a Destroyer, who is the only Savior.

But certainly the Church is now in a much better condition, and her Privileges
more ample and larger than they were before; she has lost none of her
Privileges, but gained many more, Heb. 8.6. A more excellent ministry, better
promises, Romans 5.15, 16, 17. It Is certain Infants are not thrown out of
covenant, for that would much darken the Grace of God received in the Gospel.

2. Nor is Infant Church Membership repealed in Mercy; for it can be no Mercy
to take away a Mercy, unless it means to give a greater Mercy in the room of
it. Now let the Anabaptists show what greater Mercy God has given in the room
of Infant Church Membership; there is none: Therefore it was never repealed.

2. If that Covenant, by virtue whereof Infants were received into the visible
Church, was the Covenant of Grace, then it is certain it was never repealed.

But that Covenant, by virtue whereof they were taken in, was the Covenant of
Grace, therefore it was never repealed. But that Covenant, by virtue whereof
they were taken into the visible Church, was the Covenant of Grace, as is most
evident, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. And so the Covenant made with Abraham, whereof
Circumcision was a Seal, Genesis 17.7, 10. as the Apostle clearly proves, Romans
4.11. Now the Covenant of Grace is an everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23.5. never
was, nor ever will be repealed.

Infant Church Membership was no Ceremony, neither was it any part of the
Ceremonial Law; if any say it was, let them show what it typified under the
Gospel.

If it were a Ceremony, then the Materials of the Church would be a Ceremony,
and so the Church it self, which would be very absurb to affirm.

Neither was it part of the Moral Law, the Covenant of Works, whatever pains
some of the opposite Persuasion have taken to prove it; for the Covenant of
Works knows no Mercy; neither was it any part of the Judicial Law, for
Church Membership was not a piece of mere Policy; the Church is one thing, and
the Commonwealth another.

3. If there be no mention or record of the Repeal of Infant Church Membership
in any part of the New Testament, then it is most certain it was never
repealed. But there is no record of any such Repeal in any part of the New
Testament, therefore it was never repealed; if any say it was, let them show
where that Repeal is recorded. It Is true Circumcision is ceased, because it was
a Ceremonial Type; but Infant Church Membership being no Type or Ceremony, is
not ceased.

Argument 2. If an Infant was Head of the visible Church, then an Infant may be
a Member of the visible Church. But an Infant was Head of the visible Church;
for who will deny, but that Jesus Christ was Head of the visible Church in his
infancy? what honor was done to Christ in his infancy both by Angels and men?
Hence it appears,

1. That the Nonage of Infants does not make them incapable of being
Church Members, supposing God's will.

2. It shows, that it is the will of God that it should be so; because Christ
passed through each Age to sanctify it to us. Thus Irenaeus, who lived about an
hundred and fifty years after Christ, these are his words; Ideo per omnem venit
etatem, and infantibus Infans factus, etc. Therefore Christ passed through
every Age; for Infants he was made an Infant, sanctifying Infants; in little
Children, being a little Child, sanctifying them that have that very Age;
here is clear proof from Antiquity of Infant Church Membership.

Argument 3. If Infants are federally holy, then they have a right to visible
Church Membership; but Infants are federally holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. as we have
before showed, and all sound Interpreters tell us.

Argument 4. If Infants belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, then they belong to,
and are Members of the visible Church; but Infants do belong to the Kingdom of
Heaven, therefore they belong to the visible Church. Now some Infants do belong
to the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.14. Suffer little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven. By the Kingdom of
Heaven here, must needs be meant, either the Kingdom of Grace, that is, the
Gospel Church here; and then the meaning is, That the Gospel Church, which is
Christ's Kingdom on Earth, is made up of Infants, as well as adult persons; and
this is most likely to be the meaning: And so the thing in question is clearly
proved. Or else by the Kingdom of Heaven must be meant the Kingdom of Glory:
That is, Children shall go to Heaven as well as grown Persons. If so, still the
consequence is clear; if Infants are Members of the invisible Church, then have
they an undoubted right to be Members of the visible Church.

I grant a Person may be a Member of the invisible Church, and yet no Member of
the Visible: Yet whoever is a Member of the invisible Church, has a right to
visible Church Membership.

Argument 5. If Infants are to be received in Christ's name, then they do
undoubtedly belong to Christ's Church: But we are commanded to receive Infants
in Christ's name, Mark 9.36, 37. -- He that receives one such child in my
name, receives me, etc. Does Christ take them into his Arms, and would he have
them cast out of his Church? Are we to receive them in Christ's name, and do
they not belong to Christ, nor to his Church? See Mark 10.13, 14, 15. Did
Christ say all this to deceive us? certainly they are visible Members of the
visible Church.

Now if this be so, that some Infants were sometimes admitted by God's own
appointment, and that by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, visible
Church Members;

Then undoubtedly they ought to be baptized; for Baptism is the only Rite that
Jesus Christ, who is Head of the Church, has appointed for the admitting
Members into his Church, Matthew. 28.18, 19. All that are, or will be Christ's
Disciples, must be baptized in his name; if any know any other, let them show
it.

Now these two Arguments are abundantly sufficient to prove the Infants right
to Baptism, and it is needless to name any other: But yet because some think a
thing never proved, unless much be said, and many Arguments be brought; I shall
therefore add some other Arguments; though I shall not dwell, nor enlarge on
them, because the right understanding of these already mentioned, will give
light to what remains.

CHAP. IV. Containing the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth and
Ninth Arguments for Infant Baptism.
ARGUMENT III.
IF any Infants are Christ's Disciples, then those Infants ought to receive the
Badg of a Disciple, which is Baptism; But some Infants are Disciples, Act.
15.10. Why lay you a yoke upon the necks of the disciples. Now this Yoke was
Circumcision, as v. 1. and v. 5. There were some that would impose Circumcision
on the Disciples of Christ. Now this must needs be understood of Infants as
well as others, because that Circumcision was most commonly administered to
Infants; Therefore if Infants are not only meant, they are chiefly intended;
now that all Disciples of Christ ought to be baptized; there is a plain command
for it; and so a command for Infant Baptism, Matthew. 28.19. Go therefore teach
all nations; but in the Greek it is, (...), Go disciple all nations, baptizing
them; Infants are Disciples, as before, therefore ought to be baptized.

ARGUMENT IV.
If it has been the constant custom of the Church of Christ all along from the
Apostles days to baptize Infants, none never denying It till some hundreds of
years after; Then we may rationally conclude it was the practice of the
Apostles to baptize Infants; but the former is true, therefore the latter.

Now that Infant Baptism was practiced in the Primitive Times by the whole
Universal Catholic Church, is evident.

Irenaeus, who had seen Policarpus, St. John's Disciple, and therefore lived
very near the Apostles days, says, Christ came to save and sanctify all sorts;
Qui per eum venascuntur in Deum Infantes, etc. All that are born to God,
Infants, little ones, and Children -- Born to God in the Ecclesiastical Phrase,
is but the same with Infant Baptism.

Tertullian, who lived about the Year of Redemption 200. moved some Scruples
about Baptism, yet never denied the lawfulness of it: And in case that the
Infant was in danger of death, did vehemently urge it.

Origin, who lived but little after him, speaks again and again of the
baptizing little Children, and says, They received it by Tradition from the
Apostles.

About 150 years after the death of St. John, there was one Fidus, who raised a
doubt, Whether Infants might be baptized before they were eight days old,
because Circumcision was not to be administered till then. Therefore Cyprian,
Bishop of Carthage, and 66 more, met to consider this Case; and agreed, That
Infants, recens nati, new born, might be baptized.

And thus we might cite Testimonies of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Augustine, and
many others, that it was the constant custom of the Church to baptize Infants.

Which Custom is still continued in all the Churches of Christ all the world
over; as appears in all the Confessions of all the Protestant Churches: As
Helvetia, Bohemia, Belgia, Auspurg, Saxony, Wittenberg, Swedeland, France and
Peidmont; and Histories tell us it is practiced by the Russians, Muscovites, and
all the Christians in India, Syria, Cyprus, Mesopotamia, Babylon, Palastine;
and in every part of the world where there be any Christian Churches planted.

ARGUMENT V.
The Fifth Argument for Infant Baptism is this:

If the Infants of believing Parents be in the Covenant of Grace, and the
Promise of the Covenant do belong to them; then they may, and ought to be
baptized.

But such Infants are in covenant, and the Promise of the Covenant does belong
to them, therefore they ought to be baptized.

That they are in covenant as well as their Parents, is undeniably evident from
the tenure of that Covenant made with Abraham, which was a Gospel Covenant,
Genesis 17.7 as we have abundantly proved; and that the Promise of the Covenant is
to them, is as evident, Act. 2.39. The promise is to you, and to your children;
he means the Promise of God to Abraham; the Promise of Salvation by Christ,
which was promised both to Jews and Gentiles; but to the Jews in the first
place: Or suppose the Apostle has respect unto Jer. 31.33, 34. or to Joel
2.28. it alters not the case, for those were all branches of the Covenant of
Grace, and Explications of what was virtually contained in that first Promise
to Abraham, Genesis 17.7.

ARGUMENT VI.
The Sixth Argument for Infant Baptism is this:

If the Infants of one or both of the believing Parents be federally holy, then
they ought to be baptized; but the former is true, therefore the latter, 1 Cor.
7.14. By the holiness of Children there, is not meant Legitimacy; i.e. not
Bastards; so they would have been, if both the Parents had been Pagans.

Nor is it meant that they are savingly sanctified, but federally holy; that
is, in the Covenant of Grace; and so had an undeniable right to the Seal of the
Covenant, which is Baptism.

ARGUMENT VII.
The Seventh Argument for Infant Baptism is this:

If the Kingdom of Heaven belong to Infants, then they ought to be baptized;
but the Kingdom of Heaven does belong to some Infants, Matthew. 19.14. Suffer
little children to come to me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

1. Suppose by the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant the Kingdom of Glory; little
Children when they die shall go to Heaven; this sense the Anabaptists cannot
disallow; for they say, all Children dying in infancy, are saved; the Infants
of Turks, Pagans, Infidels, Papists, all sorts: Then if they are Heirs of
Glory, this must be by virtue of their interest in, and union with Christ; for
there is no other way to Heaven, but by Jesus Christ, John 14.6. I am the way,
the truth, and the life; no coming unto the father but by me: There Is no Name
under Heaven, whereby we can be saved, but only Jesus Christ. Now if Infants
have a right to Glory by virtue of their union with, and interest in Christ,
then have they a right to be baptized; if they have a right to Heaven by
Christ, then to receive the Badge of a Disciple of Christ, which is Baptism; no
person can have any plea for Heaven, that had not a right to be baptized, Acts
2.47. The Lord added to the Church such as should be saved. This adding to the
Church was by Baptism, v. 41. And let them show that can, what right those have
to Heaven, that are not, or at least have not a right to be so added to the
visible Church.

2. But by the Kingdom of Heaven is often understood the Gospel Church: So Mat.
22.1.13.47.8.20, 21.11.12 and in most of our Savior's Parables: And this is
most likely to be the meaning of this Text, of such is the kingdom of heaven;
that is, the Gospel Church takes Infants as well as adult persons to be visible
Members in it: And then the consequence is unavoidable, The visible Church and
Kingdom of Christ is made up of Infants as well as adult persons; Baptism is
the Door into the visible Church, therefore they must needs be baptized.

ARGUMENT VIII.
The Eighth Argument for Infant Baptism is this:

If Infants are to be received in the name of Christ, they are to be baptized
in the name of Christ; but Infants are to be received in the name of Christ,
Mark 9.36. Whosoever receives one such child in my name, receives me; to receive
them in the name of Christ, is to receive them as the Disciples of Christ; or,
because they belong to Christ: And if they ought to be thus received in
Christ's Name, as the Friends and Disciples of Christ, then they ought to
receive the Badge of a Disciple, to have the name of Christ named over them in
Baptism.

ARGUMENT IX.
If in our Savior's time the Head and Master of a Family was never baptized,
but his whole Family was baptized with him, then Children and Infants ought to
be baptized, for they are a considerable part of Families.

But we never read of any Head or Master of a Family baptized, but his or their
whole Household were baptized with them; as is evident in Cornelius, Acts 10.
and Lydia, and the Jailer, Acts 16. So 1 Cor. 1.14. etc.

Object. But there is no mention of any Infants in any of these Families.

Answ. No more is there of any of riper years: And it is much more likely that
there was Infants in those Families, than otherwise; there is no mention in
Scripture of Children of believing Parents baptized at adult age.

I shall multiply no more Arguments; by these the unprejudiced Reader will be
abundantly satisfied, that Infant Baptism is God's Ordinance.

CHAP. V. Showing that the Doctrine of the Anabaptists, in excluding Infants
from Baptism, and shutting them out of the visible Church, makes all Infants to
be of the visible Kingdom of Satan, and so leaves us no well-grounded hope of
the salvation of any dying in infancy; and is therefore to be justly abhorred
as false Doctrine.
Argum. 1. THat Doctrine that makes all Infants to be of the visible Kingdom of
the Devil, is false Doctrine.

But to deny Infants Baptism, is to deny them to be of the visible Church of
Christ; and if they are not visibly in the Church of Christ, they are visibly
out of it, and of the Kingdom of the Devil; there is no third or middle state
on Earth between the visible Kingdom of Christ, which is his Church, and the
Kingdom of the Devil; and all men and women, and Infants too, are visible
Members of the one or the other. If any know of any middle state, let them show
it; Christ and Satan share the whole world between them; and if Infants are not
visibly in the Kingdom of Christ, they are visibly in the Kingdom of the Devil;
the consequence is unavoidable: what barbarous usage is this to our poor
Infants! Christ commands us to bring them to him, and tells us, of such is the
kingdom of God; and the Anabaptists perversely thrust them away from Christ,
and from the Church of Christ, set them among Pagans and Infidels, who are of
the Visible Kingdom of the Devil.

Argument 2. That Doctrine that leaves us no well-grounded hope of the
Salvation of any Infants dying in Infancy, is certainly false Doctrine: But the
Anabaptists in denying Infant Baptism to the Seed of Believers, leave us no
well-grounded hope of the Salvation of any such dying in Infancy.

I do not say, That the Anabaptists do positively assert the Damnation of all
Infants dying in Infancy, for they do the direct contrary, assert the certain
Salvation of all Infants, even Turks, Pagans, and Jews.

But I say, they leave us no well-grounded hope of the Salvation of any such;
for if Infants ought not to be Baptized, then are they out of the Visible
Church; all who belong to the Visible Church, have a right to Baptism;
therefore in denying Infants Baptism, they throw them out of the Visible
Church: And let him show, that can tell how, what grounds there are to hope, or
expect, the Salvation of any out of the Visible Church.

I grant a person may want the engaging Sign, and yet have a right to
Church Membership, yea, to Salvation; so an Elect Infant dying unbaptized is
saved; though it have not the Sign, yet it had a right to it.

Now without a promise we can neither believe nor hope, Romans 15.4, 13. Ephesians.
1.18. Ephesians. 4.4. Col. 1.5, 23, 27. Heb. 6.18, 19.

Again, such as God intends to save, he adds to the Church, Acts 2.47. it is the
Visible Church there spoken of; and such who are not so added, or have not a
right to be so added, let them show, that can, what ground there is to hope for
their Salvation. And thus all well-grounded hope of the Salvation of any Infant
dying in Infancy, is taken away by the Anabaptists.

For thus they argue from Mat. 28.18, 19. None but those who are Taught, are
Disciples; Infants cannot be Taught, therefore are not Disciples; and that this
is the only way to make Church Members; and may we not on the same ground say,
they cannot be saved because they cannot believe? Mark 16.16. He that believes
not, shall be damned. I appeal to all unbiassed persons, whether there is not
on their own bottom, the same reason to say, they are incapable of Salvation,
as of Baptism; but there is great reason to believe and hope for the Salvation
of some Infants; for as we have showed they are in the Covenant of Grace, Genesis
17.7. Acts 2.39. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. they are to be joined in standing
Church-ordinances, 2 Chronicles. 20.13. Joel 2.16. From all which, and much more
might be said, it is evident some Infants are Saved, though the Anabaptists by
their erroneous Doctrine take away all well-grounded hope of the Salvation of
any Infants dying in Infancy.

CHAP. VI. Objections of Anabaptists Answered.
Obj. 1. IF it be God's Will Infants should be baptized, Why is there no
Command for it, as there was for their Circumcision?

1. The general Command includes Children, therefore there was no need of any
particular mentioning of them.

2. The promise is as express to Children, as to Parents, Acts 2.39. The
promise is to you and to your Children.

3. It had been absurd to have given a new Command for Children, seeing they
were in the actual possession of their Privilege, and had been so ever since
Abraham's time, none had ever questioned their right and title to the Covenant.
There was no Anabaptists in the Apostles days, nor of many hundred years after.

Obj. 2. But that Covenant, Genesis 17.7. was a Covenant of Works.

Indeed some weak Anabaptists have said so.

But it was not a Covenant of Works, for that knows no Mercy to fallen Sinners;
but there is Mercy in that Covenant, that God will be a God to his People, and
to their Seed: It was a Covenant of Grace, and that the Apostle proves, Romans
4.11. as has been abundantly proved before.

Obj. 3. Though Infants were then Church Members, it does not follow they are
so now; the Church is now built on another foundation. Thus a Preacher among
the Anabaptists lately urged to me.

Ans. 1. If this be true, then the Church of Christ under the Old Testament,
had a different foundation from the Church now under the New Testament: The
Foundation is now Jesus Christ; but what was it then? What will not Proud and
Ignorant men say to maintain an Error!

2. The Foundation of the Church then was Christ, and the Covenant of Grace was
the same then as now; only then was but the dawning of the day, the darker
appearances of the Son of Righteousness; but now the Sun shines in his full
strength. Heb. 10.1. Romans 4.3, 11.

Obj. 4. But though Infants were then Visible Church Members, and had a right
to the Sign of the Covenant, God has now cast off the Jews, and so Infant
Church Membership is ceased.

Ans. The Apostle assures us, That Church Membership, and all other
Privileges, are as sure and ample now to the Believing Gentiles, as they were
before to the Jews, Romans 11.17. And if some of the branches be broken off, and
thou being a wild Olive tree, were grafted in amongst them, and with them
partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive tree.

Obj. 5. But Circumcision is abolished, therefore Infant Church Membership.

Ans. Circumcision and Infant Church Membership, were two things; Circumcision
was but the Rite of admitting Visible Members; the Rite is changed, but not
Church Membership; Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision, Col. 2.10, 11, 12.

Obj. 6. Infants are not capable of the ends of Baptism, for it is an engaging
Sign, and signifies the washing away sin, both guilt and stain; Infants being
incapable of the use of Reason, must be so of Baptism.

Ans. Baptism has more ends than one:

1. It Is Christ's listing Sign for admitting Soldiers into his Service, or
Disciples into his School, or Subjects into his Kingdom; and this is what
Infants are capable of.

2. It Is an engaging Sign, wherein they are by Parents, or other, engaged to
God, and this they are capable of also.

3. The inward Grace thereby signified, as Pardon, Justification,
Sanctification, Adoption, these Infants are capable of, otherwise they could
not be Saved, and if these are not, the Sacrament may be without them.

4. A lease for years, with a Covenant to a Child that understands it not, may
be of great use: So Baptism, though at present the Child understands nothing of
it, yet it may be, and to converted Believers is of great use afterward, and
Godly Parents at present have the comfort: For God herein has provided for the
comfort of Parents.

5. A Person may be Baptized that is not capable of all the ends of Baptism;
one end of Baptism is to wash away Sin, etc. this was an end Jesus Christ was
not capable of, and yet he was Baptized.

6. Those Infants Christ took into his Arms and Blessed, and those Circumcised
at Eight days old, knew no more of the benefits they received, than ours do
now; they were no more capable of Faith and Repentance, than ours are; and yet
they entered into the Covenant of Grace, Romans 4.11.

Obj. 7. But we have no express Command in the New Testament to Baptize Infants.

Ans. I have shown there needed none; their Privilege had been settled many Ages
before, and never questioned by any, nor repealed by Christ; their former Right
continuing firm, Acts 2.39. the general Command includes them.

Obj. 8. But if they had a Right, we might expect to find some Examples of
their Baptizing.

Ans. It Is manifest that Believers households were Baptized with them, Acts 10.
Acts 16.15, 16, 33. and if no Infants are mentioned, so neither any Children of
Believing Parents Baptized at Age; and we have much more reason to believe
there were Infants in all, or some of those Families, than any have to think
there was none.

Obj. 9. The Baptism of Believers is come in the room of Infant
Church Membership.

Ans. it has been abundantly proved, that Infant Church Membership was no
Ceremony, or Type; if any say it was, let them prove it: Therefore as it was
never abolished, nor Infants never unchurched, nothing can be said to come in
the room of it.

2. That Baptizing Adult Believers should exclude Infants, is as if the
receiving and Circumcising the Gentile Proselytes into the Church of Israel,
had been a means to have unchurched their Infants, which for any to affirm,
would be extremely ridiculous.

Obj. 10. How can Infants covenant with God, or be engaged by this Sign? or
where does God engage Parents to promise any thing for their Children?

Answ. That Parents may, and ought to covenant for their Children, plainly
appears,

1: From Nature, Lex naturae est, Lex Dei; may not Parents take a Lease for
their Children? who buyeth Lands, and not for himself and Heirs? are not
Children bound by those Ties? and then much more to God.

2. From Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. here you may see the Parents
Covenant, not only for their Children then present, but unborn, and they were
by Circumcision to enter them into Covenant, so Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. and has the
Gospel taken away the Parent's Right in his Child?

Obj. We promise what we cannot perform.

Ans. We promise to educate this Child for God, to instruct him in Gospel
truths; leaving the renovation and sanctification of the Heart to God, who
works when, on whom, and by what means he pleases.

May not a man covenant for himself and Heirs to pay a yearly Rent? and what
follows in case it be not paid, but forfeiture of his Lease, and that from the
person that should have paid it?

Obj. 11. If Infants must be baptized, why may they not as well receive the
Lord's Supper?

1. If there were that Scripture Proof to administer the Lord's Supper to
Infants, as there is for baptizing them, we would do it, when they have as
clearly proved the one, as we have the other.

2. Baptism is the initiating Seal of entering into the Church, which Infants
being Disciples of Christ, are capable of; the Lord's Supper is the confirming
Seal to be administered only to grown Christians; therefore Infants have a right
to the one, but not to the other.

Obj. 12. If Infants ought to be baptized, why is it left so dark in the New
Testament?

Ans. 1. It Is not dark, which admits of such clear proof as you see this does.

2. That all Christ's Disciples ought to be baptized, is not dark, Matthew.
28.19. Infants are Disciples; therefore it is plain they ought to be baptized.

Obj. 13. The baptizing persons before they know, occasions much gross
Ignorance.

Ans. 1. Christ is the occasion of the ruin and damnation of thousands, for he
was set for the fall, as well as the rising of many in Israel, Luke 2.3, 4. but
had it been better the world had had no Christ?

2. The Gospel is the savor of death to many; had it been better then we had
had no Gospel? What will not the wicked take hurt by?

3. Let them show what in Baptism tends to breed Ignorance; Is the entering a
Boy's name in the School the way to breed him in ignorance? if a Child's name
be put into a Lease, is this like to hurt him? what harm is it to be in
Christ's Family from our youth?

Nay, the contrary is the way to breed Ignorance and Profaneness; for how many
sad Examples have we among the Anabaptists, who refusing to dedicate their
Infants to Christ, they are ignorantly and bruitishly brought up, live and die
like Pagans.

Thus it has been proved abundantly, that Infant Baptism is God's Ordinance;
that the Infant Seed of Believers were once taken into the Church as visible
Church Members; that Christ owns them, etc. therefore they ought to be
baptized; that it is a false and dangerous Doctrine to deny them
Church Membership and Baptism.

Enough has been said for the satisfaction of those who are seeking Truth;
such who wilfully shut their Eyes, it is in vain to set light before them,
because seeing they see, but do not understand; and hearing they hear, but do
not perceive.

There Is one thing more remaining, viz. The right manner of baptizing; that
shall next be dispatched.

CHAP. VII. Showing that Washing, Pouring, or otherwise applying Water to the
Body, is the right way of Baptizing; and not Dipping, as now used by the
Anabaptists.
WHEN the Anabaptists speak of Baptizing, as it is now done generally by all the
Reformed Churches, they do it with much scorn and contempt, and can scarcely do
it in any other terms, than Sprinkling; They say we may as well sprinkle a
Lamb, nay a Dog, or a Cat, as an Infant; what Christian Ear does not abhor such
Language!

Our Protestant Divines usually define Baptism thus; it is a washing in, or of
water, or an applying water to the Baptized: Or by sprinkling the Baptized in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. None, say the Anabaptists, are
rightly baptized, but such as are dipped or plunged over head in the water.

To this I answer three things.

1. That which is a plain breach of the Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill,
is no Ordinance of God, but a most heinous Sin; but dipping over-head in cold
water in these cold Countries, is a plain breach of the Sixth Commandment, Thou
shall not kill; which forbids the taking away of our own Life, or the Life of
our Neighbor unjustly, or any thing that tends thereunto: Now dipping in cold
water tends to the taking away Life, as many have found by experience, who have
contracted such Distempers in dipping as have hastened their Deaths: Therefore
the so doing is a great Sin.

2. The Greek word (...), though it be derived from (...), to dip or plunge,
yet it is taken for any kind of washing or cleansing, where there is no dipping,
Mat. 3.11. Mark 7.4. and it sometimes signifies sprinkling, yea to baptize by
sprinkling, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were all baptized unto Moses by the cloud in the
sea; all the world knows a Cloud does but sprinkle, Heb. 9.10. diverse Washings
or Baptisms, it is evident the Apostle means the sprinkling of Blood, Exodus
29.20, 21. and the Law of cleansing the Leper, Lev. 14.4, to 9.

3. Washing, sprinkling, or pouring water upon the Body, aptly represents the
thing signified, and the Sign need not exceed the thing signified. The washing
away Sin by the Blood of Christ is the thing signified in Baptism, and this the
Holy Ghost delights to express by washing, sprinkling, or pouring out water,
Psalm. 51.7. Ezekiel. 36.25. Zec. 12.10. 1 Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 9.
and 12.24.

Quest. But did not the Apostles baptize by dipping? did not Philip and the
Eunuch go down into the water?

Ans. 1. It was never yet proved that persons were then dipped. As for Philip's
Baptism, Act. 8.38. the particular manner is not expressed, neither can it be
collected; neither does the Greek Preposition (...), necessarily signify going
into, but rather unto the water, as it is frequently rendered in other places,
Matt. 15.24. (...), unto the lost sheep: So in all these and many other places,
Matthew. 26.10. John 6.9.13.1. 1 Cor. 10.2. 2 Pet. 4.7. So that into, and out of
the water, seems to be no more than unto, and from the water. Travelers tell
us it was in the Village Bethsara, where was a very small Fountain, not
sufficient to dip in.

2. The Multitude John and the Apostles baptized, it is highly probable it was
never done by dipping, Matthew. 3.5, 6. nay almost impossible it should, for
these two Reasons.

1. The extreme scarcity of water; water was extreme scarce in those hot
Countries, that there was not water to dip such multitudes in; Enon, where John
was baptizing, there was not much water; (...), is but Oculus, an Eye, a very
little Fountain; none in probability to dip a multitude in. And so likewise
Acts 2.41. when Three thousand persons were baptized; St. Peter began to preach
about the third Hour of the day, which was about Nine of the Clock; these Three
thousand were converted by this Sermon, and were all baptized the same day; it
must needs be for on before they began to baptize, and there was no River near
Jerusalem but the Brook Cedron, which Travelers tell us, was in Summer but a
dry Ditch, therefore it is highly improbable that either John or the Apostles
baptized by dipping.

2. From the multitude of people that were baptized: We do not find John had
any to help him to baptize, and is it likely he could dip such multitudes? and
is it to be imagined that Three thousand persons could be converted; prepared
for, and be baptized, by dipping, in a few hours.

3. If they were dipped, it must be either naked, or in their Clothes.

1. It Is very unlikely they were dipped naked, for this would be very immodest
for Ministers to baptize Women and Maids naked; a means to stir up lust and
unclean Affections, and so a breach of the Seventh Commandment, Thou shall not
commit Adultery; which forbids all unchaste thoughts, words and actions; now to
look on a Woman's nakedness is an unchaste action, expressly forbidden, Lev.
20.17. and for this reason God would not have the Priest go up to the Altar by
steps, Genesis 28.42.

Besides, there was a mixed multitude of men and women baptized together; and if
they were naked, they must see one another's nakedness, which would have been
an horrible reproach to Religion.

2. If they were dipped in their Clothes, it was either in all their Clothes,
or some provided for the purpose.

If in all their Clothes, is it at all likely that they should go up and down
in the wet Clothes; and that would not be dipping, to speak properly, but
soaking.

Or was it in some Clothes only? as some light Under garment, or something
provided for the purpose? there would be much immodesty in it, and it would be
little better than naked: Besides, Where must this multitude have Clothes for
the purpose? must they go home and fetch them, and provide them? for they
designed no such thing when they came together, nay, many of them lived at a
very great distance.

Let men's Imaginations work which way soever, it will appear extremely unlikely
that there was any dipping in their baptizing; that which is most probable, is,
That John the Baptist, and the Apostle, went unto the water, or it may be, into
it, with their Feet, wearing nothing but Sandals, and so with their Hands did
take up water and sprinkle, or pour on the persons to be baptized.

And how much less probability is there, that in the baptizing of Households, as
the Jailor's in the night, Lydia, Cornelius, and others, that there was any
dipping?

4. If it were clearly demonstrated, which never was yet done, that persons
were baptized by dipping; yet would it be proved but occasional in those hot
Countries.

There is no Precept or Command for it; and therefore it would be no way
binding to us, no more than our Lord's administering his Last Supper in an Inn,
and in an upper Room, in the Evening, to none but men and Ministers, does
oblige us to do so; Christ having nowhere appointed the quantity of Water in
Baptism, no more than the quantity of Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper. It Is
neither the quantity of Water in the one, nor of Bread and Wine in the other,
that gives efficacy to the Ordinance.

Obj. But if it be God's way, we must do it, whatever be said against it.

Ans. This is but to beg the question; moreover, we have proved it is not God's
way.

Obj. But say they, The significancy is not sufficiently expressed, unless we are
dipped in the water, Romans 6.4. We are buried with him by baptism into death;
which place the Anabaptists produce to prove Baptism by dipping, as also the
necessity of it; whereas neither can be hence proved.

The Apostle's design there, is to engage Christians to forsake and put off
Sin, as is evident, v. 1. the argument he uses to enforce this is, That in
their baptism they were baptized into Christ, into the likeness of his death,
and were so buried with him in baptism, v. 3, 4. so that as Christ dyed for
sin, by their Covenant-engagement they were to dye to sin, and rise to newness
of life: So that what the Apostle here argues from, is our Baptismal
Covenanting with God, which does not necessarily suppose Dipping.

Obj. But the Apostle alludes to the Custom of going under the Water.

Ans. How does that appear? they must prove the Custom, before they can prove
this is an allusion to the Custom; so that this Text does not prove the Custom;
and the Apostle's discourse may be well understood without it: And if the
Custom be owned, yet the necessity of Dipping does not thence follow.

Other Scriptures allude to Sprinkling; we may as well thence infer, the
absolute necessity of the Custom of Sprinkling, as 1 Cor. 10.2. where it is
said, That the Children of Israel were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud,
and in the sea, or as the words may be read together, with Moses by the cloud
in the sea, (...) sometimes being so rendered, Luke 4.1. (...), by the Spirit;
so they were Baptized by Sprinkling (for a Cloud does but sprinkle); by the
cloud, i. e. by Christ who was this Cloud, or else appeared in this Cloud, as
is evident from Exodus 13.21, 22. this was at least a figure and type of
Baptism; and in several other Texts.

APPLICATION.
IS this so, That that Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, whereof
Circumcision then was, and Baptism now is the Seal, is a Covenant which
comprehends all Believers, and all their Children?

Here is then a Fourfould use to be made of it: 1. Of Information. 2.
Examination. 3. Exhortation. 4. Consolation.


1. Use shall be of Information in three things.

1. This informs us of the infinite Condescension and Goodness of God, that
when the first Covenant of Works was violated, and the way to Heaven for ever
barred up against the Sinner, there being no possibility of ever getting to
Heaven that way, it should please the Lord to make a new Covenant, a Covenant
of Grace, a new and living way to the Father: O what love and grace is this!
John 3.14, 15, 16. Now the infinite Grace of God in this second Covenant,
appears in these two things.

1. That herein God does not stand on the old terms, do this and live; the Law
required perfect personal Obedience; but now in this new Covenant God is
pleased to accept of the Obedience and Righteousness of another in our stead,
even Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

2. That God does not only command few and easy things, as the condition of
this New Covenant, viz. Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, Acts 20.21. but does freely promise his holy Spirit to work these
and all other Covenant-qualifications in us, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27.

2. This informs us of the infinite Mercy of God to us, that we live under the
New Covenant, that God should offer Christ and Salvation in a Covenant-way to
us: O let us admire Grace! What are we that God should Reveal himself to us,
and not to the world! Matt. 11.25, 26. I thank thee, O Father, -- that thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
babes: even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

3. This informs us what a fearful Condemnation will befall those who refuse to
accept of Christ and Salvation on Covenant-terms, Heb. 10.28, 29. He that
despised Moses law, dyed without mercy; of how much sorer punishment shall he
be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the
blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has
done despite to the spirit of grace.

2. Use of Examination, Is there a Covenant of Grace? Then examine your selves
what interest you have in it; if you are in this Covenant, you are a happy
People; then every Promise in the Covenant belongs to you; but if you are out
of this Covenant, your case is dreadful.

Quest. How may I know whether I am in Covenant or no?

Ans. 1. Have you done all those things that are necessary to an external
visible Covenanting with Jesus Christ? And these are

1. Knowledge in, and acquaintance with the Gospel Covenant; you can never
Covenant with Jesus Christ, until you know the terms, John 17.3. This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ.

2. Have you entered your selves into this Covenant by Baptism? Have you put
your hand to the plow, and owned Christ in that Seal of the Covenant?

3. Do you live in an awful discharge of such external and visible Duties the
Covenant requires, such as Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. Sanctifying the Lord's day,
Attendance on God in all Ordinances, etc.

2. Have you those internal Graces, and do you perform those internal invisible
Duties the Covenant requires? If you have, then you are certainly in Covenant,
and all the Promises in the Covenant belong to you, Isa. 57.15. To this man
will I look, which is of an humble and contrite spirit, and trembles at my
word. John 3.16. Matt. 11.28. Come to me you that labor and are heavy laden.
Have you that new heart, promised Ezekiel. 36.26. those Graces mentioned Mat. 5.3,
4, 5, 6. if you have these in truth, then are you in Covenant.

3. Use of Exhortation, Is there a Covenant of Grace in which Believers and
their Chidren are comprehended? then be exhorted,

1. To bless and admire Free Grace that has given you such a Covenant; O what
Mercy is this to us and our Children! that God will call our Children his
Children; and our Sons and Daughters, his Sons and Daughters, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.

2. Live and act as those who are in Covenant, Phil. 1.27. Only let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

3. Secure your interest in it, and be often calling your selves to an account
whether or no you have an interest in it.

4. Learn to live upon this Covenant; fetch all your Comforts and
Encouragements from it in all distresses, Heb. 13.5. Be content with such
things as you have, for he has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.

5. Are your Children in Covenant? then dedicate them to Christ in the
Covenant, has God taken them in? Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.29. then do not you cast
them out, but do as Hannah did, first beg a Child from the Lord, and Vow a Vow
to dedicate this Child to God, 1 Samuel 1.10, 11. God calls them his, Ezekiel.
16.20, 21. And will you dare to withhold from God his own? How will you answer
it at his Tribunal another day?

6. O Pray down Covenant-mercy on your Children as Hannah did, and as Monica,
Austin's Mother did: O Pray hard for your Children.

4th. Use of Consolation; is there a Covenant-grace which comprehends all
Believers, and all their Actions; O Soul! art thou in this Covenant? then for
thy eternal Comfort be it spoken,

1. Thou shall never want any Temporal good thing, there is Food and and
Raiment, Provision and Protection in the Covenant, Heb. 13.5. Be content with
such things as you have, for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee.

2. Thou shall never finally lose thy Grace, or be cast out of Covenant, Prove.
8.18. Phil. 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.23. Jer. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good, but I
will put my fear into their hearts, that they may not depart from me.

3. Heaven and eternal Glory is thine as sure by this Covenant, as if thou wast
already in it, 1 John 5.11, 12. This is the promise he has promised us,
eternal life.

THE END*

