THE HARMLESS OPINION OF THE REVOLUTION OF Humane Souls; As a probable
HYPOTHESIS, And very serviceable to clear many DOUBTS, And answer many
Objections of ATHEISTS AGAINST THE Divine Providence, AND THE HOLY SCRIPTURES.

Modestly defended in a Reply to a late Treatise, Signed by J. H. Printed at
Oxford, and called by him, An Answer to some Queries, proposed by W. C. or a
Refutation of Helmont's Pernicious Error, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Sarah Ho^kins, in George-yard, Lumbard street, 1694.

ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 27. read their Unbelief, p. 19. l. 24. r. querie. p. 20. l. 20.
r. room, p. ^1. for envying, r. inveighing ib. l. 1^ after to wit, r. not, p.
23. r. Memoirs, p. 25. l. 1. r. good, l. ^ after Allegories, r. prove, l. 11.
f. material, r. natural, l. 21. f. ^version, r. retorsion, p. 27. l. 14. f.
raw, r. rape, p. 28. l. 22. sua, r. suo, p. 29. l. 12. f. work, r. stroke, p.
31. l. 15. af. Person add I answer no more then, p. 33. l. ult. f. Souls, r.
Bodies, p. 3^ l. 6. f. contract, r. tract, p. 45. dele. and that cons^^ently o^
Months and Days, p. 46. l. 6. r. Pythagoras, p. 48. l. 15. after l. r. have.

THE HARMLESS OPINION OF THE REVOLUTION OF Humane Souls, etc.
Diverse things in his Title Page need some Correction, or Animadversion; 1.
That he calls it Helmont's Error, and in the Body of his Treatise he calls
them that favor it, Helmonti^^s; but why it should be ascribed to Helmont ^y
this Author, I know not, unless purposely ^o defame him, which ought not to be;
nor ^ath he any more just Cause thus to asperse Belmont, than to asperse H.
Moore, late of Cambridge; a Man of great Note, Fame, and Esteem of the judgment
of this Man's Brethren, of his Profession, for his asserting in some of his
Printed Books, The Doctrine of he Pre-existence of Humane Souls, that is of
very near Affinity unto this of the Revolutions, yea so near, that it is lame,
and insignificant without it, so as to call the Doctrine of ^^re-existence
Moore's Pernicious Error, or the favorers of it Morians, a thing, neither
Christian, nor civil 2. That he calls it not only Error, but (...) Pernicious
Error; he b^gs the Matter, but has not proved it, as the sequel may make
appear to the Intelligent and Impartial Reader. 3. He mis-represents the
Hypothesis of the Revolutions, as if it held, that every Man is often born, and
has twelve Ages (...) Trial allowed him in the World by God; b^^ it is not so
affirmed universally and absolutely but only conditionally upon the Supposition
th^^ they are not converted the first, second, or thir^ time, etc. that they
live in the World, so a rather than sail, they shall have at least so many; but
such who are converted unto God and perfectly restored out of the Fall the
first time they live in the World, need no Revolution, and have none, except in
some extraordinary Case that they be sent again to d^ Good to others, as the
Jews did judge some (...) the Prophets were, and as some (by Peter's Testimony)
judged our Savior to be either Jeremiah or Elias, but that was their great
Mistake. 4. That he says it is warmly contended for, in, and about Lambourn,
in Wiltshire. I suppose none there, or elsewhere, contend about it, as any
Matter of ^aith, but only show their favoring it, as a probable and
serviceable Hypothesis, so making it rather a Subject of Philosophy, than of
Divinity, like the Hypothesis of the Earth's Motion, now generally well liked
by the most Learned; a thing, not many Years ago, as generally disliked; and
tho many places of Scripture seem to favor the Earth's Motion, yet that will
prove neither of them to be fit, to be made a Subject of Religious
Controversy, or Matter of Faith, so as either to impose the Faith of them upon
our Christian Brethren, or that any should arraign the Favorers of it as
guilty of Pernicious Errors, destructive to the Christian Faith, but rather let
all exercise their Christian Chatity one toward another, if they agree in the
Fundamental and Principal Matters of the Christian Faith, and live Christianly,
allowing a Latitude in lesser Matters to differ one from another in some
particular Persuasions, whether Philosophical, or Theological.

That in this Epistle he calls it a Whimsical, Absurd, and Trifling Opinion,
more Modesty had better become him, whom he confesses to be young; and if he
be young in Years, his Book shows him to be younger in solid Knowledge, or
sound Learning, and that he is but a Novice, and bad Proficient in these
Sciences mentioned by him (and whereof he professes himself skilful) called
Physics and Metaphysics. But as to the Opinion it self, better and wiser Men
than he have thought it neither Whimsical nor Absurd, but Rational; and seeing
he has judged it a trifling Opinion, why does he judge it Pernicious, as
making God the Author of Sin, and contradicting the Doctrine of the
Resurrection (one of the great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith) surely,
that Opinion, which is so very Pernicious to the Christian Faith, can be no
trifling Opinion, but of great Moment and Weight, not to be slighted as a
trifling Matter, but opposed and refuted with stronger and better Arguments
than this Author harh done; all that he has said against, it deserving much,
rather the name of a Triflle.

In his answer to the first Query, from Luke 6.38. and Matthew. 7.2. The same
measure you mete, the same shall be measured or meted to you again; he seems
first to confine it to that of judging, whereas it is clear from the Context,
especially in Luke, that it not only relates to judging, but also to Works of
Charity. See the foregoing words of the same Verse, but afterward he allows
it may be extended more generally, confessing the meaning of that Passage of
Scripture above cited may be, that thereby Christ does threaten to punish
Offenders in a way suitable to their Crimes; and besides that, this Punishment
is sometimes inflicted in this Life, but (says he) here is the point at which
we part; he concludes, that if God should fa^^ to punish an Offender before he
comes to his Grave, he must be born into the World again, to suffer in like
manner, as he has offended; whereas I conclude (he says) concerning such a
one, that so dies unpunished, that his Doom is deferred till the great Day of
our Accounts; in order to which, he shall rise again, and then shall God reward
every Man according to his Works, citing Matthew. 16.27. he adds, this Life is no
time of Recompense, citing on the Margin, Eccles. 9.1, 2, 4. Job 21.7. Psalm.
73.5, 9.

Reply. Why does he so positively charge the Person, he answers (with
concluding) whereas he querieth, and shows himself rather an Inquirer, than
an Asserter, as to the sense of this, and some other places of Scripture: But
for the better understanding the present Case, I propose the following
Considerations. 1. That every Offense that a Man commits against his Neighbor
has a two fold Guilt in it, one as it relates to God another as it relates to
his Neighbor, whom he has offended; the Offense against God is either
forgiven upon sincere Repentance, or if not repented of, is to be punished
after Death, at the great Day of Account; but the Offense or Guilt, as it
relates to the Neighbor offended, as in case of Oppression, Murder, or the
like, is not so pardoned upon sincere Repentance, as not to be punished either
in this Life, or some time after, as probably by living again, and then
receiving that punishment, if the Person offended have not Satisfaction made to
him, or perhaps it may be allowed, that if the offended Person does forgive the
Offender upon his sincere Acknowledgment of the Offense; Satisfaction being
made that way, he is not liable to Punishment for it either in the present Life
or the future. And is deserves our serious Consideration, that God will not
only have us seek his Forgivenness, in order to receive his Pardon, but we must
seek Forgiveness from the Persons that we have offended, in order to have them
forgive us also, or otherwise there seems a Punishment, suitable to the
Offense, to remain due to him that offends, which cannot be supposed to be at
the Day of Judgment in such a particular Case, when the Offense is forgiven of
God as to his part: And it is worthy also of Observation, that under the Law,
in case of Theft or Robbery, no Sacrifice could avail without Restitution, and
in case of murder (even as it is at this day) Repentance does not expiate the
Crime; without giving Life for Life, as among Men, though possibly it may be
allowed, that if one murder the other, and the Person murdered sincerely
forgive him at the instant of death, it may so alter the Case, that the
Punishment of Death may not be required of him in any following Revolution; for
every Man has a Right given him of God, as his Creator, to his Goods and Life;
and if a Man take this Right from him by Injustice, Justice requires it to be
restored to him by some Satisfaction of the thing it self, or the Equivalent,
which to use the Author's Words, may be called the same Analogick measure. But
now if God has pardoned the Offense, as it immediately relates to him; but the
Offended Person has not pardoned it, it is no Analogous measure of Punishment,
for the Offender to be cast into Hell Fire, for his Offense barely against his
Neighbor, when God has forgiven it, as it respects him; and therefore it
seems probable it must be punished with some suitable and analogous
Punishment, either in the present or ^uture Life by Revolution, before the Day
of Judgment, seeing the Punishment of Hell Fire, (upon the supposition of God's
forgiving what relates immediately to him is too severe and ^o way Analogous in
that Case; and seeing the places of Scripture above cited, seem chiefly to
relate to Men's Offenses against their Neighbors, the Punishments seem
chiefly, or rather only to relate to the times of Life here in this World, and
not to that which is to come, when it may be supposed that God has forgiven,
or may forgive afterward the Offense as immediately relative to himself. 2. It
is a Maxim among the Mystic or Cabbalist Authors, that seems very agreeable
both to Scripture and good Reason; si sit judicium infra, non est judicium
supra, i. e. If Judgment be executed here below in this World, it is not
executed above, or in the World to come for the same Offense, for no Earthly
Judge punishes twice for the same Offense; may it not therefore be allowed,
that to prevent the severe Punishment of Hell Fire, that comes upon the
finally Impenitent, it pleases God to punish Men here in this World with less
severe Punishments than Hell Fire, which is the most severe, according to which
there is a Maxim among the Hebrew Mystic Authors, that God does punish the
People of Israel with long and great Punishments in this World, that they may
escape the more severe Punishment of Hell Fire in the World to come, they
believing that every Israelite shall inherit the Felicity of the World to come,
however severely they are here punished for their Sins, in order to their
Amendment, all their Punishments here being Fatherly Corrections; and this may
not only be extended to all the natural Branches of Israel, but to all God's
Elect and Heirs of Salvation, of Gentiles, as well as of Jews, and seems well
warranted by Scripture, both of the Old and New Testament, that says all
Israel shall be saved, and the whole House of Israel, which comprehends all
God's Elect every where, both of Jews and Gentiles; and thus the Cabbalists
expound the place in the Mystical Sense, Genesis 25.28. Isaac loved Esau, ((...),
quia venatio in ore ejus,) because the Hunting, or Prey, was in his Mouth; (see
the Hebrew Text) understanding the word His, to relate not to Isaac, but to
Esau himself, Isaac foreseeing by the Spirit of Prophecy, that Esau's Posterity
should greatly afflict the Posterity of Jacob in the latter Days, for a
Punishment of their Sins; and he foreseeing that this Punishment should be for
their Good, and to prevent their being punished with Hell Fire in the World to
come, therefore he loved Esau, the rather on that account, and accordingly the
Jews rec^o^ that the Gentiles or Nations that so hardly now use them, are of
Esau, and do but fulfill Isaac's Prophecy, that they may only have evil things
here in this World, that so they may escape greater vils in the World to come,
as Christ said concerning Lazarus, He had his evil things in this Life: And why
many good Men are so greatly afflicted with Poverty, and other Chastisements in
this Life, seem to have a reference to the like Case. The places of Scripture
above cited by the Author, prove not, that this Life is no time of Recompense
in any Case; for he grants that in some Cases it is, and these places indeed
prove, as well as common Experience daily teaches us, that many wicked and
cruel Oppressors escape Punishment in this present time of Life; but that they
are not punished in their Posterity some time before the end of the World, they
prove not, and that cited place in Job 27. seems rather to prove the
contrary, even that Oppressors and wicked Men are punished in their Children
and Posterity, as v. 19. God lays up his Iniquity, (see the Marginal Note, i.
e ^he Punishment of his Iniquity) for his Children, he rewards him, and he
shall knew it; but how this is done, will appear more hereafter.

In his Answer to the second Query, from Rev 13.10 he restrains, that He,
particularly to some bloody Persecutor of the Christian Religion, either Nero,
or Domitian, or both; who having butchered the Christians, were butchered
themselves, and the Rom^ns afterward taken Captives by the Goths and Vandals,
so that they had the same measure meted to them again in this Life.

Reply. As his applying that place of Scripture by a particular Limitation, or
Restriction to Nero or Domitian, is very singular, and contrary to the general
Sense of Expositors, so it is very absurd, for it relates to some great Series
or Succession of bloody Persecutors, after the beginning of the 42 Months, and
entering of the Apostasy, and the time of the Churches flight into the
Wilderness, for the same space of time otherwise called 1260 Days, or three
Years and a half, as the Context makes plainly appear, many of which
Persecutors, as the persecuting Emperors in the fifth, sixth, and following
Centuries after Christ's Resurrection, died a natural Death in their Beds, when
they then lived, and yet here it is foretold by John, That they, and such as
joined with them in bloody Persecution should suffer the like Punishment in
their Posterity and Successors in after Ages, as propably has been in part
already fulfilled, and yet is more to be fulfilled: But Math. 26.52. Speaks
universally, For all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword,
said Christ.

In his Answer to the third Query, he gives away the Cause more than he is
aware of, or understands, if he knew the manner of the Revolution as it is
generally held by the chief defenders of it, he would go near to say the same;
for they hold that Men are not only punished in their Posteitry and successors
by Revolving in them, but that Ancestors do frequently Revolve in their
Children in After-Ages, in order to Conversion together with them. But that
this noted place in Romans 11. should only be understood of the Posterity of them
that should live in these After-ages yet to come, excluding the Fathers and
Ancestors, is expressly contradictory both to this place, and many other places
of Scripture, that say all Israel, whereas the Posterity excluding the Fathers
of so many Ages and Generations backwards, would be but^ very small part of
Israel. And indeed the many Arguments used by Paul in that Chapter, to prove
that the natural Branches that were cut off by them in belief, shall be grafted
in again; even all of them by true Faith in Christ Jesus, either proves that
the Fathers that dyed in their unbelief, shall be grafted in again, or the
Apostles Arguments seem not effectual and of force, for he Argues universally
concerning them all and not a part of them. See ver. 16, 24, 26, 27, 31, 32.

In his Answer to the fourth Query, he again wrongs the Person, querying,
saying he concludes, whereas he but querieth the meaning of that place of
Scripture, Matthew. 23.35. And he wholly passes by that which is most material
in that passage, viz. That these Jews to whom Christ spoke, are charged
expressly with slaying Zacharias, whom they slew said Christ, between the Temple
and the Altar; now if they had no share in it, how could he charge it upon them
as their Fact? But his main defense, is that by these words of Scripture Exodus
20. where it is said God visits the Sins of the Fathers to the third and fourth
Generation. God does not limit his Justice, as if it did never reach Offenders
beyond the third and fourth Generation; a greater number does not exclude the
less, but contain the lesser under it.

Reply, What is this but to sport with Scripture, to put such strained Sense
and Contradiction upon it? He may as well say, when the Scripture says There
were eight Persons saved in the Ark, he may at this rate of perverting
Scripture say there were eighty or eight hundred, or as many more, as he may
fancy, and defend himself by alleging if there were eighty or eight hundred
there were eight, but this is mere trifling instead of solid answering. God
said an Edomite was not to enter the Congregation of Israel until the fourth
Generation, nor a Bastard or Moabite until the tenth. But it would be a gross
perversion of Scripture to extend the Edomites entrance beyond four
Generations, or the Bastards and Moabites beyond ten, seeing the Scripture
preciesly mentions these numbers. His Example out of Scripture as 1 Samuel 2.31,
32. 2 Kings. 5.27. and 1 Samuel 15.2. prove not what he intends, unless be had
proved that these Men's Posterity did neither Sin in their Fathers, nor that
their Fathers by Revolution did not live in them; but in this he falls short,
not understanding the true and real Hypothesis of that Doctrine which he
undertaketh to refute, but that he faith it is no injustice in God to punish
Children for their Fathers Faults when they imitate their Fathers wickedness, I
answer, if their Sin be only bare imitation, and doing the same wicked things,
they are justly punished indeed for their own Faults; but if they were not
accessory to their Fathers Sins, but only that they commit the same Sins, they
are punished for their own Sins, according to that place of Scripture Every one
shall die for his own Iniquity; the Son shall not bear the Iniquty of the
Father; but the Soul that sins shall die; and every one that eats the
sower Grapes, his Teeth shall be set on edge. But their Fathers Sins are not
imputed to them only for their bare imitation, but for having a share in their
very Sins, either whilst they were in their Fathers Loins, and acting in them,
(which is one Branch of the Revolutions) or afterward living together with
them in distinct Bodies. And because (according to the Hypothesis of the
Revolutions as delivered by Cabbalist and Mystic Writers) the Souls of the
Fathers do frequently Revolve in their Posterity, as their Grand Children, or
Childrens Children, therefore they are punished in, and with their Children, as
their Children Sinned in. and with them, even as we all Sinned within Adam; and
his Sin is not our Sin by bare imputation as some allege, but by real
participation, the Souls of the Children while in their Parents Bodies being
capable to act in them Good or Evil, as it is said of Levi, who received
Tithes, he paid Tithes in Abraham, and though the Souls of his Brethren were
in Abraham, as well as he, yet it is not said of them but of him. For his
Reference to Dr. Cradocks Sermon on Eccles 9.2. I have not had oppertunity to
see it, and think it not material to enquire after it. Next, whereas he argues
that Christ makes a manefest distinction between the Jews and their Fathers,
which he would not have done had they been the same Persons; again he says the
same Men could not be the Children and Fathers too, as our Inquirer imagines.

To this it is easily Replied, that though there is a manifest distinction
betwixt the Fathers and the Children, yet this hinders not, but that, without
all Confusion, the Children might have both Lived and Acted in their Fathers.
As Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, and yet Levi was not Abraham. And as the Souls
of the Children may or do impregnate the Fathers without Confusion, ( See for
this in Genesis 46.26.) So may the Souls of the Fathers live in the Children, by
Impregnation or Revolution, without all Confusion, as the chief Assertors of
the Hypothesis of the Revolutions do hold; for thus they understand these
words, Exodus 20. Visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers upon or in the Children
to the third and fourth Generation. That is when the Souls of the Fathers live
again by Revolution three ^or four several times in the Children, they are
gently corrected and punished in order to their Melioration or Amendment, which
is called their Visiting; but if they do not Amend they suffer Excision for
some long tract of time, and have not the benefit of any farther Revolution
until that tract of time be expired. But if in the third or fourth Revolution
they amend, and are Meliorated in any degree, they may have many Revolutions,
as the Cabbalists say, Even as many they need were it to a Thousand
Generations. For so they understand these words, Show Mercy to Thousands of
them that love me, and regard my Commandments. (so the translation) which is
said to express the rich and abundant Mercy of God; but not that so many shall
be needed, as Christ adviced the Disciples to forgive not only seven times a
Day but seventy seven times. And yet none need so many times Forgiveness every
Day, for it is probable few if any need or have above twelve, answering the
twelve Hours of the Day. How beit, I find not that the Ancient Cabbalist
Writers limit the number of the Revolutions to twelve, that being rather
queried than asserted as a probable Circumstance, by some private Persons but
whether true or false, ^oucheth not the substance of the Opinion it self, as
neither do some other Circumstantial things Query in the two hundred Queries or
Historically Narated in the Printed Epistle cited by ^his Author. But that he
says, The Inquirer ^^th not Argu^ from the Murder of Abel; that bears equal
weight with that of Zacharias; but ^his is only the Authors own Conceit, but
the Argument holds equally good from the Murder of Abel, as that of Zacharias,
nor do his two supposed Reasons he brings ruin the proof, for the Souls of all
those Jews upon whom the Blood of Abel was charged, might have been at that
very time in Cain, when he murdered righteous Abel, and might have been
consenting to that Act of murder in Cain, as according to the Doctrine of the
Cabbalists, concerning Preexistence, we all Sinned in Adam being in him when he
Sinned, and concenting to his Sin. And it is but a weak and trifling Objection
that some make against this, that so many Souls could not be contained in Adam,
for Souls being Spirits, and in corporeal Beings, do not justle for room as
Bodies do. There were seven unclean Spirits in Mary Magdalen, and a Legion of
unclean Spirits (the Legion containing 6000, and more) in one Man. But if
Spirits did justle for rooms as Bodies do, so many could not have been in them.

His second supposed Reason proceeds from his own Ignorance or in Advertency,
and not from the Letter cited by him, for though the Letter and Book of the two
hundred Queries, allow to every Man (if need be, and that they are not
perfectly converted and restored sooner a Thousand Years to live in the Body,
yet they allow four Thousand Years for the whole time from the first to last,
as suppose the Intervals of time that Souls are diflodged from all Humane
Bodies, until they return to live in Bodies, together with that time they live
in Bodies, till all their Revolutions be finished, making up the space of four
Thousand Years, See for this in the Book of the two Hunred Queries Query 27,
28, 61. all which expeesly mention four Thousand Years.

His flourish by his envying against the favorers of this innocent Hypothesis
grounded only on his Mistakes, and inadvertency I let pass without any other
Answer on this Head.

In his Answer to the fifth Query, from Ezekiel. 16.25. He is grossly mistaken, as
if these words did imply an exalted manner of denying that ever Jerusalem, (to
wit the Stone, or Timber, or Houses,) but the People shall return to her former
estate, for the following words in ver. 60, 61, 62, 63. do plainly intimate
that she, to wit, the People shall return, and God will (Mercifully) remember
his Covenant with them, and shall have this good Effect on them, that they
shall remember their ways, and shall be ashamed when she shall receive her two
Sisters, Sodom and Samaria; so that the words are no denial, but a positive
promise to Jerusalem, and the other two, viz. Sodom and Samaria. His Reasons
against this are not worth answering, as if by Cities were to be meant not the
People, but the Houses of Stone and Timber, whereas it is plain, the People
only is to be understood, and not the Houses with their Materials, or as if all
returns were made within a Thousand Years, according to the Hypothes^^ of the
Revolutions; but that is showed above to be his mistake, the whole Interval
being four Thousand Years. And his third Reason is very weak and idle like the
former, for tho^^ all the Citizens of Sodom were destroyed, and had no
posterity of their own to revolve in, the^ might revolve in others having
nearest Affinity or Relation to them that did remain of other Cites.

In his Answer to Query six from Psalm. 90. ^^ Thou turnest Man to De^^ruction,
and say, Return ye Children of Men. He alleges this Return is at the
general Resurrection; but the following words correct his mistake, that have a
necessary reference to them, for a Thousand Years in thy sight are but as
yesterday, when it is past and as a Watch in the Night, which Peter, i^ his ^
Epist. 3.8. expounds, as holding fort Gods long Suffering toward Men in
general giving them four Thousand Years space from first to last, in order to
repent and amend, which is but as four Days, or as four Watches o^^ Night;
therefore this Return of Men, seemed not to be understood of the general
Resurrection, but of the Revolutions of the Souls of Men; and the like may be
said in answer to what he says, from that other place in Eccles. 1.4.
Generation goes, and Generation comes. Which must needs have another sense
than what we say, Year comes and Year goes; because of the Similitudes and
Examples, that Solomon, brings from the Sun, the Winds, and the Rivers; for
the same Year goes away comes not again; but the same Sun that goes down,
rises again; and the same Wind that goes to the South, returns to the
North; and the same Rivers that come from the Sea, return to the Sea. Therefore
the same Generation of Men in Solomon's time, that went off, did afterward
return again, until they finish their Circuit, excepting such particulars as
were made perfect, and so need no Revolution. And here he anticipates that
Objection, why do they not remember former things? vea. 11. There is no
Remembrance of former Thing. Which cannot relate to Memories or Records, for
such there were, but to Revolutions it does well refer.

In his Answer to Queiry seven, from 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. He takes it for
granted without any solid Proof, that Christ his preaching to them of the old
World, was his Spirit in Noah, but this is at large refuted in the Book of two
Hundred Queries; and is is plain the preaching of Christ to them was after his
Death, and consequently long after Noah. Again, his preaching had a good effect
upon them to Conversion; for it is said, They were sometimes disobedient, and
therefore not always; but in Noah's time they remained disobedient, until after
Christ's Death; for they were all drowned for their disobedience. And indeed
Calvin, is so ingenious, as to confess it relates to the time of Christ, after
his Death, though he has another gloss upon it, less propable, than is here
enquired. But the Author does greatly mistake the enquirer, as if by Prison, he
meant Humane Bodies, for he means not Humane Bodies, but their Sins, and the
power of Satan, in which they were held until living again they were converted
after Christ's Death by the preaching of the Gospel; yet it is not to be
supposed that all were converted, as neither all the Sodomites at their last
Revolution shall be all converted, for the words of Christ imply that some
shall not be converted, but perish, It shall be more Tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, etc.

In his Answer to the eight and last Query, Taken from the Metaphor of a good
Husbandman, that new Grafts and Transplants his Trees, that so at last he may
have kood Fruit. He alleges the Metaphorical Arguments will prove nothing,
but the weakness of such as make them.

Reply. Metaphorical Arguments, such as Parables, and Allegories what is
intended by them, with respect to the scope and intention by them, when dully
applied, and the Anology is due and proper, as in this case it is, being
warranted by Scripture; for Paul tells us, Romans 11. That the material Branches
that in his Days, were cut off for their Sin of unbelief, shall be Grafted in
again, in some following Age or Time of the World, so as to be made true
Members of the Church of Christ. Now how can this be, but by their living again
by Revolution, in order to their Conversion, seeing we find no ground in
Scripture to believe that Souls are Converted any where else, but as they live
here in Humane Bodies on Earth? His Arguments from Metaphor, by way of
reversion, being partly false in matter of Fact, and partly improper and unduly
applied; I need not spend time nor Paper to refute it? I say partly false in
matter of Fact, because contrary to his assertion, a wise Gardener will remove
his Graft from his Stock, he has once incerted it; if the Stock prove bad, and
happen to die and corrupt, he will remove it to another stock, and not easily
lose it. Also a wise Gardener may by several Graftings or Transplantings of the
same Tree, make better Fruit, as experience has proved. But the Author it
seems, has as little skill in good Husbandry, as he has in Scripture
Mysteries. And his last Argument on this head is most improper, because Man
dies not as a Tree dies, as the Author confesses, the Soul of a Man after
Death survives, and though corruptable with Sin, yet the wise Gardener knowing
that it is capable of amendment, thinks fit to give it a Trial of a new life
again in a Humane Body.

Having thus briefly discovered the insufficiency of the Authors Answers to the
Inquirers queries, I shall in the next place with the like briefness consider,
and show the weakness and insolidity of his pretended Reasons against this
harmless Opinion.

His first Reason is, suppose some bloody Tyranty, as Nero, to have taken away
the Lives often Thousand Christians, and by more than a Hundred kinds of Death;
he argues, that by this Hypothefis of having the same measure returned ^o him
again, he must die ten Thousand times, and more then by a Hundred kinds of
Death.

Reply. This will not follow, for even according to that divine instinct of
Justice that is in Man; if one Man kill ever so many, Justice requires no more,
but that he die for all his Crimes, with some additional Circumstances of his
Death, to make his punishment the more severe: And the Authors own distinction
of a Analogical measure of punishment, may serve to answer him here, but this
Analogical measure cannot be understood to be the greatest and severest
Punishment of all, viz the torment of Hell Fire, for Ages of Ages simply for
offenses done to there fellow Creatures, but rather some suitable Punishment
executed here in this World, as I have said above upon the Answer to the first
Query; and the like may be said in case of a raw Rebellion, or self-murder,
some Analogical Punishment, such as the most wise and just Judge of the whole
World shall Judge most fit to be inflicted, is sufficient in these cases, the
greatest and most severe Punishments of Hellfire, being reserved only for such
as demonstrate themselves incorrigible after all these less severe Punishments
here in this World have been inflicted on them: For Christ himself has taught
us, that the proper Punishments of every Sin is not Hell, f^ire, but only of
the worst sort, as Contempt of God, finally Impenitency and Unbelief, after God
has extended much long-suffering toward them? see Matt. 5.22. where three
several degrees of Sin is held forth, the first two against a Man's Neighbor,
as Anger, and Contempt, (without cause) they are only punishable by the
Judgment of the Council, to wit, by the Superior Judicatories above, unto which
Superior Judicatories above, the Jews had their inferior Judicatories below,
corresponding as the Tabernacles, and things of the Law here below, did
correspond to their Patterns above, and to this Christ seems here to allude,
but for a Man to say to his Brother, (without a cause) thou Fool, is a manifest
Contempt of God, and reflects upon the great Creator himself, and therefore he
that is Guilty of this Sin, is in danger of Hellfire, if he repent not timely
of it.

His second Reason is that by the Hypothesis of the Revoluteons, God would be
the Author of Sin, because whatsoever God has ordered to come to pass in a
certain and necessary manner, of that he is the Author.

Reply. Here the Author is greatly guilty against himself, by his own
inadvertncy, Sua se jugulans gladio, killing himself. I mean his own Argument,
by his own Sword; for hedid grant above, that Domitian and Nero, who butchered
the Christians, were butchered themselves, and the Romans afterward taken
Captives, by the Goths and Vandals. And in these cases that Law of Justice of
meting the same measure unto them, was fulfilled in this Life. Now let the
Author clear it to us, whether there was not a Divine Hand, and Providence in
these Cases, and whether the Divine Justice is not herein demonstrated: And, if
this will not prove God to be the Author of Sin in these Cases, no more will it
in any other of the like Nature; and when Jerusalem, (to wit, the People) did
put our Savior to Death, and about 40 Years afterward, were severely punished,
1100000 of them being slain by Titus Vespasian, which was a most just Work upon
them; and many other, the like Cases and Instances, wherein all sincere
Christians acknowledge a Divine Hand of Justice, as when Jerusalem was formerly
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, and yet, they piously believe, God is clear, though
the Instruments frequently are wicked, unjust and cruel, and that he is not the
Author of their Wickedness, and he has a most infallible and perfect Knowlegde
and Foresight of all that comes to pass in this World, be it ever so bad; and
he can, and does so bound the Sins of Men, and show his overruling Hand over
both the Sins, and the Sinners, that in all, and over all, his Power, and
Justice, is glorified, and his Mercy exalted toward all them that love him.

But it is no ways proper here, to dispute about the Decree^ of God; for it
would make a Digression from the Subject that is proper, to that which is
foreign, and wherein all Prosessions in Christendom are concerned, to clear God
from being the Author of Sin in such Cases, when Men are here in this World
punished suitably, according to their Crimes, as well as the Favorers of the
Opinion of the Revolutions, unless the Author will say, that all such things
are come to pass in this World by mere Chance, or Accident, without Divine
Providence; but this, I hope, he will be more pious, than to affirm.

His Third Reason, being of the like Importance with the former, the same
Answer may suffice: Beside, his Inadvertency is great; that he considers not
that Repentance, or Satisfaction, made to the Person offended, and the offended
Person, forgiving the Offense, as frequently comes to pass, puts a stop to
this Author's Imaginary Wheel, or Progress of Wickedness, without end.

His Fourth Reason is only a Query, which is but a dull and faint way of
arguing; for if neither the Author, nor I, could answer all the nice and
curious Queries, that one could raise about the Resurrection, o^ some other
great Point of the Christian Faith, it will not therefore follow, that such
querying is a Refutation of those Doctrines. But in his Prosecution of his
Query, he supposes some things to be absurd, which the Favorers or Asserters
of the Hypothesis of the Revolutions will not grant to be absurd; for they are
Parts and Branches of it; when fully explained. One is, That two o^ three Souls
cannot revolve in one Humane Body; but the Cabbalists and Mystic Authors, who
assert the Doctrine of the Revolutions, say, they can, and that they frequently
so do, and this Author has said nothing as yet, to prove the Absurdity of it;
when he does, in his next Answer he may have a Reply. If one would argue, this
would make a Confusion of Persons, that Levi was in Abraham, together with his
Brethren; to wit, as to their Souls, and perhaps also, as to the Seminal
Principles of their Bodies, which are very Spiritual, and therefore well enough
consistent together for some due time; for the Body being as a House, or
Lodging to the Soul, why may not diverse Souls lodge in one Body for a time, as
well as ^ivers Men in one House? But it is confessed, that evey Soul shall have
its proper Body, in its own proper Season and Time. Another thing he supposes
to be absurd, which will not be granted to him, is, that some Souls of Men,
drowned in Noah's Flood, do remain unprovided with Bodies to this very day;
though this is no necessary Consequence, yet until he prove the Absurdity of it,
let it remain as a possible thing so to be; for according to Cabbalist Authors,
many Souls that sinned in, and with Adam, suffered Excision, and remain
unprovided with Bodies to this very day, which they call new Souls, (not as
being newly created; for the Hypothesis holds, that all Souls were created
together, and put in Adam's Body,) the first time they come into Humane Bodies,
since Adam's Fall, and that still such new Souls will be coming into the World,
for the space of 6000 Years, from Adam's Creation, and no longer. It is true,
there is a Query in the Treatise of the 200 Queries, whether all Souls of
Mankind had not begun their Revolutions before 2000 Years were expired, which
the Authors, or Writers of that Treatise did seem to favor in the Affirmative;
but upon better Consideration and Acquaintance with Cahbalist Authors, that
hold the Negative, they are better informed; and here, once for all, let me
advise the Readers of this Treatise of the 200 Queries, not to turn every Query
into a Position, or Affirmative Conclusion, as some have too unadvisedly done;
for the Person or Persons that did give forth these 200 Queries, were not clear
in many of them, so as to make them Positions, or Conclusions, either
Affirmative, or Negative, but rather left that to a farther consideration, or
to some other Person or Persons, that with more clear Light and Understanding,
might be enabled to give positive Answers to every one of them, which yet has
not been done; and it is not to be supposed, that this Author that is so
pre^udic'd, against this Harmless Opinion, shall be the Man that can do it,
except he lay aside his prejudice, and be further enlightened. But here I
perceive, some will be ready to object, what time can these new Souls have to
run their 12 Revolutions, more or less, after 6000 Years are expired, when but
a 1000 Years shall remain before the end. But, to this it is easily answered,
there will be no occasion for Souls then to revolve; for the Necessity and Use
of Revolutions, will be supplied some better way; to wit, by a greater increase
of Light and Grace, and a longer time of Life, (such as was before the Flood)
and such as shall then be converted, and become Saints, shall not die, but be
changed, as the Scripture plainly declares. And, as concerning the times of
the Souls (that revolve) absences from the Body, nothing can be universally or
generally determined; for, according to the Cabbalist Authors, some Souls
return very soon into Humane Souls, as the Souls of such as die in Infancy, or
are not great Sinners; but such as die great Sinners, and are guilty of such
Sins, that deserve Excision, which Moses's Law teaches, (namely, what
particular Sins deserve Excision) these may remain able^^t from Bodies for a
long contract of Time as^uppose 300 Years, or more, or less, as the Divin
Wisdom and Justice has appointed; but, that some do return quickly after
Death, or the Dissolution of the former Body, diverse Cabbalist Authors affirm,
and I know no sufficient Reason to contradict it.

His 5th. Reason I have already answered, by telling him that all Revolutions,
(according to Cabbalist Authors will end at the Expiration of 6000 ^^ars, from
Adam's Creation, so it will be all one thing, whether Souls then be in their
tenth or eleventh, or first and second Revolutions, for there will be need of
any more.

His 6th. Reason is soon dispatched; Solomon tells us, That there is no
Remembrance of sormer things at present, (but at the great Day of Accounts,
when the Books shall be opened, there will be a Remembrance of all things,) his
Argument is most weak, and impertinent, as if Men's living again can be to no
purpose, or of no service for their Amendment, or Melioration, except they
remember former things, or as if their Punishments would have no Service to
their Good.

Reply. How many times does God punish Nations, Countries, Cities, and
particular Persous, for particular ^ins, that many, or most are not sensible
o^, and have no^ a distinct knowledge of, and yet these ^uni^^^^ents are of
Service to them, and are blessed, (...) sanctified to many, for their
Conversion and ^^ormation of Li^e; the Application is easy (...) he Ca^e in
Hand: And, to move Men to ^epe^tance, for former Sins, whether committed in the
present Life, or any former time of L^^e, it may suffice, that they are
sensible they have such S^^s in them, and that they must be cleaused from them
before they can enjoy the Peace and Favor of God, and enter into the Kingdom
of God; ^or how many do sincerely repent of Pride and Envy, and the like Sins,
and do sincerely labor to crucify these, and the like Sins in them, with
great Success, by the help of God^s Grace, and yet they cannot tell neither
when nor where the Root of these Sins began to take place in them; for it is
but too appare^t, that Men generally, not only bring into the (...) ^orld with
them the Seed of Adam's Transgression, but other strong, and great Roots of
Sin; that had grown up in them, when formerly they lived in the World; I let
pass his E^cursion on this Head, grounded on his own ^^^^^^ation, as of his
proffering to pay 2000 l for ^^00 l Present to a Man at his second Revolution,
having no other Service, but to gratify his jocund Humor, or perhaps to let
the World know that he is so rich, or of so good Credit, that he can give good
Security for 2000 l. to be paid after so many Years Expiration.

Thus having answered his pretended Arguments, taken from Reason, against the
Revolutions of Souls; let us in the last place consider his Argument; he essays
to bring from Scripture, but with as little Success.

His first Argument is, that it interfers with the Doctrine of the
Resurrection; for if the Soul have lived in more Bodies than one, in shall rise
in all these Bodies, but the Soul rises but in one Body. Therefore, etc.

Reply. It seems this Author, for all his professed Skill in Physics, and
Metaphysics, has but little knowledge in either of them, otherwise he could
not argue so weakly on this Head. Does he not know that the Physics teach that
all natural Bodies, both of Animals, and of Men, are in a continual change of
their visible and gross Parts even as a River that continually changes its
Water, so that perhaps not one drop of Water is now in it, that was in it some
small time past; and this my Physics taught me, which I learned when I was a
Schoolboy, and I well remember that the great Objection then that was made
against this continual ^hange of the visible and gross Parts of the natural
Bodies of Mankind, was, that it seemed to interfer with the Resurrection of the
Body; for by the Doctrine of Physics, almost universally received, no Man
living has an Ounce weight, or Grain weight of the visible and gross Parts of
that Body, which he had some Years past ^ yea, as some think some few Months
past; and if we divide the Age of a Man's Life, that lives till he be 70 Years
of age; suppose, that but once in seven Years he changes all the visible and
gross Parts of his Body (though it is generally acknowledged he changes them
much oftener) he has by this account changed his whole visible Body ten times
at least in this space of time^ now let the Author tell me with which of these
Bodies he shall rise at the Resurrection, and I shall answer him with the ^ike
Reply to this present Objection; but if he say, there are certain Spiritual and
invisible Parts, belonging to these visible and gross Bodies, that may or shall
make up the entire Spiritual Body at the Resurrection, I can say the same in
the present Case, and if he can tell me where these Invisible and Spiritual
Parts of all these Bodies are lodged, in the mean time, whither they cleave to
the Body, or are separate from the Body in that Interim; I can tell him to the
same purpose in our present case, and can as easily answer all his Queries in
the one case, as he can answer mine in the other. As for that Hypothesis of the
Souls; attracting to its selt the Particles of its former Body; by a (...)
Virtue, it is only queried, and not (...), and therefore I am the less
concerned to (...), (...) I find no difficulty to defend it, against all that
he ^^ith against it in a bare affirmation, without proof, viz. That the Soul
has no ^uch Magnetic Virtue or Cuality; but it is very probable it has,
because of its great ^nion with the Body, and Love to it, as we find b^
experience in our selves^ and the Souls being loath to be uncloathed of the
Body, as Paul says, but only for the sure Hopes that it has, to be clothed
upon at the Resurrection of the Dead.

And upon this Head he turns Inquirer by proposing about 7 or 8 Queries, that
have no force in them, against the H^pothesis of the Revolutions, more than
against the Doctrine of the Resurrection, generally believed by all good
Christians, and professed by himself; and I could query as many, or rather more
things, relating to the Resurrection it self, that would be as hard, or harder
for him to answer with Satisfaction, but this is an improper and ineffectual
way to dispute against an Opinion, to query, and to give no positive Reasons,
whereby to oppose it. But that he may not only seem to query, he will rather
give some shadow of Reasons, without all Substance, than none at all: One is,
that after this fashion Men shall be brought into the World without any rather;
for a Man begets not the Souls of his Children, and as for the Body, the Soul
attracts and unites that to it self, o that the Man we call Father has nothing
to do in the Matter.

Reply. Though a Man beget^ not the Souls of his Children, yet i^ he will not
turn I^fidel, so as to contradi^^ the express Testimony of Scripture the Souls
of the Children come out of the Loins of their Fathers, Genesis 46.26. and are
conveyed into ^umane Bodies, by humane Generation; but to (...) to all the
curious and knotty Question, either about the Soul, as when, or how it comes
into the Child's Body, it is probable, that as it sur^^sseth my Knowledge,
either of Physics or Metaphysics, so it surpasses his also, and perhaps of
most Men. His pleasing himself to requently with his jocund Humor on this and
other Heads, without any just Occasion given, whereby to render the Hy^othesis
of the Revolutions ridiculous, is more like to have a contrary Effect upon
himself; as if at this rate, a Woman might be with Child without a Man, or that
Abraham did not beget Isaac, which are but ridiculous Consequences of his own
framing, having no ^ust Ground or Foundation from the Hy^othesis i^ self.

Another of his wild and ridiculous Consequences is, that a Man may beget his
own Grand father and Grandmother, also that Men may be their own Fathers, and
thus the Genealogy of Adam shall be confounded, and there shall not be seven
Generations or Persons, from Adam to Enoch, though the Scripture calls them
seven.

Reply. All this wild and ridiculous way of reasoning proceeds not from any
Absurdity of the Hypothesis it self, but from his great Ignorance, as touching
the several Parts, Strokes and Lineaments of it, as asserted by its chief
Favorers, the Cabbalist Writer; therefore in order to help him to a better
understanding of the Hypothesis, let him know, that they commonly teach, that
every Child that is born into the World, beside the Soul or Souls that revolve
in the Body of that Child has a Soul, that is most properly the Soul of that
Child, and which is commonly a new Soul, as formerly described; but these
revolved Souls, suppose of the Child's Grand father, are but Inmates in
comparison to that other Soul, that is the only proper Soul of the Child, and
this makes no confusion at all, to say, the Soul of the Grand father may lodge
in, or impregnate the Body of the Grandchild, more than to say, the Soul of
the Grandchild did formerly lodge in, or impregnate the Body of the
Grandfather; as that Levi was in Abraham's Loins, which the Scripture expressly
declares, yea, and paid tyths in Abraham. Besides, that it is not probable, nor
allowed, that the Souls of these worthy Men, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
many others, either needed, or had any Revolution in their Children. The only
most seeming difficulty on this Head is, if diverse Souls by Revolution, live
together in one Body, with that called the new Soul, that is, most properly the
peculiar Soul of that Body; if these Souls attain to a perfect Restitution in
that Body whose shall that Body be at the Resurrection, or which of these Souls
shall have it? But this may be some way answered by the Similitude of a Grain
of Corn that is sown in the ^arth; how out of it diverse Stalks and Ears of
Corn, and many Grains arise, each Grain as full as that single Grain that was
sown; for though the gross visible Body of a Man be but one, yet so much of
Spiritual parts of Bodies may be lodged within that Shell or Husk of the gross
visible Body, as may suffice to be Seeds, or Seminal Principles to as many
Bodies, as there are Souls lodged within that one Body. And thus, as the
Scripture teaches Every Seed shall have its own Body; for thou sowest not the
Body that shall be, but bare or naked Grain, etc. See 1 Cor. 15.

The distinction betwixt Revolution and Impregnation, the Cabbalist, or Mystic
Hebrew Authors hold to be this; that the Soul that revolveth into a Child's
Body, comes into that Body immediately after the Child is born into the World,
so is not conveyed from the Father of the Child, but comes ab extra, i. e.
from without; but the Soul that does impregnate another Body, comes not into
that Body when it is newly born, but some considerable time thereafter, as at
the age of 20 or ^0 Years.

But that besides the Soul, that is the most proper and peculiar Soul of the
Child's Body, which the Child receives from the ^ather, not by Generation, but
by Conveyance, ^even as Water is conveyed out of one Vessel into another
another Soul may come into the same Body by Revolution or Impregnation, (which
two they distinguish) they prove from Genesis 46.12. where it is said, that Er and
Onan died in the Land of Canaan, and yet they are numbered to be of the 70 Souls
that went down into Egypt; therefore they must needs have revolved into some of
their Brethren, and that most probably ^harez and Zarah, who were born to Jud^^
their Father, after they (viz. Er and Onan) died.

That ^ew or none have delivered their thoughts about the Revolutions when they
died, is no Argument against it, though he make it one; good Men do not revolve
commonly, and what bad Men say, is little to be minded, though Balaan seemed to
Prophecy of his Revolution in these words, that may be read Prophetically in
the future; I shall die the Death of the Righteous, and my last end shall be
like his, and yet his Death was not such as to that time of Life; as also his
Prophecy that he should see Christ, but not near, which Origin takes to be
spoke Prophetically; but how could this be true, if he did not revolve in one
of them. See Origin, Hom. 15. in number. Ipse velut de seipso Prophetans dicit,
moriatur Amma mea inter Animas justorum, and fiat semen meum sicut semen
justorum: In English thus: he (to wit Balaam) as prophesying of himself, says,
Let my Soul die among the Souls of the Righteous, and let my Seed be as the
Seed of the Righteous; so the Septuagint, as to this latter part of the Verse,
Numb. 23.10. but in the former part he seems expressly to hold forth the
Metempsychosis, or Transanimation, according to the Septuagint Version, the
words are (...), i e. Let my Soul die in the Souls of the Righteous; and that
the wise Men, or Magi, of the East, who come to worship the Child Jesus, had
their Descent from him, and their Knowledge or Institution; he says expressly,
Hom. 14. in number. ^^x illo denique fertur Majorum genus, and in^s^tutio in
partibus Orientis vigere -- and ideo quando Natus est Jesus, agnoverunt
stellam, and intellexerunt adi^^^^i prophetiam magis quam populus Is^ael: In
English thus; Of him the Kindred of Magi is said to have come, and their
Institution or Learning to have grown in the Eastern parts, -- and therefore
when Jesus was born they knew the Star, ( viz. that he prophesied of Numb.
24.17.) and understood that the Prophecy was fulfilled more than the Pe^^ of
Israel.

These words in Psalm. 78.39. God remembe^ that we are but Flesh and Wind, that
passes an^^ and comes not again; say nothing against the Revolutions, more
than against the Resurrecti^^ for it is granted, the gross and visible Body
(...) Flesh comes not again. as no more is it raise^ out of the Grave in that
gross Capacity, as i^^ deed no more could that Soul come again by any Power of
its own; but as it is sent, or commanded according to Psalm. 90. Thou turnest
M^^ to Destruction, and again thou say, return (...) Sons of Men: And to his
Instances of dive^ Holy Men, that signified they had no Expectation to live
again on Earth in a visible and gr^^ Body, it is granted; for the Hypothesis of
the Revolutions does not assert, that the Saints li^^ again until the
Resurrection of the Dead, wh^^ they shall be raised, to live in Spiritual
Bodies (...) but the Revolution is of such as are not Saints^ in order to their
becoming Saints. And as t^ that in Job 7. v. 9, 10. he that goes down to t^^
Grave, comes up no more, it is granted; the gross and visible Body comes up
no more, neither to revolve, nor to be raised from the Dead^ which is all that
place proves.

As to his sensible demonstration, it is grounded on a false Foundation, which
is his own gro^ mistake in several Particulars; one is, that the Soul undergoes
12 Revolutions in the space of ^000 Years, and that consequently odd Months and
Days, which mistake being noted above, I need say no more to it here; but if
the Soul's absence be not above one Year from the Body, as in some cases it may
happen, as has been said above, it gives his sensible Demonstration no
strength: His other mistake is, that the Soul by its Magnetic Virtue (by this
Hypothesis) draws to it the gross and visible Particles of the gross and
visible Body of Flesh and Bones, but supposing a Magnetic Virtue, it is not
supposed, that it draws the gross and visible Parts or Particles of it, leaving
the gross Body of Skin and Bones, or dried Flesh behind, so that his Instance
of embalmed Bodies, and Popish Relics of dead Men's Bones, serve nothing his
turn.

That place of Scripture, cited by him, Heb. 9.27. To disprove the Hypothesis
of the Revolutions, will not serve his turn; for the most it proves is, that
all Men die once, but it says not that Men never died, or shall die more but
once; for some that were raised from the Dead, died twice, as is generally
confessed, but the time that Christ suffered for Men's Sins, being the fullness
of time, many were then in their last Revolution, and so were to die yet once,
and but once. See Query 45. in the Treatise of 200 Queries.

His last Reason, that this Doctrine, if believed, would lead Men into
Security, is as invalid as any of the former, as if they cannot remember that
they lived before, they must conclude they have 11 times of Life yet behind;
but I deny his Consequence. That it is reported of Pythagorus, that he did
remember that he had formerly lived, this does not make his Reason good; for
first, every Report is not true; secondly; if the Report be true, the Case must
be singular, or extraordinary in him. But that as his last Strength, he says,
A Man is sure that it is eleven to one; but that he shall have another
Revolution, which is odds enough on the Sinner'^ side: I answer, he is not
sure; but rather it is eleven to one that he shall not have another Revolution*
but suppose he could be sure to have another, I say, that Surety has no more
direct Tendency to lead him into a sinful Security, than Hezekiah his being
sure that God would add 15 Years to his Life, could lead him into a sinful
Security; for we ought to distinguish betwixt the right use of a thing, and the
abuse of it, or in other terms, betwixt Causa per se, and causa per accidens; a
direct, or indirect, and accidental Cause.

That he blames the Enquirer for his defect of Modesty, because, according to
him, if they will not answer him, he concludes it is because they are ignorant
and unable; but if they will answer him, then he will charge them with Atheism:
I think the Author deserves rather to be blamed, for his unfair representing
him; for the Enquirer does not simply charge them with Atheism, for answering
fairly, but for exclaiming against it, and calling it damnable Doctrine. Again,
the Enquirer is not so uncharitable as to judge that every Man is an Atheist,
that does not believe the Doctrine of the Revolutions, only he declares freely,
(without any Immodesty) what the Logical Consequence of that Doctrine is, that
denies the Return, or Revolution of Souls, which is to deny diverse of the
Glorious Attributes of God, and what is that but to deny God himself, seeing
these Glorious Attribute^ of God are his essential Perfections, as to be
Merciful, Gracious, Long-suffering, abundant in Goodness and Truth, abundantly
Pardoning; but that God should eternally damn many Thousands, and 10000s of Men
to Hellfire, who never had more time to repent in, or amend their Life, but a
few years; as suppose to some 70 or 80, to many more, not 40, and to very many,
not 20 yea not 10, and some that die in Infancy, that to be sure are not
generally, or universally sanctified, and therefore are not fitted for Heaven,
and to give them no other time of Life, seems to the Enquirer a plain denial
of these most Glorious Attributes of God, his being so abundantly Merciful,
Gracious, and Long-suffering, and consequently by a Logical Inference, a plain
denial of the true God; but yet it is not every thing that may be made a
Logical Inference against a Man's Opinion, that ought to conclude him
practically as bad as the Opinion it self is: And such is the present Case with
the Inquirer, who does charitably believe that many pious and good Men do not
believe the Doctrine of the Revolution of Humane Souls, and so are no guilty of
Atheism, properly and directly, only he tells them what their denial of such a
Doctrine may Logically infer, and what is the tendency of it, I am sure much
more to Atheism, than the believing the Doctrine of the Return of Souls, as duly
represented, leads to careless Living, or sinful Security, which is a sort of
practical Atheism; and seeing this Author thinks not himself chargeable with
Immodesty, for telling the Inquirer that his Opinion leads to careless Living,
that is a sort of Practical Atheism, no more does the Inquirer think himself
chargeable with Immodesty, for plainly telling him that his contrary Opinion
leads consequentially to that, which may be called Atheism.

Thus I sufficiently with great briefness and plainess answered (as I hope
every Impartial and Intelligent Reader will perceive) to every thing that
seemed Material in this Authors Treatise against this harmless Opinion, at
which he seemed so much prejudiced, and I think he will say, I have Treated him
gently, being loath to exasperate him, considering (what he professes himself
to be) that he is young, and has not had much Reading or Experience,
especially in this sort of Mystic Learning, and is not acquainted with the
several necessary parts of the Hypothesis, that serve to make it duly
intelligible, in order, either to its Refutation or Confirmation: But if (...)
be desirous to know further concerning the Hypothesis it self, and the parts,
and other Circumstantial things to it, I commend to his reading. Read Isaac
Loriensis his Latin Treatise, translated out of Hebr. in Cabbala de nudata.
Tom. 2. de Revolutionibus Animarum, bound up with other Treatises, Also
H^^^ont's Agreement of the Macrocosm and Microcosm, and his (...) Treatise of
the Divine Attributes, and the Book, lately printe^ at London, called Seder
Olam; not that I would have him take for truth all that he reads in these
Books, but let him read, and well consider, and then judge. (...),

FINIS.

