The Use and Manner of the BALLOT.
the Senate floor

I Shall endeavor by this FIGVRE to demonstrate the Manner of the VENETIAN
BALLOT (a thing as diffiult in disccourse or writing, as facile in practice)
according to the use of it in OCEANA; whereof the figure represents the Senate,
containing as to the house or form of sittin^ (...) square and an half; the
Tribunal at the upper end, being ascended by four steps. Upon the uppermost of
these sit the Magistrates that constitute the Signory of the Commonwealth, that
is to say, (A) the Strategus; (B) the Orator; (C) the three Commissioners of
the great Seal; (D) the three Commissioners of the Treasury; whereof one (E)
exercises (for the present) the Office of a censor at the middle Vrne (F)

To the two upper steps of the tribunal, answer (G G: G G:) the two long
benches next the wall on each side of the house; the outward most of which are
equal in height to the uppermost step; and the innermost equal in height to the
next: of these four benches consists the first Seat: as the second Seat
consists in like manner of those four Benches (H: H: H: H:) which being next
the flore are equal in height to the two nethermost steps of the Throne: SO THE
WHOLE HOUSE IS DISTRIBVTED INTO TWO SEATS, EACH CONSISTING OF FOUR BENCHES:

This distribution causes not only the greater convenience, as will be shown
unto the Senators in the exercise of their Function at the Ballot, but a
greater grace to the aspect of the Senate. In the middle of the outward benches
stand (I: I:) (...)e chairs of the Censors, those being their ordinary places,
though upon occasion of the ballot they descend and fit where they are shown by
(K: K:) at each of the Outward Vrnes (L: L:) Those (M: M:) that sit with their
tables; and the bowls (N: N:) before them: upon the halfpace or second step of
the tribunal from the floor, are the Clerks or Secretaries of the house. Upon
the short seats (O: O:) on the floor (which should have been represented by
woolsacks) sit (P:) the two Tribunes of the horse; (Q:) the two Tribunes of the
foot; and (R: R: R: R:) the Judges: all which Magistrates are Assistants, but
have no sufferage. This posture of the Senate considered, the Ballot is
performed as follows.

First, whereas the gold balls are of several suits, and accordingly marked
with several letters of the Alphabet, a Secretary presents a little Vrne
(wherein there is one ball of every suit or mark) unto the Strategus and the
Orator; and look, what Letter the Strategus draws, the same and no other is
to be used for that time in the middle Vrne (F:) the like for the Letter drawn
by the Orator is to be observed for the side Vrnes (L: L:) that is to say, if
the Strategus drew as ball with an A: all the gold balls in the middle Vrne for
that day are marked with the letter A: and if the Orator drew a B: all the gold
balls in the side Vrnes for that day are marked with the letter B: which done
immediately before the Ballot, and so the letter unknown unto the Ballotants,
they can use no fraud nor juggling; otherwise a man might carry a gold ball in
his hand and seem to have drawn it out of an Vrne. He that draws a gold ball at
any Vrne, delivers it unto the Censor or Assessor of that Vrne who views the
character, and allows accordingly of his Lot.

The Strategus and the Orators having drawn for the Letters, the Vrnes are
prepared accordingly by one of the Commissioners and the two Censors: The
preparation of the Vrnes is after this manner. If the Senate be to elect (for
Example) the list called the Tropic of Magistrates: which is this.

1: The Lord STRATEGVS. 2. The Lord ORATOR. 3. The third COMMISSIONER of the
great Seal. 4. The third COMMISSIONER of the Treasury 5. The first CENSOR. 6.
The second CENSOR.
The Last or Schedule consists of six Magistracies, and unto every Magistracy
there are to be four C^mpetit^rs, that is in all four and twenty Competitors
proposed unto the house They that are to propose the Competitors are called
Electors, and no Elector can propose above one Competitor: wherefore for the
pr^posing of four and twenty Competitors you must have four and twenty
Electors: and whereas the Ball^t consists of a LOT and of a SVFFERAGE; the
Let is for no other use then for the designation of Electors; and he that
draws a gold ball at the middle Vrne is an Elector. Now as to have four and
twenty competitors proposed, you must have four and twenty Electors made; so to
have four and twenty Electors made by lot, you must have four and twenty gold
balls in the middle Vrne, and these (because otherwise it would be no Lot)
mixed with a competent number of blanks, or silver balls; wherefore to the four
and twenty gold balls cast six and twenty silver ones, and that (reckoning the
blanks with the prizes) makes fifty balls in the middle Vrne. This done,
because no man can come unto the middle Vrne that has not first drawn a golden
ball at one of the side Vrnes; and to be sure that the prizes or gold balls in
this Vrne be all drawn, there must come unto it fifty persons; therefore there
must be in each of the side Vrnes five and twenty gold balls, which in both
come to fifty; and to the end that every Senator may have his Lot, the gold
balls in the side Vrnes are to be made up with blanks equal unto the number of
the Ballotants at either Vrn^; for Example, the house consisting of 300.
Senators, there must be in each of the side Vrnes 125. blanks and 25. prizes,
which comes in both the side Vrnes to 300. balls This is the whole mystery of
preparing the Vrnes, which the Censors having the skill to do accordingly, the
rest of the Ballot, whether the parties balloting understand it or no, must of
necessary consequence come right; and they can neither be out, nor fall into
any confusion in the exercise of this Art.

But the Ballot, as I said, is of two parts; the LOT and the SVFFERAGE, or
PROPOSITION and RESVLT; the Lot determines who shall propose the Competitors;
and the result of the Senate which of the Competitors shall be the Magistrates.
The whole to begin with the lot proceeds in this manner.

The first Secretary with an audible voice reads first the List of the
Magistrates to be chosen for the day; then the Oath for fair Election, at which
the Senators bold up their hands; which done, another Secretary presents a
little Vrne unto the Strategus, in which are four balls, each of them having
one of these Inscriptions; FIRST SEAT AT THE UPPER END; FIRST SEAT AT THE LOWER
END; SECOND SEAT AT THE UPPER END; SECOND SEAT AT THE LOWER END; and look which
of them the Strategus draws, the Secretary pronouncing the Inscrition with a
loud voice, the SEAT so called comes accordingly unto the Vrnes; this in the
Figure is the SECOND SEAT AT THE UPPER END: The manner of their coming unto the
side Vrnes is in double files, there being two holes in the cover of each side
Vrne, by which means two may draw at once; the Senators therefore (S:S:) are
coming from the upper end of their Seat (H: H: H: H:) to the side Vrnes (L: L:)
The Senators (T: T: T:) are drawing The Senator (V:) has drawn a gold ball at
his side Vrne, and is going unto the middle Vrne (F:) where the Senator (W:)
having done the like at the other side Vrne is already drawing. But the
Senators (X: X: X: X:) having drawn blanks at their side Vrnes and thrown them
into the Bowls (Y: Y:) standing at the feet of the Vrnes, are marching by the
lower end into their seats again; the Senator (a) having done the like at the
middle Vrne, is also throwing his blank into the bowl (b) and marching to his
seat again; for a man by a prize at a side Vrne, gains no more then right to
come unto the middle Vrne; where if he draw a blank, his fortune at the side
Vrne comes to nothing at all, wherefore he also returns to his place: But the
Senator (c) has had a prize at the middle Vrne, where the Commissioner having
viewed his ball, and found the mark to be right, he marches up the steps to
the seat of the Electors, which is the form (d) set cross the Tribunal, where
he places himself according as he was drawn with the other Electors (e e e)
drawn before him: These are not to look back, but sit with their faces toward
the Signory or State, till their number amount unto that of the Magistrates to
be that day chosen; which for the present, as was shown, is six; wherefore six
Electors being made, they are reckoned according as they were drawn: First:
Second: Third: Fourth: Fifth: Sixth: in their Order, and the first six that are
chosen are the FIRST ORDER OF ELECTORS.

THE FIRST ORDER OF ELECTORS being made, are conducted by a Secretary with a
copy of the List to be chosen, out of the Senate and into a Committee or
Councel-chamber, being neither suffered by the way, nor in their room (till the
Ballot be ended) to have conference with any but themselves; wherefore the
Secretary having given them their Oath, that they shall make Election according
unto the law and their conscience, delivers them the list, and seateth
himself at the lower end of the table with his pen and paper, while another
Secretary keeps the door.

By such time as the first Order of Electors are thus seated, the the second
Order of Electors is drawn, who with a second copy of the same List are
conducted into another Committee-chamber by other Secretaries, performing the
same Office with the former.

The like exactly is done by the third and by the fou^th Orders (or HANDS, as
the Venetians call them) of Electors; by which means you have the FOUR AND
TWENTY ELECTORS DIVIDED ACCORDING TO THE FOUR COPIES OF THE SAME LIST, BY SIX,
INTO FOUR HANDS OR ORDERS; and every one of these Orders names one competitor
unto every Magistracy in their List; that is to say, the first Elector names
to the first Magistracy; the second Elector to the second Magistracy; and so
forth; but albeit the Electors, as has been shown, are chosen by mere lot, yet
the Competitors by them named are not chosen by any Lot, but by the Sufferage
of the whole Order: For Example; The first Elector in the first Order proposes
a name to be Strat^s; which name is ballotted by himself and the other five
Electors; and if the name so ballotted attain not to above half the sufferages,
it is laid aside, and the first Elector names another unto the same Magistracy;
and so in case this also fail, another, till one that he has named, whether it
be himself, or some other, have attained unto above HALF THE SUFFERAGES IN THE
AFFIRMATIVE; and the ram so attaining to above half the Sufferages in the
affirmative is written to the first Magistracy in the List by the Secretary;
which being done, the second Elector of the first Older rameth unto the second
Magistracy till one of h^ nomination be chosen unto the same; the like is done
by the rest of the Electors of the first Order, till one competitor be chosen
and written unto every Magistracy in their List: Now the second, third, and
f^orth Orders of Electors doing exactly a^te^ the same manner, to comes to pas^
that one competit^r unto every Magist^ being ^h^sen in each Order; there be in
all four C^mp^tit^s ch^s^n to every Ma^stra^y.

If any controversy arise (...) of E^ctor^, one o^ (...) C^nsors (these being
a^ the ^me the (...)) advertised b^ the (...), who b^ingeth him (...) and the
E^ct^r^ (...) bound to acquiesce in hi^ ^nt^r^. (...) which (...) the^ the
Cons^ do not ball^t a^ the (...) also a^ stan^th (...) it should deform the
house; wherefore blanks in the side Vrns are by so many the fewer. And so much
or the Lot, which is of the greater Art but less Consequence, becase it
concern^ (...) p^p^sition only: But all (except the Tribunes (...) the Judges,
which being but Assista^ts, have no Suffe^ge) are o^ ballot at the Result, unto
which I now come.

The four Orders of Electors hav^ng perfected their Lists, the face of the
H^use is changed; for the Vrnes are taken away, and every Senator and
Magistrate is seated in his proper place, saving the Electors, who having given
their Suffrages already, may not stir out of their chambers till the house has
given theirs and the rest of the Ballot be performed; which fol^ws in this
manner.

The four Lists being presented b^ ^he Secretaries of each Council of Electors
unto the Signory, are fit read according unto their Order unto the H^use in an
audible o^e; and then the Competitors are PUT UNTO TO THE BALLO^ OR SUFFERAGE
OF THE WHOLE SENATE in this manner^ A* A: named to be ^trat^g^ in the first
Order; whereupon eigh^ B^ll^tin^ or Pa^s* such a^ ^e expressed by the figure^
(s s) take ^ight of the (...) represented, th^ugh ^del^, by the figures (g g)
^dgo f^ur on the ^n^, and f^ur on the other (...) of the House, that (...) to
every bench, sing^g, A. A: named: be the Strategus in the first Order; and
every Ma^istrat^ and (...) beginning by the (...), and the Orator first holds
up a little pell^t of Linen as the (...) palleth* between his singer and hi^
thumb, that men may (...) ha^h but one, and then put it into the same; the
(...) co^s^g in the inner part of two (...) painted on the outside (...) and
(...), to distinguish the Affirmative from the Negative (...) so m^ie, that
when your hand (...), no man can see to which of the sides you put the
Sufferage, not hear to which it falls, ^use the pell^t being ^nn^n makes no
noise, the Strategus and he Orat^ having began, all the rest do the like.

The B^ll^tins having thus gathered the Sufferages, bring them before the
Sign^y, in whose presence the outward boxes being opened, they take out the
inner boxes, whereof the affirmative is white, and the negative green, and
pour the white into the b^wle (N) on the right hand, which is white also, and
the green into the bowl (N) on the left, which is also green; these bowls, or
basins (better represented at the lower end of the Figure by (h ^) being upon
this occasion set before the tables of the Secretaries at the upper end (N N)
the wh^te on the right hand, and the green on the left, the Secretaries on each
side number the balls; by which it they find that the Affirmatives amount not
to above one half, they write not the name that was balloted; but if they
amount to above one half, they write it, adding the number of above half of the
sufferages unto which it attained; the first name being written, or laid aside,
the next that is put is B: B: named to be Strategus in the second Order; the
third C: C: named to be Strategus in the third Order; the fourth D: D: named to
be Strategus in the f^u^th Order; and he of th^se four Competitors that has
m^st ab^ve half in the Affirmative, is the Magistrate; or if none of them
attain to above half, the nomination for that Magistrates ^to be repeated by
such new Elector as shall be chosen at the next Ballot. And, as is exemplified
in the first Magistracy, proceeds the Bal^t of the rest; first in the ^st, then
in the second, and so in the third and fourth Orders.

Now whereas it may happen that A: A: (for Example) b^ing named Strategus in
the first Order, may also be named to the same o^ some one or more other
Magistracies, in one or more of the other Orders. His name is first ball^tted
where it (...) w^itten, that is, unto the more worthy Magist^cy, whereof (...)
he miss, he is ball^tted as it comes in course for the next, and so for ^est,
if he miss of that, as often as he is named.

And because to be named, twice, or oftene^, whether to the same, or some other
Magistracy, is the stronger recommendation: The note must not fa^l to be given
upon the ^rame, at the preposition, in this manner.

A: A: named to be Strat^us in the first, and in the second Order. Or A: A:
named to be Strategus in the first and the third; in the first and the f^u^th,
^e. but if he be named to the same Magistracy in the first, second, third, and
f^urth Orders, he can have no Competitor; wherefore attaining to above half the
Sufferages, he is the Magistrate.

Or thus: A: A: named to be Strategus in the first, to be Censor in the second,
to be Orator in the third, and to be Commissione^ (...) the Seal in the fourth
Order, or the like in more or fewer Orders: In which cases if he miss of the
first Magistracy, he is ball^t^ to the second; it he miss o^ the second, to the
third; and if he miss of the third, to the f^uth.

The Ball^t not finished before Sunset, though the Election of the Mag^st^a^
already chosen be (...) the Election of such Competit^s a^ b^ing ch^sen are not
yet furnished with Magistracies a^ if they had never been named (for the is no
JVGG^IN^N, but an (...) that must see the Sun) and the ^allot for the ^maining
Ma^ist^acies i^ to be repeated the next day by new O^^r of El^ct^, and such
C^petit^ as by them shall be (...) In like manner, (...) of all the (...)
proposed unto the same Ma^stra^, no one of them a^tain unto above half the
Sufferages in the Affirmative.

The S^rat^an Ball to O^a^a being thus described. Th^se of the Pa^ul, of the
^land^ed, and of the (...) being so little different, that w^h^ they are all
contained* and by this may be easily understood (...) omitted


