God's Revenge against Murder: Containing the Confessions, Prayers,
Discourses, AND Last Dying Sayings, OF Mr. Edward Harrison, WHO WAS Tried,
Convicted, and deservedly Sentenced the Sixth and Ninth of this Instant April,
1692. for the late unheard of Murder of Dr. Clench; and accordingly Executed
in Holbourn, on Friday the Fifteenth following.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall,

1 Cor. 10.12.
Licensed according to Order.

SECT. I.
Containing serious Advice to all those Young Gentlemen and others, whose
Vicious Extravagancy and Debauchery, make them the Prodigy of the Age;
especially such as were Mr. Harrison's Acquaintance, and were Spectators of his
Execution.

SIRS,
YOU that were Mr. Harrison's Friends and Acquaintance, (and without
Reflection, let me add, sometimes perhaps Companions in Riot and Extravagancy;)
you, whose Vicious Practices have first prevailed to make you wish there were
no future State of Reward or Punishment, and farther Continuance in Sin, so
scared your Consciences, stupefied your Understandings, and degraded your
Reasons: As with the Food in the Psalmist, To say in your Hearts there is no
God: Here, by this late Sad Example, you may behold how Empty and Idle, how
Pernicious and Frightful, how Loathsome and Detestable such Conceits appear;
when once Serious Apprehensions of Death approach, opening the Self Blinded
Eyes of the Soul, and taking off those Vain Imaginations, which the Depravity
of Nature, the inconsiderateness of Youth* the madness of Wine, or a Proud
Fantastic Humor of Singularity have raised, and which tend no less to the
Disturbance and Distraction of Humane Society in general; than in the
particular Ruin and Destraction, (as well Temporal as Eternal,) of all these
that suffer themselves to be infatuated by them.

There is not certainly a more effectual Way to revive the Drooping Spirit of
Christian Religion in the World, than seriously to contemplate upon, and
consider our Latter End, that we must shortly dye, and come to Judgment, and
then receive a Reward according to our Deeds. If we were possessed with a warm
and constant Sense of these things, we should in all probability, endeavor to
walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, to be Holy in all manner of
Conversation. Such is the Advantage of a Religious Consideration. Alas! were
there but mature Thoughts, would but Men be wrought upon to act as reasonable
Creatures; would they but juniciously and soberly weigh things in the Balance
of their Understandings, they would s^ldom or never be found wanting in their
Duty and Obligation: If Men would once entertain serious Thoughts of Religion,
they would soon set open their Ears to its sweet and charming Language; if they
would but fix their Eyes upon it, they would soon be captivated with its
incomparable Beauty, it would presently attract their Love and Admiration, and
enforce them to embrace it with all profound Respect and Affection: A
Consideration of our Latter End, a Serious Reflection upon Eternity, this would
put the Soul in such a Frame and Posture, as would make it wrestless and
uneasy, wracked and impatient, till it had made his Peace with an incensed
Judge, by Repentance not to be repented of; (...) it (...) prepared it self for
a comfortable Appearance at his Bar, for a glorious Advancement into an endless
State of Bliss and Immortality: Such is the great Advantage of Considering our
Latter End. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
conside^ their Latter End. Now the Four last things to be continually
remembered, are Death, a Judgment to come, Hell, and Caelestial Glory. And what
more horribly than Death; What more torrible than such a Judgment? What more
intolerable than Eternal Fire? And what worthier Object can there be for us to
exert our Faculties upon, than God, and the Mansions of Everlasting Felic^ty?
How many Sins might we haVe avoided in the course of our Lives, if we had the
serious Remembrance and Apprehension of these things? And how many Sins might
we yet avoid if we would but endeavor to have these things, as Belshazard's
Hand Writing against the Wall constantly in our Eye? These things, as the Pilat
the Ship, would direct and influence our whole Life and Conversation, would
help us to steer our Course, and safely bring us to the Haven of Bliss and
Happiness, such would be the great Advantage of considering our Latter End: If
Men would but thus consider, no temptation would then take hold of them,
nothing would ruffle and discompose their Conscience, it would be void of
Offense both toward God, and toward Men. But alas! In this laps^d and
degenerate Age, in this miserable and naughty World, how many are there that
have languish'd lukewarm and Feeble Opinions of Religion? If Judgment may be
formed according to their Vicious and Immortal Conversation, what a Deluge of
Profaneness and Impiety, Ath^ism and Infedelity overflows this Sinful Land, this
poor Nation? How many live, as though they believed that Virtue and Vice, that
God and the Devil were Words signifying nothing, as if they were the extract of
some Melancholy and Pregnant Brain, as if they were invented mearly for Men's
Terror and Affrightment? The Halter, the Gibbet, and the most terrible of
Temporal Punish^^^^s, to have as little Influence upon Men's Lives, makes as
small an Impression upon the Minds of Men, as those which which are Eternal:
How many have suffered as Murderers, as Thieves, as Evildoers? And yet Men
will not take Warning and Example; Men will not be deterred from Committing the
like abominable, vile and enormous Offenses. Every Sessions gives us too many
fresh and sad Instances of this Truth. O that Men would become Wife, and
consider not only Temporal but Eternal Punishments! Such a Consideration would,
if any thing, oblige them to follow the important Business of Religion, To hu^t
no Body by Word or Deed, to keep their Hands from shedding Innocent Blood, and
from Picking and Stealing: Such a Consideration would enforce them to labor
truly to get their own Living. an to do their duty in that Station which Divine
Providence has allotted to them.

SECT. II.
Containing his Behavior in Prison, and a^ the Place of Execution; with his
Conference with Dr. H --, and several other Divines.

ON Wednesday January the 6th. Mr. Harrison was seized in White Friars, by a
Warrent from the Lord Chief Justice Holt; and committed to Newgate for the
Murder of Dr. Clench, where he continued till the 6th Instant; on which said
Day, being brought to the Old Baily, he was there arraigned and tried for the
wilful Murder of the said Doctor; where, upon hearing the full Evidence, he
was found Guilty.

Before his Trial and Conviction he was not so much affected with the Thoughts
of another World, but being now under a Sentence of Death, he began to consider
of his Latter End; and by the Christian Charity of many Divines, particularly
the the Reverend Dr. H --; He was much assisted by their Spiritual Comfort and
Advice. Yet all they could do, while in Newgate, could not persuade him to a
Confession of the Murder, saying that no Person could possibly prove it upon
him. He was told that his Conscience was Ten Thousand Witnesses, and that if he
did not confess it before he Dyed, (being concious of it) there could not be
any Hopes of his Salvation, he was told, that he should take heed how he falsely
appealed to the Heart searching God, for this would aggravate his Guilt. He
often declared, that he had been a very great Sinner, and deserved this, and
Ten times worse Punishment from God, and did expect no less than Death, and
therefore was willing to prepare for it. On Sunday the 10th Instant, the
Ordinary read Prayers, and Preached a Sermon to the Condemned Malefactors in
the Chapple, where Mr. Harrison attended and was very attentive, seeming very
much affected with th^se Preparity Exercises for his Death, but after the
Sermon was ended and before Mr. Ordinary began his last Prayer, Mr. Harrison
spoke to him and said he had made a good Discourse, and that as to what related
to Blood guiltiness if any one of Dr. Clench's Murderers were there, they
could not but be tauched the Heart, and be forced to a genuine Confession. (or
Words to that Effect) And now good Reader, we come to the last Acts of Moments
of unhappy Mr. Edward Harrison; who pursuant to the Sentence he received in the
Old Baily was this Day about the Hour of Eleven, carried from Newgate to
Holbourn, against Furnivals-Inn, where a Gibbet was Erected, for his Execution,
before he was turned off he Prayed a considerable Time by himself.

The PRAYER during the Time of his Imprisonment, before his Execution.
OH! most dreadful God, for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech Thee to give a
sinful and miserable Wretch leave to prostrate himself before the Throne of thy
Crace, and implore that Mercy which I have formerly despised and abused: I am
not Worthy, I confess, to lift up my Eyes toward Heaven, for I have fallen
from Thee by mine Iniquities, and am by Nature the Son of Death, and a Thousand
fold more the Child of Hell by my Wicked Practices, and it becomes me in the
greatest dejection of Spirit, to Sigh and Groan under the load of my Sins,
which have been so great and many, so bold, so presumptuous and shameless, that
when with an awakened Mind I reflect upon them, I am ready to sink into Hell,
and despair of any Mercy; but of thy infinite Grace, thou have promised Mercy
to me in Christ, if I will turn to Thee with all my heart; Therefore, upon the
Call of the Gospel I am now come in, and throwing down my Weapons, submit my
self to thy Mercy: And because Thou requirest, as the condition of my Peace
with Thee, that I should put away my Idols, and be at defiance with all Thine
Enemies, whom I acknowled I have wickedly sided with against Thee: I do here,
from the bottom of my heart, renounce them all; O that I could hate and abhor
them more than that Death which I expect very shortly to Suffer for them.
Bestow on me, O Lord, that ingenuous and godly Sorrow, which works
Repentance, and unfeigned purposes of amendment of life. They come too late
indeed, I may justly think, to find acceptance with Thee, and therefore, not
without fear and trembling, and a great sense of my undeservings, I look up
unto Thee, acknowledging Thy infinite Goodness, if thou will vouchsafe me but
the smallest hope of Mercy: Strengthen me, good Lord, in the hour of Death,
that I may not fall through the Temptations of Satan, but receive me through
the Merits of thy only Son, and my alone Savior, Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

