A Scriptural CHRONICLE OF Satan's Incendiaries, VIZ. Hard-hearted Persecutors,
AND Malicious Informers. With their Work, Wages, and Ends, who were Instruments
of Cruelty against true Worshippers.

Collected by Charles Harriss.

Isa 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spiled, etc.

And Chap. 25.11. -- And he shall bring down their Pride, together with the
Spoils of their Hands.

Matthew. 23.32. Fill ye up then the Measure of your Fathers.

Verse 33. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the
Damnation of Hell.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

A Scriptural Chronicle.
THis may serve as a Touchstone for all Persecutors to be tried by, who
profess the holy Scripture to be their Rule; that so all may see whose steps
they tread in, whose work they are doing, and whose Rule they walk by; and what
is the reward they may expect in the end.

THe Devil was and is the Master of Envy and Murder; and Cain was one of his
Children, and learned of his father, the Author of wickedness, to be a
Persecutor about Religion, and slew righteous Abel, because, his own works were
evil, and Abels were perfect; and for doing this wicked act of Murder the Lord
pronounced him accursed: And the Curse still hangs over the heads of all such
who walk by Cains rule, and tread in his steps of Murder about Religion.

Also just Lot was persecuted by the Sodomites, because he was a Righteous man,
and entertained the Angel of God; and although the Meeting was so small, that
there was but two besides his own Family, yet the Sodomites gathered together
both young and old, and beset his house, and endeavored to break the door,
thinking to abuse or murder Gods Ministers that were sent to call Lot out of
Sodom; so that people may see how the Sodomites formerly were unwilling to let
one escape out of sin, they would have all to be wicked like themselves; and
when Lots love reached forth to his Kindred, desiring them, to go forth with him
and be saved, telling them how the Judgments of God would come upon them, if
they still continued among those wicked people; and his words seemed to them as
an idle Tale; but what was the end of those Persecutors? first they were
smitten with blindness (the day of visitation passed over them) and afterward
were consumed with Fire and Brimstone: so all those that assault righteous men's
houses, and break down their doors to persecute the Servants of God, are seen
to walk by the Sodomites rule.

Also Is^mael, he was a Persecutor, and a Mocker, its said, His hand was
against every man, and he was a wild man; so let all Mockers see what Stock
and Birth they are ofsAlso Esau was a profane man, and a Persecutor, though he
was called a Lord, yet he was a rough spirited man, as his Stock are at this
day, and threatened to kill Jacob, the true Worshipper; and went on in his envy
till a day of Repentance was hid from his eyes, and the Sentence was
pronounced, Because of thy violence against thy Brother, shame shall cover
thee, and thou shall be cut off forever. So all you that tread Esaus steps,
consider his end, and what your own is like to be.

Also Pharaoh the King was a wicked Tyrant over the Lord's People; and when the
Lord sent his holy Servants to exhort his People to depart out of Egypt, and
to be separate from those uncircumcised Heathens, and come forth, and worship
him in the beauty of Holiness; then this Pharaoh hardened his heart, and made
Laws to oppress Gods People, and refused to give them liberty to obey the Lord,
or to have the free exercise of their Consciences toward him; nevertheless, in
the end we read they did depart, and gave up to answer the mind of God;
howbeit, then Pharaoh and all his Host, turned persecutors, endeavoring by
violence to hinder them from having their liberty to serve the God of their
Fathers; but still would have kept them in darkness and bondage among the
Uncircumcised, to follow the inventions and worship of the Magitians, and
Sorcerers, and Hirelings of Egypt; but in due time the Lord wrought
deliverance for his People, the true Worshippers; but the Persecutors and false
Worshippers the Lord overturned with an overflowing Destruction: And certainly
their end cannot be happy, who follow the Egyptians rule.

Also Jeroboam and Ahab were wicked Kings, and they set up false Worship, and
refused to walk in the holy Way of God themselves, but persecuted them that
walked in it; and when the Prophets of the Lord came in love, and warned and
reproved them for their false Worships and Wickedness; then they, like unwise
Kings, counted them their Enemies, and persecuted them: Even one of the
Prophets spoke to the King, in the time of his Worship; so that false
Worshippers, as they use to do now, cried Lay hold on him, for he disturbs me;
but remember that hand that he stretched forth against the Prophet was
withered; and we see it was the manner of the true Prophets, never to flatter
Kings in their wickedness; for when Ahab the King had taken Naboths Freehold
from him, and had caused one more righteous then himself, to be stoned to
death; then the good Prophet Elijah came to him, to whom the King said, Haste
thou found me out, Oh my ENEMY; to whom the Prophet answered, I have found thee
because thou have sold thy self to work wickedness, etc. And because they set
up false Worship, and persecuted, and imprisoned, and killed the Servants of
the Lord: Even a curse came upon them, and their Families; and it was said, He
that dies of Jeroboam, and of Ahab, in the City, the Dogs shall eat; if in the
Fields the Fowls shall eat them: And Ahab himself was slain in his Chariot, and
his Blood run out, so that when the Chariot was washed the Dogs licked his
Blood.

And much more might be said of several unrighteous Kings; as, Baasha, Ahaz,
Hosheas, Manasseth, Ammon, etc. How they ran into Pride and Hautiness, and
refused to walk in the Way of the Lord, but set up false Worship and drew and
compelled the People to it, and very often thereby made Israel of old to sin;
notwithstanding the Lord still sent his Prophets then to warn them; though for
the same, the Prophets were persecuted, and stoned, murdered, and counted
Deceivers; for which cause the Lord brought a heavy Curse, and sore Judgments
upon those Kings Families, and also upon the People that joined with them in
their false worship.

Also King Zedekiah, he persecuted the Prophet of the Lord, and the Princes,
and the false Prophets joined with him, and the Priests would have had the
Lord's Servant to have been put to death; and they counted him a Madman, and
smote him, and put him in the Stocks, and also in Prisons, and a myerie
Dungeon: So People may see how busy the Priests and false Prophets were
formerly, and how directly these in ourdayes tread in their steps; But what was
the Wages and End of these Persecutors? Some of them were slain with the Sword,
others taken Captives, and their Eyes put out, and they bound with Chains, and
their Houses burnt with Fire. This was the Portion of hard-hearted Persecutors.

Again, Nebuchadnezer the King was a setter up of false worship, and he granted
forth Order to compel all Nations to be of his Religion, and to bow at his
Music and Worship, or else, they must be cast into a Burning Fiery FURNACE; so
its said, All the Princes, the Governors, and Captains, and Judges, and
Treasurers, and Counselors, and Sherriffs, and all the Rulers conformed to the
Kings worship: But there were three true Worshippers, that would not conform;
its very like they were called (as some are now) stubborn Fellows, and Rebels
against the Kings Laws, and Breakers of the Peace, and will not be subject to
the higher Powers; and its like some Hypocrites would be ready to say, You may
conform, the thing being imposed upon you, you shall be clear, and the sin
shall be charged upon the Imposers; or you may kneel down to please the times,
and to save your selves in a way of Christian prudence, and yet have your
hearts true to your own Religion, etc. But these true Worshippers were of a
more valiant Spirit, and told the King to his face, they were not carful to
answer him in this matter (though in other things, as Tribute, Custom, etc.
they could) but they gave him to understand, he should not be King of their
souls and consciences in matters of Worship; and they knew their God was able
to deliver out of his hand; however they would not turn to be of his religion
and worship, let him rage and heat his Furnace as hot as he pleased: So ye may
see that false worship and persecution still goes together; for he caused his
Soldiers to cast them into the burning fiery Furnace; but what was the Wages
of this Persecutor, who set up that false worship? It is said, he was driven
from men, and did eat Grass as an Oz, till his Hair was grown like Eagls
Feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws, to the end he might know the Most
High rules in the Kingdoms of men, unto whom every soul is to be subject; for
he is the higher Power, and souls Bishop, who has said, My Son give me thy
Heart: and again, I will teach my People my self, and they shall not depart
from me: But it might have been well for Nebuchadnezer then, and others now, to
receive Daniels counsel, who said, O King, break off thy Sins by Righteousness,
and thy Iniquity by showing Mercy to the Poor; if it may be a lengthening to
thy Tranquillity.

Again we read of Herod the King, how ready he was to be a Persecutor; for no
sooner the Star appeared, and tidings came that our Savior was born, but he
was troubled, and fearing that Truth should come up to reign, he sent forth and
slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof
from two years old and under: so that People may see how busy the Devil has
been in all Ages, to make use of wicked Instruments, to crush the very
appearance of that which is good; but as for Herod's Wages, the Lord soon cut
him off; and there is little question but he had his Portion among Persecutors
and Murderers.

Again Herod the Tetrach being reproved by John Baptist for all the evil he had
done, and for taking another man's Wife; he turned Persecutor, and put the
Prophet in prison, and after caused his head to be cut off, being requested by
his own unclean Companions; and its like he could say to John as some such do
at this day, when they are reproved by the Lords Messengers, Thou saucy Fellow,
meddle with thy own business; thou Deceiver and Heretic, we will take a course
with you shortly; what, you would have us live without sin, and be perfect: And
so People may see how the Servants of the Lord in all ages have Suffered by
proud corrupt men, such as were Enemies of Righteousness.

Again, Did not the chief Priests, and Elders, and Captains prove the greatest
Persecutors our Savior Christ met with? it was the Priests then that hunted
after him, to have him murdered; And how many times did they belly him, and
smite him on the face, and stoned him and his Followers, and called him
Deceiver, and Beelzebub, and said he had a Devil? and was it not the Priests
then that fawned upon the Heathen Magistrates, desiring them to help them to
crucify Jesus and sought out for false Witnesses to prove, as if he had spoken
Treason a- Caesar? and was it not the Priests that gave Judas money to be
against their Informer? And it was the Hirelings that gave the Soldiers money,
and taught them to lie, saying, Christ was not risen, but was stolen away: Also
people may see, that those Rulers, viz. Pilate and Herod that joined with the
Priests to put Christ to death, they were also false Worshippers; so still its
evident that Blind Zeal, and False Worship, and Pride, and Whoredom, and
Covetousness, and Profaneness all joins together in this work of Persecution:
but what was the Wages. that many received? Christ told them their House was
lest desolate, and the Day of their visitation was over, and called them a
Generation of Vipers, saying, How can you escape the Damnation of Hell, for ye
are of your Father the Devil, (though you call Abraham your Father) for you are
found doing the Devils work, like your elder Brother Cain; and many woes he
pronounced against them, which was fulfilled upon them, and upon their
Families, and their Generations, as is manifest to this very day.

Stephen also was persecuted by the Priests and false Worshippers, and he bore
a true Testimony against them, saying, Ye Stiff-necked, and Uncircumcised in
Heart and Ears, ye do always resist the holy Spirit, as your Fathers did;
which of the Prophets have not your Fathers stoned, or persecuted? and they
have slain them that showed beforehand of the coming of the Just One, of whom
ye have now been the Betrayers, and Murderers; and those wicked men also stoned
holy Stephen to death, and cast him out of the City; terming him a Deceiver, or
Blasphemer: So people may see such Priests and Professors that resist the holy
Spirit, and follow an unholy Spirit; they were, and are persecutors of the
Righteous.

Also it was the Priests and the Captain of their Temple, and Sadduces, that
persecuted the Apostles, Peter and John, for preaching in the Temple; and also
put them in Prison, and threatened them, commanding them to speak no more in
the Name Jesus; Mark, the Priests hated him then by the Name Jesus, as bad as
they now hate him, by the Name Light, in this day of his spiritual Appearance.

Again, Herod the King made it his business to vex certain of the Church; he
killed James the brother of John with the Sword; and when he saw it pleased the
Priests and Jews, he proceeded in his work, and took Peter, and put him in
Prison, thinking about Easter time (when the People wanted some sport, and the
Priests some blood to mingle with their Sacrifice and howling Prayers) then to
have brought him forth, to be a Prey to those bloodsucking Wolves; but it
pleased the Lord to send his Angel, and deliver his Servant out of all their
hands: But this Herod the Persecutor was a wicked proud man, and the Angel of
the Lord smote him for his wickedness, and the Wages he received was to be
eaten with Worms. Let all proud blood-thirsty men think of these things.

Again, it was the unbelieving Jews that stirred up the People to persecute
Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of the Coast of Antioch; and also it
was the Unbelievers that did the like in Iconium; and when the Apostles came to
Lycaonia, and had preached, and many believed their Testimony; then those
unbelieving Jews turned Informers, adn went after them, and made an Uproar, and
caused Paul to be stoned, and drawn out of the City near dead.

Again, when Paul and Silas was as Instruments in the hand of God to cast out a
Damsel a spirit of divination; then they that had the gain of her Southsaying,
saw themselves at a loss, they, like Priests, turned Persecutors, and caused
the Apostles to be beaten with many stripes, and to be put in Prison; but
[mark] those men were not led by the true Spirit to persecute, but by that
cursed spirit of Divination and Southsaying; so let all such at this day see
who is their Leader.

Again, it was the Unbelievers at Thessalonica, and lewd Fellows of the baser
Sort, that set the City in an uproar, and assaulted (like the Sodomites) the
house of Jason, to have brought out the Disciples to have mischiefed or
murdered them, and they drew Jason (the man that had the Meeting at his House)
and several Believers, before the Rulers, crying out, these that have turned
the World upside down are come hither also; we have many in England that loves
to be called Believers, rather then Persecutors: but if a Tree may be known by
its fruits, let the meek in heart compare and judge.

Again Demetrius, and his Wicked Company, which made Silver Shrines for Diana,
and were false Worshippers; they also persecuted the true Worshippers, crying
out, Our Craft is in danger, as also our Temple, and Goddess, whom all the
World worshippeth.

Again it was Unbelievers, and false Worshippers that stirred up the People
against Paul, when they found him in the Temple and they set Jerusalem on an
uproar, and went about to kill him; and the Priests and false Worshippers said,
he was not fit to live, and they threw dust into the Air; and the nimble
fingered Priest commanded Paul should be smitten on the mouth; and they
informed Festus, and Foelix, and Agrippa, against him; and lest their own
smooth Tongues should not lie fast enough, they got, or hired Tertullus to be
their Informer and Orator against Paul: Oh they would fain have been sucking
his blood; for he was the worst Enemy they had, as for spoiling their trade,
and discovering their hypocrisy, and these Priests were the chief in all his
Sufferings and long Imprisonments; and the Apostle shows who it was that led
these Priests thus to persecute, for when he wrote to one of the Churches, he
says, He purposed to have seen them, but at present Satan hindered; so we would
have all People see whose work they are doing that persecutes and prisons the
Servants of the Lord; and again, it is written, The Devil shall cast some of
you into prison; and so along throughout the Scriptures: And since the
Apostles, through this long night that has been over People, according to
History we find good men, and true Worshippers, have been persecuted by Blind
Wicked men, who were false Worshippers.

And because many in these late days makes it their business to insence the
Rulers, and inform them against the Righteous: I have viewed over the holy
Scriptures to see what root they sprang from, and whose steps they tread in.

First, I find the Devil is called the Accuser of the Brethren; he also
informed against Job; for in those days the Sons of God met together, and the
Devil was not pleased thereat, so he endeavored to accuse Job before the Lord,
and the stress of his words were to render Job a Hypocrite, and that he loved
his Oxen and Camels, and Sheep, and things of that nature, more then he loved
either God or his Religion; and if the Lord would but suffer all he had to be
taken from him, then he would deny his Religion, and curse his God to his Face;
so the Lord gave Satan leave to try what he could do, Then Satan went out from
the Presence of God, (it was a true Saying) for no Persecutor abides in his
Favorable Presence; so then he drummed upon the spirits of the Sabeans and
Caldeans [Mark, they were a wicked Stock] and raised them up by the Alarm of
Hell; so they put on their Swords, and came and killed Jobs Servants and took
away his Cattle, as you may read at large; nevertheless Job stood firm to his
Religion: And the Sons of God met the second time, then the old Informer came
again to the Meeting, and informed against Job, ad he had done before, and
desired a greater penalty might be laid upon him, seeing he still retained his
integrity, and the Sons of God still kept up their Meeting; so Satan desired he
might have leave to touch this Flesh, and his Bone? you may see how Satan loves
to crush the Righteous to pieces; but the Lord would not commit Jobs Life into
his hand, only his Flesh; See what thou can do Satan, with thy Stones, and
with thy Whips, and with thy Stocks, and set thy Children to beat him, and make
him sore from the crown to the foot; and when all was done the Devil proved a
false Witness, and Job proved a true Worshipper, and the Lord blessed him, and
gave him more Children and Cattle then he had before the time of Persecution.
Wherefore, Oh all ye Sons and Daughters of Job, stand fast unto God, and to his
Worship, and be valiant for the Truth upon Earth.

Wiched proud Haman, also he learned of his father to be an Informer against
Gods peculier People, and told the King That their Laws differed from his, and
therefore it was not meet they should have their liberty; but he would give the
King ten thousand Tallents of Silver into his Treasury, if the King would but
give way to him to destroy in one day all the Lords People; and all this envy
rose in this proud Haman, chiefly because good Mordecai would not get up an bow
(or put off his Hat) to Haman; no sooner had the King granted Hamans request,
but the Informer commands the Scribes Lievtenants, and Governors to aid him,
and ^uilds a Gallows, intending it for Mordecai; but the Lord l^^ the King see
Hamans wickedness, and he remembered his People that had no Helper in the Earth;
and this Informer was hanged, and his ten Sons perished, and his Estate was
given to the Jews, and those that had thought to have spoiled their honest
Neighbors in the Country; they themselves became a Spoil; and there perished
of them above seventy five thousand: Let all such as have a mind of Hamans work
take notice whose RULE they walk by, and what was the Wages of envious
Murderers.

Also proud painted faced Iezebel, she was an Informer against the true
Worshippers, and would have had all the Lords Prophets to have been slain, and
she informed the King how he might get Estates from his Subjects, by setting up
false Witnesses, so he did follow her counsel; but it soon brought a heavy
Curse both upon him and his; and so will it do upon all those who after him
walk in his steps: And as for Iezebel the Informer, for her Wages she was
thrown out into the Street, and her blood trodden out with Horses, and the Dogs
eat her flesh; and only the Skull, and Feet, and Palms of her Hands were left.
Think of this all you Daughters of Iezabel, who are decking your selves in
Pride, and take delight to mock, and scorn, and speak evil against the Servants
of the Lord.

Again, Amaziah the Priest turned Informer, and told the King, That Amos had
conspired against him; and then charged Amos to be gone further from the Kings
Chapel and Court, and if he would Prophecy, be gone to another Land, etc. see
what an Engion of Satan this Priests was; but what Wages had he for his news?
it was said unto him, Thy Wife shall be an Harlot, and thy Sons and Daughters
shall fall by the Sword, and thy Land shall be divided by line, and thou shall
die in a poluted Land.

Again, There were several wicked men turned Informers against Daniel, that man
so loved of God, and one that was a true Worship^^^ now those Informers could
not find any thing against him, as being Disloyal, or Unfaithful in the Kings
business, therefore they got a Law to disturb him in his Worship, but this
Noble man would not creep into a Hole, or shut his Windows, but even as at
other times, kneeled down and prayed, and gave thanks, and worshipped the God
of his Salvation; and as he was so doing the Informers came and took witness,
and then went and informed the King; it may be they told him that they took
Daniel in the Notoriousness of the Fact; and only thus, for worshipping his
God, he was cast into the Lions Den, but the Lord preserved and delivered him
in a wonderful manner; and then King Darius commanded that the Informers, with
their Wives and Children should be cast into the Lions Den; so the Lions had
power over them, and broke all their bones to pieces and devoured them; and
this was the Wages of these Informers.

There was also several proud wicked men that informed against the three
Children, because they would not bow to false Worship, in a day when it was
attended with several sorts of Music; but you may read in the Prophets how the
Lord sorely punished that wicked stock of Caldeans, who were false Worshippers,
and persecuted the true Worshippers; and it was of those also, that helped to
kill Jobs Servants, and fetch away his Cattle, (about Religion) and it is also
to be observed, that those men that cast the Lord People into the Fire, by the
heat thereof they themselves were consumed.

Again it was an old unclean Woman, and her proud danceing Daughter that
informed against John Baptist, and desired his Head; but see, Herod was unfit
to be a Magistrate, that could swear to give them whatever could be asked; and
so cut off that great Prophets head to please one of Jezabels Jmps. Oh, how
has the Righteous in all Ages suffered by, and under such proud, lustful,
beastlike spirits, and yet the Devil still taught his Instruments in all Ages,
to brand the Lords people with names of Deceivers, and Madmen, and
Blasphemers, and all sorts of bad names, thereby to render them odious; but the
Truth shines over the Darkness, and the memorial of the Righteous is alive in
renown; but the day is come, and coming, wherein the memorial of the Wicked
shall rot, and the name of a Persecutor shall stink, and be as a Curse and a
Derision.

Also cursed Judas turned Informer, and the Priests gave him thirty pieces of
Silver to betray, and help them to take Jesus: So they got their Clubs and
Staves, and Weapons of Cruelty, and came and took him, that they might Crucify
him: and how can the Disciples of Christ expect but such as Judas in these
days, who have betrayed all good Conscience, will likewise inform against them?
but what good did the Money do Judas, when the horror and torment of Hell
seized upon him? then he threw down the Silver, and cried, I have betrayed
Innocent Blood; and being without hope of Mercy, went forth to hang himself,
and falling headlong he burst asunder in the midst, and all his Bowels gushed
out: Think of this all ye that turn Informers for filthy lucre sake; and mark
whose Rule you walk by, and whose work you are doing; for its written (when
Judas turned Informer) then Satan entered him; so Christ might well say then to
Judas, and his Companions, this is your hour and power of Darkness.

I might even fill a large Volvme, showing, through all Ages, how it was such
as were led by a wrong spirit that persecuted the Righteous; John, that beloved
Disciple, was banished by wicked men: And those were wicked Instruments that
mocked the Lords Prophet, saying, Go up thou Bald-head; so the Lord sent wild
Bears and devoured them: And it was wicked men that persecuted David, and
cursed him; and it was the Drunkards that made Songs of him, and beat, and
stoned the Prophets: And it was such wicked men that called the Apostles
Deceivers, and Ringleaders, and Pestilent Fellows, and movers of Sedition, and
Bablers; and when they were filled with the Spirit of Christ, some accused
them, as being Drunkards, and Madmen; and it was the Wicked that often times
attempted to stone our Savior, and his Messengers, calling him Blasphemer, and
many reproachful names, as we read at large in the Scriptures of Truth, and
yet many that profess the Scriptures to be their Rule; and to bear the name of
Christianity, are found directly walking in the steps of those wicked men which
the testimony of Scripture goes fully against; and it was wicked men that
spoiled the Saints Goods formerly, about Religion, and banished them, and smote
them on the Cheek, and drew them about the Streets, and pulled off their Hair;
so I hope here is testimonies sufficient concerning Persecution, to cause all
sober understanding men and women to conclude with me, that the Root of it is
the Father of Envy, and Murder, and Lies, and that Body, and Branches through
which it puts forth it self, what ever their leaves may be for show, yet it is
but a wild degenerate Plant, of a strange Vine, as is manifest by its Fruit,
seeing it proves a sour Grape, which is to be cast into the Wine Press of the
fierce Wrath of the Almighty, who knows how to reserve the Wicked for that day
of punishment.

And I would have the Reader to observe how all along in the time of the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and since to this very day, the chief
Instruments of Satan in the Work of Persecution is, and has been the Priests,
and false Prophets, and Hirelings, with their Bishops and Popes, and such
unwise Kings and Rulers, who opened their ears to hearken to their Whisperings,
and Lies, and Slanders, and murdering counsel against the Righteous; and by
hearkening to those kind of Evening-Wolves, and helping them to suck the Blood
of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, how has Kingdoms been shaken, and
Governments overturned, them and their Families cursed, and so perished in the
hot displeasure of the Lord, and their memorial has rooted, and stinks to this
very day, as the Enemies of God, and so that which was written in the Second
Psalm has been, and will be fulfilled, Why did the Heathen rage, and the
People murmur, the Kings and Princes band and assemble together against the
Lord and his Truth, saying, Let us break their bands, and cast their cords from
us; but then mark, He that sits in the Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall
have them in dirision, and speak to them in his Wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure, and crush them as with an Iron Scepter, and break them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel; and so this is according to that saying, He rebukes
Kings for the sake of his People, and commanded them not to touch his Anointed,
neither harm his Prophets; and woe be to them that break this Commandment.

But some will say, Ought not every Christian to obey the King?

I say, Yes, in all Righteousness (actively) but if any Kings command contrary
to God, and make Laws contrary to the royal Law of Love and Righteousness, then
the Commands of god, and his Law of Truth is to be kept only, and the other
witnessed against (not by Plotting or raising Insurrections) but passively, in
a Lamb like Spirit, undergoing those Penalties that shall be inflicted, until
the Lord plead with the Oppressor, and avenge his Elect, that cries unto him
night and day, and have no Helper in the Earth; and this is according to the
Saying of Christ, My Kingdom is not of this World, therefore my Servants must
not fight: And this is the Faith and Patience of Saints, to stand still and see
the Lords Salvation and Preservation, whilst they that are killing with Swords
perish, and are devoured one of another.

But say some men, Ought you not to conform, and be of the same Religion that
the Governors of the Land are pleased to establish? And if they make a Law, to
compel you thereunto; Are you not Rebels if you do not actively obey, seeing we
have a Christian King, etc?

To which I answer, By this Rule, then I may not know what Religion I must be
of next; seeing the Papists, and Presbyterians, and Independants, and others
profess themselves Christians; and we have seen how one gets up after another,
and every one sets up a new kind of Worship, and cries, You must obey the
higher Power, and bow down to my Fashion of Religion: So if I should manifest
my self as a Cloud carried about with every Tempest of men's brains, and foolish
conceits, and such as can do see, I little question; but rather then suffer
deeply, they can conform to the Turks Alcoron, or in the end wheel about to be
Atheists, and worship the visible Sun, Moon, and Stars, or fall down to
Nebuchadnezers Image, if there be but Music, etc. But he that is really a
Christian will stand to the Worship that Christ set up, which is in the Spirit
and in the Truth, which is the same to day as yesterday, and will remain when
Popish Dreams and Inventions of giddy headed men will have an end; for the
standing Rule that Christ has appointed for his People to walk by, is not a
Mass Book, nor the Fragments thereof covered with other names; but it is the
Spirit of Truth, which he promised should lead and guide them, and that it
should abide and remain with them for ever: So here is the unchangeable Way,
and Rule, and Worship set up by him, who is King of Kings; and this is the
higher Power, unto who the soul is to be subject; for its written All Power in
Heaven and Earth is given unto him; therefore let all proud flesh tremble
before him, and let none think to rob him of his Prerogative lest they be
driven to eat Grass with Nebuchadnezer, and so be made to know, there is one
will rule in the Kingdoms of men.

But say many People, What do you think of the present proceedings against
Fanatics? and do you think it safe to suffer such great Multitude to meet
together, and was it not time to limit them, etc?

To which I answer, The greatest Meetings that I have seen commonly are at the
Play Houses, and if there be danger in a Multitude, then to be sure they should
be suppressed; for the Proverb says, The Wicked run together to do Evil; but I
observe such Meetings, as are for PLAYS, and singing of BALLADS, though in the
open Streets, are most suffered, and rather increased then otherwise, together
with Bear-baitings, Revellings, Race-runnings, and much of that nature, whereby
the Lord is daily dishonored, and the Earth corrupted; but I hear of no Fines
that are levied upon such Meeters nor Houses, nor upon those open profane
Vassals of the Devil, who spend their whole time in cheating ^ools of their
Money, and teaching Youth to be Idle, and Wanton, and Curse, and Swear, and so
fit them for Baudy-houses, and to be Thieves, and so in the end to the Gallows.

And as for the late Persecution in it self, I have no reason to believe that
it is the Fruit of a right Spirit.

First, Because covetous Bishops and Priests were the chief Founders of it, for
their own filthy Lucre sake, that so as Merchants of Babylon, they might have
the whole Trade to themselves, and also lord over Gods Heritage.

Secondly, Many of those that gave life to it, the Nation well knows, had more
need to sit down, and repent in Dust and Ashes, and wait to know their own
Consciences washed and purged from filthiness; then go about to shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against them that desire to enter; and also to bring again
into bondage such who through Grace have escaped the the pollutions of the
flesh that is in the World.

Thirdly it makes sad the hearts of the Righteous; but many, that are well
known by their Neighbors to be Drunkards, Fiddlers, Players Swearers, etc. even
the worst of men; its like a Feast for them; and hereby an Arrow is put into
their hands to make the Righteous their Mark, and their Estates a continual
Prey; many of these wicked Instruments bragging what they will be worth in few
years; but let them remember Judas his End; though for a time it may be
suffered, as in the days of Malachi, That the proud, and such as work
wickedness, and daily tempt God may be set up, and counted happy, and yet
delivered; But as Peter says, Their Damnation slumbreth not; for woe be unto
such as go in the Way of Cain and Balaam, etc.

Fourthly, The Law of God teaches a man To love his Neighbor as himself, and
do as he would be done unto, and every one shall answer for himself: But I do
not believe these Rulers, that made this late Act would be served so
themselves; as they have appointed to be done to others; and also that one man
should suffer for another, this is contrary to Gods holy Law; and therefore all
Kings, Princes, and Rulers, who desire and expect their Laws and Commands to be
kept, let them be sure themselves to keep the Commands of God, and act and walk
according to his holy equal Law of Love and Righteousness; and this is the way
for a Kings Throne to be established, and his Family and Kingdom to be blessed,
and to cause the hearts of the upright to cleave unto him, and make his dread
heavy to the Workers of iniquity.

Lastly, I observe, that Kings and great learned men are very ready to be
tempering about Religion, pulling down and setting up what pleases their
Fancies, but we see they are not infallible, but are often times carried away
with their own high thoughts, and by lending an ear to such creeping Deceivers,
that serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own PURSES and BELLIES; they have many
fold more set up false worship, and caused People to sin by compelling them
thereunto, according to History, then ever yet they were Bringers to the true
Worship, or themselves found walking in it; and through their darkness have
persecuted and slain the Lords Worth yes by many cruel Trials and Tortures,
judging and condemning them as Deluders and Deceivers: Wherefore, all high and
low, come to Christ the Light, that so ye may see over the darkness of men's
ways and worships, which are full of Envy, Strife, Persecution, and Murder,
and every evil Work; and so come out of them, into the new and living Way, to
the living Worship of the true God, which is in the Mountain of Holiness, where
there is no killing nor destroying, but are known to be Disciples of Christ, in
that they love one another, Christ being the Author and Defender of their
Faith, which gives them victory over the World; and preserves his Church (not
by CLUBS, and DRUMS, PIKES and SWORDS, in the hands of Drunkards, and Cursers,
and Mockers. etc.) upon the Rock of Life by his own eternal Arm, against which
the Gates of Hell, the Dragons flood of malice, nor all the hosts of the
Egyptian Informers, and Persecutors shall not prevail: Therefore, to the
higher Power, says the true Church, be Glory forever.

THE END.

