A VINDICATION OF Mr. James Colmar BACHELOR of PHYSIC AND FELLOW of Exeter
College in Oxford. FROM THE Calumnies of three late Pamphlets, 1. A Paper
published by Dr. Bury, 1689. 2. The Account Examined. 3. The Case of Exeter
College, related and vindicated.

To which are annexed the Authentic Copies of the Affidavits relating to that
Affair.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1691.

THE PREFACE.
NOTHING could be more indirect and illegal, than the Expulsion of Mr. Colmar,
except perhaps those Arts which have been made use of to defend it. The
greatest Injustice will appear to be supported by no less Subornation; and the
Evidence that was defective heretofore, has not more criminally been omitted
in the Trial, than it has been supplied after it. At the hearing before the
Vice Chancellor, upon the Trial itself, in the Commission of Appeal, and
lastly in the Visitation; It is owned and confessed, that there was no legal
Proof against Mr. Colmar, but afterward when there was room and leisure for
Artifice and Forgery, some Oaths are said to be obtained; and He that was
sentenced upon Surmises, is libelled by Affidavits. If the Reports, mentioned
in those Pamphlets, were admitted to be true, and the Evidence clear and
authentic; yet the Oaths being taken long after the Trial, cannot affect the
Cause; and tho they may asperse the pretended Criminal, yet can they neither
justify the Sentence, nor bar the Appeal, nor acquit the Judge.

To publish the plain and direct Proofs, the occasioned a Sentence, is the
proper and regular Method of maintaining and vindicating it; but new
Depositions subsequent to the Trial, and never produced in it, prove nothing
but the disingenuous Malice of the Adversary, and the weakness of the Cause.
However it will not be an easier Task to prove the impertinence and indecency
of those Accusations, than the falsity of them too. The Witnesses are so
scandalous, the Depositions are so incoherent, the Proofs that confront them
are so strong, the Credit of the Suborner is so notorious; and in short, the
whole Method of the Contrivance will be so plainly detected, that none can be
imposed on by these Arts but such whom their own Prejudices have made willing
to be deceived: For indeed we have happily to do with those Enemies, whose
Designs, however mischievous, are equally weak, and that Innocence which is
injured hy their Malice, receives Protection from their Folly.

While this Matter between Dr. Bury and Mr. Colmar was transacted in a private
College, and the reports of it were not likely to exceed those Bounds; A
public Vindication of Mr. Colmar was needless in that place where the known
Characters of the Accuser, and of the Party accused alike prevented Belief and
supplied an Apology. In that very College where the late Rector had by two
Oaths been accused of Incontinence; none of the Fellows, tho obliged by Oath to
the Discovery of such a Crime, if true, ever charged Mr. Colmar; and in that
University where the Rector after one Recantation, had been censured anew for
notorious Heresy. Mr. Colmar had within the space of two Years received two
Degrees, and with them necessarily a public Approbation, as well of his Morals
as his Ability. Thus far therefore the Scandals, while bounded within this
Sphere, lost their Venom and Force, and had no other effect than to show the
known falsity of the Author. But now when Dr. Bury (who always wisely appeals
from those Judges that know him) has thought fit to expose these Scandals on a
wider Stage, and has endeavored by three printed Libels publicly to support
the Charge of Mr. Colmars Incontinence; He is concerned to undeceive that happy
part of the World, who are yet unacquainted with Dr. Bury and his Veracity.

The falsity therefore of the whole Charge shall be shown, and after the Proof
of the Grievance, it will be an easy Task to show the Justice of the Appeal.
The little Objections that have been started in Law against it, shall be
considered; and when it shall appear, than an Appeal is not more warranted by
Reason, than by the Rules of Common, Canon and Civil Law, and by the constant
Practice of all Colleges, he must still think that this his Act was as
justifiable in it self, as in the Consequences of it, Meritorious. For since
upon his Appeal, My Lord of Exeter was occasionally induced to know the many
other Oppressions and Enormities in the College, and at last by a general
Visitation has happily reformed them; He cannot but amidst these public
Calumnies be satisfied however, That at the hazard of his own Reputation, he
has in some Measure, and in a lower Sphere contributed to the freeing his own
private College from Incontinence, Bribery and Oppression, and the whole
University from Heresy and Socinianism.

What Assistance Dr. Bury used in those three Pamphlets, and what Author
concurred with him therein, Mr. Colmar thinks is not worth while to enquire:
The Matter was certainly taken from the Doctor himself; The Style and Argument
are such as seem to come from the same Hand, and therefore the safest way is to
give him the Honor of those Productions, which he perhaps will not disavow,
and which, beyond Contradiction, no body else will Challenge.

A VINDICATION OF Mr. James Colmer, etc.
THE Charge against Mr. Colmer is so heavy, and the Proofs of it in appearance
so strong, That many who were unacquainted with the Art and Method of the
Subornation were so severe as to imagine, That during his Acquaintaince with
Dr. Bury, he had learned to copy out his Pattern, and to reduce his avowed
Principles into Practice. He finds himself therefore under a double necessity
both of clearing himself from those groundless Scandals, which the late Rectors
Malice had of late invented; and from those more just Suspicions, to which the
same Man's former Intimacy with him had exposed him. In the mean time He is not
insensible that an easy Belief is naturally prepared for all Slanders; That
the Impressions which they generally make, are deep; That the Proof of a
Negative, and the Discovery of a secret and indirect Contrivance is difficult;
and therefore if the Evidence, which shall hereafter be produced in his Favor,
were not very plain and direct, He could not hope to overcome those settled and
lasting Prejudices. Whoever is accused, is justly in all Laws entitled to
favorable Presumptions and Allowances; Those Advantages as the Guard and
Refuge of Innocence, have always been countenanced and admitted, and therefore
if the Informer was Scandalous, the Information, tho it could not be confuted,
found little Credit; if the Witnesses were perjured, the Testimony, however
true perhaps in it self, was disallowed; if they had been tampered with, and
bribed into Evidence, the falsity of the Deposition was supposed; if the
Affidavits of the same Persons were contradictory to each other, both of them
have been justly rejected: And lastly, Some Testimonies, however direct and
positive, have been discredited nevertheless barely upon the improbability of
Circumstances, and over-ballanc'd sometimes by the known Reputation of the
Party accused. Now in this Case tho every one of these Methods has sometimes
refuted an Accusation, Mr. Colmer has the concurrent Assistance of them all;
his Defense therefore shall consist of all those Heads, by which it is possible
to disprove a Calumny, and first.

1. The Credit of the Informer, and Perjury of the Witnesses shall be examined.
2. The indirect Practices, by which the Evidence was obtained shall be exposed.
3. The know Reputation of the Party accused, shall be fully made out and
cleared. 4. The falsity and improbability of the Depositions themselves shall
be proved.
And when upon inquiry it shall appear, that an Accusation of a Creditable
Person, false and incoherent in it self, has been obtaind by ill means,
published by a bad Man, and vouched by scandalous Witnesses; Mr. Colmer doubts
not that this Libel against him will in all Judicious Men's Opinion be thought
as ill grounded as the Sentence.

It might be expected now, that Mr. Colmer should give here an account of the
Trial, and distinguish the new and supplemental Testimonies from those which
occasioned the Sentence: Upon that view it would be easy to discern the rise,
progress, decay, and growth of the Evidence; how before the Vice Chancellor (a
proper and competent Judge) it was unprepared, trivial and incoherent; before
the Rector himself where no Oath could be given, and where the Parties never
appeared, it was somewhat further advanced and improved; before the Visitor and
his Commissary, where Oaths might have been tendered, and legal Examination of
the Testimonies might have been obtained, it fell and wholly disappeared; but
now at last when Judicial Proceedings were at an end, and Witnesses could never
be confronted, it is revived, dressed up, and augmented. This indeed would be a
necessary Task as well in respect of the Visitor as of the Cause; but it is
already anticipated in the Account of the Proceedings of the Bishop of Exeter,
which is so full in that Panticular, that it is not capable of addition, and so
late, that it needs not be repeated. The faithfulness of that Relation is so
exact, that it will evidently appear, that no one Passage of it, however
immaterial after all the repeated Clamors of the Criminals, has yet been
refuted; and therefore upon a Comparison of it with these Pamphlets, especially
the last, it will not be hard to observe the different Dates of the Evidence,
and in some measure to discover the whole Method of the Subornation: By that
means the Injustice of the Sentence will be detected; but it is my farther
concern at present to show the falsity of the Libel.

1. Concerning the Credit of the Informer, and the Perjury of the Witnesses.
Mr. Colmer could wish that his own Vindication did not so far depend on the
Proof of others Crimes, that he might act on the defensive only, and clear
himself without impeaching others. But when a Calumny is to be disproved, it is
necessary for Men to know the Character in this Case a true representation of
ill Men is not suggested by Malice, but Prudence; nor is a Recrimination, but a
necessary Defense. As to the Informer then, Dr. Bury, it is not to be denied, I
suppose, that he was upon two express and direct Depositions judicially accused
of Incontinence with his Servant; and that he was so conscious of his Guilt in
that, as well as other Particulars, that upon that account only he demurred to
the Jurisdiction of a known and lawful Judge, because he could not answer to
the Charge before him. The Affidavits that were taken in the Visitation, are
here annexed; The Exceptions against them shall be elsewhere cleared and
refuted; and upon the perusal of the whole, it will be evident that the
Punishment of Fornication was not so much heretofore the Informers Province, as
the Practice of Adultery. Tho this Testimony voluntarily made by the Party
her-self upon Oath, be very strong and convincing, tho the Circumstances and
Tokens which attend and confirm the Deposition, be plain and undeniable; yet
ought the Affidavit to have less weight, if he had formerly been free from the
imputation of such Immoralities. Much undoubtedly is to be allowed to the
Credit of the Person accused, and a tenderness is to be used in receiving, and
in reporting an Accusation; but when, as by the following Oath, he appears to
have been always reputed a notorious Adulterer; when his Principles are such as
second those Reports, he cannot justly expect that Favor to which another Man
of a different Life, and Reputation might be deservedly entitled.

He may remember, I presume, how often in the hearing of his own Relations, and
before Mr. Colmer, he has declared, That the Word Fornication in the Bible was
Metaphorical, and that nothing was forbidden by that Name but Idolatry and
running after strange Gods. He has always expressed so great a tenderness for
Husbands or Wives in the Case of Coldness, that the Latitude which he allowed
them therein, would in the Language of all other Casuists be properly termed
the grossest Adultery. He having often declared, that there was an Obligation
in Justice to allow another to answer the same Expectation, which he could not
satisfy himself. Other Expressions are not out of respect to him, but out of
decency omitted, as being too gross to bear Repetition. To repeat his other
Crimes, his Heresy, Bribery and Extortion, were to give the History of his
Life; but what is most to our purpose, his particular Talent in Champerty and
Maintenance, his Intrigues with Witnesses, and his artificial management of
Evidence, need not be nicely insisted on here, as being this last Term
sufficiently discovered and exposed in Chancery. This is the Accuser that
promoted and carried on an Information of Incontinence, and the Instruments by
which he compassed his Designs, are of the same make and size. The whole
material Evidence proceeds originally from Anne Sparrow and Anne Aris, and is
resolved into the Credit of their Testimony, so that if their Oaths can have
little weight, the traditional reports, however authentically derived from
them, must have less. As to Anne Sparrow then, you may take her true Character
from Dr. Bury's own pen, who thus with his usual Elegance, and with more than
ordinary Truth in one of his Papers describes her.

Anne was known to be scarce half-witted, and the Proverb which says, Children
and Fools speak Truth, is to be understood of what they speak of their own
Accord; but when they are in other Folks Conduct, then they speak as they are
prompted.

So that here the main Witness on whose loose Expressions Mr. Colmer was
expelled; upon whose Testimony the Sentence is supported, is owned and
confessed to be a Fool, Half-witted, very pliable to a Suborner, and easy to
be drawn into Perjury. The other Witness Anne Aris was one that was expelled
the College by the late Rector; One that had caused the Expulsion of one Man,
for this same Act of which she now accuses another: One that at her Delivery,
and ever since had solemnly vowed that Smith only was the Father of the Child,
which now at the Rectors request after more than a Years distance from the
Death of it, she charges on Mr. Colmer. These are the two Witnesses, who having
before given contradictory Evidence, do at the same time swear Mr. Colmer
Guilty, and themselves once for-sworn, and upon each of these singly depends a
Conviction, and an Expulsion. If a Man would look back then on the Informer,
and consider the main Witnesses, and the nature of the Cause, he could not
reasonably expect much Truth from any of them, but if he will look forward on
the gross, and apparent falsity of the Evidence it self; he will find it such,
as not only answers, but exceeds his Expectation.

Of the Indirect Practices by which the Evidence was obtained.
The Servants of Exeter College purchase their Places at no easy Rate, and
hold them upon very hard Terms: Some of 'em upon their Entrance were forced to
furnish the late Rector with Money; others that could not purchase the same way,
were obliged under the Penalty of a Forfeiture to supply him with Affidavits.
When Mr. Colmer then had justly opposed the Rector in the Election of Mr.
Kingston; the Rector did upon that account declare that he would deny Mr.
Colmer his Degree, and by Consequence compass his Expulsion: This his
resolution he communicated to his Daughters in Devon-shire, and the Persons are
therefore named, because Dr. Bury has been pleased to deny the Matter of Fact.

Now in revenge of this Affront, and in pursuance of his Design he privately in
his Closet persuades Smith (one of his Dependants) to accuse Mr. Colmer: There
Smith (as by the Rectors own Confession since appears) was threatened, till he
wept, was frightened with the loss of his Place, and the ruin of his Wife and
his Family; and yet could by no prospect either of Reward or punishment be
bribed or terrified into Perjury. Thomasin Smith was the second Witness, which
the Rector labored to gain; and she tho much tempted, was so far from
confirming the Rectors Charge, that she repeated Anne Sparrows Words; and
wholly cleared and acquitted Mr. Colmer. And it is to be noted, that Ferdinand
and Thomasin have sworn in the Vice-Chancellors Court in the Cause between
Colmer and Crab, expressly contrary to what they are said to confess in the late
Case. This then was thought no Evidence before the Vice Chancellor; but when
Dr. Bury had advisedly made himself Judge of the Cause; Equivocal Expressions
were not only put to a strein'd and foreign Interpretation, but were crodited
against the direct Oaths that were offered by the Authors of them. And tho
doubtful Words from these two Persons, ill construed, and worse attested were
admitted as Evidence against Mr. Colmer; yet the Affidavits tendered by the
same Persons at the Trial in his behalf were suspected, and refused: Thus the
Trial went on, and the Sentence passed; but the Injustice of it was so visible,
and the scandal so great, that even the Rector himself without additional
Evidence, could not support the Infamy of it. When therefore his first
Witnesses being of a stubborn and inflexible Honesty, could by no Threats or
Arguments be induced to swear according to his Directions, nor to justify his
late Sentence; His next effort was made upon the pliable, half-witted Anne
Sparrow, who according to his own Character of her was exactly fitted to
receive any Oath, and to vouch it. Sir Kingston then a known Agent of the
Rector, and equally concerned to be an Enemy of Mr. Colmer, goes to the Wench
at London; and (as appears by Affidavit) persuades her to charge Mr. Colmer
with an Offense, of which she had before upon Oath once, and before credible
Witnesses oftentimes acquitted him. The Oath then that was ready for her, was
easily digested: She swore indeed that Mr. Colmer was concerned with her; but
it appears upon Oath that she immediately afterward declared to Anne Pierce,
That she swore only what Mr. Kingston bad her. So that here a weak, silly and
scandalous Wench, who was first tempted by Eliz. Roberts, and afterward by Mr.
Kingston to accuse an innocent Person, as soon as out of their Custody, disavows
the Accusation, acquits the Party, and discovers the Suborners: And when this
Creature repeated in Oxford the like Oaths which she made at London, it is
observable, that tho she had been known to be about the Town from January to
June, yet she was never examined till upon the return of Mr. Kingston from
London, she was again under the same Persons management, and more nearly
subject to the Influences of the Rector; and therefore it is easy to imagine
the Reason, why such a senseless prostitute Strumpet was immediately after all
these Crimes and Perjuries entertained for three Weeks together by the late
Rector in his Lodgings; and why, upon the taking that Deposition, nothing
however materially said by the Deponent, was inserted into the Oath, which was
not approved by Dr. Bury.

But there was a double Expulsion to be carried on, and therefore two Bastards
at least to be found, and Mr. Colmer was to be entitled to them both. Anne Aris
then Daughter to a Servant of the College, who had been long since expelled,
was now thought by the Rector a Person fit to be recalled, examined and
corrupted: Above a Year had now passed since her Delivery; Smith had been
accused by her as the Father of the Child, and was upon that Account already
expelled; yet now at this distance of time, she is tempted to disavow what it
her Pains she had solemnly declared; and to charge a new Man, Mr. Colmer. Her
Mother Buckland had a dependence on the Rector, and had been as to her
Employment in the College, for her ill Manners particularly disobligd by Mr.
Colmer, and upon his desire, turned off by his Friends. And therefore it is not
very probable, that a Man under Mr. Colmer's Circumstances already accused of,
and expelled for Incontinence, would have exasperated this Woman, and turned
her out of a considerable part of her Employment, if he had been conscious, as
she pretends, that she could charge him with such a Crime, and had ever been
privy to any lascivious Intrigues. This Woman then having been long and often
discoursed by Dr. Bury in his Dining Room, at last revenges her self on Mr.
Colmer; secures her Interest with the Doctor, and tempts and persuades her
Daughter to forswear her former Accusation; and upon his Exigence to supply the
late Rector with an Affidavit. The Wench then retracts what she had before
testified; and upon these Motives, and upon these Instigations, accuses Mr.
Colmer; but immediately afterward, (as Anne Sparrow had done before) She of
her own accord protests against her own false Evidence, weeps at the mention of
it; and (as appears by Oath) owns, that this Story was put into her Head, and
that she was inveigled to accuse him. These are the two Witnesses, on whose
Credit the whole Charge depends; and these are the Methods by which the
Evidence was obtained; Such Agents were singled out as were known Dependents of
Dr. Bury, and avowed Enemies of Mr. Colmer; such Witnesses were chosen as
confessedly had little claim to Common Sense, and less to Honesty; and yet
Truth is so prevalent, and Perjury so hard to be concealed, that even these
Witnesses, under this Management, voluntarily discovered the Contrivance, and
became Witnesses of that Subornation to which they were Parties.

3. The Credit of the Person accused.
This Head might possibly be accused as vain, if the Malice of Mr. Colmers
Adversaries had not made it necessary. In one of the late Libels he has been
taxed as a Person formerly guilty of Immoralities, tho upon enquiry it will
appear that those Accusations are equally groundless, and far less plausible
than the present Charge. He was first elected into Corpus Christi College from
Exeter, and was thence elected Fellow by those of Exeter, and the Testimonials
which he lately has received from all the Fellows of that College, then and now
Resident, sufficiently show what Opinion they formerly had, and still retain of
his Morals and good Behavior amongst them. The late concern of the Fellows of
Exeter in his behalf, the dismission of the Cause by the Vice Chancellor, and
the Receipt of the Appeal by the Right Reverend Visitor will sufficiently show
that he is disrespected by none there, but Dr. Bury and his Confederates. And
above all the rest, there cannot be a clearer Instance of the good Opinion of
the whole University than that without any contradiction, his Degree in Physic
with a Licentia Practicandi was lately granted to him, and by consequence his
Morals were upon that strict enquiry, fully approved by the University in
General, and by these of his own Profession in particular. And therefore till
Dr. Bury can equally approve himself to that Learned and Judicious Body, it is
not to be doubted but that his Calumnies against him will be no more successful
in their effects, then they are true in themselves.

4. Of the Falsity and Improbadility of the Depositions themselves.
The Artifice that was used in gaining the Affidavits of these senseless
Witnesses, is an indirect Method at least of producing Truth; but is a very
base and scandalous way of promoting Falsehood. Men that have any Credit
themselves, are wont to look into the repute of their Evidence, and not upon
the extorted Oaths of any prostitute Wretch to frame, and dress up an
Information. However, since Testimonies of such Persons are here produced; It
is incumbent upon Me not only as I safely may to deny the whole Charge; but to
confute the Evidence that supports it. Now certainly the Oath of Anne Sparrow,
that clears Mr. Colmer will balance the Oath of the same Person that charges
him. If a Testis Vacillans is rejected in Law, much more a perjured Witness
that swears counter to her self, and falsifies her own Depositions. If she
swore Truth before Alderman Fifield, Mr. Colmer is acquitted; and if she then
swore false, Mr. Colmer can never afterward upon her Testimony be justly
condemned.

A contradictory Oath can mean nothing, it affirms a Crime, and denies it; it
takes off its own Load, and therefore when there is no Charge remaining, all
Laws allow an Acquittal. If Aris had only to do with Smith, as she swore at her
Delivery Mr. Colmer cannot be joint Father of the Child, as at so great a
distance she attested. The Question only then is which Anne Aris is to
belive'd, whether she in her Pains, and in all probability at no great distance
from Death, or whether we must credit her sixteen Months afterward pursuing
her Mothers Revenge, and acted by the Influence of the Rector. For the
Indemnity of a Parish indeed great Liberties are and ought to be allowed, and
that Evidence will charge a putative Father before a Justice, that will not in
the Spiritual Court convict an Adulterer. And in this Case not only a Man's
Reputation lies at Stake, but his Civil Interest is in danger; Continence is
the Condition of his Freehold, and therefore slight and trivial Proofs, much
less none, ought not to divest him of it. It being clear then, that the
Witnesses have sworn against themselves, Mr. Colmers Innocence is justified by
the same Affidavits by which it is pretended to be impeached. However it is
necessary to pursue the Evidence, and to discover probably therein no Footsteps
of Incontinence, but very visible Marks of Subornation: For since the Perjury
of both the Witnesses is plain, and since it is probable that they were seduced
and inveigled into contradictory Oaths, the only doubt that remains is on whom
must fall the Guilt of suborning them. The late Rector pretends to accuse Mr.
Maundrel, and Mr. Cleaveland, but nothing is brought to support the Charge, but
one of Anne Sparrow's sayings, and one of them too (such as they are) we have
against Mr. Kingston. Now in such a Perplexity as this is, when Men have
designedly endeavored to promote Perjury; the things themselves well weighed,
the Circumstances examined, and the Character of the Persons concerned are in
all probability the Guides that will let us into the Truth of the Cause. Mr.
Cleaveland then, and Mr. Maundrel both Masters of Arts, and both in Orders, are
Men of unspotted and clear Reputation, and who are ready upon Oath to deny and
disavow the Charge. The late Rector (as the Court of Chancery well knows) is
not unpracticed in Evidencing; and his Associate Mr. Kingston is registered in
Mr. Dangerfield's Diary, as one of his singular Friends and Companions. I shall
not therefore much insist on the Oaths of the two Witnesses that swear; that
they were seduced and inviegl'd into the Accusation of Mr. Colmer; tho even
these too are wholly relied on by those that want better Evidence: But I shall
rely on the whole Management of the Desing, which, if taken together and seen
at one view, discovers it self. The late Rector himself owned, in the first
Paper by him published, that he Closeted the meanest Servants of his College;
that he beat them out of their Sayings; that he labored for Oaths, and lastly
that he turned one of them out of her Place, because her Husband would not
swear against Mr. Colmer. Did he not expel Mr. Colmer afterward, upon the
constructive Evidence of Winks and Smiles, without one Witness sworn or unsworn
of his own knowledge to any one concludent Circumstance? And why should we think
this Evidence less true than the supplemental; or that a Man used less indirect
practice in furnishing out a Libel, than in dressing up an Accusation? In short
then, a senseless Wench, who within the Year had lived privately with the Rector
in his Lodgings, was delivered of a Bastard; and therefore for the Rector's
Reputation more than the College's, it was necessary that a Father should be
procured for it. The pretended Affronts that he'had received, aggravated by the
former Intimacy, inclined him to make choice of Mr. Colmer. What Arts he then
made use of to gain Witnesses, and afterward to expel him without any, is
already known, and truly related; Since that time, when Mr. Colmar desired
nothing more, than an opportunity of confronting those Witnesses (that were
said to swear against him) and of hearing their Examination; all Opportunities
of so fair a Trial, either before the Vice Chancellor, the Visitor, or his
Commissary, have been denied him. If these Witnesses had then appeared, and the
Testimony that is printed could not have been evidently confuted, Mr. Colmer
must have submitted to the Sentence; and this had been a clear way of
acquitting Dr. Bury, but a dangerous one too, and such an one as might have
opened the Contrivance. The safest Method then was not to print the Evidence
taken at the Trial (for there was none, or such as amounted to nothing), but to
publish some supplemental Affidavits, false in themselves, indirectly and
secretly obtained, and which possibly with some Men might be thought the
grounds of the Sentence, tho in truth they were taken long after it.

I have examined however even those surreptitious Depositions, most of them
have been proved false already, and the rest are of the same stamp. Alice
Gigger boasts in Print, that Mr. Colmer offered to maintain her as a
Gentlewoman, if she would ride with him to Hinksey; but that she refused his
Offers. If this Oath had been as most of the rest, without Time, Place, and
Circumstance, it might have been better secured from the danger of Confutation.
But now since this Alice Gigger has unadvisedly venturd upon two Circumstances
that were designed, if true, to make the Information credible, they must
equally, if notoriously false, disprove her Deposition. The place where Mr.
Colmer's Horse is said to stand, was Mr. Crowder's in Holy-Well; but it is
proved upon Oath, that Mr. Colmer had no Horse there, and consequently, that
the Affidavit is groundless. The Wench farther swears, That she received a
Letter from her Brother, by which she was desired not to accuse Mr. Colmer; but
the same Brother swears that she must then receive that from him which he never
sent; that he is wholly a Stranger to the Contents of it, and never was desired
to write, nor ever actually did write any thing concerning Mr. Colmer. As to
the Deposition of Lawrence of a Violence in vain offered her seven Years since:
Dr. Bury owned at the meeting, and since, that the said Lawrence refused to
accuse Mr. Colmer; but upon condition she should not be produced to testify it
to his face. The Person to whom she was said to complain of Mr. Colmer's
Rudeness was her Dame, (who was present, and disownd it) but in her Assidavit
it is the Dames Mother (who has been dead about six Years). Besides, the place
where this Deposition was taken, renders it suspicious (as appears by what is
already said), especially since the Witness declined Swearing in the
Vice-Chancellor's Court afterward, where she might have been Counter-examin'd.
Freek and Clase testify from Ann Aris; that she always utterly refused Mr.
Colmer's rude Offers: But she swears, That before that time she had complied
with them. The whole Charge then being thus clearly answered, I shall trouble
the Reader but with one Observation more, which may be now at last unnecessary
perhaps, but is not otherwise immaterial: When the Rectour at the Trial
endeavored to procure Witnesses; Joyce Aris, who had been expelled the College
for Lying, easily complied with his request, and was brought as one of his main
Evidence against Mr. Colmer. Trivial Passages and Speeches of Ann Sparrow, she
at that time repeats, and is very earnest and violent (as far as her Capacity
served) in accusing him, but mentions nothing in the mean time of the plain and
gross Incontinence of Mr. Colmer, to which, some Months afterward, she swears
her self privy. Now since here was no kindness for Mr. Colmer (for she was now
a voluntary and warm Witness against him) since there could be no danger to any
other Party by the Discovery (for the Offense of the Woman was known, the Child
dead, and the pretended Adulterer expelled;) can any reason be assigned, why a
passionate Witness should insist upon, and urge, and improve an idle frivolous
Story against a pretended Criminal, and omit a plain and direct Proof of his
Guilt; to which she now pretends before that time to have been conscious. It is
clear then that she was ignorant of any such Crime now, but was in time taught
to know backwards, and to antedate that Oath which she afterward learnt.

And what more in such a Case can be hoped for, to clear an innocent Person
from the malicious Slanders of a revengeful Libeller? The Person accused a Man
of known Reputation, the Informer and Agents infamous; some of the Witnesses
disobliged and malicious; another senseless and half witted; all contradicting
themselves and evidently forsworn; Threats used to frighten others into the
like Information; Places taken away from those that declined the Perjury; no
Oath judicially taken, but all in the absence of the Party, after the Sentence,
surreptitiously obtained; the whole Contrivance managed by a Man of known
Incontinence upon his own account, for discharging himself of a gross and
notorious Crime, and carried on by the extorted Oaths of his own prostitute
Servants, Creatures, and Dependents.

Mr. Colmer therefore, after this clear Vindication, may justly lay claim to
the common Justice, and to the good Opinion of Mankind. Where he is known in
the University, and among those of his own Profession these Scandals already
have found no Credit; and he hopes that, if at a greater distance any will
concern themselves to know his Charge, they will be so impartial likewise, as
to consider his Defense. Mr. Colmer's Reputation was always more valuable to
him than his Fellowship. If he had been guilty of the Crime, he would never,
upon an Appeal, have enhanc'd his own Punishment, since it is plain, that upon
proof of the Charge, the Loss would have been no less, and the Ignominy much
greater. He has desired nothing hitherto but a Trial, and would willingly have
submitted to the decision of any Judge, but such an one who is likewise a
Witness and Accuser, and who pursued his own Interest as well as Revenge in his
Conviction. It is not to be thought, therefore since nothing is judicially
proved against Mr. Colmer, that this Subornation, so plainly made out, will be
assisted and seconded by other Men's secret Jealousies and Suspicions,
especially since it is utterly impossible, upon the return of the like
Contrivance; for the chastest Man in the World to clear himself, and by any
other Methods to justify his Innocence. It Is true, I confess that much Trust
is, and generally may be reposed in those worthy Heads of Colleges, which now
are, and usually have been in Oxford, and the known Credit of those Governors
is that which chiefly oppresses Mr. Colmer. But Men ought to consider again,
that whatever his Character has been, no Man has taken more care to disgrace
it; and that since the Foundation of the University Dr. Bury is the first Man,
who has received so great and so just a Punishment from the Right Reverend his
Visitor, and has at the same time incurred the Censure of the whole University.

OF Mr. Colmer's APPEAL.
THE Liberty of Appeal was so clearly and so fully proved in the Account of the
Bishop of Exeter's Proceedings, that little can be added to those Arguments,
and less need be said in the justification of them. But since the same Libel
that charged Fornication upon Mr. Colmer, does equally accuse him of Perjury,
he is concerned to show, that the reasoning of that Pamphlet is in one Case as
weak as the Allegations are false in the other. The Author of the Account will
sufficiently answer his other Exceptions; but these, as casting a Personal
Reflection on Mr. Colmer shall here be considered and refuted. In this Case
there neither is, nor never was any Dispute, but that Mr. Colmer is within the
reach of the Local Statutes of the College, and subject to Expulsion; but the
Question is only whether he was lawfully convict of Incontinence according to
the Direction and Appointment of the Statute: and whether after such
Conviction, he had liberty of appeal.

The Reasons that are given against Mr. Colmer's Liberty of Appealing are
three. 1. Because there never was an Appeal in this College, and therefore the
Non-user is a presumptive Proof of the unlawfulness of it. 2. Because the
Fellows themselves have by Oath disclaimed any Right of appealing. 3. Because
the Rector when Expelled, is expressly by Statute barred from Appeal; and
consequently the Fellow's have not greater Allowances upon their Expulsion than
the Rector.


These indeed which would be plausible Arguments against an Appeal, if true,
must be equally strong for it, if false, and thereupon it shall be provid. 1.
That Appeals have always been made to their respective Visitors from all
Colleges in general, and from Exeter in particular. 2. That the Fellows are not
by Oath barred from Appeals, to the Visitor. 3. That the Rector has the sane,
and is designed to have no other Liberty than the Fellows.


First, Then it is allowed that Laws are to be expounded by usage, and tho it
is not true, yet it need not be denied, that Statutes can be cancelled by
desuetude. Men when aggrieved have naturally recourse to all legal Remedies;
and therefore where an Action has never been brought, it is a reasonable
Presumption that it does not lie. Now then, if Non-user would have been so good
an Interpreter of the Law, Custom is no worse an Expositor; and therefore the
constant Succession of Appeals in like Cases in this and other Colleges is as
strong an Argument for us, as the discontinuance of them might have been
against us: Nothing then but gross Ignorance of all Proceedings in Colleges
could have betrayed a Man in to an Argument, which might so easily and so
strongly be retorted Even this late Rector himself has made an Appeal to the
Visitor, Dr. Ward Bishop of Exeter, and brought the Opinion of Councellor
Glanvile (which I have seen) to prove the legality of it. The Case of Goddard
V. Hide, Mich. 10. Car. 1. is so Famous an Instance as at once demonstrates the
Matter of Fact, and justifies the necessity of an Appeal.

A Fellowship fell void in Exeter College in Oxon, to which none were entitled
but such as were born within the Diocese of Sarum: One Hide that stood
Candidate for the place with Goddard, procured a false Certificate from a
senseless half-witted Midwife, purporting that Goddard was born at Eastwoodhay
within the Diocese of Winton. The Rector upon this false Certificate declared
Goddard incapable, and Hyde chosen, and expelled ten of the Fellows who gave
their Voices for the Election of Goddard. The Fellows upon this grievance
Appeal to the Bishop of Exeter their Visitor, and upon enquiry it appeared that
the Certificate was false, and the expelled Fellows were by his Sentence justly
restored. Afterward upon an Information above, the Matter was further
examined, the Parties that were Instrumental in gaining the false Certificate
were fined, and the Rector received a public reprehension for giving credit to
the Certificate, and for expelling the Fellows. It Is here clear that the
Fellows appealed from an unjust Sentence of the Rector, and it is as evident
that without liberty of Appealing there must in this, as in many other Cases, a
way have been opened to the greatest and most unwarrantablest Oppressions.

And therefore in all other Colleges where the Visitor is subject to like or
greater Restrictions, and the Fellows are under Obligations of the same: Oath,
all other Appeals have always been disallowed, and those to the Visitor always
admitted. In the Statutes of Corp. Chapter Coll. Trin. Coll. and All Souls Statutes
the Oaths are as strong, the Visitor as to this respect is as much restraind,
and yet Appeals have still been as frequent as Grievances.

Now when Appeals always in all Colleges, and particularly in Exeter, have been
made to the Visitor, we may reflect on the knowledge of a Man who childishly
declaims upon Desuetude, and has wrote out part of a Common Place Book
concerning the force of Non-user.

2. If Custom then, and subsequent usage can explain a Statute; the Oath of the
Fellow does not bar the Appeal to the Visitor. The Oath undoubtedly has its
force, and fecures the College from any Suit at Law; or any disturbance from
abroad, but never was intended to bar the Members of it from a Recourse to the
Patron and Conservator of the College.

All those Applications ad Praelatos, Proceres, Magnates, which are expressly
forbidden, explain the general Words, and put a restriction uponthem. A Visitor
who is the Representative of the Founder, is entrusted with the Care and
Government of the College, and an Appeal to him is the proper Method of
preserving the Peace of it, and of redressing the private Grievances, not of
promoting them. The Canonists, that allow great Liberties of Appealing, even
after Renunciation, except sometimes the Case of Monasteries and Religious
Societies. But even there an Appeall to the Supreme Abbot, or to the Principal
of the Order, was never disputed, but esteemed no other than it really is, a
private recourse to a proper and to a domestic Forum. Now then, universal
Authority is lodged in the Visitor by Statute, and is cast upon him by Law: And
it is absurd to imagine, that an Oath of a Fellow in general Words, either can
or was ever designed to divest him of that Power, without naming him. And
therefore, after the Practice of all Colleges, thus plainly proved, which is a
sufficient Interpretation of the Sense of the Statute, I insist on this
undeniable Argument, That if the Pounder had designed to bar the Visitor, he
would in the particular; Recital which he there makes, that least once have
mentioned him; he would in the Statute about the Expulsion of Fellows, have
inserted Appellatione remota he would have been as express in taking away the
Visitor's Authority, as he was in conferring it upon him.

3. This Author of the Case insists, that the Rector should have the same
Allowances upon his Expulsion as the Fellows, and the like liberty of Appeal;
if he would read the Statute, he might find, that the Rector wants not the same
Right, that he has an Appeal to the Visitor; but neither they nor he have any
from him. The Rector may be expelled by the Bishops Commissary; and then the
Statutes sufficiently warrant a farther recourse to the Bishop of Exeter
himself. For it is the whole Design and Intendment of all the Statutes to have
Members of the College concluded by no other Sentence than that of the Visitor.
And therefore when a Fellow is expelled by the Rector, or the Rector by the
Commissary, the Statute does never bar an Appeal; because one might be made to
the Visitor; but when the Rector is removed by the Vistor himself, then, and
then only is said Cessantibus appellationis remediis. And therefore as it is
very plain that Mr. Colmer has pursued the direction of the Statutes; so in
Dr. Bury's Appeal it is equally clear that he is guilty of Perjury by breaking
them. These are the Statutes that lead the Oath, and that best expound it. The
Oath is designed summarily to repeat what the Statutes at large explain. The
local Laws are not enlarged by it, but enforced. The strictest Obligation to
the Statutes arises from the Oath, and the best Interpretation of the Oath is
to be drawn from the Statutes.

By this you may see the Weakness of Exeter Case, and the Falsehood of it is, I
suppose, already notorious. One thing more may be added; That whatever could
not be provid by surreptitious Oaths, is said to be owned by Mr. Colmer; and a
bold assertion of a Lie supplies the want of Evidence. Every one of those
Concessions are disallowed, and might be easily disproved, did I think, when
their Affidavits are so1 false, any Credit would be given to their bare
Allegations.

It is an incumbent Duty upon every honest Man to defend himself from
Oppression and Calumny. The Appeal has righted Mr. Colmer from the one, and
this Vindication will free him from the other, especially, when it is evident,
that after all their Arts and Forgeries, the Libel is as weak and false, as the
Sentence was illegal and unjust.

ERRATA.
For Colmar read Colmer, p. 17. l. 13. dele asterwards.

THE COPIES OF THE AFFIDAVITS, BY WHICH Mr. COLMER is plainly cleared FROM THE
Charge of INCONTINENCE.
The Examination of Mrs Anne Fiddler taken the 14th of January before Sir
William Walker upon Oath Anno 1689/90. whereby Mr. Colmar is clearly acquitted.
THE Examinant says, That she was sent for to Goody Bucklands House, to
deliver her Daughter Anne Aris, whom she did examine who was the Father of the
Child that she then went withal, and bid her upon her Salvation, and as she
would answer it to Almighty God, since she did not know whether she would Live
or Dye, speak the Truth and wrong no Body, and in the extremity of her Pains
which were very great, she put the Question to her twice, who was the Father of
the Child; she answered Fordinando Smith, and being asked whether any one else
had to do with her, she answered none but him.

The Sign of Anne A. Fiddler.
Mrs. Bannister who was present at her Delivery, deposes upon Oath, that she
heard Anne Aris make these Answers above written, mentioned to Mrs. Fiddlers
Questions.

Mary Bannister.



25 July 1690.
Which Day appeared personally Mary Herne, Wife of William Herne of the Parish
of St. Michael in the City of Oxford Labourer, and declares that She was
present at the Labor of Anne Aris, who was delivered of a Bastard Child, and
she did then declare upon her Salvation, that no body had to do with her but
Ferdinando Smith, and that he was the Father of the Child, which she so
declared upon the Midwifes three times pressing her to speak the Truth, and not
to wrong any Gentleman, there being then present Marian Holton, the Wife of
James Holton of the same Parish.

Eodem die D. Maria Herne jurat' fuit coram Domino Epis.


Mary Herne.

Eodem die.
Which Day appeared personally Marian Holton, Wife of James Holton of the
Parish of St. Michael aforesaid Labourer, and declared that she was present at
the Labor of Ann Aires who was delivered of a Bastard Child, and being then
twice pressed by the Midwife, to declare who was the Father of the said Bastard
Child, declared that Ferdinando Smith the Elder was the Father of the said
Child, and that no body else had to do with her, there being then present Mary
Herne aforesaid.

Eodem die jurat' cor' Domino Epis.


Marian Holton.

The Deposition of Margaret Trendal of Oxford Spinster.
This Deponent says, That some time after Anne Aris had sworn before Sir
William Walker against Mr. Colmer of Exeter College, she this Deponent asked
why she had not accused Mr. Colmer before, to which she answered, that it was
never in her Head.

The Mark of Margaret reversed Trendal.

The Deposition of Giles Cook of Oxford Tobaccopipe-Maker.
This Deponent says, That Anne Aris being asked in his hearing why she accused
Mr. Colmer, answered she was inveigled to do it.

The Mark of Giles ^ Cook.

The Deposition of Edward Brickland of Oxford Apothecary.
This Deponent says, That he was present when Anne Aris said she was inveigled
to accuse Mr. Colmer, and that he heard her say so, and weep at the same time.

The Deposition of Griswell Mason Wife of John Mason Fuller in Oxford.
This Deponent says, That Anne Aris sometime after her being delivered of a
Bastard Child on New-Years-Day became Servant to her this Deponent, and lived
with her several Months, and that during that time this Deponent several times
pressed the said Anne Aris to confess the Truth concerning the Father of the
said Bastard Child, because Ferdinando Smith had complained he was injured by
her, and that she the said Anne Aris did always tell this Deponent that no one
was the Father of her Child, or ever had to do with her but the said Ferdinando
Smith. This Deponent likewise says, That she several times told the said Anne
Aris that she was accused of lying with some Boys of the Town, and that if it
were true she should confess it, and repent of it; but the said Anne Aris
always said to her with Tears in her Eyes, that it was not true, for that none
but the said Smith ever had to do with her.

The Mark of Griswel Mason.

These four Depositions of Margaret Trendal, Giles Cook, Edmard Brickland and
Griswell Mason were taken upon Oath the 31st of Jan. 1690/91.

before me Edw. Combs.



The Certificate of Edw. Strickland.
See the Account examined p. 27.

These are to certify that in the Deposition which I made before Sir William
Walker September 18th 1690. I described the Young Man there mentioned by saying
he was a short Commoner in a Peruque dissigured by the Small Pox.

Witness my Hand this 31st of March 1691. Edw. Strickland.

Affidavits whereby Mr. Colmer is acquitted from Incontinence with Ann Sparrow
The Certificate and Deposition of Alderman Fifield concerning the Examination
of Anne Sparrow taken before him Oct. 29. 1689.
These are to Certify whom it may concern, That Ann Sparrow having been
delivered of a Bastard Child, I being a Justice of Peace was desired to examine
the said Ann Sparrow upon her Oath, which I did do accordingly upon the 21 day
of this present October 1689. the said Ann Sparrow did then declare upon the
Oath that she took, that Mr. James Colmer of Exeter College was not the Father
of the said Bastard Child, and did also then upon her Oath declare that the
said Mr. Colmer never had to do with her, and that his name was put into her
Mouth by one Goodwife Roberts.

Witness my Hand, Oct. 29. 89. Thomas Fifield.

Compare this Certificate with the Case related p. 6. where it is confidently
and falsely averred, that she was not upon Oath for anything that appears upon
the Aldermans Certificate.

Vicesimo quinto die Martii Anno Dom 1690.
Memorandum, This day Tho. Fifield Alderman of the City of Oxford, and one of
their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of that City, made Oath before the Right
Worshipful Dr. Edward Masters Dr. of Laws, and Commissary to the Right Reverend
Father in God Jonathan by Divine permission Lord Bishop of Exon, Patron and
Visitor, Ordinary of the College of Exon in the University of Oxon, That the
Certificate hereunto annexed is all of this Deponent's own Hand Writing, and
that the Contents thereof were and are true, and were so done as is there set
down and expressed.

Jurat' Coram me

Edw. Muster Commiss. Act.
in praesentia mea Jo. Greeneway. Not' Pub' and Reg' assumpt'.


Tho. Fifield.

Mr. Walter Fifields Certificate.
On the 5th of May last about 9 at night, I was returning home to Trinity
College from my Father's, Alderman Fifields; and being informed at the Turle by
a Neighbor of Sir William Walker's that something was under Examination before
him that concerned my Father's Reputation (my Father being at that time very
ill of a Sickness, of which within six days after he departed this Life) I went
to Sir William and desired admission, which being easily granted, I found there
Dr. Bury, Mr. Crabb, and Sir Kingston, and a foolish Wench who owned her self
to be Ann Sparrow, then under Examination about a Bastard Child, concerning
which she had been examined before my Father upon Oath some Months before; but
Dr. Bury having asserted the contrary in Print, I desired some Questions might
be put to her concerning her former Examination: when on a sudden I found Dr.
Hern, and Mr. Vermin in the room (sent for, as I suppose, by Sir Kingston)
besides a great Crowd pressing in. I desired leave of Sir William to send for a
Friend, and by his Permission sent for Alderman Townsend, who being come, took
the Wench away from the Crowd into another Room, and proposed in my hearing
some Questions to her, about her having acquitted Mr. Colmer upon her Oath
before my Father She declard at the same time that she did not Swear before
Alderman Fisield, but being asked whether there were any Book, and whether she
laid her Hand upon it, she answered to both Questions, Yes. This I desired
urgently might be inserted in her Depostion but both Sir William and the
Alderman put me off, saying, There was no need of it, for that she had given
sufficient satisfaction that she was sworn before my Father, and that they
being Witnesses, their Testimony was as good or better than her Deposition.

Given under my Hand the 8th day of April, Anno Dom' 1691. Walter Fifield.
The Day and Year above written, Mr. Fifield came before me, one of their
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxon, and took his voluntary
Oath, that the aforesaid Certificate is the Truth.


Tho. Hunsdon.

The Substance of Anne Pierces Deposition taken 28 Jan. 1689.
ANne Pierce deposes, That Mr. Kingston came to Anne Sparrow in her House, and
was privately with her for a considerable time, and that soon after the said
Anne Sparrow made Oath before a Justice of Peace: And that afterward this
Deponent saw the said Anne in Bridewell, and asked her why she did accuse and
wrong a Gentleman before the Justice; to which the said Anne replied, That she
had sworn only what Mr. Kingston bad her.

Anne Pierce.

The Character of the Informer as to Bribery and Heresy sufficiently appears
in the Account. But as to Incontinence the Affidavits that were made in the
Visitation, are here made public.

24 Die Julii, 1690.
Mary Smith Spinster does declare, and will be ready to prove, That about the
beginning of November 1688. she was Servant to Dr. Arthur Bury at Exeter
College, and continued in his Sirvice till about the end of January following,
during which time the said Dr. Bury, viz. The second Night after her coming,
came into the Bed to this Informant, and one Mrs. Grace Weeks then and now
living in the House with Dr. Bury, whom she this Informant presently awaked,
and the said Grace Weeks did several times strike the said Doctor, and forced
him to leave the Bed for that time. And the next day Dr. Bury asked this
Informant very angryly why she made such a Bussle and waked Grace Weeks.

And this Informant further declares, That afterward the said Dr. Bury took
away the Keys of the Doors betwixt the lodging Chamber of the Doctor, and the
Room where this Informant and the said Grace Weeks lodged; and several Nights
after the said Doctor came in his Shirt to this Informants Bed, and came into
the Bed to her and the said Grace Weeks, and to the best of her remembrance
came in like manner to her Bed almost every Night during her stay in the House,
and was angry with her for not lying on that side of the Bed as he used to come
to, as he had directed her; and when he was in Bed with this Informant, he bid
her lie still, and several times attempted her Chastity; and when no Person was
in the Lodgings but the Doctor and this Informant, he called this Informant to
him, and asked her several filthy Questions which she will be ready to set
forth when she shall be called to prove the same. And this Informant says,
That about a Month after the said beginning of November, the said Grace Weeks
was sent away to board in the Town; after which the said Doctor usually came to
this Informants Bed in his Shirt, at Night, and desired to lie with her, having
taken away the Key of this Informants Chamber Door; and this Informant did put
Chairs in the way to hinder him from coming to her Bed, and stook Pins in the
Bed, and in the way to it whilst the said Grace Weeks lay with this Informant;
and one Night in his coming to her Bed after the removeal of Grace Weeks, he
broke his Shin with the Frame of a Chair which she laid in his way, which the
next Night he showed to this Informant when she was warming his Bed, and then
showed her a Mole on the side of his Foot, which he told this Informant no one
ever did see before, unless his Mother or his Nurse. And further says, That
the Doctor wished her to lie still in the Bed, and not to fear, for none that
had skill would ever get Children, and told her that if she would yield to him,
she should have what she would; but she refusing him, arose out of her Bed and
dressed her helf, and set up the rest of the Night, and the next day, which was
the day before he went into Devonshire, he threw the Key of this Informants
Chamber to her, and told her that if she was afraid, she might lock her self in.

Eodem die Jurat' cor' Dom' Epis.


Mary Smith.

Note, That the Circumstance of sticking Pins was owned to be true, sometime
after this Deposition was made by Mrs. Bury and Mrs. Guise to one of the Senior
Fellows.

Eodem die.
THomasin Smith the Mother of Mary Smith before named, says, That Grace Weeks
came to this Informant and told her, that the Doctor came to bed to her the
said Grace, and to the said Mary several times, and says, That Mrs. Wells a
Servant for many Years in the Doctors Family, told this Informant that the
Doctor was a very rude Man to all the Maids that ever lived with him, and
particularly that one Katherine Wakehan that left his Service with a great
Belly, could never be at quiet for him, as Mrs. Wells told this Informant; and
one Goodwife Harvey blamed this Informant for placing her Daughter with the
Doctor, when no body was at home but him, saying, He was a very rude Man to his
Maids.

Eodem die Jurat' cor' Dom' Epise'


Thomasin Smith.

14 Die Julii, 1690.
JOhn Smith says, That he was Servant to Dr. Bury when one Martha Wotton was
Servant there; and that one Night this Informant setting down on the great
Chair in the Doctors Hall, he did see the Doctor and the said Martha close
together in a Settle in the Hall, and talking softly together, and when they
perceived this Informant to rise up, they went away in the dark into the
Kitchen, and staid there for some time.

Eodem die Jurat' cor' Dom' Epise'.


John Smith.

The Deposition of Thomasin Smith, Wife of Ferdinando Smith of Oxford, Tailor,
taken before Edward Combs one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
City of Oxon. Jan. 31. 1690/91.
THis Deponent declares, That about fifteen Months since she did tell Mrs.
Wells as they were going to the Market, that she would declare what she knew of
Doctor Bury if he turned her out of her place, and within a Week or thereabout
after this, Mrs. Guise Daughter in Law to the said Doctor, did call her this
Deponent into her Chamber, and was very earnest to have this Deponent swear to
her, not to discover what she knew concerning the Rector, which this Deponent
told her she would not do, but refused to swear.

This Deponent further says, That Catherine Wakehan lived with Doctor Bury at
Exeter College a considerable time after she was delivered of a Bastard Child,
and the young Man that was the reputed Father of the Bastard lived with him
some time also after the said Wakehan's Delivery.

This Deponent further says, That she never enquired of Joan Richardson or her
Mother, where Elizabeth Terry lived, nor ever said to them or any other that
the said Terry should be well rewarded if she would say any thing against
Doctor Bury, or any words to that purpose.

Jurat' 31 die Januarii An' Dom' 1620/91;,

cor' me Edw. Combs.


The Mark of Thomasin D Smith.

The Deposition of Alice Hern Wife of Arthur Hern of Oxon, Barber.
THis Deponent on Oath says, That she has several times heard Goodwife
Harper, Wife of William Harper of Oxon, Malt-man, ask Thomasin Smith why she
would let her Daughter live with Doctor Bury, saying, That the said Doctor was
reckoned a great Whore-master.

Jurat' coram me 31 die Jan' Anno Dom' 1690/91;.

Edw. Combs.


Alice Hern.

The Deposition of John Gigger of Oxford, only Brother of Alice Gigger (at
present) of London.
THis Deponent on his Oath says, That he never Writ a Letter to his Sister
Alice by the instigation of Mr. Colmer, or his Lawyer of New College, wherein
he told her that she should not discover any thing, for if she did she should
take care of her self, for Colmer would do her a mischief, or any words to that
purpose, and that she has no Brother but him, or Brother in Law, or has had
this thirty Years. And that he never writ any thing to her concerning Mr.
Colmer in his Life.

This Deposition was before me made upon Oath Jan. 31. 1690/91;.

Witness my Hand Edw. Combs.


John Gigger.

FINIS.

