Books printed for Rich. Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul' s Churchyard.
MR. Harris's Sermon, Preached at the Cathedral-Church of St. Paul, January the
3d. 1697/8. being the First of the Lecture for that Year, Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire.

-- His Remarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to
the Natural History of the Earth. In Octavo.

Dr. Woodward's Natural History of the Earth, in Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Truth of the Christian Religion, against the
Objections of all Modern Opposers; in Two Volumes. In Octavo.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, for the Advancement of their true and
greatest Interest; Part I. By a Lover of her Sex. The Third Edition. In Twelves.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies; Part II. Wherein a Method is offered for the
Improvement of their Minds. In Twelves.

Letters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies and Mr. John Norris. In Octavo.

An Answer to W. P. his Key about the Quakers Light within, and Oaths; with an
Appendix of the Sacraments. In Octavo.

A Letter to the Honorable Sir Robert Howard: Together with some
Animadversions on a Book, entitled, Christianity not Mysterious. In Octavo.

The Notion of a GOD, Neither from FEAR nor POLICY. A SERMON Preached at the
CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, March the 7th. 1697/8. BEING The Third of the
LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King' s-Head in St. Paul'
s Churchyard, School.

PSALM x. 4. The Wicked, through the Pride of his Countenance, will not seek
after God: neither is God in all his Thoughts.


IN my last Discourse on these words, I came to consider the Third Particular I
had before observed in them; which was, The great Charge the Psalmist brings
against the Wicked and Proud Person here spoken of, viz. Wilful Atheism and
Infidelity. He will not seek after God: and all his thoughts are, There is no
God. Under which I proposed to Consider and Refute the Atheist's Objections,
against the Being of a God in general. And these I found might be reduced to
these Two Heads: I. That we can have no Idea of God. II. That the Notion of
Him, which is about in the World, owes its Original to the foolish Fears and
Ignorance of some Men, and to the crafty Designs of others.


The former of these I have already refuted, and showed that it is Groundless
and Precarious in all its Parts.

I shall now therefore consider the Second Objection against the Being of a God
in general, viz. That the Notion of a Deity, which is so generally found among
Mankind, owes its Original to the foolish Fears and Ignorance of some Men, and
to the designing and crafty Figments of others.

And here I shall first give you the Sense of these kind of Writers on this
Point: And then endeavor to show you, how very weak and trivial their
Arguments are, and how very far short they come of Disproving the Existence of
a Deity.

And first I shall give you the full sense of this Objection, from the words of
those that bring it; beginning with the Modern Writers, who, as you will find
by and by, have little or nothing new, but like Carriers Horses, follow one
another in a Track, and because the first went wrong, all the rest will succeed
him in the same Error; not considering, that he who comes behind, may take an
advantage to avoid that Pit, which those that went before, are fallen into. (as
it is in the words of the Translator of Blount's Life of Apollon. p. 19.
Philostratus.)

But here it must be premised, That since these kind of Men do frequently
disguise their true meaning; It is not the bare Words only, but the Scope of a
Writer, that gives the true Light by which any Writing is to be interpreted,
(as Mr. Hobbs Leviath. p. 338.
very well observes:) yet this must be said for both him and the other Modern
Atheistick Writers, That their Disguise is so very thin and superficial, that
any one may easily see through it, and discover their true Meaning and Design.
Nothing can be clearer, than that it is the great scope of the Author of Great
is Diana of the Ephesians, to persuade the World, That the first Original of
all Religion, was from Craft and Imposture, and that it was cultivated and
carried on by the Cunning and Avarice of the Priests. And in his Anima Mundi,
page 13, 14. he tells us, That Superstition (by which these kind of Writers
always mean Religion in general) did certainly proceed from some Crafty and
Designing Person, who observed what were the Inclinations of Mankind, and so
adapted his Fictions accordingly: He pretended to have some extraordinary way
revealed to him, from an Invisible Power, whereby he was able to instruct the
People; and to put them into a way of being happy in a Future State. And in
another place, he says, Life of Apollon. p. 3.
That Mankind being ill-natured, and unapt to oblige others without Reward, as
also judging of God Almighty by themselves, did at first conceive the Gods to
be like their Eastern Princes, before whom no Man might come empty-handed; and
thus came the Original of Sacrifices: And this Institution, he says, was
improved by the crafty Sacerdotal Order, into all that costly and extravagant
Superstition that did afterward so abound in the World. Now in this passage,
it is plain, that he makes all the Jewish Religion to be nothing but
Priestcraft and Imposture; though on wretched poor grounds, as I shall hereafter
sufficiently make appear. And his Opinion of the Christian Religion, may easily
be guessed, by what he delivers, Anim. Mund. page 124. viz. That most Christian
Churches, like the Musk-melon from the Dunghill, were raised from the filthy
Corruption and Superstition of Paganism. And in another place, he says,
Oracles of Reason, p. 158.
That he will engage to make appear, That a Temporal Interest was the great
Machine on which all Humane Actions ever moved; (he means, in the Establishing
of the Jewish and Christian Religions;) and that the common Pretense of Piety
and Religion, was but like Grace before a Meal: i. e. according to him, nothing
but a mere customary piece of Folly that signifies nothing at all, and which he
frequently ridicules and exposes Blount's Life of Apollon. in the Preface, and
p. 24.
.

Now all this, though not in plain and express words, yet in the most obvious
sense and meaning, is equally applicable to the Notion of a God; and no doubt
was so intended by the Author. And, indeed, take away Religion and the Notion
of a God must of course follow: For it is impossible to think that if there be a
God, he should not expect Veneration and Worship from those Creatures of his,
that he has rendered capable of doing it; which therefore is their reasonable
Service, Romans 12.1.

After the same manner does Spinoza declare himself as to the Origin of
Religion; which he also calls by the Name of Superstition. Causa, a qua
Superstitio oritur, conservatur and fovetur, metus est. Tract. Theol. Polit. in
Praef.
He tells us, That the true Cause from whence Superstition took its rise, is
preserved and maintained, is Fear. Si Homines res omnes suas certo consilio
regere possent, vel si fortuna ipsis prospera semper foret; nulla superstitione
tenerentur: sed quoniam co sape angusliarum rediguntur ut consilium nullum ad
far queant, inter spem metumque misere fluctuant, ideo animum ut plurimum, ad
quidvis credendum pronissi number habent. Ibid.
That if all things would but succeed according to Men's Minds, they would never
be enslaved by Superstition: But because they are often in great streights, and
so put to it, that no Counsel or Help will be beneficial to them, they are
tossed and bandied about between Hope and Fear, and at last have their Mind so
debilitated, that they are prone to believe any thing. Ea omnia quae Homines
unquam vana Religione coluerunt, nihil praeter Phantasmata, animique tristis
and timidi suisse deliria. Ibid.
But that in reality all those things which have been the Objects of Men's vain
Religious Worship, are nothing but the dreadful Phantasms and mad Figments of a
sorrowful and timorous Mind. Ex hac itaque Superstitionis Causa (sc. metu)
clare sequitur omnes homines natura superstitioni esse obnoxios: quicquid
dicant alii, qui putant hoc inde oriri, quod omnes mortales confusam quandam
Numinis Idaeam habent. Ibid.
And the reason (he says) why all Men are thus subject by Nature to
Superstition, is only from Fear; and not as some have fansied, from any
confused Idea of a God, which they will have to be impressed on all Mankind.

The Author of the Leviathan, speaks yet a little plainer as to this Point;
Leviath. p. 51.
Ignorant Men (says he) feign to themselves several kinds of Invisible Powers,
stand in awe of their own Imaginations, in time of Distress invoke them, in
time of Success give them thanks, making the Creatures of their own fancy Gods.
This is the Natural Seed of Religion, which Men taking notice of, have formed
into Laws, etc.

And he tells us in another place, Leviath, p. 26.51.
That Fear of Power invisible feigned by the Mind, or imagined from Tales
publicly allowed is Religion, not allowed, is Superstition. So that according
to Mr. Hobbs, Religion and Superstition differ only in this, that the latter is
a Lie and a Cheat standing only on the Authority of Private Men, whereas the
former is supported by the Power of the Government. In these Four Things, says
he, elsewhere, Leviath, p. 54.
consists the Natural Seed of Religion, viz. Ignorance of Second Causes,
Opinion of Ghosts, Devotion toward what Men Fear, and taking things casual for
Prognostics. These are the Accounts which our Modern Atheistical Writers give
of the Origin of Religion, and the Notion of a God among Men. And this they,
with great assurance, put off as their own new Invention; without being so just
as to mention any of the Ancients, from whom they have borrowed every Article
of it. That trite Passage every Body knows Primus in orb Deos fecit timor; and
Lucretius mentions Fear and the Ignorance of Second Causes, as that which gave
the first rise to the Notion of a God: For, says he, Caetera, quae fieri in
Terris Coeloque tuentur Mortales, pavidis cum pendent mentibu' saepe Efficient
Animos humiles formidine Divum, Depressosque premunt ad Terram; propterea quod
Ignorantia Causarum confer Deorum Cogit ad Imperium Res, and concedere
Regnum: Et Quorum operum causas nulla ratione videre Possunt, haec fieri Divino
numine rentur. Lib. 6. v. 49.
When Men with fearful Minds behold the things in the Earth and Heavens, they
become abject and depressed under the fear of the Gods; whose Empire Ignorance
of Causes sets up in the World: for when Men cannot see any natural Reason for
any Effect, they strait fancy it is the Product of some Divine Power. The very
same thing he says also in another place, Lib. 5. v. 1160. Nunc. quae causa
Deum, etc.
where he attributes likewise the Notion of Ghosts, and consequently of the
Gods interfering with the Affairs of the World, to Men's not being able to
distinguish Dreams from Real Appearances. Tully tells us, That there were some
in his time, and no doubt long before, who attributed the Opinion and Belief of
the Gods to have been feigned by Wise Men for the good of the Commonwealth. ^i
qui dixerunt toram de Diis immortalibus opinionem fictam esse ab hominibus
sapientibus Reipublicae causa.
And Plato acquaints us, (...). Plato de Legib. lib. 10.
That the ancient Atheists did affirm, that the Gods were not by Nature, but by
Art and Laws only, and so were different in different places, according as the
different humor of the Law givers chanced to determine the Matter. Sextus
Empiricus says, That there were at first some Intelligent and Prudent Men --
(...). Sext. Emp. adv. Math. p. 310.
who considered what would be beneficial to Humane Life; and these first
feigned the fabulous Notion of Gods, and caused that Suspicion that there is in
Men's Minds about them. Afterward he says, That heretofore Men lived wild and
savage, and preyed upon one another like wild Beasts; till some Men being
willing to prevent and repress Injuries and Rapine, invented Laws to punish
those that did amiss: And then they feigned, that there were Gods also, who
took cognizance of all Men's Actions, whether good or bad; that so no one might
dare to commit any secret Wickedness, when he was by this means persuaded, (...)
(...),
That the Gods, though unseen by Men, did yet inspect into all Humane Actions,
and take notice who did well, and who the contrary. Sextus also attributes the
Rise of Men's Belief of a God, to their ignorance of Second Causes, (as I showed
you before that Lucretius does:) for he makes Democritus speak thus, (...).
When Men of old saw strange and frightful things in the Air or Heavens, such
as Thunder, Lightning, Thunderbolts, Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, etc. not
knowing the Natural Causes of them, but being terrified by them, they strait
imagined the Gods to be the Authors of them. This therefore being proved to be
the true sense of the Ancient Atheistical Writers, and from them copied by the
Moderns, viz. That Fear, Ignorance and Cunning were the first Originals or
Causes of the Notion and Belief of a God. Let us now fairly examine the Case,
and see what ground there is for such an Assertion; and whether this can
account for that Universal Notion of a Divine and Omnipotent Being, which we
find every where in the World. And,

1. I say, That the Notion of a GOD, could not come from Fear; for if it did,
either this Fear must be universally inherent in all Mankind, or else peculiar
only to some Dastardly and Low-spirited Mortals. If the former be asserted,
it is a very convincing Argument, that there is a just ground for such a Fear;
and that it has something that is Real for its Object, that can thus affect
all Men, after the same manner. And if it be so, that all Men are naturally
subject to this Fear of a Deity; how could any one ever discover, that there
was no real ground for this, in the nature of the thing? how came he himself
exempted from this poorness of Spirit? And if he were not exempted from this
terrible Passion, how came he to discover, that the Object of this Fear is all
a Cheat, and nothing but a mere Mormo and Bugbear? 'Twas very lucky for him,
that the rambling Atoms of his Constitution jumpt by chance into such a
courageous and noble Frame and Temper! But pray who was this mighty Man? when
and where did he live? what Ancient History gives us any Account of this happy
Person, that laughed at that which all the World besides were afraid of? Let
the Atheists give us but any Relation of him, that is Authentic, and it shall
be allowed as the greatest thing they have ever yet advanced. But I suppose
they will not say that this Fear is Universal; but that it only possesses mean
and abject Spirits, and never invades the Great and Brave Soul. Let us see
whether this will do them any service. Now by Brave and Great Souls, who do
they mean? Do they intend by them, such as have Power, Command and Empire over
others? Nothing is more certain, than that Kings and Princes have been equally
subject to these Fears of a God, and of Divine Punishment, with the meanest and
most contemptible of their Subjects. And this Praeterea, cui non animus
formidine Divium Contrahitur? cui non conrepunt membra pavore Fulminis
horribili cum plaga torrida tellus Contremit, and magnum percurrunt murmura
Coelum? Non Populi Gentesque tremunt? Regesque superbi Conripiunt Divum
per^ulsa membra timore Ne quod ob admissum foede, dictumque superbe Poenarum
grave sit solvendi tempus adactum? Lucret. l. 5. v. 1217.
Lucretius himself owns, (as also that this Fear of a Deity is Universal) and
we have Examples of it in the Histories of all Ages and Parts of the World. But
they will say, it is like, that by Brave and Great Souls, they don't mean Kings
and Princes, but the Wise, Knowing, and Learned part of Mankind: These were
they that first discovered this Cheat, and who, finding its Advantage to
Mankind, have ever since continued it and carried it on for the Public Good.
These Cunning Men finding the Vulgar generally subject to dismal Apprehensions
and Fears of they knew not what kind of Invisible Powers, took advantage from
thence to tell them of a God, and to form the product of their Fears into the
Notion of a Deity. Now to this I say, That if these cunning Politicians found
that there was a Fear, Dread and Apprehension of some Divine and Almighty
Being, Universally impressed upon the Minds of Men, as no doubt but there is;
this, I say, is a very convincing Argument that such a Belief has a good
Foundation in the Nature of the thing, and consequently has Truth at the
bottom. And therefore it is plain, that these Men did not Invent, but find this
Notion and Belief actually Existing, by a kind of Anticipation in the Hearts of
all Mankind. And that they could not possibly invent it, had there been no
Ground nor Reason for such a Belief, I shall plainly prove by and by.

But again; That the Notion of a God, did not arise only from Fear, is plain
from hence; That Mankind has gotten an Idea of Him, that could never proceed
only from that Passion. If Fear only were to make a God, it would compose him
of nothing but black and terrible Idea's: it would represent Him to be (...),
all envious and spiteful; a grim, angry and vindicative Being; one that
delights in nothing but to exercise his Tyrannical Power and Cruelty upon
Mankind: we should then believe him to be such a Power as the Indians do their
Evil God, and we do the Devil; a mischievous and bloody Deity, that is the
Author of nothing but Evil and Misery in the World: for these must be the
dreadful Attributes of a Being which Fear only would create and set up in our
Hearts.

But now, instead of this, we find a quite different Notion of God in the
World. We justly believe Him to be a most Kind, Loving and Gracious Being, and
whose mercies are over all his works. We are taught by the Scriptures, those
Sacred Volumes of his Will, to believe that He at first Created the World, and
all things that are therein, to display his Goodness and Kindness to his
Creatures: That he wills not, nor delights in the death of a sinner, nor in the
evil and misery of any thing; but that He has by most admirable methods of
Divine Love, provided for our Happiness both here and hereafter. Now such an
Account as this of the Deity, could never take its Rise from Fear only: And
therefore since it cannot be denied but that we have such a Notion of God, it
must have some more Noble and Generous an Original. We find, indeed, in our
selves a just Fear and Dread of Offending so Good and Gracious a God; and we
believe it suitable to his Justice, to punish those that will pertinaciously
continue in a state of Rebellion against Him, after having refused and slighted
the repeated Overtures of his Mercy. But then we know very well, That the
Notion we have of a Deity, is not occasioned by, and derived from this Fear;
but, on the contrary, this Fear from it. It Is the Natural Consequence and
Effect of the Belief and Knowledge of a God, but it cannot be the Cause and
Original of it. For Fear alone can never dispose the Mind of Man to imagine a
Being that is infinitely Kind, Merciful and Gracious. The Atheist therefore
must here take in Hope too, as well as Fear, as a joint Cause of his pretended
Origin of the Belief of a God; and say, That Mankind came to imagine that there
was some Powerful and Invisible Being, which they hoped would do them as much
good, as they were afraid it would do them hurt Vid. Archbishop Tillotson's
First Sermon, p. 47.
. But these two contrary Idea's, like Equal Quantities in an Equation with
contrary Signs, will destroy one another, and consequently the Remainder will
be nothing. And therefore the Mind of Man must lay aside such an Idea of God,
as soon as he has well considered it, for it will signify just nothing at all.

Another very good Argument, That the Notion of a God, did not take its first
Original from Fear only, may be drawn from hence, That those that do believe
and know most of God, are the least Subject to that servile Passion. If Fear
only occasioned Men's Notion and Belief of a God, the consequence must be,.that
where the Notion of a Deity is most strong and vivid, there Men must be most
timorous and apprehensive of Danger; there the greatest distrust, suspicion,
and anxious sollicitousness about the Events of Futurity would be always found.
But this is so far from being true in Fact, that no one is so free from those
Melancholy and Dreadful Thoughts and Apprehensions, as he that truly believes
in, and Fears God. For he can find always in Him Almighty Defense and
Protection; he can cast all his care on God who he knows cares for him: When
all the treacherous Comforts of this World leave him, and when nothing but a
gloomy Scene of Affliction, Distress and Misery presents its self here; yea,
even when Heart it self and Strength begin to fail, God will be (he knows) the
Strength of his Heart and his Portion for ever; and even in the vast Multitude
of his Afflictions, God's Comforts will refresh his Soul.

But it is far otherwise with the miserable Wretch that has no Belief of, nor
any Knowledge of God; if he fall into Affliction, Trouble, or Misery, he has
nothing to support him: He is the most abject and dispirited of all Mankind,
his whole head is sick, and his heart is faint, and his Spirit cannot sustain
his Infirmity; for he has not only no Power and Ability to bear the present
load of Misery, but he expects yet much worse to come; and notwithstanding all
his former Incredulity and Bravery, he now, as the Devil himself does, believes
and trembles. And therefore, though as Plutarch observes, (...), it be the
chief Design of Atheism to give Men an Exemption from Fear; yet it is a very
foolish one, and falls very far short of answering its End: for it deserts and
fails its Votaries in their greatest Extremities and Necessities, and by
depriving them of all just Grounds for hope, must needs expose them to the most
dismal Invasions of Fear. And thus, I think, it is very plain, That the Notion
of a God could not take its first Original from Fear. As to the Ignorance of
Second Causes, which is sometimes alleged as another Occasion of the Notion of
a Deity; the Modern Atheists do not much insist upon it, and therefore I need
not do so in its Refutation. I have showed already whence they had it; and I
think it sufficient to observe here, that there are no Men so Ignorant of
Second Causes, nor any that give so poor and trifling Accounts of the
Phenomenon of Nature as these Atheistical Philosophers do. And therefore
Ignorance ought rather to be reckoned among the Causes of Atheism and
Infidelity, than of the Idea of God and Religion; for I am very well assured
that a through insight into the Works of Nature, and a serious Contemplation of
that admirable Wisdom, excellent Order, and that useful Aptitude and Relation
that the several Parts of the World have to each other, must needs convince any
one, that they are the Products of a Divine and Almighty Power. The Invisible
things of God may be understood by the things that are made, and his Eternal
Power and Godhead discovered by this means Rom, 1.20.
; as has been excellently demonstrated by the learned Dr. Cudworth, Dr.
Bentley, Mr. Ray, and many others. And these kind of Gentlemen have betrayed
their shallow and superficial Knowledge of things, by nothing more, than by
pretending to give an Account of the Original of the World, the Motion of the
Heavenly Bodies, of Gravity, and several other Phenomenon of Nature, without
having recourse to a Deity; as I shall hereafter more particularly observe. But
I now hasten to Refute that which they make their Great and most Common
Objection against the Being of a God; And to show,

2. That the Notion of a God did not, nor could not, arise from Cunning and
Contrivance; and that it was not invented by any Crafty and Politic Person.

Though that it did do so, is the constant Assertion of these Gentlemen; and
they do it with as much assurance, as if it were a Self-evident Proposition. In
all Companies they will nauseously tire you with this Battology, over and over
again, That All Religion is a Cheat, and the greatest Cheat of all is Religion.
But this themselves have happily discovered; and therefore they Scorn to be
imposed upon by Priestcraft; they will neither be ridden by Priests, nor lead
by them; they can go without Leading-strings; and will not be put to the Temporal
Charge of a Spiritual Guide: and they have quitted the Thoughts of going to
Heaven by the same means as they go to the Playhouse, (i.e.) by giving Money
to the Door-keepers. As the Translator of Philostratus insolently expresses it.
Blount's Life of Apollon. in the Preface.
Now after all this bold and repeated Exclamation against Priestcraft and Holy
Shams, etc. Would not one think that they had some demonstrative Ground, to
prove that the Notion of God, and Religion is all a Cheat and Imposture? Would
not one suppose that they could name the very Person that first Invented this
Fourbe; tell us when, and where he lived, and plainly prove by what means he
came to impose so grossly on Mankind, and how they came to be such Fools as to
take it, and dully to submit to it ever since? Nothing sure, that is less than
a direct Demonstration, ought to protect a Man under so rude a Liberty as these
Gentlemen take, of ridiculing all the Sacred Laws of God and Men. But have they
any such Proof ready? or have they ever yet produced it? No, nor is it possible
they ever should; as appears plainly from the Ancient Histories of all Nations
in the World. In no one of these do we ever find the least mention made of any
one that Invented the Notion of a God. 'Twas a Thing taken for Granted by all
the Ancient Lawgivers, that there was a God: This they never went about to
prove; nor had they any need so to do, or to feign it, for they found it
universally and naturally stamped upon the Minds of Mankind. This Moses himself
does not so much as attempt to teach the Jews, as knowing very well that it was
what they had a general Notion and Idea of before. And Homer speaks every where
of the Gods, as of Beings universally known and believed, and never goes about
to prove their Existence. The same thing appears in Hesiod, and in the
Fragments that we have of all the Ancient Greek Poets. And though it be not
true in Fact, yet it is a good Argument ad Hominem against the Atheists, that
Lucretius pretends to tell you when Atheism began, and who was the first Bold
Man that disputed and denied the Being of a God. This, he says, was Epicurus.
Primum Graius homo mortales tollere contra Est oculos ausus, primusque
obsistere contra: Quem nec fama Deum, nec fulmina nec minitanti Murmr
compressit Coelum. -- Lib. 1. v. 67.
But he cannot deny but that in so doing, Epicurus contradicted the common
Sentiments of all Mankind, and broke through those Fears and Obligations that
the generality of Men were under to a Divine Power. But to Refute a little more
Methodically this trite Objection. I say, that the Notion of a God could not
derive its Original from the cunning Invention of any Politic Person, for
these Reasons:

1. Because the pretended Inventor himself could never possibly have come by
such a Notion, had there been no such Being as a God. Sextus Empiricus observes
very well, That though -- (...). Adv. Math. p. 314.
it is pretended that Lawgivers and Politicians invented the Notion of a God;
yet the Asserters of it are not aware of an Absurdity that arises thence: for
if it should be asked, how they themselves came by such a Notion? they must be
at a loss; they will not say they had it from others, nor can they account how
they came by it; and therefore it must have been from the beginning; and so all
Men must have a Notion of God, though not all after the same way. And, indeed,
it is not possible to imagine that such a Notion could ever have come into any
one's Head, had there been no such Being as a Deity. Were he an absolute
Nonentity, and really Nothing at all, it is unconceivable how any one could
ever attain an Idea of God, or have coined any word that should so have
expressed that Idea, as to render it intelligible to any one else. The Mind of
Man cannot invent, or make any new simple Idea or Cogitation; it cannot
possibly make a Positive Conception of that which is really nothing at all.
Which way soever we come by our Idea's, we cannot have one of what is
absolutely a Nonentity; for what is absolutely Nothing, can neither come into
us by our Senses, nor be innate in our Minds. And therefore if there were no
God, we could never have had any Idea of Him; nor could any one ever possibly
invent, or frame such a Notion in his Mind. I know the compounding, ampliating
and feigning Power of the Mind will here be alleged; and it will be said that
we may by that means frame Notions of things which perhaps did never, nor ever
will Exist: Thus we may gain the Notion of a Flying Horse, of a Creature, half
a Man and half a Horse, a Man of a Thousand Foot high, etc. and therefore say
they, Sext. Empiric. Adv. Mathem. p. 316, 317.
why might not the Mind of Man, by this compounding and ampliating Power, feign
as well the Notion of a Deity? To which I answer, That this Power in our Minds
does not, nor cannot extend so far. All that we can do by it, is to connect
together two or more possible and consistent Idea's, or to Ampliate or Enlarge
any one or more of them, in point of Time, Extent, etc. Thus, as was before
said, by connecting the Idea's of Wings and a Horse, or of a Horse and a Man,
we may feign a Pegasus or a Centaure; and I can imagine either of these
Creatures, or any other, to live Five Thousand times as long, or to be Fifty
thousand times as big, as is usual. But all this is still short of what it is
brought for, and will give no account at all of the Invention of the Idea of a
God. For suppose the Mind would endeavor to amplify the Idea of a Man into
that of God, which is the Way Sextus Empiricus says Men might and did come by
the Notion of a Deity. Vbi supra.
First, he says, the Mind can give him Eternity of Duration: But how came it
by that Idea of Eternity? was that Idea previous to the Invention of a Deity?
and had Mankind a clear Conception of it? if they had, the Notion of God could
not be then invented, for one of his chiefest Attributes was known before. But
I suppose they will say that the Notion of Eternity was gained by Ampliating
the Idea of Duration or Time beyond the common and ordinary Term: And thus by
imagining a Man to live a Thousand or Ten Thousand Years, I may come to frame
the Notion of a Being that should always exist. But that is a gross Mistake;
for a Being that should endure Ten Thousand, or Ten Millions of Years, is not
therefore exempt from dying at last, any more than one that endures but Ten
Minutes. Had I not in my Mind before a clear Idea of Eternity, I could no more
by this Ampliating Power gain a Notion of an Eternal Being, than I could
believe my self to be Eternal; for every thing about me would contradict that
Notion; and it is very strange that I should come to believe any Being could
have an Eternal Duration from considering of things that are all perishable and
mortal.

That which leads Men into this mistake, is, I suppose this: We have all of us
a Notion of a Being, Perfect or Eternal, as to his Duration, because there is
such a Being in Reality: And therefore, whenever we go about to consider of
Time, or of the Period or Term of the Duration of a Being, we can ampliate it
so, as to suppose it shall never cease to be, but have its Being still
continued on without end: That is, we can connect the Idea that we have of
Eternity with a Being, and so render it Eternal. But this could never be done,
if there were no Idea of Eternity at all, if there were nothing Eternal, if
there were no God. The case is the same as to all the other Perfections of the
Divine Nature. We have clear Idea's and Notions of them in our Minds; and
therefore we can talk about them, and be understood: because there are real
Idea's that answer to those words that we use; and something really existing,
that answers to those Idea's. But were there no such Being, nor any thing Real
in Nature, to deduce our Idea's from, were there no God, it is impossible there
could be any such Idea's at all.

But however, this Assertion, That the Mind of Man was able to Invent the
Notion of a Deity, and communicate it to the World, is a most flat and palpable
Contradiction to what the Atheist at other times urges, and that too, as
founded on Principles that he is very fond of. In my last Discourse, I showed
you, That he objected against the Being of a God, from our not being able to
have any Idea of Him; and this he endeavors to support, by asserting also,
That we have no Knowledge but Sense, and that all our Conceptions are Passive.
Now both these are absolutely inconsistent with the Original that he is now
attributing to the Notion of a God. For if it be true, as he says it is, That
we can have no Idea of God; it is very strange to suppose, that a Politic Man
should Invent, and the World Receive the Idea or Notion of That which it is
impossible for any one to invent, or receive. It Is a little odd, that a Man
should first cunningly devise he knew not what, and then the affrighted World
believe they knew not what; and that we should prove and assert, and the
Atheist ridicule and deny the Existence of That which we do none of us all know
any thing about! But so it must be, according to the Atheist's Uniform Scheme
of Things.

Again, If, as he asserts, all our Conceptions be Passive, and all our
Knowledge, Sense: which way could this Cunning Inventer of a God, come by his
Notion or Idea of Him? how could his Mind attain any such feigning and
ampliating Power? For according to the Atheist's Principles, the Mind could
have no Active, much less Spontaneous Power at all; but all our Idea's and
Conceptions would be mere necessary Motions, mechanically occasioned by the
Impressions of External Objects. So that as Protagoras tells us (in Plato's
Theoetet.) (...): It Is neither possible to conceive that which is not, nor
indeed any thing else, but only just as our Mind suffers it by Impressions from
without. And therefore no Man could ever possibly Invent any thing at all, nor
have any Power within him of putting or joining together two or more simple
idea's, or of ampliating or enlarging any Idea or Notion at all; much less
could he grow so very subtle as to Invent the Notion of a Deity. And as no
Lawgiver nor Politician could, we see, have Invented the Notion of a Deity, if
he had had a mind so to do; so it appears very weak and foolish in him to do
it, if he could. For while there was no Belief among Men, of any Divine and
Almighty Power, he would have been a mortal God himself, Leviathan, p. 87.
as Hobbs calls the Commonwealth: His Will would have been his Law; and Men's
Obedience to Him, would have been founded in the Fear they were under of his
great Power. And this, according to the Atheistical Principles, would have been
a much better Stay and Support to his Authority, than the idle Obligations of
Conscience and Religion. For the aforesaid Author tells us, Ib. p. 7.
That if the Fear of Spirits ( i. e. of a God) were taken away, Men would be
much better fitted for Civil Obedience. And in another place he goes a little
further yet, and says, Ib. p. 238.
That it is impossible any Government can stand, where any other than the
Sovereign has a Power of giving greater Rewards than Life, and greater
Punishments than Death. That is, where there is any Obligation on Men's Minds to
a Divine and Almighty Power: which they will choose to obey, rather than the
Unlawful Commands of an Arbitrary Prince, that can only kill the Body. Now
there is no doubt but that this is true of such a Power or Government, as that
he calculated his Leviathan for; i. e. One absolutely Arbitrary and Tyrannical.
And all Power must be so, if there be no God, and no Antecedent Good and Evil,
but what the Will of the Sovereign shall make so, as Mr. Hobbs positively
asserts there is not. Therefore that Man must act very unwisely, who when he
was possessed of Power enough to give Laws to, and govern others by his sole
Will and Pleasure, would ever invent the Notion of a God and Religion. For this
was the direct way to cramp himself in his Power, to tie up his own Hands, and
to let the People see that he himself is accountable to God, as well as they;
it is to teach them, that the Power he has, is but a Trust committed to him by
God, which he is to discharge for his Subjects Good and Advantage, and not only
to gratify his own Will and Humor. And this Notion might induce the Subjects
of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Prince, to ease him of the Trouble of a
Government, that they perceived involved him in a great deal of Guilt, and
would proportionably increase the Account that he must one day give of his
Stewardship. But,

2. As the Idea and Notion of a God, cannot possibly have been invented by any
one; so neither could it have been understood or believed by Mankind, if it had
been so. Had there been only one Person that had coined the Idea of a God, and
no manner of Notion at all of any of his Attributes or Perfections previous to
this, in the Minds of Men; what would it have signified, to tell them, that
there was a God? how could they understand the meaning of a mere Arbitrary
word, that had no manner of foundation in Nature, nor any Idea or Notion
answering to it? Words are but Marks of Things, or Signs to know them or
distinguish them by: and therefore a Word that is the Sign of what is
absolutely Nothing, or a Nonentity, must needs be nonsense and unintelligible.
And consequently, he that should attempt to awe Mankind with an empty Sound,
that had no Signification, would certainly be exposed to contempt; and instead
of affrighting others, would only be laughed at himself. The Author of Anima
Mundi, says, Page 36.
That to tell a Profane Rabble of an Invisible Deity, and of a Future State of
Rewards and Punishments, will signify nothing at all: and, That Men will not
for such Metaphysics, forbear any manner of Pleasure or Profit, how base
soever. How then could the Figment of a Deity gain admittance into the Minds of
Men, at first? What would it signify to tell Men of an Invisible Power, that
presides over, and governs the World; when (according to the Atheist's
Supposition) they had no manner of Notion of any such Being before, and
consequently could not know what was meant by such Words and Expressions.
Should you tell them, indeed, of a potent Neighbor, that was coming strongly
armed, to take away their Life or Goods, they would look about them, and
endeavor, by flight or force, to secure themselves. But to tell them of a
Power that they never saw nor heard any thing of before, and which they are
told withal, is impossible to be seen or heard, or any way rendered an Object of
their Senses, could make no impression at all on Mankind: or suppose that it
could make some impression, and frighten some Men at its first proposal, how
long would this last? No longer, at farthest, than till they were by Experience
convinced that it was false and precarious, and that there was no Ground nor
Reason to believe any such thing. And this they must arrive at in a small time,
if the Thing were false. It Is impossible such a Cheat as this, which it would
have concerned every one to have examined, could long have maintained its
Ground. Time discovers, and certainly lays open all impostures; and that the
sooner, the more are concerned to enquire into it. And therefore had this
Notion and Belief of a Deity had no other Original and Foundation than what the
Atheists pretend, it is impossible it could have continued so long in the World;
and much more so, that it should have gained ground as we know it has
continually done, and be established on better Principles, the more it has
been considered and understood. Opinionum commenta delet dies, naturae judicia
confirmat, says Cicero. Besides, It cannot well be imagined that any Man
should have the vanity to believe, that a thing which he knew he had invented
himself, and which had no manner of ground nor foundation to support it from
the Nature of the thing, could ever impose upon and delude Mankind, or indeed
find any admittance in their Belief. He must needs think that others would be
as sagacious to discover the Cheat, as he could be to contrive it; and that
among so many Heads, some one would soon detect the Forgery of what must
necessarily appear false and precarious to the common Sense and Reason of all
Men. But,

3 dly, and lastly, The Universality of the Notion and Belief of a God, is also
a most demonstrative Argument, that it could not arise from the Invention of
any Cunning and Designing Person. That there is such an Universal Notion of a
Deity, cannot, I think, be denied by any one; and I doubt not but farther
Discoveries will satisfy us, that there is a Notion of God even among those
Barbarous and Savage People that are said to have no manner of Idea of Him, by
a late Ingenious Author. But supposing that it were so, that the Knowledge of a
God were quite lost, in three or four dark and uncultivated parts of the Earth,
whose Inhabitants are so brutish, as scarce to think at all: this is no more an
Argument against the Belief of God's being Universally diffused throughout the
World, than Monsters and Fools are, that Men have not generally a Humane Shape
and Reason. There are some Anomalies, Irregularities and Exceptions in all
Things and Cases, which yet are not by any accounted of force enough to
over-turn a general Rule. I shall not say much to this Point, it having been so
largely and frequently handled already; only I cannot omit the Testimony of
some of the Ancient Writers, who are very express, that there is an Universal
Notion of a God among Mankind, and which they looked upon to be Natural, or by
way of Anticipation. There is, says Cicero, In omnium Animis Deorum Notionem
natura ipsa impressit. De Not. Deorum, lib. 1.
a Notion of a God impressed on the Minds of all Men. And in another place,
says he, Quae Gens est, aut quod Genu^ Hominum, quod non habeat sine Doctrina,
anticipationem quandam Deorum, quam appellat (...) Epicurus. Ib. c. 32.
What kind of Nation or People is there any where to be found, who have not,
without learning it from others, a Prolepsis or Deity. And in two other places,
he tells us, Tuscul. Quaest. l. 1. De Legib. l. 1.
That there is no Nation so barbarous and wild, who do not acknowledge the
Being of a God, and some how or other revere and worship him. Seneca, in his
Epistles, Vid. Epist. 117, 118. De Benefic. 4.4.
frequently says the same thing. Sextus Empiricus owns also, (...).
That all Men have a common Notion of God, by way of Prolepsis; and believe Him
to be a most Blessed and Happy Being, Incorruptible, Immortal, and incapable of
any kind of Evil. (...). Adv. Mathem. p. 314.
And he concludes, That it is unreasonable to assert, that all Men should come
to attribute the same Properties to God by Chance, and not rather be induced
thereunto by the Dictates of Nature. Maximus Tyrius has a very plain Passage,
to prove this common Notion of a God, (...). Dis. 1. p. 5.
Though, says he, there be so much quarrelling, difference and jangling in the
World, yet you may see this agreed in all over the Earth, that there is One
God, the King and Father of all. This the Greek and the Barbarian both say, the
Islander and the Inhabitant of the Continent, the Wise and the Unwise alike.
Aristotle says, (...). De Coelo, l. 1. c. 3.
That all Men have a Pre-notion concerning the Gods, even both Greeks and
Barbarians. And in another place, he has a very remarkable passage to this
sense, That there is a very Ancient Tradition (which our Forefathers have
handed down to Posterity, in a Mythological Dress) That there are Gods; and
that the Divine Nature sustains or encompasseth all things. But this Tradition,
he says, had, in process of time, some Figments connected with it; as, that
the Gods had Humane Shapes, or those of other Creatures, etc. which if we
separate from it, we may suppose it at first divinely spoken and delivered,
That the Gods were the First Beings. (...), etc. Aristot. Metaph. l. 14. c. 8.
p. 483. Paris. 1654.


Many more Testimonies might be produced to prove this Point, that it was the
concurrent Opinion, of all the Ancient Heathen Writers, that there was a common
Notion or Belief of a Deity in the Minds of Men; But these, I think, are
sufficient. And now what can the Atheist say to such a Proof as this? What
greater Evidence can be desired of the Truth of any thing, than that it has
been believed by all Men in all Ages and Places of the World? It Is a very good
way of Arguing from Authority, that Aristotle uses in his Topics. That, says
he, which seems true to some Wise Men, ought to appear a little probable; what
most Wise Men believe, is yet further probable; and what most Men, both Wise
and Unwise do agree in, is much more probable yet; But what is received as
Truth by the general consent of all Mankind in all Ages of the World, has
certainly the highest degree of Evidence, of this Kind, that is possible. And
what has such a Testimony, it is intolerable Arrogance and Folly for any Men to
deny; and to set up their single Judgments and Opinion contrary to the common
Suffrage of all Mankind. But they are so puff't up with Pride and Vanity, that
they do not see the Weakness and Precariousness of what they advance, nor how
inconsistent it is with their other Tenets. If it have but the appearance of
contradicting the received Notion that we have of a God, and if it do but seem
never so little to Undermine Religion, they will set it up at a venture as a
Demonstration, and stick to it, let it be never so inconsistent with what at
other times they deliver. Thus sometimes they will assert, that there is no
Universal Idea or Notion of a God. At other times they will grant there is such
an One, but that it was Coined and Invented by some Cunning Politician a long
while ago, before any Books or Histories were written, and by him communicated
by Tradition to Posterity. But here they do not consider that this will
necessarily derive all Mankind from one common Parent: which is a thing they
will, at another time, by no means admit of, lest it should seem to countenance
the Story of Adam or Noah: which is said to be nothing but an old Jewish
Tradition. And that it is impossible to account for the Peopling of America and
All Islands remote from the Continent, without supposing their Inhabitants to
be Aborigines, and to spring out of the Earth like Mushrooms. And then, to
account for the General Notion, that they cannot deny, these Aborigines have of
a God; as before they made One Wise Man Invent it, now they will suppose it to
be done by a Hundred such Cunning Politicians: who, though in different Places
and Ages of the World, yet did all light by chance on the very same Notion of a
God, and Abuse and Cheat Mankind just after the same manner; and though this be
the most extravagant and ridiculous Assertion that ever can possibly come into
the Mind of Man, as well as contradictory to the former, yet it is all one for
that; this, or any thing else, shall be supposed rather than they will yield to
the Conviction of Truth, and allow the Notion of a Deity to have a real
Foundation. But it is no wonder to find Men that wilfully shut their Eyes
against the clearest Light, to go forward and backward, and often times run
against each other in the dark Mazes of Error: those must needs be at a Loss
who neglect His Guidance, who is the Way, the Truth and the Light, and that
Spirit which would lead them into all Truth; and those, no doubt, may easily
miss of the true Knowledge of God, who are resolved they will not seek after
Him, and all whose Thoughts are, that there is no God.

FINIS.
Books printed for Rich. Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul' s Churchyard.
IMmorality and Pride the Great Causes of Atheism. A Sermon Preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, January the 3 d. 1697/8. Being the First of the
Lecture for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire In Quarto.

The Atheist's Objection, That we can have no Idea of God Refuted. A Sermon
Preached at the Cathedral-Church of St. Paul, February the 7 th. 1697/8. Being
the Second of the Lecture for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire In Quarto.

Remarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth. In Octavo.

All three by J. Harris, M. A. and Fellow of the Royal-Society.

Dr. Woodward's Natural History of the Earth, in Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Truth of the Christian Religion, against the
Objections of all Modern Opposers; in Two Volumes. In Octavo.


