A True Copy of a Letter, WRITTEN BY Mr. HARRISON, In Newgate, to a near
Relation, after his Condemnation for the Murder of Doctor Clinch.
Dear Cosen,
NOW accept of my hearty Thanks for all your Services and loving Kindnesses;
and God Allmighty reward you: I am now preparing my self for another World, and
do heartily forgive all my Enemies. There was Four of my Witnesses that did not
appear; one Mr. White and his Wife, Mrs. Fairelace and the Maid, where I was
that Night. Let not God lay my Blood to their Charge: and God forgive all those
that swore falcely against me. And whether before my Execution, or after, God
is pleased to do it (but I am sure he will Reveal it) and when it is brought to
light, the World then will know my Wrongs. In the mean time I resign my Soul
and Body to him, who is a just God, and by this means will bring me to himself.
This Affliction is a great one, and more than human Nature can bear; but I
trust in him, that he will not lay more on me, than he will give me the Grace
of his holy Spirit to undergo. And indeed I look upon it as a Fatherly
Chastisement, for whom he loves he does chastise:For if I had my Deserts, he
might have taken me off in the midst of all my Sins, and have rewarded me with
the Punishment of the everlasting Prison ( Hell) prepared for all impenitent
Sinners: But I hope he will give me the Grace of his holy Spirit to repent my
self of all my Sins; which I have, and do, and shall, with a humble, lowly, and
obedient Heart, and not in the least cloak, or dissemble them before my
heavenly Father, who gave up his only begoten Son to die for Sinners (and me the
greatest.) And I hope he will give me the Grace to follow his Example, who was
falsely Accused, Condemned, and suffered a shameful Death upon the Cross; I
being now falsely to suffer a shamful Death: At which time I sincerely and
heartily beg of him to support me, which I trust in God he will: Humbly beging
Pardon, and confessing the Sins I have been guilty of. Now I have Two Things to
beg of you, for Christ his sake: The First is, That you will take it from me a
dying Man, without the least Hopes of Pardon here, from any mortal Man, That I
am Innocent, Clear, and Free, In Thought, Word, and Deed, of this bloody,
barbarous, unheard of, and inhuman Murder, for which I do suffer, surely
knowing, and certainly believing no Salvation can be had from the Almighty God,
the Searcher of Hearts, That at the Hour of Death dies with a Ly in his Mouth.
Therefore I desire your Prayers (for me being Innocent) and all other good
Christians Prayers, That God Almighty will be pleased to bring to light this
bloody Deed, not when we would have him, but at his one appointed time (not our
Will, but his own be done.) The other is, That you would be pleased to speak to
your Minister, or any other Divine you know, to visit me, and get him to come
as soon as you can; and let me see you, for I have desired that no body may
come at me, but your self, and Cozen William, and some Divines; being I will
not now discourse any Persons relating to worldly Affairs, but what may tend
for the Salvation of my poor Soul: So recommending you to god, I rest

The most wronged Man, the most unhappy Man, as to this World; yet one of the
most happy Men through Christ my Savior, in whom I trust for my eternal
Salvation. HENRY HARRISON.

London, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall.


