THE LAST WORDS OF A Dying Penitent: BEING An Exact Account of the Passages,
Proceedings, and Reasons on which was grounded the first Suspicion of his being
concerned in the Bloody inhumane Murder of Dr. Clinch, on the 4th of January
1691. between the hours of Nine and Eleven: With a Brief Observation on what
was Sworn by most of the Witnesses against him. For which he was Executed on
the 15th of April 1692. The which he leaves to the World to Judge. Trusting as
to his Innocence in this, and relying on God Almighties Pardon for all his
manifold sins; in and through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ he hopes
to be saved.

Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am the chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. Written with his own Hand after Condemnation.

HEN. HARRISON.



Licensed

April 16. 1692.


London, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall,
1692.

The People expect a Confession always at the time of any Man's Execution:
Therefore at that hour when it shall please God to call me to it, that I may
have nothing more to do than to recommend my Body and Soul to him that gave it,
I have writ this, which has a little taken my thoughts from my Duty to God, for
which I emplore his Pardon.
I beg of the Reader to make no Nice Construction of my words, but to take the
real honest meaning.
I have writ this merely, and only for the satisfaction of my Relations,
Friends and Acquaintance. I have not had time to digest it into Method, because
Time is precious with me now.
IN the first place I will give an Account of my first Acquaintance with that
Gentlewoman Mrs. Vauwick, for whom the World believes I committed this bloody
inhumane Murder, and for which I now suffer.

About two years ago I was brought acquainted with her, being a Widow, by a
Gentlewoman of my Acquaintance; and had not been above 2 or 3 times in her
Company, till I was Arrested for 40 l. at that time I having got a Commission
for Cornet in my Lord Danbies Regiment; whereupon my Friend came to see me in
Prison, and with her this Gentlewoman: I told them I was undone; for I had but
just got my Commission, and if my Lord should hear of it, I should lose it; and
my Relations would never do any thing for me, who were able to furnish me with
such a Sum as was fitting for that Post. Whereupon this Gentlewoman took pity
of that my misfortune, and trusting to my Honesty, became bound for that Debt,
by means whereof I had my Liberty: But in a Months time the Regiment was quite
off; and ever since I have been quite out of Employ. But after this I several
times visited the Gentlewoman, and found her very Melancholy, I then not
knowing any of her Concerns; but at last prevailed with her to tell me the
occasion, which was to this effect: (I will but hint just on the heads of those
Matters that were her Ruin and my Death. I could have writ a whole Volume on
this Subject, had it not been at this time, which is precious to me, and ought
to be employed in nothing else, but in Prayers to Almighty God for the
forgiveness of my sins, and to prepare me for my latter end; but I hope God
will forgive me, because I write nothing but Truth, to the best of my knowledge.)

This Gentlewoman had left her 500 l. to be laid out in a Purchase for her self
during Life, and afterward for the use of her Children. This money lying for
some time dead in Dr. Edisburies hands, one of the Masters of Chancery, She
applied her self to one Mr. Samuel Hartlib to find her out a Purchase for the
said money. This Hartlib, as I was informed, was a Man formerly of very good
business and Credit, but at that time was very poor and needy. He brought her
acquainted with one Mr. Row, and Mr. Edwards, who were the sole Actors of a
Purchase of Houses in Buckingham-Court, tho there were several concerned, as
Mr. Royor, Mr. Royley, Mr. Chambers, and Mr. Bayley, who had Mortgages of the
said 2 Houses. But in short, the purchase was made, and Mr. Row got in to be
Trustee, by the help of his good Friends Mr. Hartlib and Mr. Edwards, and was
confirmed so by a Decree in Chancery. Pray observe, that this 500 l. was all
this poor Woman had in the World; and the Purchase was made for 550 l. for
which fifty pounds one of the said two Houses was Mortgaged to the said Mr.
Chambers at that very time: But pray note, that before the Purchase, she told
Mr. Row, that she had taken up 50 l. in Household Goods, and owed some 15 or 20
l. more, and unless she could have an Hundred Pounds more out of her own money,
(to pay off her Debts) she would not meddle with it: They promised her
faithfully that she should have it at the Sealing of the Writings, at which
time the money was to be paid for the said Purchase. But pray now observe, Here
was the immediate Ruin to the poor Widow, and also had been to her 4 small
Children, if her Relations had not taken them when they were just a going to
the Parish, and in the long run is my unhappy End, God forgive them.

At the time of receiving the money, her Trustee Mr. Row, and Mr. Edwards his
Confederate, and Mr. Royley, and some others, being at a Tavern, they seemingly
quarrelled amongst themselves, insomuch, that she thought they would have
fought; but it was about dividing the money, which was over and above the real
Value of the Purchase; and the poor Woman expecting still her Hundred Pounds
according to the promise made her, she began to examine Mr. Row, on whom she
relied, having put all she had in the World for her self and four Children to
live upon, into his Trust, Where is my Hundred Pounds, that I may carry it home
and pay my Debts? Whereupon Mr. Row said, Do you see Madam what Rogues these
are? they have received the money this Morning; Hang them, Hang them, never
trouble your self, as I am your Trustee, I Will serve you, and indeed he has
served her, and me too, as you will find in the Sequel of this unhappy Paper.
Says Row, Madam, I have Fifty Pounds in my Trunk which has not seen day this
Seven Years, you shall have that to morrow; and my Credit can raise you Fifty
or an Hundred Pound more in a day or two's time. This was about June or July
1690. but on what day I cannot tell, because I have not the Writings: But from
the day of her paying the money, she could scarce ever see Mr. Row; but when
she did, he made frivolous Excuses of paying away a great Sum of money, and
such like; but that he was a raising money, which she should have this day, and
the other day; but alas his Credit could not raise Five Pounds in the whole
World at that time, as I was credibly informed; and as all persons that knew
him do know to be true, he being at the same time either a Prisoner at large in
the Kings Bench, or a Soldier in one of the Companies of Kings-Guards for his
Protection. This is most certainly true, when the Widow, and others of her
Acquaintance informed me of the truth of this, she then entreated, and begged
of me with Tears and Prayers, to assist her in this her deplorable Condition. I
could not refuse it her, considering the great Obligation she had first laid on
me: Therefore out of Gratitude I could do no less than help her. Now for what
past after, I can affirm to be Truth of my own Knowledge: As I am a dying Man I
will not say any thing but what is Truth, to the best of my knowledge. Now she
being deluded by him and his Confederate Mr. Edwards, and she not having the
Hundred Pounds according to promise, out of her own money, she was presently
ruined, lost her Credit with her Creditors, to whom she promised payment at
that time when she made the Purchase, and so day after day, and week after
week, as he promised her she should have it by his procurement, which he could
not perform, by reason of his base dealing in the World. At this time she had a
House very well furnished in the City, and was forced to absent her House, and
leave her Children and Servants only there; and she was forced day after day to
take Goods out of her House, to dispose of to maintain her Children, and follow
him up and down from Tavern to Tavern, in expectation of his raising her the
Hundred Pounds, which she could not do her self, by reason the Estate in Law
was in him: But now pray observe, the two Houses were sold her as well Tenanted
then at 40 l. per annum each House, out of which there was 30 l. per annum
Ground-Rent to be paid; but no sooner was the Purchase money paid, but the
Tenants left the Houses, being only Tenants at Will; so that the Houses lay
empty all this while, and the Ground-Rent and Kings Taxes running on, she was
head and ears up in Debt; and no body would take the Houses, because Mr. Row
was concerned: So that she was forced to quit her House she then lived in in
the City, and live in one of her own Houses.

Now comes the dismal Story of the Hundred Pounds borrowed of Dr. Clinch, which
was the occasion of her Ruin, and my unhappy Misfortune.

Row not performing his promise of supplying her with the Hundred Pounds, she
applied her self to Dr. Clinch, who was her very good Friend, and her Husbands
before her. He furnished her with the money, and paid it honestly; but would
not lend it, unless Mr. Row would join with her in a Lease or Mortgage of one
of the two Houses, and be bound with her for the money, because she could make
no Security her self; which he readily did, that he might the better defraud
her. But at that time, Counselor Fairbeard being out of Town at Tunbridge, the
Dr. would do nothing till his return, only in the mean time he supplied her
with 30 l. at three several times, and paid it thus, 15 l. at one time, and 10
l. at another, and 5 l. at another; which Mr. Row received to redeem her Goods
which she had pawned to supply her necessities. It is true, he did redeem some
of her Goods, but she could not have any Account of the laying out of her
money, till at last Mr. Fairbeard coming to Town, and the Writings were drawn
by him, and afterward sealed, and this was not till November following; the
remainder of the money was paid by Dr. Clinch's Order at Sir Francis Child's
Shop at Temple Bar; but at the receiving of it, there a dispute arose betwixt
Mr. Row and the Widow, Mr. Row not permitting her to receive the money, unless
he had 20 l. under pretense, that there was so much due to him by a Bill he
delivered her the Night before; which was a base, unreasonable Bill; and
withal, that there was Moneys rather due to the Widow from Mr. Row, upon a
fair Account betwixt them; but nevertheless the Widow said in my hearing, Mr.
Row take ten or fifteen pounds, and let us go to the next Tavern, and take you
one, and I will take another, to adjust the Accounts betwixt us: No said Row,
Madam you shall not receive a penny, unless I have 20 l. and then I will meet
you at the Tavern, which he then had: So she and I went to the Tavern, Mr. Row
promised he would come to us to settle the Accounts, we stayed two hours for
him, and then he sent word, he had met with some persons about other business,
and could not come, but would wait on her another time at her own House; but he
never came at her, tho she sent for him several times, but kept out of the way,
all her Concerns lying at Random; her hands being tied so, that she could do
nothing without him, as to the letting of the other House, and several other
matters too tedious now to mention.

Now pray observe, That the Dr. at the time the Writings were Sealed, or
thereabouts, assigned over the same Security, or made some other Security, or
Mortgage to Row of the said House; Row giving the Dr. Bond to see the Covenants
performed in the Deeds made from Mr. Row (being Trustee) and the Widow, to Dr.
Clinch; which Covenants were these, That the Dr. should be paid Quarterly 6 l.
odd Money, and so continue till the Doctor's whole Money was paid, which would
be in Five years time or thereabouts: Now pray also observe, That the last
Money was but paid in November 1690, and the first quarterly Payment became due
at Quarter-day next following. For the Dr. expected that quarterly Payment,
from the time he had lent the first 30 l. at 15 l. one time, 10 l. another, and
5 l. another; as I first mentioned: Tho the Case is intricate, I would make it
as plain as I can, that the Truth may be understood: For Row several times said
he had done that which would puzzle 20 Lawyers.

Observe, That Mr. Row made it his Business both to the Widows Relations, and
other People concerned with her, that I had ruined her, and spent all she had,
when as you may find by this, that all she had was but 500 l. and it was every
Penny of it paid away for the Purchase; and that she only had Forty One Pounds
Fifteen Shillings, most of which, was paid away at the receiving of it, to some
of her Creditors. And that for 3 Months I supported her and her Children,
partly with my own Money, and by getting in Debts that were due to her, besides
an endless Trouble I had in bringing Mr. Row to an Account, which is not yet
done.

It is desired that her Relations will take notice, that at the time of the
Purchase, and at the payment of the Money, after Mr. Row got in to be Trustee,
he got her to sign a Deed, particularly a Covenant in the Deed was to this or
like effect, That after the Death of Mrs. Vauricke and her 4 Children, the
Estate to come to him and his Heirs. Upon which I often used to say, That he
designed to break the Widows Heart, and Starve the Children, that the Estate
might come to him and his Son.

Now Row being Trustee, and also having a Deed from the Dr. for which he was
glad; he domineered and ranted about, saying, That he had Houses in Buckingham
Court, and kept the poor Woman under, that she durst not do any thing, neither
could she, by reason of his being Trustee, and also having that Deed from the
Dr. But now I knowing the abuses done the poor Woman, and that she could never
get him to come to any Account, she applied her self to me again to right her,
if I could by any means: Upon which I went to Mr. Fairbeard and told him what
had past; and that Mr. Row was an ill man; and that we could never get him to
come to any Account, as he promised he would do in his hearing at Sir Francis
Child's Shop, he being then present: Mr. Fairbeard said he could not believe
it, for Mr. Row was a man of Credit and Reputation; and as he told him, he was
an Attorney of the Common Pleas. I made answer, that he was no such man, but an
Impostor and a Cheat: whereupon he advised me to go to Mr. Cook the
Prothonotary at the Temple, and search whether he was an Attorney of the
Common Pleas or no; and if he was not, I should take a Summons from my Lord
Chief Justice, and he would come and justify he owned himself to be an
Attorney of the Common Pleas, and so by that means have him turned out from
being Trustee: Now I finding him not to be so, I did take out a Summons from my
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Mr. Row meeting me according to the
Summons, desired me to let him alone, and he would come to an Account, and
deliver up his Trust, and do any thing else I would have him; and this he
promised before Mr. Hales of the Temple, an Attorney of the Common Pleas; but
for 3 weeks or a month after, we could neither see nor hear of him, till one
came and informed us that he was to be a Witness in Westminster Hall, and there
we had a Summons from my Lord Chief Justice Holt, to appear before him; which
was done: And being before my Lord, we had a small hearing of the Cause, as I
may call it; for we had there Mr. Lloyd of the Temple our Counsel, and my Lord
hearing what was alleged against him, told him, that he was an ill man, and
said thus to Row, You are a fine Fellow to be a Trustee. My Lord finding that
he was a Trustee made in Chancery, advised us to make an end, and spoke thus to
Mr. Lloyd, As you are her Counsel, let Mr. Row take another, and make an end;
for the poor Woman will be ruined, or to this effect. Mr. Row readily answered
he would, and that he would bring Mr. H. (any one may judge the meaning of
that.)

The time and place being appointed, Mr. Lloyd, the Widow, and my self, went
there, where we met Mr. Row, and 2 or 3 Fellows of his Gang, but no Mr. H. was
there; Mr. Row said, what should I have Counsel, I can do my business my self;
Mr. Lloyd told him, he was not to argue the Case with him but Mr. H. and they
two were to make an end, if they could agree; whereupon Mr. Lloyd was angry
with him, and went away: So that he was then upon the Hide and Seek again,
putting us every day to great Expenses; for he did not care to part with his
Trusteeship: And for us to come to my Lord Chief Justice again, would put the
Widow to more Charges, and that my Lord could do nothing in it, because he was
a Trustee in Chancery.

Now what to do we could not tell, but we then petitioned the Lords
Commissioners, and Mr. Sergeant Tremayne our Counsel: Upon hearing what was
alleged against the said Mr. Row, the Lord Commissioner Rawlinson said, it was
the most barbarous Case he ever heard. Pray note, That Row was to appear that
day but durst not; knowing the Villainy that he had committed, whereupon by an
Order of Court, a Messenger was ordered to take Mr. Row into Custody; (the
Petition and Orders ought to be inserted here, but that my little time I have
to live ought to be otherwise employed.) Now after the Messenger was awarded
against him, he absconded himself from his Dwelling House, and all other places
he then used; so that the Messenger of the Chancery Mr. Bush, and my self,
daily hunting after him for near the space of a month, but could not take him.
Pray observe here, that this was in April 1691. and also observe, that from
Christmas before till that time, Mr. Row daily and hourly threatened to seize
her Goods, and take possession; and she did leave her House for fear of it, for
some little time, expecting to be relieved by the Lords Commissioners, but she
left her Children and Maid in possession: Now Row by force entered, without any
manner of Law; for he turned the Children out of Doors, and sold the Bed from
under them, and took the rest of the Goods that were in the House. Now is the
time that Dr. Clinch's Name comes to be mentioned, and I beg of you observe, I
will make it as clear as I can, and speak nothing but the Truth to the best of
my Knowledge, and as I hope to see God in Glory. Now when Mr. Row had turned the
poor Fatherless Children out of Doors, etc. Then the Widow applied her self to
the Dr. and told him what had past, and wondered why he would not keep the
Security in his own hands, but make it over to Row: Said she to the Dr. I dare
trust you with all I have in the World. I am now using endeavors to get Row
turned out of his Trusteeship, and bring him to an Account for the money he
owes me, and the Goods he has wronged me of; for he twice robbed the House of
the Locks, Keys and Bolts, under pretense of his being Trustee. I hope no body
can call it any thing else but Robbery, when she owed him nothing, but he was
in her Debt 50 l. or thereabouts, and she could not take the Law of him,
because he was her Trustee. So that the Widow solicited the Dr. several times
with a great many Prayers and Supplications, to stand her Friend till such time
as he was righted in Chancery.

And now was the time that Row applied himself to the Dr. and insinuated
himself so far into the Doctors favor as to make him believe that it was all
false; and that he was the wronged man, and that she owed him a great deal of
moneys, and withal told him, that it was not he that had ruined the Widow and
Fatherless, but one Mr. Harrison, who was a Gamester, and spent and played away
all her money; and so Mr. Row and his Agents made it their business to make him
believe so, and every one else that was concerned, but more particularly her
Relations, fearing lest they should undertake her just Cause, being monied
People, and persons of great Note and Credit; and he did effect his design, for
from that time till now her Relations would not look upon her, nor hear any
thing of her, because he had so bespattered her concerning me.

Now was the time I told her, that I would use my endeavors and interest with
the Dr. who was my very good Friend, and for several years had known him; for
he had been my Physician; and many times when he saw me, told me he would come
Day or Night to serve me, if I had need for him. Nay further than that, at the
time the Duke of Norfolks Regiment was to be raised, he told me, if I would
have a Commission in that Regiment, he had that Interest with the Duke, that he
believed he could do any thing with him; but I told him I was engaged to a
Person of Quality already. Now let the Reader judge, whether or no I had any
reason to injure the Dr. or much more to Murder him. Now was the time also I
solicited the Dr. upon the Widows Account, who always showed me Civility and
Respect, and never an Angry word past betwixt us. And also about this time the
Dr. employed one Mr. Johnson of Furnivals-Inn, to look after the business: Says
the Dr. Mr. Harrison, I do not understand the Law, and besides that, I have a
great deal of business otherwise, I cannot trouble my self; but I have left it
all to Mr. Johnson: Upon this, I told the Widow what the Dr. had done, That he
had left it all to one Mr. Johnson; whereupon she replied, That she was got out
of the Drying Pan into the Fire, for her Relations knew who he was; but I was
altogether a Stranger to Mr. Johnson. Now pray observe, that at that time all
our Applications to the Dr. or Mr. Johnson, was to let her have a little more
money, till she had made an end in Chancery, and got Row out from his
Trusteeship; for she intended to undertake some Employ to maintain her self and
Children, and that the Dr. should have possession of both the Houses for his
Security; and we would endeavor to get a Decree in Chancery for that purpose.
The Dr. and I many times argued the Case, and once or twice, computed the
In-come of the Estate, and what might be lent upon it: The Dr. was sensible of
the Wrongs done the Widow, and would have helped her in any thing, if Mr.
Johnson had not prevented him. Now you must understand the Widow could do
nothing to help her self as to raising of Money, for these 2 Reasons: First,
Because Row was Trustee, and not then turned out, nor is yet; as you will
understand by the Sequel of the Story: So now to come back to Mr. Row, where I
mentioned him as to his absconding himself; that the Messenger could not take
him, whereas by an other Order, made the Twenty Sixth day of May, 1691. It was
ordered one Mr. Royor and Royley, Mr. Edwards and Dr. Clinch, were to attend
Sir John Hoskyns, about the Matters in question; for you must know, that we had
the wole Business on the Stage, as to all the Persons concerned in putting that
Purchase upon her, and by what devices and means Mr. Row got in to be Trustee.
Now this was the time that Dr. Clinch first began to be displeased, and so was
Mr. Fairbeard his Counsel, and Mr. Johnson, for bringing his, Name in question,
where so black a Case appeared to the Lords Commissioners, on Row's Account,
saying, Have not I lent my Money, and paid it honestly? Yes, Sir, I know it; but
Row received the most of it, and the Widow cannot get an Account of it; and it
was by our Counsel's Advice that we did it; for by the Dr's appearing before
the Mr. in Chancery, all was made clear, how Mr. Row and his Confederates were
the Persons that had ruined the Widow and her Children, as by the Report does
appear, which ought to be inserted here. But no more of that. I hope now her
Relations will have pity of her disconsolate condition, being the most wronged
Widow in the World, to whom I have ordered the Papers of the Proceedings of her
Cause to be carefully delivered. Only thus much of the Report made by Sir John
Hoskyns, which I showed my Lord Chief Justice at my Trial. But he told me, it
would signify nothing to my Trial; which is thus verbatim. And as for Dr.
Clinch his matter, I find that the said Dr. Clinch was desired by the said Mrs
Vauwick and Mr. Row, presently after the said Purchase of the said 2 Houses, to
lend the said Mrs. Vauwick an Hundred Pound to furnish one of the said Houses;
and there being a Debt of 14 l. that was due to Dr. Clinch from the said Mrs.
Vauwick's late Husband Deceased, and about 3 l. 17 s. for Interest thereof, the
said Dr. Clinch did lend the said Mrs. Vauwick Two Guineas more, which made it
up Twenty Pounds; and the said Mrs. Vauwick secured the said Twenty Pounds by
her Bond; and the said Dr. Clinch at their, the said Row and Vauwick's Desire,
did undertake to lend it, upon his being secured the said 100 l. and the said
20 l. in all 120 l. by a Mortgage of one of the said Two Houses, to be paid at
times in the Deeds for that purpose mentioned, the which 100 l. I find was
paid, and disposed, and received thus, 41 l. 15 s. to the said Mrs. Vauwick, 5
l. to Mr. Fairbeard and his Clerk for Writings, 3 l. for the ensuring Mrs.
Vauwick's Life, and 50 l. 5 s. to the said Mr. Row for the use of Mrs Vauwick.

Now we having got this Report, all our business was done with Dr. Clinch, and
this Report was Signed, 8th of August 1691. by Sir John Hoskyns. By this Report
it appears, who wronged the Widow, as you will find also by a Petition here
inserted, upon which the Widow was to have an Hearing. The Petition was thus
verbatim.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England,
the Humble Petition of Anna Katherina Vauwick, and her 4 small Children,
shows,
THat your Petitioner has been basely defrauded of all she has by Robert Row, a
pretended Attorney of the Common Pleas; and that your Petitioner being advised
by the Lord Chief Justice Holt to petition your Lordships, provided he did not
come to an Account, and pay your Petitioner the Moneys he so unjustly detained
from her, upon pretense of being her Trustee: And the said Row failing his
Promise to the said Lord Chief Justice, your Petitioner petitioned your
Lordships accordingly about 4 Months ago; and upon hearing what was alleged by
Mr. Sergeant Tremaine, your Petitioners then Counsel, your Lordships thought it
a very hard Case, and were pleased to order a Messenger to take him into
Custody. But he absconding himself for the space of a Month, your Lordships
were pleased to refer the matter to Sir John Hoskyns, to examine the same, which
he has done. But by reason of the many Delays of the said Row, your
Petitioners having no Support, but what Friends has given them out of Charity,
she having pawned and sold all her Goods and Wearing Apparel for Sustenance for
her Children, and in bringing the said Row to an Account, that your Petitioner
and her Children are ready to starve, and that for this Month last past they
have scarce eat or drunk any thing but Bread and Water.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays in tender Commiseration to your
Petitioner and her Childrens Sufferings, to appoint a Day for the said Row to
Attend, and that the Masters report by your Lordships particular Order may then
be heard; and that your Petitioner and her Children may have such present
Relief from the said Row, as to your Lordships great Wisdom shall seem meet.
Amd your Petitioner shall ever Pray.

Now this Petition for a Hearing before the Lord's Commissioners was delivered
to the Clerk of the Petitions about a Week or Ten Days before Michaelmas Term
last, but not having Money, it was not Signed; and within few days after the
Widow was Arrested by one Tailor an Upholsterer, who is an Acquaintance of Mr.
Row's; but whether by the contrivance of Row or no, I dare not say, tho we
suspected it, he dreading what would become of him when such a barbarous Case
should be laid open. Now pray observe, that the Widow was Arrested about Two
Months, or thereabouts, before the Dr. was murdered, and not at his Suit. Pray
take notice, and withal observe the part of the Report inserted here, relating
to Dr. Clinch, and also the Petition, and likewise who it is that was in the
wrong, and who had ruined the Widow, whether Dr. Clinch or Row. And now to whom
any Malice or Revenge ought to be done, whether to the Doctor, who had honestly
paid the Money, or to Row, who had not only, with his Confederates, (the Persons
formerly mentioned) cheated her above an Hundred Pounds in the Purchase, and
also 2 Quarters Rents, as the rest of the Report makes out, and also as you
find by the Report here, 50 l. 5 s.

Now she being Arrested, and in the Compter Two Months before the Drs. Death,
and not at his Suit, let all the World judge, whether or no the Dr. was
murdered upon her Account or no. And I do protest in the Presence of Almighty
God, and as I hope for Salvation, I had not spoken to the Dr. in 3 Months time
before his Death, the last time being at his own House, to my best remembrance.
And Dr. Clinch's own Coachman owned to me, That he believed it was about 3
Months. And pray let the Reader consider, that there was no Advantage could be
had, and that it would be nothing in the Widows way, if it had pleased God that
Dr. Clinch had died in his Bed. And also observe, that the Widow had not Five
Shillings at that time, nor could not tell where to get one Guinea in the
World, if it could have procured her Liberty: For at that time her Acquaintance
were making a Purse for her, to bring her Habeas Corpus; for the Marshal told
me, he would take my Word for her Liberty: Therefore you must know by this she
had no Money to give me to hire a Ruffian. Now it pleased God that Dr. Clinch
was most barbarously murdered, on the 4th of January, betwixt 9 and 11 at
Night. I need not mention the manner, because it is too well known. Now it being
such a barbarous black Deed, startled all the Town. It seems, before the next
Night it was given out that Mr. Row and my Self knew the 2 Ruffians that
committed this Fact; but the next Day after it was done, being Tuesday, it was
2 a Clock before I heard of it, which was at Joe's Coffee House going into
Salisbury-Court, where I was told of the Murder, and the manmer of it, as they
heard it was done: I remember very well what I said, These were the boldest
daring Villains I ever heard of; What, to Murder a Man in the open Streets,
and at that time of the Night, and carry him through the City in a Coach when
all the Watch was set? And I do remember that I took Pen and Ink, and writ a
Letter to the Widow in the Compter, which was to this or the like Effect:
Madam, I just now have heard of the blackest inhuman Murder that ever was
known; but before this I suppose you have heard of it, because it is all over
the Town, if not, it is thus: Doctor Clinch was last Night barbarously Murdered
in a Coach in Leaden Hall- street. And so writ, as I heard how it was done,
etc. The same Night I was at one Clinch's Coffee-House in Mitre-Court, where
every one was talking of it, for it was a general Discourse. The same Night I
was to see for a Gentleman there who owed me Money, and he came in whilst I was
there, and told me, that he had received a Bill out of the Country, and desired
me to meet him at the Sugar Loaf in White Friars, and dine with him the next
Day; which Words were spoke publicly. Upon which, I suppose, the Constable was
directed; for the next Day I came there, and enquired for the Gentleman, and
they told me he was at Clinch's Coffee-House; and going there, I met the
Constable, who as soon as he saw me, said thus, or to the like Effect; Mr.
Harrison, I am sorry to meet with you, I have my Lord Chief Justice's Warrant
against you: For what? said I. Go to the Sugar Loaf and I Will tell you, said he;
yes, with all my Heart. When we came there, several of Dr. Clinch's Friends
were there; what past is not material: So they carried me to the Constable's
House in Grays-Inn-Lane, where we staid about 2 Hours, because my Lord was
busy there: We discoursed about Mr. Row, and the Business on which I have writ
before, and I told them, I had not seen Mr. Row this long time, nor the Dr. to
my Knowledge, for Row and I were perfect Enemies, not knowing then he was
suspected to be one with me; but being brought before my Lord, Row was there;
and he brought Witnesses where he was, and Bail with him: But now pray observe
my failing, I being surprised, being examined w^ere I was, I told my Lord; That
I was at such a Place fhrom 7 or 8 or thereabouts, till 11 or thereabouts; but
not having the Persons there to justify it, I was sent to Newgate, and Row
Bailed. Now pray observe, that Mr. Row and my self were suspected then to be
the 2 persons; now I being committed, and a scandalous Libel coming out the
next Day, made all the World believe I was the Man that committed it. I was
almost Distracted, and I thank God that he did not give me over to Despair; but
at last I was a little settled in my Mind, and began to consider, That it was
for my Sins, my former Sins, he suffered this Judgment to come upon me, and I
became calm and considered, and did, and ever since have, blessed be his Holy
Name for this his Fatherly Chastisement; and he has ever since given me
Patience under all my Sufferings, and supported me under all my Afflictions
till this time; and I trust and firmly believe, he will not forsake me at the
Hour of my Death. After a day or two being in Prison, I sent for the People of
the House where I was, and desired them to recollect themselves what time I
came there, and how long I staid there; and sent to those Persons that were in
Company, to know certainly the time, for they were all partly Strangers to me:
I had an Account given me, for I could not recollect every thing my self; but
you will understand in my Case following: And when my Witnesses had given me
the satisfaction, the Sessions coming on about 10 days after, I had all my
Witnesses there, and Petitioned for my Trial; but was put off, because the
Coroner had not brought in his Inquest. Now pray observe, that the Coroner had
been with me, and took my Examination, before that Sessions; and promised me he
would let me have two days notice of my Trial; but he did not: So that I tired
my Friends with waiting, and my Witnesses being Strangers, that Expense was all
lost. Now knowing my Innocence, and believing that the Prosecutors desired
nothing more than to find out the Truth, I frankly sent them a Copy of my Case,
and also another to the Coroner; the doing of which was my ruin: And I told my
Lord the same at my Trial; and he made Answer, "I was to blame in that: And
thus it was Verbatim.

An Exact Account of the just Defense I made concerning my Innocence, touching
the Inhuman Murder of Dr. Clinch, on the 4th of this Instant January, betwixt
9 and 11 a Clock.
My first Proof.
MR. Jones my Landlord, and Landlady, and the Maid, with one Turner a Porter,
plying at Shooe-Lane end in Fleet Street, who carried my Port-Mantle-Trunk at
or near 8 a Clock on that Night, to my Lodgings, at the Golden Ball in Paul's
Churchyard; and after I had given Orders for a Fire to be light, I went from
thence, and told them, I would be at home again betwixt a 11 and 12.

My second Proof.
That betwixt 8 and 9 a Clock the same Night, I came from my said Lodgings, and
went along Fleet Street, to the King's Head in Crown Court in Chancery Lane,
over against Serjeant's Inn, where I played at Cards, from 9 a Clock or
thereabouts, till 11 a Clock or thereabouts, the same Night; to prove this, the
Master of the King's Head, his Wife and Maid, one Mr. Baker an Ironmonger, Mrs.
Whiple a Cornet's Wife, one Mr. White and his Wife.

To Confirm the Testimonies of these Persons, during the time we played at
Cards, these two Accidents fell out; at 10 a Clock or thereabouts, a Hubbub
arose in the said Court, about the Pumping a Woman that had picked a Gentleman's
Pocket: The other was about a quarter of an Hour after, That one John Allan, a
Drawer at the King's Head Tavern at the end of Chancery Lane, came to the
King's Head in Crown Court; he being somewhat Impertinent and Saucy, as I
thought, I rose from my Seat, went to the Door, and struck at him with my Muff;
which the Drawer remembers.

My third Proof.
That Mr. White came to call his Wife home about half an Hour past ten a Clock,
and found me at Cards with the said Company.

My fourth Proof.
That at my return home from that Place, at 11 a Clock or thereabouts, to my
Lodging^s, one Mr. Sutton and one Mr. Russel, Gent. of my Acquaintance was in a
Coach, at the King's Head Tavern door at the end of Chancery Lane, drinking a
Glass of Sack; They told me, They were going to the Horse-Shooe Tavern in Drury
Lane, and desired me to go along with them; and I did go into the Coach to
them: But I considering that it was too late, presently came out of the Coach
again, and so walked all along Fleet street, home to my Lodgings in Paul's
Churchyard, and was at home at half an Hour past 11 a Clock, or thereabouts,

Pray observe, that I came from Mr. Humpstead's Lodgings before the
Port-Mantle-Trunk was carried to my Lodgings, which he swore at 9 a Clock, when
it was before 8 I was with him; which has given all the Suspicion.

Now let any one judge, whether it looks like as if I were guilty, to give my
Adversaries an Account of my Witnesses, and what they could testify for me:
But my Design in this, was That when they had found what I said to be true, I
was in hopes they would have suffered me to Bail: But instead of that it turned
to my ruin; for Dr. Clinch's Coach man went to them, and abused them all, and
every Body else that took my part; but however the second Sessions coming on,
all my friends and Witnesses attended two Days in hopes of my Trial; my
Witnesses being in the same House where theirs was, and they seeing me so well
provided, my Trial was put off till the third Sessions, upon pretense that they
had discovered something more. Now I being in Prison, and without Money, and had
given them all this trouble, and waiting two Sessions, all the time of the
Sessions, they were very uneasy; besides being abused by Dr. Clinch's
Coachman, they would not trouble themselves any more. But this I had forgot,
that most of them denied coming, because they said they should be abused and
vilified, because the Murder was so black that was laid to my Charge.
Whereupon I was forced to Petition the Lord Chief Justice for Subpoenas, which
was granted me, which was both a great Charge and Trouble, I being confined,
that I could not look after it my self; though I was promised, I should either be
Tried or Balled; but instead of that I was more strictly confined. Now From the
last Sessions till this, my Enemies were at work how to bring their Designs
about; the first thing I heard was, That there was a Boy made away, and, as it
was reported, by my Contrivance; and then he was put in the Gazette; but not
being found out, at my Trial his Examination was produced as an Evidence, which
was allowed of as good, according to Law, and I believe it might be so, because
my Lord Chief Justice said it was Law. Now I do protest I never heard of any
Boy an Evidence against me, till it was told me in the Press-yard, That a Boy
was made away that was an Evidence against me; whereupon I answered, Why did
they not try me last Sessions, for then they had the Boy? But I found there was
no occasion for him this Sessions, considering the two young Maids this
Sessions, one concerning the Handkerchief and the other seeing me in the Coach
at Brownlowstreet-end, as you will hear anon; God forgive them and those that
put them upon it. Now this Sessions coming on, I was forced to have Subpena's,
and the same Charge and Trouble again as I had been at before: But now it was
too late, for Mr. White and his Wife kept out of the way, and so that they
could not be found, nor did appear: I know not the Reason, but God forgive
them, I fear there was foul Dealing. Mrs. Whiple did not appear, and the Maid
could not come, because the House could not be left alone. Now the Day of my
Trial being come they would have put it off again, but that my Lord Chief
Justice would not suffer it, and I pressing for it, it was granted me; and I
must own my Lord had all the Patience imaginable, so that I can find no Fault
with Judges or Jury. I will now mention the most remarkable Passages that I can
remember as to the Evidence against me. The first was, to satisfy the Court
the occasion of my being suspected to be one of the Persons that committed the
Fact, about the Hundred and twenty Pounds lent by the Doctor to the Widow, my
Acquaintance; but what he swore I cannot remember; but as I was informed, he
was the Person that gave the first Suspicion of me to be the Man; if so, God
forgive him, for I had not seen him in three Months before the Doctor was
murdered. The next that swore (for I cannot remember every thing, but this
Passage) That I came to his Chamber, and laid my Hand upon my Sword, and said,
I would be revenged on the Doctor: It is false, as I am a dying Man; for there
was no Discourse of the Doctor, but Matters relating to himself; for the Doctor
was always willing to do any thing for the Widow's Good, but was prevented by
him. As for the two Witnesses at the Coffee-House, that swore that I said, That
I should say, God D -- him, he ought to have his Throat cut. And the Woman more
particularly swore this, that I said, What, would he have a Woman of your
Quality go to Service? G.D. him, he ought to have his Throat cut. Pray observe,
this Woman comes to Newgate. I coming to her, said, Mrs. Joe, I wonder you can
sleep in your Bed, knowing the Wrongs you have done me; she presently answered,
Lord! Captain Harrison, all I said was, That you said he ought to be hanged,
but I believe it was in your Passion, and I really think you are as Innocent as
I am: Which was the reason why I asked in Court, What she had for swearing
that? This is true upon my Salvation.

I am sorry that I have not the Trial, and then I could better answer it: And I
will not tell a Lie, now I am going out of the World, therefore would only hint
at those things I am sure are false, and will not name any Person, but leave it
to God to touch their Hearts in his due Time, for it cannot be expected I can
remember all that was said in Court; I will only mention the particular
Sayings, and let them remember it after my Death. As to the Witness that said,
I was at his Lodgings at nine a Clock exactly, and that I had a Gentleman
staying below for me, and that I had urgent Business to do that Night, and
several other Discourses about the poor Woman that Night: God forgive him for
being positive to an Hour; I might have believed it might have been that Time
he swore, if Circumstances relating to the Gown, which he may know (by reading
the Account of my Defense before mentioned) must satisfy him to the contrary,
though I fear the World cannot understand my Meaning; but I write this merely
for himself, that he may recollect himself of what he has done; when he knows
in his Conscience my Business was another thing.

Now as to that Man in the Compter, who swore that the Night before the inhuman
Murder was done, I was there, and being in Discourse with the Widow, he
hearkened at the Door, and heard me say, G. D. me, I would have the Blood of
Hinch or Clinch. This, or to the like effect, was what he swore; I never said,
I would be the Death of Hinch or Clinch in my Life, as I must appear at the
Judgment Seat of God to answer it. As to that poor Woman, I pity her, whose
Evidence was, That I was at her House on S. Thomas Day last, and had on a Black
Shabby Suit, I think, were her Words. Upon my Salvation it is false, for I have
not had a Black Coat on in three Months Time, before the Doctor was murdered,
as several can Testify, nor never wore any Coat but that I had on when I was
brought before my Lord Chief Justice, which was the same I had on at my Trial,
in three Months Time before the Murder: I shall answer her Evidence no more.

As to the 2 Maids, I never heard of them as Evidences against me till I saw
them in Court; therefore you will think I had a hard Task to go through; but
God be thanked he supported me then, and believe he will continue it to me, and
also assist me at the Hour of my Death.

As to the first Maid or Girl, about fifteen or sixteen Years old, as I take
her to be, she keeps her Mother's Apple-shop: Her Evidence was, I told her,
That I was a Parliament Man, and that one Day being out of the Room, she saw a
Handkerchief there, and went to the Maid below, and said, Can this be a
Parliament Man, and have such a Handkerchief as this? of such a like Piece the
Maid had an Apron, and they compared them together, and they were almost alike.
Now the Handkerchief that was about the Doctors Neck, when he was Murdered,
was produced in Court; and she swore that was the Hankerchief, or very like it:
This was her Evidence. To the best of my Knowledge, or to the same Effect, upon
my Salvation, it is false, for I never in my Life said I was a Parliament Man:
or ever had I such a Handkerchief in all my Life as that was, to the best of my
Knowledge.

As to the other Maid who swore, That she saw me by the glimmering of a Lamp in
the Coach, at the end of Brownlow Street, and heard me talk, and was with me in
Prison, and heard my Voice before she came into the Room where I was, and said,
That was the Voice that I heard in the Coach that Night when the Doctor was
Murdered. And I asked, Why she did not declare it before? Which my Lord Chief
Justice observed; but the Gentleman who was Council against me, as I take it,
put into her Head, and said, it was Scruple of Conscience, and that her Mother,
or some Body else, would not let her meddle in such a dangerous Business. God
forgive her, she did my Business; and God forgive them that put her upon it.

As to that Person who swore I said I was but just come out of Kent, and had
been out of Town a Fortnight or three Weeks: God forgive him, I leave it to his
own Conscience, and pray to God that he would reform his Course of Life. I do
not say this as a Reflection, God forbid I should, but rather as an
Exhortation, that if he reads this, he may repent himself of the Wrongs done me.

And as for the Person who swore against me, of my being at his Lodgings
exactly at 9 a Clock, which was the occasion of my unhappy Death, being false;
for it was at 8, which I convinced him of in Prison upon Circumstances. God
Almighty pardon him, and lay it to his Heart, that he may truly repent himself;
and withal let him remember the Bond: He knows my meaning.

I have writ these Remarks upon my Trial, which will be insignificant to
Strangers; for they will be scarcely understood by any but the Parties
concerned, who have falsely sworn against me: And God in his due time touch
their Hearts, that they may sincerely repent themselves; and I freely forgive
them, as I hope God in his Infinite Mercy will do me at the last Day. Amen.

I have one thing to add, That after my Condemnation, the next day a most
scandalous Pamphlet came out, Entitled, An Impartial Account of the Notorious
Wicked Life of Captain Harrison: One Passage in it I must take Notice of, which
is this, My Rascally Behavior toward the Duke of Monmouth, when he suffered
on Tower Hill. I thank my God no one could be more sorry than my self for his
unhappy end: As to the rest of it, being so scandalous, that all my Friends,
Gentlemen and Acquaintance, know to the contrary: But it is hard that for the
Lucre of a Penny, a Man dares write so many Lies; but God forgive them that did
it; for he would have writ the same upon his own Brother upon the like Occasion.

I have writ this chiefly for my Relations, Friends and Acquaintance, who I do
not fear but that they will believe me: And as for the rest of the World I
leave it to them to judge as they please, till it shall please God to bring to
Light this black Deed of Darkness, which he certainly will at his good
appointed time; Not our Will but his be done. And now to conclude, The greatest
thing that grieves me, as to this World, is, My Relations; but let this be
their Comfort, as well as my Happiness, That I am Wronged, and that I am
Innocent; and I do heartily beg of God to forgive those that falsely Swore
against me; and more particularly that Person who was the first Author of the
Suspicion: For I do bless the day wherein I was falsely Accused; for by that
means I was brought to a sight of my former Sins, and do acknowledge it is
God's Justice and just Judgment, for which I give Praise to his Holy Name, that
I have this time to bewail, and repent my self of all my Sins, begging Pardon
of all those I have any ways wronged, forgiving heartily every one that has
wronged me; even those I do most heartily forgive who are the occasion of my
Death; as I hope God will forgive me, and receive me unto his Everlasting
Kingdom, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, his only Son, my
Lord and Savior. Amen.

Comfortable Sayings in the Holy Scripture, on which I rely, and put my
Confidence and Trust in, through Jesus Christ my Savior.
At the first opening of the Holy Bible, after the lying down upon the Ground
in the Condemned Hole, after being found Guilty.
ISAIAH III. ARise, shine, for the light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee; for behold the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross
darkness the people, but the Lord shall rise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee; for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy
on thee glory to be to thee for this thy comfort, O Lord. PSALM LXXI. 3.
Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the ungodly, out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man. -- be fain, when I sing unto thee, and so will my
soul whom thou have delivered. O God, -- I faithfully trust in thee, to deliver
me; and believe thou will not forsake me, but that thou will in this my Trouble
make haste to help me.

MATTHEW XI. 28. Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest O Lord, I confess, I am heavy laden with my Sins, but I
trust in thee, that thou will ease me, and that thou will give Rest to my Sick,
Sinful Soul; O cleanse it with the precious Blood of my Savior.

MATTHEW XVII. 11. For the Son of Man is come to save that which was lost, etc.
O Jesus Christ, my Savior, I firmly believe thou will save me; for I was lost
to thee, but now am found, thanks be to God my Savior.

1 TIMOTH. I. 15. This is a true saying and worthy of all men to be received,
That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Glory be to thee O God,
I heartily believe (...) and that thou came to save Sinners, and me the
greatest of Sinners.

Now into thy Hands I commend my Sp^^^t.
Mr. Harrison's Letter to his Friend.
Dear Cousin,
NOw accept of any hearty thanks for all your and your Wife's Services, and
loving Kindnesses, and God Almighty reward you: I am now preparing my self for
another World, and do heartily forgive all my Enemies. There were four of my
Witnesses that did not appear, one Mr. White and his Wife, the Maid of the
House where I was, and one Mrs. Fairlace; let not God lay my Blood to their
Charge, and God forgive all those that swore falsely against me. And whether
before my Execution or after God is pleased to bring to Light this Murder, I am
sure he will do it; then the World will know my Wrongs: In the mean Time I
resign my Soul and Body to him, who is a just God, and by this Means will bring
me to himself. This Affliction is a great one, and more than Human Nature can
bear; but I trust in him, that he will not lay more on me than he will give me
the Grace if his Holy Spirit to undergo, and indeed I look upon it as a
Fatherly Chastisement; for whom he loves he chastises: For if I had my Deserts
he might have taken me in the midst of all my Sins, and have rewarded me with
the Punishment of the everlasting Prison (Hell) prepared for all impenitent
Sinners; but I hope he will give me the Grace of his Holy Spirit, to repent my
self of all my Sins, which I have and do, and shall with the Help of him, with
an Humble, Lowly and Obedient Heart, and not in the least Cloak or Dissemble
them, before my Heavenly Father, who gave up his only begotten Son to die for
Sinners, and me the greatest: And I hope he will give me his Grace to follow
his Example, who was falsely Accused, Condemned and suffered a shameful Death
upon the Cross, I being now falsely accused, and to suffer a shameful Death; at
which Time I sincerely and heartily beg of him, to support me, which I trust in
God he will, humbly begging Pardon, and confessing the Sins I have been guilty
of. Now, one thing I beg of you, for Christ his sake, That you will take it
from me, a dying Man, without the least Hopes of Pardon here, from any Mortal
Man, That I am Innocent, Clear and Free in Thought, Word and Deed of this
Bloody, Barbarous, unheard of Murder, the which several Times I have protested
to you my Innocence, and for which I do suffer; surely knowing and certainly
believing, no Salvation can be had from Almighty God, the Searcher of Hearts,
to any one who at the Hour of Death dies with a Lie in his Mouth; therefore
desire your Prayers for me (being really Innocent) and all other good
Christians Prayers, That God Almighty will be pleased to bring to Light this
Bloody Deed, not when we would have him, but at his own appointed Time; not our
Will, but his be done. And I beg of you, let me see you, for I have desired,
That you and Cosen C --, and a Divine or two (and no Body else) may come to me,
for I will not now Discourse any Persons relating to Worldly Affairs, but what
may tend for the Salvation of my poor Soul. So recommending you to God, I rest,

The most Wronged Man, the most Unhappy Man, as to this World, yet one of the
most Happy Men through Christ my Savior, in whom I trust for my Eternal
Salvation, HEN. HARRISON.

FINIS.

