THE Atheistical Objections, AGAINST THE BEING of a GOD, And His ATTRIBUTES,
Fairly Considered, and Fully Refuted.

IN Eight Sermons, Preached in the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, London, School.
Being the Seventh Year of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL,
Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


Immorality and Pride, The Great Causes of ATHEISM.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, January the 3d. 1697/8.

BEING The First of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God THOMAS Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Sir
HENRY ASHURST Baronet; Sir JOHN ROTHERAM Sergeant at Law; JOHN EVELYN Senior
Esquire;
Trustees appointed by the Will of the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire.
Most Reverend and Honored,
AS I had the Honor to Preach this Sermon by your Kind and Generous
Appointment, so I now Publish it in Obedience to your Commands, and humbly
offer it, as also my ensuing Discourses, to your Candid Patronage and
Acceptance. I have (in pursuance of Your Grace's direction) studied to be as
Plain and Intelligible as possibly I could, and shall, by the Divine
Assistance, prosecute my whole Design after the same manner; which Method of
Treating this Subject, appears very Suitable to the Pious and Excellent Design
of Our Noble and Honorable Founder.

I humbly desire your Prayers to Almighty God, that He will vouchsafe to render
my weak Endeavors effectual to show the Groundlessness and Inconclusiveness of
those Objections which Atheistical Men usually bring against the great and
Important Truths of Religion; which is the End they are sincerely directed to,
by

Most Reverend and Honored, Your most obliged humble Servant, J. HARRIS.

PSALM X.4. The Wicked through the Pride of his Countenance, will not seek
after God: Neither is God in all his Thoughts.


IN this Psalm is Contained a very lively Description of the Insolence of
Atheistical and Wicked Men, when once they grow Powerful and Numerous; for
then, as we read at the Third Verse, they will proceed so far, as openly to
boast of and glory in their Impiety: They will boldly defy and contemn the
great God of Heaven and Earth, v. 13. They will deny his Providence, v.11. and
despise his Vengeance: And, as we are told in these words of my Text, They will
grow so Proud and high, as to scorn to pay him any Honor or Worship, to Pray
to him or Call upon him; but will endeavor to banish the very Thoughts of his
Being out of their Minds. The Wicked through the Pride of his, etc.

In which words, we have an Account more particularly, by what Methods and
Steps Men advance to such an Exorbitant height of Wickedness, as to set up for
Atheism, and to deny the Existence of a God; for there are in them these Three
Particulars, which I shall consider in their Order.

I. Here is the general Character or Qualifications of the Person the Psalmist
speaks of; which is, That he is a Wicked Man. The Wicked through the Pride, etc.

II. The particular kind of Wickedness, or the Origin from whence the Spirit of
Atheism and Irreligion does chiefly proceed; And That is Pride. The Wicked
through the Pride of his Countenance, etc. And,

III. Here is the great Charge that is brought against this Wicked and Proud
Man; viz. Wilful Atheism and Infidelity: He will not seek after God: Neither is
God in all his Thoughts: Or, as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, with good
Warrant from the Hebr. All his Thoughts are there is no God.

In discoursing on the two First of these Heads, I shall endeavor to show,
that Immorality and Pride are the great Causes of the Growth of Atheism amongst
us: And on the Third, I shall consider the Objections that Atheistical Men
usually bring against the being of a Deity, and show how very weak and invalid
they are.

And first I think it very Necessary to say something of the Causes of
Infidelity and Atheism, and to show how it comes to pass that Men can possibly
arrive to so great a height of Impiety. This my Text naturally leads me to,
before I can come to the great Subject I design to Discourse upon; and I hope
it may be of very good use to discover the Grounds of this heinous Sin, and the
Methods and Steps by which Men advance to it; that so those who are not yet
hardened in it, nor quite given up to a Reprobate Mind, may, by the Blessing of
God, take heed, and avoid being engaged in such Courses as do naturally lead
into it.

I. Therefore let us consider the general Character or Qualifications of the
Person here spoken of in my Text, And that is, that he is a Wicked Man. The
wicked through the Pride, etc.

And this is every where the Language of the Sacred Scripture, when it speaks
of Atheistical Men. David tells us ( Psalm. 14.1. and 51.1.) that it is the Fool
(i. e. the Wicked Man, for so the word Nabal often signifies, and is so here to
be understood) It Is he that has said in his heart there is no God. It Is such
an one as is a Fool by his own fault; one stupefied and dulled by Vice and
Lust, as he sufficiently explains it afterward; one that is corrupt and become
filthy, and that has done abominable works. So the Apostle St. Paul supposes,
that those Men will have in them an evil heart of unbelief, who do depart from
the living God, and live without him in the world. And indeed, it is very
Natural to conclude, That those which are once debauched in their Practices,
may easily grow so in their Principles: For when once it is a Man's Interest
that there should be no God, he will readily enough disbelieve his Existence:
We always give our assent very precipitantly to what we wish for, and would
have to be true. A Man oppressed with a Load of Guilt, and conscious to
himself, that he is daily obnoxious to the Divine Vengeance, will be often very
uneasy, restless, and dissatisfied with himself, and his Mind must be filled
with Dismal and Ill-boding Thoughts. He is unwilling to leave his Sins, and to
forego the present Advantage of Sensual Pleasure; and yet he cannot but be
fearful too, of the Punishments of a Future State, and vehemently disturbed now
and then, about the account that he must one day give of his Actions.

Now, it is very Natural for a Man under such Circumstances, to catch at any
thing that does but seem to offer him a little Ease and Quiet, and that can
help him to shake off his melancholy Apprehension of impending Punishment and
Misery. Some therefore bear down all Thought and Consideration of their
Condition, in an uninterrupted enjoyment of Sensual Delights, and quite
stupifie and drown their Conscience and Reason in continual Excesses and
Debauchery; and thus very many commence Atheists, out of downright Sottishness
and Stupidity, and come at last to believe nothing of the Truths of Religion,
because they never think any thing about it, nor understand any thing of it.
Others, who have been a little enured to thinking, and have gotten some small
smattering in the superficial Parts of Learning, will endeavor to defend their
wicked Practices by some pretense to Reason and Argument. These will one while
justify their Actions, by forced and wrested Citations and Explications of
some particular Texts of Scripture; at another time they will shroud themselves
under the Examples of the Prevarications of some great Men in Sacred Scripture,
as a License to them, to be guilty of the same or the like wicked Acts; without
considering at all, of their great Penitence afterward. Sometimes they will
dispute the Eternity of Hell Torments, deny that their Soul shall survive the
Body, and please themselves with the glorious hopes of being utterly
annihilated. Now they will argue against the Freedom of their own Wills; and by
and by, against that of the Divine Nature: and from both conclude, that there
can be no harm nor evil in what they do, because they are absolutely
necessitated to every thing they commit. But against all this precarious stuff,
the Sacred Scriptures do yet appear and afford a sufficient Refutation. The
next Step therefore must be to quarrel at, and expose them; to pretend that
there are Absurdities, Contradictions and Inconsistencies in them: To assert
that the Religion they contain, is nothing but a mere Human and Political
Institution, and the Invention of a Crafty and designing Order of Men, to
promote their own Interest and Advantage; but that they are of no manner of
Divine Authority, nor Universal Obligation. And when once they get thus far,
they begin to be at Liberty; now they can pursue their vicious Inclinations
without control of their Consciences, or the Conviction of God's holy Word,
and are got above the Childish Fears of Eternal Misery. By this time, the true
and through Calenture of Mind begins; they grow now deliriously enamoured with
the feigned Products of their own Fancies; and these Notions appear to them
now, adorned with such bright and radiant Colors, and so beautiful and
glorious, that they will rush headlong into this Fools Paradise, though Eternal
Destruction be at the bottom; for now they stick at nothing; They Retrench the
Deity of all his Attributes, absolutely deny his Presidence over the Affairs of
the World, and make him nothing but a kind of necessary and blind Cause of
things, Nature, the Soul of the World, or some such word, which they have
happened to meet with in the Ancient Heathen Writers. But they Profess that
it is impossible to have any Idaea of him at all; and what they cannot conceive
or have an Idaea of, they say is nothing, and by Consequence there can be no
such thing as a God. This, or such like, I Am persuaded is the usual Method, by
which these kind of Men advance to absolute Infidelity and Atheism: And in
this, they are every step confirmed and established by the seeming Wit, and
real Boldness, with which Atheistical Men dress up their Arguments and
Discourses; and of which, if they were stripped and divested, their weakness
and inconclusiveness must needs appear to every one. But the Mirth and Humor,
and that Surprising and Extravagant Vein of talking which always abounds in the
Company of such Men, so suits and agrees with his own vicious Inclinations,
that he becomes easily prejudiced against the Truth of Religion, and any
Obligation to its Precepts and Injunctions: And so he will soon resolve to seek
no more after God, but will employ all his Thoughts to prove that there is no
such Being in the World.

But on the other hand, it appears wholly impossible for a Man to arrive at
such a pitch as absolute Infidelity and Atheism, if he has been virtuously
Educated, and be inclined to live a Sober and a Moral Life. For there is
certainly nothing that Religion enjoins, but what is exactly agreeable to the
Rules of Morality and Virtue; nothing but what is conformable to right Reason
and Truth; nothing but what is substantially good and pleasant, and nothing but
what will approve it self to a thinking Mind, as certainly conducing to the
good of Human Society, and to every one's Quiet, Ease, and Happiness here in
this Life: And over and above this, it gives us an assurance of a glorious
Immortality in the World to come.

Now, Can it be imagined, that any sober and virtuous Man, and one that is not
prejudiced by the Inducements of Sensual Pleasure, if he seriously considers
things, will not be induced to take upon him the Profession of our holy
Religion: and with all due Gratitude to our Gracious God, accept of so vast a
Reward as this of Eternal Happiness? Especially too when it is* for doing that
only out of a true Principle of Religion, which it is supposed he was inclined
to perform without it, by the Principles of Reason and Honor. A Man that is
inclined to live virtuously, justly, temperately, and peaceably in this present
World, will soon be satisfied, if he read the Holy Scriptures, that it is this
which lies at the Bottom of all Revealed Religion, and for whose Advancement
and Propagation among Mankind, all that gracious Dispensation was contrived and
delivered to us. What reason can therefore be possibly assigned, why such a
Person should disbelieve the Truths of Religion? Is not a desire of Happiness
so Natural to us, that it is the great Inducement of all our Actions? and will
not every Man aim to get as much of this as he can, according to the Notion he
has of it? what is there then that can prejudice such a Man's Mind against the
Belief and Expectation of a future Reward at the hand of God? Is it not Natural
to embrace any offer that proposes to us a great Advantage? and are not we very
ready to believe the Truth of any thing that is advanced of that Nature? The
Great Truths therefore of Religion, containing nothing impossible, absurd or
improbable in them, and exhibiting to him Infinite Advantages on such easy
Conditions, must needs be the delightful Objects of a Good and Virtuous Man's
Faith. He, indeed, that has just Grounds to fear that his Irregular Life will
incapacitate him for the Favor of God, and the Joys of another World, may be
willing, and at last infatuated so far, as really to disbelieve what he knows
he cannot obtain. But one that is of a Moral, Sober and Virtuous Disposition,
can never be supposed to be so unaccountably absurd, as to commence Atheist
contrary to his Interest, his Inclination, and his Reason.

And as it is hardly possible to conceive a Person can be an Atheist, without
being first Wicked; so it appears as difficult to imagine, that if he be an
Atheist, he should not continue to be so. I know the Contrary is often
pretended; viz. That one that believes nothing of a God or Religion, may yet
be, and often is guided by a Principle of Reason and Honor, and will do to
others as he would be done unto himself: Such an one ( it is said) will be
satisfied of the Necessity of Humane Laws, and of the Advantages that do thence
arise to Mankind: He will think himself obliged to submit to the Laws of his
Country, and consequently will keep up to the Rules of common Justice and
Honesty; and this (say they) is enough, and all that Religion can pretend to
enjoin. Pensees diverses Ecrites a un Docteur de Sorbonne a l'Occasion de la
Comete qui parut au Mois de Decembre, 1680. Rotterdam. 8 vo.
There is a late French Author, that endeavors to maintain by Arguments and
Examples, that the Principles of Atheism do not necessarily lead to Vice and
Immorality. But in the Proof of this, he comes very short of his Design. He
alleges, That some Professing Christianity have always, and do still, live as
bad Lives and as wickedly as any Atheists whatsoever can do: And that some
Atheists have lived very Regularly and Morally. But what then? Allowing and
granting all this; it does not in the least follow that Atheism does not lead
to Immorality and a Corruption of Manners. For it is neither asserted that
Atheism is the only way of becoming Wicked; nor that an Atheist must
necessarily be guilty of all manner of Vice. No doubt very many Men betake
themselves to a sinful Course, without having any Principles to justify
themselves by, as the Atheist pretends to: But are drawn into Wickedness purely
by Incogitancy and want of Consideration. And such kind of Persons, though they
make an outward Profession of Christianity, yet they may be, and doubtless
often are, as Vicious and Immoral as any other Men, without ever arriving at
the Point of Speculative Atheism, or perhaps without ever so much as doubting
of the Being of a God, of the Truth of Religion, or of a Future State of
Rewards and Punishments. No one says also that an Atheist must necessarily be
guilty of all manner of Vice and Immorality: But it is plain enough, that his
Principles lead him to prosecute any vicious Inclination that is suitable to
him, and to do any thing that he can safely, to procure to himself that kind of
Happiness or Satisfaction he proposes to enjoy. Many Sins are disagreeable to
some particular Periods and Circumstances of a Man's Life, to his Constitution,
Genius and Humor. Now it is easy to suppose a Man may abstain from such, for
his own Ease, Health and Quiet's sake. Self-Love will preserve the Atheist from
such open and notorious Acts of Wickedness, as will expose him to the Capital
Punishment of Human Laws; and which will endanger depriving him of his Being
here, where he only proposes to be happy. This Principle also of Self-Love,
will hinder him from exposing himself to Ignominy and Scandal; and will make
him endeavor to keep fair in the Opinions of those whose disesteem would give
him a great degree of Unhappiness. But it does not in the least follow from
hence, that because he is not guilty of all manner, or of this or that
particular Vice, that therefore he is a good Moral Man, and guilty of none at
all: It cannot be concluded from hence, that such a Person will avoid
committing any Fact, be it never so Wicked, when it is stripped of all these
Inconveniences, and can be done secretly, safely and securely: when it is
agreeable to his Constitution and Humor, fashionable and gentile, and
contributes very much to that kind of Satisfaction he is inclined to; for as
one that had considered this Point well, observes, Self-Love, which like Fire
covets to resolve all things into it self, makes Men they care not what Villainy
or what Impiety they Act, so it may but conduce to their own Advantage.
(Preface to Great is Diana of the Ephesians.) And indeed, if he be not
absolutely Stupid, and one that proposes to himself no manner of End at all, he
will certainly do this very thing: He will pursue and practice Indifferently
such kind of Designs and Actions, be they good or bad, as will give him as much
Pleasure and Happiness as he can have here in this short Life, where, Miserable
Wretch as he is, he only has any hope. And nothing can nor will hinder such a
Person from endeavoring to do or obtain any thing he has a Mind to, but the
fear of being exposed to Punishment and Misery here, from those among whom he
lives. Now, this Consideration can have no place in secret Actions, and
consequently nothing will hinder a Man of these abominable Principles from
committing the most barbarous Villainy that is consistent with his Safety, and
subservient to his Desires; that can be either concealed in Secrecy, or
supported by Power. For, as to the Principle of Honor, that such Men will
pretend to be governed and guided by, and which they would set up to supply the
Room of Conscience and Religion; it is plain, that it is the veriest Cheat in
Nature: it is nothing but a mere abusive Name, to gull the World into a Belief
that they have some kind of Principle to act and proceed by, and which keeps
them from doing an Ill Thing: Whereas the Atheist can have no Principle at all,
but that sordid one of Self Love; which will still carry him to the
perpetrating of any thing indifferently, according as it best conduces to his
present Interest and Advantage. They deny that there are any Actions truly Good
or Honorable, or Wicked and Base in themselves; but that this is all owing to
the peculiar Customs, Laws, and Constitutions of Places and Countries: And that
as all Men are, so Actions also, are naturally equal and alike: And how far
such Notions as these will carry Men, it is very easy both to Imagine and to
Observe. One would think nothing could be more Noble, Honorable and Comely,
than for a Man to stick firm and constant to those Principles that he pretends
to, and by no means whatever to be brought to abjure and deny them. Sincerity
is so lovely and desirable a Virtue, that it does approve it self, as it were
naturally, to the reason of all Mankind: and it is equally Useful, nay, indeed
Necessary, to the due Government of the World. But this Noble Virtue, so
peculiar to a Man of True honor and greatness of Mind, the Atheist will
practice no longer than it is for his Interest and Advantage, and while it is
consistent with his Safety. That Men may profess or deny any thing to save
their Lives, is the avowed Principle of one of their great Writers. And the
same is expressly asserted in other words, even in lesser Cases than that of
Danger of Death, by the Translator of Philostratus's Life of Apollonius
Tyanaeus, with a great Pretense to Wit and Humor. But if Men may Lie and
Prevaricate from so base and abject a Principle as Fear, no doubt they may do
so for Interest and Advantage, for that is certainly as good a ground, as
Cowardliness and Baseness; and then what becomes of this boasted Honor that is
so much talked of; this greatness of Mind, that will keep a Man from doing an
ill thing. In reality, 'twill at last amount to no more than this, that he will
forbear doing an Ill Thing, when he thinks it will prove ill to him: he will be
Just, Honest and Sincere when he don't dare be otherwise, for fear of the Law,
Shame, and Ignominy: For all Men of Atheistical Principles would be Knaves and
Villains if they durst, if they could do it safely and securely: such a Man
('it is like) shall return you a Bag of Money, or a rich Jewel you happen to
depose in his Hands; but why is it? it is because he dares not keep it and deny
it; it is great odds but he is discovered and exposed by this means; and
besides, it is Unfashionable and Ungenteel to be a Cheat in such Cases. But to
impoverish a Family by Extravagance and Debauchery, to defraud Creditors of
their just Debts, or Servants of their Wages, to Cheat at Play, to violate
one's Neighbor's Bed to gratify one's own Lust, are things, which though to
the full as Wicked and Unreasonable in themselves, are yet swallowed down as
allowable enough, because common and usual, and which are not, the more is the
pity, attended with that Scandal and Infamy that other Vices are. Thus it is
very plain, that this pretended Principle of Honor in an Atheist or a Wicked
Man, and this Obedience and Deference that he pretends to pay to the Laws of
his Country, is a most Partial and Changeable thing, and vastly different from
that true Honor and Bravery that is founded on the Eternal Basis of Conscience
and Religion; it is an Airy Name that serves only to amuse unthinking and
short-sighted Persons into a Belief, that he has some kind of Principles that
he will stick to; that so he may be thought fit to be trusted, dealt and
conversed withal in the World.

And thus, I think, it is very clear and apparent that Wickedness naturally
leads to Infidelity and Atheism, and Infidelity and Atheism to the Support and
Maintenance of That: And that it is the Wicked that will not seek after God,
and whose thoughts are that there is no God. Which was my First Particular.

I come next to Consider,

II. That Peculiar Kind of Wickedness which the Psalmist here takes notice of,
as the chief Ground from whence Infidelity and Atheism proceed: And that is
Pride. The Wicked, through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek after
God, neither is God in all his Thoughts.

And I question not but this Vice of Pride, is generally the Concomitant of
Infidelity, and the chief Ground from whence the Spirit of Speculative Atheism
proceeds. When Men of proud and haughty Spirits lead ill Lives, as they very
often do, they always endeavor to justify themselves in their Proceeding, be
it never so Irregular and Absurd, and never so contrary to the considerate
Sentiments of all the rest of the World. A Proud Man hates to acknowledge
himself in an Error, and to own that he has committed a Fault: He would have
the World believe that there is a kind of Indefectibility in his Understanding
and Judgment, which secures him from being deceived and mistaken like other
Mortals. Whatever Actions therefore such a Person commits, he would fain have
appear reasonable and justifiable. But he sees plainly that he cannot make
Wickedness and Immorality do so, as long as Religion stands its Ground in the
World. The Sacred Scriptures are so plain and express against such a course of
Life, that there is no avoiding being convicted and condemned while their
Authority remains good: It Is impossible any way to reconcile a vicious Life to
the Doctrine there delivered: And therefore he sees plainly, That one that
Professes to believe the great Truths of Religion, and the Divine Authority of
those Sacred Books, and yet by his Practices gives the Lie to his Profession,
and while he acknowledges Jesus Christ in his Words, does in his Works deny
him; he sees, I say, that such an one stands (...), Self-condemned, and can
never acquit himself either to his own Conscience, or to the Reason of Mankind.
Now this is perfectly disagreeable to the Genious and Humor of a Proud Man; he
cannot bear to be thought in any respect Incoherent or Inconsistent with
himself: And therefore having vainly tried to justify himself in his
Wickedness, by alleging the Examples of some good Men in Sacred Scripture,
that have been guilty of great Sins, but whose Repentance he can by no means
digest: And having also fruitlessly endeavored to rely on the perverted Sense
of some particular Texts of Scripture, which he knows are sufficiently refuted
by the Analogy of the whole; he finds at last that it is the best way to deny
the Divine Authority of the Bible, and the Truth of all Revelation, and so
boldly shake off at once all Obligation to the Rules of Piety and Virtue; and
since Religion cannot be wrested so as to give an allowance to his way of
living, he will take it quite away, Banish that and God Almighty out of the
World, and set up Iniquity by a Law. And nothing can be more pleasing and
agreeable to the Arrogance of such Men than this way of Proceeding: It
gratifies an insolent and haughty Spirit prodigiously, to do things out of the
common Road; to pretend to be Adept in a Philosophy that is as much above the
rest of Mankind's Notions, as it is Contradictory to it: to assume to himself a
Power of seeing much farther into things than other Folk, and to penetrate into
the deepest recesses of Nature. Vid. Jul. Caes. Vanini Amphitheatr. in Titulo
and Epist. Dedicator.
He would pass for one of Nature's Cabinet Counselors, a Bosom Favorite that
knows all the secret Springs of Action, and the first remote Causes of all
Things. He pleases himself mightily to have discovered with what Ridiculous
Bugbears the Generality of Mankind are awed and frighted; he can now look down
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre Errare, atque viam palantes
quaerere vitae. Lucr. lib. 2.
with a Scornful Pity on the poor grovelling Vulgar, the Unthinking Mobb below,
that are poorly enslaved and terrified by the Fear of a God, and of Ills to
come they know not when nor where: He despises such dull Biggots as will be
imposed upon by Priests, and that will superstitiously abstain from the
Enjoyment of present Pleasure, on account of such idle Tales as the
Comminations of Religion. And as he despises those that are not Wicked, so he
upbraids those that are so, with inconsistency with their Principles and
Profession, and for doing the same things that he does, when they have nothing
to bear them out: And thus he doubly gratifies his Pride, by justifying
himself, and condemning and triumphing over others. Nay, the very Mistakes and
Errors of such a Man, we are told, appear laudable and great to him, and he
can please himself at last, with saying, That he has not Erred like a Fool,
but Secundum Verbum. Vid. Oracles of Reason, p. 92. When Men have a while
enured themselves to talk at this rate, and to blow themselves up with such
lofty Conceits and Fancies, they grow by degrees more and more opinionated, and
do dote more and more on their own dear Notions; and finding by this means
quiet and ease in the Practice of their Sins, they at last degenerate so far as
firmly to believe the Truth of what they perhaps at first advanced and talked
only from a Spirit of Contradiction; and become so stupid and blind, as, like
great Liars, to believe their own Figments and Inventions Vid. Great is Diana
of the Ephesians.
To such any Extravagant and Inconsistent Hypothesis, so it do but clash with
Sacred Scripture, shall be no less than a real Demonstration; a Bold and daring
Falsity shall pass for undoubted Truth; and a Profane Jest, or a Scurrilous
Reflection on the Character or Person of one in Holy Orders, shall be a
sufficient Refutation of the plainest Demonstration he can bring against their
Principles and Practices. For it is most certain, that though a Proud Man
always think himself in the right, and arrogate to himself an Exemption from
the common Frailties and Errors of Mankind; yet there is no body so frequently
deceived and mistaken, as he; for he does so overestimate all his Faculties and
Endowments, and is so much enamoured of, and Trusts so much to his own
Quickness and Penetration, that he usually Imagines his Great Genius able to
Master any thing without the servile fatigue of Pains and Study: and therefore
he will never give himself Time seriously to examine into things, he scorns and
hates the Drudgery of deeply revolving and comparing the Idaeas of things in
his Mind, but rashly proceeds to Judgment and Determination on a very Transient
and Superficial View: And there will he stick, be the Resolution he is come to
never so absurd and Unaccountable; for he is as much above confessing, an
Error in Judgment, as he is of Repenting of a Fault in Practice. And indeed,
as the absurd and ridiculous Paradoxes which Atheistical Writers maintain, show
their shallow insight into things, and their Precipitancy in forming a
Determination about them; so the Pride and Haughtiness with which they deliver
them, abundantly demonstrates the True Spirit of such Authors, and the Real
Ground both of their Embracing and Maintaining their Opinions. Plato describes
the Atheists of his Age, to be a Proud, Insolent, and Haughty sort of Men, the
Ground of whose Opinion was, he says, (...), in reality, a very mischievous
Ignorance; though to the conceited Venders and Embracers of it (...). It
appeared to be the greatest Wisdom, and the Wisest of all Opinions. Lactantius
tells us in his Discourse, De Ira Dei, p. 729. Oxon. that the true Reason why
Diagoras Melius and Theodorus, two of the Ancient Atheists denied a Deity was,
That they might gain the Glory of being the Authors of some new Opinion,
contradictory to the common Notions of Mankind. And of the former of these,
Diagoras, Sextus Empiricus acquaints us, That because a certain perjured
Person, who had wronged him, lived unpunished by the Gods, he was so enraged at
it, that he undertook to maintain there were no Gods at all. Lib. Adr. Mathem.
Edit. Genev. 1621.

The like Pride and Arrogance Lactantius tells us he found in the two great
Writers that appeared against Christianity, in his time, in Bithynia. The
former of these, who, it is probable, was the famous Porphyry, called himself
Antistes Philosophiae, the Chief or Prince of Philosophers; and says
Lactantius, Nescio utrum Superbius an Importunius, pretended to correct the
blind Errors of Mankind, and to guide Men into the True Way; He could not bear,
that Unskilful and Innocent Persons should be enslaved by the Cheats of, and
become a Prey to, Crafty and Designing Men. Lib. de Justit. p. 420, 421. Oxon.

With the like Assurance do the Modern Writers of this kind express themselves:
And though they have in reality very little or nothing New, but only the
Arguments of the Ancients a little varied and embelished, (as I shall have
occasion to observe hereafter more at large,) yet they all set up for new
Lights, and mighty Discoverers of the Secrets of Nature and Philosophy; and all
of them assume the Glory of first leading Men into the way of Truth, and
delivering them out of the dark mazes of Vulgar Errors. This was the pretense
of Vanini, who was burnt for Atheism at Toulouse, A. D. 1619. whose Mind, he
says, grew more and more strong, healthful and robust, Animus tamen in supremae
and vulgo Philosophantibus incognitae Philosophiae Arcanit investigandis
validior factus and robustior; ut Physico-Magicum nostrum, quod mox ex umbra in
lucem prodibit pellegent, aequa posteritas facile est Judicatura.
as he exercised it in searching out the Secrets of that Supreme Philosophy,
which is wholly unknown to the common and ordinary Rank of Philosophers: And
this, he says, will soon be discovered, by the perusal of his Physico-Magicum,
which was now to see the Light. Vid. Vanini Amphitheatr. in Epist. Dedicat.

After the same manner do Machiavel, Spinoza, Hobbs, Blount, and all the late
Atheistical Writers, deliver themselves; Instances of which, I think, I need
not stay to give, since it is conspicuous through the whole course of their
Writings, and, no doubt, taken notice of by every Reader; only of the first of
these, viz. Machiavel, I cannot but take notice, that Vanini himself says,
that 'twas his Pride and Covetousness that made him deny the Truth of the
Miracles recorded in Sacred Scripture. Amphitheatr. p. 51. Edit. Lugduni, 1615.

And as the Writings, so the Discourses of these Gentlemen do equally discover
this Pride and Vanity: for they do usually deliver themselves with such a
scornful and contemptuous Air, when they either endeavor to establish their
own, or to overthrow their Adversaries Arguments, as sufficiently shows the
Propriety and Truth of the Psalmist's Observation here, that it is through the
pride of his countenance, that the wicked will not seek after God. The LXXII.
indeed render it, (...) Through the abundance of his wrath: and therein they
are followed by the vulgar Latin. As if the Wicked were angry against God, and
enraged at his Presidency over Humane Affairs: as if they fretted under, and
quarelled at the Severity of his Laws and Government, and scorned to apply
themselves to him by Prayer, and to submit to him by Obedience. But though this
may be a good sense of the words; and though, I doubt not, a stubborn
Frowardness and Perverseness of our Wills against the Will of God, may be a
frequent cause and ground of Infidelity: yet our English Translation appears to
me to be much better warranted from the Hebrew; for there it is properly,
through the Elevation of his Nose or Face. Which, truly, is very emphatical,
and expresses such a proud and scornful gesture of Face, as is the natural
Indication of the Internal Haughtiness of a Man's Mind; or as the Targum, on
this place, render it, of the arrogance of his Spirit. Such a Turn and Air of
Countenance as argues a proud contempt of all the rest of Mankind, who trot on
in the common road, believe and worship a God, and poorly submit to be governed
by his Laws and Precepts.

And thus having dispatched my Two first Particulars, and showed, That
Wickedness and Pride are two great Causes of Infidelity and Atheism; I should
now proceed to speak to the Third thing observable in my Text, viz.

III. The great Charge which the Psalmist brings against the wicked Person here
mentioned, That he will not seek after God; neither is God in all his Thoughts.
But this I must leave for my next Discourse, and shall now Conclude with a word
or two by way of Application.

Since the Case stands thus, That Wickedness in general, and Pride in
particular, do so naturally lead to Infidelity and Atheism; and that it is
hardly possible to imagine a Man can entertain such an Opinion without them:
Let every one then, that has any Inclination or Temptation that way, seriously
examine his own Mind, whether he be not prejudiced toward it by some vicious
Desires and Affections; whether he does not heartily wish that there were no
God nor Religion; whether he has not, by his past Actions, really loaded
himself with guilt, and therefore is disturbed in his Mind with the
apprehension, that the Divine Punishment will overtake him, and light upon him,
for his Sins: Let him search diligently whether he has not recourse to
Infidelity, as to an Opiate in this case, to allay the Pains of his Conscience,
and to compose the Disorder of his guilty Mind, and to gain, as it were, an
Insensibility in Sinning. For if the case be thus, it is plain, he is not free,
and at liberty, to make a just Judgment of the Truth of Things; he is already a
Party, and much more inclined to one side of the Question than to the other;
and consequently, he will pitch on that as Truth, which he would have to be so.
But this is certainly a very partial way of proceeding, and such as no wise Man
would use in a matter of so very great moment, to engage one's self rashly in a
Determination, before a thorough and careful Examination of the Evidence on
both sides: This is to look on things in a false Light, through colored
Glasses, through Diseased and Icterical Eyes; and then to believe them to be in
reality, what our depraved and prejudicate Apprehensions make them.

The Enemies to Religion say, That the Preachers of it are not to be minded;
the Arguments they bring are all forced and strained, because it is their Trade,
and they get Money by it; and their Craft obliges them to cry out, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians! I hope therefore this being so Precarious and Partial a
way of Proceeding, to subscribe to Religion by Implicit Faith, and to take it
up upon trust from those, whose Interest (they say) it is to propagate it in
the World: I hope, I say, that Men will not act so on the other hand, and
embrace Atheism and Infidelity on the same Precarious Grounds. I hope all such
Persons can clearly approve themselves to be truly Virtuous and Moral in their
Inclinations and Practices; and are sure that they have no strong Inclinations
to such Actions as the World calls Vicious. For if they have, and do take real
Pleasure in the Practice of Wickedness, it is plain that they must be Prejudiced
and Bigoted to their Lusts and Humors; they cannot be Free-thinkers in the
Case; the Cloggs of ill Custom, and a loose Education bear them down, and they
cannot shake them off. Their present Interest influences and governs their
Belief, and enslaves and Tyrannizes over their Reason.

Let them consider impartially the Arguments for Infidelity, and they will find
them all forced and strained Paradoxes, Invented by Skeptical and Canting
Philosophers, a Crafty and Designing sort of Men, who set up Atheism because
they Get by it, and whose Interest it is that there should be no God and
Religion.

Let not therefore Men be so stupid and blind as to talk of Prejudices on the
side of Religion, and never perceive that there are any at all on that of
Infidelity. If they scorn to take up Religion on trust, without examining into
its Grounds and Reasons; for their Own sakes let them be as Cautious and
Inquisitive on the other hand, and not run Hood-winked into Eternal
Destruction, by subscribing to Atheism in have, and without that previous
Consideration and Regard, which so great and important an Affair requires: For
if they will but strip themselves of those Prejudices which arise from their
Vices, and avoid being impetuously born down by their depraved Inclination;
they will soon perceive that the Grounds and Principles of Infidelity are
abundantly too precarious to afford them any thing like a Demonstrative
assurance of the Falsity of Religion: Without which, surely no Man of Sense,
and that can think at all, will ever run the hazard of Damnation.

FINIS.
Books printed for Rich. Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
DR. Woodward's Natural History of the Earth. in Octavo.

Remarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth; By J. Harris, M. A. and Fellow of the
Royal-Society. In Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Truth of the Christian Religion, against the
Objections of all Modern Opposers; in Two Volumes. In Octavo.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, for the Advancement of their true and
greatest Interest; Part I. By a Lover of their Sex. The Third Edition. In
Twelves.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies; Part II. Wherein a Method is offered for the
Improvement of their Minds. In Twelves.

Letters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies and Mr. John Norris. In Octavo.

An Answer to W. P. his Key about the Quakers Light within, and Oaths; with an
Appendix of the Sacraments. In Octavo.

A Letter to the Honorable Sir Robert Howard: Together with some
Animadversions on a Book, entitled, Christianity not Mysterious. In Octavo.

Now in the Press.
Discourses on several Practical Subjects, By the late Reverend W. Pain, D.D.
With a Preface giving an Account of his Life, Writings, and Death. In Octavo.

The ATHEIST's Objection, That we can have no Idea of GOD, REFUTED.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, February the 7th.
1697/8. BEING The Second of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

PSALM. x.4. The Wicked, through the Pride of his Countenance, will not seek
after God; neither is God in all his Thoughts.


IN these words, I have, in a former Discourse, taken notice of these Three
Particulars: I. The General Character or Qualifications of the Person here
mentioned, which is, That he is a Wicked Man.

II. The Particular Kind of Wickedness, or Origin from whence the Spirit of
Atheism and Irreligion does chiefly proceed, and that is Pride; The Wicked,
through the Pride of his Countenance, etc.

III. The great Charge which the Psalmist brings against the Person here spoken
of in my Text, viz. Wilful Atheism and Infidelity; He will not seek after God,
neither is God in all his Thoughts.



The Two first of these I have already dispatched, and therefore shall now
proceed to discourse on my Third Head, viz. The great Charge here brought
against this Wicked Person, That he will not seek after God; neither is God in
all his Thoughts: or, as it is in the Margin, with good grounds (as I have
before observed) from the Hebrew, All his Thoughts are, There is no God.

Which appears to me to imply a wilful and malicious slighting and contemning
of God, and his Laws, and an endeavor to banish the very Thoughts of his
Existence out of their Minds. And under this Head, I shall make it my business
to enumerate all the pretended Arguments and Objections which I have met with,
and are of any weight, against the Being of a God, in general; and then
endeavor to show how Weak and Inconclusive they are, and how miserable a
Support they will prove for Atheism and Infidelity.

But first it will be necessary, briefly to clear up one Point, and to obviate
one Objection that may be made against this very Attempt of mine, of Refuting
and Answering the Atheists Arguments and Objections.

It will, I doubt not, be said, That there is not now, nor ever perhaps was in
the World, any such Person as a Speculative Atheist, or one that believes,
there is no God. It is said, with great assurance, by some, That the Ancient
Atheists were only such as declared against the Plurality of Gods, and the
Idolatry and Superstition of the Heathen Worship. And we are told by one, very
lately, Two Essays from Oxford, in the Apology.
That he has traveled many Countries, and could never meet with any Atheists,
(which are few, if any;) and all the Noise and Clamor, says he, is against
Castles in the Air.

To which I Answer, That nothing can be more plain and clear, than that both
Ancient and Modern Writers do give us an account of such Persons as were known
and reputed Atheists, by those that were Contemporary with them, and did well
understand their Principles and Tenets. I need not insist on Proofs from any of
the Ancient Christian Writers; for it is sufficient, that Plato, Diogenes
Laertius, Plutarch, Cicero, and many others, do acquaint us, that such kind of
Men there have been in the World. Though I shall particularly produce the
Testimony of two Authors, one ancient, and the other, it is probable, now
living, to prove this Point; and these are, Sextus Empiricus, and he that wrote
the Thoughts on the Comet that appeared in the Year 1680. Sextus is express,
Adv. Mathem. p 317, 318, etc. Genevae, 1621.
That Diagoras Melius, Prodicus Chius, Euemerus, Critias Atheniensis,
Theodorus, and many others, were absolute Atheists, and denied that there were
any Gods at all. And the French Gentleman Pensees diverses a l' Occasion de la
Comete, Tom. 2.. clxxiv. p. 531.
says the same of most of those mentioned by Sextus, and other Ancient
Writers; and to the number, adds some others of a Modern date: And Mr. Blount
says, Anim. Mand. p. 96.
that the Epicureans constantly affirmed, there were no Gods. Now the Evidence
of these Authors will, I hope, be allowed, because they seem Well-wishers to
the Cause of Infidelity themselves. To these I might add, were it necessary,
That Vaninus himself tells us frequently of Atheists that he met with, (and no
one will doubt but that he knew where to find one at any time,) and he calls
Machiavel, expressly, Atheorum facile Princeps Amphitheatr. D. Providentiae, p.
35.
But indeed, this Assertion of these Gentlemen, That there is no such thing as
an Atheist in the World, is like most other things that they advance, Uncertain
and Precarious, and often contradicted by what at other times they deliver: for
though they are sometimes, and in some Companies, for Reasons that are very
obvious, unwilling to take the Title of Atheist on themselves or their Party;
yet they are often ready enough to bestow it on others; and when it is
subservient to their purpose, will insinuate, Vid. Blount's Translation of the
Life of Apollonius, p. 84.
That the greatest Lights and Teachers of the Church believe as little of
Religion as themselves. But I say also,

2. That it is one thing to disbelieve the Existence of a God, and another to
declare so to the World. And it does not at all follow, that a Man is not an
Atheist, because he does not openly profess himself to be so, at all times, and
in all Companies. There are no Writers so insincere as these kind of Gentlemen;
they are very cautious and tender how they expose themselves to the just
Punishment of the Law. Vaninus himself, though he did at last suffer Death
madly, for his Infidelity, (as one Anima Mundi, in the Oracles of Reason, p. 54.
says of him, that died as madly himself,) yet is he very cautious and
careful, in his Writings, how he renders himself obnoxious to the Censure of
the Inquisition; and he declares, Amphitheatr. p. 151, 334. Lugdun. 1615.
That he will submit all things to the Judgment of the Roman Church. So a
Gentleman of our own Nation, though he endeavors, as effectually as it is
possible, underhand, to ridicule and undermine Religion; yet he would sain
appear to the World to be a good Christian, and one that has a mighty
Veneration for God and his Laws: but, in the mean time, it is very easy to
discover his true Principles and Design; for he declares* Blount's Translation
of Philostratus's Life of Apollonius, in the Preface.
That he thinks it much safer to believe as the Church believes, and to pin his
Faith always on my Lord of Canterbury' s Sleeve, as he says he will do, and
subscribe to any ridiculous Legend, rather than incurr the Censure of the
Popish Clergy; as he basely calls the Ministers of this most Excellent
Protestant Church: for the same laudable Reasons also, he forbears
communicating, what he does, or ought to think Truth, to Mankind, (as he tells
us in many places.) Now if this be the case with these Men of Honor, that they
dare not speak their Minds, nor discover their true Sentiments plainly to the
World; we must by no means conclude over-hastily of their Orthodoxy, by what
they say in Discourse at some times, or publish in Print at others: but, in
short, if they set up such a Notion of a God, as is essentially inconsistent
with the Idea that all Mankind have of such a Being; if they make him either a
Necessary Agent, or a Blind, Idle and Unactive One; if they divest him of his
Providence, or cramp him in his Attributes, as those that call themselves
Deists generally do: in a word, if they make him such an Impotent and Careless
Being, as either cannot or will not govern the World, give Laws to his People,
vindicate his own Honor, and punish and reward Men according to their Actions:
It Is plain, I say, that though in words they may profess to believe and honor
a God, yet in reality they deny him, and have no manner of Notion of his true
Nature and Perfections. But it is not the Name only, nor the empty Sound of the
word Deity, but the Thing, that is wanting in the World; it is the true
Knowledge and Belief of this only, that can clear a Man from the imputation of
Atheism: If he be not right in this Point, i. e. if he have not such a belief
of God, as implies in it a knowledge of the Perfections of his Nature, he may
call himself by as fine and fashionable Names as he pleases, and pretend to
Deism and Natural Religion; but in reality he is an Atheist, and so ought to be
esteemed by all Mankind; for as one says, Blount's Anima Mundi, in Oracles of
Reason, Pre^.
that knew very well what an Atheist was, Such are Atheists, as deny God's
Providence; or who restrain it in some particulars, and exclude it in reference
to others, as well as those who directly deny the Existence of a Deity: And
Vaninus Amphitheatr. p. 124.
calls Tully Atheist, on this very account; and in another place, he says,
Page 152.
That to deny a Providence, is the same thing as to deny a God.

This therefore being returned in Answer to the Objection, That there is no
such thing as an Atheist: Let us now go about to examine and consider the
Arguments and Objections that are usually brought by Atheistical Men, against
the Being of a God. And these, one would think, should be exceeding weighty
ones, and no less than direct Demonstrations; for if they are not such
strenuous Proofs as are impossible to be refuted, I Am sure the Atheist ought to
pass for the most senseless and stupid of all Mankind. He slights and despises
that inestimable Offer of being Happy for ever; he runs the risque of being
eternally Miserable; he bids open defiance to the Laws of God and Man; and he
opposes his own Opinion and Judgment, to the sober and considerate Sentiments
of the judicious part of Mankind, in all Ages of the World. Now surely, in such
a case, he ought to be very sure that he cannot be mistaken; and to be as
demonstratively certain, as of the truth of any Theorem in Euclid, that there
is no God, no Moral Good nor Evil, no Revealed Religion, nor any Future State
of Rewards and Punishments. But can any Man have the face to pretend to this?
Will not the common sense of all Mankind pronounce this impossible? and that a
Demonstration of the Nonexistence of these things, is not to be obtained? Can
any one be directly assured, that there is not so much as a Possibility that
these things should be true? And if so, then it is plain, that for any thing he
can directly prove to the contrary, the Atheist may be in the wrong, and
consequently be Eternally damned and miserable. Now would any one, that can
think at all, run this Dreadful Hazard? much less sure, one that pretends to be
a Man of Penetration and Judgment, and to Philosophize above the Vulgar: And
yet this every Atheist does; and that too on no other Grounds but the Strength
of some trifling Objections against, and seeming Absurdities in, the Notion of
a God, and Religion, which the Extravagant Wit of wicked Men has invented and
coined to stop the Mouths of those that reprove them, to stifle and bear down
the Stings of Conscience, and to gain some pretense to Reason and Principles in
their Impious Proceedings. But surely these Persons must know well enough, that
it is a very easy thing to start Objections against the most plain and obvious
Truths; They know also, that in other Cases, themselves think it very
unreasonable to disbelieve the truth of a Thing, only because they cannot
readily answer all the Objections a witty Man may bring against it, and because
they cannot solve all the Phoenomena of it. Now, why should not they proceed so
in Matters of Religion? They know that all the great Truths of it, have been
demonstrated over and over, by those Learned and Excellent Persons which have
written in the Defense of it; Nay, they know too, that most of their Objections
have been already refuted and answered, and that they adhere to a Cause that
has been frequently baffled. They know the weight and importance of the
Subject, and that if Religion should at last prove to be true, they must be for
ever Miserable: All this, I say, they very well know; and therefore it looks
strangely like an Infatuation upon them, that they will run this Dreadful
Hazard only on the Strength of a few Objections, and a bare surmise only that
there is no such thing as a God or Religion. These Objections are their only
Hold and Pretense that they can stick to and abide by, and what and how Great
they are, I shall now proceed to Examine. These I shall take in their Natural
Order: And,

1. Consider such Objections as are brought against the Being of a God in
General.

2. Such as are alleged against his Attributes and Perfections.

3. Such as are advanced against the Truth and Authority of revealed Religion.
The Groundlessness and Inconclusiveness of all which I shall endeavor as
clearly as I can to Demonstrate.

And First, I shall consider and refute the Objections and Arguments that are
brought against the Being of God in General; and these are (as far as I can
find) all reducible to these two Heads. It is said,

1. That we can have no Idea of God.

2. That the Notion of a Deity owes its Original, either to the foolish Fears
of some Men, or the Crafty Designs of others.

I shall at this Time handle the former of these, and Refute the Objections
that are brought against the Existence of a Deity, from our not being able (as
they say) to have any Idea or Notion of him. The Atheist alleges, That
whatsoever is Unconceiveable is really nothing at all: that we can have no
Idea, or possible Notion of any thing that is not some how or other an Object
of our Senses; for all Knowledge is Sense: and we can only judge of the
Existence of things by its Evidence and Testimony. Now God is by Divines said
to be Incomprehensible, Infinite, and Invisible; i. e. Something that it is
impossible to know any thing about; Leviathan, p. 208.
that is every where, and yet no where; that sees every thing, and yet no body
can see him; nor can we perceive any thing of him by any other of our Senses:
We cannot tell what to make of such an Account as this of a God; we can have no
^^^tasm, Idea or Conception of any such Thing; and therefore we justly
conclude, There is no such Being in Nature. And as for that precarious Notion
of a God, that is so much talked of in the World, it is nothing but a mere
Phantome or Mormo devised and set up by Politic and Designing Men to keep the
Rabble in awe, and to scare such Fools as are afraid of their own Shadows. The
several Points of this Objection, I shall singly consider; and,

As to the First Part of it, That what we cannot attain any Idea of; or, That
what is absolutely Vnconceiveable, is really nothing at all; perhaps it may be
true, taking it in the most strict and proper sense of the words; for though I
am not of Protagoras's Mind, that Man is (...) yet as I think, that That which
is absolutely Unconceivable in its own Nature, is not possible to be Existent;
so what is absolutely so to us, we can know nothing at all of, nor reason, nor
argue about it; since there is no doing of this but from our Ideas. But I
cannot see how this will be advantageous at all to the Cause of Infidelity: For
there is neither any one that asserts, nor is the Atheist able to prove, that
That Being which we call God, is absolutely Unconceiveable. There is a vast
difference between a thing's being Inconceivable, and Incomprehensible; between
our having no Idea at all of a thing, and our having an Imperfect one; and
between our knowing Nothing at all of a Being, and our comprehending all the
Possible Perfections and Excellencies of such a Being. We readily grant that
the Immense Nature of God is incomprehensible to our finite Understandings; but
we don't say it is absolutely Unconceivable, and that we can know nothing at all
about it. The common Notion Sextus Empiricus allows, that there is (...), a
common Notion or Idea of a God, even when he dispu^es against him. Adv. Math.
p. 333.
which all Mankind have of a God, is a sufficient Refutation of this Part of
the Objection, as it is also a very good Proof of the real Existence of a
Deity; for if there were no such Being, it is impossible to conceive how any
Idea of him could ever have come into any one's Mind, as I shall hereafter more
largely prove.

2. There is implied in this Objection, That we can have no possible Idea, nor
Notion of the Existence of any thing that is not the Object of our Senses: And
from hence these Sublime Thinkers argue against the Existence of a Deity, and
conclude there is no God, because they cannot see him, and because he is not
perceivable by any of our Bodily Senses. Thus one of our Modern Atheistical
Writers asserts, That the only Evidence we can have of the Existence of any
thing, is from Sense. And in another place, Hob's Leviath. p. 11.
Whatsoever we can conceive (says he) has been perceived first by Sense,
either at once or in Parts, and a Man can have no Thought representing any
thing not subject to Sense. And he defines Sense to be Original Knowledge.
Which is but the Reverse of what Protagoras, long ago determined: for Plato, in
his Theaetetus, tells us, That he defined all Knowledge to be Sense. Now, is
not this admirable Philosophy? and worthy of those that pretend to a sublimer
pitch of Knowledge than the Vulgar? There is no Knowledge, say they, but Sense.
If so, then, as Protagoras says, all Sense must be Knowledge; and
consequently, he that sees, hears, smells or feels any thing, must immediately
know all that is to be known about it: By seeing the Letters of any Language,
or hearing the Words pronounced, a Man or a Beast must needs understand all the
Sense and Meaning of it; and the Philosophic Nature of all Bodies will be
perfectly comprehended, as soon as ever they once come within the reach of our
Senses. This is, indeed, a good easy method of attaining Learning; and perhaps
very suitable to the Genius of these Gentlemen! But I cannot account from this
Notion, how they come to have so much more Penetration and Knowledge than their
Neighbors. Are their Eyes and Ears, Noses and Feeling, so much more accurate
than those of the Vulgar? Yes, doubtless, these are truly Men of Sense! their
Lyncean Eyes can penetrate Millstones, and the least silent whisper of Nature
moves the Intelligent Drum of their tender Ears; nothing escapes their
Knowledge, but what is undiscoverable by the nicest Sense, and can only be
comprehended by Reason. Reason! an Ignis Fatuus of the Mind, whose uncertain
Direction they scorn to follow, while this Light of Nature, Sense, can be their
Guide. Nor will it avail them to allege here, that when they say, we have no
Knowledge but what we have from our Senses; they mean only, that all our
Knowledge comes in that way, and not by Innate Idea's: for the Author I have
mentioned above, is express, that we can have no thought of any thing not
subject to Sense; that the only Knowledge we have of the Existence of all
things, is from Sense; and that Sense is Original Knowledge. And if so, there
can be no such thing as comparing or distinguishing of Idea's in our Mind; but
the simple Idea's of Sensible Objects being impressed upon our Brain, must
needs convey to us, by that means, all the Knowledge that we can ever obtain
about them, and that as soon too as ever the Objects are perceived. But than
this, nothing can be more false and absurd: for it is plain, that by our bare
Sensations of Objects, we know nothing at all of their Natures. Our Mind,
indeed, by these Sensations, is vigorously excited to enquire further about
them: but this we could by no means do, if Sense were the highest Faculty and
Power in our Natures, and we were quite devoid of a Reasoning and Thinking
Mind. This, Democritus of old was very well aware of, (however he comes now to
be deserted by the Modern Atheistick Writers,) for says he, (...), etc. Vid.
Sext. Empiric. adv. Mathem. p. 164.
There is in us two kinds of Knowledges; one Dark and Obscure, which is by the
Senses; the other Genuine and Proper, which is by the Mind.

And nothing can be more plain, than that we have certain Knowledge of the
Existence of many things, which never were, nor perhaps can possibly be the
Objects of our Bodily Senses. Protagoras himself says, Sext. Emp.
(...) (...): Take heed that none of the Uninitiated hear you, who are such as
think nothing to Exist, but what they can lay hold of with their Hands; and who
will not allow any thing that is Invisible, to have a place among Beings.

The Epicurean Atheist must needs grant the Existence of his Atoms, and his
Empty Space; when yet they must be both acknowledged to be no way sensible.
Those that hold a Soul or Life in Matter, Plastically diffused through all
Parts of the Universe, by which all things are actuated and regulated, cannot
deny but this Power is Invisible, and no way the Object of Bodily Sense. Nay,
those that assert a Corporeal Deity, and say, that nothing can possibly exist
but Body; must needs own, that something of this Deity, as his Wisdom, Power
and Understanding, which is certainly the Chief and most Noble of all his
Essence, can no ways fall under our Bodily Senses. Let him that asserts, That
what is not the Object of Sense, is really nothing at all; let him tell me, if
he ever saw that Power, Faculty, Understanding or Mind, by which he is enabled
to make such a Determination? That there is such a Power or Mind in him, it is
impossible for him to doubt or deny: for that very doubting and denying, will
refute him; and must convince him, that there must be something in him of a
Real Nature, that can thus Think and Consider, Doubt and Deny; and at last
conclude, That there is nothing Actually Existent, but what is Sensible: For
what is really and absolutely Nothing, can never Think, Consider, Doubt or
Determine.

Now let him call this Mind or Soul of his what he pleases, I do not here
consider its Nature; let it be a Substance distinct from Matter, be it a happy
Combination of Animal Spirits; or the brisk Agitation of any fine and subtle
Parts of Matter, it is all one to our present purpose, it certainly Exists, or
is; and yet is it by no means an Object of Sense. For Animal Spirits, Motion,
and the sinest and subtilest Parts of Matter are no more sensible to us now,
than an Incorporeal Substance is. And as he is thus assured that there is
something real in himself, which yet is the Object of none of his Senses; so he
cannot but conclude the same of other Men that are round about him, that they
also have a Soul or Mind of the same Nature: for he must know and be satisfied,
that they can think, reason, doubt, affirm, deny and determine, as well as
himself. Now, if he must grant that there are on this Account many things
existent in the World, which do no way fall under the cognizance of our Senses,
it will be strangely senseless and ridiculous to argue against the Being of a
God from His not being so; and to deny that there is any such thing, because he
cannot see Him with his Bodily Eyes, because he cannot feel Him with his Hands,
and hear the Sound of his Voice actually speaking from Heaven. For the
Existence of that Divine Being whom no Eye has seen nor can see, is as plainly
demonstrable from Reason and Nature, from his visible Works in the World, and
from the inward Sentiments of our unprejudiced Minds, as the Being of our Own
and Others Minds is from the power of thinking and reasoning that we find in
our selves and them.

3. But Thirdly, it is objected further, Hobb's Leviathan, p. 51.
That we cannot have any Idea of God, and consequently may conclude, There is
no such Being; because he is, by Divines, said to be Incomprehensible and
Infinite: (That is, say they) something which we can know nothing at all about;
for we cannot have any Phantasm or Conception of any such thing. Thus says
that famous Atheistical Writer, Whatever we know, we learn from our Phantasms;
but there is no Phantasm of Infinite, (...). Sext. Empir. adv. Ma^^. p. 17. And
a little after, he asserts, that (...).
and therefore no Knowledge or Conception of it. No Man, says he, can have in
his mind an Image of Infinite Power or Time: And there is no Conception or Idea
of that which we call Infinite. In another place, he asserts, Leviath. p. 11,
190.
That the Attributes of God signify Nothing true nor false, nor any Opinion of
our Brain; and are not sufficient Premises to infer Truth, or convince
Falsehood. And the Name of God (he says) is used, (...) to make us Conceive
him, but that we may Honor him. And he elsewhere says, Leviath. Par. iv. c.
46. p. 374.
That those that venture to discourse Philosophically of the Nature of God, or
to reason of his Nature from his Attributes, losing their Understanding in the
very first attempt, fall from one Inconvenience to another, without end or
number, and do only discover their Astonishment and Rusticity. This Bold Writer
does in another place tell us, Page 190.
That God must not be said to be Finite; and so being neither Finite nor
Infinite, he must be nothing at all: Which is the very same Dilemma that the
Sceptick, Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Mathem. p. 333.
makes use of against a Deity. Another Modern Author of the same stamp, tells
us, That he that calls any thing Infinite, does but, Rei quam non capit
attribuere nomen quod non Intelligit; Give an unintelligible Name to a thing
which he does not understand. All which agrees exactly with what Sextus also
says, in many places of his Book; and whom these Gentlemen follow pretty
closely in most things, without taking any notice at all of him.

Now to this, I return; That as it is very foolish and precarious, to deny the
Existence of a God, because He is not an Object of our Bodily Senses; so, to
conclude, that there is no such Being, from our not being able perfectly to
comprehend Him, and to have a true and adequate Idea of him, is equally absurd
and unaccountable. For at this rate, we may soon come to deny the Existence of
most things in Nature, since there are very many of which we do not adequately
comprehend the Nature of, and know all that is to be known about them. There is
(...), something Incomprehensible in the Nature of all things. Are there not a
thousand Beings, which we are sure are truly and actually existent in Nature,
the manner of whose Operation and Action we cannot comprehend, and whose
Phenomenon we cannot Philosophically explain? Let any of these Penetrating
Gentlemen try their Skill at Gravity, Light, Sound, Magnetism and Electricity,
and oblige the World with such an adequate Account of any one of them, as shall
make all impartial and curious Men acquiesce in it as satisfactory. Let him
clearly show us how his own Sensations are made; how the Circulation of the
Blood first begins, and continues its Vital Tour round his Body; how
Pestilential and Contagious Diseases first invade and are propagated; how
several Medicines, that may be properly enough called Specifick's, operate; and
particularly, how the Cortex Peruvianus cures an Intermitting Fever: In a word,
let him tell us how his own Body (setting aside Accidents) decays, grows old,
and dies, when the same Digestions and Assimulations are made to Day, as were
Yesterday, and there is no apparent defect in the Nutriment of any one part of
it. He that can account for these, and many other such like things, which are
obvious to every one's daily Observation, will certainly approve himself to be
a Man of very curious and acute Thought, and of very deep Insight into Nature:
and when he has fully convinced me, that he thoroughly comprehends the Nature
of but these few things, I will allow that he has some ground to disbelieve
the Existence of whatever appears to him Incomprehensible. But if a Person will
heartily own, as he that has any Knowledge and Modesty must do, That there are
many things in the History of Nature, of which he cannot meet with a
satisfactory Solution and Explication; he has certainly no manner of reason to
disbelieve the Existence of a God, on the same account; and to say, There is no
such Thing, because his Nature is Incomprehensible to our finite and imperfect
Capacities. We cannot, by searching, find out God, nor discover the Almighty
unto perfection, Job xi.7.

But again; There is a vast difference between Apprehending and Comprehending
of a thing; between knowing a thing really to be, and knowing all that is
possible to be known about that thing. We cannot indeed perfectly comprehend
the Nature of God, because we have shallow, limited, finite and imperfect
Capacities and Faculties; and the Deity contains in himself all possible
Perfection. Every one must grant, that it is impossible the lesser should
contain and comprehend the greater, especially too when the Extent and Fullness
of one, Infinitely exceeds the Capacity of the other. From hence therefore to
infer that we can have no Idea nor Knowledge at all of God, is very absurd and
incongruous. It Is a strange Method of Arguing, that I can know nothing at all
of a thing, because I cannot know every particular that belongs to it; and he
would deservedly be esteemed a Madman, that should deny that there is any such
thing as the Sun, because he cannot tell how many Miles he is in Diameter, how
far he is from us, and which way he comes by a supply of Matter to continue his
enlivening Fire and Heat. When some great and advantageous Revolution is
brought about in any Nation; when the Public Good is secured, the Laws and
Liberties preserved, and Confusion, Bloodshed, and Misery of all Kinds,
prevented, by the wise and deep Council and Conduct of Him, or Those that are
at the Helm of Affairs: Would it not be gross Stupidity, for a Man to assert,
That all this came about by Chance, and that there was no Wisdom nor Conduct,
that so opportunely managed all things; only because he cannot penetrate into
all the secret Steps and Methods of it, and see all the hidden Springs, by
which it was moved regularly on to its intended Perfection? There are many
things whose Existence 'twould be ridiculous to doubt of, whose Nature and
Qualities we are very far from being able perfectly to Comprehend and Explain.
And amongst the rest, there is nothing but our own Existence, that we can be
more assured of, than that there is a God. For as to all Objects of Sense, we
may, as Monsieur Des Carts shows, have some reason to doubt of their actual
Existence without us, till we are first satisfied that our Senses do not
deceive us: Till we know this, for any thing we can demonstratively prove to
the contrary, all sensible Objects may be mere Phantasms and Delusions, and
nothing but the internal Configurations of our own Brains, and the result of
Imagination and Fancy. But when once we are assured that there is a God, who is
perfectly Knowing, Wise, and Good, we shall discover that He can be no
Deceiver; we shall find that it is not suitable to the Idea we have of Him, that
He should delude and cheat us with false Appearances; and consequently we may
well conclude, that he has appointed our Senses to be proper Judges of their
own Objects, and that those Things are actually existing without us, whose
Idea's we so plainly perceive in our selves, and which we truly judge to be so.

And if we will impartially consult our own Thoughts, and reason clearly from
those Idea's that we have within us; I think, we may most demonstratively be
assured of the Existence of a God, and that He is such a most Perfect or
Infinite Being, as the Sacred Scriptures and Divines describe Him to be. I will
allow that the greatest Certainty that we can have of the Existence of any
thing, is of our own Being; of which, as I have already said, no one can
possibly doubt: for whatsoever can Think reason, doubt, will, and determine,
must needs be Something, and have a true and real Being. And because we find by
this means, that there is certainly something actually existing; it will
plainly follow, that something or other must always have been so: for if ever
there was a time when there was Nothing, there never could have been any thing
at all: for absolute Nothing could never have done, or produced any thing.
Something therefore ('it is plain) must have been always, or eternally existing,
and which never could have had any beginning. For if it ever had any beginning,
though never so many Thousands of Millions of Ages ago, it must have then began
from mere Nothing, which it is impossible for any Man to conceive. Now, if we
consider our selves, or any things else that are round about us in the world;
we shall plainly find, that neither we nor they, can be this thing that always
was existent, and which we have discovered must have been without beginning;
for we know well enough, that it was but a little while ago when we began to
be, and that it is but a short space before we shall die, and cease to be in
this World any more. Besides, we find in our selves, and discover in things
without us, such Defects, Limitations and Imperfections, as sufficiently must
convince us, that neither we nor they can be Independent Beings, nor indeed the
Cause of one another's Existence. We must therefore in our Thoughts have
recourse to some first Cause or Origin, from whence all things do proceed: And
that there must be some first Cause, or some Being, which produced both our
selves and the things that are round about us in the World, we cannot but be
assured of, for we know, nothing can cause, or make it self to be; and we see
that we cannot make or produce each other; and we perceive that none of our
Forms or Modes of Existence are Indestructible and Eternal; but that all things
are continually slitting and changing: some improving and increasing, while
others are decreasing and dying. The common Matter, indeed, of all Bodies will
remain, and we do not find it to be perishable, as their forms are; But then,
this we may easily know cannot be the first Cause of all other Things; since we
have no Idea of its being an Active, Intelligent, Wise, and Powerful Being, as
that must be; but the Notion we have of it is, that it is (...), purely
Passive, and obsequiously Capable of all variety of Forms and Motions; as I
shall hereafter more largely show. If we farther carefully consider of this
Being, that we have thus found must have eternally been or existed; we shall
find also, that it must for ever continue to be for the time to come; for we
cannot imagine, how a Being that has Eternally existed for the time past,
should ever terminate or cease to be for the time to come; since there is
nothing in its self, or in any thing without it, that can possibly be the Cause
of its Destruction. Such a Being therefore will be properly Eternal, and
necessarily Self-existent, without Beginning or End, or any Possibility of
Dying or Ceasing to be. Such a Being also, must on this Account, be the
Creator, Author, and Cause of all things: because, nothing can be the Cause of
it self; and therefore they must either be Eternal and Necessarily Self
existent, as we are assured they are not; or else derived from, and produced by
this Eternal and Infinite Being. And as the Beings themselves are derived from,
and produced by this Eternal and Self existent Being, so must all their
Perfections and Qualifications too: for they are indeed the most Noble Things
in their Natures. Knowledge therefore, and Wisdom, Thought and Reasoning, and
all the excellent Powers and Faculties that are found in any Creatures, must
come from the same Power that produced those Beings and Natures in which they
are inherent. And if these Excellencies and Perfections are derived from this
Necessarily existent Being, they must certainly be in Him in the greatest
Perfection: for if they were not in Him, they could not be derived from him;
since it is unconceivable that any thing can give or communicate to another,
either what it has not it self, or a greater degree of any thing than it is
Master of. This Eternal and Self-existent Being therefore must have in it, and
that in the utmost Perfection, all the Excellencies that we admire and value in
any other things. It must have the Power of doing all things that are possible
to be done, and therefore be Almighty; it must know all things that are
possible to be known, and therefore be Omniscient: In a word, it must be
All-Wise and Good, Just and True, Merciful and Gracious, and contain in it all
possible Excellencies and Perfections. Now this may very well pass for a
Description of the Deity; and it is such an One as is very Intelligible and
Plain to the meanest Capacity that can but think at all. And it gives us such
an Idea of God, as we see is easily attainable by an obvious and familiar Chain
of Consequences, and which puts our Minds not at all on the wrack to conceive.
As for the word Infinite, which is often applied to God, and which these
Gentlemen quarrel so much at, and of which they affirm, that it is impossible
to have any Conception or Idea; I say, that it is groundlessly and precariously
asserted: and that nothing but the wilful Darkness and Confusion which they
have brought upon their own Minds can make it appear Unintelligible. For as the
Excellent Dr. Cudworth has proved the Idea that we have of Infinite, is the
same with that which we have of Perfection. And therefore when we say, that God
is Infinite in Power, Wisdom or Goodness, we mean by it, that He is most
perfectly or completely so; and that he wants nothing which is necessary to
render Him most Perfect, and Excellent in that Respect of which we speak of
Him. Now a Being that any way is Deficient or Imperfect, and that has not all
the possible Excellencies that are to be had, is Finite, and that in the same
proportion as it is defective. Thus, for Instance, those Beings which endure
but for a time, which had a Beginning, and will have an end, are finite or
imperfect, as to their existence: But GOD, who is, was, and is to come, who is
and will be from Everlasting to Everlasting, He is properly said to be Infinite
(...). Sext. Empir. adv. Math. page 150.
or Perfect, as to Existence or Duration. For there is no Restriction,
Limitation or Imperfection in His Nature, in this respect, as there is in that
of all Creatures whatever. A Being whose Power extends to but a few things, is
very imperfect or finite in Power; and if there be any Possible thing that it
cannot do, it is still so far imperfect in Power. But a Being that can do all
things that are not contradictory to his Nature, or all possible things, is
properly said to be Infinite or Perfect in Power, or Almighty; so a Being that
knows all things possible to be known, is Infinite or Perfect in Knowledge: and
the like of any other Attributes or Perfections: In all, the Comparison or
Proportion is the same. A Being that wants no degree of Excellency or
Perfection is God; Infinite in Power, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness and Truth. But
if a Being want any one, or any degree or proportion of These Things, it is
Finite and Imperfect, and that in the same degree or Proportion. Now, where is
the Inconceivableness, Confusion, Absurdity, and Nonsense of all This? is it
not as easy to conceive or apprehend that a Being may have in his Nature all
possible Perfection, as it is to have an Idea of one that is Imperfect and
Deficient? for how comes the Idea of Imperfection into our Mind? how come we to
know that a Thing is Finite, Defective and Limited, unless we have also an Idea
or Notion of Infinity or Perfection? how can we know what is wanting in any
Being, unless we have an Idea of it, that it is in some other Being? Most
certain therefore it is, that we may have as true and clear an Idea of the
Existence of a God, as of any thing in Nature: Vid. Mr. Lock's Essay of
Understanding. P. IV. Chapter X.
and in Fact it is most notoriously true, that a clear and distinct Notion that
there is such a Being, has and does still appear in the Minds of all Mankind;
and it is impressed there, I doubt not, by the peculiar Care of that Divine and
Merciful Being Himself.

And therefore those that assert, that we have not, nor can have any Notion or
Idea of a God, nor of his Attributes and Perfections, and that on that Account
deny his Existence; discover such wretched Ignorance as well as Obstinacy, that
they are really a Disgrace to Humane Nature. For pretending to be over-Wise,
they become Fools, they are vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart
is darkened; Their vicious Inclinations have debauched their Reason and
Understanding: And though God be not far from every one of us, since in Him we
live, move, and have our being; yet their Wickedness and Pride is such, That
they will not seek after God, neither is God in all their Thoughts. From which
wilful Blindness and Stupidity, may the God of Truth deliver them, by the
gracious Illuminations of his Blessed Spirit; To whom, with our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, be all Honor and Glory, etc.

FINIS.
Books printed for Rich. Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MR. Harris's Sermon, Preached at the Cathedral-Church of St. Paul, January the
3d. 1697/8. being the First of the Lecture for that Year, Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire.

-- His Remarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to
the Natural History of the Earth. In Octavo.

Dr. Woodward's Natural History of the Earth, in Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Truth of the Christian Religion, against the
Objections of all Modern Opposers; in Two Volumes. In Octavo.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, for the Advancement of their true and
greatest Interest; Part I. By a Lover of her Sex. The Third Edition. In Twelves.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies; Part II. Wherein a Method is offered for the
Improvement of their Minds. In Twelves.

Letters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies and Mr. John Norris. In Octavo.

An Answer to W. P. his Key about the Quakers Light within, and Oaths; with an
Appendix of the Sacraments. In Octavo.

A Letter to the Honorable Sir Robert Howard: Together with some
Animadversions on a Book, entitled, Christianity not Mysterious. In Octavo.

The Notion of a GOD, Neither from FEAR nor POLICY.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, March the 7th. 1697/8.

BEING The Third of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

PSALM x.4. The Wicked, through the Pride of his Countenance, will not seek
after God: neither is God in all his Thoughts.


IN my last Discourse on these words, I came to consider the Third Particular I
had before observed in them; which was, The great Charge the Psalmist brings
against the Wicked and Proud Person here spoken of, viz. Wilful Atheism and
Infidelity. He will not seek after God: and all his thoughts are, There is no
God. Under which I proposed to Consider and Refute the Atheist's Objections,
against the Being of a God in general. And these I found might be reduced to
these Two Heads: I. That we can have no Idea of God.

II. That the Notion of Him, which is about in the World, owes its Original to
the foolish Fears and Ignorance of some Men, and to the crafty Designs of
others.



The former of these I have already refuted, and showed that it is Groundless
and Precarious in all its Parts.

I shall now therefore consider the Second Objection against the Being of a God
in general, viz. That the Notion of a Deity, which is so generally found among
Mankind, owes its Original to the foolish Fears and Ignorance of some Men, and
to the designing and crafty Figments of others.

And here I shall first give you the Sense of these kind of Writers on this
Point: And then endeavor to show you, how very weak and trivial their
Arguments are, and how very far short they come of Disproving the Existence of
a Deity.

And first I shall give you the full sense of this Objection, from the words of
those that bring it; beginning with the Modern Writers, who, as you will find
by and by, have little or nothing new, but like Carriers Horses, follow one
another in a Track, and because the first went wrong, all the rest will succeed
him in the same Error; not considering, that he who comes behind, may take an
advantage to avoid that Pit, which those that went before, are fallen into. (as
it is in the words of the Translator of Blount's Life of Apollon. p. 19.
Philostratus.)

But here it must be premised, That since these kind of Men do frequently
disguise their true meaning; It is not the bare Words only, but the Scope of a
Writer, that gives the true Light by which any Writing is to be interpreted,
(as Mr. Hobbs Leviath. p. 338.
very well observes:) yet this must be said for both him and the other Modern
Atheistick Writers, That their Disguise is so very thin and superficial, that
any one may easily see through it, and discover their true Meaning and Design.
Nothing can be clearer, than that it is the great scope of the Author of Great
is Diana of the Ephesians, to persuade the World, That the first Original of
all Religion, was from Craft and Imposture, and that it was cultivated and
carried on by the Cunning and Avarice of the Priests. And in his Anima Mundi,
page 13, 14. he tells us, That Superstition (by which these kind of Writers
always mean Religion in general) did certainly proceed from some Crafty and
Designing Person, who observed what were the Inclinations of Mankind, and so
adapted his Fictions accordingly: He pretended to have some extraordinary way
revealed to him, from an Invisible Power, whereby he was able to instruct the
People; and to put them into a way of being happy in a Future State. And in
another place, he says, Life of Apollon. p. 3.
That Mankind being ill-natured, and unapt to oblige others without Reward, as
also judging of God Almighty by themselves, did at first conceive the Gods to
be like their Eastern Princes, before whom no Man might come empty-handed; and
thus came the Original of Sacrifices: And this Institution, he says, was
improved by the crafty Sacerdotal Order, into all that costly and extravagant
Superstition that did afterward so abound in the World. Now in this passage,
it is plain, that he makes all the Jewish Religion to be nothing but
Priestcraft and Imposture; though on wretched poor grounds, as I shall hereafter
sufficiently make appear. And his Opinion of the Christian Religion, may easily
be guessed, by what he delivers, Anim. Mund. page 124. viz. That most Christian
Churches, like the Musk-melon from the Dunghill, were raised from the filthy
Corruption and Superstition of Paganism. And in another place, he says,
Oracles of Reason, p. 158.
That he will engage to make appear, That a Temporal Interest was the great
Machine on which all Humane Actions ever moved; (he means, in the Establishing
of the Jewish and Christian Religions;) and that the common Pretense of Piety
and Religion, was but like Grace before a Meal: i. e. according to him, nothing
but a mere customary piece of Folly that signifies nothing at all, and which he
frequently ridicules and exposes Blount's Life of Apollon. in the Preface, and
p. 24.
.

Now all this, though not in plain and express words, yet in the most obvious
sense and meaning, is equally applicable to the Notion of a God; and no doubt
was so intended by the Author. And, indeed, take away Religion and the Notion
of a God must of course follow: For it is impossible to think that if there be a
God, he should not expect Veneration and Worship from those Creatures of his,
that he has rendered capable of doing it; which therefore is their reasonable
Service, Romans 12.1.

After the same manner does Spinoza declare himself as to the Origin of
Religion; which he also calls by the Name of Superstition. Causa, a qua
Superstitio oritur, conservatur and fovetur, metus est. Tract. Theol. Polit. in
Praef.
He tells us, That the true Cause from whence Superstition took its rise, is
preserved and maintained, is Fear. Si Homines res omnes suas certo consilio
regere possent, vel si fortuna ipsis prospera semper foret; nulla superstitione
tenerentur: sed quoniam eo saepe angustiarum rediguntur ut consilium nullum ad
far queant, inter spem metumque misere fluctuant, ideo animum ut plurimum, ad
quidvis credendum pronissimum habent. Ibid.
That if all things would but succeed according to Men's Minds, they would never
be enslaved by Superstition: But because they are often in great streights, and
so put to it, that no Counsel or Help will be beneficial to them, they are
tossed and bandied about between Hope and Fear, and at last have their Mind so
debilitated, that they are prone to believe any thing. Ea omnia quae Homines
unquam vana Religione colucrun^, nihil praeter Phantasmata, animique tristis
and timidi fuisse deliria. Ibid.
But that in reality all those things which have been the Objects of Men's vain
Religious Worship, are nothing but the dreadful Phantasms and mad Figments of a
sorrowful and timorous Mind. Ex hac itaque Superstitionis Causa (sc. metu)
clare sequitur omnes homines natura superstitioni esse obnoxios: quicquid
dicant alii, qui putant hoc inde oriri, quod omnes mortales confusam quandam
Numinis Idaeam habent. Ibid.
And the reason (he says) why all Men are thus subject by Nature to
Superstition, is only from Fear; and not as some have fansied, from any
confused Idea of a God, which they will have to be impressed on all Mankind.

The Author of the Leviathan, speaks yet a little plainer as to this Point;
Leviath. p. 51.
Ignorant Men (says he) feign to themselves several kinds of Invisible Powers,
stand in awe of their own Imaginations, in time of Distress invoke them, in
time of Success give them thanks, making the Creatures of their own fancy Gods.
This is the Natural Seed of Religion, which Men taking notice of, have formed
into Laws, etc.

And he tells us in another place, Leviath. p. 26. 51.
That Fear of Power invisible feigned by the Mind, or imagined from Tales
publicly allowed is Religion, not allowed, is Superstition. So that according
to Mr. Hobbs, Religion and Superstition differ only in this, that the latter is
a Lie and a Cheat standing only on the Authority of Private Men, whereas the
former is supported by the Power of the Government. In these Four Things, says
he, elsewhere, Leviath. p. 54.
consists the Natural Seed of Religion, viz. Ignorance of Second Causes,
Opinion of Ghosts, Devotion toward what Men Fear, and taking things casual for
Prognostics. These are the Accounts which our Modern Atheistical Writers give
of the Origin of Religion, and the Notion of a God among Men. And this they,
with great assurance, put off as their own new Invention; without being so just
as to mention any of the Ancients, from whom they have borrowed every Article
of it. That trite Passage every Body knows Primus in orb Deos fecit timor; and
Lucretius mentions Fear and the Ignorance of Second Causes, as that which gave
the first rise to the Notion of a God: For, says he, Caetera, quae fieri in
Terris Coeloque tuentur Mortales, pavidis cum pendent mentibu' saepe Efficient
Animos humiles formidine Divum, Depressosque premunt ad Terram, propterea quod
Ignorantia Causarum confer Deorum Cogit ad Imperium Res, and concedere
Regnum: Et Quorum operum causas nulla ratione videre Possunt, haec fieri Divino
numine rentur.
When Men with fearful Minds behold the things in the Earth and Heavens, they
become abject and depressed under the fear of the Gods; Lib. 6. v. 49.
whose Empire Ignorance of Causes sets up in the World: for when Men cannot see
any natural Reason for any Effect, they strait fancy it is the Product of some
Divine Power. The very same thing he says also in another place, Lib. 5. v.
1160. Nunc quae causa Deum, etc.
where he attributes likewise the Notion of Ghosts, and consequently of the
Gods interfering with the Affairs of the World, to Men's not being able to
distinguish Dreams from Real Appearances. Tully tells us, That there were some
in his time, and no doubt, long before, who attributed the Opinion and Belief
of the Gods to have been feigned by Wise Men for the good of the Commonwealth.
Ii qui dixerunt totam de Diis immortalibus opinionem fictam esse ab hominibus
sapientibus Reipublicae causa.
And Plato acquaints us, (...). Plato de Legib. lib. 10.
That the ancient Atheists did affirm, that the Gods were not by Nature, but by
Art and Laws only, and so were different in different places, according as the
different humor of the Law givers chanced to determine the Matter. Sextus
Empiricus says, That there were at first some Intelligent and Prudent Men
(...). Sext. Emp. adv. Math. p. 310.
who considered what would be beneficial to Humane Life; and these first
feigned the fabulous Notion of Gods, and caused that Suspicion that there is in
Men's Minds about them. Afterward he says, That heretofore Men lived wild and
savage, and preyed upon one another like wild Beasts; till some Men being
willing to prevent and repress Injuries and Rapine, invented Laws to punish
those that did amiss: And then they feigned, that there were Gods also, who
took cognizance of all Men's Actions, whether good or bad; that so no one might
dare to commit any secret Wickedness, when he was by this means persuaded, (...)
(...)
That the Gods, though unseen by Men, did yet inspect into all Humane Actions,
and take notice who did well, and who the contrary. Sextus also attributes the
Rise of Men's Belief of a God, to their ignorance of Second Causes, (as I showed
you before that Lucretius does:) for he makes Democritus speak thus, (...).
When Men of old saw strange and frightful things in the Air or Heavens, such
as Thunder, Lightning, Thunderbolts, Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, etc. not
knowing the Natural Causes of them, but being terrified by them, they strait
imagined the Gods to be the Authors of them. This therefore being proved to be
the true sense of the Ancient Atheistical Writers, and from them copied by the
Moderns, viz. That Fear, Ignorance and Cunning were the first Originals or
Causes of the Notion and Belief of a God. Let us now fairly examine the Case,
and see what ground there is for such an Assertion; and whether this can
account for that Universal Notion of a Divine and Omnipotent Being, which we
find every where in the World. And,

1. I say, That the Notion of a GOD, could not come from Fear; for if it did,
either this Fear must be universally inherent in all Mankind, or else peculiar
only to some Dastardly and Low-spirited Mortals. If the former be asserted,
it is a very convincing Argument, that there is a just ground for such a Fear;
and that it has something that is Real for its Object, that can thus affect
all Men, after the same manner. And if it be so, that all Men are naturally
subject to this Fear of a Deity; how could any one ever discover, that there
was no real ground for this, in the nature of the thing? how came he himself
exempted from this poorness of Spirit? And if he were not exempted from this
terrible Passion, how came he to discover, that the Object of this Fear is all
a Cheat, and nothing but a mere Mormo and Bugbear? 'Twas very lucky for him,
that the rambling Atoms of his Constitution jumpt by chance into such a
courageous and noble Frame and Temper! But pray who was this mighty Man? when
and where did he live? what Ancient History gives us any Account of this happy
Person, that laughed at that which all the World besides were afraid of? Let
the Atheists give us but any Relation of him, that is Authentic, and it shall
be allowed as the greatest thing they have ever yet advanced. But I suppose
they will not say that this Fear is Universal; but that it only possesses mean
and abject Spirits, and never invades the Great and Brave Soul. Let us see
whether this will do them any service. Now by Brave and Great Souls, who do
they mean? Do they intend by them, such as have Power, Command and Empire over
others? Nothing is more certain, than that Kings and Princes have been equally
subject to these Fears of a God, and of Divine Punishment, with the meanest and
most contemptible of their Subjects. And this Praeterea, cui non animus
formidine Divum Contrahitur? cui non conrepunt membra pavore Fulminis horribili
cum plaga torrida tellus Contremit, and magnum percurrunt murmura Coelum? Non
Populi Gentesque tremunt? Regesque superbi Conripiunt Divum perculsa membra
timore Ne quod ob admissum foede, dictumque superbe Poenarum grave sit solvendi
tempus adactum?
Lucretius himself owns, (as also that this Fear of a Deity is Universal) and
we have Examples of it in the Histories of all Ages and Parts of the World.
Lucret. l. 5. v. 1217.
But they will say, it is like, that by Brave and Great Souls, they don't mean
Kings and Princes, but the Wise, Knowing, and Learned part of Mankind: These
were they that first discovered this Cheat, and who, finding its Advantage to
Mankind, have ever since continued it and carried it on for the Public Good.
These Cunning Men finding the Vulgar generally subject to dismal Apprehensions
and Fears of they knew not what kind of Invisible Powers, took advantage from
thence to tell them of a God, and to form the product of their Fears into the
Notion of a Deity. Now to this I say, That if these cunning Politicians found
that there was a Fear, Dread and Apprehension of some Divine and Almighty
Being, Universally impressed upon the Minds of Men, as no doubt but there is;
this, I say, is a very convincing Argument that such a Belief has a good
Foundation in the Nature of the thing, and consequently has Truth at the
bottom. And therefore it is plain, that these Men did not Invent, but find this
Notion and Belief actually Existing, by a kind of Anticipation in the Hearts of
all Mankind. And that they could not possibly invent it, had there been no
Ground nor Reason for such a Belief, I shall plainly prove by and by.

But again; That the Notion of a God, did not arise only from Fear, is plain
from hence; That Mankind has gotten an Idea of Him, that could never proceed
only from that Passion. If Fear only were to make a God, it would compose him
of nothing but black and terrible Idea's: it would represent Him to be (...),
all envious and spiteful; a grim, angry and vindicative Being; one that
delights in nothing but to exercise his Tyrannical Power and Cruelty upon
Mankind: we should then believe him to be such a Power as the Indians do their
Evil God, and we do the Devil; a mischievous and bloody Deity, that is the
Author of nothing but Evil and Misery in the World: for these must be the
dreadful Attributes of a Being which Fear only would create and set up in our
Hearts.

But now, instead of this, we find a quite different Notion of God in the
World. We justly believe Him to be a most Kind, Loving and Gracious Being, and
whose mercies are over all his works. We are taught by the Scriptures, those
Sacred Volumes of his Will, to believe that He at first Created the World, and
all things that are therein, to display his Goodness and Kindness to his
Creatures: That he wills not, nor delights in the death of a sinner, nor in the
evil and misery of any thing; but that He has by most admirable methods of
Divine Love, provided for our Happiness both here and hereafter. Now such an
Account as this of the Deity, could never take its Rise from Fear only: And
therefore since it cannot be denied but that we have such a Notion of God, it
must have some more Noble and Generous an Original. We find, indeed, in our
selves a just Fear and Dread of Offending so Good and Gracious a God; and we
believe it suitable to his Justice, to punish those that will pertinaciously
continue in a state of Rebellion against Him, after having refused and slighted
the repeated Overtures of his Mercy. But then we know very well, That the
Notion we have of a Deity, is not occasioned by, and derived from this Fear;
but, on the contrary, this Fear from it. It Is the Natural Consequence and
Effect of the Belief and Knowledge of a God, but it cannot be the Cause and
Original of it. For Fear alone can never dispose the Mind of Man to imagine a
Being that is infinitely Kind, Merciful and Gracious. The Atheist therefore
must here taken in Hope too, as well as Fear, as a joint Cause of his pretended
Origin of the Belief of a God; and say, That Mankind came to imagine that there
was some Powerful and Invisible Being, which they hoped would do them as much
good, as they were afraid it would do them hurt Vid. Archbishop Tillotson's
First Sermon, p. 47.
. But these two contrary Idea's, like Equal Quantities in an Equation with
contrary Signs, will destroy one another, and consequently the Remainder will
be nothing. And therefore the Mind of Man must lay aside such an Idea of God,
as soon as he has well considered it, for it will signify just nothing at all.

Another very good Argument, That the Notion of a God, did not take its first
Original from Fear only, may be drawn from hence, That those that do believe
and know most of God, are the least Subject to that servile Passion. If Fear
only occasioned Men's Notion and Belief of a God, the consequence must be, that
where the Notion of a Deity is most strong and vivid, there Men must be most
timorous and apprehensive of Danger; there the greatest distrust, suspicion,
and anxious sollicitousness about the Events of Futurity would be always found.
But this is so far from being true in Fact, that no one is so free from those
Melancholy and Dreadful Thoughts and Apprehensions, as he that truly believes
in, and Fears God. For he can find always in Him Almighty Defense and
Protection; he can cast all his care on God who he knows cares for him: When
all the treacherous Comforts of this World leave him, and when nothing but a
gloomy Scene of Affliction, Distress and Misery presents its self here; yea,
even when Heart it self and Strength begin to fail, God will be (he knows) the
Strength of his Heart and his Portion for ever; and even in the vast Multitude
of his Afflictions, God's Comforts will refresh his Soul.

But it is far otherwise with the miserable Wretch that has no Belief of, nor
any Knowledge of God; if he fall into Affliction, Trouble, or Misery, he has
nothing to support him: He is the most abject and dispirited of all Mankind,
his whole head is sick, and his heart is faint, and his Spirit cannot sustain
his Infirmity; for he has not only no Power and Ability to bear the present
load of Misery, but he expects yet much worse to come; and notwithstanding all
his former Incredulity and Bravery, he now, as the Devil himself does, believes
and trembles. And therefore, though as Plutarch observes, (...), it be the
chief Design of Atheism to give Men an Exemption from Fear; yet it is a very
foolish one, and falls very far short of answering its End: for it deserts and
fails its Votaries in their greatest Extremities and Necessities, and by
depriving them of all just Grounds for hope, must needs expose them to the most
dismal Invasions of Fear. And thus, I think, it is very plain, That the Notion
of a God could not take its first Original from Fear. As to the Ignorance of
Second Causes, which is sometimes alleged as another Occasion of the Notion of
a Deity; the Modern Atheists do not much insist upon it, and therefore I need
not do so in its Refutation. I have showed already whence they had it; and I
think it sufficient to observe here, that there are no Men so Ignorant of
Second Causes, nor any that give so poor and trifling Accounts of the
Phenomenon of Nature as these Atheistical Philosophers do. And therefore
Ignorance ought rather to be reckoned among the Causes of Atheism and
Infidelity, than of the Idea of God and Religion; for I am very well assured
that a through insight into the Works of Nature, and a serious Contemplation of
that admirable Wisdom, excellent Order, and that useful Aptitude and Relation
that the several Parts of the World have to each other, must needs convince any
one, that they are the Products of a Divine and Almighty Power. The Invisible
things of God may be understood by the things that are made, and his Eternal
Power and Godhead discovered by this means Romans 1.20.
; as has been excellently demonstrated by the learned Dr. Cudworth, Dr.
Bentley, Mr. Ray, and many others. And these kind of Gentlemen have betrayed
their shallow and superficial Knowledge of things, by nothing more, than by
pretending to give an Account of the Original of the World, the Motion of the
Heavenly Bodies, of Gravity, and several other Phenomenon of Nature, without
having recourse to a Deity; as I shall hereafter more particularly observe. But
I now hasten to Refute that which they make their Great and most Common
Objection against the Being of a God; And to show,

2. That the Notion of a God did not, nor could not, arise from Cunning and
Contrivance; and that it was not invented by any Crafty and Politic Person.

Though that it did do so, is the constant Assertion of these Gentlemen; and
they do it with as much assurance, as if it were a Self-evident Proposition. In
all Companies they will nauseously tire you with this Battology, over and over
again. That All Religion is a Cheat, and the greatest Cheat of all is Religion.
But this themselves have happily discovered; and therefore they Scorn to be
imposed upon by Priestcraft; they will neither be ridden by Priests, nor lead
by them; they can go without Leading-strings; and will not be put to the Temporal
Charge of a Spiritual Guide: and they have quitted the Thoughts of going to
Heaven by the same means as they go to the Playhouse, (i. e.) by giving Money
to the Doorkeepers. As the Translator of Philostratus insolently expresses it.
Blount's Life of Apollon. in the Preface.
Now after all this bold and repeated Exclamation against Priestcraft and Holy
Shams, etc. Would not one think that they had some demonstrative Ground, to
prove that the Notion of God, and Religion is all a Cheat and Imposture? Would
not one suppose that they could name the very Person that first Invented this
Fourbe; tell us when, and where he lived, and plainly prove by what means he
came to impose so grossly on Mankind, and how they came to be such Fools as to
take it, and dully to submit to it ever since? Nothing sure, that is less than
a direct Demonstration, ought to protect a Man under so rude a Liberty as these
Gentlemen take, of ridiculing all the Sacred Laws of God and Men. But have they
any such Proof ready? or have they ever yet produced it? No, nor is it possible
they ever should; as appears plainly from the Ancient Histories of all Nations
in the World. In no one of these do we ever find the least mention made of any
one that Invented the Notion of a God. 'Twas a Thing taken for Granted by all
the Ancient Lawgivers, that there was a God: This they never went about to
prove; nor had they any need so to do, or to feign it, for they found it
universally and naturally stamped upon the Minds of Mankind. This Moses himself
does not so much as attempt to teach the Jews, as knowing very well that it was
what they had a general Notion and Idea of before. And Homer speaks every where
of the Gods, as of Beings universally known and believed, and never goes about
to prove their Existence. The same thing appears in Hesiod, and in the
Fragments that we have of all the Ancient Greek Poets. And though it be not
true in Fact, yet it is a good Argument ad Hominem against the Atheists, that
Lucretius pretends to tell you when Atheism began, and who was the first Bold
Man that disputed and denied the Being of a God. This, he says, was Epicurus.
Primum Graius homo mortales tollere contra Est oculos ausus, primusque
obsistere contra: Quem nec fama Deum, nec sulmina nec minitanti Murmr
compressit Coelum. -- Lib. 1. v. 67.
But he cannot deny but that in so doing, Epicurus contradicted the common
Sentiments of all Mankind, and broke through those Fears and Obligations that
the generality of Men were under to a Divine Power. But to Refute a little more
Methodically this trite Objection. I say, that the Notion of a God could not
derive its Original from the cunning Invention of any Politic Person, for
these Reasons:

1. Because the pretended Inventor himself could never possibly have come by
such a Notion, had there been no such Being as a God. Sextus Empiricus observes
very well, That though -- (...).

Adv. Math. p. 314.
it is pretended that Lawgivers and Politicians invented the Notion of a God;
yet the Asserters of it are not aware of an Absurdity that arises thence: for
if it should be asked, how they themselves came by such a Notion? they must be
at a loss; they will not say they had it from others, nor can they account how
they came by it; and therefore it must have been from the beginning; and so all
Men must have a Notion of God, though not all after the same way. And, indeed,
it is not possible to imagine that such a Notion could ever have come into any
one's Head, had there been no such Being as a Deity. Were he an absolute
Nonentity, and really Nothing at all, it is unconceivable how any one could
ever attain an Idea of God, or have coined any word that should so have
expressed that Idea, as to render it intelligible to any one else. The Mind of
Man cannot invent, or make any new simple Idea or Cogitation; it cannot
possibly make a Positive Conception of that which is really nothing at all.
Which way soever we come by our Idea's, we cannot have one of what is
absolutely a Nonentity; for what is absolutely Nothing, can neither come into
us by our Senses, nor be innate in our Minds. And therefore if there were no
God, we could never have had any Idea of Him; nor could any one ever possibly
invent, or frame such a Notion in his Mind. I know the compounding, ampliating
and feigning Power of the Mind will here be alleged; and it will be said that
we may by that means frame Notions of things which perhaps did never, nor ever
will Exist: Thus we may gain the Notion of a Flying Horse, of a Creature, half
a Man and half a Horse, a Man of a Thousand Foot high, etc. and therefore say
they, Sext. Empiric. Adv. Mathem. p. 316, 317.
why might not the Mind of Man, by this compounding and ampliating Power, feign
as well the Notion of a Deity? To which I answer, That this Power in our Minds
does not, nor cannot extend so far. All that we can do by it, is to connect
together two or more possible and consistent Idea's, or to Ampliate or Enlarge
any one or more of them, in point of Time, Extent, etc. Thus, as was before
said, by connecting the Idea's of Wings and a Horse, or of a Horse and a Man,
we may feign a Pegasus or a Centaure; and I can imagine either of these
Creatures, or any other, to live Five Thousand times as long, or to be Fifty
thousand times as big, as is usual. But all this is still short of what it is
brought for, and will give no account at all of the Invention of the Idea of a
God. For suppose the Mind would endeavor to amplify the Idea of a Man into
that of God, which is the Way Sextus Empiricus says Men might and did come by
the Notion of a Deity. Vbi supra.
First, he says, the Mind can give him Eternity of Duration: But how came it
by that Idea of Eternity? was that Idea previous to the Invention of a Deity?
and had Mankind a clear Conception of it? if they had, the Notion of God could
not be then invented, for one of his chiefest Attributes was known before. But
I suppose they will say that the Notion of Eternity was gained by Ampliating
the Idea of Duration or Time beyond the common and ordinary Term: And thus by
imagining a Man to live a Thousand or Ten Thousand Years, I may come to frame
the Notion of a Being that should always exist. But that is a gross Mistake;
for a Being that should endure Ten Thousand, or Ten Millions of Years, is not
therefore exempt from dying at last, any more than one that endures but Ten
Minutes. Had I not in my Mind before a clear Idea of Eternity, I could no more
by this Ampliating Power gain a Notion of an Eternal Being, than I could
believe my self to be Eternal; for every thing about me would contradict that
Notion; and it is very strange that I should come to believe any Being could
have an Eternal Duration from considering of things that are all perishable and
mortal.

That which leads Men into this mistake, is, I suppose this: We have all of us
a Notion of a Being, Perfect or Eternal, as to his Duration, because there is
such a Being in Reality: And therefore, whenever we go about to consider of
Time, or of the Period or Term of the Duration of a Being, we can ampliate it
so, as to suppose it shall never cease to be, but have its Being still
continued on without end: That is, we can connect the Idea that we have of
Eternity with a Being, and so render it Eternal. But this could never be done,
if there were no Idea of Eternity at all, if there were nothing Eternal, if
there were no God. The case is the same as to all the other Perfections of the
Divine Nature. We have clear Idea's and Notions of them in our Minds; and
therefore we can talk about them, and be understood: because there are real
Idea's that answer to those words that we use; and something really existing,
that answers to those Idea's. But were there no such Being, nor any thing Real
in Nature, to deduce our Idea's from, were there no God, it is impossible there
could be any such Idea's at all.

But however, this Assertion, That the Mind of Man was able to Invent the
Notion of a Deity, and communicate it to the World, is a most flat and palpable
Contradiction to what the Atheist at other times urges, and that too, as
founded on Principles that he is very fond of. In my last Discourse, I showed
you, That he objected against the Being of a God, from our not being able to
have any Idea of Him; and this he endeavors to support, by asserting also,
That we have no Knowledge but Sense, and that all our Conceptions are Passive.
Now both these are absolutely inconsistent with the Original that he is now
attributing to the Notion of a God. For if it be true, as he says it is, That
we can have no Idea of God; it is very strange to suppose, that a Politic Man
should Invent, and the World Receive the Idea or Notion of That which it is
impossible for any one to invent, or receive. It Is a little odd, that a Man
should first cunningly devise he knew not what, and then the affrighted World
believe they knew not what; and that we should prove and assert, and the
Atheist ridicule and deny the Existence of That which we do none of us all know
any thing about! But so it must be, according to the Atheist's Uniform Scheme
of Things.

Again, If, as he asserts, all our Conceptions be Passive, and all our
Knowledge, Sense: which way could this Cunning Inventer of a God, come by his
Notion or Idea of Him? how could his Mind attain any such feigning and
ampliating Power? For according to the Atheist's Principles, the Mind could
have no Active, much less Spontaneous Power at all; but all our Idea's and
Conceptions would be mere necessary Motions, mechanically occasioned by the
Impressions of External Objects. So that as Protagoras tells us (in Plato's
Theoetet.) (...): It Is neither possible to conceive that which is not, nor
indeed any thing else, but only just as our Mind suffers it by Impressions from
without. And therefore no Man could ever possibly Invent any thing at all, nor
have any Power within him of putting or joining together two or more simple
idea's, or of ampliating or enlarging any Idea or Notion at all; much less
could he grow so very subtle as to Invent the Notion of a Deity. And as no
Lawgiver nor Politician could, we see, have Invented the Notion of a Deity, if
he had had a mind so to do; so it appears very weak and foolish in him to do
it, if he could. For while there was no Belief among Men, of any Divine and
Almighty Power, he would have been a mortal God himself, Leviathan, p. 87.
as Hobbs calls the Commonwealth: His Will would have been his Law; and Men's
Obedience to Him, would have been founded in the Fear they were under of his
great Power. And this, according to the Atheistical Principles, would have been
a much better Stay and Support to his Authority, than the idle Obligations of
Conscience and Religion: For the aforesaid Author tells us, Ib. p. 7.
That if the Fear of Spirits ( i. e. of a God) were taken away, Men would be
much better fitted for Civil Obedience. And in another place he goes a little
further yet, and says, Ib. p. 238.
That it is impossible any Government can stand, where any other than the
Sovereign has a Power of giving greater Rewards than Life, and greater
Punishments than Death. That is, where there is any Obligation on Men's Minds to
a Divine and Almighty Power: which they will choose to obey, rather than the
Unlawful Commands of an Arbitrary Prince, that can only kill the Body. Now
there is no doubt but that this is true of such a Power or Government, as that
he calculated his Leviathan for; i. e. One absolutely Arbitrary and Tyrannical.
And all Power must be so, if there be no God, and no Antecedent Good and Evil,
but what the Will of the Sovereign shall make so, as Mr. Hobbs positively
asserts there is not. Therefore that Man must act very unwisely, who when he
was possessed of Power enough to give Laws to, and govern others by his sole
Will and Pleasure, would ever invent the Notion of a God and Religion. For this
was the direct way to cramp himself in his Power, to tie up his own Hands, and
to let the People see that he himself is accountable to God, as well as they;
it is to teach them, that the Power he has, is but a Trust committed to him by
God, which he is to discharge for his Subjects Good and Advantage, and not only
to gratify his own Will and Humor. And this Notion might induce the Subjects
of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Prince, to ease him of the Trouble of a
Government, that they perceived involved him in a great deal of Guilt, and
would proportionably increase the Account that he must one day give of his
Stewardship. But,

2. As the Idea and Notion of a God, cannot possibly have been invented by any
one; so neither could it have been understood or believed by Mankind, if it had
been so. Had there been only one Person that had coined the Idea of a God, and
no manner of Notion at all of any of his Attributes or Perfections previous to
this, in the Minds of Men; what would it have signified, to tell them, that
there was a God? how could they understand the meaning of a mere Arbitrary
word, that had no manner of foundation in Nature, nor any Idea or Notion
answering to it? Words are but Marks of Things, or Signs to know them or
distinguish them by: and therefore a Word that is the Sign of what is
absolutely Nothing, or a Nonentity, must needs be nonsense and unintelligible.
And consequently, he that should attempt to awe Mankind with an empty Sound,
that had no Signification, would certainly be exposed to contempt; and instead
of affrighting others, would only be laughed at himself. The Author of Anima
Mundi, says, Page 36.
That to tell a Profane Rabble of an Invisible Deity, and of a Future State of
Rewards and Punishments, will signify nothing at all: and, That Men will not
for such Metaphysics, forbear any manner of Pleasure or Profit, how base
soever. How then could the Figment of a Deity gain admittance into the Minds of
Men, at first? What would it signify to tell Men of an Invisible Power, that
presides over, and governs the World; when (according to the Atheist's
Supposition) they had no manner of Notion of any such Being before, and
consequently could not know what was meant by such Words and Expressions.
Should you tell them, indeed, of a potent Neighbor, that was coming strongly
armed, to take away their Life or Goods, they would look about them, and
endeavor, by flight or force, to secure themselves. But to tell them of a
Power that they never saw nor heard any thing of before, and which they are
told withal, is impossible to be seen or heard, or any way rendered an Object of
their Senses, could make no impression at all on Mankind: or suppose that it
could make some impression, and frighten some Men at its first proposal, how
long would this last? No longer, at farthest, than till they were by Experience
convinced that it was false and precarious, and that there was no Ground nor
Reason to believe any such thing. And this they must arrive at in a small time,
if the Thing were false. It Is impossible such a Cheat as this, which it would
have concerned every one to have examined, could long have maintained its
Ground. Time discovers, and certainly lays open all impostures; and that the
sooner, the more are concerned to enquire into it. And therefore had this
Notion and Belief of a Deity had no other Original and Foundation than what the
Atheists pretend, it is impossible it could have continued so long in the World;
and much more so, that it should have gained ground as we know it has
continually done, and be established on better Principles, the more it has
been considered and understood. Opinionum commenta delet dies, naturae judicia
confirmat, says Cicero. Besides, It cannot well be imagined that any Man
should have the vanity to believe, that a thing which he knew he had invented
himself, and which had no manner of ground nor foundation to support it from
the Nature of the thing, could ever impose upon and delude Mankind, or indeed
find any admittance in their Belief. He must needs think that others would be
as sagacious to discover the Cheat, as he could be to contrive it; and that
among so many Heads, some one would soon detect the Forgery of what must
necessarily appear false and precarious to the common Sense and Reason of all
Men. But,

3 dly, and lastly, The Universality of the Notion and Belief of a God, is also
a most demonstrative Argument, that it could not arise from the Invention of
any Cunning and Designing Person. That there is such an Universal Notion of a
Deity, cannot, I think, be denied by any one; and I doubt not but farther
Discoveries will satisfy us, that there is a Notion of God even among those
Barbarous and Savage People that are said to have no manner of Idea of Him, by
a late Ingenious Author. But supposing that it were so, that the Knowledge of a
God were quite lost, in three or four dark and uncultivated parts of the Earth,
whose Inhabitants are so brutish, as scarce to think at all: this is no more an
Argument against the Belief of God's being Universally diffused throughout the
World, than Monsters and Fools are, that Men have not generally a Humane Shape
and Reason. There are some Anomalies, Irregularities and Exceptions in all
Things and Cases, which yet are not by any accounted of force enough to
over-turn a general Rule. I shall not say much to this Point, it having been so
largely and frequently handled already; only I cannot omit the Testimony of
some of the Ancient Writers, who are very express, that there is an Universal
Notion of a God among Mankind, and which they looked upon to be Natural, or by
way of Anticipation. There is, says Cicero, In omnium Animis Deorum Notionem
natura ipsa impressit. De Not. Deorum, lib. 1.
a Notion of a God impressed on the Minds of all Men. And in another place,
says he, Quae Gens est, aut quod Genus Hominum, quod non habeat sine Doctrina,
anticipationem quandam Deorum, quam appellat (...) Epicurus. Ib. c. 32.
What kind of Nation or People is there any where to be found, who have not,
without learning it from others, a Prolepsis or Anticipation of a Deity. And in
two other places, he tells us, Tuscul. Quaest. l. 1. De Legib. l. 1.
That there is no Nation so barbarous and wild, who do not acknowledge the
Being of a God, and some how or other revere and worship him. Seneca, in his
Epistles, Vid. Epist. 117, 118. De Benefic. 4.4.
frequently says the same thing. Sextus Empiricus owns also, (...).
That all Men have a common Notion of God, by way of Prolepsis; and believe Him
to be a most Blessed and Happy Being, Incorruptible, Immortal, and incapable of
any kind of Evil. (...). Adv. Mathem. p. 314.
And he concludes, That it is unreasonable to assert, that all Men should come
to attribute the same Properties to God by Chance, and not rather be induced
thereunto by the Dictates of Nature. Maximus Tyrius has a very plain Passage,
to prove this common Notion of a God, (...). Dis. 1. p. 5.
Though, says he, there be so much quarrelling, difference and jangling in the
World, yet you may see this agreed in all over the Earth, that there is One
God, the King and Father of all. This the Greek and the Barbarian both say, the
Islander and the Inhabitant of the Continent, the Wise and the Unwise alike.
Aristotle says, (...). De Coelo, l. 1. c. 3.
That all Men have a Pre-notion concerning the Gods, even both Greeks and
Barbarians. And in another place, he has a very remarkable passage to this
sense, That there is a very Ancient Tradition (which our Forefathers have
handed down to Posterity, in a Mythological Dress) That there are Gods; and
that the Divine Nature sustains or encompasseth all things. But this Tradition,
he says, had, in process of time, some Figments connected with it; as, that
the Gods had Humane Shapes, or those of other Creatures, etc. which if we
separate from it, we may suppose it at first divinely spoken and delivered,
That the Gods were the First Beings. (...), etc. Aristot. Metaph. l. 14. c. 8.
p. 483. Paris. 1654.


Many more Testimonies might be produced to prove this Point, that it was the
concurrent Opinion, of all the Ancient Heathen Writers, that there was a common
Notion or Belief of a Deity in the Minds of Men; But these, I think, are
sufficient. And now what can the Atheist say to such a Proof as this? What
greater Evidence can be desired of the Truth of any thing, than that it has
been believed by all Men in all Ages and Places of the World? It Is a very good
way of Arguing from Authority, that Aristotle uses in his Topics. That, says
he, which seems true to some Wise Men, ought to appear a little probable; what
most Wise Men believe, is yet further probable; and what most Men, both Wise
and Unwise do agree in, is much more probable yet; But what is received as
Truth by the general consent of all Mankind in all Ages of the World, has
certainly the highest degree of Evidence, of this Kind, that is possible. And
what has such a Testimony, it is intolerable Arrogance and Folly for any Men to
deny; and to set up their single Judgments and Opinion contrary to the common
Suffrage of all Mankind. But they are so puff't up with Pride and Vanity, that
they do not see the Weakness and Precariousness of what they advance, nor how
inconsistent it is with their other Tenets. If it have but the appearance of
contradicting the received Notion that we have of a God, and if it do but seem
never so little to Undermine Religion, they will set it up at a venture as a
Demonstration, and stick to it, let it be never so inconsistent with what at
other times they deliver. Thus sometimes they will assert, that there is no
Universal Idea or Notion of a God. At other times they will grant there is such
an One, but that it was Coined and Invented by some Cunning Politician a long
while ago, before any Books or Histories were written, and by him communicated
by Tradition to Posterity. But here they do not consider that this will
necessarily derive all Mankind from one common Parent: which is a thing they
will, at another time, by no means admit of, lest it should seem to countenance
the Story of Adam or Noah: which is said to be nothing but an old Jewish
Tradition. And that it is impossible to account for the Peopling of America and
All Islands remote from the Continent, without supposing their Inhabitants to
be Aborigines, and to spring out of the Earth like Mushrooms. And then, to
account for the General Notion, that they cannot deny, these Aborigines have of
a God; as before they made One Wise Man Invent it, now they will suppose it to
be done by a Hundred such Cunning Politicians: who, though in different Places
and Ages of the World, yet did all light by chance on the very same Notion of a
God, and Abuse and Cheat Mankind just after the same manner; and though this be
the most extravagant and ridiculous Assertion that ever can possibly come into
the Mind of Man, as well as contradictory to the former, yet it is all one for
that; this, or any thing else, shall be supposed rather than they will yield to
the Conviction of Truth, and allow the Notion of a Deity to have a real
Foundation. But it is no wonder to find Men that wilfully shut their Eyes
against the clearest Light, to go forward and backward, and often times run
against each other in the dark Mazes of Error: those must needs be at a Loss
who neglect His Guidance, who is the Way, the Truth and the Light, and that
Spirit which would lead them into all Truth; and those, no doubt, may easily
miss of the true Knowledge of God, who are resolved they will not seek after
Him, and all whose Thoughts are, that there is no God.

FINIS.
Books printed for Rich. Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
IMmorality and Pride the Great Causes of Atheism. A Sermon Preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, January the 3 d. 1697/8. Being the First of the
Lecture for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire In Quarto.

The Atheist's Objection, That we can have no Idea of God Refuted. A Sermon
Preached at the Cathedral-Church of St. Paul, February the 7 th. 1697/8. Being
the Second of the Lecture for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire In Quarto.

Remarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth. In Octavo.

All three by J. Harris, M. A. and Fellow of the Royal-Society.

Dr. Woodward's Natural History of the Earth, in Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Truth of the Christian Religion, against the
Objections of all Modern Opposers; in Two Volumes. In Octavo.

The Atheist's Objections, Against the IMMATERIAL NATURE of GOD, AND
INCORPOREAL SUBSTANCES, Refuted.

In Two SERMONS Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, April 4th. and
May 2d. School.

BEING THE Fourth and Fifth of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

JOHN iv.24. God is a Spirit --


THE Occasion of these words was this: Our Blessed Lord, in his way into
Galilee, passed through Sychar, a City of Samaria, near to which was the famous
Well of the Patriarch Jacob. To this Well our Savior went to refresh himself
on his Journey; and as he always made it his business to be doing Good, took
occasion from a Woman's coming to draw Water, to discourse with her about the
Business of his Mission. By way of Introduction to which, He first gives her
some Proofs of his being endowed with a Supernatural Knowledge. From whence
she justly concluding Him to be a Prophet, or a Person enriched with Divine and
Extraordinary Gifts and Qualifications; she asked Him concerning one great
Point that had been long in dispute between the Samaritans and the Jews, ( i.
e.) about the true Place for Religious Worship. The Jews rightly asserted
Jerusalem to be the Place where Men ought to Worship. The Samaritans contended,
that it ought to be with them, at Shiloh, in Mount Ephraim, where the Ark and
Tabernacle were placed long before the building of the Temple at Jerusalem, and
where also the Patriarchs, before the Law, did use to sacrifice to, and worship
God. They pretended also to be the true Successors of Jacob, and of the Ancient
Patriarchs, and consequently, that their Place of Worship had the greatest
Support from Antiquity. This Pretense was an Umbrage to that Temple that they
set up in Mount Gerizim (in the time of Darius) in opposition to that at
Jerusalem, Joseph. Antiquit. l. 11. c. 8.
and which they supposed to give an Holiness to that Mountain, even after the
Temple was destroyed. And the Samaritan Version of the Pentateuch has plainly
falsified the Text of Moses, in Deuteronomy. xxvii.4. by substituting Mount Gerizim
instead of Mount Ebal, in order to gain some Honor to this Celebrated Place.
But notwithstanding all these mighty Pretensions, the Samaritans were perfectly
in the wrong. The Ancient Pedigree that they boasted so much of, was wholly
false and precarious. For they were, in reality, only the Successors of some
Assyrians, who were planted in the Cities of Samaria by Salmaneser, when he
carried the Tribe of Ephraim Captive into Assyria; as you may read at large, 2
King. xxvi.24.

This therefore being the true State of the Case between the Jews and the
Samaritans; our Savior's Answer to the Woman was, That the Jews were in the
right, because they worshipped the True God, and that too in such a manner as
was agreeable to that Revelation God had given them of his Will: We know what
we worship -- But the Samaritans were doubly mistaken, both as to the Object,
and as to the Place of their Worship. They, He tells her, worshipped they knew
not what. In which, it seems probable, that he may allude to what is said of
their Ancestors the Assyrians in the Place before mentioned, 2 King. xvii.26. (
viz.). That they worshipped the God of the Land. That is, They blindly paid
their Devotion to the God of their New Country, without having any true and
real Knowledge of him: But along with him, they worshipped their own Assyrian
Deities too; such as Succoth-Benoth, Ashima-Nergal, and the like. Our Savior
tells this Woman also, That a Time of Reformation was now at hand, when the
Worship of God should not be confined either to Jerusalem, or Mount Gerizim;
and that a more pure and Spiritual manner of Worship should be established; one
that was not embarrass'd with so vast a number of External Rites and
Ceremonies, but one more suitable to the Nature of God, and to the Improved
Sentiments of Mankind: for God, says he, is a Spirit; and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. This seems to be the Occasion and
Connection of these words: which having briefly showed you, I proceed now to
speak to the words themselves, God is a Spirit.

By which Terms, God and Spirit, thus connected together, we understand an
Infinite Being, most Wise and Powerful, containing in Himself all possible
Perfection, without being subject to any of those Defects and Limitations which
we plainly discover in Material Beings. And after this manner the Holy
Scriptures do describe God Almighty to us; they attribute such Perfections and
Qualifications to Him, as we can have no possible Idea of, as belonging to
Matter.

Body or Matter is a Sluggish, Insensible, Passive and Unintelligent Thing, not
possibly able to move of it self, or to act or perform any thing by its own
Power; but all the Motion and Activity that it has, comes to it by
Communication from something that is without it, or distinct from it. But all
Power, both in Heaven and Earth, is the Lords: In his Hands are Power and
Might: with Him is Wisdom and Strength, he has Counsel and Understanding. He
made all Things; He stretches forth the Heavens alone, and spreads abroad
the Earth by himself. There is none like to Him, who created and maintains
all things, and in whom all Things Live, and Move, and have their Being 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12. Job 12.9, etc. Isa. 44.24, etc. Acts 17.24, 25, etc.
.

The Form and Fashion of all Material Things, we see, is continually flitting
and changing, and there is nothing among them of any constant and lasting
duration. But God is Immutable and Eternal, the same Yesterday, to Day, and for
ever; He was, and is, and is to come, and with him is no variableness, neither
shadow of Turning Rev. 4.8. Jam. 1.17. Deuteronomy. 33.27.
.

Material Beings are all limited and imperfect as to their Extent. The Place
they are in confines and circumscribes them; Nothing else can be there with
them, nor they themselves any where else. But the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain God, which yet he more than fills with his Presence: which Presence no
one can flee or hide himself from: He is the searcher even of our hearts, and
knows the most secret thoughts of Men. There is no Creature that is not
manifest in his sight, but all things are Naked and open before him 2 Chronicles.
6.18. Jer. 23.24. Jer. 17.10. and 20.12.
. This and such like is the Account that the Sacred Scripture gives of God,
which is plainly Inconsistent with his being Material or Corporeal: and
therefore it calls him in the words of my Text a Spirit, a Divine, most
Excellent and Perfect Being, that discovers himself to our Reason and
Understanding, but cannot possibly do so to our Senses; for him no Eye has
seen nor can see; he is Invisible, he is a Spirit.

But here the Atheist thinks he has a sufficient Ground for insuperable
Objections; Here his Philosophy is called in to his Assistance; and by the
Strength of that, he will undertake to maintain, that there is not, nor cannot
be any such thing as a Spirit, (i. e.) Any Incorporeal or Immaterial Being or
Substance. And therefore since the Sacred Scripture and Divines do describe the
Deity after this absurd and impossible manner, it is a good Argument (say they)
that there is no such Being at all: For when Men pretend to Describe God after
such a manner as is Nonsensical, Unintelligible and Impossible, (and yet say,
that theirs is the only right way of Speaking of him): When Men attribute such
a manner of Existence to him, as we know is contradictory to the Nature of
Things; we have then just Ground to disbelieve all that they advance, in
defense of so ridiculous and absurd a Notion, and consequently to conclude that
there is no God at all. And hence we see these Men raise another Great
Objection against the Being of a God, viz. That his Nature is so Described as
to be Unintelligible and Nonsense, Which I shall now therefore endeavor to
Refute.

And in Order to show the Groundlesness and Invalidity of this Objection, I
shall in pursuance of my former Method: I. Give you the sense of the Modern and
Ancient Atheists on this Point. And then,

II. Endeavor to Refute what they Advance, and show how Unreasonable it is to
build Atheism and Infidelity on so weak and invalid a Foundation. And,



1. I shall give you the Modern and Ancient Atheists Sense on this Point.

Mr. Hobbs, that lofty Pretender to Philosophy, declares that to say there is
any Immaterial Substance, is not so much an Error, as it is Nonsense; it is
using an Insignificant word, whereby we conceive nothing but the Sound Leviath.
p. 19.
. And in his Kingdom of Darkness, where he undertakes to correct the University
Learning, he is very Angry with Aristotle's Metaphysics, because it brought
in, as he says (though falsely, as I shall prove hereafter) the Doctrine or
Notion of Separated Essences, and also of Immateriality and Incorporeity; for
what is not Corporeal, he says, is Nothing, and consequently no where. And
this he undertakes to prove from a Passage which he seems to have borrowed from
Ocellus Lucanus, though without naming him; and which, though it be a poor Sophism,
and much worse than those he is condemning; yet he boldly lays it down as a
Demonstration. The Universe, says he, is Corporeal, that is to say Body, and
has the Dimensions of Magnitude, namely, length, breadth, and depth; also
every Part of Body is Body; and consequently every Part of the Universe is
Body, and that which is not Body is no Part of the Universe. And because the
Universe is all, that which is no Part of the Universe is Nothing, and
consequently no where Leviath. p. 371.207.
. In another place he says, That no Man can conceive any thing but he must
conceive it in some place, of some Determinate Magnitude, and as that which may
be divided into Parts Leviath. p. 11.
. And again, p. 17. and 207. he tells us, That an Incorporeal Substance is a
Contradictory and Inconsistent Name; it is all one as if a Man should say, an
Incorporeal Body; which words when they are joined together, do destroy one
another; and therefore Body and Substance are all one Leviath. p. 17.207.
. Elsewhere he tells us, That the proper Signification of the word Spirit in
common speech, is either a subtle, fluid and invisible Body, or else a Ghost
or other Idle Phantasm of our Imagination Leviath. p. 208.
, and a little after he asserts, that to Men that understand the meaning of the
words Substance and Incorporeal, they imply a Contradiction; and that to say an
Angel or Spirit is an Incorporeal Substance, is to say in effect there is no
Angel nor Spirit Leviath. p. 214.
. And this Notion he defends in his Answer to Bishop Bramhall's Book written
against his Leviathan; and perseveres in asserting that God himself is a Most
Pure simple and corporeal Spirit; and he defines a Spirit in General to be a
thin, fluid, transparent and invisible Body Answer to Bishop Bramhall, p. 31,
36.
. Thus also Spinoza, in his Opera Posthuma, p. 13. determines Extended
Substance (that is Body) to be one of the Infinite Attributes of the Deity, and
this he undertakes to demonstrate from hence; that there is not (as he says)
any Other Substance but God; and who consequently is a Corporeal, as well as a
Cogitative Being. Deus est res extensa Ethices Pars 2. Prop. 2. p. 42.
. This, you perceive, is the plain sense of these Writers, That there is no
other Substance but Body; and consequently to talk of a Spirit or an
Incorporeal Substance, is to them perfect Nonsense and Contradiction. But though
this be their Opinion and Assertion, yet they did not Invent it, nor first find
it out: they are as far from being Originals in this, as in other things; for
herein they do but Copy the Sentiments of the Ancient Atheists, and tread
exactly in their Steps. That there was nothing but Body in the World, was long
ago the Assertion of such unthinking Men as our Modern Atheists are. Plato
tells us, That there were some in his Time, who asserted nothing to be
Substance but what they could feel, and which would resist their Touch: and
these Men affirmed Body and Substance to be the same thing; and what they were
not able to lay hold of, and to grasp with their Hands, they said was really
nothing at all. And if any one happened to talk with them about any thing that
was not Body, they would ridicule and despise him, and not hear a word more
that he should say (...). Sophist. p. 172. Ficin.
.

Aristotle acquaints us, That just such were the Atheistical Principles of his
Contemporaries. They affirm (says he) Matter or Body to be the only Substance;
and that all other things are only Passions and Affections of it. And in
another place, he says, that these Men asserted all things to be one; That
there is but one Nature only, which is the Matter of all Things, and this is
Corporeal, and has magnitude (...). Metaph. l. 1. c. 7.
. And this was long before the Opinion also of Leucippus, and Democritus.

Epicurus argues against Plato, that there can be no Incorporeal Deity; not
only because no Man can frame a conception of an Incorporeal Substance, but
also because whatever is Incorporeal, must needs want Sense, and Prudence and
Pleasure; all which things are included in the Notion of God: And therefore an
Incorporeal Deity, says he, is a Contradiction Dr. Cudw. Intel. Syst. p. 20.
. And his Followers, as appears by Lucretius, continued in the same Opinion,
that there is no other Substance in Nature but Body Praeterea nihil est quod
possis dicere ab omni Corpore sejunctum, etc. Lib. 1. v. 431.
; and they had no Notion of any Incorporeal thing, but their Vacuum or Empty
space, which was really nothing at all.

Sextus Empiricus tells us, that all the Epicureans, and some of the Stoics,
as Basileides in particular, maintained (...), that there was nothing
Incorporeal or Immaterial Adv. Math. p. 267.
. By these Testimonies we see plainly, that the Modern Atheists transcribe the
Ancient Opinions exactly, and have been able to add very little to them. And
the Notion that Mr. Hobbs seems so fond of, and which he would fain set up as
his own Discovery, That a Spirit is nothing but a Thin fluid and transparent
Body: seems to me to be plainly taken from the (...), which Aristotle tells us,
was the Definition that some then gave of a Spirit, or the Soul of Man.

And thus having truly stated the Case, and showed you what the Sentiments of
the Ancient and Modern Atheists were and are, as to the Matter before us. I
shall now proceed to Examine by what Reasons and Arguments they endeavor to
support their Assertion, That there is no such thing as any Incorporeal
Substance, but that whatever really is, is Body. And here I find their main and
chief Argument to be This; that an Immaterial Substance is an Unconceivable
Thing: It Is what no Man can possibly have any notion or conception of; it is a
perfect contradiction in Terms, and consequently Nonsense and Impossible. This
is every where almost the Language of Mr. Hobbs, as I have before observed. He
also pretends to discover the (...), the true Cause of this Fiction about
Immaterial Substances. The Notion, he tells us, took its rise from the Abuse of
abstracted Words, and suchlike Metaphysical and Scholastical Terms, which some
have fansied as real Entities separated and distinct from the Subject, or
Matter, of which they are Attributes or Qualities only. Thus for Instance,
because we can consider Thinking or a Reasoning Power alone by it self, and
distinct from Body; therefore some have been so foolish as to conclude that it
is not the Action or Accident of that Body in which it is, but a real Substance
by it self. And it is upon this Account, that Leviath. p. 373.
when a Man is dead and buried, they will say, his Soul (that is, his Life) can
walk separated from the Body, and is seen by Night among the Graves, whereas
Life is only a Name of Nothing, p. 372.
and the Soul or Mind of Man is in reality Nothing else but the result of
Motion in the Organical Parts of his Body Leviath. p. 190. and De Cive C 15..
14. And in another place, he says, Men's nihil aliud est praeterquam motus in
quibusdam partibus corporis Organici.
. It Is like the forms and qualities of Other things, depending purely on the
Mechanism, Modification, and Motion of the Parts of Matter, according as it
happens to be variously disposed, figured and agitated; and consequently it can
be nothing at all distinct from that Body whose Form or Quality it is. And this
Soul or Mind, or any other Faculty or Quality in Man, coming once to be
conceived as a thing distinct from the Body, and being Invisible and
Insensible, has been called by such Names as we use to give to fine Subtle
and aereal Bodies. Such as (...), Spiritus, and the like: which do properly
signify the Wind, or, which is near akin to it, the Breath of Man Leviath. p.
207, 208.
. And so Mr. Hobbs tells us, that in order to express our greater honor of
God, the name of Spirit has been given to him likewise, as better expressing
to vulgar Apprehensions his fine aereal and Subtle Nature, than the grosser
word of Body. But however, Philosophers and Men of sense must take care, and
not be imposed upon by insignificant words, so far as to imagine there can in
reality be any such thing as an Incorporeal Substance: for that is, when
thoroughly considered, an absolute Contradiction and Nonsense. It Is nothing but
an empty Name, with which some poor Wretches are frighted, as the Birds are
from the Corn by an empty Doublet, a Hat and a Crooked Stick Leviath. p. 373.
; as he is pleased to express himself. And this is the sum of what this mighty
Philosopher advances against Immaterial Substances. Spinoza is the only Man
besides, which I have met with, that aims at disproving the Existence of
Incorporeal Beings: Which in his Opera posthuma he pretends demonstratively to
do. But his chief and indeed only Argument is this (as I hinted before) that
there is but one only Substance in the World, and That is God. Matter or Body
he asserts to be one of the Attributes of this Substance, or the Mode by which
God is considered as Res extensa; from whence he concludes, that there can be
no Substance but what is corporeal, because Body is an Essential Property of
his one only Substance, the Divine Nature. The Precariousness of which Obscure
and Metaphysical way of Arguing, I shall plainly show below.

And, Thus having given you the sum, of what these Writers advance against the
Doctrine of Incorporeal Substances, I shall next proceed to Refute it, and to
show you how weak and inconclusive their Arguments and Objections are. In order
to which, I say, In the First place,

1. That it is a very precarious and groundless way of arguing, to deny the
Existence of any thing only from our particular Apprehensions and Conceptions
not being able to master it. For it will not in the least follow, that there
can be no such thing as an Incorporeal Substance or a Spirit, because some few
Men pretend that they cannot conceive how any such thing can possibly be. And I
have already showed, See my Second Sermon.
that we have very just reason to allow the truth of, and to be satisfied of
the Existence of many things, whose Nature neither we, nor perhaps any one
else, can fully Understand and Comprehend. These Gentlemen pretend that they
cannot conceive or have any Idea of an Incorporeal Substance. But yet they
think, I suppose, that they have a clear Idaea and Conception of Body. Though
should you put them to describe it, they would be very much at a loss. For as
one has well observed, ( Mr. Lock in his Essay of Humane Understanding, Book
2. c. 23.) if we carefully examine our Idea of Substance, we shall find that it
is a kind of complex one, consisting as it were of several Idea's coexisting
together: which because we are apt to conceive as one thing, we give it the
General Name of Substance: as imagining that word to express something, though in
reality we know not what, which is the support of these Accidents or Qualities
which occasion the Idea's we have in our Minds of it. Let us therefore take any
corporeal Substance, as suppose Gold; and inquire in our Mind what is that
Support, Substratum or Substance, in which the Accidents of Yellowness, great
Specific Weight, and strange Ductility under the Hammer do inhere; all which
concur to give us that complex Idea which we have of Gold; Shall we not find
our selves put to it how to conceive, or to have a clear Idea of this? If we
should say that the subject of these Properties are the solid extended Parts;
we shall not be much the nearer Satisfaction: for our Mind will be inquisitive
again what is the Support or Subject of that Extension and Impenetrability. We
may say, indeed, that it is the Substance it self: which is a word that we use,
and implies something or other that is the Support of these Properties, but
what that is, we have, I think, no clear and certain Idea. When yet we have
clear and distinct Conceptions enough of these Properties which we find in this
Body, and from whence we pronounce it to be Gold. So if on the other hand we
take any Incorporeal Substance, as suppose the Mind or Soul of Man; and enquire
what is the true Support of that Self-moving Power, that Reasoning and
Cogitative Faculty, and that Liberty or Freedom of Action which we plainly
perceive to be inherent in it: we shall indeed be at a loss, but yet no more
than we were before in reference to Gold. For as from considering the
Properties peculiar to that Body, we were satisfied that they must be inherent
in something, though how or in what, we have no clear Idea; so when we consider
Life, Cogitation and Spontaneous Motion in our Soul, we know very well that
those more real Properties must have something also for their Support, or some
Substance to inhere in: though what that is, and the peculiar manner of this we
are wholly ignorant of. But then we have as just reason to believe that this
Substance is real, as that the Substance of Gold is so. For Cogitation, Life,
and Spontaneous Action, are Properties undoubtedly of as real a Nature as great
Intensive Weight, Yellowness and Ductility can possibly be. And as we cannot
but conclude both these to be real Substances, so we cannot also but conceive
them as Natures absolutely distinct and different from each other, and which
can have no necessary dependence upon and relation to each other: for we can
never imagine that Gold can be ever brought to think, reason or move it self
spontaneously, any more than we can conceive a Soul or Mind to be yellow, heavy
or ductile. That is, we have quite different Idea's of each of them, and which
nothing but wilful or long habituated Ignorance can ever make us confound
together. And thus it appears to me that we may have as clear an Idea of
Incorporeal Substance, as we have of Body; and that the former is no more
unconceivable than the latter. And therefore it is as absurd to argue against
the Existence of a Spirit, only from our not having any clear Idea of the
Substance of a Spirit; as it would be to say there is no such thing as Body,
because we don't know exactly what the Substance of Body is: which I dare say
no Man can affirm that he does. It Is very possible that Men may be so blinded
and prejudiced by false Principles, so stupefied by Ignorance, Idleness or
Vice, and so engaged and enslaved to a peculiar set of Notions, which advance
and support that way of acting and proceeding which they take delight in, that
a great many things may appear Unconceivable and Impossible to them, which
shall be far from being so to others, whose Minds are free, and more enured to
thinking. Should you tell a Man, who is a Stranger to Geometry and Astronomy,
of the many admirable and surprising Truths that can certainly be demonstrated
from the Principles of those Noble Sciences, he would boldly pronounce them
Impossible; and all your Discourse and Proof (should you attempt any such
thing) would to such a Person be Nonsense, and your words mere empty and
insignificant Sounds. And there are many Persons in the World, on whom the
clearest and strongest Method of Reasoning that ever was, will make no manner
of impression at all, because their Minds are not at all enured to a close way
of Arguing and Thinking. And truly the Atheistical Writers do discover so poor
a Knowledge in Philosophy, and so very little acquaintance with true Reasoning
and Science; that it is no wonder at all that they should not be able to
conceive and comprehend a great many things which others are very well
satisfied with. I know very well, says the Ingenious Person before cited,
Essay of Human Understanding, p. 143.
that People whose Thoughts are immersed in Matter, and who have so subjected
their Minds to their Senses, that they seldom reflect on any thing beyond them,
are apt to say they cannot comprehend a thinking thing; which perhaps is true,
etc. And therefore such a Philosopher as Mr. Hobbs, that defines Knowledge to
be Sense; and says, that the Mind of Man is nothing but Motion in the
Organical Parts of his Body, may easily be infatuated so far as to assert that
there is no other Substance but Body, and that a Spirit or Incorporeal Being,
is a Nonsensical, Contradictory and Impossible Notion. While Others, who can
raise their Minds a little higher, and who can penetrate farther into things,
will be fully satisfied that such Philosophy is Nonsense and Impossibility. As
indeed some Persons, in all Ages of the World, of which we have any Account,
have ever been. For,

2. Which is another very good Ground, from whence to refute this absurd
Opinion that there is no such thing as an Incorporeal Being: I say, there have
been always many Persons in the World, that have firmly believed and embraced
the Doctrine of Immaterial Substances, and who have also asserted the Deity to
be of that Nature. And this will Undeniably refute the two great Points of Mr.
Hobbs his Opinion. For, if it be proved plainly that there has been all along
a received Belief and Opinion that there are Immaterial Substances, and that
God himself is such an One: it is then most clear and certain, that the Notion
is neither inconceivable, contradictory, nor nonsense: and also that it did not
take its Rise and Original only from the Abuse of the Philosophy of Aristotle.
Not the former; for what is in its own Nature unconceivable, nonsensical and
absurd, could never sure gain an Admittance into the Belief of so many great
Men, as we shall see presently this Opinion did. Not the latter; for what was
commonly received in the World before the time of Aristotle, could never be
derived only from his and the Schoolmen's Philosophy, as Mr. Hobbs is pleased
to say this Belief of Immaterial Substances was. And that there was always in
the World, a Notion and Belief of another more noble Substance than Body, and
that the Deity was of an Incorporeal or Spiritual Nature, we have the united
Suffrages of all the Ancient Writers that are preserved down to our time.

Cicero tells us, That the Heathen Philosophers generally defined God to be
Men's pura and sincera, soluta and libera ab omni concretione mortali Lib. de
Not. Deorum, and Tuscul. Quaes^. lib. 1.
; and speaking of Thales Milesius in particular, he says of him, Aquam dixit
esse Initium Rerum, Deum autem cum Mentem quae ex aqua cuncta fingeret. Now
this Mind they all distinguished plainly from Matter, and looked upon it as a
much more Noble Principle than 'twas possible to conceive Matter to be.
Lactantius acquaints of Pythagoras De Ira Dei, c. 11. p. 742. Oxon.
. Quod unum deum confitetur, dicens Incorporalem esse mentem, quae per omnem
Naturam diffusa and intenta, vitalem sensum cunctis Animalibus tribuat. And
Plutarch gives us much the same Account of him in his Books, De Placitis
Philosophorum, viz. That he made two Principles; Lib. 1. c. 3.
one Active, which was Mind or God: The other Passive, or the Matter of the
World. And those Verses of Empedocles, are very remarkable; wherein speaking of
the Deity, he asserts Him not to be of Humane shape: And also that, (...)
(...) --
(i. e.) That he is no way perceivable by any of our Senses; which is as much
as to say, he is Incorporeal. And in the next Lines he does expressly tell us
what he is: (...),
(...).
A sacred and ineffable Mind, which by swift Thoughts moves and actuates the
whole World. Anaxagoras also asserted, That Plutarch de Placitis Philosoph.
Lib. 1. c. 3* p. 876.
an ordering and regulating Mind was the first Principle of all things; and
this Mind he made, as Aristotle says of him, (...). The only, pure, simple,
and unmixt thing in the World: thereby plainly distinguishing it from Matter,
the Parts of which, he, who was as Sextus Empericus calls him (...) knew very
well to be promiscuously blended and mixed togethere very where. Sextus also
tells us, That That Mind which Anaxagoras asserted to be God; was (...), an
Active Principle; in opposition to Matter, which is a Passive one, Sext. Empir.
adv. Mathem. p. 309.
and this is agreeable to what the Poets say of Spiritus intus alit; men's
agitat molem, etc. We are told likewise by Sextus, That Xenophanes held (...),
That there is but One God, and he Incorporeal. And Plutarch describing the
Deity, has these remarkable words, God is Mind, a separated Form perfectly
unmixed with Matter, and without any thing that is passible, (...). And in
another place he asserts, (...). That it is impossible Matter alone can be the
sole Principle of all things De Placit. Philos. l. 1. c. 3.
.

Plato every where distinguishes between corporeal, and incorporeal
Substances, calling the former by the Names of (...) Sensible, and the latter
always either (...) or (...), immaterial or intelligible; and he says, That
certain intelligible and incorporeal Forms, are the true and first Substance;
and that incorporeal Things which are the greatest and most excellent of all
others, are discoverable by reason only, and nothing else (...) -- (...). In
Polit. p. 547. Ficin.
.

And in another place, he says, That they were instructed by their
forefathers, that Mind and a certain wonderful Wisdom, did at first frame, and
does now govern all things, His words are (...), (...). In Phileb. p. 28. Which
sufficiently shows the Antiquity of the Notion of an Incorporeal Deity, and the
way also how they came by it. Of the same Opinion also was Socrates, as we are
told by Plutarch, and others. Lib. de Placit. Philos. 1. c. 3. Zeno and the
Stoics defined the Deity to be (...), an Intellectual and Rational Nature; or
as Plutarch recites their Opinion, (...); an Intelligent Spirit devoid of all
Bodily shape. Ibid. And Sextus Empericus tells us of Aristotle, that he
constantly asserted God to be Incorporeal, and the Utmost Bounds of the
Universe Adv. M^th. p. 155.
. And Aristotle concludes his Book of Physics with affirming (...) -- (...).
Not. Auscult. l. 8. c. 15.
that it is impossible the first Mover (or God) can have any Magnitude; but he
must needs be devoid of Parts, and Indivisible. And Plutarch gives us this as
the received and common Opinion of the Stoics, that God was (...), a Spirit
that was extended, or did penetrate throughout the whole World. De Placitis
Philosoph. lib. 1. c. 3. p. 882.

Now by these Passages, and many others that might easily be produced, it
appears very plain that the most Ancient Writers had a good clear Notion of
God, and that they speak of him as of a Mind perfectly distinct from Matter, or
as an immaterial or incorporeal Being. Many of them also deliver themselves
very expressly as to the Soul of Man; which, as Plutarch tells us (...). Lib. de
Placitis Philos. 4. c. 2. p. 898.
, they generally asserted to be Incorporeal; and that it was naturally a
Self-moving and Intelligible Substance. But of this, more in another place. And
that the Ancients did believe God to be a Spirit, or a most Powerful,
Intelligent, and Perfect Immaterial Substance will yet farther appear, if we
consider what Notion they had of, and how they defined Matter or Body. Plato
describes it by the words (...), that which thrusts against other Bodies, and
resists their Touch or Impulse. Others call it (...), that which so fills up a
place, as, at that time, to exclude from it any other Body. Sometimes they
called it the (...), in contradistinction to the (...), or the (...). That is,
they distinguished it to be of a pure passive Nature, and which was acted and
determined only by Impulse from without it, or distinct from it; they knew very
well that there was also besides it, some Active Thing, something that was the
Cause of Motion and Action in the Universe. For, as Plutarch well observes,
(...), (...). De Placitis Philos. Lib. 1. c. 3.
It Is impossible Matter alone can produce any thing, unless there be besides it
some Active Cause. Sextus Empiricus also gives this Definition of Matter or
Body (...). Adv. Math. p. 32.
That it is that which resists other things which are brought against it; for
Resistance, says he, or Impenetrability, is the true Property of Body. By
these Accounts that they have given us of Matter or Body, it is very easy to
understand their Notion or Idea of it; which, indeed, was the Just and True
one. They thought Matter or Body to be a purely Passive Thing, incapable of
moving or acting by it self; but wholly determined either by some Internal and
Self-moving Mind, or by the Motions and Impulses of other Bodies without it:
That it was (...), that is, as we now adays speak, Impenetrably extended, and
did so fill up space or place, as to exclude any other Body from being in the
same Place with it at the same Time: If to this you add what Aristotle, and
some others, said of it, that it was also capable of all Forms, Figures and
Modifications, you have then the whole that ever they thought Matter could do
or be. Now from hence it is exceeding clear that they could not, as indeed we
find actually they did not, think Matter or Body the only Substance in the
World; and that the Deity was Material or Corporeal. For they always described
the Divine Nature by Attributes and Properties that were the very Reverses of
what they appropriated to Matter or Body. God, they have told us, is an
Intelligent Mind, pervading and encompassing all things; an Active Energetical
Principle; the Cause of all Motion and Operation whatever; Intangible,
indivisible, invisible, and no ways the Object of our Bodily Senses; But yet
whose Essence is plainly discoverable by our reasoning and Understanding
Faculty. This was, as we have seen, the Notion or Idea that many of the Ancient
Philosophers had of the Deity; and this plainly shows us, that they looked upon
him to be what St. John here defines him, an Incorporeal Being, or a Spirit.
There were indeed some even then, as I have before showed, who being wholly
immersed in Matter themselves, did assert that there was nothing else but Body
in the World. Such were Leucippus and Democritus; and afterward Epicurus and
his Sect, who perverted the Ancient Atomical and true Philosophy to an
Atheistical Sense, and made use of it for the banishing the Notion and Belief
of a God out of their own and others Minds: as, indeed, some others long before
them had attempted to do (...). Arist. Metaph. l. 1. c. 3. p. 842. Paris.
. But in this, it is very plain (as Dr. Cudw. in his Intellectual Syst. of the
Universe.
an Excellent Person of our Nation has observed) that these Men did not
understand the Philosophy they pretended to: For it does most clearly follow
from the Principles of the True Atomical or Corpuscular Philosophy, that there
must be some other Substance, distinct from, and more Noble than Matter; and
which is of an Immaterial, Incorporeal or Spiritual Nature. And this, I hope,
it will not be judged impertinent briefly to prove at this Time; because some,
who seem not so thoroughly to understand it, have of late reckoned the
Mechanical Philosophy among the Causes of the growth of Atheism and Infidelity.
It is very much to the Purpose, that the Ancient Atomists before Democritus and
Leucippus, did plainly assert and maintain the Doctrine of Incorporeal
Substances, and that the Deity was also of that Nature himself, as I think I
have sufficiently proved in this Discourse; and therefore those confident
Modern Writers, who say that the Ancients never had any Notion of an Immaterial
Being, betray equally their Ignorance with their Assurance: for the Doctrine of
Immaterial Substances was as well the Concomitant, as indeed it is the
Necessary result of this kind of Philosophy. The Embracers of it, found plainly
that they had a clear and distinct Idea of two Things, viz. Passive Matter, and
Active Power; and these they found were perfectly distinct from each other, and
no way dependent at all upon each other. To the former of these, they only
attributed extension and impenetrability, and a Power of being variously
figured, modified, disposed and moved. To the latter, they ascribed Cogitation,
Life, Sensation, and the Power of Motion, which they plainly saw did belong to
this, and could not do so to the other. And these Two, they made the Two Great
Principles or General Heads of Being in the Universe, and called them by two
vastly different Names, as I have before showed, viz. the (...), and the (...).
The one Passive Matter or Bulk, and the other Self-Activity, or Life. In the
former of these, viz. Passive Matter; they found that there was nothing Real,
besides its Bulk, or impenetrably extended Parts: and that consequently all
Forms and Qualities in Bodies were no real Entities distinct from the Body in
which they inhered, but only the Parts of the Body differently modified,
disposed and agitated, and therefore they held, that when any Body received a
new Form or Quality differing from what it had before, there was no new Entity
produced, any more than an old one destroyed; for that they looked upon to be
perfectly Impossible: And this was the true Ground of that Fundamental Axiom of
theirs, That Nothing could be made or produced out of Nothing; which they did
not (as the Modern Atheists do) advance at all in Opposition to a Creative and
Almighty Power's producing all things at first from Nothing; but purely against
the producibleness of real Entities out of Nothing, in an Usual and Natural
way: which those that assert Forms and Qualities to be Substantial and Real
Beings, must needs grant to be daily done. But it was this, and this only, that
that Axiom was levelled against. And hence it was that they asserted the Deity
and the Souls of Men to be real Entities distinct from Matter, and not to be
producible out of the Power of Matter; as all Qualities which are nothing but
Modes of it, they maintained, were: and this made them perhaps have recourse to
the (...) and (...), the Prae-existence and Transmigration of Souls; for they
could never believe their Souls were, as one expresses it, younger than their
Bodies, and that they perished, when the Bodies died. And therefore nothing can
be plainer, than that the very Principles of this Philosophy did lead Men to
the Acknowledgment of Incorporeal Substances, and forced them to believe Life,
Motion, and Cogitation to be things that could not be Modifications of Matter,
nor perishable and producible, as the common Qualities and Forms of Body or
extended Bulk are. And thus when it is rightly considered and thoroughly
understood, the Atomical or Mechanical Philosophy is so far from being any way
instrumental to the leading Men into Atheism, that there is none other that
does so truly distinguish between Matter and Incorporeal Beings; none that
renders the Operations and Qualities of Bodies so Intelligible, and none that
prepares so clear, natural, and easy a way for the Demonstration of Immaterial
Substances, as this kind of Philosophy does. Indeed, as almost all things are,
so This is capable of, and has been made use of to ill Purposes by its
Atheistical Votaries; who did anciently, as they do now, assert that
Cogitation, Life, Sensation, and Active Power, were all producible out of bare
Matter without a Deity. But as this was what the True Atomists never could
think possible; so it is really involved with the most monstrous Absurdities
that ever any Opinion was: and which therefore ought not to be charged on the
Philosophy it self, but only on that Dark, Unintelligible and Inconsistent
System of it, which the Ignorant Atheists have Compiled; and that only to
render it subservient to their wicked Designs of excluding the Idea's of God
and of Incorporeal Substances out of the World. Though (God be thanked) they do
in this Point so far fail of Success, that nothing can be clearer than that
it is utterly impossible to account for any first Cause of things, for
Cogitation, Life, Sensation, or Motion, according to their Principle, that
there is no other Substance but Body: And this necessarily leads me to another
very good Argument, for the Necessity of allowing Incorporeal Substances, and
to prove that God himself is of that Nature, or a Spirit, viz. The strange
Absurdities of the contrary Opinion.

But these being very many, and it being of great moment truly to clear up this
Point, in an Age wherein Men are so fond of Corporealism. I shall deferr this
till my next Discourse: wherein I shall finish this and my remaining Arguments
to Prove God to be a Spirit, and that there are Beings of an Immaterial and
Incorporeal Nature.

The End of the Fourth Sermon.
THE Fifth Sermon.
JOHN iv.24. God is a Spirit. --


I Have already shown the Meaning and Import of these Words, and what we
understand by God's being a Spirit. I have shown you also the Atheist's
Objections against the Immaterial Nature of God, and the Existence of
Incorporeal Substances; and have endeavored to Refute them, from Two
Arguments. I have proved,

1. That it is a precarious and unfair way of Arguing against the Existence of
any thing, only because our particular Apprehensions and Conceptions cannot
master it: And that it will not follow, That there is no such thing as an
Incorporeal Substance, on the Account only of some Men's declaring that they
cannot conceive how any such thing can be. Where likewise I showed, That the
Notion of a Spirit, or an Immaterial Substance, is as Intelligible as that of
Body; and that we have as much reason to believe the Existence of the former,
as of the latter.

2. I have plainly proved, That the Notion of Incorporeal Substances has all
along been believed and received by many Knowing and Judicious Men amongst the
most Ancient Writers and Philosophers; and consequently that it can neither be
Nonsense and Impossible, nor of so late an Original as the perverted Philosophy
of Aristotle: both which the Atheists are pleased to assert.

3. I proceed now to speak to a Third Argument, To prove the Deity to be of a
Spiritual or Immaterial Nature, and that there are Incorporeal Substances: And
this I shall draw from the many and strange Absurdities of the contrary
Opinion, That there is nothing but Matter in the World. And if these can fully
be made to appear, I hope the Doctrine involved with them will also appear
false and precarious; and that the contrary Opinion, of the Real Existence of
Incorporeal Beings, will find an easy admittance into our Faith. But here I
must premise, as taken for granted, That we are all agreed on the Definition
of, or know what we mean by Matter or Body, viz. That it is Substance
Impenetrably extended; whereby we distinguish it from Spirit, which is a
Thinking Substance without Corporeal Extension, or without having Parts extra
Parts. For if this be not the Notion which our Adversaries have of it, as well
as we; It Is in vain to dispute about it at all. If therefore they have any
other Idea of it that is different from this, let them produce it, and make it
as clear and Intelligible as this is; for without doing so, they do nothing to
the purpose. And if they have not a clear and distinct Idea of Matter or Body,
how come they so boldly to say that Matter and Substance are all one? how can
they distinguish the Idea's of Body and Spirit so plainly, as to be sure there
can be no such thing as an Incorporeal Substance, but that it implies a
Contradiction? Unless they fully know what Matter or Body is, there may be
Millions of Varieties and Degrees of Immaterial Substances; or there may be no
such thing as Body at all, for any thing they can prove to the contrary. The
Atheist must then do one of these two things; he must either establish a new
Notion of Matter, that shall be so intelligible and plain, that all Mankind
shall as readily acquiesce in it, as they do in the old and common one, or else
he must resolve to keep to That. The former of these he has not yet done, nor
I believe is very ready to do; but when he does it, 'twill be time enough to
consider it. In the mean while, I will readily join Issue with him, on the
common and received Notion of Body: And from thence undertake to maintain, That
nothing is more absurd and unaccountable than their Assertion, That there is no
other Substance but Matter or Body in the World. For,

First, Had there been nothing else but Matter in the World from Eternity (and
if there be nothing else now, there never was any thing else) I cannot possibly
see how these Gentlemen can account for Motion, (...), says Anaxagoras. Vid.
Diog. Laert.
or show us how Matter came first to be moved. And Matter without Motion sure
could never be God, never be the Cause of any thing, nor could it ever produce,
act, or do any thing whatever. Before Motion began, Matter could have been
nothing but an heavy, lifeless Lump of vast extended Bulk; which must have lain
also for ever in the same dead and unactive Position, if nothing had been
superinduced to put it into Motion and Action. And no one sure can be so stupid
as to call this a Deity! This is as Mr. Blount rudely and irreverently
expresses himself, worse than to suppose Oracles of Reason, p. 126, 127.
a Hum-Drum-Deity, chewing of his own Nature; a Droning God, that sits hoarding
up of his Providence from his Creatures. And this even he cannot but
acknowledge, is an Atheism no less Irrational, than to deny the very Essence of
a Divine Being. I hope therefore they will grant, that Matter without Motion
cannot be supposed to be a Deity. And if so, then the Divine Nature (whatever
it be) must be something distinct from, and more Noble than Matter, and more
akin to Motion, than to Matter or Body in general, or to it quatenus Matter, as
the Schools speak. And indeed, Motion taken in this sense, not for a
translation of Body from one place to another, but for the Active Cause of
Motion, may be very well said to be Incorporeal, or the Deity it self. But how
came this Motion into Matter at first? and which way did Matter attain this
Divine Activity, or God-like Energy? Here they must assert one of these three
things, either, 1. That Motion came into Matter from something without it, and
distinct from it. Or, 2. That Motion is Essential to Matter, and Coeternal
with it. Or, 3. That it came into it afterward by Chance, or without any Cause
at all. The First of these they will not say, I doubt, because it is Truth: but
however, if they do, our Controversy is at an end; for we believe that 'twas a
Divine and powerful Mind, perfectly distinct from, and more Noble than Matter,
who first made it, and moved it, and does still continue to modifie and dispose
it according to his Infinite Wisdom and Providence.

And one would think no Man can be so senseless as to maintain the last, viz.
That Motion came into Matter without any Cause at all, and that it was Chance
only that first produced it; for Chance here signifies nothing in reality: And
truly, Men that will be so ridiculously absurd as to assert, that a Body, or
Particle of Matter, that is once at rest, may move by Chance only, or may
Chance to move of it self, though there be nothing to cause its Motion, deserve
no serious Refutation, but ought to be treated only as we do Fools and Madmen,
with silent Pity and Compassion. And yet so very fond are some Persons of any
thing that opposes Truth, that they will run into the greatest Absurdities to
maintain it. For a late Corporealist is pleased to say, Observe. on Dr.
Bentley's Sermon. p. 6, 7.
That Matter can move of it self: and to show his deep Skill in Philosophy, he
tells us, that Wind, Fire, and very fine-sifted small Dust, are Matter, and yet
Self movers. And of Wind and Fire, he profoundly asserts, That they cannot lose
their Motion, or cease Moving, so long as they continue to be Wind and Fire.
That is, As long as Wind and Fire are in Motion, they cannot cease to move.
This, indeed, is a very deep and important Discovery! But yet it is what hardly
any Man would have published in Print, but one that concludes a Body must needs
move of it self, only because he cannot see with his Eyes the Cause or Origin of
its Motion. And yet even this he may often see in the case of Fire, if he will
but vouchsafe to observe how it is usually kindled. A little Consideration would
have satisfied him also, that Winds may be produced in the Atmosphere, by the
Air's being moved some way, by Heat, Compression, or some other Accidental
Cause, as well as in an Eolipile, or a Pair of Bellows. And as for his fine
Dust's rising up in a Cloud of it self; had he understood that the Agitation of
any Fluid will keep the small Particles of any heavier Matter mixed with it
from descending to the bottom of it, nay, and raise them up from thence too;
and had he not forgotten that this was the case here, (the Air being so
agitated by the Motion of Sifting) he would not, sure, have been so silly as to
have brought these as Instances of Spontaneous Motion in Matter. But however,
he is not the first that has been guilty of this Absurdity. For Aristotle
upbraids some, in his time, Metaph. l. 1. c. 3.
with introducing Motion into Matter, without any Cause, or without supposing
any Principle whence it should proceed.

The Second Point therefore, is, I suppose, that which our Corporealist will
adhere to, viz. That Motion is Essential to, and Coeternal with Matter; and
that either all Matter and Motion taken together, or else some Fine and Subtle
Parts of it are the Deity. But this, if it be thoroughly considered, will appear
almost as absurd and unaccountable as that Matter should be moved without any
Cause at all. For, in the first place, it is plain, That Motion is not
Essentially included in the Idea of Matter. I can conceive Matter to the full
as well, if not better, when it is at rest, as when it is in Motion. When I
look on any Body, or consider any determinate quantity of Matter, I can
conceive that it is a Substance that is impenetrably extended, divisible, and
moveable; that it fills up such a space, and that it excludes any Body from
being there with it at the same time, without conceiving it to be in Motion at
all; much less being forced to acknowledge that it must be, and was always in
Motion. Whereas certainly, if Motion were as Essential to Matter, as
Impenetrability and Extension, 'twere as impossible for me to conceive it at
rest, as it is to conceive it without those Qualifications or Properties: But
no doubt I have as true an Idea of a Stone or a Bullet, or of any other Body or
Part of Matter, when it lies still on the Ground, as I have of it when it is
projected from a Sling or a Gun. Now if Motion be not Essentially included in
the Idea or Notion that we have of Matter, how can any one suppose it as
Essential to, and Coeternal with it? This is a Conclusion beyond the power of
our Reason to make; no one can come to it naturally, and in the ordinary way of
Apprehending and Reasoning; and it is much more Unintelligible and Mysterious
than a great many other things which they pretend they cannot believe purely on
this account.

But supposing that Motion be Essential to Matter; it must then be so to every
Particle of it, and that Uniformly alike, or in the same Proportion. And if so,
then every Atom of Matter must always retain its Original Degree of Motion or
Velocity, and can never possibly be deprived of it: For no Accidental Cause can
any way either increase or diminish, promote or hinder the Essential Properties
of a Being. Thus, for Instance, take a Particle of Matter, or any Body
whatever, and move it as fast or as slow as you please, place it where or how
you please, separate it from other Particles or Bodies, or combine it with
them; still 'twill retain its Essential Properties of Extension and
Impenetrability, and they will receive no Intension and Remission all this
while. But now it is quite otherwise in the case of Motion; we find the same
Body may be brought to move sometimes faster, sometimes slower, and sometimes
(to all appearance) be reduced to absolute rest; which could never be, if
Motion were Essential to each Particle of Matter, in such a Determinate Degree
of Velocity, and there were (as is now supposed) Nothing else without or
distinct from Matter to put it into Motion. For then nothing could ever
accelerate or retard its Motion: no one Body could ever move faster or slower
than another. But a Snail or the Pigritia would keep pace with the seemingly
Instantaneous irradiations of Light.

And thus we may see plainly, that without supposing some Principle of Motion
distinct from Matter, Motion could never have come into it, nor have been
coeternal with it.

But allowing them that Motion should get into Matter neither they nor we know
how, or that it is Eternal and Essential to it: If there be nothing else but
Matter and Motion in the Universe, which way will they account for the Deity?
they dare not say Matter alone without Motion can be God; and I think there can
be nothing more clear, than that Bare Motion in Matter can never make a Deity.
For if Motion came into Matter any time after its Existence, the Deity must
then be produced, and consequently receive a Beginning; and so the First Cause
of all things must be caused himself after all things, which is contradictory
to the Notion of a Deity.

If they say that Motion is Coeternal with, and Essential to Matter, and the
Deity be Matter thus Eternally moved; then either every Particle of Matter must
be essentially God, or else he must be the result of the whole, or of some
Parts of Matter combined together. If the former be asserted, there must of
necessity be as many Gods as there are Atoms or Physical Monads: for each of
them are Individually distinct from each other, and have their separate and
peculiar Properties of Impenetrability, Extension and Motion; which in this
fine Hypothesis, are the only Perfections of the Divine Nature. But no doubt
they will say, that it is not any one Particle of Matter that is a God alone,
and therefore they cannot be all Deities singly; But it is all of them, or at
least a good convenient Number of these luckily combined together, out of whom
the Deity is composed. Though which of these to stick to, our Corporealists are
very much at a loss; Spinoza asserting the former, and Mr. Hobbs the latter.
But I think it is no great matter which they adhere to; for both are alike
unaccountable and absurd: For if there be not a Divine Nature, and its
Perfections, in each single Atom of Matter; will barely combining some, or all
of them, together make a Deity of them? Can it ever enter into the Heart of Man
to conceive that barely collecting together a parcel of roving Particles of
Matter, such as agitated Dust, or Motes moving up and down in the Sun, will
ever unite them into a God? give the Combination Almighty Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness? when there was nothing like this before in any of the Atoms
themselves? Certainly, Men that can assert such monstrous Opinions as these, do
not think as other People do; or, indeed, rather do not think at all. These
certainly labor under the Disease mentioned by Epictetus, of (...), Arrian.
Lib. 1. c. 5.
a stony Insensibility or Deadness of Understanding, by which they are besotted
and stupefied in their Intellectuals; so that they can believe and assert any
thing, if it be subservient to their designs, though never so contradictory to
the clearest light of Reason and Truth.

But to go on: Granting to the Corporealists that Matter either has been
always in Motion, or for what time they please; allowing its Particles to be
small or great, to move swiftly or slowly, and to be combined together, or
disjoined from each other as they think fit. I enquire what all this will
signify toward producing of Cogitation, Wisdom, and Understanding? or to the
production of Life, Self Activity, or Spontaneous Power? And yet These are the
most Great and Noble Things in the World; these are the highest Perfections of
the Divine Nature, and in these we place the Essence of the Deity.

Now here Matter and Motion is more than ever at a loss; and I think it
demonstratively certain that it cannot account for these things. Aristotle did
very truly find fault with the Corporealists of his Time, that they did not, as
ours cannot now, assign (...), Lib. 1. Metaph. c. 3.
any Cause of well and fit; any Origin of, or Reason for that Wisdom and
Regularity, that harmonious Relation and Aptitude of one part of the Creation
to another, which is so very conspicuous in all things; supposing that there is
nothing in Nature but Matter and Motion. And it is most certainly true, that
the Idea which we have of Body does not necessarily include Cogitation in it,
nor our Notion of Cogitation include Body: but they are two as distinct Idea's
as any we have. So far are they from being the same thing, that we cannot
possibly conceive Cogitation with Extension. No Man ever conceived a Thought to
be so many Inches or Yards long; to be deep, thick or broad, to be divisible
into two or more Parts, or to have any Kind of Figure or determinate Position
or Extension; whereas if whatsoever be unextended, or not Body, be absolutely
Nothing, as these Gentlemen assert: Cogitation, Wisdom, Understanding, and
Spontaneous Power must be nothing: or else they must be figurate Bodies; than
which nothing can be more absurd. And if we farther examine our own Mind, and
consult our own Reason, we shall find that we cannot possibly conceive how
thinking, Wisdom, Consciousness, and Spontaneous Power can possibly be the
result of Bare Motion of the Parts of Matter. Was there ever any one that
seriously believed a Particle of Matter was any Wiser or had any more
Understanding for being moved than it was before when it lay still? for let it
be never so briskly agitated, is it not still Body? there is no other Idea
arises from hence, but only that it changes its place, and is united
successively to several parts of space, that it will move such other Particles
of Matter as it is capable of, and be retarded in its Motion by hitting or
striking against them; these, and such like, are all the Ideas that we can have
of a Body in Motion; but what is this to Thought and Consciousness? Did ever
any one but a stupid Corporealist imagine that a Particle of Matter by being
moved, was made Intelligent? and that its traveling from place to place, made
it understand all things in its way? and did any one ever think that the
Knowledge of such a rambling Atom increased in Proportion to the velocity of
its Motion? Yes, doubtless! and thus a Bullet discharged from the Mouth of a
Cannon, ought to be looked upon as one of the most Ingenious Beings in Nature.
And hence it will follow, that the more have any one makes to tumble over
Books, or to ramble over Countries; and the more precipitantly he makes a
judgment of Notions or Opinions, the Better Account he can give of Authors and
Places; and the more solid and substantial will be his Learning. This, indeed,
is the best Account that can be given of the fineness and quickness of Thought,
that some Men so much pretend to; for this way they may come by a vast share of
Penetration, and be volatilized far above the dull studious and considerate
Vulgar: and the Event shows that they frequently make use of the Experiment.

But again; As we cannot possibly conceive that the Motion of one Particle of
Matter alone, can give it Knowledge and Understanding; so neither can we
suppose that a Body composed of many of them, can acquire any such thing barely
on the Account of the Motion or Agitation of its Parts, for Motion only will do
no more to the whole, than it did to each one singly; and it is not conceivable
that Three, or Three Millions of Bullets will be any wiser for being discharged
together, than if they were all shot singly in pursuit of Understanding. Nor
can any happy Combination or Constitution of Parts avail any thing in this
Case, any more than Motion; nor can that be effectual to super-induce Wisdom
and Understanding into Matter. The (...) will be no more a God, than Jupiter's
Log was among the Frogs, nor than the most dense and gross body in Nature. For
after all the various Positions, Configurations, and Combinations of Matter, is
it not Matter still? will rarefying or subtilizing of Matter change its Nature
and Essential Properties? A Rare Body is nothing but a contexture of fine and
subtle Particles, which being separated farther asunder than is usual, are
also perhaps more briskly agitated and moved. And pray what is here new? what
will this do toward Divinity? will bare Figure and Position of Parts change
the Nature of those Parts, and give them Cogitation and Knowledge when they had
no such thing singly and before? will adding, subtracting, multiplying or
dividing of Numbers, make them any thing else more Noble than what they were
before? will not the Sums, Remainders, Products, or Quotients be still Figures
and Numbers like the first Digits, out of which these do by Combination or
various Positions arise? and is it not just so with Matter? will a Particle of
it be made any more Wise and Intelligent, for being rendered smaller than it
was before? and has a little Particle more Sense than a larger? will Three or
Four, or Four Millions of these be more ingenious than a Body or Lump that is
as big as them all? and will moving a few Atoms a good distance from each
other, Separate them into Knowledge, and Disjoin them into an Understanding
Power which none of them had before? If Men can swallow such things as these,
and think at this Extravagant and Unaccountable Rate; I fear all good Arguments
and sound Reason will be lost upon them, and they ought to be neglected as
downright Stupid or Distracted. And yet these, and such like Absurdities, must
be the Natural Consequences of supposing Matter and Motion alone capable of
thinking, that Matter can be rarefied into a Deity, and that Divine and
Almighty Wisdom, Knowledge, Goodness and Power, are the result of Body luckily
disposed and moved; which yet was the Opinion of Hobbs, and is still of many of
his Admirers and Followers. For notwithstanding those Excellent Demonstrations
that many Learned Men Dr. Cudworth, Dr. Bentley, and others.
amongst us have established, that Matter and Motion cannot possibly produce
Cogitation, Consciousness, Understanding and Liberty of Will: There is lately
an Ignorant Corporealist who asserts, Observations on Dr. Bentley's Sermon, p.
10.
That the Inflamed and glowing Particles of the Blood, called Spirits, though
they are not in themselves Sentient and Intelligent, are yet the active
Principle of Life and Motion, of Sense and Understanding in Man and Beast; and
do act the Understanding or Brain to apprehend, judge and remember. Now by this
it is plain that he supposes Cogitation, Understanding, Consciousness and
Liberty, and all the Faculties of the Soul of Man to be nothing but the result
of some peculiar Motions in a Fitly organized Body. The Animal Spirits he
thinks are like the Elastick Particles in the Spring of a Watch, though they
cannot tell what a Clock it is themselves, yet they can by means of the Spring
which they actuate, do that and many other things that the Movement shall be
fitted for: Or to make use of a Comparison of his own; The Animal Spirits may
do as the Wind does in the Chest of an Organ, though it can make no Music of it
self, yet by being communicated so as to inspire the several Pipes, it may
actuate them into a very fine Harmony.

It is not my Business nor Design to discourse here of the Soul of Man: but yet
I would fain beg these Corporealists clearly to explain, how
Self-Consciousness, Reflection, and Liberty of Action can possibly be accounted
for by this Hypothesis. For this necessarily makes Men mere Machines at long
run. An Engine is never the more free and conscious to its self of its own
Operations for being fine and curiously contrived: And the wonderful Clock at
Strasburgh knows no more what it does, nor is it any more the Spontaneous Cause
of its so many and curious Motions, than the Ancient Clepsydra, or a modern
Hourglass knows what it is about, when it rudely measures the Duration of
any Part of Time. For whatever is performed by mere Matter and Motion must
needs be necessary in every step and degree of its course, be the way of acting
in the Engine never so curious, and never so remote from the cognizance of our
Senses. They know well enough, as I shall show below, that there is no possible
room for freedom of Action, Consciousness of any Operation, nor for a
Cogitative and Reasoning Power, according to this way of explicating the
Operations of the Humane Soul. For in the Animal Spirits they grant there is no
such thing; they are only a fiery and briskly agitated Fluid, which serves to
actuate any Part of the Rational Machine pro re nata: And these several Parts
or Organs of the Machine can no more produce any such thing without the Animal
Spirits, than the Hand or Dial-Plate of a Watch can, or any other Part of a
curious Instrument. If therefore you enquire of them, wherein they place this
Cogitation, Self-Consciousness and Liberty; they will tell you it is in the Man,
it is in the whole; it is neither his Soul alone, nor his Body alone; it is no
Spiritual Substance distinct from Matter, but it is the whole Man that thinks,
reasons, and acts freely by the form of the whole: But this is very
unaccountable, and is what neither they nor any one else, I believe, can ever
apprehend or conceive; that Liberty should be the result of Necessarily moved
Matter; that Cogitation should arise from Senseless and Unthinking Atoms, and
that Knowledge and Consciousness of its own Operations should come into any
Engine by its being finely and curiously contrived, and be nothing but the
necessary result of bare local Motion, and rightly Organized Matter.

These Absurdities some other Corporealists clearly perceiving, and being fully
convinced that it is impossible to account for Cogitation, Consciousness, and
the like, from bare Matter and Motion; and to educe the Perfections of the
Deity out of the Power of Matter only. These, I say, had recourse to another
way of maintaining their beloved Assertion, that there is no other Substance
but Body. They assert, that Cogitation is Essential to Matter: or, as Spinoza
words it, All Substance is essentially Cogitative and Extended; so that as
there is no Substance but what is Material, so there is none but what is
Cogitative too. Indeed, as I showed you before, he asserts that there is but
One only Substance, which is God, or in other words, Universal Matter; and
Cogitation and Extension (he says) are the two Infinite Attributes, or else
the Affections of the Attributes of the Deity Op. Posthum. p. 12. and 14.
. And this, with a great deal of Assurance (as the way of these Writers is) he
pretends to demonstrate Mathematically, by a Pompous, though a very Obscure,
Apparatus of Definitions, Axioms, Postulates and Propositions. But it is not
calling a thing a Demonstration, that will make it to be so; nor concluding
with Quod erat Demonstrandum, that will make every body acquiesce in a
Proposition, when it is either perfectly unintelligible or false. And yet such
are those that Spinoza brings to prove and support this strange Opinion. The
Monstrous Absurdities of which, I shall now consider.

And First, It Is plain, That if Cogitation be as Essential to Matter as
Extension; Then all and every Particle of it must needs be a Thinking Substance
or Body by it self, Distinct from all Other Particles of Matter in the World.
There is no one doubts but it is so, in reference to the proper and allowed
Affections of Body, Impenetrability and Extension. Every least Particle or Atom
of Matter has these Properties as complete within it self, as they are in the
whole Bulk of the Universe, or in any larger Body whatsoever: These are also
individually distinct in each Particle; so that its Properties, though of the
same kind, are not the very same with those of other Parts of Matter. Now if to
each such Particle of Matter Cogitation be also added; then every Atom in the
Universe will be a Thinking, Intelligent and Reasoning Being, distinct from all
the rest, and have its own proper and peculiar Faculties and Operations; 'twill
be a different Person from all Others; and every Individual Particle of Matter
will be so from it, and from every one else in the World. Every Atom also will
be equal to any of the rest, in respect of this Cogitative Power; will have it
in the very same Proportion, and not be wiser or more foolish, duller or more
ingenious than its neighbors. And if this be so (as it must necessarily be, if
all Matter be Essentially Cogitative) then there must either be no God at all,
or else every Particle of Matter must be a distinct God by it self; and so the
most ridiculous Polytheism that ever was imagined, must be introduced and
allowed of. For if there be any such things as Perfect Knowledge, Power, Wisdom
and Goodness, every one of these Particles must have it: For it is impossible
Infinite or Perfect Power, Wisdom, Knowledge and Goodness, can be produced out
of finite; the lesser can never produce the greater, nor any thing make or give
that which it has not within it self: And therefore it plainly follows, that
either there is no Deity at all, or else that every Particle of Matter must be
a God by it self, according to this Hypothesis. For finite or imperfect
Cogitation can no more be the Cause of Infinite, than Cogitation can arise from
incogitative Matter. And this Spinoza saw very well; and therefore he asserts
all Cogitation, as well as all Substance, to be Infinite Op. Post. p. 21.6. 4,
5.
. Indeed, to avoid this abominable Absurdity of each Particle of Matter's being
God by it self; he says, that there is but one only Substance in Nature, and
that this is God Ib. p. 12.
But this will not help him out, nor do him much service in defending him from
the horrid Absurdities of this Notion. For if by Substance, he mean only
Substance in general, or the Idea that we have of some Substratum, Support or
Subject of Inhesion in which we conceive the Properties and Accidents of Real
Beings to inhere; as by his Definition of Substance he seems to imply; It Is
plain, this is only a Metaphysical Notion, only a general Word or Term that
serves to denote our conception of something in a Being that does not depend
upon the Properties of it, nor inhere in them, but they upon and in it. But we
can have no Notion of Substance existing without any Properties, any more than
of Properties without it. If therefore he mean that God is such a Substance as
this, that God is the Term or Idea of Substance in general, he makes the Deity
nothing at all but a mere Name, a mere Ens Rationis, or Creature of the Brain
only; than which nothing can be more ridiculous and foolish. For it is the
Attributes or Properties of the Deity that we chiefly contend for, and which we
are chiefly obliged to Acknowledge and Reverence; and it is These that we assert
must be inherent in an Infinite and Immaterial Substance, or Spirit. But if by
there being but one only Substance, which he says is God, Spinoza means, that
the Deity is the whole Mass of Beings or of Matter in the Universe, as by what
he delivers in many places, I do really believe that he did; for he asserts,
that all Corporeal Substance is Infinite and One Ib. p. 14.
; and that Extension and Cogitation are the Attributes, or the Affections of
the Attributes of God, as I hinted before. I say, if this be his Opinion, there
cannot possibly be a more unaccountable, absurd and impossible Notion of God
advanced. And it is also absolutely inconsistent and contradictions with what he
does at other times assert. For if Substance, Matter, and God, signify all the
same thing, and all Matter be Essentially Cogitative, as such; Then it is plain,
as I have showed already, that God cannot be the whole Matter of the Universe,
but each Particle of Matter will be a God by it self. For if there be any such
thing as Infinite Perfection, it must be Essentially in every Particle of
Matter; otherwise Infinite Perfection may arise out of what is only Finite,
which is impossible. And if every Particle of Matter have this Infinite
Perfection, the whole Mass of these, Collectively considered, will be by no
means One God, or One Being, Infinitely Perfect, but a Swarm of Innumerable
Deities, every one of which will be Personally distinct from each other, and
yet contain all possible Perfection in it self. But allowing him all the
Collective Mass of Beings, or the Universe to be God; What a strange kind of a
Deity would this make? The Divine Nature must then necessarily be Divisible,
part of it here, and part there; part of it in Motion, and part of it at Rest;
part of it Hot, and part Cold; part Fire, and part Water; and, in a word,
subject to all manner of Imperfections, Vicissitudes, Changes, Contrarieties
and Alterations that can be imagined. But this the common Sense of all Mankind
will abhor and detest to be spoken of the Deity: and besides, it is contrary to
what Spinoza asserts in other places, where he says Substance is Indivisible
Ib. p. 11.
. But how there can be but One Only Substance, and that the Matter of the
Universe; and how this Substance can be Indivisible, when yet each Particle of
Matter must be a distinct Substance by it self, and is divisible, and divided
from all others, as our Reason and our Senses do every day inform us, is a
flight of Metaphysics above my Understanding, and can, I believe, never be
conceived by any one that understands the meaning of the Words or Terms such an
Opinion shall be delivered in. But he indeed that does not, and that will
admire lofty and insignificant Sounds, without Sense, or he that has some
wicked and base Design to cover under such Cant, may conceive any thing, or at
least say that he does so.

The Operations and Actions also of a Corporeal Deity (were it possible there
should be such an one) must be all absolutely Necessary, and determined by pure
Physical and Mechanical Fatality. For he would be really and truly Natura
Naturata, only the bare Result of Motion in Matter, as it is variously formed,
figured, moved and disposed so as to produce any Natural Effect. And this, I
doubt not but some of these Corporealists very well understand; and that is the
reason that makes them so very fond of the Notion of a Corporeal Deity, and of
asserting, That there is nothing in the World but Body: For then they know very
well, that there can be nothing but (...) in Nature, such a Physical Necessity
as will perfectly exclude all Freedom and Liberty of Will amongst Men, and
consequently destroy all Notions of, and Distinctions between Good and Evil.
They don't care to say plainly there is no God, that looks a little too
barefaced: for Atheism is a Name they don't love to take. But they will
readily and studiously endeavor to advance such an Account and Notion of a
Deity as shall do as well; such an one as they know is in effect the same as to
say there is no God at all. And this the representing him as Corporeal, will
effectually do; for this subjects Him to a Physical Necessity, makes Him
nothing at all but Nature, and deprives both Him and us of the Noble Principle
of Freedom of Will: and then they know that there can be no such things as
Rewards and Punishments proportionate to Men's Actions; but that all things are
alike, without any distinction of Good and Evil, and consequently that they may
do any thing that they have a mind to. And this appears to be the Issue that
they would willingly bring all things to; For if this were not the case, what
Reason can be given why Men should be such zealous Sticklers for a Corporeal
Deity? Why should they still, in spite of Sense, Reason and Philosophy,
maintain, That there can be no such thing as an Incorporeal or Immaterial
Substance? Is it purely out of a devout and holy Desire to understand the
Divine Nature more clearly, in order to speak of him more properly, to adore
him more religiously, and obey him more heartily? I fear, not: For if Matter
and Motion can Think, and (as they say) the Properties or Attributes of God can
be accountable that way, and there be really and truly a Wise, Powerful, Just
and Good God, though Corporeal; why should not these Gentlemen look upon
themselves obliged to obey such a God, as well as a Spiritual one? Why do they
quarrel with, and cast off his Holy Word, and reject and despise his Revealed
Will? Is not a Corporeal Deity (according to their Notion) truly a Being
endowed with all possible Perfections. Is not He the First Cause, Maker and
Preserver of all Things? and consequently is not He as fit and worthy to be
worshipped as well as a Spiritual One? and cannot such a Deity acquaint his
Creatures how he will be worshipped and served? cannot He Reward them for so
doing, and Punish them for offending against Him, equally as if He were
Incorporeal? If he cannot, indeed, then there is something more than bare
Speculation in the case, and there must be some substantial Reason why Deists
and Antiscripturists are always Corporealists. And this is the truth of the
Matter; the God of the Corporealists is not the True Deity, whatever they may
pretend, but a blind, stupid, senseless Idol, that has nothing but the Name of
God wickedly applied to it. It Is only Nature or a Plastic Power in Nature, the
whole mass of, or some sine, subtle and active Parts of Matter in rapid
Motion, without any Understanding, Quando attribuimus Deo sensus, Scientiam and
Intellectum, quae in nobis nihil aliud sunt quam suscitatus a rebus externis
organa prementibus animi Tumultus, non est putandum aliquid tale accidere Deo.
Hobbs de Civ. c. xv..14. p. 271. The same thing he says also, Leviath. c. 31.
p. 190.
Wisdom, or Design, without liberty of Will or freedom of Action; but
Physically and Mechanically Necessary in all its Operations. Their God is
(...), and (...), as Herodotus speaks, he is the Servant of Necessity, and
cannot possibly himself avoid the destined fate. And to be sure, if God be not
a free Agent, Nothing else can: for all things flowing from him by an
inevitable Necessity Omnia Inevitabili necessitate ex Dei Natura sequi statuo.
Op. Past. p. 453. Vid. etiam, p. 24, 18, 26, etc.
, or being Parts of Him, as Spinoza asserts, they must be under the same
Necessity with the Deity, and he says plainly, That every thing that is
determined to Operate, is so determined necessarily by God, and could not act
at all if God did not thus necessarily determine it Op. Post. p. 24.
. That the Will of Man cannot be called free, but is only a necessary Cause P.
28.
. And in another place P. 36.
he tells us plainly, that there are no such things as final Causes in Nature,
they being only the Ignorant Figments of Mankind; but that all things are
Governed by Absolute Necessity. A while after this, P. 37.
he asserts Man to be a mere Machine, and says, that it is only those who are
Ignorant of Causes that say he was thus finely formed by any Art or Design; or
who attribute his Composition to any Supernatural Wisdom. And then at last he
comes to the great Point on which all this Philosophy turns; which is, That
Good and Evil are not by Nature; but that the Notions of them came only from
Men's mistaken Opinion, that all things were made for them; and who therefore
call that Good which is agreeable to their Fancy, and that Evil which is
contrary to it. By which short Connection of their Opinions, it is clear enough
why Spinoza was a Corporealist, as also why Mr. Hobbs advanced the same
Notions. And I doubt those that Espouse the same Opinions now adays, know too
well the Consequences of them.

But of the Precariousness of these Notions, I must say no more now; designing
particularly to confute them hereafter, as they are made Objections against the
Truth, and Obligation of Religion in general.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
REmarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth; By John Harris, M. A. and Fellow of the
Royal-Society. In Octavo.

Discourses on several Practical Subjects; By the late Reverend William Pain,
D. D. with a Preface giving some Account of his Life, Writings, and Death.

Both Printed for Richard Wilkin.

A REFUTATION of the Objections Against the ATTRIBUTES of GOD in general.

IN A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, September the Fifth,
School.

BEING The Sixth of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

JEREM. ix.24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight, says the Lord.


PRide and Vainglory, are Things which Human Nature is strangely subject to;
there being scarce any one so mean, but who judges that he has something or
other that he may justly be Proud of, and value himself for. But as Pride is
Folly in the general, so it apparently discovers itself in this respect, That
those Men are usually most Vain, who have the least Reason to be so, and that
too in Things that are the least valuable in themselves. Thus, as the Prophet
intimates in the Verse before the Text, Men frequently glory in Bodily
Strength, in Beauty, and Agility, and in the Affluence of external Possessions:
Things which are the meanest Appurtenances to our Natures, and which are
neither in our Power to get nor keep. Wisdom indeed, and Judgment, Learning and
Parts, Wit and Penetration, and all the Nobler Endowments of our Minds, are
things of the greatest intrinsic Worth and Value, and we have much more reason
to esteem our selves for them, than for all the Goods of Fortune, or any Bodily
Excellencies. But yet, Let not the wise man Glory in his Wisdom and Knowledge
neither; though as the Targum on the place hints, it were as great as that of
Solomon himself; for we have in reality no just ground to value our selves for
even this, when we consider that the best of us have it but in a very slender
Proportion; and that our highest Knowledge is very imperfect and defective.
Hence it comes to pass, or at least ought to do so, that the Modesty and
Humility of truly knowing Men increases with their Learning and Experience:
Their being raised something above the common level, instead of lessening and
shortening in their Eyes the Statures of other Men, increases their Prospect of
a Boundless Field of Knowledge all around them; the more of which they
discover, the more they find yet undiscovered. But he that knows but little,
vainly thinks he knows every thing, and judges all is empty and void that is
without the Bounds of his scanty Horizon.

Another great Vanity there is also in Pride, which is, That Men are frequently
conceited and Proud of those things, which they have the least share of, and
are fond of such Actions as do plainly discover their Defects. For usually
those Men are most forward to talk of Learning, who are least acquainted with
Books; and those make the greatest Noise about, and Pretensions to Philosophy,
who have the least insight into Nature. Those who talk most of Certainty and
Demonstration have usually the most confused Idea's, and the most Superficial
Notions of things, and are the farthest of all Men from true Science. This is
apparently seen in the Pretenders to Skepticism and Infidelity, and in all the
Atheistical Writers. No Men express themselves with such an insupportable
Insolence as these New Lights, these Reformers of our Philosophy and our
Politics; who yet after all are Proud knowing nothing, as St. Paul speaks,
Romans 1.21. But are vain in their imaginations; their foolish heart is darkened,
and professing themselves to be wise, they become fools. And therefore it is
that the wisdom of God appears as foolishness to them, because the carnal mind
savoureth not the things that are of God.

Though would Men but studiously apply themselves to consider of, would they
carefully and impartially examine into, and would they but seriously make use
of those Means that God has graciously given Mankind, in order to attain a
sufficient Knowledge of his Nature and Perfections; They would then find so
much Beauty, Wisdom, Harmony, and Excellency in this inexhaustible Fund of
Knowledge, as would sufficiently Reward their Pains and Endeavors. And this we
may glory in; this Knowledge will be the most noble and honorable that our
Capacities can attain unto; and in comparison of which, there is no other
Qualification and Excellence in our Natures at all valuable. For here we have
an Object the greatest and most perfect that can be, the more we know of which,
the more we shall exalt and perfect our selves. Here are no empty Speculations;
no difficiles Nugae, no false Lights, nor Fantastical Appearances; but it is a
real and substantial, an useful and practical Knowledge; a Knowledge that does
not only delight us for the present, but which brings constant and lasting
Satisfaction here, and eternal Happiness hereafter. Let him therefore that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows God, that He is the
Lord, who exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth,
for in these things do I delight, says the Lord. In which words, there are
these two Things chiefly considerable: I. A Supposition that God is capable of
being known to us by his Attributes.

II. An Account of some of those Attributes which he exercises in the Earth,
and in which he delights.



Under which Two Heads, I shall, in pursuance of my general Design, endeavor
to Answer those Objections that Atheistical Men have brought against the
Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature.

1. Here is a Supposition that God is capable of being known to us by his
Attributes. He that glories, let him glory in this, that he understands and
knows God, that he is the Lord, who exercises loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth.

It Is plainly supposed here, That this Knowledge which we are directed to
acquire, is a possible Knowledge. God would not command us to understand him by
his Attributes of Goodness, Mercy and Justice, which he continually exercises
in the Earth, if it were impossible for us to attain to it: He would not
delight to do such Works in the World, if nothing of them could be known, nor
himself by them. But the Psalmist tells us, the Lord is known by his Works: And
that the Heavens declare his Glory, and the Firmament shows his handy work:
And St. Paul is express, That the Invisible Things of Him are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead.

And indeed, These Attributes of God are what is most and best known to us, and
from the certain Knowledge that we have of these, we may be effectually assured
of the Existence of some first Cause, some Supreme Being in whom all these
Attributes and Perfections must inhere. The Infinite Nature, indeed, of This
Divine Being is Incomprehensible to our shallow and scanty Understandings, and
we cannot by searching find it out, nor discover the Almighty unto Perfection.
But notwithstanding we have as certain a Knowledge, and as clear Idea's of his
Attributes as we have of any thing in the World. And Grotius's Gloss on this
place is very just and proper: God does not bid Men know him according to his
Nature, which exceeds Humane Capacity to do, but according to those Attributes
or Properties of his which relate to Mankind, which the Hebrews call Middoth,
i.e. those Measures or Dimensions of Him which are proportionable to our
Understandings and Capacities. And such his Attributes are, for we see them
visibly exerted in the Works of the Creation, and we find them necessarily
included in the Notion that we have of the Supreme Being, or the First Cause of
all things; as I have already showed in another Discourse.

But this, some are pleased to deny; and say, That nothing at all can be known
of God, but only, that he is: for his Nature is perfectly Incomprehensible;
that we do but dishonor God, by pretending to Understand and to talk about his
Attributes; about which we can say nothing but only what serves to express our
Astonishment, Ignorance, and Rusticity; and therefore the Civil Magistrate
ought to determine what Attributes shall be given to the Deity. This seems to
be the Sense of Vaninus, and is plainly of Mr. Hobbs; and was before them of
Sextus Empiricus. Which take in their own words:

Non Deum melius Intelligimus quam per ea quoe negamus nos Intelligere, says
Vaninus Amphitheatr. Provid. Aetern. p. 9.
. Again, Deum nuuis tam plene indicatum intelligimus Vocibus, quam iis quoe
Ignorantiam nostram proetendunt. We can have, says Mr. Hobbs, no Conception of
the Deity, and consequently all his Attributes signify only our Inability and
Defect of Power to conceive any thing concerning Him, except only this, that
there is a God Humane Nature, p. 69.
. And in another place, says he, God's Attributes cannot signify what he is,
but ought to signify our desire to honor him; but they that venture to reason
of his Nature from these Attributes of honor, losing their Understanding in
the very first Attempt, fall from one Inconvenience to another without End and
Number, and do only discover their Astonishment and Rusticity Leviath. p. 374.
. Again, When Men (says he) out of Principles of Natural Reason dispute about
the Attributes of God, they do but dishonor him; for in the Attributes we give
to God, we are not to consider Philosophical Truth Leviath. p. 191.
. And therefore he concludes, That those Attributes which the Sovereign Power
shall ordain in the Worship of God, as signs of Honor, ought to be taken and
used for such by Private Men in their Public Worship Leviath. p. 192.
. In which he agrees as he uses to do, exactly with Sextus Empiricus; who
tells us that the Sceptick is in the right for asserting Gods according to the
Laws and Custom of his Country; and in paying them that veneration and worship
which on the same account becomes due to them, will not venture to determine
any thing Philosophically about them (...). Adv. Math. p. 317.
.

Now from these Passages, I think it appears plain enough, that though these Men
did in words pretend to own and acknowledge a God, yet in Fact they were
Atheists, and had no true Belief of any such Being. For a Deity without the
Attributes of Understanding and Wisdom, without Ends or Design; none of which
Mr. Hobbs asserts expressly, can be in God Leviath. p. 190.
, is a Ridiculous stupid Being, an Idol that every rational Agent must needs
despise, and which can never be the Object of any one's Adoration, Love, or
Obedience. To assert therefore that the Attributes of God are not discoverable
by Reason, nor agreeable to Philosophical Truth, but may be declared to be any
thing which the Sovereign Power pleases to make them; this is designedly to
expose the Belief and Notion of a Deity, and to render it so Precarious, that
it can be the Object of no Rational Man's Faith. And this last named Writer
Treats the Deity after the same manner in most other Places of his Works; He
says, we must not say of Him that he is Finite, that he has figure Parts or
Totality, that he is here or there, that he moves or rests, or that we can
conceive or know any thing of him; for all this is to dishonor him: And yet to
say that he is an Immaterial Substance, that he is an Infinite and Eternal
Spirit, is, he says, Nonsense, and what destroys and contradicts it self.
However he is willing to allow the word Immaterial or Spirit to be used toward
God, as a Mark of Honor and Respect.

That is, we may attribute to God what we know to be Nonsense and
Contradiction, and this is the Way to Honor him; and to speak of him any other
way, is to Dishonor Him! Who does not perceive that it was plainly the Design
of this Writer to treat of the Deity after such a manner, as should deprive Him
of all Knowledge and Care of Humane Affairs, and consequently, effectually
Banish out of Men's Minds a just Veneration for Him, and Adoration of Him? Such
Men are the most Dangerous and Mischievous of all others; Professed Atheists
can do no great Harm; for all Persons are aware of them, and will justly abhor
the Writings and Conversation of Men that say boldly there is no God. But there
are but few such; they have found a way to pass undiscovered under a fairer
Dress and a softer Name: They pretend to be true Deists and sincere Cultivators
of Natural Religion; and to have a most Profound Respect for the Supreme and
Almighty Being: But when this Profound Respect comes to be thoroughly examined
and duly understood, it will appear to be the most abominable Abuse that can
be, and a most wicked and Blasphemous Idea of the Deity. For they make him
either nothing but the Soul of the World, Universal Matter, or Natura Naturata,
a God that is an absolutely necessary Agent, without any Rectitude in his Will;
without any Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Mercy, or Providence over his
Works. But let such Persons take what Names they please upon themselves, a
little consideration will soon discover what they are in reality; and, I hope,
give Men a just abhorrence of such Notions, though never so speciously put forth.

But let us now proceed to examine what Ground there is from the Nature of the
Thing, for Men to advance such wicked Opinions, and to show the weakness and
precariousness of them. And here it must be premised and taken for granted,
that there is a God. This is what the Persons I am now concerned with, pretend
to own, and to acknowledge. Which being supposed: It appears very plain that we
may have if we will, and some Persons, as I have showed Sermon 4 th. and 5 th.
, have always had, a very clear Notion or Idea of the Attributes and
Perfections of such a Being; as also that they are fixed and immutable
Properties in the Divine Nature. For by professing to believe a God, they must
mean, if they mean any thing, The first Cause and Author of all Things, and the
Governor and Disposer of them; A Divine Being, containing in himself all
possible Perfections; without being subject to any manner of Defect. This I
have already hinted at in another place In my Second Sermon.
, and shall now more largely prove.

So far is it from being true, that we cannot reason of the Nature of God from
his Attributes, nor Discourse of those Attributes from our Reason; That this
seems to be the only proper Way of enquiring into the wonderful Depth of the
Divine Perfections. I mean, the only Way we have without Revelation, for I am
not now considering what God has farther discovered of Himself to us by his
Word. For though the Deity does abound with Infinite Excellencies and
Perfections; yet by the Light of Nature we can discover those only, of which he
has given us some Impression on our own Natures; and these are the Scales and
Proportions by which our Reason must measure the Divine Attributes and
Perfections. For in order to gain good and true Notions of these, we ought to
take our Rise from those Perfections and Excellencies which we find in the
Creatures, and especially in our selves.

There can be but two Ways of coming to the Knowledge of any thing; by its
Cause, and by its Effects. It Is impossible for us to make use of the former of
these, in Reference to the Deity: For He being himself without Cause, and the
First Cause and Original of all Things cannot be known to us this Way. But by
the second Way, he very properly may be the Object of our Knowledge, and we
ought to apply our selves to this Method, in order to understand the Attributes
of God. For whatever Excellency or Perfection we can any way discover in the
Effects of God in the World, i. e. in the Works of the whole Creation; the same
we cannot but suppose must be in Him, in the highest and most noble Proportion
and Degree; since they are all owing to, and derived from Him.

And if we take a serious and considerate View of the Excellencies and
Perfections that are to be found in the Creatures, or the Works of God in the
World; we shall find that they may be reducible to these Four general Heads;
Being or Substance, Life, Sensibility, and Reason. All which we find to be in
our selves, and therefore they are at hand, and ready to assist our
Meditations; and these will, if duly considered, lead us into a good Way of
discovering the Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature. And I doubt
not but a great Reason why Men have had and advanced wrong Notions of God, has
been because they have had such of themselves, and of those Perfections that
are in our own Natures. Men that do not understand that the true Perfection of
Humane Nature consists in Moral Goodness, or in an Universal agreeableness of
our Will to the Eternal Laws of Right Reason, cannot conceive aright of the
Attributes and Perfections of God: For they will be for making him like
themselves, guided by vehement Self-love, and inordinate Will, or whatever
predominant Passions possess them.

'Twere easy to Trace this in the Epicurean Notion of a God dissolved in Ease
and Sloth, and who neglects the Government of the World, to enjoy his own
private Pleasures; and in the Hobbian one of a Deity not guided by any
Essential Rectitude of Will, but only by Arbitrary, Lawless, and irrisistible
Power; for both these Opinions are exactly agreeable to the Genius and humors
of their Authors and Propagators.

But to proceed with our Deduction of the Divine Attributes from the
Excellencies and Perfections which we find in our selves. 1. If in the first
place we consider Being, and the high Perfections that do belong to it; we
shall find that they must needs be in the Deity, who is the First and Supreme
Being, and the Cause and Author of all others in the World, in the utmost
Perfection. Now the highest Perfections belonging unto Being, we find to be
these two: 1. That it shall have an underivable and necessary Existence, always
be, and never cease, die, terminate or be extinct; and, 2. That it be Great and
Ample as to its Extent, in opposition to Littleness or Scantyness, and to being
Limited, Circumscribed, Bounded or Restrained by any Other Thing.

And if we attribute these two Perfections to God, thence will plainly Arise
his Eternity, and his Immensity or Omnipresence. For what cannot possibly cease
to be, but has necessary Existence included in its Nature, is Eternal. And
what cannot be any way Limited, Circumscribed or Restrained, must needs be
Boundless and Immense, and present every where. And I dare say, that these
Notions of God's Eternity and Immensity, do find an easy admission into, and
are firmly rooted in all considerate and unprejudiced Minds; and who are not
debauched by Skeptical and Atheistical Metaphysics. For it is impossible for
any one that thinks at all, to have a Notion of a Deity that can die, or cease
to be; or that is so confined and imprisoned in any one part of Space, that he
can extend himself no farther: No! it must be an Epicurean Stupefaction of
Soul, indeed, that can induce a Man to fancy a Mortal or a Topical God; one
that may be slain, or die of old Age, or be shackled and confined to any one
part of the Universe, exclusive of the rest. And though a Man cannot find perhaps
that he has an adequate Idea of Eternity; yet that God must be without
Beginning or End, he will readily allow, as soon as he considers the Thing; for
he will perceive that the First Cause of all Things could not be caused by any
thing else, but must be Self-existent, and without Beginning: and if nothing
could cause his Being, nothing can take it away neither, and consequently he
must be Everlasting or Eternal. And of this Attribute the Heathens had a clear
Idea and Belief, giving God the Title of (...), and Swearing usually by the
Immortal Gods. Tully says, Deum nisi Sempiternum Intelligere qui possumus? How
can we conceive the Deity any otherwise than to be an Eternal Being. And
Aristotle in many places makes Eternity Essential to the Idea of God; and
particularly, Lib. 2. de Coelo. And so as to Immensity or Omnipresence, though
he, indeed, cannot tell the manner how a Spirit or Immaterial Substance
permeates Matter, or is present to every part of it; yet he will conclude that
the Deity must some how or other actually fill and be present with all things;
since it is impossible he should be excluded any where, or be in any respect
bounded or limited; as it is also that he should act or operate where he is not.
Nor would, I believe, any free and unprejudiced Mind have recourse either to
the Notion of God's being Universal Matter or Infinite Space, in order to solve
His Immensity or Omnipresence. For the former, he would see, necessarily makes
the Deity materially divisible, into Parts actually separated from each other;
and to be part of him here, and part there; which he could not but think
monstrously absurd and impossible: and the latter renders God nothing at all,
but Imaginary Room, Vacuity or Space, in which Bodies are capable of Moving up
and down, or to and fro, without hindrance or impediment from any Medium. Which
how it should, any more than the former account for the Energetical Power,
Wisdom, Justice and Goodness of the Divine Nature, (the noblest Perfections he
can have any Idea of) 'twould be as impossible for him to conceive, as it is
for the Assertors of it to prove. The ancient Heathens allowed this Attribute
of Immensity to the Deity, by common consent. Tully tells us, That Pythagoras
asserted, Deum esse animum per Naturam Rerum omnium intentum and comeantem, De
Not. Deorum. And he cites it as the Opinion of Thales Milesius; Deorum omnia
esse Plena, De Legib. lib. 2. which Virgil also affirms expressly, -- Jovis
omnia plena. And again, Deum namque ire per omnes Terras tractusque maris,
coelumque profundum, Georg. lib. 4. And Seneca tells us, That God is ubique and
omnibus proesto Ep. 95.
. And in another place De Benef. lib. 4.
, Quocunque te flexeris, ibi Deum videbis Occurrentem tibi, nihil ab illo
vacat, Opus suum ipse Implet.

2. If we consider Life; Another Perfection which we find in our selves, we
must needs conclude that this is in the Deity too, who is the great Author and
Fountain of Life, in the highest Degree and Proportion imaginable. Now the
Perfection of Life seems to consist in Activity, or an Energetical Power to
Act, or Operate; in opposition to Impotence, Weakness, or Inability. And this
Perfection, no one sure can possibly doubt to be in the Deity. For besides that
it is impossible for us to conceive that Life and Activity in our selves can
proceed from a Dead and Unactive Principle; our Reason must needs reject the
Notion of an Inanimate, and Impotent Deity, or of one that is any way defective
in Power, as soon as it can be proposed to it. Can we imagine that a Being from
whom all Life, Power and Energy is derived, can be without it himself? and that
he who has, as Simplicius calls it, (...), a whole entire or perfect Power,
that has all the Power of Nature at His Command, can be unable to perform
whatever is possible to be done? that is, whatever is agreeable to, and
consistent with, the other Attributes of the Divine Nature? And if so, must not
then such a Being be owned to be Almighty or Omnipotent? From whence we see
another great Attribute does plainly arise. And of this Attribute of the Deity,
there was a plain and clear Notion all along among the Heathen Writers; as
appears from Homer in many places, who speaking of God, says, (...). The same
thing also we have in the Fragments of Linus, long before Him. And in
Callimachus also, in express words. As also in Agatho, an Ancient Greek Poet
cited by Aristotle in his Ethics. So in Virgil and Ovid, you have frequently
the Title of Pater Omnipotens given to the Deity. And this Attribute of
Infinite Power in God, Epicurus set himself with all his might to confute;
denying there was any such thing as Infinite Power at all; that thereby (says
Lucretius, lib. 1.) he might take away Religion too.

And from hence also his Eternity might be naturally deduced. For we cannot
conceive this Life or Activity, this Almighty Power that is in God, can ever
cease, decay or determine, any more than it can have had a beginning, and
consequently such a Being must necessarily Exist, be Eternal, or Endure and
Live for Ever.

3. If we proceed a little higher, and consider Sensibility which is another
great Perfection that we find in our selves, and some other Creatures, we must
needs Attribute This also, and that in the highest degree, to the Divine
Nature. I take this now in the general, for that Power or Faculty whereby any
Being is capable of taking Pleasure or feeling Pain. And such a Sensibility, or
something Analogous to it, we cannot but think God must have in the most
exquisite Perfection, since our Own, as well as that of all other Creatures,
must be derived from Him. And though, indeed, we ought to think that the Infinite
Perfection of his Nature secures him from all Possibility of feeling Pain,
(since nothing can contradict his Will, run counter to his Desires, or
frustrate his Expectations) yet we have no reason to suppose the Deity
insensible of Pleasure; but may justly conclude from hence, that he is always
most perfectly happy. For he contains in Himself all Possible Good and Infinite
Excellencies and Perfection, and of this He is most exquisitely sensible, and
consequently must eternally be Pleased and delighted with himself in the
Enjoyment of his own Infinite Fullness: And this Notion many of the Heathens had
of God, that he was a most Happy Being; stiling Him frequently, (...); and
(...).

4. But the Highest Perfection which we can discover in our selves, and in any
created Beings whatever, is Reason. And this, no doubt, we ought also to
attribute to God in the highest Degree and Perfection. Now the Perfection of
Reason seems to consist in these two Things:

1. In Knowledge and Wisdom in the Understanding Faculty. And,

2. In Rectitude or Righteousness in the Will.

All which we cannot but suppose the Divine Nature to be perfectly endowed
with. And first as to Knowledge and Wisdom; The former of which, implies an
Understanding of things as they are in themselves, according to their true
Natures and Properties: And the latter, a considering of them as to their
Relations to, and Dependances upon one another; or in other words, according as
they are fit or qualified to be Ends or Means.

And these must certainly be in God, for the same reason that we have found in
Him the other Perfections abovementioned. To the Deity therefore, from this
Consideration, we ought to Attribute Omniscience, and Infinite, or most perfect
Wisdom; for no doubt we ought to conclude, That the Deity both knows every
thing according to its Nature, and also understands its Usefulness and
Subservience to any End, Design or Purpose whatsoever. And therefore it was as
stupidly or impiously said by Mr. Hobbs, That there can be no such thing as
Knowledge in God, and that he can have no Ends. For I cannot imagine there can
one so grossly Ignorant and Foolish be found among Mankind, who does really
believe there can be an ignorant or a foolish God; and who would not abhor such
a Position as monstrously absurd and impossible. A Man must be a long while
conversant with Atheistical and Skeptical Philosophy, before he can grow so
dull as not to perceive the force and Power of the Psalmists Logic and
reasoning in Psalm. 94. v. 8, 9, etc. and he must be very Studiously brutish and
Learnedly foolish, before he can think that he that planted the Ear, should not
be able to hear himself; and that he that formed the Eye should not see; and
that he that gave and taught all Knowledge to Men should have none himself.

The mighty Reason that Mr. Hobbs is pleased to give, Why there can be no
Understanding in God is, because that Faculty being in us nothing but a Tumult
of Mind, raised by External Things that press the Organical Parts of our Bodies
Leviath. p. 190.
, there can be no such thing in God. And in other places, he sagaciously
determines, that it is impossible to hear without Ears, to see without Eyes, and
to Understand without Brains, none of which God has; and therefore must be
Ignorant and Stupid. But, methinks, it is very hardly done of Him, to determine
the Deity to be Corporeal* and yet to assign Him none of these Material Organs
in order to make him an Intelligent Being. Why should not the same Matter which
is able to form the Mechanic Understanding of so great a Philosopher, be
capable of being modified as Intelligently in the Divine Nature? Must the Deity
have the worst and most stupid Body of All others? Into what abominable
Absurdities will such Principles as these lead a Man! or rather into what
abominable Impieties and Blasphemies will Vice and Pride hurry him! He does not
only think wickedly that the Deity is such an one as himself, but infinitely
worse; a Corporeal Being that has less and fewer Perfections than a Corporeal
Man! But I must not dwell on showing the Design of this Writer, having
sufficiently done it already. I shall only now add, that I think I have already
proved that Matter alone cannot think, know, nor understand; and therefore it
is not Men's Brains, but their Soul that has this Intelligent Power; and no
doubt an Infinite and Immaterial Mind, needs not any Material Organs to convey
Knowledge to him, in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge do Inhabit,
and from whom they are all derived and do proceed.

And there was, Anciently amongst the Heathens, a clear belief of the Infinite
Knowledge and Wisdom of God. Tully tells us, that Thales used commonly to say,
Deos omnia cernere, the Gods behold or know all things. And Seneca says, Deo
nihil Clausum est; interest Animis nostris, and mediis cogitationibus
intervenit. And as to the Wisdom of God, Tully deduces it after the same manner
as we now have done, by attributing the Excellencies of the Creature to the
Deity in the Highest Perfection. Sapiens est Homo, says he, and propterea
Deus; Man has Wisdom, and therefore God, from whom the Wisdom in Man is
derived, must needs have it himself. But again, As we must attribute to God
Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom; so we must Rectitude of Will or Perfect
Righteousness too. And since the Rectitude of the Will consists in an exact
Conformity of it and all its Affections to the Impartial Rule of Right Reason;
we cannot but suppose also, that the Will of God is in a most exquisite
Conformity to the Dictates of his Unerring Reason; and that the Deity does in
every respect act exactly agreeable thereunto. And by this means we shall find
that God must be Just and Righteous in all his Proceedings, and that he always
executes Justice and Righteousness in the Earth, and delights in these things.
Our Adversaries, indeed, do assert, That there is no such thing as any
distinction between Good and Evil, Just and Unjust, that can be taken from any
common Rule, or from the Objects themselves; but only with Relation to the
Person that uses them; who calls that Good which he loves, and that Evil which
he hates Leviath. p. 24, 63, 64. Spinoza Oper. Posth. p. 37.
. That God does every thing by his Irresisistible Power; and that in that is
founded our Obedience to Him, and not in any Principle of Gratitude to him
Leviath. p. 187.
for Benefits which we have received from him. That Justice is founded in
Power, and that whatever is Enacted by a Sovereign Power cannot be Unjust. The
Groundlessness of which Impious and Dangerous Notions, I shall fully show in a
subsequent Discourse; and therefore shall only now observe, that this Way of
depriving the Deity of these most excellent and lovely Attributes of Justice
and Goodness, and making Him to Act only according to the Arbitrary Dictates of
Irresistible Power, gives us the Notion of a Devil instead of a Deity, of an
absolute Tyrant, instead of a righteous Governor of the World; and is directly
contrary to the Sober and Considerate Sentiments of all Mankind Plato calls the
Deity (...), the very Idea or Essence of Good. And herein he seems to have
followed the Pythagoreans and Timaeus Lacrus in particular: Who asserts of
Mind, according to him the first Principle of the Universe, that it is, (...),
of the Nature of Good: And says further, (...), that they call it God, and the
Principle of the best things.

Aristotle also reckons Moral Goodness among the Perfections of the Divine
Nature: And Plutarch says, it is one of the chiefest Excellencies in the Deity;
and that on this account it is that Men love and honor Him.

Hierocles in Carm. Pythagor. asserts the Deity to be Essentially Good, and not
by Accidental or External Motives.


, in whose Minds a plain Distinction between Good and Evil is founded, and who
can never be brought without doing great violence to themselves, to assert that
the Deity is not guided in all things by the Eternal Rules of Truth and
Justice, and that the Judge of all the Earth should not do right. They see the
comeliness and loveliness that there is in good and just Actions among Men; and
therefore cannot suppose that an Infinite and Almighty Being can do any thing
contrary to them; they are sensible that Deviations from those Rules proceed
only from the Defects and Imperfections that are in our Natures; but that God,
who is (...), who possesses and sustaineth all things, cannot make use of any
indirect Means to procure himself Happiness, or to stave off Misery; since the
Perfection of his Nature gives him all the one, and secures him from all the
other. And they which certainly never believe that God will do any Action, that
they do not think suitable to be done by a good and just Man; But will on just
Grounds conclude, That whatever Excellence or Perfections they can any way
discover to be in a Good Man, must needs be in the highest Proportion in God,
and consequently that the Deity must be most Righteous, Just and Good, and most
Kind, Merciful and Gracious in all his Dealings with his Creatures.

And thus we see how by considering the Excellencies and Perfections which we
find in our selves, and attributing them in the Highest Proportion to that
Supreme Being the Deity, from whence they must all be derived; we may attain to
a good and clear Knowledge of the Properties and Attributes of the Divine
Nature: We may find them to be such as are agreeable to the plainest Reason and
to Philosophical Truth: and consequently conclude, that they can have no such
weak and precarious Foundation as the Order of the Civil Power, and the Will of
the Supreme Magistrate.

And were it now my Business, 'twere very easy from hence to show also the
True Foundation of Religious Worship; that it does depend on the Right
Apprehensions and Notions that we have of the Attributes of God; and that our
Obedience to Him, is founded in our Gratitude to him for the Benefits which we
receive from Him, and consequently is our Reasonable Service. But the Proof of
this will be more proper in another Place.

FINIS.
A REFUTATION of the Objections Against MORAL GOOD and EVIL.

IN A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, October the Third,
School.

BEING The Seventh of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

JEREM. ix.24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things do I delight, says the Lord.


IN these Words, as I have already showed, there are these two Things
considerable: I. A Supposition that God is capable of being known to us by his
Attributes.

II. An Account of some of those Attributes which he exercises in the Earth,
and in which he delights.



On the former of these, I did, in my last Discourse endeavor to remove the
Objections against the Attributes of God in general, and to show that they are
plainly discoverable by Reason, and agreeable to Philosophical Truth. As to the
Second,

The Attributes of God mentioned here by the Prophet, and which he is said to
delight to exercise in the Earth.

I think it not necessary to discourse particularly of them, having in my last
Sermon shown how They, as well as all other Excellencies and Perfections which
we can discover in the Creatures, must of necessity be in the Divine Nature in
the greatest Perfection; because they are all derived from Him. But that which
I judge will be more proper to be done now, as being agreeable to my Design of
Answering the Atheistical Objections in their Natural Order, will be from hence
to Remove two Great Bars to the true Knowledge of God and of his Attributes,
which Skeptical and Unbelieving Men have here placed in the Way. For indeed,
till this be done, no true Notion of God or of his Perfections can be
established in Men's Minds; nor any Ground fixed whereon to build a Rational
Belief of Natural or Revealed Religion, or any kind of Worship of the Supreme
and Almighty Being. And these Two great Objections of our Adversaries are,

1. That there is in reality no such thing as Moral Good and Evil; but that all
Actions are in their own Nature indifferent.

2. That all things are determined by Absolute Fatality: And that God himself,
and all Creatures whatsoever, are Necessary Agents, without having any Power of
Choice, or any real Liberty in their Nature at all.

These are two of the strongest Holds of Atheism and Infidelity, which it is
therefore absolutely necessary to batter down and demolish: And these do in
some sense communicate with and run into one another; and indeed the former
plainly follows from the latter. But however, they being very frequently made
use of distinctly by the Opposers of Religion, and the former being maintained
by some Persons whom I cannot find do hold the latter; I shall endeavor to
Refute them severally. Beginning with that which I have first proposed; viz.

That there is in reality no such things as Moral Good and Evil, but that all
Actions are in their own Nature purely Indifferent.

And this Position our Adversaries are very express in maintaining, as will
sufficiently appear by their own Words.

The Virtues that Men extol so highly, says Mr. Blount Anima Mund. in Or. of
Reason, p. 117.
, are not of equal weight and value in the Balance of Nature; but that it may
fare with them, as with Coin made of Copper or Leather: which though it may go at
a high Rate in one Country by Proclamation; yet will it not do so in another,
for want of Intrinsic Value. It Is plain enough what he means by this; but how
this Assertion will agree with his allowing some things to be (...) Oracles of
Reason, p. 89.
, Good and Just in their own Nature, as he does in his Account of the Deists
Religion, let the Admirers of those Contradictory Oracles of Reason, consider.
But, indeed, it is no new or uncommon thing with these kind of Men to make
Contradictory Propositions subservient to their Purposes: as they often do in
this very Case. For when you upbraid them with a Disbelief of Revelation, they
will say, that it is enough for any Man to live up to the Principles of Natural
Religion, and to adhere inviolably to all things, (...); for those are things
that are Obligatory on all Mankind, and not like Revealed Truths, mere
Political and Topical Institutions. Whereas at another time, if you tell them
of some gross Immoralities that they are Guilty of, and which are plainly
contrary to Reason, and to the clearest Light of Nature; Then they will answer
you, That Good and Evil are only Thetical things; which receive their very
Essence from Human Laws or Customs only, but that by Nature nothing is either
Good or Bad; and that all Actions are alike and Indifferent; so hard is it, as
an Excellent Person observes A. Bish. Tillots. Sermon. Vol. 4. p. 315.
, to contradict Truth and Nature, without contradicting ones self. But to go on,

Spinoza takes care to deliver himself very plainly, as to this Matter. Bonum
and Malum nihil Positivum in Rebus sc. in se consideratis indicant Op Posthum,
p. 164.
. And in another Place, he tells us, Postquam homines sibi persuaserunt, omnia
quae fiunt, propter ipsos fieri, id in unaquaque re praecipuum judicare
debuerunt, quod ipsis, utilissimum; and illa omnia praestantissima aestimare, a
quibus optime afficiebantur. Unde has formare debuerunt Notiones, quibus Rerum
naturas explicarunt, sc. Bonum and Malum, Ordinem and Confusionem, etc. Ibid p.
37. Vid. etiam, p. 171, 185, 360, etc.
. And the same thing also he asserts in many other places.

Mr. Hobbs also expressly maintains, That there is nothing simply nor absolutely
Good or Evil, nor any common Rule about them to be taken from the Objects
themselves, but only from the Person; who calls that Good which he likes or
desires, and that Evil which he hates, etc. Leviath. p. 24.
Nothing, says he, is in its own Nature Just or Unjust, because naturally
there is no Property, but every one has a Right to every thing Ibid. p. 63, 64.
; And therefore he defines Justice to be only keeping of a Covenant P. 73.
. And in another place he tells us, That Good and Evil are only Names that
signify our Appetites and Aversions; which in different Tempers, Customs and
Doctrines of Men are different Ibid p. 79.
. The same thing he asserteth also in many other places of his Writings Vid.
Hum. Nature, p. 38. Element. de Cive c. 1.. 2.
. And this Doctrine the Translator of Philostratus is so fond of, that, though he
be sometimes very desirous of being thought an Original, yet he Transcribes
this entirely from Mr. Hobbs Blount's Life of Apollonius, p. 151.
; as indeed Mr. Hobbs, according to his usual way, had before, in a great
measure done from Sextus Empiricus; who in very many places declares that it
was the Opinion of the Scepticks, that there was nothing Good or Evil in it
self (...) -- Pyrrh. Hypot. p. 46. And again, p. 147. (...).
. And he endeavors to prove this Point, by the very same Arguments which the
Modern Assertors of this Opinion, do make use of Vid. Sext. Emp. Adv. Math. p.
450, 451, etc. 462, 463, etc.
.

And though Mr. Hobbs boast much of his Notions about these things to be new, and
originally his own; yet it is plain, that it was the Old Atheistick Doctrine
long before Plato's Time. For he tells us, Lib. 2. De Rep. p. 358. That there
were a sort of Men who maintained, That by Nature Men have a boundless Liberty
to act as they please, and that in such a state, to do that to another which is
now called an Injury, or a piece of Injustice, would be Good; though to receive
it from another would be Evil: And that Men did live a good while at this rate,
but in Time finding the Inconveniences of it, they did agree upon Laws, in
order to live peaceably and quietly with one another. And then that which was
enacted by these Laws, was called Just, and Lawful. (...).

This is the Principle we see of those Atheistical Men: which though some of them
do now and then take Care to conceal, or to express a little cautiously, yet
they understand one another well enough: and so indeed may any one do them,
that thinks it worth his while to consider seriously of, and to search into the
Bottom of the Matter. And this is truly one of the Great Depths of Atheism and
Infidelity: It Is a Principle that when once thoroughly understood and imbibed,
confirms a Man in the Disbelief of all manner of Religious Obligation. For he
that has once swallowed down this abominable Tenet, will, as some of the
lately mentioned Writers discover themselves to do, believe nothing of the
Deity, but that he is Almighty and Arbitrary Power, or a Blind fatal and
Necessary Agent: Either a Being that makes his Will his Law, and who is not
guided in his Actions or Dispensations, by the Dictates of Reason nor by any
Rules of Justice and Goodness: or else one that properly speaking, has no Ends
nor Designs at all Spinoz. Op. Posthum. p. 36.
; but is without any Understanding Ostendamad Dei naturam neque Intellectum
neque Voluntatem pertinere. Ibid. p. 18. Vid. Etiam, p. 29.
, Freedom of Will, Choice or Wisdom; one who cannot possibly help doing as he
does, but is impelled in every thing by absolute Necessity. So that there being
(as according to these Principles there cannot be) no Goodness in the Deity,
there can be none any where: But all Actions, antecedent to Human Laws, will be
Indifferent. And the Obligation that Men are under to Human Laws being only, as
Hobbs says, from Fear of Punishment; no doubt a Man of this wicked Persuasion
will stick at the Perpetration of no Villainy nor Immorality, that will any way
advantage himself, and which he can commit secretly and securely; but will
pursue his own Private Benefit and Interest (the only Good he understands, and
thinks himself obliged to mind) by all possible Means and Endeavors.

This therefore being the Case before us, it will very much concern us to
Return a fair Answer to, and fully to Refute this Dangerous Objection against
all Religion, and indeed against the Good and Welfare of all Governments, and
all Civil Societies: and which I wish we had not so much reason to believe, is
fixed in the Minds of too many amongst us.

And in order to do this the more clearly and effectually, it will be necessary
first truly to state the Point, and to dis-engage it from some Difficulties and
Perplexities which our Adversaries have designedly clouded it withal. Say they
whatever is the Object of any Man's Desires that he calls Good; as also
whatsoever is in any respect Beneficial and Advantageous to him. And on the
other hand, that which is hurtful and prejudicial to him, and is the Object of
his Hatred and Aversion, that he calls Evil, and so doubtless it is to him.
Now, say they further, Since that which may be Good to one Man, or desired by
him now, may be Evil to another, or may by the very same Person, be hated and
shunned at another Time; it plainly follows, that the Nature of Good and Evil,
is perfectly precarious, and will be as various and changeable as the different
Humors and Inclinations of Mankind can make it. And thus Men's Actions will be
denominated accordingly. Every one accounting that a Good one which he likes,
which promotes his Interest, and is conducible to his Advantage: And calling
that an Evil one, which he disapproves of, and which is contrary to his
Interest and Inclination.

To all which, I say, that these Men run their Argument a great way too far,
and conclude much more from it than the Nature of the thing will bear. For
allowing as a first Principle that all Men desire Good, and that they cannot do
otherwise; Allowing also that Apparent or seeming Good has the same Effect as
real Good, while it is the Object of any particular Man's Desires: Nay,
allowing also this Apparent Good to be a very precarious Thing, and to depend
very much on the different Humors, Tempers and Inclinations of Mankind; which
is the whole Basis on which these Writers found their Argument. I say, Granting
all this, it does not come up to the Question between us, nor form any Real
Objection against the natural difference between Good and Evil, and the Eternal
Obligation of Morality; for the Point in dispute is not whether such an
Essential and Immutable Difference as this now spoken of, be discernible in all
the Actions of Mankind; for it is readily allowed that there are a great many
Indifferent, and which are neither good nor bad in their own Natures, but may
be either, as Circumstances determine. This, I say, is not the Case; but
whether there be not some such Actions, as do plainly discover themselves to
the Unprejudiced Judgment of any Rational Man, to be Good and Evil in their own
Natures, antecedent to the Obligation of any Human Laws. Or in other Words,
whether there be not some Actions which do carry along with them such a clear
and unalterable Reasonableness and Excellency, as that they do approve
themselves to be Good and Lovely to any Unprejudiced Mind, and consequently
Mankind must be under an Universal and Eternal Obligation to perform them, and
to avoid and shun their Contraries. As also, whether we have not all the reason
in the World to believe that those Actions, which the Mind of Man can thus
discover to be Morally and Essentially Good, are agreeable to the Will of God,
and directed by it: And to conclude, that the Deity also acts and proceeds in
all Respects according to the same Universal and Eternal Dictates of Reason,
and is Just and Good, Equitable and Righteous in all his Dealings with his
Creatures; and that he exercises these things in the Earth. This I take to be
the true state of the Case; and this is what we Assert, and our Adversaries
Deny; and what I shall now endeavor to prove.

In order to which, it must be allowed in the

1. Place, That Man is a thinking Being, and has the Power of Reasoning and
Inference. It must be allowed also, that we are capable of Knowing this, and do
most evidently discover such a Power in our selves. And since all Intelligent
Creatures do naturally desire to be happy, we must do so too, and consequently
endeavor to obtain that Kind of Happiness which is agreeable to our Natures
and Faculties; i. e. a Happiness that shall relate to our whole Natures, and
not to the Body only: Now the Happiness of any Being consisting in the free and
vigorous Exercise of its Powers and Faculties, or in the Perfection of its
Nature; and the Nature of Man being Reason, the Happiness of Mankind must
consist chiefly in the free and vigorous Exercise of his Reasoning Faculty; or
being in such a Condition as that we can do all things that are agreeable to,
and avoid all such things as are disagreeable to it. Now all this supposed and
granted, as I think none of it can be denied, it will plainly follow, that all
such Actions as do Universally approve themselves to the Reason of Mankind, and
such as when duly examined and considered, do constantly and uniformly tend
toward, and promote the Happiness of Man, considered as to his whole Nature,
and chiefly as to that part of him in which his Nature does more properly
consist, which is his Rational and Understanding Faculty: Such Actions, I say,
must necessarily be said to be in their own Nature Good; and their Contraries
must be denominated Evil, after the same manner; for whatsoever is universally
Approved, is universally Good: to call a thing Good being nothing else but to
declare its conducibility to that end it was designed for. Now according to our
Adversary's Assertion, Men call that Good which promotes their own Advantage
and Happiness, and so no doubt it ought to be esteemed; all that they mistake
in, being, that they don't understand wherein their true Happiness consists.
And therefore if a Thing does in its own Nature approve it self to the
impartial Reason of Mankind, and can on due Examination manifestly appear to
conduce to the Interest, Advantage and Happiness of Human Nature; such a thing
must by all Rational and thinking Men be pronounced naturally and morally Good;
and its Reverse, Evil in the same manner. And that this is the case in
Reference to that which is commonly called Moral Good and Evil, will appear
plain and evident when we show,

2. That there are some Things and Actions which the Free and Unprejudiced
Reason of all Mankind, cannot but acknowledge to be Comely, Lovely, and Good in
their own Natures as soon as ever it considers them, and makes any Judgment
about them. And this is what is apparent to the Observation of all Men to have
been ipso facto done; and the Truth of it cannot be denied: For have not all
Nations in the World agreed in paying some kind of Worship and Veneration to
the Deity? Was there ever any Place where, or Time when, Obedience to Parents,
Gratitude for Benefits received, Acts of Justice, Mercy, Kindness, and Good
Nature, were not accounted reasonable, good and decent things? I know some
Persons have boldly told the World that it is quite otherwise, and that there
are some whole Nations so Savage and Barbarous as to have no Notion of any
Deity, who have no manner of Religious Worship at all, and who have no Notion
or Idea of Moral Good and Evil: But when we consider that these Accounts come
originally only from a few Navigators, who probably did not stay long enough at
those Places to acquaint themselves with the Language of the Natives, and who
consequently could not have much Knowledge of their Notions, Opinions, and
Customs; it will be too hardy a Conclusion to infer positively that Men pay no
Worship to, nor have any Idea of a God, only because they did not see them at
their Devotions. And moreover, when we have had later and more accurate
Accounts of some of those Places, which do plainly disprove the former
Assertions, we have good reason, I think, to suspend our assent to them. And
then as to their Notions of Good and Evil, it will not follow that they account
Stealth and Murder as good and comely things as Justice and Mercy, only because
these Relators had some of those Acts committed on them. For commonly they
themselves show them the way, by wickedly Robbing, Imprisoning and Murdering
them; and therefore why the Poor Indians may not return some such Actions upon
their Enemies and Invaders, without being supposed to be quite Ignorant of the
Difference between Good and Evil, I confess, I do not see. And by what too
often appears from their own Relations and Books of Travels, the Indians have
not more reason to be thought Savage and Barbarous, than those that give us
such an Account of them; for by their Actions they discover as poor Notions of
Morality, as it is possible for any Men to have.

But after all, suppose the Fact true, as I do really believe it is not, That
there is any Nation of Men so Stupid as to be quite devoid of any Notion of a
God, or of the Difference between Good and Evil: All that can be concluded from
hence is, that some Men may for want of Commerce with other Parts of the World,
and for want of Thinking, and cultivating and exercising their Rational
Faculties, degenerate into mere brute Beasts; and indeed, as such the Relators
describe them; according to whose Account of them, many Species of the Brute
Creation discover more Understanding, and Act, if I may so speak, more
rationally; but it cannot be fairly argued from hence, that they never have had
any Notion or Belief of these things; or that their Reasons will not assent to
the Truth of them hereafter, when their unhappy Prejudices may be removed, and
they may become civilized by Commerce. Much less sure will this Prove, that
there is no Notion of a Deity, nor of Moral Good and Evil in all the other
Parts of the World, and amongst Men that can think, and do exercise their
Reason and Understanding. Will not a General Rule stand its Ground though there
be a few Exceptions against it? Will Men take their Measures to judge of Human
Nature only from the Monstrosities of it, from the worst and most stupid Parts
of Mankind? Men may as well argue that all Mankind are devoid of Arms or Hands,
or are Universally Defective in any other Part of the Body, because some few
are daily born so, or rather have them cut off. We see there are often Natural
Defects in Men's Minds as well as their Bodies, and that some are born Fools and
Idiots, as well as others Blind and Lame; and a great many we see make
themselves so by their own Fault; But sure no one will conclude from hence,
that all Mankind are Fools and Idiots, unless he be a degree worse than one
himself. And yet Men may even as justly make any of these absurd Inferences, as
to say, there is in the Minds of Men no Power to distinguish a Natural
Difference between Good and Evil, only because there are some Stupid and
Barbarous People, among whom no such thing can be discovered. For my part, I do
most heartily believe, that it is impossible for a Rational and Thinking Mind,
acting as such, to be insensible of the Difference between Moral Good and Evil:
I cannot Imagine that such a Person can think it a thing indifferent in its own
Nature, whether he should Venerate, Love and Worship the God that made him, and
from whom he derives all the Good he can possibly enjoy; or whether he should
Slight, Despise, Blaspheme or Affront him. It seems utterly impossible to me,
that any thinking and considerate Man, should judge it an indifferent thing in
its own Nature, whether he should honor and reverence his Father, or abuse him
and cut his Throat: or that he can esteem it to be as good and decent a thing
to be Ungrateful or Unjust, as it is to acknowledge and to return a Kindness,
to render every one their Due, and to behave our selves toward others, as we
would have them do toward us.

I do not think that the Instances produced by a late Ingenious Writer, of some
wild People's exposing their Sick and Aged Parents to die by the Severities of
Wind and Weather, nor of others who eat their own Children, are of force to
prove that there is really and naturally no difference between Good and Evil,
any more than I will believe that he cited those Passages with a design to make
the World think so; for I think, allowing the truth of all these Relations, no
such Inference can be thence deduced. A Practical Principle, of the Truth and
Power of which a Man may be demonstratively assured, may yet be overborn in
some Respects by other Opinions which Ignorance and Superstition may have set
up in a Man's Mind. This Gentleman says, p. 25. Of Human Understanding, That a
Doctrine having no better Original than the Superstition of a Nurse, or the
Authority of an Old Woman, may be length of time grow up to the dignity of a
Principle in Religion or Morality. Now should a precarious and wicked Opinion
overruled a Man in one or two particular Cases, and carry him against the Rules
of Morality, will it follow from thence that a Man does believe those Rules of
no Natural Force, and that it is an Indifferent thing whether he observe them
or not? Ought I to conclude, that because I have read of a King that Sacrificed
his Son to Moloch, that therefore he believed it as good and reasonable a thing
to burn his Children alive, as to preserve, take care of them, and give them a
good Education? Certainly, 'twould be a fairer and more reasonable Inference,
to conclude that his Reason and Natural Affection was overpowered by his
Idolatrous and Superstitious Opinion; and that the reason why he did such a
Wicked and unnatural Action was because he expected some very great Benefit for
it from the Idol, or that he would Inflict some very great Judgment upon him,
if he did not do it. And so in the Cases abovementioned, one may well enough
believe that those Barbarous and Inhumane Wretches that Starved their Parents
and Eat their Children; did not nor could not believe it was as good and
reasonable so to do, as it would be to preserve them; but only that they were
under the Power of some Wicked Superstition, or Abominable Custom that had
unhappily crept in among them; which they thought it a greater Evil to break
(if they thought at all) than they did to Act against their Judgment, Natural
Reason, and Affection. For this way (as he observes*) it is easy to imagine how
Men, may come to worship the Idols of their own Minds, grow fond of Notions
they have been long acquainted with there, and stamp the Characters of Divinity
upon Absurdities and Errors, etc. p. 26. So that I cannot see any Consequence
at all, in asserting the Nonexistence of Moral Good and Evil, from a few
Barbarous and Ignorant Wretches doing some Actions that bear hard on the Rules
of Morality: For notwithstanding that they may be lost in a great measure in
some places; yet these things, and many others that might be instanced in, do
certainly carry such Self-evidence along with them; that a free and
unprejudiced Mind must needs perceive which way to determine, as soon as ever
they can be proposed to it, and considered of by it. For any one in the World
that does but understand the meaning of the Terms in any of the lately
mentioned Moral Propositions, will be demonstratively assured of the Truth of
them: And he will see as clearly that God is to be worshipped, that Parents are
to be honored, and in a word, that we ought to do to others as we would be
done unto, as he assents to the Truth of such Axioms as these: That a Thing
cannot be and not be, at the same Time; That Nothing has no Properties; And
that the whole is greater than any one, and equal to all its Parts taken
together: For the Reason why all Mankind allow these as first Principles, is
because their Truth is so very Apparent and Evident, that they approve
themselves to our Reason at first sight. And so, I think, do all these Great
Principles in Morality; they certainly affect impartial and considerate Minds,
with as full a Conviction as any of the former can possibly do. And would no
more have been denied or disputed than the others are, had they not been Rules
of Practice, and did they not require something to be done, as well as to be
believed. For he that rightly understands what is meant by the words God, and
Worship; will see the Necessary connection between those Terms, or the Truth of
this Proposition, God is to be worshipped, as evidently as he that knows what a
Whole and a Part is, will see that the Whole must be greater than a Part. And
no Proposition in Geometry can be more demonstratively clear, than these Moral
ones are, to Men that are not wilfully Blind and wickedly Prejudiced against
such Practical Truths. For as one has well observed Essay of Human Understand.
p. 274, 275.
, Morality may be reckoned among those Sciences that are capable of
Demonstration. And that these Moral Truths have a stronger connection one with
another, and a more necessary Consequence from our Idea's, and come nearer to a
perfect Demonstration than is commonly imagined; insomuch, that as he says in
another place, They are capable of real Certainty as well as Mathematics Page
284.
Now if the case be so, as most certainly it is; it will plainly follow, that
Those things that do thus demonstratively approve themselves to the
unprejudiced Reason of all Mankind, must be good and lovely in their own
Natures, or Morally so, antecedent to the Obligation of Human Laws, Customs or
Fashions of particular Countries.

And in this plain Distinction between Good and Evil, which our Reason, when
duly used, Impowers us thus at first sight to make, is founded that which we
call Conscience: which is a kind of an Internal Sensation of Moral Good and
Evil. And this Candle of the Lord, set up by himself in men's Minds, and which
it is impossible for the Breath or Power of man wholly to extinguish Essay of
Hum. Understand. p. 276.
; is as Natural to a Rational Mind, as the Sense of Pain and Pleasure is to the
Body; for as that is given us by the Author of our Natures to preserve us from
bodily Evils, and to capacitate us to enjoy such a Kind of Happiness; so
Conscience is our Guard against the Invasions of Moral or Spiritual Evils; and
will, if rightly followed, give us always so much Peace, Joy, and Satisfaction
of Soul, as cannot possibly be had any other way. But again;

2. It is most plain also, That there are some things which do Universally and
Naturally tend to promote the Happiness and Welfare of Mankind, and others that
do equally contribute to its Misery: And consequently on this Account we must
esteem the former to be really and naturally Good things, and the latter, Evil.
Now one would think, that one need not spend Time to prove that the Practice of
Moral Virtue, does Uniformly and Naturally promote the Happiness of Mankind,
and that Vice and Immorality do as naturally and necessarily tend to its
Misery. For does not any one plainly perceive, that there is no Virtue, or Part
of Morality, but what has some particular Good and Advantage to Human Nature,
connected with it, as all Vice and Wickedness has the contrary? Does not a
sincere Veneration for that Supreme and Almighty Being, from whom all our
Powers and Faculties are derived, and a consciousness to our selves that we are
obedient to his Will, and consequently under his Protection; does not this, I
say, bring constant Peace, Comfort and Satisfaction along with it? and prove
our greatest Support under any Troubles and Afflictions? And on the other hand,
has not generally speaking he that is guilty of Impiety, Profaneness and
Irreligion, dismal Doubts and dire Suspicions in his Mind of impending
Punishments, and Misery? Is not such a Man's whole course of Action, a continual
state of War in his own Breast, and a constant Contradiction of his Reason and
his Conscience? What has such a Person to support him, or to give him any
comfort on a Sick or a Deathbed, when the hurry and amusements of sensual
Pleasure are over; and when all the treacherous Enjoyments of this World begin
to fail him, and discover themselves to be counterfeit and fictitious? But
again, is it not plain to every one, that Truth, Justice and Benevolence, do
Naturally and Essentially conduce to the well being and Happiness of Mankind,
to the mutual support of Society and Commerce, and to the Ease, Peace and Quiet
of all Governments and Communities? and does it not as clearly appear on the
contrary that breach of Trusts and Compacts, lying and falsifying of Men's
Words, Injustice, Oppression, and Cruelty, do inevitably render that Place or
Society miserable where they abound? What an unexpressible wretchedness would
Mankind be in, if Hobbs his State of Nature were in Being amongst us? i. e. a
State wherein no Man would have any Notion of Moral Virtue, but where every one
should think himself to have a right to all things, and consequently be still
endeavoring to obtain them; and making it his daily business to vex, rob, ruin
and destroy all who opposed his Will, and they also be doing continually the
same things against Him, and against one another. A Man must be stupidly and
wilfully blind before he can assert such a State as this, to be as happy and
advantageous to Mankind, as where all Moral Virtues are observed and exercised:
And therefore Mr. Hobbs himself is forced to allow that rational Agents would
have recourse to the Enacting of Laws for the due Government and Regulation of
Society. But how these Laws should ever come into Peoples Heads, that are
supposed to have no manner of Notion of any distinction between Good or Evil,
Just or Unjust; and when there is in reality no such thing, is what I cannot
not possibly conceive. On the contrary, I think that the Constant and Universal
Support, that these Moral Virtues have always had from Human Laws, is a most
demonstrative Argument that Men have always thought them Substantially and
Morally Good and Excellent in themselves; and that they do Naturally and
Eternally conduce to the good of all Societies. Indeed, some things may be, and
often are Enacted or Prohibited by Human Laws, that have no real nor Intrinsic
Goodness, nor Natural Evil in them; but are only Good and Evil, according to
some particular Circumstances and Exigencies of Affairs. And thus God himself
was pleased to appoint the Jews many Rites and Observances that had not any
real or Intrinsic goodness in them, but only were necessary for the present
Circumstances and Condition of that Nation. But then these are every where in
Holy Writ, Post-poned to Moral Virtue Mich. 6.8. Deuteronomy. 10.12. 1 Samuel 15.22.
Psalm. 50.8.
, declared by God himself to be of much lesser Value; and whenever there was a
Competition between them, these were to give place to those; which were
properly speaking good in their own Natures, and of Universal and Eternal
Obligation; whereas the others were only good pro and nunc. Therefore they are
said by the Apostle, to be not Good, i. e. in themselves or in their own
Natures; but only by Institution. But this is not the Case as to such Actions
as we have been mentioning, which are called Morally Good or Evil; for these
have been constantly and universally distinguished by Humane Laws, and have
never been confounded or changed. For can any Man produce a Law that ever
obtained universally against paying Adoration and Worship to the Deity? against
Men's honoring their Parents, or against their being Just, Good, Merciful, and
Righteous in their Dealings with one another? Against such things, as St. Paul
tells us, there is no Law. Nor is it possible for our Adversaries to show us,
that the contrary Immoralities were ever universally thought good and lawful;
or allowed and established by any General Authority whatsoever; and should the
Reverses to Moral Virtue be enjoined as Laws, and every one commanded to be
Unjust, Oppressive, and Cruel, as now he is enjoined the contrary, any one may
imagine what would be the dismal Consequences of it.

3. But again, Another Argument for the Natural distinction between Good and
Evil, may be drawn from the Consideration of our Passions and Affections: For
these are so framed and contrived by our Wise Creator, as to guide and direct
us to Good, and to guard and preserve us from Evil by a kind of Natural
Instinct, which we find in our selves frequently previous to all Reasoning and
Consideration. Thus, we perceive a strange Horror, and very ungrateful
Sensations seize upon us immediately, on the sight of a Scene of Misery, or a
Spectacle of Cruelty; and as soon as ever our Ears are entertained with the
doleful Relation of such Actions; so also an Instance of great Injustice or
very base Ingratitude, raises a just Indignation in us against the offending
Person; and we cannot avoid being uneasily moved and affected in such Cases.
While on the contrary, a very pleasing Satisfaction of Soul arises in us, when
we see, or hear of an Instance of great Kindness, Justice, Generosity, and
Compassion. Now this Sympathizing of our Natural Affections with our Reason;
and their approving and disapproving the very same things that it does, is a
very convincing Argument that there is an Essential difference between Actions
as to their being Good or Evil, and that we have a plain Knowledge of such a
distinction. For no doubt God implanted these Passions and Affections in our
Natures, and gave them this Turn which we plainly perceive they have, in order
to prepare the way for our Reasons more thoroughly assuring us of the Natural
Goodness and Excellence of Moral Virtue, when it comes to be Ripe, and
sufficient for that End; and in the mean time, to keep Children and Young
Persons, in whom we perceive these Natural Efforts to be very strong, by a kind
of Anticipation or Natural Instinct from doing such things as their Reason,
freely exercised, will afterward condemn them for.

And now upon the whole, there being thus plainly proved an Essential and
Natural Difference between Moral Good and Evil; and that the Reason of all
Mankind freely and impartially exercised does agree in this Point, that
Morality conduces to the Happiness, and Immorality to the Misery of Human
Nature: We may very justly conclude from hence, that all other Rational Agents
must judge of Good and Evil after the same manner, and plainly distinguish one
from the other. And they also must Know and Understand that their Perfection
and Happiness (though they may differ in some Circumstances from us) does
consist in Acting according to the Eternal Rules of Right Reason and Moral
Virtue. For if the Case be not so, several Rational Natures all derived from
the same Deity, may come to make contradictory Judgments, even when they Act
according to the Great and Common Rule of their Nature. But the Principle of
Right Reason, at this Rate, would be the most precarious thing imaginable, and
Men could never possibly be assured that they were in the Right in any Point,
or knew any thing at all. Assuredly therefore this Great Rule of Right Reason
that God has given his Creatures to govern and direct themselves by, is no
such uncertain thing, is in no respect Contradictory to it self; but must be
Uniformly and Constantly the same in all Beings, that are endowed with it, when
it is rightly and perfectly followed.

And from hence also we cannot but conclude, that the same Eternal, Constant
and Uniform Law of Right Reason and Morality that God has given as an
Universal Guide to all Rational Beings, must also be in Him in the greatest and
most exquisite Perfection. And that, not only because all Perfections and
Excellencies in the Creatures must necessarily be in that First Being from whom
they are derived, as I have already proved; But also, that if it were not so,
God must be supposed to have given us a Rule of Action that is contrary to his
own Nature, or at least vastly different from it. And that he has contrived
our Powers and Faculties so, as to deceive us in the most Material and
Essential Points, and indeed has left us no possible way of knowing the Truth
of any thing whatsoever.

For, If when, as I have shown above, God has not only fixed in our Natures, a
Desire of Happiness; but also disposed them so, that every Power Faculty and
Capacity of them convinces us that the Exercise of Moral Virtue is the Way, and
indeed, the only Way to make us entirely happy. If I say after all this, there
be no such things as Moral Virtue and Goodness, but that all Things and
Actions, both in us and the Deity, are purely and in their own Natures
Indifferent; it is plain, Reason is the most ridiculous thing in the World, a
Guide that serves to no manner of Purpose but to bewilder us in the Infinite
Mazes of Error, and to expose us to Roam and Float about in the boundless
Ocean of Skepticism, where we can never find our Way certainly to any Place,
nor direct our Course to the Discovery of any Truth whatsoever. But this not
being to be supposed of the Deity, who contains in himself all Possible
Excellence and Perfection; it must needs be that our Reason will direct us to
conclude the Deity also guided and directed in all his Proceedings by the
Eternal Rules of Right Reason and Truth: and consequently that He will and does
always exercise loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth; as
the Prophet here speaks.

And indeed, the Hobbian Notion of a Deity guided only by Arbitrary Will
Omnipotent, without any regard to Reason, Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom, is so
far from attributing any Perfection to God, or as they pretend, being the
Liberty and Sovereignty of the Deity; that it really introduces the greatest
Weakness and Folly, and the most Brutish Madness that can be! for what else can
be supposed to be the Result of Irresistible and Extravagant Will, pursuing the
most fortuitous Caprichio's of Humor, without any Wisdom, Ends, or Designs to
Regulate its Motions by?

And of this the Ancient Heathens were so sensible, that they always connected
Goodness with the Idea that they had of an Omnipotent Mind's being Supreme Lord
over all things in the Universe; for Mind not guided and directed by Goodness
was, according to them, not (...) but (...), mere Folly and Madness, and
consequently no true Deity. There is a Remarkable Passage of Celsus's to this
purpose, which though introduced upon another Design, yet very clearly shows
the Idea that the Heathens had of the Goodness and Wisdom of the Deity. God,
says he, cannot do evil things, nor will any thing contrary to Nature (or
Reason) -- for God is not the President or Governor of Irregular or Inordinate
Desires; nor of erroneous Disorder and Confusion, but of a Nature truly Just
and Righteous. -- (...) -- (...). Orig. contr. Cells. lib. 5. p. 240. Cantabr.

Excellently to the same Purpose, is that Saying of Plotinus, The Deity does
always act according to his Nature or Essence, and that Nature or Essence
discovers Goodness and Justice in all its Operations: for indeed, if these
things should not be there (i. e. in God) where can they else be found? (...);
p. 265. Ficin.

And it is plain that the Heathens had a true Notion, that the Deity must be a
Good, Just and Righteous Being; because several of the old Atheists, as
Protagoras, etc. argued against the Existence of a Deity, from the Worlds being
so ill Made and Ordered as it is, and from there being so much Evil and Misery
among Mankind, as they pretended to find in the World; but now there had been
no manner of force in this Argument, and it had been ridiculous to bring it,
if, both the Atheistical Proposers of it, and their Antagonists, had not had a
clear Notion that Goodness, Justice and Righteousness are naturally included in
the Idea of a God. Accordingly Vaninus tells us, That Protagoras used to say,
Si Deus non est unde igitur Bona? si autem est, unde Mala, Amph. Aetern.
Provid. p. 90. And the same thing Tully tells us also ( Lib. De Not. Deorum)
that Diagoras used to object against a Deity. All which sufficiently proves
that they were all Agreed that there was some common Standard of Good and Evil;
and that the Notion of a Deity had always these Attributes of Goodness and
Justice connected with it.

And if this be so, as undoubtedly it is, we shall gain one more good Argument
for this Natural and Eternal Distinction between Good and Evil, and a yet much
Nobler Foundation for Morality. For we cannot but think, that a God who has
Perfect Goodness, Justice and Mercy, Essential to his Nature, and who has
Created several Orders of Being in the World, to make them Happy, and in order
to display his own Glory, by his Just, Kind and Gracious Dealing with them: we
cannot but think, I say, that God will give to those of his Creatures, whom he
has endowed with Reason, and a Power of Liberty and Choice, such a Method of
knowing his Will, (the Way that leads to their own Happiness) as that they
shall never be Mistaken about it, but by their own gross Fault and Neglect. And
also that he will make the difference between Good and Evil, and between Virtue
and Vice so plain and conspicuous, that no one can miss of the Knowledge of his
Duty, but by a wilful Violation of those Powers and Faculties God has
graciously implanted in his Nature. And all this we see God has Actually done:
and indeed much more; having over and above connected very great Rewards with
the Practice of Virtue and Morality. And has either naturally planted in the
Minds of Men a Notion of some future State, or else has given our Nature such
a Power, as that we may attain to such a Notion: for we find a very plain
Belief and Expectation of such a State, among many of the Ancient and Modern
Heathens.

And over and above all this, he has also given us a clear Revelation of his
Will in the Holy Scripture, that sure Word of Prophecy and Instruction, whereby
we may, if we will, gain a yet plainer Knowledge of our Duty, be more perfectly
Instructed in the Method of Eternal Salvation, and find also much higher
Encouragements, and much greater Helps and Assistances than we had before in
the State of Nature. And all this is vouchsafed us to enforce the more
effectually the Practice of Moral Virtue, and to enable us more perfectly to
perform those Things, which the Universal Reason of Mankind approves as Good,
Lovely and Advantageous to Human Nature.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
REmarks upon some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth. In Octavo. And,

Immorality and Pride the great Causes of Atheism. The Atheist's Objection,
that we can have no Idea of God, Refuted. The Notion of a God, neither from
Fear nor Policy. The Atheist's Objections, against the Immaterial Nature of
God, and Incorporeal Substances, Refuted. A Refutation of the Objections
against the Attributes of God in General: In Six Sermons Preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, School. being the first Six of the Lecture for that
Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire By John Harris, M. A. and
Fellow of the Royal Society.

Dr. Payne's Discourses on several Practical Subjects. In Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Christian Religion, in Two Parts. In Octavo.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, in Two Parts. In Twelves.

Letters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies, and Mr. Norris.

A Treatise of the Asthma, divided into Four Parts. In the First is given a
History of the Fits, and the Symptoms preceding them. In the Second, The
Cacochymia, that disposes to the Fit, and the Rarefaction of the Spirits which
produces it, are Described. In the Third, The Accidental Causes of the Fit, and
the Symptomatic Asthmas are Observed. In the Fourth, The Cure of the Asthma
Fit, and the Method of Preventing it, is Proposed. To which is annexed a
Digression about the several Species of Acids distinguished by their Tastes:
And it is observed how far they were thought Convenient or Injurious in general
Practice, by the Old Writers; and most particularly in relation to the Cure of
the Asthma; By Sir John Floyer. In Octavo.

A Refutation of the Atheistical Notion OF Fate, or Absolute Necessity.

IN A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, November the
Seventh, School.

BEING The Eighth of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

JEREM. ix.24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things do I delight, says the Lord.


I Did, in my last Discourse, begin to Speak to the Second Particular
considerable in these Words, viz.

An Account of some of those Attributes which God is here said to Exercise in
the Earth, and in which he Delights.

On which I did not think it necessary to Discourse particularly; but from
thence took an Occasion to Remove two Great Bars to the true Knowledge of God
and of his Attributes, which Skeptical and Unbelieving Men had raised in the
Way. Which were These: I. That there is in reality no such Things as Moral Good
or Evil: But that all Actions are in their own Nature indifferent.

II. That all things are determined by absolute Fatality: And that God himself,
and all Creatures whatsoever, are Necessary Agents, without having any Power of
Choice, or any real Liberty in their Natures at all.



The former of These I did then dispatch, plainly proving the Existence of
Moral Good and Evil, and answering the Objections against it.

I proceed now to speak to the latter; which is an Objection that our
Adversaries are very fond of, and do all of them, upon Occasion, have recourse
to. And it is indeed a great Point gained if they could make it out, and will
effectually destroy all manner of Religious Obligation, and all dread of
Punishment for doing amiss. Dr. Cudworth in Preface to his Intellectual System.
For as one observes on these Three things all Religion is founded: 1. That
there is a God who made, presides over, and governs all things. 2. That there
are some things (...), in their own Natures good and just. 3. That there is
also something (...), something in our own Power to do, whereby we are
Accountable for our Actions, and become guilty when we do amiss. But there can
certainly be neither Good nor Evil in any Man's Actions, and no Rewards or
Punishments can be the Consequents of them, if nothing at all be in our own
Power, if whatever we act or commit, it is absolutely impossible for us to
avoid acting or committing. Which yet must be the case, if, as they assert,
Things are determined by absolute Fatality; and that God himself and all
Creatures whatsoever are necessary Agents, without having any Power of Choice,
or any real Liberty in their Natures at all.

I shall therefore at this Time, 1. Show you that this is plainly their
Assertion, from their own words.

2. I shall endeavor to show the Groundlesness of of those Reasons on which
they build their Hypothesis.

And 3. from some Arguments, Establish the contrary Position of the Freedom and
Liberty of Human Nature.

1. And that this is the Assertion of the Two great Atheistical Writers, is
very plain, Mr. Hobbs declares himself to be of the Opinion, Hobbs Tripos, p.
297.
That no Man can be free from Necessitation. That Nothing takes beginning from
it self, but from the Action of some other Immediate Agent without it self. And
that therefore, when first a Man has an Appetite or Will to something, to
which immediately before he had no Appetite nor Will, the Cause of his Will is
not the Will it self, but something else not in his own disposing. So that
whereas it is out of Controversy that of Voluntary Actions the Will is the
Necessary Cause, and by this which is said, the Will is also caused by other
things whereof it disposes not, it follows, that Voluntary Actions have all
of them Necessary Causes, and therefore are necessitated. Ibid. p. 312.
This (says he also) is a certain Truth; that there are Certain and Necessary
Causes which make every Man to will what he wills, Ib. p. 306. And then as to
the Deity, I have already more than once taken notice, That Hobbs denies Him
any Understanding, Sense, or Knowledge; Vid. Sermon V. p. 51. Sermon. VI. p. 5.
and asserts him to be without any Ends or Designs in his Actions and
Operations. Which plainly makes Him an Agent absolutely and physically
Necessary; as, indeed, follows also from the Notion of his Being Corporeal,
which the same Writer every where maintains Vid. Sermon. V. p. 49.
.

Spinoza also is very Express in this Matter, as I have already shown Sermon. V.
p. 51.
in some Measure. In mente (says he) nulla est absoluta sive libera voluntas;
sed Men's ad Hoc vel illud Volendum determinatur a Causa, quae etiam ab alia,
and haec iterum ab alia and sic in Infinitum Spinoza Op. Posthum. p. 85.
. And in another place, Voluntas non potest vocari Causa libera, sed Tantum
necessaria. p. 28.
And yet on another Occasion, and in another Book, he has these words, Clare
and distinct Intelligimus, si ad Nostram naturam attendamus, nos in nostris
actionibus esse liberos, and de multis deliberare propter id solum, quod
volumus Princep. Philos. Carts. Demonstrat. p. 103.
. Which is as plain and palpable a Contradiction to what he, with the same air
of Assurance, delivers in other places, as can possibly be.

Mr. Hobbs also cannot be acquitted from expressly contradicting himself as to
this Point of Liberty and Necessity; for he tells us in his Reasons for his
Opinion) Hobbs Tripos, p. 314.
That he that reflecteth on himself cannot but be satisfied. That a Free Agent
is he that can do if he will, and forbear if he will. And such an Agent he
allows Man to be, and says he has proved it too. But how he will reconcile
this with his Assertion that no Man can be free from Necessitation, and that
all our Actions have necessary Causes, and therefore are necessitated, I cannot
imagine. As to Spinoza's Account of the Deity, in Reference to this Point, I
have given a hint or two of it already. He makes God to be the same with
Nature, or the Universe, to be Corporeal and an absolutely necessary Agent; one
who cannot possibly help doing as he does; one who has no Power of Creation,
nor does act according to free Will p. 29. Op. Posthum. and p. 33, 18.
. But is Limited and Restrained to one constant Method of Acting by the
Absolute Necessity of his Nature, or by his Infinite Power. And lest any one
should misunderstand him so far, as to imagine that he means by this, that God
is by the Excellency and Perfection of his Nature, in all his Operations
exactly conformable to the Rules of Justice, Goodness and Right Reason; He
plainly excludes that Notion in these words; Qui dicunt Deum omnia sub Ratione
Boni agere, Hi aliquid extra Deum videntur ponere, quod a Deo non dependet, ad
quod Deus tanquam ad Exemplar in Operando attendit, vel ad quod, tanquam ad
certum scopum collimat: Quod profecto nihil aliud est quam Deum Fato subjicere
Op. Posth. p. 32.
.

Now, I think nothing can more show the wicked Perverseness of this Writer's
Mind, than this Passage; For he could not but know very well that when Divines
assert the Deity to be Essentially and necessarily Good, they do not mean that
Goodness is any thing Extrinsical to the Divine Nature, much less that it is
something which has no dependence upon it: but only that the Excellency and
Perfection of his Nature is such, as that it is in every thing exactly
conformable to Right Reason; and therefore this was certainly a wilful
Perversion of their Sense, set up on purpose to overthrow the Notion of Moral
Goodness in the Deity. But how vain is it for him to tell us, that for the
Deity to Act sub Ratione Boni, is for Him to be Subject to Fate, when at the
same time he Himself Asserts, that God is in every respect a Necessary Agent,
without any free Will, nay, without any Knowledge or Understanding in his
Nature at all? This is so plain a Demonstration, that it was his chief and
Primary Design to banish out of Men's Minds the Notion of Moral Goodness, that
nothing can be more: and therefore though he was resolved to Introduce absolute
Necessity into all Actions both Divine and Human; yet it should be such an one
as should leave no Umbrage for any distinction between Good and Evil, or any
Foundation for Rewards and Punishments. And in this Notion of Necessity, these
Writers follow Democritus, Heraclitus, Leucippus, and that Atheistical Sect;
who maintained that there was Nothing in all Nature but Matter and Motion. And
therefore when these Modern Writers assert that there is nothing in the
Universe but Body, as they do, they run Fate farther than most of the Old
Heathen Patrons of Necessity did. For there was none but the Democritick Sect,
that supposed Fate to have a Power over the Will of Man; and in this
particular, even they were deserted by Epicurus; as I observe below. The
Pythagoreans, Platonists, and Stoics agreed that the Mind of Man was free. And
it is well known that the Stoics did in this Free Power of the Will of Man,
found that arrogant Assertion of theirs, That a Wise Man was in one respect
more excellent than the Gods; for they were Good by the Necessity of their
Nature and could not help it, whereas Man had a Power of being otherwise, and
therefore was the more commendable for being so. There was, indeed, some of the
Poets, and some few of the Philosophers too, who did subject the Gods
themselves to Fate or Necessity. Thus Seneca in one place says, Necessitas and
Deos alligat; Irrevocabilis Divina pariter ac Humana Cursus vehit. Ille ipse
omnium Conditor ac Rector scripsit quidem Fata, sed sequitur, semper paret,
semel jussit. Which Opinion is effectually refuted and exposed by Lucian, in
that Dialogue of his called (...). As also by Lactantius in his First Book De
falsa Religione, Chap. 11. But this, as I doubt not but Seneca and some others
understood in a softer sense than at first sight it appears to have, so was it
the Doctrine of but a few; for generally the Heathens did fully believe that
Prayers and Sacrifices would alter a Man's Fortune and Circumstances for the
better; that they would appease the Anger, and gain the Favor and Blessing of
the Gods, and that Their Nature was not so absolutely Fatal and Necessary, but
that they could freely deal with their Creatures according as they deserved at
their hands. For we find Balbus the Stoic mentioned by Cicero, telling us,
That the Nature of God would not be most Powerful and Excellent, if it were
Subject to the same Necessity or Nature, Qua Coelum, maria, terraeque reguntur:
Nihil Enim est praestantius Deo, Nulli igitur est Naturae Obediens and
Subjectus. So that these Writers tread in the Steps of the worst, and most
Atheistical of the Heathen Philosophers, and maintain a more rigid Fate, and a
more irresistible Necessity than most of them did. But,

2: I come next to show the Groundlesness of those Reasons and Arguments on
which these Men build their Hypothesis of Absolute Necessity.

And first as to the Reasons of Mr. Hobbs. The Chief that he brings against the
freedom of Human Actions are these, says Mr. Hobbs, In all Deliberations and
alternate Successions of Contrary Appetites, it is the last only which we call
Will; this is immediately before the doing of any Action, or next before the
doing of it become Impossible. Also, Nothing, says he, can take beginning from
it self, but must do it from the Action of some other immediate Agent without
it; if therefore a Man has a Will to something, which he had not before: the
Cause of his Willing is not the Will it self, but something else not in his own
disposing. So that whereas it is out of Controversy, that of Voluntary Actions
the Will is the Necessary Cause; and by this which is now said, the Will is
also Caused by Other things whereof it disposes not, it follows that Voluntary
Actions have all of them Necessary Causes, and therefore are necessitated. Again
also, Every sufficient Cause, says he, is a Necessary one, for if it did not
produce its Effect necessarily, 'twas because something was wanting to its
Production, and then it was not sufficient. Now from hence it follows that
whatsoever is produced, is produced Necessarily, and consequently all Voluntary
Actions are Necessitated. And to define a Free Agent to be that, which when all
things are present which are necessary to produce the Effect, can nevertheless
not produce it, is Contradiction and Nonsense; for it is all one as to say the
Cause may be sufficient (i. e.) Necessary, and yet the Effect shall not follow.
This is the Substance of all Mr. Hobbs his Proof against Free Will; in which,
there are almost as many Mistakes as there are Sentences; and from hence it
plainly will appear, that either he had no clear Idea's of what he wrote about;
or else did designedly endeavor to perplex, darken and confound the Cause: For
in the first place, He confounds the Power or Faculty of Willing in Man with
the last act of Willing, or Determination after Deliberating. And consequently
does not distinguish between what the Schools would call Hypothetical and
Absolute Necessity: which yet ought to be carefully done in the Point between
us; for an Agent may be free, and no doubt every Man is free to deliberate on,
and to compare the Objects offered to his Choice, and yet not be so after he
has chosen. Then, indeed, Necessity comes in; it is impossible for any one to
choose and not to choose, or to determine and not to determine; and after the
Election is made, no one ever supposed that a Man is free not to make it. And
therefore if by the Will Mr. Hobbs means that last Act of Willing or Electing,
which immediately precedes Acting, or which is next before the doing of a thing
become impossible, as he expresses himself; he fights with his own shadow, and
opposes that which no body ever denied: for no Man ever supposed Freedom and
Determination to be the same thing; but only that Man before he determined was
free, whether he would determine so and so, or not. And accordingly he himself
defines a voluntary Agent, to be him that has not made an end of Deliberating
Tripos, p. 311.
.

Again, 2. It Is hard to know what he means here, by Nothing taking its beginning
from it self: he is talking about Voluntary Actions, and about the freedom of
Human Nature, and therefore should referr this to the Will of Man: but the
Instances he afterward produces, are of Contingent Things Ibid. 315.
, which are nothing at all to his purpose. But if this be spoken of the Will,
what will it signify? I grant Nothing can take its beginning from itself; the
Will of Man took its beginning from God, and Voluntary Actions (we say) take
their beginning from the Faculty or Power of Willing placed in our Souls: But
what then? does it follow from thence, that those Actions we call Voluntary are
Necessitated, because that they take their Original from that free Power of
Election God has placed in our Natures, and not from themselves? I dare say,
no one can see the consequence of this part of the Argument. And it will not in
the least follow from hence, that the Cause of a Man's Willing, is not the Will
it self; but something else not in his own disposing: Which yet he boldly
asserts. It is the Power of Willing, or that Faculty which we find in our
selves, of being free (in many Cases) to Act or not Act, or to Act after such a
particular manner, which is generally called the Will; and this is commonly
said to be free. Though I think (as one has observed) Mr. Lock, in his Essay of
Humane Understanding.
it is not so proper a way of Speaking, as to say, the Man is free. For besides
that it is not usual, nor indeed proper, to predicate one Faculty of another;
it is hardly good sense to say the Will is free, in the manner now explained;
for that would be the same thing as to say, that a free Power is free; whereas
it is not the Power, but the Man that has the Power, that is free. But however
the Other way of Expression has prevailed and does do so, and I don't think
any one is misled by it into Error; for that which every body understands and
means by saying the Will of Man is free, is, that Man has in his Nature such a
free Power, as is called his Will. Now from hence it will not follow that a Man
is free whether he will Will, or not; for he must Will someway, either to Act,
or not to Act; or to Act after such a particular manner. But it will follow,
that when a Man has made any particular Volition, or has determined the Point
whether he shall Act, or forbear to Act, he is then no longer at Liberty, as to
this particular Case and Instant; for the Determination is then actually made,
and the Man no longer free not to make it. But this proves nothing at all
against the Liberty or Freedom of the Mind of Man.

Again, what does Mr. Hobbs mean by the Will's being the Necessary Cause of
Voluntary Actions? Does he mean that the Will of Man must of Necessity act
freely, and produce Actions voluntarily; if he does, we are agreed; but if he
means that the Will is previously necessitated in every Act of Volition to Will
just as it does, and could not possibly have willed otherwise; this is to beg
the Question, and to take for granted the great thing in Dispute; it is to call
that out of Controversy, which is the only thing in Controversy; which
indeed, when a Man contradicts the Common Sense and Reason of Mankind, without
Proof, is the best way of Proceeding.

But that which looks most like an Argument for the Necessity of all Humane
Actions, is this which he brings in the last place. That Cause (says he) is a
sufficient Cause which wants nothing requisite to produce its Effect, but
such a Cause must also be a Necessary one; for had it not necessarily produced
its Effect, it must have been because something was wanting in it for that
Purpose, and then it could not have been sufficient: So that whatever is
produced, is produced necessarily; for it could not have been at all without, a
sufficient (or necessary) Cause; and therefore also, all Voluntary Actions are
necessitated.

Now all this proves to his Purpose (I think) just nothing at all: He proceeds
on in his former Error of confounding the Act of Willing with the Power of
Willing; and of making Hypothetical the same with absolute Necessity; for, not
now to dispute what he says of every sufficient Cause's being a Necessary one;
allowing that when ever any Volition or Determination is made, or when ever any
Voluntary Action is done, that the Will of Man was a sufficient Cause to
produce that Effect; nay, that it did at last necessarily produce it; he can
infer nothing from hence more than this; That when the Will has determined or
willed, it is no longer free to Will, or Nill that particular thing at that
particular Instant; which I don't believe any Body will ever, or ever did deny.
But this will not prove at all that the Will was necessitated to make that
Determination a Priori, and that it could have made no other; which yet is what
he means, and ought to have clearly made out. For the same Power or Faculty of
Liberty, which enabled it to make that Determination, would have been a
sufficient Cause for it to have made another contrary to it, or differing from
it: and then when that had been made, it would have been as necessary as the
former. And therefore that Definition of a Free Agent's being that, which when
all things are present which are needful to produce the Effect, can
nevertheless not produce it, (though I don't think it the best) does not, when
rightly understood, imply any Contradiction, nor is it Nonsense at all. For the
meaning of it is, That he is properly Free, who has the Power of Determination
in himself; and when all Requisites are ready, so that nothing shall
extrinsecally either hinder him from, or compel him to Act, can yet choose
whether he will Act or not.

Thus, if a Man has Pen, Ink and Paper, and a place to write upon, his Hand
well and at Liberty, and understands how to write; he has all things present
that are needful to produce the Effect of Writing; yet he can nevertheless not
produce that Effect; because he can choose after all, whether he will write or
no.

Mr. Hobbs defines a Free Agent to be him that can do if he will, and forbear
if he will, and that Liberty is the absence of all external Impediments Tripos,
p. 314.
; which if he intended any thing by it, but to palliate a bad Cause, and to
amuse the Person he wrote to, is as much Nonsense and Contradiction to what he
himself advances about Necessity as is possible. For how a Man can be said to
Act necessarily, that has no external Impediments to hinder him, or Causes to
compel him, but is free to Act if he will or forbear if he will, is what I
believe no Man can possibly conceive.

Thus we see plainly, that this great Patron of Necessity has very little to
say for his Darling Notion, and that he plainly contradicts and is Inconsistent
with himself. Had he indeed dared speak out, and thought it time to declare his
Opinion freely, he would, no doubt, have proceeded on other Grounds in this
Point, and made use of Arguments more agreeable to his Set of Principles: which
being allowed him, would have demonstrated an absolute Necessity of all things
whatsoever. For he was a thorough Corporealist, and maintained that there was
nothing more in Nature, but Matter and Motion; which if it were true, it is
most certain, that all Things and Actions must be inevitably Fatal and
Necessary; for (as Mr. Lock well observes) nothing but Thought or Willing, in a
Spirit, can begin Motion. The Necessity therefore in such an Hypothesis would
be the true Ancient Democritick Fate, the (...), or, as Epicurus calls it,
(...), a through Material necessity Mechanically producing all Things: or the
Fate of the Naturalists, who held nothing besides Matter and Motion. But this
Notion, for some Reasons best known to himself, he did not think fit to insist
on, when he wrote this Tract against the Liberty of Human Nature. Though his
Successor Spinoza, with a little Variation did; whose Arguments we must next
consider.

Spinoza, as I have formerly showed, was an Absolute Corporealist as well as
Mr. Hobbs; but finding that Cogitation could never be accounted for from Matter
and Motion only, he supposes Cogitation Essential to Matter; and as he makes
but one only Substance in the World, which is the Matter of All Things, or God;
so he supposes Cogitation to be one of the Essential Attributes of this Deity,
as Extension is the other. And from hence he concludes, That all things,
according to the Infinite variety of their several Natures, must necessarily
flow from God or the whole, and must be just what they are, and cannot be, nor
could not possibly have been, any otherwise Ex necessitate Divinae naturae,
Infinita Infinitis modis sequi debent. Op. Posthum. p. 16, 18.
. He does indeed Style the Deity Causa Libera, and say he is only so p. 17.
. But the reason he assigns for it, is only because nothing can compel him to,
or hinder him from doing any Thing; but he expressly denies him to have either
Understanding or Free Will p. 18. Tract. Theol. Polit. c. 4. p. 63.
. And he declares oftentimes, That all things flow from the Deity by as
Absolute a Necessity, as that the Three Angles of a Triangle are equal to Two
right ones. And then as to the Mind of Man, he gives this Reason why it cannot
have any free Will; Quia men's ad hoc, vel illud Volendum determinatur a Causa,
quae etiam ab alia, and haec iterum ab alia and sic in Infinitum Op. Posthum.
p. 85.
. The same thing also he asserts in another Place p. 28.
, and from thence undertakes to prove also, that God cannot have any Free Will;
and withal says, That Understanding and Will, as they are called, belong to
the Nature of God, just as Motion and Rest, and other Natural Things do, which
are absolutely determined to Operate just as they do, and cannot do otherwise
p. 29.
. This is the Argument of Spinoza, to prove that there is no such thing as
freedom in the Nature of Man, but that he is determined in every thing by
Absolute and Inevitable Necessity. And this Necessity also it is plain according
to him, is purely Physical and Mechanical.

As to the Refutation of which, I think, I have already effectually removed the
foundation on which it is all built, by proving that there are such Beings as
Immaterial Substances, and that God himself is such an One, or a Spirit Vid.
Sermon. 4, and 5.
. For all the Necessity Spinoza contends for, depends purely on his Notion of
the Deity; as appears sufficiently from what I have produced of his words. If
therefore it be true, that God be an Immaterial Substance, a Being Distinct
from Nature, or the Universe; and the Creator and Producer of all things, (as I
think I have very clearly proved) it is most certain that the whole Chain of
Spinoza's Argument for Necessity is broken to pieces. For the Reason he assigns
for the necessary Operations of the Deity, are not the Perfections of his
Nature determining him to Good and Just, Lovely and Reasonable things; but that
the Deity being Universal Nature, All things and Operations are Parts of him,
and their several Ways and Manners of Acting and existing according to the
necessary Laws of Motion and Mechanism, are his Understanding and Will: which
Ignorant People, he says, may perhaps take in a literal Sense, and think that
God can properly Know or Will any thing; but that in reality there is no such
thing as Understanding or Free Will in God, since all things flow from Him by
Inevitable Necessity. And if there be not any freedom in the Deity, that is in
the whole, there can be none in Men, or in any other Beings, who are but Parts
of him.

If this indeed be true, that there is no other God but Nature; then it is easy
to see that all things must be governed by absolute Fatality, and be in every
respect Physically necessary; there can then be no such thing as Contingency,
or any Voluntary Actions; and if we were sure of this, it is indeed the greatest
Ignorance and Folly in the World, to pretend to talk any thing about it. But on
the other hand, if there be a Deity who is an Infinitely perfect Being,
distinct from Nature: who Created all things by the Word of his Power, and for
whose sole Pleasure they are and were Created, then none of those Consequences
will follow; but it will appear very reasonable to believe, that God has still
a Care and Providence over that World which he made at first: and that he
delights to exercise loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth;
as the Prophet here speaks: That he has made some Creatures capable of Knowing
and Understanding this, and who consequently have a free Power, as in other
things, so of giving Praise and Glory to so Great and Wonderful a Being, nay,
and of Glorying themselves in being capacitated to attain so Excellent a
Knowledge. And that Man has such a Power or Freedom of Will, in his Nature, is
what I shall now proceed in the last place plainly to prove.

1. And the first Argument I shall make use of to demonstrate this, shall be
the Experience of all Mankind. And this, one would think, should be of great
Weight, and turn the Scale against all the Atheistical Metaphysics in the
World; and so, no doubt it would, were it not wicked Men's Interest to advance
the contrary Notion. Now that we have a free Power of deliberating, in many
Cases, which way it is best for us to proceed; that we can act this way or that
way, according as we like best; and that we can often forbear whether we will
Act at all, or not, is a Truth so clear and manifest, that we are (I think)
almost as certain of it as we are of our own being and Existence; and it is an
unimaginable thing how any Man can be persuaded that he has no such Power Had
it not been a thing Undeniable that the Will of Man is free, and had not
Epicurus, and his Follower Lucretius, very well known that it was a thing which
every one could not but experience in Himself, he had certainly, as a very
Learned Person observes ( Dr. Lucas Enquiry after Happiness, Vol. 1. p. 156,
157.) followed his Old Master Democritus, and asserted the Mind of Man to be as
necessarily and fatally moved by the strokes of his Atoms, as Natural and
Irrational Bodies are. But this Opinion he was forced to desert, and to assert
the Liberty of the Soul of Man; and 'twas to make this out according to his
Senseless Hypothesis, that he Invented that Unaccountable Oblique Motion of his
Atoms; which Lucretius calls Exiguum Clinamen Principiorum. Lib. 2.
. Indeed, one may by Sophistical words, Metaphysical Terms, and abstruse
Unintelligible Banter, be perhaps a little amused and confounded for the
present. But that any one should by such a Jargon be persuaded out of his
Senses, his Reason, and his Experience, and continue in that Opinion, is what I
do believe never yet befell any Rational and Thinking Man. When Zeno brought his
silly Sophisticals Argument to prove there was no such thing as Motion; his
Antagonist thought it to no purpose to return an Answer to what plainly was
contradictory to the common Sense of Mankind; and therefore convinced him only,
by getting up and Walking. And the very same Return will baffle and expose all
the Pretended Arguments for Necessity. For it is plain, He had a Power first
whether he would have walked or not, he could have walked Five Turns, or Fifty;
he could have gone across the Room, or length-wise; round it, or from Angle to
Angle. And I dare say, no Sophistry or Metaphysics whatever would have
convinced him that none of these were in his Power, when he plainly found them
all to be so; any more than he was convinced a Body could not move out of its
place, when he had seen and tried a Thousand times that it would. It Is the same
thing in reference to the Thoughts of our Minds, as it is in the Motions of our
Bodies. We plainly find we have a Power in abundance of Cases, to prefer one
thought before another, and to remove our Contemplation from one Notion or Idea
to another: We can, in our Minds, compare and revolve over the several Objects
of our Choice; and we can oftentimes choose whether we will do this, or not;
and this Internal Freedom in Reference to our Thoughts and Idea's, we do as
plainly perceive, and are as sure of, as we are that we can voluntarily move
our Body or any part of it from place to place. And as I have plainly showed
you above, our Adversaries do grant and allow this when it is for their Turn.

But they will say, though we seem to be free, and do think and perceive our
selves to be so, yet in reality we are not; and it is only our Ignorance of
Things and Causes, which induces us to be of this mistaken Opinion Falluntur
homines quod se liberos esse sutant, quae opinio in hoc solo consistit, quod
suarum Actionum sint conscii, and Ignari Causarum a quibus determinantur. Haec
ergo est eorum libertatis Idea quod suarum A^^ionum nullam c^gnescunt Causam.
Nam quod aiunt humanas Actiones a Voluntate pendere verba sunt quorum nullam
habent Ideam. Eapt. Spinoz. Op* Posthum, p. 73. Vid. etiam, p. 37.
; and the Idea of Liberty which Men have is this, that they know no Cause of
their Actions; for to say they depend on the Will, is to talk about what they
do not understand, and to use words of which they have no Idea's at all. To
which, I say, that I cannot but be of the Opinion that it is a good Rational
way enough of Proceeding, to pronounce of things according as we do experience
them to be, and to declare them to be that which we have all the Reason in the
World to think and believe that they really are. And I think we may well enough
own and be contented with the Charge of Ignorance here laid upon us. For the
Case is thus: We think our selves free, because we plainly find and experiment
our selves to be so in a Thousand Instances; and this also these Penetrating
Gentlemen sometimes, as I have showed, do kindly allow; and we are indeed
wholly Ignorant of any Causes that do absolutely determine us to Action; or
which do necessitate us in what we do* previous to that free Power which we
find in our selves; so that plainly perceiving our selves to have this free
Power, and being Ignorant of any true Reason why we should believe we are
mistaken in what we perceive and know, we do, indeed, (such is our Ignorance
and Weakness) embrace the Opinion that there is a Liberty of Action in Human
Nature. And this free Power or Liberty which we find in us, we not being deep
Metaphysicians, call the Will; by which we understand, as I have showed before,
not any Particular Act of Volition, but the Power or Faculty of Willing. And
since we plainly perceive that in many cases we are not determined to Action by
any thing without us, but do choose or refuse, act or not act, according as we
please; and being withal grossly Ignorant of any Cause these Actions have, but
what we find and perceive them to have, we call our free Will the Cause of
these Actions, and say they depend on it: and yet after all, do we not find
out, that we talk about what we do not understand, and use words that we have
no Idea of. But our Adversaries, it seems, have a quite different relish of
things, they soar in a higher and more subtle Region, they will not condescend
to speak common sense in this Matter; Though they plainly understand, (as they
tell us) that they are really free as to many Actions, and can deliberate
whether they will do them or not, purely because they have a free Power so to
do Spinozae Princip. Philos. Carts Demonst. p. 103.
; though they are satisfied that they can act if they will, or forbear if they
will Hobbs Tripos, p. 314.
; yet they say this is in reality a Mistake, and that there is no such thing as
freedom after all, but that all Actions are absolutely necessitated. And as for
the Power or Faculty which is vulgarly called the Will; that sometimes is one
thing sometimes another, according as they think fit to name it. Sometimes it is
an Act of Volition that follows the Ultimum dictamen Intellectus, and sometimes
it is the Understanding itself Spin. Op. Posth. p. 87, 88.
. Now it is nothing but an Idea Ibid. p. 399.
, and by and by a mere Ens Rationis Ibid. p. 399.
, or an Imaginary Cause of Action, which Ignorant Men have fansied that they
have in themselves p. 73.
. So hard is it for Men that fly so high, to have a distinct view of any thing
below. But I proceed,

2. To another Argument, for the freedom of Humane Nature; and that is, the
monstrous Absurdities and Consequences of the contrary Opinion. For the
Assertion that all our Actions are necessitated, it perfectly destroys the
Notions of Good and Evil, Rewards and Punishments, and of all manner of
Obligation both to Divine and Human Laws: and consequently is the most
Destructive Principle, that can be advanced, to the Good of Society. I have
already proved that there is a Natural Distinction between Actions as to Good
and Evil, that this is plainly discoverable by the Light of Reason, and that
all Nations in all Ages of the World have been sensible of it; and if this be
proved, (as I think it has been) we ought not to desert it, only because we
cannot readily solve all the Difficulties about the Freedom of the Will of Man,
which a Skeptical Man may raise against it; much less ought we to embrace an
Opinion that perfectly Contradicts it; as this of absolute Necessity certainly
does. For if all things and Actions whatever are absolutely Necessary, and
cannot possibly be otherwise than they are; there can be no such thing as Good
or Evil, Right or Wrong, Honorable or Base, etc. And why should any Creatures
trouble themselves about paying any Veneration to the Deity, if that he could
not help making them just such as they are? and if he has absolutely
necessitated them to do just as they do? God has, according to these Horrid
Principles, no Natural Right to any Obedience from us, as a free Agent would,
who had out of his own gracious Goodness bestowed so many Gifts and Mercies
upon us. This Mr. Hobbs well knew, and therefore he tells us, That there is no
Obedience due to God out of Gratitude to him for Creating or Preserving us,
etc. Leviath. p. 187.
but what we pay him, is founded only in his Irresistible Power.

And so likewise, as to Human Laws and the Good of the Government or
Commonwealth where we are placed. No Man, according to these Abominable Tenets,
has any Obligation upon him to obey Rulers, to be just and honest in his
Dealings, to be loving and merciful, helpful and beneficial to his Neighbors;
but he may Rebel, Murder, Rob, and Oppress, without being Subject to any guilt
at all; and if he can but escape Punishment from the Magistrate he is safe
enough, and has no reason to be disturbed in his own Mind; for he cannot help
any of all this, he is under an absolute necessity of doing what he does, and
no one ought to blame him for it. Indeed, Spinoza says, That the Government
may, if they think fit, put such a Man to Death; but not because he is Guilty
and deserves it, but because he is Mischievous and Dangerous to them, and
therefore is to be feared. And when one wrote to him on this Point, alleging,
that if the Will were not free, All Vice would be excusable; he Answers, Quid
inde Spinoz. Op. Posthum. p. 586
? Nam homines mali non minus timendi sunt, nec minus perniciosi, quando
necessario mali sunt.

By which he plainly allows that all Wickedness is excusable, though it be not
always tolerable, as it is not when it becomes formidable. Fear is that which
according to these Men does every thing in the World, in this Case. A Subject
pays Obedience to the Laws, not because he thinks himself bound in Conscience
so to do, or because it is just and reasonable; but because he is afraid of
Punishment if he do not do it. And the Magistrates Punish an Offender, not
because they think he has committed any Fault, or is Guilty of any Crime
properly speaking; but because They are afraid of Him, and under an
apprehension that he is likely to do them a Mischief. And thus a Man that is
guilty of all manner of Immorality, an Assassinator of Princes, a Firer of
Cities, a Betrayer of his Country, a Poisoner, Coiner, a Common Robber, or the
most flagitious Villain that can be imagined, is as Innocent as a Saint from
any guilt of Sin he has upon him; for he is necessitated to do what he does,
he cannot help it, any more than another Man can, that acts virtuously, as it is
called: and therefore he may and ought to have as much Peace and Satisfaction
in his own Mind, and as much Respect and Honor paid him from others too,
provided they are not afraid of him, as ever any Man had.

But will not such a Principle as this be the most mischievous and dangerous to
Mankind that can possibly be? Does it not open a Door to all the Wickedness
that can possibly enter into the Heart of Man to commit? And consequently ought
not all Governments to be afraid, as they themselves would express it, of Men
that vent such Notions as these, so plainly contradictory to, and inconsistent
with the Good of Human Society?

And as this is a most pernicious, so it is the most Impudent and Daring Opinion
that ever was advanced: for it charges all Mankind in all Ages of the World,
with the most gross and palpable Folly that can be: For, besides that it gives
the Lie to the Experience and certain Knowledge of every Body, as I showed
before; it renders all Laws, and Rules of Action, and all the Sanctions of
them, ridiculous: it makes all Advice and Exhortation useless, and to no
purpose; all Censure, Punishment and Reproof is Unjust and Unreasonable; All
Honors and Rewards it renders Unmerited; And all Knowledge, Wisdom, Care and
Circumspection, become by this means, the most foolish and unaccountable things
in the World; for if all things are governed by Absolute Fatality, any one may
see that all these things signify Nothing at all, but it is plain, the Wisest
Part of the World as they have been justly esteemed, are in reality the
greatest Fools and most stupid Idiots that can be: for they encourage Men to
act well, and discourage them from doing amiss, by Elaborate and Studied
Methods, when after all, it is impossible according to this Notion, that any one
can possibly avoid doing just as he does.

Nor can I see how these wonderful Discoverers themselves, that have thus
luckily found out that all Mankind are mistaken in thinking themselves Free,
when they are not so; I cannot see, I say, how according to their own Notions
they can be acquitted from being as Ignorant and Mistaken, and as arrant Fools
as the rest of Mankind. For why do they write Books, and spin out such
Elaborate Treatises as they fancy they do? and why should they set themselves
up above others, and expect Praise and Glory for their fine Thoughts and
elevated Notions? they cannot sure be so Ignorant as to expect to convince any
Body, or to Proselyte any one over to their Opinion? Can any Man help being of
that Opinion he embraces? if he can, he has free Will, and is not necessitated
to hold what he does hold; which destroys all they are so studiously advancing.
But if he cannot alter his Opinion freely, but is absolutely necessitated to
believe what he does believe; how ridiculous is it to pretend to Dispute or
Argue in such a Case? They will say, no doubt, that they are necessitated to
write, and cannot help it: But if the Government should Plead the same thing,
for Punishing them for so doing; they would, we know, make a large outcry
against Persecution, and the Infringement of that Native Liberty, that every
Man has to enjoy his own Opinion. For these Gentlemen make use of Liberty and
Necessity, according as it best serves their purpose. When they commit
Immoralities and Wicked Actions; they then ought not to be punished either by
God or Man, because they are necessitated to do it, and cannot help it. But if a
Government, judging such Notions destructive to the Good of Human Society, and
contrary to the express Word of God, thinks fit to Prohibit the Propagation of
them, and to Punish the Authors of them: How do these Men then Cry up the
Liberty of Human Nature? then every Man's Opinion ought to be free, no
Compulsion must be used, every Man's Conscience is to be his Guide, and the
like. But how ridiculously Vain is all this, according to these Principles? Is
not the Magistrate as much necessitated to Punish as they are to Offend? and
the Government to make Laws as they are to break them? Oh by no means! They
would be free to Sin and to commit Wickedness, and then necessitated not to be
Punished. They would have Men think them necessitated in all their Actions, so
as to excuse them from blame, and they would have the Magistrate free to
forbear Punishing them, though he think them never so guilty. That is, in short,
they would do what they please, and no one should call them to an Account for
it; they would act like Fools, and yet be thought Wise Men; they would proceed
contrary to Reason, and yet have the Reputation of having Principles, and
pursuing the Dictates of Reason and Truth: And they would build themselves a
Reputation in the World by advancing Paradoxes contrary to the common Sense and
Reason of Mankind: by pretending to a higher pitch of Knowledge than their
Neighbors, and by calling all the rest of the World Fools and Ignorant. In a
word they would say, with those in the Psalmist, We are they that ought to
speak, who is Lord over us. This, I am fully persuaded, is what they aim at in
all their Arguments and Objections against Religion, and particularly in the
bustle that they make about this Point, of the Absolute Necessity of All Events
and Actions. Which how weakly they Prove, and how contradictorily they
Maintain, against the Common Sense and Experience of all Mankind, I think I
have sufficiently shown.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
REmarks upon some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth. By John Harris, M. A. and Fellow of the
Royal-Society. In Octavo.


