A REFUTATION of the Objections Against MORAL GOOD and EVIL. IN A SERMON
Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, October the Third, School. BEING
The Seventh of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's- Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

JEREM. ix. 24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things do I delight, says the Lord.
IN these Words, as I have already showed, there are these two Things
considerable:

I. A Supposition that God is capable of being known to us by his Attributes.

II. An Account of some of those Attributes which he exercises in the Earth,
and in which he delights.

On the former of these, I did, in my last Discourse endeavor to remove the
Objections against the Attributes of God in general, and to show that they are
plainly discoverable by Reason, and agreeable to Philosophical Truth. As to the
Second,

The Attributes of God mentioned here by the Prophet, and which he is said to
delight to exercise in the Earth.

I think it not necessary to discourse particularly of them, having in my last
Sermon shown how They, as well as all other Excellencies and Perfections which
we can discover in the Creatures, must of necessity be in the Divine Nature in
the greatest Perfection; because they are all derived from Him. But that which
I judge will be more proper to be done now, as being agreeable to my Design of
Answering the Atheistical Objections in their Natural Order, will be from hence
to Remove two Great Bars to the true Knowledge of God and of his Attributes,
which Skeptical and Unbelieving Men have here placed in the Way. For indeed,
till this be done, no true Notion of God or of his Perfections can be
established in Men's Minds; nor any Ground fixed whereon to build a Rational
Belief of Natural or Revealed Religion, or any kind of Worship of the Supreme
and Almighty Being. And these Two great Objections of our Adversaries are,

1. That there is in reality no such thing as Moral Good and Evil; but that all
Actions are in their own Nature indifferent.

2. That all things are determined by Absolute Fatality: And that God himself,
and all Creatures whatsoever, are Necessary Agents, without having any Power of
Choice, or any real Liberty in their Nature at all.

These are two of the strongest Holds of Atheism and Infidelity, which it is
therefore absolutely necessary to batter down and demolish: And these do in
some sense communicate with and run into one another; and indeed the former
plainly follows from the l^tter. But however, they being very frequently made
use of distinctly by the Opposers of Religion, and the former being maintained
by some Persons whom I cannot find do hold the latter; I shall endeavor to
Refute them severally. Beginning with that which I have first proposed; viz.

That there is in reality no such things as Moral Good and Evil, but that all
Actions are in their own Nature purely Indifferent.

And this Position our Adversaries are very express in maintaining, as will
sufficiently appear by their own Words.

The Virtues that Men extol so highly, says Mr. Blount Anima Mund. in Or. of
Reason, p. 117.
, are not of equal weight and value in the Balance of Nature; but that it may
fare with them, as with Coin made of Copper or Leather: which though it may go at
a high Rate in one Country by Proclamation; yet will it not do so in another,
for want of Intrinsic Value. It Is plain enough what he means by this; but how
this Assertion will agree with his allowing some things to be (...) Oracles of
Reason, p. 89.
, Good and Just in their own Nature, as he does in his Account of the Deists
Religion, let the Admirers of those Contradictory Oracles of Reason, consider.
But, indeed, it is no new or uncommon thing with these kind of Men to make
Contradictory Propositions subservient to their Purposes: as they often do in
this very Case. For when you upbraid them with a Disbelief of Revelation, they
will say, that it is enough for any Man to live up to the Principles of Natural
Religion, and to adhere inviolably to all things,; (...) for those are things
that are Obligatory on all Mankind, and not like Revealed Truths, mere
Political and Topical Institutions. Whereas at another time, if you tell them
of some gross Immoralities that they are Guilty of, and which are plainly
contrary to Reason, and to the clearest Light of Nature; Then they will answer
you, That Good and Evil are only Thetical things; which receive their very
Essence from Human Laws or Customs only, but that by Nature nothing is either
Good or Bad; and that all Actions are alike and Indifferent; so hard is it, as
an Excellent Person observes A. Bish. Tillots. Sermon. Vol. 4. p. 315.
, to contradict Truth and Nature, without contradicting ones self. But to go on,

Spinoza takes care to deliver himself very plainly, as to this Matter. Bonum
and Malum nihil Positivum in Rebus sc. in se consideratis indicant Op Posthum,
p. 164.
. And in another Place, he tells us, Postquam homines sibi persuaserunt, omnia
quae fiunt, propter ipsos fieri, id in unaquaque re proecipuum judicare
debuerunt, quod ipsis, utilissimum; and illa omnia praestantissima aestimare, a
quibus optime afficiebantur. Unde has formare debuerunt Notiones, quibus Rerum
naturas explicarunt, sc. Bonum and Malum, Ordinem and Confusionem, etc. Ibid p.
37. Vid. etiam, p. 171, 185, 360, etc.
. And the same thing also he asserts in many other places.

Mr. Hobbs also expressly maintains, That there is nothing simply nor absolutely
Good or Evil, nor any common Rule about them to be taken from the Objects
themselves, but only from the Person; who calls that Good which he likes or
desires, and that Evil which he hates, etc. Leviath. p. 24.
Nothing, says he, is in its own Nature Just or Unjust, because naturally
there is no Property, but every one has a Right to every thing Ibid. p. 63, 64.
; And therefore he defines Justice to be only keeping of a Covenant P. 73.
. And in another place he tells us, That Good and Evil are only Names that
signify our Appetites and Aversions; which in different Tempers, Customs and
Doctrines of Men are different Ibid. p. 79.
. The same thing he asserteth also in many other places of his Writings Vid.
Hum. Nature, p. 38. Element. de Cive c. 1.. 2.
. And this Doctrine the Translator of Philostratus is so fond of, that, though he
be sometimes very desirous of being thought an Original, yet he Transcribes
this entirely from Mr. Hobbs Blount's Life of Apollonius, p. 151.
; as indeed Mr. Hobbs, according to his usual way, had before, in a great
measure done from Sextus Empiricus; who in very many places declares that it
was the Opinion of the Scepticks, that there was nothing Good or Evil in it
self (...) -- Pyrrh. Hypot. p. 46. And again, p. 147. (...).
. And he endeavors to prove this Point, by the very same Arguments which the
Modern Assertors of this Opinion, do make use of Vid. Sext. Emp. Adv. Math. p.
450, 451, etc. 462, 463, etc.
.

And though Mr. Hobbs boast much of his Notions about these things to be new, and
originally his own; yet it is plain, that it was the Old Atheistick Doctrine
long before Plato's Time. For he tells us, Lib. 2. De Rep. p. 358. That there
were a sort of Men who maintained, That by Nature Men have a boundless Liberty
to act as they please, and that in such a state, to do that to another which is
now called an Injury, or a piece of Injustice, would be Good; though to receive
it from another would be Evil: And that Men did live a good while at this rate,
but in Time finding the Inconveniences of it, they did agree upon Laws, in
order to live peaceably and quietly with one another. And then that which was
enacted by these Laws, was called Just, and Lawful. (...).

This is the Principle we see of those Atheistical Men: which though some of them
do now and then take Care to conceal, or to express a little cautiously, yet
they understand one another well enough: and so indeed may any one do them,
that thinks it worth his while to consider seriously of, and to search into the
Bottom of the Matter. And this is truly one of the Great Depths of Atheism and
Infidelity: It Is a Principle that when once thoroughly understood and imbibed,
confirms a Man in the Disbelief of all manner of Religious Obligation. For he
that has once swallowed down this abominable Tenet, will, as some of the
lately mentioned Writers discover themselves to do, believe nothing of the
Deity, but that he is Almighty and Arbitrary Power, or a Blind fatal and
Necessary Agent: Either a Being that makes his Will his Law, and who is not
guided in his Actions or Dispensations, by the Dictates of Reason nor by any
Rules of Justice and Goodness: or else one that properly speaking, has no Ends
nor Designs at all Spinoz. Op. Posthum. p. 36.
; but is without any Understanding ^stendam -- ad Dei naturam neque Intellectum
neque Voluntatem pertinere. Ibid. p. 18. Vid. Etiam, p. 29.
, Freedom of Will, Choice or Wisdom; one who cannot possibly help doing as he
does, but is impelled in every thing by absolute Necessity. So that there being
(as according to these Principles there cannot be) no Goodness in the Deity,
there can be none any where: But all Actions, antecedent to Human Laws, will be
Indifferent. And the Obligation that Men are under to Human Laws being only, as
Hobbs says, from Fear of Punishment; no doubt a Man of this wicked Persuasion
will stick at the Perpetration of no Villainy nor Immorality, that will any way
advantage himself, and which he can commit secretly and securely; but will
pursue his own Private Benefit and Interest (the only Good he understands, and
thinks himself obliged to mind) by all possible Means and Endeavors.

This therefore being the Case before us, it will very much concern us to
Return a fair Answer to, and fully to Refute this Dangerous Objection against
all Religion, and indeed against the Good and Welfare of all Governments, and
all Civil Societies: and which I wish we had not so much reason to believe, is
fixed in the Minds of too many amongst us.

And in order to do this the more clearly and effectually, it will be necessary
first truly to state the Point, and to dis-engage it from some Difficulties and
Perplexities which our Adversaries have designedly clouded it withal. Say they
whatever is the Object of any Man's Desires that he calls Good; as also
whatsoever is in any respect Beneficial and Advantageous to him. And on the
other hand, that which is hurtful and prejudicial to him, and is the Object of
his Hatred and Aversion, that he calls Evil, and so doubtless it is to him.
Now, say they further, Since that which may be Good to one Man, or desired by
him now, may be Evil to another, or may be the very same Person, be hated and
shunned at another Time; it plainly follows, that the Nature of Good and Evil,
is perfectly precarious, and will be as various and changeable as the different
Humors and Inclinations of Mankind can make it. And thus Men's Actions will be
denominated accordingly. Every one accounting that a Good one which he likes,
which promotes his Interest, and is conducible to his Advantage: And calling
that an Evil one, which he disapproves of, and which is contrary to his
Interest and Inclination.

To all which, I say, that these Men run their Argument a great way too far,
and conclude much more from it than the Nature of the thing will bear. For
allowing as a first Principle that all Men desire Good, and that they cannot do
otherwise; Allowing also that Apparent or seeming Good has the same Effect as
real Good, while it is the Object of any particular Man's Desires: Nay,
allowing also this Apparent Good to be a very precarious Thing, and to depend
very much on the different Humors, Tempers and Inclinations of Mankind; which
is the whole Basis on which these Writers found their Argument. I say, Granting
all this, it does not come up to the Question between us, nor form any Real
Objection against the natural difference between Good and Evil, and the Eternal
Obligation of Morality; for the Point in dispute is not whether such an
Essential and Immutable Difference as this now spoken of, be discernible in all
the Actions of Mankind; for it is readily allowed that there are a great many
Indifferent, and which are neither good nor bad in their own Natures, but may
be either, as Circumstances determine. This, I say, is not the Case; but
whether there be not some such Actions, as do plainly discover themselves to
the Unprejudiced Judgment of any Rational Man, to be Good and Evil in their own
Natures, antecedent to the Obligation of any Human Laws. Or in other Words,
whether there be not some Actions which do carry along with them such a clear
and unalterable Reasonableness and Excellency, as that they do approve
themselves to be Good and Lovely to any Unprejudiced Mind, and consequently
Mankind must be under an Universal and Eternal Obligation to perform them, and
to avoid and shun their Contraries. As also, whether we have not all the reason
in the World to believe that those Actions, which the Mind of Man can thus
discover to be Morally and Essentially Good, are agreeable to the Will of God,
and directed by it: And to conclude, that the Deity also acts and proceeds in
all Respects according to the same Universal and Eternal Dictates of Reason,
and is Just and Good, Equitable and Righteous in all his Dealings with his
Creatures; and that he exercises these things in the Earth. This I take to be
the true state of the Case; and this is what we Assert, and our Adversaries
Deny; and what I shall now endeavor to prove.

In order to which, it must be allowed in the

1. Place, That Man is a thinking Being, and has the Power of Reasoning and
Inference. It must be allowed also, that we are capable of Knowing this, and do
most evidently discover such a Power in our selves. And since all Intelligent
Creatures do naturally desire to be happy, we must do so too, and consequently
endeavor to obtain that Kind of Happiness which is agreeable to our Natures
and Faculties; i. e. a Happiness that shall relate to our whole Natures, and
not to the Body only: Now the Happiness of any Being consisting in the free and
vigorous Exercise of its Powers and Faculties, or in the Perfection of its
Nature; and the Nature of Man being Reason, the Happiness of Mankind must
consist chiefly in the free and vigorous Exercise of his Reasoning Faculty; or
being in such a Condition as that we can do all things that are agreeable to,
and avoid all such things as are disagreeable to it. Now all this supposed and
granted, as I think none of it can be denied, it will plainly follow, that all
such Actions as do Universally approve themselves to the Reason of Mankind, and
such as when duly examined and considered, do constantly and uniformly tend
toward, and promote the Happiness of Man, considered as to his whole Nature,
and chiefly as to that part of him in which his Nature does more properly
consist, which is his Rational and Understanding Faculty: Such Actions, I say,
must necessarily be said to be in their own Nature Good; and their Contraries
must be denominated Evil, after the same manner; for whatsoever is universally
Approved, is universally Good: to call a thing Good being nothing else but to
declare its conducibility to that end it was designed for. Now according to our
Adversary's Assertion, Men call that Good which promotes their own Advantage
and Happiness, and so no doubt it ought to be esteemed; all that they mistake
in, being, that they don't understand wherein their true Happiness consists.
And therefore if a Thing does in its own Nature approve it self to the
impartial Reason of Mankind, and can on due Examination manifestly appear to
conduce to the Interest, Advantage and Happiness of Human Nature; such a thing
must be all Rational and thinking Men be pronounced naturally and morally Good;
and its Reverse, Evil in the same manner. And that this is the case is
Reference to that which is commonly called Moral Good and Evil, will appear
plain and evident when we show,

2. That there are some Things and Actions which the Free and Unprejudiced
Reason of all Mankind, cannot but acknowledge to be Comely, Lovely, and Good in
their own Natures as soon as ever it considers them, and makes any Judgment
about them. And this is what is apparent to the Observation of all Men to have
been ipso facto done; and the Truth of it cannot be denied: For have not all
Nations in the World agreed in paying some kind of Worship and Veneration to
the Deity? Was there ever any Place where, or Time when, Obedience to Parents,
Gratitude for Benefits received, Acts of Justice, Mercy, Kindness, and Good
Nature, were not accounted reasonable, good and decent things? I know some
Persons have boldly told the World that it is quite otherwise, and that there
are some whole Nations so Savage and Barbarous as to have no Notion of any
Deity, who have no manner of Religious Worship at all, and who have no Notion
or Idea of Moral Good and Evil: But when we consider that these Accounts come
originally only from a few Navigators, who probably did not stay long enough at
those Places to acquaint themselves with the Language of the Natives, and who
consequently could not have much Knowledge of their Notions, Opinions, and
Customs; it will be too hardy a Conclusion to infer positively that Men pay no
Worship to, nor have any Idea of a God, only because they did not see them at
their Devotions. And moreover, when we have had later and more accurate
Accounts of some of those Places, which do plainly disprove the former
Assertions, we have good reason, I think, to suspend our assent to them. And
then as to their Notions of Good and Evil, it will not follow that they account
Stealth and Murder as good and comely things as Justice and Mercy, only because
these Relators had some of those Acts committed on them. For commonly they
themselves show them the way, by wickedly Robbing, Imprisoning and Murdering
them; and therefore why the Poor Indians may not return some such Actions upon
their Enemies and Invaders, without being supposed to be quite Ignorant of the
Difference between Good and Evil, I confess, I do not see. And by what too
often appears from their own Relations and Books of Travels, the Indians have
not more reason to be thought Savage and Barbarous, than those that give us
such an Account of them; for by their Actions they discover as poor Notions of
Morality, as it is possible for any Men to have.

But after all, suppose the Fact true, as I do really believe it is not, That
there is any Nation of Men so Stupid as to be quite devoid of any Notion of a
God, or of the Difference between Good and Evil: All that can be concluded from
hence is, that some Men may for want of Commerce with other Parts of the World,
and for want of Thinking, and cultivating and exercising their Rational
Faculties, degenerate into mere brute Beasts; and indeed, as such the Relators
describe them; according to whose Account of them, many Species of the Brute
Creation discover more Understanding, and Act, if I may so speak, more
rationally; but it cannot be fairly argued from hence, that they never have had
any Notion or Belief of these things; or that their Reasons will not assent to
the Truth of them hereafter, when their unhappy Prejudices may be removed, and
they may become civilized by Commerce. Much less sure will this Prove, that
there is no Notion of a Deity, nor of Moral Good and Evil in all the other
Parts of the World, and amongst Men that can think, and do exercise their
Reason and Understanding. Will not a General Rule stand its Ground though there
be a few Exceptions against it? Will Men take their Measures to judge of Human
Nature only from the Monstrosities of it, from the worst and most stupid Parts
of Mankind? Men may as well argue that all Mankind are devoid of Arms or Hands,
or are Universally Defective in any other Part of the Body, because some few
are daily born so, or rather have them cut off. We see there are often Natural
Defects in Men's Minds as well as their Bodies, and that some are born Fools and
Idiots, as well as others Blind and Lame; and a great many we see make
themselves so by their own Fault; But sure no one will conclude from hence,
that all Mankind are Fools and Idiots, unless he be a degree worse than one
himself. And yet Men may even as justly make any of these absurd Inferences, as
to say, there is in the Minds of Men no Power to distinguish a Natural
Difference between Good and Evil, only because there are some Stupid and
Barbarous People, among whom no such thing can be discovered. For my part, I do
most heartily believe, that it is impossible for a Rational and Thinking Mind,
acting as such, to be insensible of the Difference between Moral Good and Evil:
I cannot Imagine that such a Person can think it a thing indifferent in its own
Nature, whether he should Venerate, Love and Worship the God that made him, and
from whom he derives all the Good he can possibly enjoy; or whether he should
Slight, Despise, Blaspheme or Affront him. It seems utterly impossible to me,
that any thinking and considerate Man, should judge it an indifferent thing in
its own Nature, whether he should honor and reverence his Father, or abuse him
and cut his Throat: or that he can esteem it to be as good and decent a thing
to be Ungrateful or Unjust, as it is to acknowledge and to return a Kindness,
to render every one their Due, and to behave our selves toward others, as we
would have them do toward us.

I do not think that the Instances produced by a late Ingenious Writer, of some
wild People's exposing their Sick and Aged Parents to die by the Severities of
Wind and Weather, nor of others who eat their own Children, are of force to
prove that there is really and naturally no difference between Good and Evil,
any more than I will believe that he cited those Passages with a design to make
the World think so; for I think, allowing the truth of all these Relations, no
such Inference can be thence deduced. A Practical Principle, of the Truth and
Power of which a Man may be demonstratively assured, may yet be overborn in
some Respects by other Opinions which Ignorance and Superstition may have set
up in a Man's Mind. This Gentleman says, p. 25. Of Human Understanding, That a
Doctrine having no better Original than the Superstition of a Nurse, or the
Authority of an Old Woman, may be length of time grow up to the dignity of a
Principle in Religion or Morality. Now should a precarious and wicked Opinion
overruled a Man in one or two particular Cases, and carry him against the Rules
of Morality, will it follow from thence that a Man does believe those Rules of
no Natural Force, and that it is an Indifferent thing whether he observe them
or not? Ought I to conclude, that because I have read of a King that Sacrificed
his Son to Moloch, that therefore he believed it as good and reasonable a thing
to burn his Children alive, as to preserve, take care of them, and give them a
good Education? Certainly, 'twould be a fairer and more reasonable Inference,
to conclude that his Reason and Natural Affection was overpowered by his
Idolatrous and Superstitious Opinion; and that the reason why he did such a
Wicked and unnatural Action was because he expected some very great Benefit for
it from the Idol, or that he would Inflict some very great Judgment upon him,
if he did not do it. And so in the Cases abovementioned, one may well enough
believe that those Barbarous and Inhumane Wretches that Starved their Parents
and Eat their Children; did not nor could not believe it was as good and
reasonable so to do, as it would be to preserve them; but only that they were
under the Power of some Wicked Superstition, or Abominable Custom that had
unhappily crept in among them; which they thought it a greater Evil to break
(if they thought at all) than they did to Act against their Judgment, Natural
Reason, and Affection. For this way (as he observes) it is easy to imagine how
Men, may come to worship the Idols of their own Minds, grow fond of Notions
they have been long acquainted with there, and stamp the Characters of Divinity
upon Absurdities and Errors, etc. p. 26. So that I cannot see any Consequence
at all, in asserting the Nonexistence of Moral Good and Evil, from a few
Barbarous and Ignorant Wretches doing some Actions that bear hard on the Rules
of Morality: For notwithstanding that they may be lost in a great measure in
some places; yet these things, and many others that might be instanced in, do
certainly carry such Self-evidence along with them; that a free and
unprejudiced Mind must needs perceive which way to determine, as soon as ever
they can be proposed to it, and considered of by it. For any one in the World
that does but understand the meaning of the Terms in any of the lately
mentioned Moral Propositions, will be demonstratively assured of the Truth of
them: And he will see as clearly that God is to be worshipped, that Parents are
to be honored, and in a word, that we ought to do to others as we would be
done unto, as he assents to the Truth of such Axioms as these: That a Thing
cannot be and not be, at the same Time; That Nothing has no Properties; And
that the whole is greater than any one, and equal to all its Parts taken
together: For the Reason why all Mankind allow these as first Principles, is
because their Truth is so very Apparent and Evident, that they approve
themselves to our Reason at first sight. And so, I think, do all these Great
Principles in Morality; they certainly affect impartial and considerate Minds,
with as full a Conviction as any of the former can possibly do. And would no
more have been denied or disputed than the others are, had they not been Rules
of Practice, and did they not require something to be done, as well as to be
believed. For he that rightly understands what is meant by the words God, and
Worship; will see the Necessary connection between those Terms, or the Truth of
this Proposition, God is to be worshipped, as evidently as he that knows what a
Whole and a Part is, will see that the Whole must be greater than a Part. And
no Proposition in Geometry can be more demonstratively clear, than these Moral
ones are, to Men that are not wilfully Blind and wickedly Prejudiced against
such Practical Truths. For as one has well observed ( Essay of Human
Understand. p. 274, 275
), Morality may be reckoned among those Sciences that are capable of
Demonstration. And that these Moral Truths have a stronger connection one with
another, and a more necessary Consequence from our Idea's, and come nearer to a
perfect Demonstration than is commonly imagined; insomuch, that as he says in
another place, They are capable of real Certainty as well as Mathematics (
Page 284.
). Now if the case be so, as most certainly it is; it will plainly follow, that
Those things that do thus demonstratively approve themselves to the
unprejudiced Reason of all Mankind, must be good and lovely in their own
Natures, or Morally so, antecedent to the Obligation of Human Laws, Customs or
Fashions of particular Countries.

And in this plain Distinction between Good and Evil, which our Reason, when
duly used, Impowers us thus at first sight to make, is founded that which we
call Conscience: which is a kind of an Internal Sensation of Moral Good and
Evil. And this Candle of the Lord, set up by himself in men's Minds, and which
it is impossible for the Breath or Power of man wholly to extinguish ( Essay of
Hum. Understand. p. 276.
); is as Natural to a Rational Mind, as the Sense of Pain and Pleasure is to
the Body; for as that is given us by the Author of our Natures to preserve us
from bodily Evils, and to capacitate us to enjoy such a Kind of Happiness; so
Conscience is our Guard against the Invasions of Moral or Spiritual Evils; and
will, if rightly followed, give us always so much Peace, Joy, and Satisfaction
of Soul, as cannot possibly be had any other way. But again;

2. It is most plain also, That there are some things which do Universally and
Naturally tend to promote the Happiness and Welfare of Mankind, and others that
do equally contribute to its Misery: And consequently on this Account we must
esteem the former to be really and naturally Good things, and the latter, Evil.
Now one would think, that one need not spend Time to prove that the Practice of
Moral Virtue, does Uniformly and Naturally promote the Happiness of Mankind,
and that Vice and Immorality do as naturally and necessarily tend to its
Misery. For does not any one plainly perceive, that there is no Virtue, or Part
of Morality, but what has some particular Good and Advantage to Human Nature,
connected with it, as all Vice and Wickedness has the contrary? Does not a
sincere Veneration for that Supreme and Almighty Being, from whom all our
Powers and Faculties are derived, and a consciousness to our selves that we are
obedient to his Will, and consequently under his Protection; does not this, I
say, bring constant Peace, Comfort and Satisfaction along with it? and prove
our greatest Support under any Troubles and Afflictions? And on the other hand,
has not generally speaking he that is guilty of Impiety, Profaneness and
Irreligion, dismal Doubts and dire Suspicions in his Mind of impending
Punishments, and Misery? Is not such a Man's whole course of Action, a continual
state of War in his own Breast, and a constant Contradiction of his Reason and
his Conscience? What has such a Person to support him, or to give him any
comfort on a Sick or a Deathbed, when the hurry and amusements of sensual
Pleasure are over: and when all the treacherous Enjoyments of this World begin
to fail him, and discover themselves to be counterfeit and fictitious? But
again, is it not plain to every one, that Truth, Justice and Benevolence, do
Naturally and Essentially conduce to the well being and Happiness of Mankind,
to the mutual support of Society and Commerce, and to the Ease, Peace and Quiet
of all Governments and Communities? and does it not as clearly appear on the
contrary that breach of Trusts and Compacts, lying and falsifying of Men's
Words, Injustice, Oppression, and Cruelty, do inevitably render that Place or
Society miserable where they abound? What an unexpressible wretchedness would
Mankind be in, if Hobbs his State of Nature were in Being amongst us? i. e. a
State wherein no Man would have any Notion of Moral Virtue, but where every one
should think himself to have a right to all things, and consequently be still
endeavoring to obtain them; and making it his daily business to vex, rob, ruin
and destroy all who opposed his Will, and they also be doing continually the
same things against Him, and against one another. A Man must be stupidly and
wilfully blind before he can assert such a State as this, to be as happy and
advantageous to Mankind, as where all Moral Virtues are observed and exercised:
And therefore Mr. Hobbs himself is forced to allow that rational Agents would
have recourse to the Enacting of Laws for the due Government and Regulation of
Society. But how these Laws should ever come into Peoples Heads, that are
supposed to have no manner of Notion of any distinction between Good or Evil,
Just or Unjust; and when there is in reality no such thing, is what I cannot
possibly conceive. On the contrary, I think that the Constant and Universal
Support, that these Moral Virtues have always had from Human Laws, is a most
demonstrative Argument that Men have always thought them Substantially and
Morally Good and Excellent in themselves; and that they do Naturally and
Eternally conduce to the good of all Societies. Indeed, some things may be, and
often are Enacted or Prohibited by Human Laws, that have no real nor Intrinsic
Goodness, nor Natural Evil in them; but are only Good and Evil, according to
some particular Circumstances and Exigencies of Affairs. And thus God himself
was pleased to appoint the Jews many Rites and Observances that had not any
real or Intrinsic goodness in them, but only were necessary for the present
Circumstances and Condition of that Nation. But then these are every where in
Holy Writ, Post-poned to Moral Virtue Mich. 6. 8. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 1 Samuel 15. 22.
Psalm. 50. 8.
, declared by God himself to be of much lesser Value; and whenever there was a
Competition between them, these were to give place to those; which were
properly speaking good in their own Natures, and of Universal and Eternal
Obligation; whereas the others were only good pro hic and nunc. Therefore they
are said by the Apostle, to be not Good, i. e. in themselves or in their own
Natures; but only by Institution. But this is not the Case as to such Actions
as we have been mentioning, which are called Morally Good or Evil; for these
have been constantly and universally distinguished by Humane Laws, and have
never been confounded or changed. For can any Man produce a Law that ever
obtained universally against paying Adoration and Worship to the Deity? against
Men's honoring their Parents, or against their being Just, Good, Merciful, and
Righteous in their Dealings with one another? Against such things, as St. Paul
tells us, there is no Law. Nor is it possible for our Adversaries to show us,
that the contrary Immoralities were ever universally thought good and lawful;
or allowed and established by any General Authority whatsoever; and should the
Reverses to Moral Virtue be enjoined as Laws, and every one commanded to be
Unjust, Oppressive, and Cruel, as now he is enjoined the contrary, any one may
imagine what would be the dismal Consequences of it.

3. But again, Another Argument for the Natural distinction between Good and
Evil, may be drawn from the Consideration of our Passions and Affections: For
these are so framed and contrived by our Wise Creator, as to guide and direct
us to Good, and to guard and preserve us from Evil by a kind of Natural
Instinct, which we find in our selves frequently previous to all Reasoning and
Consideration. Thus, we perceive a strange Horror, and very ungrateful
Sensations seize upon us immediately, on the sight of a Scene of Misery, or a
Spectacle of Cruelty; and as soon as ever our Ears are entertained with the
doleful Relation of such Actions; so also an Instance of great Injustice or
very base Ingratitude, raises a just Indignation in us against the offending
Person; and we cannot avoid being uneasily moved and affected in such Cases.
While on the contrary, a very pleasing Satisfaction of Soul arises in us, when
we see, or hear of an Instance of great Kindness, Justice, Generosity, and
Compassion. Now this Sympathizing of our Natural Affections with our Reason;
and their approving and disapproving the very same things that it does, is a
very convincing Argument that there is an Essential difference between Actions
as to their being Good or Evil, and that we have a plain Knowledge of such a
distinction. For no doubt God implanted these Passions and Affections in our
Natures, and gave them this Turn which we plainly perceive they have, in order
to prepare the way for our Reasons more thoroughly assuring us of the Natural
Goodness and Excellence of Moral Virtue, when it comes to be Ripe, and
sufficient for that End; and in the mean time, to keep Children and Young
Persons, in whom we perceive these Natural Efforts to be very strong, by a kind
of Anticipation or Natural Instinct from doing such things as their Reason,
freely exercised, will afterward condemn them for.

And now upon the whole, there being thus plainly proved an Essential and
Natural Difference between Moral Good and Evil; and that the Reason of all
Mankind freely and impartially exercised does agree in this Point, that
Morality conduces to the Happiness, and Immorality to the Misery of Human
Nature: We may very justly conclude from hence, that all other Rational Agents
must judge of Good and Evil after the same manner, and plainly distinguish one
from the other. And they also must Know and Understand that their Perfection
and Happiness (though they may differ in some Circumstances from us) does
consist in Acting according to the Eternal Rules of Right Reason and Moral
Virtue. For if the Case be not so, several Rational Natures all derived from
the same Deity, may come to make contradictory Judgments, even when they Act
according to the Great and Common Rule of their Nature. But the Principle of
Right Reason, at this Rate, would be the most precarious thing imaginable, and
Men could never possibly be assured that they were in the Right in any Point,
or knew any thing at all. Assuredly therefore this Great Rule of Right Reason
that God has given his Creatures to govern and direct themselves by, is no
such uncertain thing, is in no respect Contradictory to it self; but must be
Uniformly and Constantly the same in all Beings, that are endowed with it, when
it is rightly and perfectly followed.

And from hence also we cannot but conclude, that the same Eternal, Constant
and Uniform Law of Right Reason and Morality that God has given as an
Universal Guide to all Rational Beings, must also be in Him in the greatest and
most exquisite Perfection. And that, not only because all Perfections and
Excellencies in the Creatures must necessarily be in that First Being from whom
they are derived, as I have already proved; But also, that if it were not so,
God must be supposed to have given us a Rule of Action that is contrary to his
own Nature, or at least vastly different from it. And that he has contrived
our Powers and Faculties so, as to deceive us in the most Material and
Essential Points, and indeed has lest us no possible way of knowing the Truth
of any thing whatsoever.

For, If when, as I have shown above, God has not only fixed in our Natures, a
Desire of Happiness; but also disposed them so, that every Power Faculty and
Capacity of them convinces us that the Exercise of Moral Virtue is the Way, and
indeed, the only Way to make us entirely happy. If I say after all this, there
be no such things as Moral Virtue and Goodness, but that all Things and
Actions, both in us and the Deity, are purely and in their own Natures
Indifferent; it is plain, Reason is the most ridiculous thing in the World, a
Guide that serves to no manner of Purpose but to bewilder us in the Infinite
Mazes of Error, and to expose us to Roam and Float about in the boundless
Ocean of Skepticism, where we can never find our Way certainly to any Place,
nor direct our Course to the Discovery of any Truth whatsoever. But this not
being to be supposed of the Deity, who contains in himself all Possible
Excellence and Perfection; it must needs be that our Reason will direct us to
conclude the Deity also guided and directed in all his Proceedings by the
Eternal Rules of Right Reason and Truth: and consequently that He will and does
always exercise loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth; as
the Prophet here speaks.

And indeed, the Hobbian Notion of a Deity guided only by Arbitrary Will
Omnipotent, without any regard to Reason, Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom, is so
far from attributing any Perfection to God, or as they pretend, being the
Liberty and Sovereignty of the Deity; that it really introduces the greatest
Weakness and Folly, and the most Brutish Madness that can be! for what else can
be supposed to be the Result of Irresistible and Extravagant Will, pursuing the
most fortuitous Caprichio's of Humor, without any Wisdom, Ends, or Designs to
Regulate its Motions by?

And of this the Ancient Heathens were so sensible, that they always connected
Goodness with the Idea that they had of an Omnipotent Mind's being Supreme Lord
over all things in the Universe; for Mind not guided and directed by Goodness
was, according to them, not (...) but (...) mere Folly and Madness, and
consequently no true Deity. There is a Remarkable Passage of Celsus's to this
purpose, which though introduced upon another Design, yet very clearly shows
the Idea that the Heathens had of the Goodness and Wisdom of the Deity. God,
says he, cannot do evil things, nor will any thing contrary to Nature (or
Reason) -- for God is not the President or Governor of Irregular or Inordinate
Desires; nor of erroneous Disorder and Confusion, but of a Nature truly Just
and Righteous. -- (...) Orig. contr. Cells. lib. 5. p. 240. Cantabr.

Excellently to the same Purpose, is that Saying of Plotinus, The Deity does
always act according to his Nature or Essence, and that Nature or Essence
discovers Goodness and Justice in all its Operations: for indeed, if these
things should not be there ( i. e. in God) where can they else be found? (...)
p. 265. Ficin.

And it is plain that the Heathens had a true Notion, that the Deity must be a
Good, Just and Righteous Being; because several of the old Atheists, as
Protagoras, etc. argued against the Existence of a Deity, from the Worlds being
so ill Made and Ordered as it is, and from there being so much Evil and Misery
among Mankind, as they pretended to find in the World; but now there had been
no manner of force in this Argument, and it had been ridiculous to bring it,
if, both the Atheistical Proposers of it, and their Antagonists, had not had a
clear Notion that Goodness, Justice and Righteousness are naturally included in
the Idea of a God. Accordingly Vaninus tells us, That Protagoras used to say,
Si Deus non est unde igitur Bona? si autem est, unde Mala, Amph. Aetern.
Provid. p. 90. And the same thing Tully tells us also (Lib. De Not. Deorum)
that Diagoras used to object against a Deity. All which sufficiently proves
that they were all Agreed that there was some common Standard of Good and Evil;
and that the Notion of a Deity had always these Attributes of Goodness and
Justice connected with it.

And if this be so, as undoubtedly it is, we shall gain one more good Argument
for this Natural and Eternal Distinction between Good and Evil, and a yet much
Nobler Foundation for Morality. For we cannot but think, that a God who has
Perfect Goodness, Justice and Mercy, Essential to his Nature, and who has
Created several Orders of Being in the World, to make them Happy, and in order
to display his own Glory, by his Just, Kind and Gracious Dealing with them: we
cannot but think, I say, that God will give to those of his Creatures, whom he
has endowed with Reason, and a Power of Liberty and Choice, such a Method of
knowing his Will, (the Way that leads to their own Happiness) as that they
shall never be Mistaken about it, but by their own gross Fault and Neglect. And
also that he will make the difference between Good and Evil, and between Virtue
and Vice so plain and conspicuous, that no one can miss of the Knowledge of his
Duty, but by a wilful Violation of those Powers and Faculties God has
graciously implanted in his Nature. And all this we see God has Actually done:
and indeed much more; having over and above connected very great Rewards with
the Practice of Virtue and Morality. And has either naturally planted in the
Minds of Men a Notion of some future State, or else has given our Nature such
a Power, as that we may attain to such a Notion: for we find a very plain
Belief and Expectation of such a State, among many of the Ancient and Modern
Heathens.

And over and above all this, he has also given us a clear Revelation of his
Will in the Holy Scripture, that sure Word of Prophecy and Instruction, whereby
we may, if we will, gain a yet plainer Knowledge of our Duty, be more perfectly
Instructed in the Method of Eternal Salvation, and find also much higher
Encouragements, and much greater Helps and Assistances than we had before in
the State of Nature. And all this is vouchsafed us to enforce the more
effectually the Practice of Moral Virtue, and to enable us more perfectly to
perform those Things, which the Universal Reason of Mankind approves as Good,
Lovely and Advantageous to Human Nature.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
REmarks upon some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth. In Octavo. And,

Immorality and Pride the great Causes of Atheism. The Atheist's Objection,
that we can have no Idea of God, Refuted. The Notion of a God, neither from
Fear nor Policy. The Atheist's Objections, against the Immaterial Nature of
God, and Incorporeal Substances, Refuted. A Refutation of the Objections
against the Attributes of God in General: In Six Sermons Preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, School. being the first Six of the Lecture for that
Year, Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire By John Harris, M. A. and
Fellow of the Royal Society.

Dr. Payne's Discourses on several Practical Subjects. In Octavo.

Dr. Abbadie's Vindication of the Christian Religion, in Two Parts. In Octavo.

A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, in Two Parts. In Twelves.

Letters concerning the Love of God, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies, and Mr. Norris.

A Treatise of the Asthma, divided into Four Parts. In the First is given a
History of the Fits, and the Symptoms preceding them. In the Second, The
Cacochymia, that disposes to the Fit, and the Rarefaction of the Spirits which
produces it, are Described. In the Third, The Accidental Causes of the Fit, and
the Symptomatic Asthmas are Observed. In the Fourth, The Cure of the Asthma
Fit, and the Method of Preventing it, is Proposed. To which is annexed a
Digression about the several Species of Acids distinguished by their Tastes:
And it is observed how far they were thought Convenient or Injurious in general
Practice, by the Old Writers; and most particularly in relation to the Cure of
the Asthma; By Sir John Floyer. In Octavo.


