A Funeral Sermon ON MORDECAI ABBOTT Esquire Preached at Lorimers Hall, April the
7th, 1700.

By THOMAS HARRISON.

Psalm. 89.48. What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death? Shall he
deliver his Soul from the hand of the Grave?

Mat. 24.46. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find
so doing.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar,
and A. Bell at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhil. 1700.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line antepenult, put the Comma after little. P. 15. l. ult. for
Servant, read Service. P. 18. l. ult. r. they may both themselve acknowledge. P.
19. l. 2. for but, r. and.

To the Sorrowful Widow of Mordecai Abbott Esquire
MADAM;
THO I readily complied with Your desire in preaching the following Sermon, I
could not without some reluctance consent to the printing of it: But my great
Obligations both to Your deceased Husband, and Your self, gave Your Request the
force of a Command. I rather chose to have my Prudence censured than my
Gratitude. I am sensible that I studied it under a great disadvantage, both by
reason of my bodily Indisposition, and those necessary Affairs that lay upon my
hands; which made me the more unwilling to publish it. But if God, who is a
Sovereign Agent, shall be pleased to make it useful to any that read it, I
shall find no reason to repent its being brought upon the public Stage.

I hope, Madam, when you seriously consider how suitable those Words w^^ch I
preached upon are to the Character of your departed Relative, it may be a means
to support You under that severe Stroke which separated Him from You. He was a
good and a faithful Servant, and I question not but he is now entered into the
Joy of his Lord. His Conversation upon Earth gives You solid ground to hope
that he is advanced to Heaven, where he is possessed of a complete Felicity: And
that sweet Savor he has left behind him perfumes his Family, now his Body is
clothed with Corruption. It Is an honor to You that You had such a Husband; to
Your Children, that they had such a Father.

That the Lord would supply this Loss by the more eminent Vouchsafement of his
Gracious Presence to You; that he would adopt Your Fatherless Children into his
own Family; that the choicest of his Blessings may constantly descend upon You
and Yours, is the unfeigned desire of,

Madam, Your humble Servant, THO. HARRISON.
April 15th, 1700.
Matthew. xxv. 21. His Lord said unto him, Well done good and faithful Servant;
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many
things: enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.


THE great Apostle of our Profession, during the public exercise of his
Ministry upon Earth, spoke very much in Parables, according to the style and
manner of the Jewish Nation: Hereby spiritual things were brought down to the
Capacities of his Hearers, being represented by those earthly ones which were
most familiar to their Understandings. We have two Parables in this Chapter, my
Text is a part of the latter, which begins with the 14th, and ends with the
30th Verse. The Scope of this Parable was to persuade Men to diligence in the
Service of God, and to a faithful improvement of the Benefits which they
receive from him.

In order to the Explication of my Text, I shall consider four things.

1st. The Speaker.

2dly. The Person spoken to.

3dly. The Speech it self.

4thly. The time when it was delivered. An account of these things will give
you further light into the whole Parable.

1st. The Speaker; His Lord. Hereby our Lord intends himself, who was ready to
travel into a far Country, to ascend to the Emperial Heaven, which is at a vast
local distance from this lowly Earth, wherein he then sojourned. He has a
double Lordship over all Countries, viz. Essential and Primitive, as the second
Person in the Trinity; and Derivative and Dispensatory, as Mediator. Tho many
of the human Race refuse to serve and obey him, they are all his rightful
Servants and Subjects: His Dominion over them is not founded upon their
Consent; he is nevertheless their Lord, tho they will not own him to be so. In
short, they that slight his Authority now, will find it exercised hereafter in
the infliction of a deserved and severe Punishment upon them. The unprofitable
Servant shall be cast into outer Darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of Teeth; as you may see in the 30th Verse of this Chapter.

2dly. The Person spoken to: His Lord said unto Him. We have an account of the
Person in the preceding Verse, and that with respect to two things, viz. his
Receipt, and his Improvement.

1. His Receipt. This Servant had received five Talents from his Master. All
the Blessings that the Children of Men enjoy, flow from Jesus Christ: Temporal
good things are dispensed by him as the Governor of the World; and spiritual,
as the Head of the Church. His Favors are not communicated to all in an equal
measure. We read of one Servant that received but one Talent, of another that
received two Talents; but this Servant was entrusted with five. The supreme
Lord makes a considerable difference between one and another by the
distribution of his Favors. One has no more than Food and Raiment, just
enough to supply the Necessities of Nature; another abounds in Wealth, his Cup
is so full that it runs over: one lives obscurely, and makes no figure in the
World; another is in an exalted Station: one is very weak in his Intellectuals,
another is furnished with a considerable stock of Parts and Learning. And
surely the Proprietor of Heaven and Earth may dispose of his own as he pleases.
They that enjoy the least, have more than they deserve; they that enjoy the
most, must acknowledge that it is not their Worthiness, but the sovereign
Goodness of their Lord, that has made them to differ from others.

2. His Improvement; He gained besides them five Talents more: he did not hide
his five Talents, as his fellow Servant did his one Talent, but laid them out
and improved them. He gained more by his five Talents than the other Man did by
his two; his Improvement was proportionable to his Receipt. To whomsoever much
is given, of him shall much he required; Luke 12.48. The more God has done for
us, and bestowed upon us, the more will he expect from us. All that we have
received from him should be laid out in his Service, for the advancement of his
Honor. I proceed,

3dly. To the Speech it self: Well done good and faithful Servant, thou have
been faithful in a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things: enter
thou into the Joy of thy Lord. Herein we have his Lord's Commendation of him,
and the Happiness to which he adjudges him.

1. His Lord's Commendation of him; Well done good and faithful Servant, thou
have been faithful in a few things. He approves of his Service, and commends
him for it. I conceive the latter word faithful may be explicative of the
former Epithet, good: the Goodness and Excellency of a Servant chiefly
consisting in his Fidelity to his Master. The things wherein he had been
faithful are called few, in comparison of what should be entrusted with him,
and bestowed upon him. The most that we receive from Christ at present, is very
little compared with what we shall receive from him hereafter. There is a vast
disproportion between what we have in hand, and what we have in hope. I may say
of the Enjoyments, as the Apostle does of the Sufferings, of the present time,
that they are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed
in us, Romans 8.18. God will deal more bountifully with his own Children when
they come to Heaven, than he ever does while they remain upon Earth.

2. The Happiness to which he adjudges him: I will make thee Ruler over many
things; enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. We must not be solicitous to
accommodate every word in a Parable to that spiritual Truth that is taught us
by it. I will not determine whether these words, I will make thee Ruler over
many things, do purely serve for the setting off the Parabolical Narration, or
are to be taken in a spiritual sense. According to the former Notion they are
expressive of a kind Master's treatment of a faithful Servant; having
experienced his Fidelity in smaller matters, he entrusts him with greater, and
advances him to a higher Station. According to the latter Notion they are
expressive of that great Felicity which Christ will confer upon his faithful
Servants in another World. This is further held forth in the following words,
Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord; whereby is certainly intended the Glory
and Blessedness of the Heavenly State. This is expressed by Joy, because the
fruition of it will produce a triumphant and unspeakable Joy in those that
enter into it. Thus Psalm. 16.11. In thy Presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy
right hand are Pleasures for evermore. It Is called the Joy of his Lord, and
that probably on a double account.

(1.) Because in the Vision and Enjoyment of Christ the greatest part of their
Felicity will consist. Tho there be many Jewels in that never fading Crown of
Glory which shall be set upon the Heads of Believers in another World, this is
the brightest and most sparkling. When our Lord prays for the final Happiness
of his People, he thus expresses himself; Father, I will that they be with me
where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me, Joh. 17.24.
The Apostle therefore desired to depart, that he might be with Christ, Phil.
1.23.

(2.) Because his Glory in Heaven is the Exemplar and Pattern of that which his
People shall enjoy. They shall enter into that Joy, which he as their
Forerunner is already entered into: Not that they shall possess the same Glory
in all respects that Christ has; for his personal Glory as the Son of God, and
as Mediator, are incommunicable; but they shall partake of his Glory according
to their Capacity. We are told that they shall reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. and
that when he shall appear they shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. Their Souls shall
be perfectly conformed to his human Soul, in Purity and Felicity, and their
Bodies shall be fashioned into the likeness of his glorious Body. An entering
into this Joy may denote the plenitude and abundance of it: Here Joy enters
into us, but hereafter we shall enter into Joy; we shall be swallowed up in a
fathomless Ocean of pure and unallay'd Pleasures. I proceed,

4thly. To consider the Time when this Speech was delivered. If we look back
into the 19th Verse, we shall find it was when the Lord came to reckon with his
Servants. Hereby our Lord's second Coming in visible Glory, to judge both Quick
and Dead, is evidently intended: Of this we have a particular account in the
latter part of the Chapter. The Heavens must contain our ascended Lord till the
times of the restitution of all things, and then he shall descend from thence
in the Glory of his Father, with all his holy Angels, to convene the whole Race
of Adam before his Judgment Seat, to call them to an account for the Deeds done
in the Body, and to pass a definitive Sentence upon them according to their
Works. It Is true, there is a particular Judgment which immediately follows
after Death: When the Soul is separated from the Body, it appears before the
Bar of the supreme Judge, to give an account of its Stewardship, and then
receives an irreversible Sentence of Condemnation, or Absolution. But I
conceive our Lord chiefly respects the General Judgment, when the Trial will be
public, the Sentence pronounced with the most awful Solemnity; and the
Happiness or Misery of every Man completed.

Having gone through the words by way of Explication, I might raise several
Observations from them. But that I may comply with my time, I shall only speak
to this Proposition:

Doct. That they who are faithful Servants of Christ in this Life, shall be
possessed of a very joyful and happy State in the next. In prosecuting this
Point, I shall, I. Describe the faithful Servants of Christ. II. Give an
account of that joyful and happy State of which they shall be hereafter
possessed. III. Show the certain Connection between serving Christ faithfully in
this Life, and the Possession of that blissful State in the next. IV. Make some
Application.


I. I am to describe the faithful Servants of Christ, who they are that shall
be owned as such by the Supreme Lord, when he comes to Judgment. They may be
described, (1.) From their State. (2.) From their Actions. The former is
necessarily presupposed to their serving Christ with Faithfulness and
Acceptance. The Service which they do for Christ consists in the latter.

1. Their State may be described ^n two Particulars.

(1.) They are justified by the Righteousness of Christ. It Is impossible that
any good Fruit should be brought forth by a Person till he be ingrafted into
Christ, as is plainly taught us by our Lord himself; Joh. 15.4, 5. Now being
found in Christ, and ^aving on his Righteousness, are conjoined, because they
are inseparable; Phil. 3.9. They who are mystically one with Christ, must ^eeds
be interested in his Mediatory Righteousness, and so perfectly justified in the
sight of God. Tho, according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works, the Servant
was to be first accepted, and then the Person on that account; yet according to
the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, the Person must be first accepted, and then
the Service. Nothing short of an Investiture with Christ's perfect
Righteousness can render our Persons acceptable to the most High; and till they
become so, our most splendid Services will be abominable in his sight.

(2.) They are renewed and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ: Every acceptable
Service flows from a Principle of spiritual Life. A corrupt Tree cannot bring
forth good Fruit, Mat. 7.18. We may as well suppose that Grapes should be the
Product of Thorns, o^ Figs of Thistles, as that an unsanctified Person should
bring forth Fruit unto God. They that are in the Flesh cannot please God; Romans
8.8. Their Persons cannot therefore their Actions cannot; because they are the
Products of a Nature at variance with him, a Nature that is not, nor cannot be
subject to his Law. The faithful Servants of Christ are conformed to his Image:
The Law of God is first written in their Hearts, and then copied out in their
Lives.

2. I shall describe them from their Actions: Only I would premise this, we are
not to suppose that they are altogether free from Sin. The most faithful
Servants of Christ offend in many things; their Errors are so many and so
great, that they cannot fully understand them: Their best Performances are
imperfect, being tinctured with the remaining Corruption of their Natures.
Should God be strict to mark the Iniquities of their holy things, they could
not stand before him. But,

(1.) They design the Honor of Christ in that Service which they do for him.
Many carnal Persons do several things that are agreeable to the Revealed Will
of this glorious Lord, and have a proper tendency to serve his Interest; but
they have no eye to his Glory in any of these Actions: they only aim at the
advancement of their own Reputation, the promotion of some Secular Interest, or
the quieting of their own Consciences. But they who sincerely serve the Blessed
Jesus, fix upon his Glory as their ultimate end; and what Good they do is
proposed by them as a means subservient to it. The grand reason of their
practical Holiness and Obedience is, that they themselves may not only
acknowledge the Glory of their great Master, but likewise proclaim it to others.

(2.) They have a regard to all his Commandments. The Character which Christ
gives of his Friends, Joh. 15.14. agrees to his faithful Servants, they do
whatsoever he commands them: They do not slight any Precept on which they can
discern the stamp of his Authority: They make conscience both of first and
second Table Duties, of those that are Personal and those that are Relative of
the least as well as the greatest, of the most difficult as well as the most
easy.

They will not say of any Divine Command, This is a hard saying, who can bear
it? They are ready to do any sort of Work their Master sets them about, however
toilsom and laborious, however mean and contemptible in the eyes of the World,
however costly or hazardous: They mind the Duties of every place and station
wherein the Providence of God has set them, whether Civil, Domestic, or
Ecclesiastical* They discharge their Duty toward their Country, their
Families, and the Church to which they are related, with Integrity and
Diligence. And this they do, not by constraint, but willingly.

(1.) They lay out all the Talents with which they are entrusted in his
Service: As they are Stewards, they improve what he has put into their hands
to those Ends and Purposes for which they received it.

Have they a plentiful Estate? they do not spend it in making provision for the
Flesh; nor do they covetously hoard it up, but employ a considerable part of it
in supporting the Worship of God, propagating the Gospel of Christ, and
relieving those that are in distress. They honor God with their Substance, and
with the first fruits of their Increase. Are they advanced to any Station
wherein they are capable of serving Christ or his People with their Interest?
they improve it to the utmost for such a purpose. They serve the Lord with
those Parts and Abilities, with those Gifts and Graces which he has bestowed
upon them.

II. I proceed to give you an account of that joyful and happy State whereof
those faithful Servants shall be hereafter possessed: And since it is expressed by
Joy in my Text, I shall mention some things which render that State very
joyful, or excite a triumphant Joy in those that enter into it; and then give
you the Properties of that Joy which results from these Fruitions.

1st. I shall mention some things which render that State very joyful, or
excite a triumphant Joy in those that enter into it.

1. A freedom from those Infelicities which attend a mortal State. As the
privation of Good is cause of Sorrow, so a deliverance from Evil gives a
natural rise to Joy. Will not a Prisoner rejoice when relieved from that
Dungeon to which he was confined, and freed from those Fetters wherewith he was
shackled? How joyful is a Man when recovered from a languishing Sickness, and
eased of racking Pain? Surely our Mouths will be filled with Laughter, and our
Tongues with singing when we shall be perfectly freed from that mighty train of
Evils which Adam's Fall brought into this lower World. How will our Spirits
exult when we shall be set at a vast distance from those things, which often
made us sigh, groan and weep! When we enter into the other World, we shall be
freed from all sorrowful, and from all sinful Evils.

(1.) From all sorrowful Evils. There is no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor shall
there be any more Pain; for former things are past away; Rev. 21.4. There is no
Infirmity of Body, no Poverty, no Disgrace, no Treachery of pretended Friends,
no Persecution of open Enemies; there are no perplexing Cares, or tormenting
Fears, no Temptations from within or without, no Divine Withdrawings. How will
the Soul rejoice when it can say, I felt abundance of Pain by reason of the
disorder of my Body, but now I enjoy perfect Ease: I was racked and tortured
with many Cares and Fears, but now they are all chased away as the Shadows of
the Evening by the rising Sun: I was violently buffeted by the wicked one, but
he is now bruised under my Feet, I have obtained a complete and final Victory
over him; I am got out of the reach of his fiery Darts and malignant
Suggestions.

(2.) From all sinful Evils. These are most grievous to a renewed Soul, when in
a right frame; no Pressure so heavy as that Body of Death which he continually
carries about with him. Of this the Apostle Paul made a very doleful Complaint,
Romans 7.34. And from the fountain of indwelling Sin many actual Sins do
frequently stream. But all vicious Habits are entirely rooted out of Believers
when translated into another World. No unclean thing can enter into the holy
place above. The rags of mortal Defilement drop from them, as Elijah's Mantle
did from him when mounting up to that lofty Region. And none of those Sons that
are brought to Glory, ever wander from God's Commandments: There is no more
disconformity to the Divine Will in their Actions than there is in their
Hearts. And how will the holy Soul exult when freed from those Fetters of
Corruption which so often kept it at a distance from God, and hindered it from
doing his Will! To what an ecstasy of Joy will it be raised, when it finds it
self without spot or wrinkle!

2. The moral Perfection of our Souls. The separate Spirits of just Men are
made perfect, Heb. 12.23. As the old Man shall then be destroyed, so the new
Man shall come to its full growth, to its highest pitch. That moral Image of
God which was imperfectly portrayed upon us at our Introduction into the
Kingdom of Grace, will be brought to its utmost Perfection upon our entrance
into the Kingdom of Glory. Now we may consider this moral Perfection both as it
respects the Understanding, and as it respects the Will, the two supreme
Faculties of the human Soul.

(1.) As it respects the Understanding; and so it consists in a Perfection of
Knowledge. Now we see through a Glass, darkly; but then face to face: now we know
in part, but then shall we know even as also we are known; 1 Cor. 13.12. Then
that which is perfect will come, and that which is in part shall be done away.
Those things we have at present concealed from us, shall then be unfolded to
us: Our Apprehensions of those things which we are now acquainted with, will be
much clearer and more distinct than they are while we dwell in this cloudy
Region, where so many Mists and Fogs arise to obscure our sight of Divine and
Spiritual Objects, and our Souls are apt to make a judgment of them as
represented by the Senses. What bright views shall we then have of the Nature
and Perfections of the Deity, of the glorious Mysteries than are contained in
the everlasting Gospel, of the eternal Counsel and Designs, of the beautiful
and harmonious Providence of the Eternal King! Knowledge is so agreeable to the
human Mind, that Men take abundance of Pains, and wade through many Difficulties
in the pursuit of it, and are even transported with Joy when they have obtained
it, tho in a trifling inconsiderable matter. What an elevation then will be
given to our Joy, by the clearest view of the most excellent Objects? What
Pleasure will result from those bright Idea's of God and Christ, wherewith our
Minds shall be filled?

(2.) As it respects the Will; and so it chiefly consists in a Perfection of
Love, which is a Grace very suitable to the triumphant State. There is a vast
difference between that Love which a militant Saint bears to his Heavenly
Father and his Glorious Redeemer, and that of a triumphant Saint. Our Love,
when we come to Heaven, will bear a just proportion to our Knowledge. The Light
wherewith our Minds shall be irradiated, will be accompanied with a suitable
warmth of Affection. And as a Perfection of Love to God will mightily ennoble
our Wills, so it will produce solid and unspeakable Joy, forasmuch as it
renders the fruition of God and Christ exceeding delightful. There can no
satisfaction arise from the Presence of an unbeloved Object: and the Pleasure
that we take in the Enjoyment of any thing will be proportionate to its share
in our Affections. In short, since Believers mourn at present to find their
Love of the supreme Being but as smoking Flax, how will they rejoice hereafter
when it shall become a triumphant Flame?

3. The full enjoyment of God and Christ. Tho the Divine gracious Presence be
afforded to Believers in their way to Heaven, yet the glorious Presence of God
will not be enjoyed by them till they enter into that blissful Habitation. Our
Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, is but partial at
present, hereafter it will be full. Since God is our chiefest Good, the supreme
Object of our Love, we must needs rejoice in the complete fruition of him. What
a triumphant Joy will spring up in our Souls, when we shall lie in the Embraces
of such a glorious Person as our Emanuel, one who is the brightness of the
Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person: one who is very nearly
related to us, being our elder Brother, our Head, our Husband: one who has
laid the most endearing Obligations upon us by what he has done for us. How
pleasant will it be to dwell with Him, who from Eternity undertook for us as
our Sponsor, who in the fullness of time took upon him our Nature, stood in our
Law-place, redeemed us from eternal Misery, and purchased everlasting Happiness
for us by his Obedience and Sufferings; who loved us so as to give himself a
Ransom for us; of whose fullness we have received, and Grace for Grace; who has
succor'd us in our Temptations, supported us under our Afflictions, and
conducted us to the Heavenly Canaan.

4. The Society of glorious Angels and glorified Saints. How joyful will that
State be, wherein we shall dwell and converse with the highest Order of created
Beings, who have performed many eminent Services for us in the house of our
Pilgrimage, being all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister to them who
shall be the Heirs of Salvation? How pleasant will it be to dwell and converse
with the whole Assembly of triumphant Saints, when free from all those
Imperfections which attended them in their mortal State, and very much abated
the Comfort of their mutual Society? There will be no Divisions or Animosities
among them, but perfect Unity, and a flaming Love shall reign in all their
Hearts.

5. The glorious and blissful state of our Bodies. When our great Master shall
come again as a quickening Spirit, he will raise the Bodies of his Members from
their Beds of Dust, and reunite them unto their Souls: And tho for substance
they will be the same that they were before their Dissolution, yet the
Qualities will be greatly altered. The Bodies of Believers shall be reformed
with all glorious Perfections suitable to their Nature, and partake with their
Souls in consummate Blessedness in a glorious Immortality; 1 Cor. 15. The Soul
must needs have a great Affection for its Body, and when separate from it,
desires a reunion. How will it exult then when the Marriage-knot shall be
retied, and it shall find such a vast and happy change made in its dear
Relative since the doleful Separation? How will it rejoice to possess an
incorruptible, a spiritual, a glorious and an immortal Body?

2dly. I shall give you the Properties of that Joy which results from these
Fruitions, in two particulars: It Is endless, and it is undecaying.

(1.) It Is endless. That fullness of Joy which is in God's immediate Presence,
lasts for evermore: It must needs be so, because that Happiness whence it
results will be of a perpetual duration. Those Evils from which the glorified
Saints are freed, shall no more return upon them; they shall never be deprived
of the Beatific Vision of God, nor dislodged from the immediate Embraces of
their dear Redeemer. Tho the first Adam was soon expelled the Earthly Paradise,
the Seed of the second Adam shall never be driven out of the heavenly: Their
Souls shall no more be divorced from their Bodies. In short, when millions of
millions of Ages are run out in the fruition of Heavenly Pleasures, their
Happiness will be no nearer to its Period than at the first moment of their
admission into the Regions of Glory.

(2.) It Is undecaying. As they shall not cease to rejoice, so their Joy will
never be impaired or diminished: There shall be no Clouds to obscure the
Splendour of that Eternal Day. Our Happiness will be always the same, and our
Perception of it equal throughout an endless Eternity. The long Enjoyment of
Celestial Pleasures will not make us to grow weary of them. There is an
infinite variety in God, and whatever is truly desirable is eminently enjoyed
in him. An infinite Good produces always the same pure equal complete Joy,
because it arises from its intrinsic Perfection that wants no foil to commend
it. In a word, this Joy is no ravishing Rapture, but a constant height of
Affection. Thus I dismiss the second General Head. I must but touch upon the

III. To show the certain Connection between serving Christ faithfully in this
Life, and the possession of that blissful State in the next. There is no
Connection by way of Merit between the one and the other. Eternal Life is the
free Gift of God, and therefore not the proper Reward of our Services. Since we
owe a perfect Obedience to our Lord, could we yield that, it would not entitle
us to the Glory of Heaven. But there being many flaws and defects in our
Obedience, it is very absurd to claim so great a Felicity on that account. Tho
the Word of God assures us, that the possession of Heaven shall certainly
follow upon the faithful serving of Christ on Earth. I might produce several
Texts to this purpose, but two shall suffice.

We are assured, that Christ will render eternal Life to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality; Romans 2.6, 7.
He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting; Gal.
6.8. This glorious Judge will at the grand Assize pronounce a Sentence upon
every one suitable to the kind and nature, tho not to the desert of his Works.
Then shall Men return and discern between the righteous and the wicked; between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Since all Christ's faithful
Servants are justified and sanctified, they shall certainly be glorified. They
who have a right to Heaven, and a meetness for it, shall infallibly enter into
that delectable Habitation. There is such Connection between the Fruits of
electing Love, that they who have received any one, shall certainly receive all
the rest. I proceed,

IV. To make some Application.

1. How highly does it concern us to enquire, whether we are the faithful
Servants of Christ or not! Since this is a matter of everlasting importance,
how strict should we be in the examination of our selves, that we may come to a
due result in our own Minds about it? Let us seriously consider whether the
Character that has been given of such Persons agrees to us. We have a great
deal of Work to do, are we diligent in it? Some Talents are entrusted with us
all, do we carefully improve them? If we loiter and are unfaithful, we cannot
conceal our Infidelity from our Omniscient Lord, tho our fellow Servants may be
unacquainted with it. Deceitful Pleas and Excuses will not avail us, when we
stand before that Judge, whose Eyes are as a flame of Fire.

2. How sad will the Condition of unfaithful Servants be in the awful day of
Account! If they that are faithful shall enter into the Joy of their Lord, then
they that are unfaithful shall be doomed to eternal Sorrow. As there is a vast
difference between their State and their Actions at present, so their Condition
will be vastly different hereafter. They that spend all their time in the
Service of Sin and Satan, will receive dreadful Wages, even everlasting Death,
at the end of it. The Talents which are now entrusted with them, will inflame
their Reckoning when they stand at their Lord's Tribunal: Since they have sown
to the Flesh, they shall of the Flesh reap Corruption. Think of this, O
Sinners, before it be too late. That Time, those Estates, those Opportunities,
those natural and acquired Parts which you now profusely squander away, must
ever long be accounted for. In a short time Christ will say to every one of
you, Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward.
And how sad an Account will you give if taken out of the World in your present
state? Think what Horror will seize you (if not extremely stupid) when Death
shall sit upon your quivering Lips, and your Souls shall be just ready to take
their flight into an eternal World! How dreadful will the thoughts of appearing
before the Lord be to you, when sensibly approaching his Judgment Seat! Think
of that awful Day when Christ shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire, to
take Vengeance upon them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel. How
dreadful a Spectacle will the Supreme Judge be to you who have slighted and
contemned him, when he shall appear in a pompous manner, armed with Almighty
Power, and attended with a numerous Train, to pronounce an irreversible
Sentence of Condemnation upon you? Can you bear to dwell in blackness of
Darkness, and to lie in unquenchable Flames with Legions of Devils?

Tho you have highly offended your Lord, it is not yet too late to find Mercy.
He now sits upon a Throne of Grace, and extends his Golden Scepter to the
greatest Criminals. Come to Christ by Faith, that you may be interested in his
Righteousness, which will free you from the Guilt of your former Infidelity;
and receive that Grace from him which will capacitate you to serve him
faithfully the remainder of your days. Know that many who were once in the same
case with your selves, are now reigning in Life, through Jesus Christ their Lord.

3. What Encouragement have Believers to fidelity in the Service of their Lord!
That assurance which you have of a future Felicity, should encourage you to lay
out your selves to the utmost in the Service of Christ at present. The
Improvement which the Apostle makes of the Doctrine of the Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15. ult. is a natural Improvement of this Doctrine; Therefore, my beloved
Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord. Since Christ
will bestow such an unspeakable Happiness upon you hereafter, how willing
should you be to do your utmost to serve him here? The Joy that is set before
you should carry you cheerfully through all the fatigues and difficulties of your
present State.

4. This may comfort us under the loss of our Godly Friends and Relations. It Is
true, the better they were, the greater loss we sustained by their removal. But
the Consideration of what they have gained by a translation into another World,
may very much lighten the Affliction, and cheer our Spirits under it. Are we
satisfied that our deceased Friends were good and faithful Servants of Christ?
we may conclude that they are entered into the Joy of their Lord, and therefore
have passed through a very happy Change.

And I may reasonably suggest this to the surviving Relatives of that Excellent
Person whose Death has occasioned this Discourse: I think the words of my Text
were justly applicable to him. To give his just Character might render me
suspected of Flattery by those who were unacquainted with him. Ever since I had
the honor of his acquaintance, I took him to be a sincere Christian; and the
better I knew him, the more I was confirmed in that Opinion. I found him a
solid and serious, not a flashy and airy Professor; one that had a great
concern not only for the Welfare of the Nation, but for the Interest of Christ
in it. His Lord had entrusted him with several Talents; he had a plentiful
Income, was in an eminent Station, had great natural Abilities, and a general
Reputation among all sorts of Persons. And did he bury these Talents? No, he
laid them out in the Service of his Lord. How freely and liberally did he
contribute toward the relief of those that were in want, and the propagation
of the Gospel? I never knew him backward to the promotion of any good design;
but were it convenient, could give many Instances of his readiness to do good
both by his Purse and Interest. He was lovely in every Capacity, a good
Subject, a true Patriot, a useful and honorable Member of the Church of
Christ, a loving Husband, a careful Father, a kind Master, and a faithful and
affectionate Friend. But he is gone, his place shall know him no more: having
served his own Generation by the Will of God, he is fallen asleep; God has
called him away in the midst of his days, when many unprofitable Servants are
left behind. Such a loss, so Public, so General, ought to be bewailed. Now a
righteous Man is perished, a merciful Man is taken away, and we ought to lay it
to heart. But let us not mourn as those that are without hope. It would be a
good Improvement of this Providence, if Men of Interest and Estate would
imitate his Example. That covetous narrow Spirit which prevails among the
Professors of this day, is a great Reproach to our holy Religion.

I close with a short Address to the mournful Relations of this worthy Person:
Have a care of repining at the Hand of God, tho you have received a severe
stroke. He that has taken him from you, first gave him to you, and had a
sovereign Right to dispose of him. It highly becomes Creatures and Subjects to
acquiesce in the Will of the supreme Lord. God is righteous in all his Ways,
and holy in all his Works, and his Will is always agreeable to infinite Wisdom.
The ways of his Providence are all Mercy and Truth, even when he seems to walk
contrary to them. For your Comfort, think of that happy State into which your
dearest Friend is entered; Death was a blessed Gain to him; he has thereby
obtained a Post not to be exchanged for the highest Preferment in the Court of
an Earthly Prince. Be followers of him as he was of Christ. Study to serve your
Lord in your Day and Generation with uncorrupted Fidelity; so shall you also be
owned by him in the day of Account: he will then say to you, Well done good and
faithful Servants; You have been faithful over a few things, I will make you
Ruler over many things: enter ye into the Joy of your Lord.

FINIS.

