Nahash Redivivus IN A LETTER FROM The PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND, Directed to the
Honorable William Lenthal, Speaker of the House of COMMONS.

Examined and Answered, by John Harrison of the Inner Temple Esquire.

1 Samuel 11.2. And Nahash the Amonite said unto them, On this condition will I
make a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes.

Verse 11. Saul put the host in three companies, and they came into the midst
of the host in the morning watch, and slew the Amonites til the heat of the
day; and it came to pass that they which remained were scattered, so that two
of them were not left together.

Si pars una faedus violaverit, poterit altera a foedere discedere, nam capita
foederis singula conditionis vim habent.

H. Grot. in lib. 2. de jure belli and pacis Cap. 15. N. 15. Si vel tantillum
ex dictis pars alterutra transgrederetur rupta fore pacta.

Eodem in loco ex Thucydide. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewster, and are to be
sold at the three Bibles in Creed-Lane, near the West End of Paul's. 1649.

Nahash Redivivus In a Letter from the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND, Directed to the
Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the House of COMMONS.
ALthough it may perhaps seem strange to those who having taken the boldness
to believe themselves men, and in that belief to make use of their own Reason,
and by the exercise thereof have formed to themselves right apprehensions of
things and men, and have seen through those masks and pretenses of Religion,
Covenant and Reformation, by which our ill Neighbors on the other side of
Tweede have endeavored to vail and muffle themselves, while they pursued their
own Interest: That either precious time should be spent, or good paper so ill
employed as take notice of their late Letter from their Parliament misdirected,
and therefore perhaps ought not to have had public reception, much less an
answer.

Yet for that there are many good souls amongst us, full of integrity and
piety, and whose zeal to the Common wealth of England is as warm, and their
affections as real as any others, according as they apprehend, who yet come not
beyond that infant rate of Illumination and Reformation of Presbytery; and
therefore while they are under that Scottish Mist, and Calidonian darkness, are
in great danger of seducement, and of being imposed upon by those, who march
behind, that Stalking horse to shoot their Game dead, and of being made by
them to serve turns, perfectly opposite to their own good intentions, and
promote Interests destructive to the Commonwealth of England and the good of
the people in it: to which ininconveniency their candor and innocence alone
would never have subjected them, if they would but have acted as men, and have
taken the pains to prove, and examine all things, and not have suffered
themselves to be led blindfold by those Blind-guides amongst us, especially a
few wretched ones here in London, the Antisignani of the Appollyonists, who
wear a black garment to deceive, by whom they are made believe that the blessed
Reformation in Scotland, and the happy Government there, is purely Evangelical,
and according to the mind of Christ, and that all is Gospel that comes from
thence; to which belief experience has showed us, that we have many honest
men, though sufficiently weak, as firmly glewed, as any poor, wretched, and
perhaps well-meaning Papist is to believe, that all is Canonical which the
Roman Consistory shall resolve, that Vrim and Thummim are the linings of the
Popes Pall, and that Oracular verity is as clearly and frequently spoken now
from his Chair, as it was of old from between the Cherubims. For the sake
therefore of poor honest Presbyterians, whose weakness apprentizing their
judgments to their Teachers, and they for Interest causing them to depend upon
a foreign State, makes them as dangerous to this Commonwealth, besides their
intentions, as those are intentionally, who are acted from Rome,

I shall for their sakes, and caution to them, crave leave of those that need
it not a little to examine this Scots Letter, and upon that occasion to offer
some light to those who are benighted in a fog of that land of darkness.

And although I very well understand what the power of prejudice is, and of
what difficulty to remove; and that it is not an easy matter to dispel those
suffusions, or couch those Cataracts that have been growing upon our Eyes from
our birth; yet for that the intellectual Organ (pardon the abuse of the
Expression) has a right formation, and is intrinsecally adequate to the
receptions of light, if what is adventitious and extrinsecal be removed,

I shall not wholly despair, that so many as love truth will see it, if it be
rightly proposed, though perhaps not so at first as to distinguish men and
trees; but when they shall perceive light to come in, they will undoubtedly
say, Surely the light is a good thing, and find that it offends only those
who have weak, or sore eyes.

I also know how hard it is to persuade any of their own imperfections, and
especially in matter of knowledge, most men believing, that themselves (or some
other, whom their laziness has propounded to follow as an infallible guide)
have attained the aim of knowledge; and that though many are below them, who
ought to come up to their measure, yet that nothing is really beyond them,
which they should move toward; and that what ever goes besides their rule, is
Error and Schism; and what ever pretend beyond their view, is fancy and
Enthusiasm: Most being like her in Seneca, who would not believe the blindness
of her eyes, but accused her house of darkness.

To evidence therefore, that there is a suffusion remaining upon the discerning
faculty of most men, it would be necessary to show, that it is originally upon
all, and how it grows, That so we may the more willingly submit to the cure of
it. To this end, we might consider, that man lives the several lives, or
passes through the several States of Vegetation, Sense, and Reason. Of the
first, we shall say nothing, from thence this disease grows not; but when he
comes out of infancy (though that also be on this side Vegetation) into
Childhood, and begins to receive in the objects of Sense, specially those of
Hearing and Seeing (the other will not in this subject concern us) he begins to
form to himself certain Idola or Images of things, as they are brought to him
by those Senses, which wanting a Judgment to examine, he lays them up as they
offer themselves in the Storehouse of his Memory; and by often, either Acts of
Memory, or of new Reception of the same object by the same Sense, it becomes
familiar to him, conformed to his Sense (to him (then) the highest Judge of
Truth) and is seldom after reduced to examination, that being a thing which few
believe to be necessary, and of which number fewer are willing to undergo the
pains.

Thus from our Eyes come all Errors, Natural or Physical, and quantitative; and
from our Ears, all those that refer to things Aeconomical, Political, or
Theological. I will not descend to the other Senses, as nothing to this
subject, they looking at Errors, personal or individual, nor was there need to
have named the first but for evidence to the second, and demonstration both of
the disease and the cure. In a word (that the Gate may not be too great for the
House (this being no place for a just volumn, which the subject might deserve,
and exact from a greater leisure) nor seem to be built wholly of an
Heterogeneal matter) we live a life of Sense before we can live a life of
Reason; and by the frequent Acts of Sense, we put a false Tincture upon our
then weak judgments, not yet able to act by themselves: which Tincture
dis-colours to our after Receptions, whatsoever is rightly offered to our
discussion or discourse, for Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem, etc.

How easily are children deceived in quantity at distance? what child not
otherwise told, does not to firmly believe, being taught by his Sense, That the
Moon is not greater then a Sieve, or at most then a Cart-wheel? and this
conceit he shall carry to his grave, and believe it Knowledge, and his
conception Truth, if he be not delivered by demonstration: For, that other way
of being delivered by the assertion of some man, whom he believes in those
things fit to be his Master, is only to beget a belief, not a knowledge. But
let this child be instructed with Arithmetic and Geometry, and so prepared,
let him read the doctrines of the Spears and of Trigonometry, he will then
easily discover there is a Parallax, and find what it is; and by the help of
his Lines, and Angles, and Numbers, be able to determine her distance, and to
demonstrate her quantity to his own satisfaction; and wonder that his Sense
should have so far misled his former opinion. I might say the like of the daily
and annual motion which Sense has put in the Heavens, though an enabled
Judgment will find it in the Earth, and deliver also the Planets from all
retrograde motion in their respective Circles, and see it certain, equal,
ordinate, and progressive, with respect to their own Centers, and that all
Anomalous Phenomenon arise from the place of our Contemplation of them; but
this is to wander too far, only the Truth that is found in these
Contemplations, demonstrative and satisfactory, may well put men upon, at
least, a suspicion, That Error and Mistake, may enter by the Ears, as well as
by the Eyes, in all those three Considerations formerly mentioned; And that
there may be some help to deliver them. Especially, we may believe the first,
when we see the Jews, Turks, Papists, and that thing called a Common-Protestant
(the worst of the four) keeping so tenaciously those opinions (I would not call
them principles, unless Catachrestically, and as to them) which they sucked in
with their mothers milk; for which, never an one of them can give any better
Reason then the other, nor any one of them, what becomes a reasonable man, no
more then those who receive their Forms of Religion; and so also of Politics
later, and from older Teachers, with as little Demonstration, but with as much
Obediential Weakness, as the child receives its Mothers Dictates, while it
stands to be dressed at her Knee.

But no more of this: And I beg their pardon, that think this either too much,
or too little to the purpose. I know it is necessary for some, and perhaps it
may please others, I only desire our Conscientious Presbyterians (for to the
Factious ones, the Scotch-acted ones, I have nothing to say, because I would
say nothing in vain) would look to themselves, and take heed they be not misled
by their dark Lanthorns, who understand not their own way: That they would but
believe it is possible, they may err and their guides too, whom they have
chose to follow, and therefore prove all things, and with an acted Reason, read
over this Scotch Letter, and what will be said to it; and that not only in
these few Pages, but in such other as will take pains to prepare Antidotes
against these poisons propined by seeming friends: Perhaps it may appear to
them upon an unprejudiced Examination, worthy their hate and abomination.

Now to the Letter, which follows.

SIR,
THe Estates of the Parliament of this Kingdom, having received a Letter, dated
the 23. of May, signed by you as Speaker of the Parliament, and written in the
name of the Commonwealth of England; which Titles, in regard of the Solemn
League and Covenant, and Treaties, and the many Declarations of the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms, are such as they may not acknowledge.

IT is a thing most worthy the observation of any who will take notice of the
wonderful Acts of Providence that are abroad in the world (in the time of so
great a Catastrophe) for the forming of his judgment to a right prognosis of
Events, or Direction of his practice, into ways of safety to himself, That no
man has suffered, or fain, or been any way unhappy, or unsuccessful in any of
his endevors, but he has been instrumental to it, and that generally by
precipitating themselves into such Actions, in the pursuit of a false or
mistaken Interest; which most Spectators, though but of common foresight could
discern, would prove funest and dangerous. Follow this beginning of these men
to the end; and take thence another example of this rule.

How necessary is it to have no Interest in our pursuit, but that of God? and
how easily does he attain the end of his designs, that designs only to be
subservient to the will of God, as he shall be led into it by the evidence of
the Divine Revelation? He that walks uprightly, walks safely; but he that
perverteth his ways, shall be found out.

That foulest Hypocrisy that ever the Sun looked upon, far beyond that of The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord: Or, We have Abraham to our Father,
cannot but have heavily provoked the Omniscience of the Divine Purity, and an
heavy judgment must needs attend them; which that it may come upon them with
effect, and find them naked, and without defense; See how they blow up their
own Bulwarks, and cast away whatsoever should uphold them; and must needs do it
with the pre^ence of their Common Subject of all their gross hypocrisy, and
provocation, the Solemn League and Covenant.

Are they so sure, they shall never more need the Commonwealth of England, or
the Parliament here, that they may not acknowledge it? and that by reason of the
Solemn League and Covenant, the Treaties, and Declarations of both Kingdoms?
Can it be imagined, that these were ever made, or entered into, with an
intention to give the Scottish Nation a power paramount over that of England?
What plaistered foreheads have this people, that can thus impudently still
offer these things, which have been so often cleared by the Parliament of
England, and with light so stating in their faces, that they could never abide
to look on them! We know they never answered them, and believe they stand so
convinced of the impossibility, that it will never be attempted. When they
offer any thing in answer, it will not want a Reply, if it can be worth it. For
the Treaties they speak of, it is believed here, there are none in force. They
have most happily delivered us, by their barbarous, inhumane, and faedifragous
invasion of this Nation the last year, which was determined, promoted, carried
on, and acted by Authority of the Parliament of Scotland. Sure they cannot say,
That that invasion was also according to the Treaty and Covenant, and in
pursuance of the ends thereof, Impudence it self must acknowledge it a breach;
if so, how has it been since made up? Its true, Acts may be done in a Nation,
by some of a Nation against Treaties, which are not thereby broken, but
reparation and satisfaction may be made, and the Treaty not suffer by it. But
it is certainly an undeniable Maxim, That an Act cannot be done by a Nation
against a Treaty (by the supreme Authority) but it dissolves the Treaty, and
can never be repaired, but by mutual consent. And therefore at this time, this
Nation is through the merciful dispensation of the wisest providence, as free
from whatsoever relation or mutual Obligation to the Nation of Scotland, by the
Treaties and Covenant, as if they had never been made. And for Declarations of
this Parliament, they bind no more then any other Laws do, which the
Parliament has power to repeal, as often as in their judgments they find it
good for the people to do so, and to do otherwise, were a breach of their
Trust, and neglect of their duty. If the Scots make Laws like those of the
Medes and Persians (which we conceive they do not) much good may they do them;
we envy it not The Parliament of England is more grave, then to dance after a
Bag-Pipe. It were to be wished, we had not some others among us, more in love
with their baubles. But who are like to loose most by this not acknowledging?
are we bound when they are free? let them not overvalue themselves? may they
not have need again of their Neighbors? have they made a Solemn League and
Covenant also, with all the Cavalierish party, with Montross, and all his
Heathen Mountainers? Let them make such a Covenant, and with Death, and Hell
too, either it shall not stand, or they shall fall by it. If they should need
us again, (and why perhaps may they not?) must they not eat their word,
notwithstanding the Solemn League and Covenant?

It is very probable, that before the Common wealth of England come to Treat
with them again, they will make them acknowledge them a Commonwealth, or make
them do that which some of them will think worse for them; though perhaps it
will not be really so for most. It might be as well for some among them, if
they were a Commonwealth too; but it is not necessary they should be made
happy against their wills; and indeed, all men are not fit for it: Some are fit
to be freemen, and some delight to be slaves.

They may remember the States of Holland would not treat with the King of Spain
for their twelve years Truce, till he owned them for free Estates, and gave
them the Titles of High and Mighty.

And I hope this Commonwealth will as well know how to be duly acknowledged,
and as punctually exact it, though I believe they will not (as they need not)
swell up to an appearance of greatness, by the putting on of those bubbles and
bladders of empty and windy Titles, which may very well be omitted, where it is
resolved by the actions of Justice, Prudence, and Fortitude, to lay a
foundation for reputation and respect in the judgment and affections of men.

One short question to the signal hypocrisy of this Paragraph before I leave
it.

Do they believe there is a God? Or that he is Omniscient? Is he the Searcher
of hearts? Are they so tender of the Covenant now, that they cannot acknowledge
England a Commonwealth, and yet last year, notwithstanding the Covenant, could
invade it with an Army, and commit all manner of hostile Acts in it, of the
effects whereof many Counties labor at this day?

For a close to this Paragraph.

Let them remember they must recant, and they must acknowledge this a
Commonwealth. This were a hard task to some spirits, but their Stool of
Repentance has prepared them to such things, and indeed made them able to do
any thing without blushing. If the wind grow high, they can lower their Sayls,
they use to rant it like Knights Errant when they have no enemy, but they are
as submissive as Spaniels, when well cudgelled.

Paragraph 2.
As for the matter therein contained, those many things of just Resentment,
wherein satisfaction is demanded from this Kingdom, are only mentioned in the
general, and therefore cannot so well receive a particular Answer. But if by
these general expressions, the late unlawful Engagement against England be
understood, They desire that their Protestation against the same in Parliament,
and the opposition made thereunto by them afterward in Arms (which they never
laid down, until the garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle were restored unto the
Kingdom of England) may be remembered, together with the Letter of the House of
Commons to the general Assembly of this Kirk, of the third of August, 1648.
And that Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, authorized from both houses of Parliament, did
upon the fifth of October last, represent to the Committee of Estates of this
Kingdom, the wrongs and injuries committed against the Kingdom of England in
that Engagement, and thereupon did demand, that they would give assurance in
the name of the Kingdom of Scotland, not to admit or suffer any who have been
active in, or consenting to that Engagement, to be employed in any public
place, or trust whatsoever; which was not only granted, and afterward confirmed
in Parliament, but all Acts for prosecution thereof have been repealed, and all
proceeding relating thereunto, publicly disclaimed And if any other wrongs
shall be made known unto us, we shall be ready to return such an answer, as may
give just satisfaction.

WHat those things of just Resentment are, which the Letters of the Parliament
of England mentions in general, particular pens can take no notice of. They
may know them in due time* in reference to former, as well as later actions in
England, and a seven years continued progress in Ireland, which they may
assure themselves are not forgotten.

As to the late unlawful Engagement, which they so readily confess, and
withal tell of their Protestation against it; but it is well known they said
nothing against it, till they saw the Army would be commanded by such as would
not serve their turns, nor carry on their Interest, but the Invasion was
generally liked, and promoted by their boutefeu Priests, till they saw they
were outwitted by the Fox Hamilton, and when they saw the enemies of their
Kirk-Government in power in the Army, then indeed the Engagement was unlawful,
because it might have proved Prelaticall, but had it been Orthodox it had been
lawful enough. They may take notice that it is not their Protestation that will
build again the houses they fired, store with plenty the Countyes they wasted,
restore to honor violated Chastity, or recover the lives lost in resisting
their Covenanting Invasion; and therefore notwithstanding their Protestation,
the breach was National, and so must the satisfaction be; and the Commonwealth
of England will expect a better then that which universally expiates all things
there; the wawling humiliations in the Stool of hypocrisy. But besides, they
say that they continued in Arms till the Garrisons of Barwick and Carlisle were
delivered, and therefore they did more then protest; It is true indeed they
did, but that they were able to do so, let them thank that Honorable Lieut.
General, who like a good disciple of the best Master, had learned to forgive
his Enemies, and to render them good for their evil, who had a wretched
Country justly forfeited by their wicked invasion wholly at his mercy, as were
also all that dissembling crew that then cried little less then Hosanna to him,
and who have since appeared again, what they then were, and what his Honor was
then told they then were, and what he would after find them, (viz. Scots)
though the excess of his own candor, and the melting flowings of his Christian
spirit would neither suffer him to believe what he could not choose but know,
nor act as became their provocations; but let that pass, perhaps the coals of
fire he then heaped upon their heads, may be a more lasting torment to them
then the execution of his Sword.

They say the Lieut. General represented the wrongs and injuries committed
against England in that Engagement. He did not then revenge them or take
reparation, he might have done the one as well as the other, or as well as he
gave that subsistence they have. Those forces who had beaten their numerous
Army in England, might without great difficulty have gathered their gleanings
of men, and consumed all the heaps of their Harvest, the time of year was
proper to have distroyed it: had his horse stayed there to have eaten their
Oats, their men must have starved for want of food, For what they granted or
repealed, which they boast in this Paragraph, they may thank him who gave them
a capacity to do it, and which they will find they will not be able to
maintain without some help more merciful to their necessities then any that
will be solicited for them, by either Montross, or Forth, or Cochram, or that
shall be brought them by their so hastily embraced Charles the Second, the fates
of whose house they have seemed with great affection to espouse* and think with
their bladders to Buoy up his sinking ship.

For the Garrisons of Barwick and Carlisle, we shall not thank them for
delivery of them, they would have cost them more to keep then the pay of the
soldiers in those towns; there were English forces among them which they were
desirous might depart, lest their longer stay there might further discover
their weakness and poverty, and increase it, and besides, perhaps they might
have sown among them some Tares of Error, Heresy, and Schism, which have
troubled the Presbytery to weed out of the Kirk, a thing which they fear more
then all the profaneness in the Nation, for that they have a Cathobian, the
blessed stool: but for this other, the Doctors are not yet agreed upon a Recipe.

And for their compliance with the Lieut. Generals demands, that none who had
been in that Engagement should have any employment in any public place or
trust, it adds nothing to their merit an obligation upon them by that demand,
in establishing thereby their subsistence they had not been without that act of
his; the compliance wherewith they would have now so fain believed, was an
effect of their own ingenuity and gratitude, dispositions perhaps which they
are no more able to bring into act, then their whole wretched Country is to
give just satisfaction to the wrong which this Nation has within these ten
years suffered by them.

Paragraph 3.
If the Bonds of Religion, Loyalty to the King, and mutual Amity and
Friendship, betwixt the Kingdoms be impartially considered, according to the
Solemn League and Covenant, and the Professions and Declarations of both
Kingdoms; The Estates of Parliament think that they have just cause to complain
of the late proceeddings in England, in reference to Religion* the taking away
of the Kings life, and the changing the Fundamental Government of that Kingdom;
against which, this Kirk and Kingdom, and their Commissioners have protested,
and given testimony, whereunto they do still adhere.

IF the principles of the Common-Freedom and Justice, the Rules and Laws of
Nations, and of mutual Amity and Friendship with one another be considered, the
Common wealth of England may think they have just cause to complain of the
Scots, not only for invading this Nation with an Army, but usurping with a
ridiculous impudence, a power paramount to the Supreme Power of England,
assembled in Parliament, upon all occasions, taking upon them, not only to
direct what they are to do with the King, and in the Government, but they will
needs make a Religion, and impose that too. What State-Religion is, which for
political respects, is almost every where imposed upon the people, this is not
a place to examine. But it would deserve their weightiest consideration,
whether some thing be not done herein, by way of usurpation of the
incommunicable Throne. And while men cry out of profaneness (and justly too,
perhaps it never more abounded) commit the most horrible that ever was in
compelling Religion to dress it self in Forms to serve their secular Interests;
but hindering all they can the progress of it, in Purity and Power, to the
promoting of it in that way, which needs not their help. Have we not the
Scriptures in England, and in English too? and are not they the rule of all
things that are to be believed, and all things to be done? May not we expect
the Divine Discoveries and Assistance, to such as humbly and duly seek to know
the Will and Mind of God, as well as they of Scotland? May we not keep a Smith
in Israel? Do we offer to impose ought upon them? Did not they think it an
intolerable burden, when their late Tyrant, by the Council of his Priests,
would obtrude upon them a Rule of Worship, and State of Government
Ecclesiastical* And is it so sweet to do what they thought too hard to suffer,
as it put them to the hazard of all to avoid it? But perhaps they will say,
That was a corrupt Form of Worship and Government; but this of theirs, is the
best Reformed. They should say, The best that they know; and then we will
desire them, to give leave to us to be free, that are not, perhaps, so fully
persuaded of it. To beg the thing in Question, is no good Logic; and may we
not think it possible, they may miss it in their Theology too.

For that of the Kings life, the Parliament of England has published to all
the world, the Causes of their so proceeding with the late King of England. If
he be a Tyrant, oppress his people against the Laws, which he tramples under
foot, and puts his will in the place, levy War, and seek to make a Conquest of
the people, and God gives the people a victory against him, he falls into their
hands; they propound him terms for their future safety, he refuses what they
judge necessary; they thereupon bring him to judgment, and condemn, and execute
him as a Tyrant: What has Scotland to do with this? Because the King of
Scotland will tyrannize England, therefore England must not secure it self,
because Scotland will not give it leave. How long has this dependence been?

They cannot but remember it was wont to lie on the other side; why was there
so much care had else in penning the Preface to the large Treaty? the breaking
whereof, by their invasion, has put things as they were.

As to the change of the Fundamental Government, as they are pleased to call
it; who made them so well able to judge what Fundamental Government is with us,
that they can so magisterially pronounce of it? But what has their Kirk to do
with it? Are they set up over Nations, to pluck up, and to plant? Where is the
jus divinum for it? And how far does their jurisdiction extend? It may be it is
as boundless as the Sea: We are sure the Sea bounds it not (for they practice
at that rate in Ireland, as they pronounce here) and, perhaps, if it should get
a little more strength, it would show its impudence further. But it does well
for its time, it has not been long a growing, it made a good stop last year,
to put it self out of pupilage, and Commenced Independent; it was more then the
old one could ever do, in the height of her pride and Ruff. Their protest
herein, has given sufficient testimony to all that observe; that they are not
much troubled with blushing; that they are very forward to meddle with that
they have nothing to do with; and are heterogenial to that sort of people, who
are of that Kingdom, which is said not to be of this world; they love so much
to be espousing all secular Interests, and mixing and immerging themselves in
them; and there is the less hope they will mend for the future, because they,
still, at present, do so constantly adhere. But it is not impossible they may
change their minds; there is one way to effect it.

Paragraph 4.
And since it is apparent there has been of late in England, a backsliding and
departure from the grounds and principles, wherein the two Kingdoms were
engaged; the Parliament of this Kingdom does propound, That the late
proceedings there, against Covenant and Treaties, may be disclaimed and
disavowed, as the prosecution of the late unlawful Engagement against England,
and their former Professions, may return to the same. Upon which grounds, they
are content to authorize Commissioners on behalf of this Kingdom, to Treat with
Commissioners from both Houses of the Parliament of England, sitting in
freedom, concerning all matters of just complaint, which either Nation may have
against the other, and for redress and reparation thereof, and to do every
thing that may further conduce, for continuing the happy Peace and Union
betwixt the Kingdoms, which can never be settled upon so sure a foundation as
the former Treaties, and the Solemn League and Covenant: From which, as no
alteration, or revolution of Affairs, can absolve either Kingdom, so we trust
in God, that no success, whether good or bad, shall be able to divert us. But
as it has been our care in time past, it shall be still our real endevor, for
the future, to keep our selves free of all compliance with, or inclining to the
Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant party, upon the one hand* or to those that
are enemies to the Fundamental Government, by King and Parliament, and
countenance and maintain Error, Heresy, and Schism, upon the other. I have no
other thing in command from the Parliament of this Kingdom, but to take notice,
that there is no Answer returned to their Letter of the fifth of March last,
and so rests.

MAny things may be apparent to you, which are not true, nor will appear so to
those who have their souls exercised to discern good and evil, or who lie not
under the pre-occupations of prejudice. It is not to us apparent that stand
nearer, that there is any such backsliding and departure from the grounds and
principles, wherein the two Nations were engaged; of which, if they would
convince, they should do well to enumerate what those grounds and principles
were, that upon agreement in matter of fact, we might descend to the
consideration of, whether they be principles, and then whether or no they be
deserted, before they accuse of Apostasy, and deserting of Principles.

If we consider what it was that stirred up either, or both the Nations to
engage in the war that has been made against the late King, it will appear, it
was the sense of the present tyranny and oppression, and a just fear of
greater. That which was propounded by them in that Engagement, can be no other,
but the good of the Nations in their just Liberty; which being the ultimate end
propounded, must needs be the first principle of motion; and only that can
deserve the name of a principle, and every thing else is a superstructure, and
can only stand in the relation and Category of a means to that end; and every
means is to be made use of only, so far as it is conducible to the end, and to
be departed from when it deviates, and to be left behind, and others taken up,
when the former fall short. In the beginning it was hoped, it was wished, That
the King might have seen, and owned* and mended his Errors, and that the good
of the people might have consisted with the continuance of the King; and there
wanted not many addresses for it, and long expectations of it, nor overtures of
such dangerous condescension, as we have cause forever to bless God, whose
watchful providence kept us, in hiding from his eyes, the means of our ruin,
which were by our idolatry of Kingship put into his hands; and at last
discovering to us, how incommensurable that means was to our just end, and that
there was an incompossibility of a coexistence of Kingship, and the Nations
happiness, and the saedifragous invasion of England, by the Nation of Scotland,
was not the worst Colyriam for clearing our eyes, in this particular.

The Parliament of England therefore finding the former remedies not only
improper and invalid, but dangerous and destructive; which at best would but
have wrought a palliate cure, and induced a cicatrice upon the orifice of a
Fistula; in discharge of their duty, they proceeded forward upon their first
principle, to a Fundamental Cure; and not only to cure the disease in the
present, and continuing cause, but to eradicate the original cause it self, and
take away thereby, all common possibility of recidivation. And this has not
been to go backward, but to go forward: And if the Scots be angry at the
distance they find between us, they may do well to inquire, whether it
proceeds not from their standing still, and not pursuing their principle
rather, then from our Apostasy from it; unless they will be ingenuous for
once, and confess that they proceeded not upon the same principle, viz. The
good of the people governed, but rather looked at some Interest of the
Governors, and for so much they have done their share; so as a King has long
been nominal only among them, having had nothing at all to do in their
Legislative power, has had no Commissioners in their Parliament, or Kirk
assembly, as formerly, nor any thing to do with his little Revenue there; only
the Name was necessary to be continued there, and nothing else, but his full
power in England; how else should they hope for the great Offices at Court, the
opportunity of Bribery in the Bedchamber, the prodigal, and accountless waste
of the privy Purse, for the relief of their Beggary; unto which, to compel
their King, they know the best of all men, by their unblushing importunities:
But, for the good of the governed, it is not yet apparent they have done any
thing for their release from a miserable slavery, not much on this side that
condition which our late Tyrant (setting before him a well known pattern) had
designed us unto. They suffering their vassals (for so they are pleased to
honor their Tenants) to be in a condition, when their many chaldrons of
Victual-Rent is once paid, in little better condition, then those whose Livery
is a Canvas Suite, and Wooden Shoes, with this difference, that for defect of
Wood, to make such Provision, many there, especially of the other Sex, are
forced to go barefoot. But to make these in any sort free, were to abate their
own greatness, which has no other foundation, then the miserable oppression
which themselves put upon the People, for whose satisfaction, and to give them
some content, their Ministers tell the Common people they are the happiest
Souls, and the purest Kirk under heaven, for they are as perfectly freed from
Popery and Prelacy, as they are from all things that are comfortably fit either
to eat or wear.

But the Letter says, Their Parliament does propound, that the late
proceedings here against Covenant and Treaties may be disclaimed and disavowed,
as the late unlawful Engagement against England has been disclaimed and
disavowed there, and that such as have departed from these principles, and
their former professions, may return to the same, upon which gounds they are
content to authorize Commissioners to treat; Where was this done? was it in the
Parliament House, or in the Consistory? Had they not been lately imposing some
Penance? and now they cannot get out of that Style. The Parliament sent unto
them to offer their resentments of the injuries this Nation received from them,
and demanded satisfaction for them, and a way, if they thought fit to embrace
it, for an amicable composure. The Scots propound and obtrude previous
conditions, which the Parliament of England must yield to, or they will not
treat: In good time, who are like to have most use of it? worse terms then
that of Nahash, the right eyes would have served him, yet that demand cost him
dear; but here nothing less then self-distruction; We must return back to what
we have left, cease to be a free Commonwealth, suffer a Scottish Presbytery to
be set up amongst us, submit to their King, and then, forsooth, they will
authorize Commissioners to treat with Commissioners from the Houses of the
Parliament of England, sitting in freedom, and will embrace us again, and be
our DEAR Brethren; and when this is done, what shall we get by it, but as much
as they, who hug a Beggar, and catch a Louse. It seems they account themselves
very desirable, they require such conditions; but they consider not what was
told them in the beginning of this Discourse, they may be hereby instrumental
to their own sufferings, excluding all possibility of amicable composure, and
put themselves hereby into an incapacity to be otherwise treated, then as
enemies. But before we proceed further, we must ask their meaning of the word
Freedom, because they say their Treaty must be with the Houses of Parliament,
sitting in Freedom; What want of freedom is there in this Parliament? there is
not two Houses, what have they to do with that, who have but one themselves;
and they may be silent of alterations, all men know they have suffered
alterations in their Parliament; the removal of their Lords, of the Articles,
was as material a step to the eclipsing of their Kings power, and restoring
their people to their just liberty, as any alteration made with us in
Parliament; but that they will say was necessary, and conducing to the good of
the people there: we will not deny but it might, and will exercise no act of
judgment upon it; we say, what we had done, was also necessary, and conducing
to the peoples good, and let them be desired to suspend their usurped Paramount
power, and not judge our actions, nor interpose in that, wherein they have
nothing to do.

But the House sits not in freedom, many Members are kept away by force, and it
sits under the power of the Sword; so it has done for seven years past, as to
the protection of it, or else it had not sat at all, it had fallen by the late
Kings Sword, if it had not protected it self by its own. But let us ask, how
sits their Parliament, is there not something of a Sword there? Did not some of
those now in power* when their Army was destroyed in England* raise an Army in
Scotland, and with it forced their then Parliament from Edenbrough, and by the
power of the Sword (which they were enabled to keep in their hand by that part
of our Army that marched into Scotland with the Honorable Lieut. Genesis a
preserving favor, which they could then own, and give thanks for) they called
a new Parliament, and gave Rules previous to election, that none should be
Members that had been in the late Engagement against England; and upon this
ground they still keep out what Lords (as well as others) they fear will divest
them of their Government. This is all very lawful with them, and the Parliament
very free* and it writes this Letter as believing it is so, and yet can upbraid
us, because some were kept out by force* which the Parliament keeps out still,
who perhaps were no great enemies to their late unlawful Engagement; and some
perhaps there were, more their Spies and Agents, then became any trusted with
an interest more contradistinct to theirs, then to admit of a Coalition, much
less exchange; and who at this day hold such correspondencies with them, if
they be not deceived, who think they have means to know, as may hereafter cost
them very dear; we are yet to learn, why the Parliament of England may not keep
out those, who are too good friends to a State, that invaded us with an Army,
as well as the present Parliament of Scotland will not admit of those who
engaged against England, and would not suffer their party to command them in
the expedition. It Is true, all who are not now in the House, are not their
friends; some there are who know them too well, ever to entertain such terms
with them, whose being in or out, or the cause of it, if I should meddle with,
I should imitate them, which is something against my genius, interposing in
that, in which I have nothing to do; and which only belongs to the judgment of
the House.

Therefore I hope they will talk no more of Freedom, but come to the next,
which is, For the continuing the happy peace and union between the Nations; for
they may please to take notice, that without their leave, the one of them is no
Kingdom, but a Commonwealth; but for the continuance, they cannot get out of
their dreams: What was the Invasion of England, a fancy only, or an
apparition? Sure some of them felt it otherwise, when they came to waken in the
other world: Are we still at peace? does the union hold? by what bands? have
they not broken all that can unite humane Society? have they played the whore
so shamefully, and is the marriage still good? They invaded us with an Army
against all Leagues, and Treaties, they thereby set us loose: And there is no
more tie between the Nations, then there is between us and the Transilvanian;
with whom, we have not, nor never had any League. Yet we shall not certainly
refuse a Peace of Neighborhood, when just, and due satisfaction for wrongs is
made by them; but no more dear Brethren. This Commonwealth so much exenterated
for recovery of its Liberty, and not least by them, will not be always able to
bear the charge. Peace in it own nature, is the most happy State of all below,
and the dark shadow of the eternal State of rest: But Peace may have conditions
worse then war; and for removal of which, a war may be justly, and necessarily
undertaken. Peace is not simply happiness, without completing adjuncts; but
for their desire of union, we are to be excused; though we cannot believe it a
fruit of their piety, we may discern their Interest through it; and we discern
it is ours to have no union with them; nor is it indeed possible; union is of
homogeneals: we can never unite, nay, we can never conjoyn; where conjuncture
is made, there is continuity; here is too much dissimilitude, will be too much
incompliance. We may dwell quietly together, if they will (and that will be
all,) if they will not, they may choose. But let them set their hearts at rest
for any more union; and therefore they may be silent of the means, and not
dispute of what is the surest foundation; whether the former Treaties, or any
other: the former are dissolved, and if ever we make any more with them, I hope
now they are better known, they will be better looked to.

As to their dogmatizing, that no revolution or alteration of Affairs can
absolve either Kingdom from the former Treaties, and Solemn League and Covenant
(if they intend their relative which to reach to both) we shall tell them, That
all the Doctors are not of that opinion; and either they wrote this unconsulted
the Lawyers, or if they gave such an opinion, they were not jurisperiti. And
for the Covenant, it was an appendant to a Treaty, and some that never took it,
think it cannot stand by it self (to say no worse of it) and so let it go.

For their trust, that no success either good or bad shall be able to divert
them; they must excuse us, if we have not that faith, truly we may be allowed
to be Thomists, when we have to deal with Scotists. We believe a very little
Interest, a very little profit will do it, it is radicated; the impulse of
their genius will carry them to it; and if their King had been able to have but
touched that Key, there had been a more harmonious close between him and their
Commissioners. Yet it seems they would have been content to have come to an
equation, if he would have contributed to the forming of a Prosthaphaeresis.
It Is like they will take heed of Popery and Prelacy, because they act among them
an higher degree of Popery, properly so called; but for Malignancy, I will not
be their Compurgator: There is much variety of it, it is very possible there
may be some kinds or degrees of it among them. For their joining King and
Parliament in their own Government, I would ask again, what influence he has
into it, more then barely a name? As for this Commonwealth, we must needs ask
them again, what they have to do with it? That they will not maintain Error,
Heresy, or Schism, we would take their words, if they were sure they could,
tell what Error, and Heresy, and Schism is. But perhaps they make a man of
Straw, and then fight with it; or call that which is Truth, by the name of
Error: For we cannot conceive them to be more then men; and while they are but
so, they may possibly err, and err in that very act, by which they judge of
Error; and then for ought they can thus preassure us, they may maintain Error,
and condemn Truth, as well as their Pharisaical forefathers, who condemned
truth it self; and the same may be said of their Heresy. We shall charge them
with none, and desire them to consider, that is there more Christian like for
them to do the like by us. The best Christians have been persecuted for such,
by the Whore of Rome, with whom, if they have no affinity, it were to be wished
they would not use her Dialect. For the other hard word of Schism, it signifies
little. The Protestants made a Schism from Rome, and Calvin from the
Protestants. The old Prelatical party that were Calvinistical in their
doctrine, yet accounted you as much Schismatical for your Government, as you do
the Independents for theirs* and as they do the Anabaptists, and others for
depatting from them; it is a thing as they mean it, in order to their simple
Government, of no consideration; they may be as tender of it as they will, he
had little to do would trouble them about it, it help^ their pitiful
declamations, to fill up their hour with an use of Reproof, which being a known
Common place, save their brains a stretch on the rack for invention, and for
their sakes let them enjoy it. I shall not trouble them about it, nor with any
thing further, then to desire them to take notice, that there have been
several pieces published by the Parliament of England, out of which it seems
they can draw nothing of advantage to themselves, nor out of themselves any
thing that will serve as a just answer to them, all which are of an elder date,
then that of the fifth of March l^st, which therefore they shall do well to
answer first, and after that take notice that their Letter of the fifth of
March is not answered: and withal, perhaps it were not a thing wholly
imprudential, to think of a better answer to this last Letter; and consider,
whether by some other they might have better consulted their own good; perhaps
hereafter (this overture being thus Magisterially rejected) when their
necessity shall put them upon a more becoming address, they may be told, We are
now both of us grown wiser.

FINIS.

