Threni Hybernici: OR, IRELAND Sympathising with England and Scotland, In a sad
LAMENTATION for loss of their JOSIAH.

Represented in a SERMON at Christ-Church in Dublin, before his Excellency the
LORD DEPUTY, with diverse of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, there
Assembled, to Celebrate a Funeral Solemnity, upon the death of the late LORD
PROTECTOR.

By Dr. Harrison, chief Chaplain to his said Excellency.

And all Judahand Jerusalem mourned for Him,

2 Chronicles. 25.24. This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation,

Ezekiel. 19.14. 4 Reg. 13, 14. Pater mi, Pater mi, Currus Israel and auriga eius,

4 Reg. 2.12. Cicero some. Scip. Omnibus qui patriam conservarint, adjuverint,
auxerint, certus est in Coelo ac definitus locus, ubi be^ti aevo sempiterno
f^u^ntur.

Seneca. -- Numquam stygias fertur ad umbras inclita virtus.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Staggs-head by St. Gregory's Church
in Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS RICHARD, LORD PROTECTOR OF England, Scotland, and
Ireland, And the dominions thereunto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
IT was the saying of David, Psalm. 112.6. The Righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance. And of Solomon, Prove. 10.7. The memorial of the Just
shall be blessed. Divine Providence made it my Lot to hear this ensuing Sermon
pathetically delivered by that Pious divine Dr. Harrison, in a full and fluent
manner; extracting Tears from the Eyes, and Sighs from the Hearts, of the
Hearers. I moved the Doctor, for the Printing thereof, being so precious a Piece
touching so unparalle'd a Person, that it was more fit to be made public then
to perish in Oblivion; who in a modest manner termed it, A sudden, imperfect,
and unpolisht Collection of scattering Thoughts, and Notes, which brevity of
time, and burden of Spirit would not permit him, more completely to Compile;
yet upon my Importunity be was pleased to condescend to my Motion, and
delivered me this Copy now Printed, written with his own Hand. The usefulness
of the Piece repleat with so many rare Observations, together with the desire
of Erecting all lasting Monuments that may conduce to the Eternizing of the
blessed Memory of that thrice Renowned Patron and Pattern of Piety, your Royal
Father, (whose pious Life is his never-perishing Pyramide; Every man's Heart
being his Tomb, and every good man's Tongue an Epitaph) has emboldned me in all
humility to present it to your Highness, as a lively Effiges to mind you of his
unmatchable Virtues: And, as the learned Author intended it not so much for the
Ey, or Ear, as for the Heart, not for Reading only, but Practice principally:
So may your Highness please to make use thereof as a Pattern of Imitation for
Piety and Reformation in the Nations; that your Highness may become a
successful Successor of such a peerless Predecessor, to inherit his Goodness
with his Greatness; that out of his Ashes you may spring another Phoenix; as an
Honeycomb out of the strong Lion; a Royal Branch of that rare Root, a strong
Rod to be a Scepter to rule: So shall your Highness holy and virtuous Progress
be a new Crown of Comfort to the three Nations, filling the Peoples Hearts with
joyful hopes of Happiness, and a firm, well-grounded Peace, that they may sit
safely under their own Vines and Fig Trees, freed from the Terrors and Turmoils
of tumulteous, bloody Broils; And that your Highness may obtain and enjoy the
continual Protection of the Omnipotent Protector to Crown your Highness and
the Nations with Loving Kindness and tender Mercies, shall be the constant
Cordial Prayer of

Your HIGHNESS Most humble And faithfully devoted, Edward Matthews.

IRELANDS Lamentation For loss of their JOSIAH.
LAMENT. V. 16. The Crown is fallen from our Head; Woe unto us that we have
sinned.


THese Words put forth themselves into these three Branches.

First, Here is the Calamity of the People of God, the Crown was fallen from
their head.

Secondly, the Cause of it, We have sinned.

Thirdly, the Effect of both, they take up a woeful Lamentation upon both these
Considerations, the latter especially; Woe unto us that we have sinned.

Let me a little open the Words: Our Head; The Head spiritual is Christ, and
he cannot fall, nor his Crown from him: but they speak here of the Civil, the
outward and visible Head of the State, as in Isa. 9.15. The Ancient and
Honorable he is the Head.

The Crown; that is, The Emblem of Praeeminece and Authority, and an Ornament
in them that have no Authority: as in Prove. 12.4. A verteous Woman is a Crown
to her Husband; Not a Ring for his Finger, or a Chain for his Neck, but a Crown
for his Head, a choice and chief Ornament: So here they are speaking of Josiah,
who was the Glory and chief Ornament of their State; and so the Hebrew Doctors
expound it. I know the Seventy say, it was written in the time of their
Captivity, and upon that occasion only; and this is embraced generally our
Expositers. But why might not Jeremy look upon it as then present, though
thirty years before they did go into Captivity, and four Princes Reigns
between? And that passage in the 2 Chronicles. 35.25. warrants this Interpretation,
And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing Men and the singing Women
spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day, and made them an Ordinance
in Israel; and behold they are written in the Lamentations.

Woe, is sometimes put for a word of Threatening, or Prophetical Denunciation,
as in Matthew. 11.21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, etc. And in
Matthew. 23. from the 13. to the 17. Verse; Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites. Sometimes it is used as a word of Pity, of Commiseration; as in
Jer. 13.27. Woe unto thee, or Alas for thee O Jerusalem, Will thou not be made
clean? When shall it once be? Sometimes for a word of Confession, or
acknowledgement of our sad and calamitous Estate; as in Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me
that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar, amongst these
spiritual Blackmoors: so in 2 Samuel 1.26. Woe is me, or I am distressed, or in
anguish, for thee my Brother Jonathan, etc. And here it may be taken in all
these senses; We unto us Now, (for Now is in the Original) our woe is Now begun,
and it will multiply; they felt and foresaw misery coming on, their present
sorrow was great, and their expectation was far worse, they saw the Consequents
in the Antecedents, they saw the Effects in their Causes; And so may we, unless
through infinite Mercy those Causes be timely removed. The words thus explained
will yield us three Observations.

Observe. 1. It is a matter of woeful lamentation to Gods people, when God
causes the Crown to fall from their heads. when the Glory, the chief Ornament
falls from their State, from their Government.

When a Jacob dies, though as a Rick of ripe Corn he be gathered into the Barn,
yet even the Egyptians will mourn for him, and that with a grievous mourning,
Genesis 50.3.11. And shall not the Israelites then mourn for a Moses? sahll not
we mourn for our Moses? of whom I am persuaded after-Ages will say as they of
him, Deuteronomy. 34.10. And there arose not a Protector since in England, (how many
soever we may have) like unto him, whom the Lord knew face to face, (who had
such intimate Communion with him) In all the signs and the wonders which the
Lord sent him to do in the Land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and to all his Servants,
and to all his Land; And in all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror,
which Moses showed in the sight of all Israel.

And yet you may observe, that the Egyptians mourned longer Jacob, then the
Israelites for Moses, they seventy days, these but thirty; both because the
people of God are, and ought to be more moderate in their Mournings, then
others which have no hope, 1 These. 4, 13. either as to them that are departed,
or as to themselves, or the Public; and because the Lord had beforehand
prepared a hopeful Successor, Deuteronomy. 34.8, 9. So the days of weeping and
mourning for Moses were ended, And Joshua the Son of Nun was full of the spirit
of Wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him (and solemnly designed him
for the Government) and the Children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as
the Lord commanded Moses.

Let me give you the grounds of the Point; They lament, first, Because of the
strong Influence that a good Governor has into the Vitals of a State, Lament.
4.20. they call Josiah, The Breath of their Nostrils; so the Chaldee Paraphrast
expounds it, Josiah who was as dear to us as the breath of our Nostrils, under
whose shadow we said we shall live. I know that Grotius, Diodati, and others in
their Annotations upon the place, do apply in to Zedekiah (who was indeed taken
in the Pits of the Enemies) but if Zedekiah, much more might Josiah be termed,
The breath of their Nostrils, and that you know is a great matter, it is all in
all to the natural body, the heart soon slakens without it, when it can no
longer breath out its warmth, nor fetch in cool Air to allay its heat: The
Spirit of Reformation died with him, the State never breathed after Reformation
more, till after the Captivity.

No wonder therefore that Prophet Zechary, Chapter 12.10. etc. alluded to their
mourning for him, telling them the day should come when their mourning for the
Messiah, should be as vehement; as universal, as that for Josiah, all the Land
should mourn in public Humiliations, Families in private meetings, every
Family apart, and the Leaders of the Families apart, Like to the mourning in
the Valley of Megiddo, there Josiah fell, and there they mourned, 2 Chronicles.
35.22. And such a mourning is suitable to the loss of One, who has an eminent
Influence into the Welfare of a State first, as He is, Pater Patriae, a common
Father, careful to protect and provide for all, especially for those of the
Household of Faith, whom the Ministers of Christ, by his blessing upon his Word,
have begotten through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. To these is the Magistrate a
Nursing Father, Isa. 149.23. to carry them in his Bosom (as God said to Moses)
As a Nursing Father bears the sucking Children, Numb. 11.12. notwithstanding
all their frowardness; doubtless such an One was Josiah, Our Josiah, and it is
no small loss to the poor people of God to part with such a Friend, such a
Father, if we be not sensible of it now, we shall feel it to our cost
hereafter; but if we feel it now, and it work kindly with us, there is hope
that through a supply and a Succession of the same Spirit, we shall feel it the
less hereafter.

Secondly, As he is Custos utriusque tabulae, The Keeper of both Tables, which
is clear out of the old Testament, and the chief Magistrates Duty is not so
particularly laid down in the New (as is that of Subjects, and other Relations)
because no such new Members of the visible Church in the Apostles days, nor
for a long time after, it must then be fetched from the old Testament, or no
where.

And this is so necessary, even his looking to the Duties of the first Table,
that some have ventured to say, that a Persecuting Magistrate (as in the
Primitive Church) were ten times rather to be wished, then one careless and
neglecting to set up Ordinances, suffering all to run into Irreligion and
Heathenisme: For either by persecuting, or commending and countenancing the
Worship of God, the Magistrate causes Religion to flourish, by doing neither,
He takes the way, utterly to abolish it: as Julian the Apostate was about to
do, had not God cut him off the sooner: Better a Persecuter, then a Neuter,
better a Domitian, a Nero, then a Gallio; Who cares for none of those things.

But what a mercy is it to have a Josiah indeed, a Prince cordially studious of
Religion and Reformation, whose heart aches and trembles for the Ark of God, as
Elie's did, 1 Samuel 4.13. And who prefers Jerusalem before his chiefest joys,
as David did, Psalm. 137.6.

And what a calamity is it to have such an one taken away, before Reformation
be perfected, 2 Chronicles. 35.20. After all this, when Josiah had prepared the
Temple, then Necho King of Egypt comes and cuts him off, when the Church had
most need of him; For Israel to lose a Moses, when they are yet in the
Wilderness (which is our case at this day) this is a Lamentation, and ought to
be unto us for a Lamentation.

Thirdly, As he is Custos utriusque Gladii, The Keeper of both Swords, Martial
and Civil.

First, of the Military Sword, He is the great Arbiter of Peace and War, and in
time of War, he is the chief Leader; so was Josiah, so our Josiah: We might all
say to him, as the Israelites to David, 2 Samuel 5.2. Thou wast he that leddest
out and broughtest in Israel with safety and Victory: How often did he offer
himself willingly ( Judge. 5.9.) and jeoparded his life in the high places of
the Field? for Courage and Conduct, for Prudence, Piety, and Success in War,
our Leader was Incomparable; This Land, all these three Nations will afford him
everlasting Monuments; The God of Peace grant we never feel the want of this
great Leader in this particular.

Secondly, He bears the Civil Sword also, He is the Guardian of all
Vindictive Power, God has put his own Sword of Justice into the Magistrates
hand; He is Gods Sword Bearer, Romans 13.4. none may usurp it nor resist it.

There are two things that legitimate the Magistrates Vindictive
Administrations: First, That he acts by Gods Authority, and secondly, According
to his Justice, both must concur; a private man may not of his own head kill a
Malefactor: Ehues slaying Eglon, Moses the Egyptian, are no patterns for us,
unless we have the same Commission, or privy Seal.

Exempla heroica sunt supra Regulam: Nor may the Magistrate kill an innocent
Person: but when he puts a Malefactor to death according to Gods order, it is
not man, but God that kills him.

Now to lose such a Magistrate, who bare not the Sword in vain, but durst draw
it against the greatest Transgressour, and who durst not touch the poorest
Innocent with the least of his Fingers (as God himself is impotent as to the
doing of the least evil) Who could do nothing against the truth (as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 13.8.) and could not but do his utmost for the truth, this is a
great loss unto a people.

Fourthly, As he is Custos salutis publicae, the vigilant Sentinel of public
Safety, Romans 13.6. for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this
very thing, (...) watching, by the just punishment of the wicked, to preserve
and protect the Just (as Grotius expounds it) and hereupon the Apostle makes
one Interence, Ver. 7. Let them have their due (and all their Ministers under
them) Custom, Tribute, Fear, and Honor: It Is a sin against all equity and
conscience, to deny or withhold any of these from them, seeing they are always
watching for our Good.

And let me make another Inference; It is a duty which every man owes the
Magistrate, in all Proposals, Overtures and Endeavors, whether relating to
matters Civil or Spiritual, to carry it with all possible simplicity and
integrity, otherwise to bring in Evils, under painted Vizards, and specious
pretenses, what is it, but to surprise these Sentinels, and to elude their
Vigilance, and that is the practice and part of an Enemy: such a Watchman of
Israel was Josiah, such a Watchman was our Josiah; it was no easy matter to
surprise him: How securely did we sleep, while He watched over us; Been dormivi
quia Antipater vigilavit, I slept well to Night (said Alexander) because I knew
a careful man was in the Watch. But what shall become of us now, that this
Watchman is fallen asleep? If he who keeps Isreal, who neither slumbers nor
sleeps, watch not over us, and over our Rulers, and help them to watch for us.

I and all the World may say of him that is now gone from us, as one said of
Mucianus the Roman Consul; He did Vim Principis complecti, nomen remittere, He
had all the power, and performed all the part of a good King, though he refused
the Title; Cause therefore have we to take up a woeful Lamentation, when such a
Prince, when such a great man is fallen in our Israel, who in all these respects
had so benign an Influence into the Vitals of our State: And that is the first
ground of the Lamentation.

A second may be, the rarity and scarcity of such as might supply such Decays,
fill up such a breach, such an Hiatus: Where shall a man be found to stand in
this Gap? He only who has the residence of the Spirit, can supply us; And
blessed be his Name, that he has made this Noble Vine fruitful and full of
Branches, that there are strong Rods for the Scepters of them that bear Rule;
where there is no strong Rod to be a Scepter to Rule (what ever some men think)
this is a Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation in Ezekiel's Judgment,
Chap. 19. ult. O let us pray that the Lord would strengthen these Branches,
that they may not be broken off, that no East wind (of Invasion from abroad)
may wither them, no fire (of Contention at home;) consume them, as the Prophet
speaks, in that Chapter.

Thirdly, this is an usual Honor that God puts on his eminent and faithful
Servants, when they are gone, their removal is bewailed and lamented; men may
marvail as the Disciples did, to see a fruitless Fig. tree, suddenly withered
away, Matt. 21.20. but there is no moan made, there is no mourning: But when an
useful Vine dies, which affords both Shade and Fruit, that is a loss) much more
then that of Jonah's Gourd) to be lamented, the most Serviceable, shall always
be: the most Honorable; They that live much desired, cannot dye but much
lamented: as for the wicked and worthless person, it shall be nothing so, they
shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my Brother, Ah Lord, or Ah his Glory, He
shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the
Gates of the City.

The loss then of a gracious Prince, of a pious Governor, is very lamentable.
The second Point will lead us to look into the Cause thereof, and that is this.

Observe. 2. The sins of Gods people are the fall of their Crown; these Traitors
pull it from the head of a State, or Government: and there was a double sin at
that time most remarkable in that people:

First, They went about to pluck the Crown of Sovereignty from Gods head, They
would not hearken to him, nor obey him, see this in Jer. 25.2, 3. etc. From the
thirteenth year of Josiah (and that was the next year after he began the
public Rerformation; for it is said in the 2 Chronicles. 34.3. In the twelfth year
he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem) From the very beginning of the
Reformation, says Jeremy, even unto this day, (for ten years space together)
The word of the Lord came unto me (and it died not with me) But I have spoken
unto you, rising early and speaking, but ye have not hearkened. And the Lord
has sent unto you all his Servants the Prophets, rising early and sending
them, but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your Ear to hear; They said, turn
ye again now every one, from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings,
and yet ye have not hearkened unto me, says the Lord, that ye might provoke
me to anger with the works of your hands, to your own hurt. Thus even in a time
of Reformation they fell to Apostasy, Idolatry, and Profaneness, they first
sunk into Apostasy, and then into Calamity, and the Crown dropped from their
head, that was the beginning of it; see this further in Zeph, 1.1. The word of
the Lord came unto him in the days of Josiah, I will utterly consume all,
says the Lord; Why, what was his Controversy? ver. 5. They did worship, and
swear by the Lord, and by Malcham, they made a hotch potch, a mingle mangle of
Religion, they began to curdle and turn by degrees, Ver. 6. And them that are
turned back from the Lord, and those that have not sought the Lord, nor
enquired for him, but fell to looseness and lewdness, as it is there described
particularly in all sorts of persons, from the Prince to the Prentice.

Secondly, They did what in them lay to pluck the Crown from Josiah's head, the
fairest Flower in his Garland, studiousness of Reformation, there was none like
him for that, 2 Kings 23.25. and they did what they could to weaken his heart
and hands in it, they would not bear it, they loathed it, and waxed weary of
it, Jer. 1.2. The word of the Lord came unto him in the thirteenth year of
Josiah, in the time of Reformation, mark that, and then hear how the Lord
charge them, Chap. 3.10. They turned not unto me with their whole heart, but
feignedly, says the Lord: they made a show, and talked, and took the Covenant,
but they would not stand to it, they had no heart to a Reformation, but
hankered still after their former evils. 'Twas time now to rack them from off
their Lees, to empty them from Vessel to Vessel, to turn them out of
Jerusalem the Vision of Peace, into Babylon, whose very Name speaks Confusion.
The Lord help us to see our Faces in this Glass; I appeal to your Consciences,
how much of our State and Story is told over in these particulars: And yet if
there be any hope in our Israel concerning this thing, the last Observation
must help us to it, and it is this;

Obs. 3. The sincere people of God, take up a wosull Mourning not so much for
the fall of their Crown, as for their sins that caused it, they point the
finger at this, they place the Woe upon this, Woe unto us that we have sinned.
Thus Daniel in the 9. of his Book, complains not of misery (save only of the
Desolation of the Sanctuary) but of sin, ver. 5, 6. We have sinned and
committed Iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by
departing from thy Precepts and from thy Judgments; Neither have we hearkened
unto thy Servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy Name to our Kings, our
Princes, and our Fathers, and to all the people of the Land. This pierced his
heart, in the midst of all his personal Preferment. So was it with good
Nehemiah, Chap. 1.6, 7. (Let thine Ear now be attentive, and thine Eyes open,
that thou may hear the Prayer of thy Servant, which I prayed before thee now
day and night, for the Children of Israel thy Servants, and confess the sins of
the Children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee, both I and my
Fathers house have sinned. We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have
not kept thy Commandments, nor the Statutes, nor the Judgments, which thou
commandedst thy Servant Moses. Sin, sin, that lay more heavy upon the hearts of
these good men, then all their sufferings: And its clear it must be so; First;
from the nature of sincere repentance, which is never to be so affected with
grief lying on our spirits, as for our grieving the spirit of God, Zech. 12.10.
They shall mourn for him, and be in bitterness for him: and so it was, Acts
2.27. When they heard this, that they had crucified the Lord of Life and Glory,
this went to their hearts; and this the Prophet Isaiah bewails, that they
rebelled against one who had been so tender, so indulgent, and compassionate
toward them, Isa. 63.9.10. In all their affliction, he was afflicted, and the
Angel of his presence saved them, in his love and in his pity, he redeemed
them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. But they
rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit; Therefore he was turned to be their Enemy,
nnd he fought against them. So David, Psalm. 51.3, 4.

Secondly, When ever God intends good to a person, or a People, he leads forth
their Spirits this way, makes the stream of their sorrows run forth in this
Channel, for this is the principal (if not the only) way to redress and remove
their Calamities felt, or feared, when Sinners mourn for sin, as sin, then God
pardons sin, and when God pardons Iniquity, he heals Infirmity, Psalm. 103.3.

If this then be our present posture, though we are made weak by such a loss,
yet he will strengthen us, and give us Healers (that is the Magistrates Charity,
Isa. 3.7.) yea this ruin shall be under his own hand, and this is the right
course to lodge it there.

Now briefly to put all these truths together to Use.

Use. Does not the Lord call his people in these Nations, to a serious and
sensible apprehension of such a stroke.

May I not say to the Commonwealth of England, as this Prophet did to the
Commonwealth of Israel? Lament. 2.13. What thing shall I take to witness for
thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I
equal to thee that I may comfort thee, O Virgin Daughter of Zion? for thy
breach is great like the Sea, who can heal thee? Our Bank is now broken down,
who can repair it; who can heal it? that can he alone who made both the Bank
and the Breach; Who at first gave a decree to the Sea, and shut it up as with
Doors and Bars, saying, Hitherto shall thou go and no further, and here shall
thy proud Waves stay: He can keep the Sea from breaking in upon us, at such a
time as this, and repair our Bank and Bulwark again. But will he do it? That
cannot I tell, but I can tell you of several Symptoms and Indications of
approaching mercy, even in times of greatest Calamity; do you look if you can
find them upon your own Spirits, and they are these: First, When a Person, or
People are troubled more for sin, then for suffering, either incumbent, or
approaching: When they look on sin as the greatest, the only evil, when they
mostly bewail that, that is a sure sign of escaping; Ezekiel. 7.16. But they that
escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the Mountains, as Doves of the
Valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his Iniquity. Now is the Voice of
this Turtle heard in our Land, at this day; When sin sits heavy, suffering sits
light (said Mr. Greneham) And God will make it so to be indeed, not to Faith
only, but to Sense also.

Secondly, When we are laid low in the sight and sense of this vileness,
judging our selves worthy of the greatest punishment, unworthy of the least
refreshment, when we see cause to submit in case of Reprobation, much more in
case of Affliction, when we are thus abject and cast down, it is the custom of
our gracious God (and from thence his Character) to be a Comforter of such, 2
Cor. 7.6. God that comfort those that are cast down; When Jacob was in his
own Eyes, not worthy of the least of all Gods mercies, then he escapes all the
misery so nigh unto him, and so much dreaded by him; the thing that he feared
came not upon him, Gen 32.10. etc.

Thirdly, When the Spirit of Prayer is kept warm in our hearts, or rather, our
hearts kept warm by the Spirit of Prayer, for our selves and for others, that is
a token for good unto us; when Job prayed for his Friends, then God turned his
Captivity, Job 42.10.

How do ye feel your hearts Christian? frozen, or flaming, cold, or burning
within you? can you pray for your Rulers, for the Public, for your selves, and
your Posterities after you? Does the House of Israel enquire of the Lord for
this thing? Ezekiel. 36.37. then will he do it for us, then will he increase us
with men like a flock; we shall then live and not die, neither shall our men be
few.

Fourthly, When there is a quiet resignation of our selves, and our affairs to
the Lord, not limiting him, but leaving him to his liberty, to take away what
Instruments he pleases, and use what Instruments he pleases; He will be
Master over the Sons of men, and when we are willing he should be so, all
things then shall work together for our good: When we can choose God, and let
him choose all the rest; David could not miscarry when his heart was once
wrought over to this resignment, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.

Lastly, When the Spirit of Faith is up in our hearts, when through the
discoveries of his Grace in Jesus Christ, we are enabled still to trust in him,
hang on him, expect good from him, so that he cannot shake us off; Generous
Spirits scorn to fail those that depend on them: poor sinful Creatures have no
other way to engage the great God to stand their Friend, but by this
dependence; And says the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 26.3. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is staid on thee, because he trusts in thee. When an
Hawk pursued a Sparrow so close, that it flew into Xenocrates his Bosom, Non
oportet supplicem prodere, was his word, and shall God give up his Turtle that
flies into his Bosom, pursued by Birds of Prey? No, he will never do it, Psalm.
74.19, 20. Now what hopes have ye Christians? what expectations? Can ye wait
upon the Lord, that hides his Face from the house of Jacob, can ye resolve to
look for him, Isa. 8.17. Can ye believe for these poor Nations? these wounded,
woefully wounded, Nations? to have slight thoughts of this Wound, is the way
never to be healed.

But what grounds of Faith or hope can you show us; to fix our feet upon at
such a time as this?

Suppose I could show ye none, yet it is a duty in the sincere people of God
with their Father Abraham, even against hope, to believe in hope, and to give
Glory to God in believing, Romans 4.18.20. But yet God has not left us without
visible grounds, to support our sinking expectations concerning these Nations:
For first, our grand Enemies have had all the advantages against us, they could
wish for, and yet have not prevailed; all Campanella's projects have been
accomplished, Monarchy turned into a Free State (out of which they hoped to
fish some notable Advantages) The Dutch engaged in a War against the English,
to weaken both these States in their Shipping, wherein they were most powerful
and formidable.

A Rebellion in Ireland, an horrid one, as that Popeling Politician could have
wished; Philosophy mingled with our Divinity, and what not? and yet the
Spaniards Universal Monarchy not effected: Our English Roses not yet blasted,
not yet over-topped by the Lillies of France, nor our British Crosses become
Perches to the Austrian Eagles.

As if God had said from Heaven, You shall have fair play, all that ye can
propound to your selves, and yet come short of your Reckoning.

This speaks as if God had no mind to cast us away, to abandon and give us up
as a Prey to the Teeth of our Adversaries: Let us bless the Lord for this, and
still believe on him; Our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the
Fowlers, the Snare is broken and we are escaped. Our help is in the Name of the
Lord who made Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 124.7, 8.

Surely when God thus encamps about his House, it is a sign that no Oppressor
shall pass through them any more (if they fall not off from Him) Zech. 9.8.

Secondly, Are we not a People, redeemed with so high an hand, and such an
outstretched Arm, as never People was since the days of Israel? And has the
Lord been working so many Miracles of Mercy, for so many years together? and
will he now undo us, and all his own great Works together? What will he do unto
his great Name? What will the Nations say? It was not he, it was a chance that
happened to them? What will his and our Enemies say and do? There is a
stupendous expression in Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. I said that I would scatter them
into Corners, I would make the Remembrance of them to cease from among men (I
would pay them, I would smock them, they have deserved it at my hands) were it
not that I feared the wrath of the Enemy, least their Adversaries should behave
themselves strangly, and least they should say, Our hand is high, the Lord has
not done all this; Can the great God fear any thing? Yes, God himself tells us
that he fears, on the behalf of his poor People, that desire to fear his
Name, and what need they to fear Enemies, that have a God to fear for them?
Only let us Sanctify him in our hearts, and let him be our fear and our
dread, and we need fear nothing else.

Thirdly, What Spot of Earth (to the praise of Free Grace be it spoken, not to
boast of our selves carnally) What Spot of Ground in the World bears so many
real Saints upon it, as our Island? and some sprinklings here also, that cry
Day and Night unto him? Souls sealed and marked in the Forehead, not to be
touched by the Destroyer; Might Sodom have stood, if there had been but ten
righteous Persons there; and shall not these Nations escape, who have yet so
many thousands to stand in the Gap?

Are not the holy Seed the Sap and Substance of our Robur Anglicanum, our
English Oak; as an Oak whose Substance is in it when it casts its Leaves, The
holy Seed shall be the Substance thereof, Isa. 6.13.

Thus says the Lord, As the new Wine is found in the Cluster, and one says,
destroy it not, for a Blessing is in it, so will I do for my Servants sake,
that I may not destroy them all, Isa. 65.8.

And surely we have Governors, who say in their heart. The Inhabitants of
Jerusalem shall be our strength in the Lord of Hosts their God, Zech. 12.5.

Fourthly, After all the Wind-falls in Gods Orchard, so many top-heavy, tall
Oaks and Cedars laid along, those that are Trees of Righteousness indeed and
kept their standing, are more deeply rooted by all these shakings; Professors
were never so sober, since the times of Persecution, never so in love with old
Truths, they see plainly the pretended new light was an Ignis fatuus, that
misled poor benighted Souls, yea many that erred come now to understanding, and
they that murmured are better instructed, according to that sweet Promise, Isa.
29.24. We shall not therefore be ashamed of our hope, neither shall our faces
wax pale. For as the prevailing of the Spirit of Error was the Herald of
Misery, so is the returning of a Spirit of Sobriety the welcome Harbinger of
Mercy.

Fifthly, So many hopeful young men coming on to the Ministry (which is the
Observation of our Brethren in England, in their Ordinations) their Parts more
raised, their Lives more reformed, the Council of God more clearly revealed
then formerly; even this bespeaks a continuance of Mercy: Surely the great
Husbandman has yet some Harvest to Inn, seeing he makes such provision and
preparation of Laborers, Luke 10.1, 2. After these things, the Lord appointed
other Seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face, into every City
and place, whither he himself would come. Where Christ sends his Disciples
before him, he himself means to follow after; the Treaty to Peace holds, whilst
his Leiger-Embassadours are not recalled.

Sixthly, The general sense of this heavy stroke is a good sign among us.

Indeed when the Righteous is taken away, and no man lays it to heart, then
there is evil to come, Isa. 57.1. But I am persuaded no stroke these thousand
years has been more felt by the best people of these Nations: the mourning is
universal, like that in Zech. 12.12, etc. not only amongst the Rulers, the
Families of David and Nathan, not only amongst the Ministers, the Family of
Levi; but even the Family of Shimei, who was of the house of Saul, a
Malcontent, a Reviler, That comes along in the Train of the Mourners: we read
indeed of others of that Name who were of the house of Levi, but that cannot be
here meant, because it was before mentioned by Name. Its strange indeed to find
the Family of Shimei mourning for the loss of the house of David, yet the Lord
can bring this to pass, and has done so at this time (If I be rightly
informed) it is said of Galba, that he left but few willing to live under his
Government, but many mourning for his death: How many do now confess they were
unworthy of such a Ruler? they knew not how to prise, how to improve such a
Mercy, and when we cut out Fingers with Swords, it is time they should be laid
up.

Seventhly, That the great Plot of fiering London, raising the Countries,
betraying the Ports and Garrisons, was utterly broken, before this Blow was
given; That this man of War should die himself in Peace (contrary to the
Prophesyings of many) and leave us in peace; This speaks much tenderness in our
God toward us, that such a storm should be blown over (and a day of
Thansgiving kept throughout the three Nations for it) before this skillful
Pilot was called from the Helm. Indeed when the Pilot is cast over board in a
storm, it fore-speaks a Shipwreck. But now that the Lord has thus in measure
debated with us (notwithstanding all our Luxuriancies) and stayed the rough
wind, in the day of the blasting Eastwind; well may we hope, that by This shall
the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and that this shall be the Fruit to take away
our sin, Isa. 27.8, 9. that his design is to purge and prune us, not to root
us up.

Eighthly, That we should slide so quietly, so naturally into a Settlement, I
think far beyond all our expectations, this is a wonderful Mercy, Sol
occubuts, nox nulla secuta est, Our Sun is set, and yet no Night ensued.

Now for Light to rise when the Sun sets, that at Evening time it should be
light (according to that promise in Zech. 14.7.) this is not only a sign of
mercy, but a Miracle of mercy it self.

Ninethly, That we now have Magistrates, the Legallity of whose Call to their
present Office and Station, is beyond all dispute, all settled by Authority of
Parliament; The Scepter put into his Highness's hand, that now is, according to
the Sanction of Parliament: The Sword put into his Excellencies hand hereafter
his late Highness's establishment by Parliament; Even this may give us a
rational ground of hope, of quietness and submission, even in the most unquiet
Spirits: at least they will have a less reason to pretend for their
unquietness, though unquiet persons never want pretenses.

Tenthly, We enjoy Magistrates, to whom the Interest of Religion, is so
endeared, so incorporated, by a Principle of Grace in themselves, that they can
no more forsake or abandon it, then their own Souls, and so intwisted by the
hand of Providence, with their own Interest, that they cannot be safe if they
quit it: their Authority, their Safety is Embarked in the same Bottom with it,
they must swim, or sink together.

Now, God promised it of old as a Favor to his People, that their Nobles
should be of themselves, and that their Governors should proceed out of the
midst of them (Let not us despise ours, because they do so) And I will cause
him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me, for who is this that engaged
his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord, Jer. 30.21. It is an admirable
thing when Rulers and Governors engage their hearts to approach unto God, God
himself seems to be taken with it, and to wonder at it; Let us help them with
our Prayers to engage more and more, with and for God, for this also speaks
establishment, ver. 20. and prosperity, ver. 19. And out of them shall proceed
thanksgiving, and the voice of them that make merry, and I will multiply them,
and they shall not be few, I will also glorify them, and they shall not be
small; Their Children also shall be as afore-time, and their Congregation shall
be established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them, And their
Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall proceed from the midst
of them, and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me, etc.

Again, The late Success of the Swede, and our own Success in Flanders, putting
a Curb, and a Bridle upon the Jaws of our ill Neighbors, these look like the
Pledges and Forerunners of more mercy.

Lastly, And especially some beginnings of real Reformation, and breathings
after more, in Persons, Families, Congregations, Towns, Cities, Countries;
these where ever they are to be discerned, look very smilingly and promisingly
upon us: Indeed if Reformation be neglected, all our other grounds of hope will
fail us and float away, If the people turns not to him that smites them,
neither do seek the Lord of Hosts, then will he set up their Adversaries
against them and join their Enemies together, and they shall devour Israel with
open Mouth, Isa. 9.11, 12.13. And thou, who ever thou art that hate to be
reformed, may be one of the first, that shall be so devoured; But if
Reformation be cordially endeavored by us, according to our places, this will
make us precious in the sight of the Lord, and he will make us honorable, Isa.
43.4. if this be pursued (I am not afraid to affirm it) as sin has plucked the
Crown from our head, so Reformation will restore it, and set it again upon the
head of our State and Government; yea the Lord will redeem our life from
destruction, and (as David speaks, Psalm. 103.4.) Crown us with loving kindness
and tender mercies.

Without Reformation, we are a lost People, but if the Lord make us a reforming
People, we shall certainly be a preserved People, that will restore our
Ornament, our Glory to us; Come therefore and let us return unto the Lord, for
he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

FINIS.

