An Exact ENQUIRY Into, and Cure of the Acute Diseases OF INFANTS.

By Walter Harris, M. D.

Englished by W.C. M.S. With a Preface in Vindication of the Work.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Clement at the White Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1693.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Margaret Countess of Roxburgh, etc.
MADAM,
There Is none I can so safely come unto for Shelter to my first Labors as Your
self, in whose Nature, Justice and Equity, are so firmly established, that your
Name prefixed to this Book, is not only able to defend it from Calumny, but
also to cover a great many Faults may be found in it.

If I should declare my Obligations to lay this Work at your Feet, this Epistle
would swell to a greater Bulk than the Book it self: For who could enumerate
all your Endowments, or my own particular Ties in less space? Who can
sufficiently declare that profuseness of Nature, who, ordinarily, gives some
Excellency to one, some to another, but has Concentrated all in You: Who did
ever see Nobility such a debonaire Countenance, such exact and divine
proportion of Body, Politeness of Mind, and Pleasantness in Conversation, so
blended and mixed in a Creature? so that I Am at a stand, whether I should say,
That they are the Attendants of your Birth, or much rather, since they are not
to be found in your Equals, I could almost think that Nobility and Riches are
but the Earnest of the Reward of so great Virtues. Madam, I am hardly
restrained from breaking in upon Them, but I fear I should wander in this vast
Field and inextricable Labyrinth. Wherefore, I do truly value my self, that I
have resisted so great a Temptation, in not launching out into this Ocean, in
improving the Subject before me in Panegyric. Yet I cannot so entirely
moderate my Passion, but I must say, That the great Prudence whereby you have
managed and improved That Estate, in the Minority of your most Noble Son, is a
most plain Declaration of the most of the other Virtues.

But that I may not offend against your Modesty, I must keep off, and tell you
in short, That this Dedication is the Basket of Flowers the poor Man presents
his Rich Neighbor with. Yet, worthless things receive a value, when they are
made the Offerings of Respect, Esteem, and Gratitude: These I have in the
highest degree for You; so that if they can add a Price to what they go along
with, proportionable to their own Greatness, I can with confidence brag, I here
make your Ladyship the greatest Present you ever received. This I am sure, I am
under the greatest obligation to seek all occasions to acknowledge; and I
should be most Ungrateful, if I did not lay hold on this Opportunity, to
testify to the World, how much I am obliged to be,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most humble, and most obedient Servant, WILLIAM COCKBURN.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Here present you with a Translatition of the best, if not the first and only
Book yet extant upon the Subject; which, however rational, is rejected by a
great many, otherways Learned, Physicians, as Empyrical. Neither, is that
strange Humor of decrying what we do not use, stayed there; but the malice of
some has led them into a great many Personal Reflections upon the Learned
Author himself, as a most unlearned Innovator. This imputation of Novelty, is a
terrible Charge amongst those who judge of Men's Heads, as they do of their
Perukes, by the fashion; and can allow none to be right, but the received
Doctrines. Truth scarce yet carried it by Vote any where, at its first
appearance; new Opinions are always suspected, and usually opposed, without any
other reason, but because they are not already common; and its Detectors
disclaimed against, as the greatest Enemies of Mankind. This way of
Calumniating is no newer than the World it self: This has been the Fate of such
as have deserved best in all Ages, and never more evident than in the last;
for, though there have been a great many things discovered in it, so essential
and necessary for the use of Medicine, that it may be a wonder how it had
subsisted before that time; yet, were not the English Oracles, Harvey, viz.
Willis, Lower, Sydenham, etc. freed from the Scourge of an unruly Tongue, and
Pens dipped in blackest Satyr. So, we may the less admire that Libels, as unjust,
are brought against this first, though most exact Essay of curing Infants
Diseases.

As the Trial and Examination of Truth, and not any Antic Fashion, must give
it price, though it be not yet current by the Public Stamp: So shall this
Treatise be found entirely rational, if they will but adjust it to their own
Rule. For are not there here, Causes Procatartick, Antecedent, and Immediate
described from the surest Considerations? Has not he begun with Reflections
upon the first Motion in the Ovum, and observed the Nature and Constitution of
its very Spring? Neither has he left in disguise, but clearly demonstrated,
what external Injuries they can sustain; yea, he has most accuratly enquired
into the Nature of their Fabric and Body it self, and has deduced all the
Maladies that can be subsequent thereupon, from the most solid and firm
Principles of the best Philosophy.

And, therefore, that Calumny is most malicious, when they traduce him as a
Rejecter of the use of Philosophy, h. e. best informed Reason, in Medicine; and
that he should teach how to become Physicians by practicing. This indeed, is
the way of some impudent Murderers; yet all that he says, is, That Practice is
the Standard of our right Reasonings, while, in the mean time, he does very
well know it to be simply impossible, that one just Observation can be made,
when the understanding is not sufficiently polished by necessary Philosophy;
Experience being very deceitful. So when in several places of his Book, he does
inveigh against, and declare the uselesness of that, which was ordinarily
brought for the Introducing, and handing in, of Medicine; he does positively
speak of those which are fitted to the frisking Spirits of Young Men, but which
never had place but in the Brains of their Inventers.

Yea, he does almost in plain Terms assort, what that is he thinks absolutely
requisite for polishing and preparing the Minds of Men, for becoming faithful
observers of the Effects of Natural Operations? by the several Appeals he does
make, through the whole book, unto Experiment. As if he had most plainly
declared the great use of the Experimental Philosophy for explaining
Phaenomena's in Medicine; which, methinks, should be no hard task to prove, if
the Ingenious and immortal Mr. Boil had loft any thing debatable upon this
subject, and the world were not utterly satisfied of the great advances
Philosophy has made in that School more than in any other.

Whatever be the truth of this: It is most certain that the contrivers of these
fanciful Philosophies have got their Understanding and knowledge this way,
whatever be the dress they have put theirs into. This might most easily be
demonstrated from the great use Aristotle made of the Works of his Ancestors,
especially of those of Ocellus Lucanus, though he handed them down unto
Posterity as his own. So, he and his Followers in this Reformation, fixing
their Thoughts only on Words, and the end of their Contemplations and
Reasonings, about little more than Sounds; the result of all, was nothing but
Noise and wrangling about Sounds, without convincing or bettering a Man's
Understanding: Which the Ingenious and most Famous Des Carts has exercised in
great measure and stoutly asserted our liberty in Disquisition, against that
Tyrant of Men's Minds; for which no Generation shall ever mention him without
due Praise.

Yet, his Followers have very much endeavored to bring the World back into
that Slavery and Bondage, their Master had but lately freed it from; whilst
they set up a clear Deduction of all Truths from their Masters Principle; as if
all that boundless Extent were the natural and undoubted Possession of their
Understandings, wherein there is nothing exempted from its Decision, or that
escapes its Comprehension. They do not remember how much their Master was, and
they are, obliged to Experimental Philosophy. His Meditations are a new dress
of the most Learned Lord Verulam, his Novum Organum; being his Dubitation is to
be read in the 31st. Aphor. of that Book, where he says, That a Redress is to
be made from the first Foundations; because, as he says in the distribution of
that Work, there is a twofold fault of our Senses, they, sc. either altogether
forsake, or deceive us: for there are a great many things, which our Senses,
etc. His Prejudices were before that time termed Idols, by the Learned Bacon;
and the Advice of fixing upon some general Truth, by which we may more clearly
make Disquisition into her more retired Recesses, given by that most ingenious
Gentleman; who, tho well knowing the Infinity of such Maxims, upon the ground
of Assent, at first hearing and understanding the Terms; yet could never
suspect that any could carry the Matter so high, as to fix upon any one as the
first; neither is the Proof of Existence, because of Thought, at all such;
except we also know the necessity and relation of Thinking, and Being, which he
perhaps had cleared, if he had not been afraid of falling into that other
general Truth and innate Idea (if there be any such) that it is impossible for
the same thing to be, and not to be.

This, then, being the whole Life and Spring of his Meditations; we may most
justly say, That they are nothing else but Sir Francis Bacon revived. And that
his natural Philosophy is nothing but a dexterous Application of his ingenious
Principles to the common and observed Operations of Nature, will be most clear;
if we do recollect, where, in the Fourth Book of his Principles of Philosophy,
being now destitute and run out in his own Learning, he does ingenuously
confess, That he can assert nothing positively of these Phaenomena's not having
had sufficient Trial and Experiment. And as the Ancients did cast such things
as they could not explain by their beloved Four Qualities, into that vast
Catalogue of such as are Occult; so the ingenious Des Carts did dispatch a
great many Difficulties with his as unconceivable Dispositions and certain ways
of Doing. Neither has Aristotle and his Followers been more diligent in
suppressing those Ancient Philosophers, that, as the most Learned Lord Verulam
says in the 282 p. of his 3d. Book, about the increase of Sciences, After the
fashion of the Ottoman Family, they thought they could not safely Reign, unless
their Brethren were Assassinated; than the Followers of that Famous Man to
suppress, contrary perhaps to their Master's first Design, every way of
explaining Phaenomena's but their own.

This Contagion stops not here, but has diffused it self so much into
Medicine, that now, there can be no Learned Physician, but who does reason his
Diseases from these three Principles, h. e. from the different Efforts and
Operations of the Matter of the first, Globules of the second, and that of the
third Element. But whether my most Learned Author has just reason to subscribe
to those, or keep by his own Philosophy, shall appear from the following
Considerations: As,

1. From this useless and general way of explaining Phaenomena's, wherein
there is nothing to be found but empty Sounds, and most abstract Notions. They
call all Diseases a Confused or ill mixture of the Humors, which in the main
is true; but how to settle the different kinds of Diseases, is somewhat hard;
and their Cause an obstruction of Pores, and so (with them) must always be
thrust out by Diaphoretick and Sweating Medicines: And so there is never any
use for cooling and temperate Medicaments, these silly and naughty parts of the
Creation, which are ordained without any Design, and are of no use to Man, as
the standard of our Religion would inform us: So either there must be no such
thing in nature as these Remedies, or the Scriptures do cheat us, when they
inform us, That all on this Earth was created for the use of Man. Yea, it might
much be doubted (that I may pursue their fancy) whither the parts of Matter,
arrested by Pores of a different Figure; these Causes of Obstructions, are to
be driven. Surely, not outward, lest they produce a too great extension of
Fibers, and so communicate Irregular Motions unto their beloved Glandula, and
so, create some grievous Perception in the Soul, h. e. Pain. Neither inward,
being they have not yet seen the necessity for these Wedges, to force their
Return, which, else, they could easily have supplied us with. But to the
purpose:

2. From the bad Success their greatest Authors have had in practice, not to
name any, being it is well known to any that have been in their Country; yea,
whatever Parade they make in their Theory, their Practice is nothing different
from that of the Ancients; and their Prescriptions are most implicitly
transcribed, yea sometime when they do flatly oppose those Views they
established from their Theory.

3. From the small Progress Physic has made under its Conquest. For what
Advances have they made merely, or for the most part, by their Philosophy? Is
not the spacious Field of the Materia Medica the same, for them, as it was left
by Dioscorides and Bauhinus; though the Rise and Beginning of this Philosophy
has been in a time when the great Secrets in Anatomy have been disclosed; which
some, most ridiculously apply to the great Advantages that have accrued to the
World by this; as if it had been the Clew of Ariadne, that led into the vast
Labyrinth of Anatomy, and of a great many more that did then appear, by the
diligent scrutiny of Men at that time.

So that he may say of Medicine, considering its growth under the Cartesian, or
other fanciful Philosophy, what the Learned Verulam said, upon another
occasion, of the Mechanics in his days, That they were come to a greater
height in the Shops, where Men were Armed with Tools, than they had come in
the Schools of Mathematicians. That Medicine has made better advances in the
School of Hippocrates than in all the rest; and it may justly have the
Character, being the Consequences are as dismal, that the most Famous Bacon
gives of the Peripatetick Philosophy.

I might demonstrate here, for further Defense, the great Advantages Physic
has, being treated after this manner, and so run through all the past Ages
until History should give us no more help; if the treating of this particular
would not swell this Preface into a big Volume.

I shall not for-estall you with any Collection of the most considerable
Remarks of this Book, lest I should be obliged to range it into this Epistle;
and a very little patience will be able to conquer them all.

And now having answered, at as great length as this place will allow, the
several Cavils that have been brought against this Book: It Is now fallen to my
own share, that I give some account of my self in this Translation, and that I
who have been Vindicating another, may need some excuse for my self. Truly,
this pitiful Humor of excusing is large worse than the fault, and makes a Man
become unpardonable for doing any thing, they are sensible does need
Vindication, when at the same time they may leave undone, that which they make
Apology for. Yet, that I may not flatter my self that I can escape Censure more
than better Writers, and my most Learned Author; I shall declare my Design,
that, at least, they may not be utterly unmannerly, and give us the lie in
Things I positively over.

And. 1. It Is no affectation to be in Print, which no Man, that would keep free
of Public Malice, does desire; beside how mean a thing it is to be a
Translator, though a work only suitable to my Years.

All my Ambition is, that I have caught held of this occasion, to defend
Truth, and my Learned Author from unjust Calumnies.

I have put it in an English Dress, not only that the rude and unlearned may
see in this Mirror (my Author's Book) what the Art of Physic is, and how
unfit it is to be practiced by the Ignorant and unskilful, who presumptuously
venture on the Lives of others; and turn Mountebanks with a few Receipts,
without the least considering the most profound Principles of this Art; or
searching into the Nature of Diseases their several Motions, and different
Symptoms. But especially, that Women and Illiterate People, with whom these
Physicians have interposed their Scandalizing Authority, may be taught, from
the solid Reasonings and the Answerableness to the Standard he has set up, to
be more afraid of such, as of Hogboblins, as do most endeavor the preservation
of their and their Infants health, by the Methods of the most Famous and
Learned Sydenham, and of my Author, put in practice as the different Exigences,
which are only known to the Skilful, do require.

But, also, the Learned may be remembered that the World had very much advanced
in knowledge, if the endeavors of ingenious and industrious Men had not been
much cumbred with the Learned, but Frivolous use of uncouth, affected, or
unintelligible Terms, introduced into Sciences, and there made an Art of, to
that degree, that the Art of Medicine, has not been able to endure a satisfying
Trial, until the diligent Labors of some late Authors have broke in upon this
Sanctuary of Vanity and Ignorance.

So I hope our thus discovering this and other parts of Physic in the Language
of every Gossip it so far from putting edged Tools into the Hands of Children,
and teaching Men to play too much with their own and others Healths, that it
may be a way to put a stop to the Infinite Mischiefs and frequent Murders that
are daily committed.

Only, now, I must make Apology to my Author, though unacquainted, for making
use of his Book upon that Design; to whom only I can answer, that it is the
fittest, upon many accounts, for so Public a Service. And as he, in the close
of this Book, leaves allways to others the same power of judging he assumed to
himself: so I hope he does not, either, restrict this Maxim in doing; for I
take him to be so candid and just a Man, that he does nothing in Public but
what he allows in others; and, therefore, I presume, he cannot be
dissatisfied, being he did travel in the same kind of Labor, h. e. he
Translated Monsieur de Bleyny de la verole, upon the same Design, I do his de
morbis. etc.

THE CONTENTS.
THat the things that make for a more certain Cure of Infants were, before,
wanting amongst Physicians. page 2. But it is easier than is commonly believed.
p. 3. That is proved by an Agurment taken from the difference of Ages and
Constitutions. p. 4. There is but one cause of all Infants Diseases. p. 5. What
that is. ibid. By what infallible Signs the Diagnostick of these Diseases is to
be enquired into. p. 7. What was the seeming uncertainty of the Diagnostick. p.
8. The foregoing Cause of these Diseases. p. 10. How much the Health of the
Infant depends upon the Mother. p. 11. Other Causes of Infants Diseases are
recounted. 15. Cold, viz. very easily caught. ibid. The faulty Milk of the
Nurse. p. 17. Their over soon eating Flesh. p. 20. The imprudent allowance of
drinking Spirituous Liquors. p. 21. With whom Wine does best agree, and whom it
most injureth. p. 22. All the Causes of Infants Diseases do always concentrate
in one that is more immediate. 24 All the Symptoms have their Rise from a
prevailing Acid. p. 30. That Hipp. did take his Indications of Cure from
defeating the second, and not the first Qualities. p. 34. The Prognostic p.
37. The Cure. p. 39. What Is the Foundation we should chiefly lay for the curing
Infants Diseases. p. 41. The Designs of Cure are twofold. p. 42. The first is,
to prepare the Acid aright. p. 47. That the Preparation of Humors of old, was
of no use, and without any design. ibid. Why so many ancient Physicians have
neglected Purging in Fevers. p. 48. That the Concoction is better advanced by
Purging than any other way. ibid. The Preparing Medicaments are enumerated. p.
51. Why the Volatile Spirits are not reckoned amongst such as do Prepare. p.
53. Why the foregoing Medicines are amongst the best Anodynes. p. 54. That the
ignorance of their Virtues is the reason that That Virtue of these Medicaments
was altogether unknown to Physicians. p. 55. By what the Knowledge of
Physicians is to be measured. p. 56. Forms and Uses of preparing Medicaments.
p. 57. Forms of gentle Purgatives are described. p. 62. The deserved
Commendation of Rhubarb, above all other Purgatives. p. 64. In what esteem we
should have Aloes. p. 65. Some things out of Hipp. that oppose us, and are
against Purging in Fevers. p. 68. An Answer. p. 69 and 70. The Fatal Mistake of
some Physicians that over-thwartly prescribe Purging. p. 71. Concerning the
Blooding of Children. p. 72. The Virtues of Testaceous Medicaments. p. 73. What
are meant here by such. p. 75. The extravagant giving of Opiats, has been
introduced through the ignorance of their use. ib. That Narcoticks are neither
necessary nor safe for Infants. p. 77. The danger of all Warm Medicaments and
Cordials in the cure of these tender Ones, is observed. p. 78. Whether the
using Testaceous Medicaments does produce Obstructions. p. 79. What my Opinion
is about the Crissis. p. 80. What is to be determined concerning the use of
Precipitating Medicaments. p. 82. How very gentle Fevers do frequently become
such as are called Malignant. p. 84. The constant Practice amongst the Turks in
curing the Plague. p. 86. The Notion of Malignity is refelled. p. 87. What
Sudorificks, and in how much they, are of use. p. 88. An account of the Fever
that was Epidemick last year. p. 89. Of the difficult breeding of Teeth of
Infants, and its Cure. p. 91. The Cure of Thrushes. p. 94. How a Flux is to be
cured. p. 96. And their Vomiting. p. 98. What are the Specificks for their
Gripes. p. 99 What are best in Convulsions. p. 100. The Specificks of the
Ancients against Convulsions, have not those Virtues they ascribed to them. p.
101. An Example of a Girl seized with most severe Convulsions, and recovered by
things of no value. p. 102. Some things about the Small Pox and Measles of
Infants. p. 105. An Argument taken from the Nature of the Small Pox, against
the custom of too warm Traitment. p. 106. Examples of sundry Infants cured of
their Fevers by this my Method. p. 109. A remarkable Instance of the Hurt of
Aloeticks, in the Fevers of these Young Ones. p. 125 The cure of a Boy almost
destroyed by an abundance of Worms. p. 129 The description of a Black Mineral,
and its comparison with the common Preparation. p. 130 An Objestion against the
foregoing Method. 133 The Reply. ib. What my thoughts are concorning
Chemistry. 134 The excellency of the Works of Nature in relation with those of
Art. p. 137 The Conclusion. p. 138
An Exact ENQUIRY Into, and Cure of the Acute Diseases OF INFANTS.
WHEN but last Summer I had discoursed the most skilful and accomplished
Physician, Mr. Sydenham about the frequent Success I have had in the Cure of
the most dangerous Diseases of Infants:

That very Learned Man did seriously inquire what method I did take in so lame
(that I may say no more) and so defective an Affair, of which the most famed
Physicians have had so small knowledge. Before him, then, did I most willingly
expose that way, which of all pleased me most, and which he, after trial, did
not only not disprove, but confirming it by his own experience, and declaring
it most useful to others, did most earnestly desire me, to recommend it to the
World. By the persuasion then of so Learned a Man, I take my Pen, and to my
power, do consult the Health of my Country.

I know in how unfrequented, and unknown a Path I am to walk, since Children,
and especially sick Infants offer nothing for a clear Diagnostick, but what we
can collect from their moaning Complaints, and their uncertain Idiom of
frowardness; wherefore, very many Physicians of the best Vogue, have often
declared to my self, what unwilling Visits they made to Sick, but especially
New born Children; hoping little from these Notices for the unridling of their
Maladies. No doubt, we should as diligently inquire after a perfect Cure of
Childrens Diseases, as of any other thing that may seem wanting in Medicine;
neither do rich men, who do desire, or would preserve the Health of the Heirs
of their vast Properties and Possessions, trust much to this; but all Parents
who with an invincible Affection, do as eagerly maintain the Health of their
Young ones as their own. Wherefore, if I shall give some small light, which
advanced by the polished wit of other men, that may render this rude and
imperfect Work more absolute and exact, I shall not repent me of my
Undertaking, but shall take it in very good part.

Who therefore will diligently ponder the Symptoms of the Youngest Infants,
which are most evident, or whoever shall seriously reflect upon their delicate
Constitution, and most simple Diet, shall find this not so difficult a Task, as
he formerly conceived. For I do not doubt to assert the Diseases of that Age
generally to be but very few, and only to differ in degree; yea, that the Cure
of Infants is far more easy and safe, than that of Men and Women.

As of all Ages, that of old People is with very much ado changed to better,
because of the dryness and hardness, and almost flinty temper of all their
Solid Parts; so without doubt, the Younger, because of their delicate and
mucilaginous Tenderness, are apt to receive any alteration imaginable. For
these Parts of an Old Man are dry and withered, which in Infants are most
humid, viz. their Bones, Membranes, Ligaments, Arteries, Veins, Nerves, and the
very musculous Flesh: Since that even the Bones of Infants may be more properly
termed Cartilages; and now being they do abound with so much natural and
acquired moisture, that their Bodies are perfectly soft and flexible, that
temperament and constitution is very justly said to be the most humid.

And as the constitution of Children is most humid, so I dare not to pronounce
all their Diseases to be of one kind, and to be produced from one and the same
cause; and that the Maladies of the however different parts of the Body,
whether they be the uppermost or nethermost, as the Stomach, Intestines, Lungs,
Head or Nerves, are variously and most affected, are of the same Nature, under
diverse and sundry Names.

In which assertion, that I may not seem rashly to maintain a Paradox, you may
hear Hippocrates himself in his Book of Winds or Vapors, speaking of one and
the same Universal Cause of Diseases. (...), etc. The Rise of all Diseases is
one and the same. The place only makes the difference. Wherefore, Diseases
seem to have nothing of Relation, because of the diversity of their places;
when, tho, there is but one Species, and the same Cause of all Diseases.

Wherefore, if we shall consider the nature of the Moisture of Children, we
shall not find it possible to degenerate into any defect or putridness, but
that which is acid. For with whatsoever Disease they are affected, however
named by the Authors; seldom or never could I find wanting Excrements of a very
sour smell, and an abundance of tart and acid Belchings, especially in the
beginning. But also, almost all Liquors that do tend to putrefaction, do
naturally contract an acor or sharpness. Yea, Milk it self, the proper Food of
that tender Age, if kept for some time, becomes sour, and does, coagulate
upon the Fire, without the addition of any other Acid. Moreover, all the
Symptoms of Childrens Diseases do justly reckon their beginning from an Acid.

With all which, let us consider the weak temperament and the infirm
constitution of their Blood, so that the Spirits that lodge therein, have not
yet attained so great mastery as to discharge their Functions and Offices, or
to settle by their own Force or Activity, any Irregular Motions of the Humors
proceeding from any inward or external Cause. For that Vital Liquor, as Stum,
before it be duly fermented, does easily contract a preternatural Acor and
Tartness; tho it may easily be redressed by timeous and artificial Help.

By an Infant I do not only in a more strict sense understand, with Galen, a
Child of one, two or three months, but in a larger (as commonly) a Child more
advanced in Age, even to four Years; from which to 14 he is a Boy. And being
confirmed by multiplied experience, and Reason it self suggesting no less, I do
firmly assert, that the younger the sick Child or Boy is, that his cure is so
much the more easy. For any Impression whether good or bad, is sooner received
by a soft than a hard Body; though it be more lasting, if once it be impressed
upon the hard: So Children, do easily fall into Diseases, and are very easily
restored to their Health, if they be not ignorantly and unskilfully treated.

The Diagnostick of Childrens Diseases, cannot so much be collected from their
own Relation, neither from the touching of their Pulse, or from a more curious
Trial of their Urine, as from the Answers of the Nurses and Women that are
their constant Attendants. The Women know, if they have been troubled with
Loathings, and Vomitings, and how long; whether the Food or Milk that was cast
up, was curdled; whether untimeous Weeping, Watching, and Disquiet, give any
Notices of Colic Pains; whether they be affected with acid Belchings, or the
Hick up, or a Cough does appear; whether their Belly has kept a due course,
and if their Excrements be white, green, or filled with Bile. They know, if
their Infants have had extraordinary drouth, and so be Feverish, or if their
mouths be full of Thrushes, which do much trouble their Sucking. Being
enquired, they can inform you, if epileptick Spasms have seized their ender
Bodies, with the several Concomitants of time and severity, or whether their
present Sickness be treisted with their breeding of Teeth; or lastly, whether
any thing considerable, whether that be a swelling of their Belly, or of any
other part, either Wheels or Pushes, or the Jaundice, or Rose do appear. The
other Symptoms, methinks, do more belong and appertain to subtle Speculation
than Practice.

But the frequent Complaint of an uncertain Diagnostick, has more its rise from
the preposterous and useless way of curing, than from any want of Symptoms. For
under this Mask and Vail Physicians do willingly cloak and conceal their
Ignorance and Mistakes. Neither can I conceive upon what account Almighty God
who governs and provideth for all things, who disposes of every thing in so
good order, and who has given to the very Beasts, and to Insects, of all these
the most vile, an innate and sufficient sagacity for preserving themselves;
should restrain his bounty from communicating it self in that manner to the
Children of Men.

But the Pulses of Children are naturally, or upon every little Alteration do
become so swift and frequent, that they always seem somewhat Feverish.
Moreover, they are for the most part, so chagreen and froward, that not keeping
their Wrest one moment in the same posture, do not suffer their Pulse to be
touched. Lastly, there are so many things that do accelerate or otherways
change their Pulses, that Sentiments taken thence should prove very uncertain,
if no altogether false.

Their Urine, when in perfect Health, is most thick; so that any too curious
Person, unacquainted with this, could pronounce them laboring under some
grievous Distemper, though at that minute, they do enjoy most prosperous
Health. The Urine of Infants is always mixed with their Excrements in their
Clothes, so that it does rather serve for the scalding and excoriating of their
Thighs, than for the profound and deep enquiry of the Diviner.

But that we may the better search into their Diseases, we must not entirely
neglect the Notices that may be gotten from the foregoing or procatarctick
Cause; which are to be taken from the consideration of the Disposition of their
Parents about the time of Conception; or from the Reflections upon that
Nourishment which was then transmitted into them, either by the Navel, Pores of
the Flesh, or of the Skin, which are then most patent, while they are in the
Womb, and but yet beginning to be, and exist.

It cannot be denied that there are such diseases as are derived from one or
both of the Parents unto their Children: Who can doubt, but that the Gout,
Epilepsie, Stone, Consumption, etc. Have descended from Father to Son, when
whole Families of the same Blood have ended their lives in the same kind of
Disease. The prolifick Seed does so firmly communicate to the Foetus a
disposition to Diseases, which is so natural, and grows so much with their
years, that it cannot be rooted out with any pains or industry. And I think
that hereditary Diseases are never more frequently communicated, than from the
Mother in the time of her big Belly. For Teeming Women are obnoxious to a
thousand Faults and Errors in their Diet; they are exposed to a thousand
Accidents, with which either being affrighted or otherways wronged, do derive
indelible and uneffaceable Injuries upon their Children. For how absurd are the
longings of Women with Child! One cheweth Coals, another Lime, a third Ashes,
and each with the greatest pleasure; one eats raw Fleshes, the other crude
Fishes; yea the Appetite of some has been so depraved, that it could not be
satisfied but by some Callous and solid part from the Body of Man. Moreover, it
is daily most obvoius, how great the force of their Fancy and Imagination is?
How great Monsters it has produced! and what taches of all kinds it has
communicated to Infants. And now, if I should resolve to scartle together, from
all hands, the wonderful accounts and Histories of Teeming Women, or in plain
English, if under a pretense of vast Learning, I should give out my self for a
great Reader, I have here a very fair opportunity of digressing and expatiating
into a very large Field, however beside the purpose; but I choose rather to
prosecute my design, and endeavor Brevity, than by idle circumlocutions, and
the vain and empty Citations of Authors, to boast of learning falsely so
called: Always esteeming that Man more learned, who can produce something that
is true, from his own knowledge and Experience, than him, who being very well
acquainted with the Tables and Registers of Books, can collect and quote, upon
occasions, the Opinions and Sentiments of Authors, quibling and contending
among themselves.

Those Mothers who are most subject to these depraved Appetites, do impress and
communicate unto their Children such diseases as can only be cured by time And
poor Women whose best Divertisement and only Antidote against Melancholy, is
hard labor and constant working, whose Food is most slender and simple, are
seldomest essayed and proved with these depravations. But above all, such as
are Hysteric (with whom we may justly reckon a great part of your delicate
Women, who spend the most of their time in Dressing and Decking, and do
languish and decay with idleness, whose lazy and torpid Blood waxes Acid and
Tart, after the same manner that standing Waters do corrupt) do most certainly
Communicate to their Infants such Dispositions to Diseases with their first
life. Being an ill Raven (as the Proverb is) an ill Egg.

Amongst the rest of the Creatures the innate goodness of the Kind, is most
surely derived upon their young, partly because of their simple Diet, and
partly, but more especially, because the Male sacredly observing the Laws of
Nature, never copulateth with his Female, when his instinct (however informed)
inditeth her teeming. But Man (whose lofty Reason has taught him to despise
the Brutes) almost more salacious than a Buck-Goat, not knowing how to restrain
and bridle his Lust, importuneth his Mate from her first Conceiving until the
hour of Birth. Hence it is that strong and Healthy Men do so frequently beget
weak and valetudinary Children. This is the Reason why Old Men having
overpassed (by the benign favor and help of Nature) the Stage and Period of
their immoderate Embraces, do beget of their Decayed and Barren Seed, more
plump and healthy Children than the strongest and most keen Youth.

Thus having considered the procatarctick cause of their Diseases, which do
mostly depend upon the condition of the Parents whilst they are begotten;
especially of the Mother, in the time of her Big Belly: We will now come
nigher, and inquire into the more immediate Causes of their Maladies, which may
be reduced to these four Articles.

1. To their catching Cold.

2. To the too thick Milk of the Nurse.

3. To their over soon eating Fleshes.

And 4. To the mad and imprudent fondness of Mothers, and many Nurses who do
often permit their Infants to sip up Wine and other strong and Spirituous
Liquors.

And, 1. Cold, especially from the night Air, to which they are most subject,
does very often make way for these Fevers, with which Infants are so frequently
affected. Since that they come naked from the Womb, not being clothed by Nature
as all other creatures are; Reason or, rather, Nature, destitute of her own
help, does instantly suggest the necessity of wrapping them up into warm
Clothes. Moreover, the mutability of the Air, and the continual vicissitudes of
Heat and Cold, do plainly advertise us, how great our care should be in the
warding off its Injuries. For the more tender and delicate the Temperament and
Constitution of any, even of the most adult is, the more are they subject unto
impresses and inconveniences from the Air. But the strength and constitution of
Infants are of all the most tender and infirm; and unless there be great care
taken for warm and convenient, not fine, splendid and sumptuous Clothes
especially for such as are descended of honest Parents, they cannot long eschew
these Diseases, which are the ordinary attendants and consequents of night Air.
Yea, an exact care for convenient Apparel (whatever some strong men may deny)
is so absolutely neessary for every age, that ordinarily the most weak and
valetudinary People (for as much as I could ever observe) do live longer, than
the most robust and strong Men; which can be attributed to nothing else, than
the great care of the one, and supine negligence of the other for convenient
and warm Clothing.

2. The too thick Milk of the Nurse. For if she be a lover of Wine or any other
strong and spirituous Liquors, her Milk is so warmed and on a sudden inflamed,
that fire it self only passes her Breasts, for her sucking Infant; but if she
more wantonly entertain the untimely embraces of her Husband, her monthly
Visits are renewed by their Coppulating, and so her Milk Corrupts and grows
sour and the matter for the Milk being otherwise diverted; the Milk it self
does gradually diminish, and the lean Child for some time troubled with
unconvenient Food, is so often killed.

Lastly, If she be hysteric h. e. of a more tender and delicate Constitution,
however Chaste and sober she may be, yet her Milk does degenerate and Naturally
turns thick. In how great danger then are Sucking Infants! upon how
Inconstant and Slippery a plan does the Health of these Innocent Children Sist!
It Is this, and some other Causes, which I shall just now recount, that are the
frequent occasions why we hear so often the sound of the Passing Bells of the
Villages about London, for some one Child that is undeservedly Atoning and
Expiating the faults and mistakes of its Nurse; and now ending it^ scarce well
begun Life, having met with some unchaste Intemperate or froward, and dishonest
Nurse.

But also from the foregoing Causes does depend, a remark which a Divine of
very good Credit and entire Fame, Rector of the Parish of Haies, twelve miles
from London, did make, when he told me with great Grief, how his Parish which
is very large, and of great extent, well Peopled, and seated in a most pleasant
and wholesome Air was upon his coming to that place filled with Sucking Infants;
yet in the space of one year he was assistant at the burying of them all (if
you do except two, and his own only Son; whom, being yet very weak, he did not
unadvisedly commit unto my Care, from his Birth.) Yea, he was witness that same
Year to the Interring of the same Number which had been twice supplied in a
City, perhaps amongst the greatest in the World, yet brought to an untimely end
by the fault of the Mercenary Nurses.

Moreover, the thickness of Milk, whatever be its cause, cannot but produce a
great many inconveniences of sundry kinds; being that the Bodies of Infants,
should, of all, be the most fluid, and these smallest conduits which are
ordained for transmitting of the Chyle, should always be kept open: and lastly,
being that this most unnatural thickness of Food is most opposite to that most
fluid Constitution of Infants, and does give occasion to all kinds of
Obstructions in the first Passages.

3. To their over soon eating, if not more properly, devouring and swallowing
down, of fleshes. For it is most admirable that Mothers are not in a fear of
killing their Infants, with so disagreeing and improper Food; whom, though they
love so excessively, that they seem mad in that passion. For who could
seriously think that flesh, so solid and compact a substance, can be at all
agreeable with these tender Infants, who as yet have got no teeth, at least not
strong and firm enough, for the chewing of fleshes. What man of the least
judgment can assert the Riot and excess of the most manly and robust Age any
way convenient with one, that is so tender, and most simple, and whose strength
is most infirm.

It Is certain, that convenient Diet is not to be neglected in any part of our
time, but because the Temperament and Constitution of Young Ones do the so
easily sustain Injuries upon that score; neither have they force enough to ward
off Diseases from that hand: therefore there should be greater care taken for
the preventing these errors and mistakes. For a cropful of fleshes too early
and untimely devoured, is a most fruitful mother of Crudities, which are almost
inseparable from this gormandizing Age. Crude and indigested food does
necessarily produce that corruption of humors; from which not only worms are
bred, but also these various, most grievous, and most irregular Symptoms,
whereby Infants are wasted and do decay, do proceed and have their rise.

By the way, I must observe, that the Crudities of Infants are, over and above,
daily increased and accumulated because that almost all Nurses do repose their
Infants for sleep presently after Meat of whatever kind.

4. To their sipping up of Wine and other strong and spirituous Liquors
imprudently permitted and allowed. And this cause, as the former, is only
referrible to the foolish indulgency of Mothers. Doubtless, they do suppose,
that these things, which they reckon good and pleasant to themselves, and which
do free their hearts from care, cannot be disagreeing with their Infants. As if
forsooth one Shoe were fitting for every Foot! Truly, these very good Women do
not consider, how hard and firm their Hides, and how soft and tender the thin
Skin of these young ones are; they do not remember that one man's Meat (as
people speak) is another's Poison. Lastly, they entirely forget how their
craving Appetite is scarcely quieted with the strongest Meats, and how hardly
their Infants do digest Milk and Panado.

But the nigher that any come to Old Age the more do Wines become agreeable
with them. Being, the languishing Heat of Old Men does want a supply from
volatile Spirits, which may be had in great abundance from Wine, both for the
increase, as also for the preservation of their natural Warmth. Wherefore Wine
is most hurtful and inconvenient for the Nature and Constitution of Infants,
being it is the most different and remote from that of old men; for their very
weak Nerves are most easily destroyed with it, and their tender Bodies are
either colliquated by degrees, or suddenly cast into Fevers with the subtle
flame and heat of Wine.

There are some who would allow Wine to Infants, because of their untimely
eating of flesh. For that they think, that Wine, even in that Age, does much
advance and further the Concoction and Fermentation of Crudities, to which, no
doubt, these young Ravens are very subject. But I shall not so much here
debate, whether one mistake should cure another, or both be eschewed, as I
shall offer to the impartial consideration of any man, who may compare the
Children of poorer People who have a simple and sober Diet, and those of the
rich who have all things in plenty and excess.

Truly, all kinds of Wine and spirituous Liquors more liberally drunk, do not
only destroy the natural Ferment of the Stomach of Children, debauch the
Appetite, burn up its Coats and wrinkle them as Parchment over much dried by
the fire; but also (which is most considerable in this case) do exceedingly
injure the Nervous Coat, by which all the Nerves of the Body are weakened and
the Animal Spirits driven into confusion. The Wine which of all least wrongeth
that tender Age, is that which is White; in as much as it was reputed cold by
the Ancients, though not absolutely so, but in respect of all other Wines,
whether they be red, yellow or of a Fallow color. Yet Galen strictly
discharged Children the use of every Wine.

All the Causes antecedent or mediate of Children's Diseases, however many they
really are, or be supposed, may justly be resolved into this one immediate
cause, scil. a very active and prevailing Acid.

The History, then, of the more grievous Diseases, wherewith Infants are mostly
affected, is, as follows.

Their stomach whatever be the first Cause, is always affected with an Acid
Distemper, whence, their Aliment is reduced, not into that homogeneous
Substance of Chyle, but into a Posset. This inequal condition of the Chyle and
Nourishment, begot likewise from too much Acidity, does chiefly produce
Loathing, Vomiting and sour Belchings. But if this Distemper be protracted, and
of greater continuance, they turn pale by degrees, and their discolored Face
is tinged with somewhat of a yellow or green Color. Then does their Belly
swell with Wind, and Flatulent Eruptions are carried upward. In the mean while
one or two red pustles (a most certain sign of too much Acidity) do appear upon
their skin, upon some upper part of their body, sometimes, sc. upon both cheeks
sometimes upon their chin, sometimes upon their Forehead, or upon their Neck,
though sometimes lower, and the Infant becomes daily worse. But he also
breaths high, and that with a kind of shoring; with which symptom he is
always affected (especially if the Child be plump) when his Disease has got
into the Category of such as are Acute.

Moreover, he is often troubled with a flight, dry Cough, though sometimes it
is strangling and suffocative: with a dry Cough, because of the sharpness and
Acrimony of the Humors that continually prickle the most sensible Branches of
the Windpipe; but the choking does proceed from the abundance of Serous and
Watery Humors, that so fill up and burden the small Vesicles of the lungs,
that it cannot be cast off and discharged. But also, they being endued with a
great debility and weakness of Nerves, and a superlative softness and delicacy
of Constitution, they are not able to subsist with that violent trouble of
Coughing, but do succumb under that unnatural and excessive motion of their
Breast, and their face is blackish as that of strangled people.

But, if this coagulated or posseted Food, does fall from their stomach into
the Intestines (as frequently it does) then Gripes or Colick-pains, greenish
Excrements, and very often, most dangerous Flixes do ensue. And while this
Tragedy is in acting in the lower Ventricle, these great Pains must be attended
with more Dramatists, and therefore, do introduce Fevers, which, it not kindly
entertained and dexterously managed do cut short the days of a great many
Infants; or if the pains being not so violent, but, perhaps, surrendering to
whatsoever an unskilful Cure, yet does it terminate into a Bigg belly, the most
convenient thing in Nature for producing the Rickets or King's Evil. A certain
sort of tremulous Mucilage or Gelly (the immediate Origin of Worms) which is
sometimes whitish, though sometimes of a gray and yellow Color mixed with
Green, is naturally, but oftener by Medicaments dexterously and skilfully
administered, purged off with the Excrements. They often rub their Nose, not
only when they are troubled with Worms (as Women commonly believe) but in every
Fever which has its rise from a corruption of Humors; for any sharp Humors
carried upward, do affect the thin and sensible Membranes of the Nostrils,
either of young or old, in Acute or Chronick Diseases. The aforementioned
Gripes do continually produce watching, disquiet and moaning, which the Nurse
does as often endeavor to allay, by giving it her Breast, that there may be
some short delay or Truce struck up, for her troublesome business and employ.
But if the Nurse be oppressed with Poverty at home, and therefore be sometimes
forced to leave her Infant discharging his Complaints in the senseless Air; or
being merely mercenary (as most ordinarily she is) and not compassionating her
weeping Infant, it is frequently troubled with some one kind of rupture for
many years. Moreover, its Milk or Food (while these Pains do continue) never
duly digesting but turning Acid, is posseted, so by little and little it
becomes Feverish; his drougth is intended, his Joints turn flaccid, and so the
tender Infant grows daily weak and infirm. Upon the close of all this
sickness, Convulsive motions and Spasms do seize upon the Members of the Feeble
Infant; and when there is no more force and strength in their Nerves for
actuating the Muscles of the Heart, and protruding the Blood (by the Laws of
Circulation) into the Arteries, does cast up the White of its Eyes to the
Heavens, the proper Seat of unviolated Innocence, and ends untimely its short
life, before it has understood the miseries of living.

If they become sick about the time of their breeding Teeth; they are affected
with a great many of the foregoing Symptoms, and Thrushes; Ulcers of the Mouth,
of a fiery hotness (a sort of white Scurf) which do often begin immediately
after their Birth, and before the growing of their Teeth, though now and then
later, yet about this time do most prevail, and do sometimes so blister their
Mouth, that being overspread, and every where Ulcerated, it cannot let in the
beloved Breasts themselves, nor a Spoon without the greatest trouble and
aversation.

Further, the Mouths of Infants are very often so hurt and wounded with
Thrushes, that they cannot weep nor let Tears fall from their Eyes for some
days; although they be tormented with exceeding tenderness and intense heat of
Mouth, with a great many other sicknesses that are the ordinary Attendants of
Fevers. And therefore I account that change from their being dumb unto their
echoing the House with Cries a very good sign.

Boys of greater Age tainted with Feverish Symptoms; do for the most part
complain of their head; which pain is no Disease of it self, but sympathetick
and derived from the Stomach and lower parts of the Body.

That all these and the like Symptoms do immediately proceed from the posseting
and thickness of their Food, especially being greater than can be at all
agreeable with the Constitution and Nature of Infants, whose Canals and
Passages should necessarily be most fluid; and that this posseting is oftener
produced from some degrees of Acidity than any other cause, is most evident
from our Senses themselves and the way of Cure (which is excellently
effectuated by such things as obtund Acidity, and deoppilate or dissolve
Coagulations.)

The frequent Vomiting of that thick Gelly, and that viscid and coagulated
Phlegm somewhat green, when the sickness has advanced; and their breath which
has a very sour smell, are things most evident to our senses.

That the green Color of their Excrements is merely from Acidity mixed with
Bile, will be most evident to any who take pleasure in changing of colors into
green with Vinegar and Acid Spirits. Moreover, the smell of their green
Excrements being always designed Acid by the very Nurses, does clearly
demonstrate the same.

The excessive Gripes and pains in their Belly and Paleness of Face do confirm
the abundance of Acidity; for so soon as they are troubled with these Pains,
they turn pale, though never so high colored before they were affected with
this Distemper; except that sometimes their Cheeks are possessed with a
pleasant blush, which does easily evanish into the wonted paleness.

En passant, I shall observe that I do by no means hunt or sue for the honor
(if there be any such) of being the Author of a new Hypothesis; neither think I
my self obliged, if I have either excogitated or established one, to collect
all sorts of arguments (as is customary) though against my inclination, for
gaining credit to the foresaid Hypothesis. Being, the chief thing in Medicine,
and which can only be serviceable to the health of mankind, is such a knowledge
of Diseases as is both founded upon, and confirmed by Experience and Practice.
For the other ways of explaining Phenomena's however learned and subtle they
may be thought, do rather make a show of an acute Sophister, or Philosopher,
improperly so called, or very often of a most ready wit; but shall never
proclaim him a truly skilled Physician, and a Man excelling in his own Trade.
For all these gay speculations, which are so admir^d (as Poetical Flashes) by
the frisking Spirits of young Men, are seldom or never to be found but in the
Brain and Fancy of their Inventor; and are never so often contrived as by
those, who are the most unsuccessful Practitioners. But the solid and genuine
Ideas of Diseases are never to be acquired, or their truth justly to be judged
or approved of, but by practice it self.

I know how obnoxious, and perhaps not undeservedly, this my Notion of an Acid,
which I suppose to prevail in the most remarkable Diseases of Children is to
the Censure of diligent considerers Yet neither shall I too stiffly, debate
whether all the signs of Acidity, which subtle Men free of business and given
to quibling an strife can remember, do quadrate and exactly agree with that
Notion of an Acid, which I maintain does so much abound in the Stomachs of
Infants. My expectation shall be a abundantly satisfied (albeit take no great
pains in polishing and displaying that Notion) if I shall be so happy as at
length to demonstrate a more effectual and a more certain Method of Curing than
has been hitherto in use, and which I freely leave to the determination of
such, as shall try the truth of my assertions.

Nevertheless, I shall not pass over what Hippocrates, without all
peradventure, chief of all Physicians, does declare at large, in his book
concerning the old Medicine, about the Causes of Diseases: that, viz. he may
more thoroughly demonstrate that all Diseases have not their rise from the
first, but second Qualities. His words then are these: (...), etc. They (for
the most famous of the Old Physicians) did not think that man was either
injured with what is dry, or moist, hot or cold, and that he had no want of any
of those. But they esteemed that most apt to injure which was most potent in
its kind, and was above the Constitution of Man, so that Nature could not
overcome it, and this they endeavored to extirpate and remove. But the thing
that is sweetest is the most potent amongst things that are sweet, the
bitterest amongst bitters, the sourest amongst things that are sour, and that
of every thing, which is in the highest degree. For they did clearly see that
these things were in Man, and that it was these that did most annoy him. For
there is in man both Bitter, and Salt, and Sweet, and Acid, and Austere, and
Insipid, and a great many more which have different Faculties according to
their strength and abundance: And that they are neither perceived, nor do they
offend any Man, when they are duly mixed and adjusted amongst themselves: But
so soon as any of them are separated or do appear apart, then are they
conspicuous and do trouble and harm Man. For all these meats, which* being
eaten, do not agree with us, and do destroy our health, are either Bitter and
not well mixed, on Salt or Acid, or some other way intemperate and excessive;
and therefore do create trouble and disorder in the Body. And thereafter (...).
For it is not as it is Hot, that it has so great power, but as it is Austere
and Insipid or othereways does more or less participate of the foregoing
Qualities. Again, (...): men are not Feverish merely because of Heat, neither
is it alone the cause of the Disease; for Bitter and Hot, and Hot and Acid, and
Salt and Hot, and a great many more are one and the same; and again, Cold
joined with other Powers, etc.

From these words, and a great many to the same sense fully explained in the
aforementioned Book, it is most evident, that our heavenly Old Man, that Star
of the first magnitude, has ratified, that these second Qualities, sc.
Acidity, Bitterness, Saltness, and the like, are to be considered, as the chief
Causes of Diseases. And therefore I do not doubt to add, that it most naturally
follows, that the Cure should mainly be carried on, not so much by destroying
Heat with Cold, as by obtunding and blunting the Acidity, altering the Bitter,
allaying the Salt, by inciding tough Humors, and rendering more compact such as
are thin, by mitigating those that are harsh, and lastly, by opening the
obstructed passages of the Body, and freeing them of their Stuffing.

But perhaps, it may be necessary, that I do premise something in the place of
a Prognostic (as is usual) before we do attempt their Cure.

And truly, the Prognostic, in my Opinion, does rather depend upon the method
of Cure it self, as that is right, or wrong; as also upon the Behavior of the
Nurse, whether sc. she overmuch studieth her own fancy, and be the only wise
(which, alas! is a most sad consideration) or whether, she be obedient, and
does faithfully perform and execute what is commanded her, than from the
Diseases of Infants and Children. For their Fevers are very slight, neither
does their feverish Heat so much burn, as it is more properly a certain degree
and advancement of Heat; except when too too curious Art which trusts to, and
relyeth over much upon these fiery and spirituous Cordials, is most unluckily
brought in to their Assistance.

Corpulent and fat Infants troubled with Defluxions, and having an open Mould,
are most subject to the Rickets, Chin-Cough, King's Evil, and almost incurable
Thrushes.

Lean and Scraggy Children are, of all, the most tender and very subject to the
worst Fevers, h. e. to such as are hottest and most in censed, and most
inimical to the Nervous Kind.

Children which are born by Hysteric, tender and valetudinary Mothers, which
delight much in, and do continually devour unripe Fruits, and Sallads while
they are with Child; or at that time do long after such things as are Sour and
Austere; or by those who are Belly-Gods, and mere Slaves to their Stomach; and
lastly, have their Appetite depraved from whatever Causes: These, I say, do
with great difficulty amend of any great Disease.

Children that keep open in their Belly, have their Health better than such as
are constipate.

The Spring and Summer are the best times for curing of Fevers; but the Harvest
and Winter are not so.

From the middle of July to the middle of September, these epidemick Gripes of
Infants are so common, (being the annual Heat of the Season, does entirely
exhaust their strength) that more Infants, affected with these, do die in one
month, than in other three that are more gentle.

Convulsions, or at least starting of their Nerves, coming upon Children
weakened by some one Disease, or somewhat burned up with not Medicaments, do
bring, all their miseries and troubles, wherewith they are tormented, unto an
end.

But as to what may appertain to the Cure of Infants Diseases, none of these
Authors (for as much as I know) who have ordinarily published Volumes about
those, and a great many more things that belong to the curing of Diseases, do
seem to have accurately enough inquired into it. Truly, they have not neglected
to describe very diligently a great many Diseases, to rehearse learnedly their
Causes and to deliver as well their Diagnostick as Prognostic Signs. They have
all trod the same path, and the more Modern (for the most part) have most
implicitly and without further examination embraced the Assertions of their
Predecessors.

Sylvius de le Boe has wrote the best Treatise of any that ever I did read on
the Diseases of Infants, for he did valiantly maintain an Acid to be their true
and general Cause, yet he, partly because of his great kindness for some very
Volatile Chemical Preparations, and therefore over warm and spirituous, and
partly because of his almost constant use of Opiates, which he ordered for the
youngest Infants (so that he was uncharacterized and distinguished by the name of
the Opiate Doctor) did shake, if not totally destroy by his Practice, what he
had in a great deal, must learnedly established in his Theory.

If we therefore, do desire to lay any sure Foundation for the curing of
Infants Diseases; we should chiefly eye their natural tenderness and weakness.
And we should make such a choice of Medicaments as may be most convenient for
these tender ones. For the more gentle and safe these Remedies are which we
administer, the event shall the more certainly answer our expectation. And
truly, the use of great and generous Medicaments (commonly so called) has
never any place in the curing the Diseases of Infants. What avails the
continual burning of Fires, for the extracting the Powers and strength of
Minerals, when their Bodies are so easily altered? Prithee, what natural
Harmony can there be betwixt the almost impenetrable hardness of Metals and the
waxy Softness of the Constitution of Infants? Or how can their weak Ap^^tite,
that is scarce able to digest their Milk and Panado that slender ^ood, endure
the burning Heat and Caustic Faculty of these most deleterious and inflaming
Medicaments? Truly, even as their food is most simple, so, in all reason, ought
their Medicaments to be: not much recedeing from their Natural State, and very
free of too too laborious Art.

Being, then, that Acidity is the chief cause of all these Diseases wherewith
this tender age is affected, the whole Artifice of the Cure is hinged upon the
defeating of the Acid. Truly, there might a good deal of mi^^ be raised before
the Eyes of Novices* that the truth might not be disclosed to the sedulous
Inquirers. But to be ingenuous, and if it be lawful to speak truth, and that we
may not lose our Cost and Pains, whatever things o^ most immediately eliminate
the Acid these are they that promote the Cure and whatever serve not that
design, do more or less torment and trouble the tender Bodies of these Infants.

But the right management and traitment of the Acid, is stayed (...) on these
two Views and Intentions First se^^^ That the Acid may be made fit, and
prepared to be cast out of the Body. 2. That the Acid thus prepared, be
eliminated with convenient and proper Medicaments. The one, without the other
can never make a perfect Cure, but when joined, are not only able to defeat
Acute Diseases, but do much allay the dispositions to Diseases of greater
continuance.

The purging of Young Children in the height and vigor of Acute Diseases at
first view does seem most difficult and full of hazard. But the certain
advantage from the following method is Apology sufficient, after Trial.

It Is true, the Purging of people of full age in continued Fevers did make a
show both of danger and boldness to Novices and the unexperienced.
Notwithstanding, its event and happy success is much approved and made out by
the late trials of the most skilled Physicians. But the incomparable and
unparallel^^ Vanquisher of Fevers of all kinds, the most famous Practitioner
Mr. Sydenham was the first that did ever communicate the benefits and
advantages of Purging even in Fevers themselves; who designedly did expose in
his Monitory Schedule, that was Printed three years ago, his Method for staving
off and driving away that Epidemick Fever, which so much rages at this time.
And therefore, he has merited so much by this, as I think, no Age (so long as
the art of Medicine shall flourish) can pass by his Name in silence: Who
likewise did not doubt to detect with a sublime and Masculine Spirit the
hurtful and deadly mischief of Diaphoreticks over-thwartly and perversely used
not only in Foreign Countries, but amongst our selves. He has inculcated
before, in his Works Printed long ago, the great use of Purgatives for the
Bastard Inflammation of the Lungs (a Disease very rise and frequent amongst us)
and a great many more; and, in the Postscript, added to the end of all his
Works he did place the cure of that which he called the Winter Fever entirely
in Purging. Truly the ardent Affection of that Man, now almost seventy, and
being most sickly and valetudinary, for the public good, could not be hindered
or interrupted by approaching Death; why at length he should not Communicate
his most complete and exact Observations upon this matter, in that golden
Schedule.

But that Purging (though it be not enrolled amongst the secrets of Curing,
neither is accounted among the Wonders of Chymy) is amongst the best helps that
the fruitful inventions of Curious Men have at any time discovered; I am
induced to believe chiefly upon this account: Because, none can be in perfect
health, at least, not abide therein for any time, who hate not Evacuations by
their belly once a day: Which natural evacuation is no less necessary for the
maintaining and the preservation of Health, than our daily food for the
nourishing of our Body. For (...) way of living does but as much require, that
the best and most succulent part of our food, be carried by the Lacteal Veins
for nourishment to our Body, as that the worst and grosser part (which too long
retained, does cast forth hurtful, yea venomous, scents) be by Nature or Art
cast out by the common Privy of the Body. Truly, Purging has most justly
acquired to it self that Reputation and Renown, that in common discount it
alone has the very ample and honorable name of Physic.

It has been my constant custom, these last seven Years to enjoin Purging in
the Fevers of Children and the youngest Infants, according to the prescript of
that commended Method, although; I did set it at naught for these People of full
Age: And neither can I express how much it did answer my expectation and design.

Wherefore, when at first I did seriously read the before mentioned ^chedule, I
had as great joy and gladness of Spirit, as if I had received some signal
favor from God. Therefore, I was easily persuaded most succesfully to try that
method of Purging of People of full Age, who had found before the most desired
event of it in the Fevers of young ones.

But the first Indication in the Cure of the Fevers of Infants, is to prepare
the Acid aright. And it shall become most evident, that Acids must of necessity
be prepared, before they can be purged off with advantage, if we will but a
little consider the nature of an Acid: If viz. we shall reflect upon its great
power of Coagulating and Posseting; if, as the general cause of Obstructions,
which do arise from it; if the natural tendency of all Liquors, if you do
except the most Spirituous, into an Acid; if the great trouble that Physicians
meet with in the Curing of these people, whose Bodies do abound with Acidity;
and, above all, if we shall consider those Gripes which attend the purging of
these Bodies, that abound with Acidity, without preparation.

I know that this saying, Preparation of humors, may be read amongst ^ great
many Authors. And their design was, that the ensuing Purgative might have the
better event. They did intend to attenuate gross humors, mitigate hot ones, to
open the Obstructed Passages, or to force these by Diaphoreticks through the
Pores of the Skin. But they mustered up against these, I know not what great
train of Syrups, Simple distilled Waters and a great many such trifles, which
were of no use for the designed preparing or altering of the Body. And the time
which should have been spent, in subjugating the acute Disease, was squandered
away in idleness, and ignorance, if not worse.

But, I think, this whatever preparation had its rise, from that common, but
not thoroughly understood Aphorism of Hippocrates. 1. N. 12. Things Concocted,
not Crude, are to be medicated. And I do believe* that the continual wresting
of this great Canon into Senses very strange and foreign to the purpose, is
the Cause, why so many famous Physicians in the bypast Ages have so little
dreamed of the benefit and advantage of purging in continued Fevers. For indeed
the first beginnings of Fevers (and especially after the sick persons are
confined to a warm Bed) do very often give most evident signs, of Crudity; the
assistant Physicians, however happy Practitioners they be upon other occasions,
for the most part do instantly betake themselves to Diaphoreticks as their only
refuge, and they are as much affrightned at the very naming and mentioning of
Purging, as the Foolish Nurses.

Neither am I ignorant, that some Authors have had long Disputes about Purging
in Fevers, as almost in all other Diseases; but if I may speak my mind in few
words, they have rather designed, with many words, to fill up volumes, to amuse
the Minds of their Readers, and to show their great Learning, than ei the to
illustrate or determine the Truth. Sydenham the great Ornament and Blazing Star
of this Age, having a more than ordinary Masculine Spirit, and a most sublime
Understanding, has made good, h. e. has more fully completed by his Practice
and manifold Reasonings that Affair, in which the other Authors have truly
cheated and cozened the World.

The preparation of Humors by Alexipharmacks and Sudorificks in Fevers, did
more further their Crudity, than Concoction. Truly, if at any rate they must be
said to prepare, yet no other thing, but an untimely Death, while they do most
certainly procure Frenzies, Convulsions, and a great many most deplorable
Symptoms, by forcing up these Crudities from the lowest parts of the Body into
the Head.

If in the beginning of Fevers (whether they be Essential or Symptomatick) we
shall delay, and put off till to morrow, these necessary Evacuations in the
expectation of the lingering Concoction, how soon does that too irrrevocable and
golden opportunity pass away? The only time, wherein the beginning of the
ensuing Cure was to be made, wherein there was sufficient strength, and in
which alone there can be advantage by Evacuations, yet is spent in the
Administration of Cordials and the vain and uncertain trial of the
Fever-vanquishing Medicaments of the Chemists; and the Patient just now strong,
ends his days furious and mad. Moreover, I assert, that notwithstanding the
blind prejudice of men, Evacuations duly made, do more reduce crude Urine to
their desired Concoction, and the Patient unto his Health, than any thing yet
known to man.

The preparation then (of which I speak, is not to be essayed with sweating
Medicaments, properly so called, h. e. such as warm the Body, which upon no
account are agreeable with tender Infants, or Children, but on the contrary,
are most hurtful. Since, the most temperate things shall most securely absorbe
the prevailing Acidity, by little and little they mitigate Ebullitions, and
become the most safe and powerful Anodynes. These are Crabs Eyes and Claws,
Oyster shells, of Wilks, Cuttle-bone, Egg-shells, Chalk, Coral, Coraline,
Pearls, the Mother of Pearls, both the Bezoars, burned Hartshorn, burned
Ivory, the Bone of a Hart's-heart, the Shavings of Hart-horn, of the
Unicorn's-horn, Bole Armenick, sealed Earth, Boodstone, etc. Among the
Compounds, the Powder of Crabs Claws compounded, the Goack-stone, and the
Powders for making the Confection of Hyacinth, take place.

Before all, I must observe, lest the most necessary liberality of Physicians
toward the poor should be interrupted, that these precious Medicaments brought
from afar out of the Indies (for as much as I could observe) have no more
pleasant and benign effect, than those of a lesser value, and which the wise
Providence of God has abundantly supplied for the manifold uses of mankind.

And therefore I cannot recommend the Magisteries of any precious Stone,
however they be praised by a great many. Surely, they have changed their,
whatever, native Power, into such as is very Foreign. And which, before were
most convenient for absorbing the Acid, but being now neither sweet nor sour,
are only made useless by too curious Art.

Of design, have I not mentioned the boasting Accounts of Volatile Salts,
whether they be Spirituous or Oleous, not of the Bezoard Mineral, lunar or
solar; nor of the Spirit of Sal-armoniack or Hart's-horn; yet the use of these
Spirits is not to be entirely laid aside, even for these young ones: Because,
they do excellently absorb Acidity, but are most dexterously to be administered,
because of the great Heat that attends them. Upon this score, your lixivial
Salts, the hot Cordial Waters, as the Compound-Paeony-Water, the Plague-Water,
Aqua Coelestis, Mirabilis, the strong Cinnamon Water, and the like, do fall
much short of their wonted Fame, unless they be mixed with others, that are
more temperate, in so very small a Quantity, that their burning Heat does
become altogether unperceptible to the Taste. For these Medicaments that
overheat the Body; whatever be their Fame or Inestimable Value, though they
should most impudently promise immortality it self; yet will they easily
consume the Bodies of young ones, and by degrees disperse their natural Heat,
or turn it to that which is Feverish, and lastly become as useless for that
tender Age, as Milk and Panadoe, for quieting the craving Stomach of a
Ploughman. For which Reasons, Galen did most straightly bar Children from the use
of his Treacle, however justly prepared, which though he so highly esteemed, that
he thought it an All-heal and Universal Remedy.

That the foregoing temperate Powders do absorbe Acidity, is a thing so well
known, that it does need no proof. And that they are the most safe, most
certain and never-failing Anodynes in the Gripes of Children, shall be evinced
by giving them in a more liberal than the ordinary Dose, h. e. in a sufficient
quantity for attaining the designed end. Moreover, I do boldly assert, that the
mentioned Powders dexterously administered, do, with the same certainty that we
know that the effects of Rhubarb are purgative, allay and assuage all the Pain,
and Disquiet of Infants from whatever Cause, except there be no hope lest from
whatever Remedies, because of some great Defect of the chief parts.

If in any violent Inflammation, we should let six Ounces of Blood, and if
twenty, at least, were requisite, why should we accuse Blood-letting as useless
in that Disease, when the too spare Administration of that Remedy is only to be
blamed. Likewise, if one or two Ounces of the foregoing Powders, were requisite
for the allaying of these paint, wherewith Infants are affected, what great
success could we expect from the imperfect use of one or two Drams, when at the
same time, in Ounce is necessary? An exact knowledge of Medicaments is the
slenderest, if not the meanest accomplishment of a good and skilful Physician.

The right use of Medicaments for satisfying the designs of curing, the
adjusting both the kind and quantity of Medicaments to the particular
Constitution of the Patient, from a quaint Reflection upon the nature of the
present Disease; the exquisite knowledge of the Constitution, especially of
people of full Age, h. e. whether it be Sanguine or Melancholic; and whether
the Fever does mostly affect the Blood, or whether Spirits be wanting and
their strength weakened by that bustle and trouble; and lastly, the right
knowledge of appointing Diet, are all more requisite to make a good Physician,
than the most numerous Provision of Medicinal Receipts, whence ever Collected.
And if that be not true, the Apothecary being most Learned in Receipts will
easily excel the most Learned Physician, and his prattling Servant be equal to
his Master; and also a Nurse, or at least, the babbling and Cup. Gossip Women
being enriched with Books of Receipts preserved from Generations, shall carry
the Prize and Glory from the most Learned Physician and the Apothecary,
howsoever conversant in the Prescriptions of Physicians.

But that we may to our purpose, I use to help an Infant of a Year old, that is
feverish or tormented with Gripes (as it is for the most part) with these
sorts of Medicaments.

of the compound Powder of Crabs-Claws, of Pearls prepared, of each i. mix all,
and make a Powder to be divided into six equal parts.

Or of the Oriental Bezoard, of Pearls prepared, of Crab's-eyes prepared, an.
ss. of the Species for the Confection of Hyacinth i. make a Powder to be
divided after the fame manner.

Or. of the simple Powder of Crabs-Claws, i. of Crabs Eyes prepared ij. of
Cocheneal viij. gr. mix all, and make a fine Powder to be divided into six
Doses. Let him take one instantly, let it be reiterated (if necessity does
require it) two hours after, and henceforth every 4th. hour, for the first two
days, unless that Sleep intervene. Let the Powders be given in a spoonful of
the following Julep, drinking another After all.

of the Alexiterious Milk water iv. of Black Cherry Water, ii. of the Compound
Paeony-Water, of Plague-Water ana ii. of Pearled Sugar ss. mix all, and make a
Julep.

Or of Penny Royal Water, of the alexiterious Milk-water, ana iij. of the Syrup
of Clove Gilly flowers vi. M.

Of of Sweet Almods, freed from their Husks, in number X. Contuse them in a
Marble Mortar, pouring upon them by degrees, of Barley water, of the
Alexiterious milk water, ana lib.ss. strain it, and to the colature, add of
weak Cinnamon Water vi. of white Sugar ss. M and make an emulsion.

Sometimes I use Juleps full of Pearls (omitting every thing else) ordering the
Glass to be well shaken before they are poured out.

of black Cherry Water iv. of the whole Citron ij. Mirabills, of Pearls
prepared ana ii. of white Sugar ss. M. and make a Julep; of which let him have
three spoonfuls as before.

But if the Infant be troubled with a Cough, the mentioned Powders are to be
taken more sparingly; in lieu of which, he may take half a spoonful of a thin
Lohoch or Electuary.

of Corallin pulveris'd of the simple Powder of Crabs Claws ana iss. of the
Syrup of Maidenhair, of the Syrup of Althaea ana i. of the Syrup of the Balsam
of Tolu ss. of the water of wild Poppy Flowers ss. for diluting all; M. Bole
Armenick is most appositely mixed amongst these, because, it does most
powerfully stop the Defluctions that fall down upon the Lungs. The Juice of
Pennyroyal, in which when warmed, there is Sugar Candy dissolved, is amongst
the best of Remedies. The Oil of sweet Almonds, is also very proper, if it does
agree with the taste of the Infant. Likewise vive Sulphur, or the Flowers of
Brimstone (having a wonderful virtue in drying, penetrating, and discussing
Humors stuffed up in any part of the Body) mixed with such things as absorbe
Acidity, are very useful for gross and phlegmatic Constitutions. Neither has
Sulphur any hurtful or deleterious Faculty (as Crato and some other Learned Men
did unjustly suspect) but is of a most preservative and expulsory Virtue, which
is most opposite to Corruption of Humors.

The frequency of the Administration of these Powders cannot be determined, but
are to be reiterated accordingly as the Symptoms are more gentle or violent.
This only I shall resume, that all the Pains, Disquiet, and Watchings of
Infants, are as certainly assuaged with testaceous Medicaments, as the Pains
and Watchings of older people are eased and allayed by Narcoticks.

But here, any who has but the least smack of Physic may object, that the
giving of these Powders is no new thing. To whom I only do reply, that indeed,
the foolish, spare and niggardly use of these Medicaments, has been known too
long, and to too too many; but that never any did inculcate either so
reiterated, or so great Doses of them, nor yet the ensuing necessity of
purging. There Is a known Story (and any man may draw the parallel with ours) of
a certain merry Man, who when he had boastingly defied the Bystanders, to fix
an Egg upon either of its ends, neither any of them, after a great deal of
Trial, could see through, or unriddle the Mystery, he himself, breaking a
little both ends of the Egg, in a trice removed all their Astonishment, and at
the same time made them break forth into laughter. For when it was known, it
did become most easy to the whole Company.

I order them to be purged upon the third day, after I am called, unless the
Smallpox, Measles or Scarlet Fever do appear, and Infants of one Year after
this manner.

of the Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb ii. of the best Rhubarb in Powder, gr.
xv. or i. of the Alexiterious Milk-water, i. or of small Cinnamon Water, gut.
xxx. to dilute all. M.

Or of the Syrup of Purging Thorn iss. or ii. of the Powder Diasenna gr. viii.
M.

of the Countess of Warwicks Powder, as it is described in the last Edition of
the London Dispensatory, in the rest under the name of the Cornachine Powder,
gr. vi. Let him have it in a spoonful of black Cherry Water, sweetened with a
litlet Sugar.

of sweet Almonds, No. iij. Contuse them in a Marble Mortar, pouring upon them
by degrees i. of Barley, or of any other simple Water. Dissolve in the Colature
iii. or ss. of the best Manna. M. and make a purging Emulsion.

of len^tive Electuary ii. or iij. dissolve it in i. of the alexitetions Milk
Water.

For irregular Symptoms arising from a great corruption of Humors, I do very
much use gr. vi. of the black Mineral afterward described, or gr. iv. of
sweetened with as much of the Flowers of Brimstone mixed together in a Glass
Mortar, and given at Night in some pleasant Syrup, purging the next day.

If the sick Infant be three or four years old, or has passed the hazard of
breeding Teeth, and especially if there be any considerable suspicion of Worms
or Putrefaction of Humors for some time contracted, there is nothing better
than a Bole of that Powder last mentioned, and it may be made with Marmalade of
Quinces, or confected Orange Peel, pulpod through a Hair-Scarce.

These kind of Boles do very much avail for those, who are ordinarily
constipate in their Belly, and are not easily purged; in as much as they do
prepare, so that the Purgative which is ordered the next day, has a better and
easier Operation.

I do sometimes also order the following Plaster, or the like, to be applied
upon the Navel.

of the best Aloes from Socotr^ i. of the leaves of Savine, of the tops of the
lesser Centaury, of the Flowers of Chamomile made into a Powder ana i. of
Venice Turpentine as much as is sufficient to make all into a Plaster. Spread
a little of the Plaster de Cymino upon its Margin, that it may stick faster
to that place.

Of all Purgatives there are none more innocent, and that are more agreeing
with Infants, that the well known and very much used Rhubarb, which pleasantly
and safely does remove the Subject matter of the Fevers of these tender ones,
which does easily purge and strengthen their Stomach and whole Body loaden'd
and oppressed with vicious Humors, and which, upon that account, does best
agree with Infants, Boys, teeming Women, old People and such as are weak
through any Disease. Truly, Rhubarb does more justly merit the Title of a Hiera
or sacred Medicament, than Aloes, so exceedingly commended by the Ancients and
more Modern, which has got the first place, and kept for the Basis of all the
Shop Pills; which indeed does sometimes deserve very great Praise, upon the
account of its remarkable bitterness, yet it does not unjustly undergo some
Tache and Dishonor, because of its Acrimony, Sharpness, and its excessive
Heat, which it does communicate to the Body.

A Powder like the former is, after the operation of some gentle Purgative, to
be given at night; and thereafter are to be reiterated three or four times, at
a convenient season, for two days more; and upon the third the Purgative is to
be given, the quantity of which may, now, be known by the operation of the
former.

These things being done aright, the most grievous Symptoms do ordinarily
disappear; or at least, are so much allayed, that the Patient, who was just now
in great danger, is exeemed from the least suspicion, by better Health.

The same method (under whatever Form) of preparing and purging off the
Humors, may be taken with Children of more years, only Doses and Quantities of
Medicaments are to be discreetly changed.

You must observe, that the first Purge we give to Children in Fevers, be not
only gentle, but also of a lesser Dose than usual; and that sometimes, in case
of a bound Belly, a very mild Clyster made of iv. of Cows Milk sweetened with
Sugar, and to which is added a little Salt, is to be injected on the night that
immediately precedeth the first Purgative.

Moreover, if the Purgative shall prove too weak, it may be sharpened with i. or
two of the Crystal ^o Tartar, dissolved in some spoonfuls of weak Oat-broth, or
the like.

But you must especially take care, that you only use pure and well-prepar'd
Crystal of Tartar, and not that which is adulterated, and is commonly sold, and
which is little better than crude Tartar it self.

If any great Sickness does betake an Infant that is fat, plump, and of a very
moist Constitution, which easily does degenerate into an Acid (and especially
in Winter) so that the sour Corruption cannot entirely be defeated by twice
Purging after the foregoing manner; then, you must persist in the same method,
until the Sickness does quite evanish: But that the space of one or two days
must be allowed for the taking of these Powders, that alter Acidity.

Neither could I ever observe any inconveniency or bad consequence attend so
frequent Purging; but the strength that was formerly lost, did seem to be
renewed.

Only, you must beware, that in the purging of Infants, upon no occasion
whatever, you give any Purgative that may master its strength.

Wherefore, I cannot pass by what Hippocrates, the greatest master of Physic,
does learnedly declare, in his Book about Purging Medicines; but not so well
understood. Whoever, then, are seized with strong Fevers, are not to be purged
until the Fever does remit. If otherwise, yet not within fourteen days. For
their Flesh and Stomachs, being they are hot, do receive the Medicament, and
are not purged; the Fever increases, their Color is ruined, and they have a
sort of King's Evil. For when the Bile is chafed and put in motion, the sick
Person will neither sup nor drink, but loathes every thing, and very often
dies. But, if he survive that time, and his Fever does remit together with the
operation of the Purgative, he recovereth. Wherefore, we ought not to give
purging Medicines in violent Fevers. But if any do want them, you may give an
infusion by Clyster, as often as you list. For in that, there is less hazard.

We may observe from these word of our Master: 1. That he does speak concerning
the Fevers of those of full Age, which are usually great and most ardent, but
are not to be ununderstood of those of Infants and Children, which are
naturally gentle, and not so easily inflamed. 2. That the purging Medicines in
his time were most violent, strong and poisonous, an Elaterium, Colocynth,
Hellebor, and the like, but the great part of our Lenitives that are most
gentle, yea most temperate, if some of them be not actualy cold, were as
unknown to the wise men of that Age, as the Antipodes, the new world, or lastly
the art of printing. 3. That Hippocrates does speak of Fevers in their natural
state and condition, and as they are left to themselves, even as his
Descriptions of epidemick Diseases truly and accurately contain it; neither
must he be understood, after what manner the art of the following, especially
of the present Ages (however things present be ill spoken of by the Envious)
being promoted and made more perfect (which our Posterity, if I be not in a
huge mistake, will most thankfully bring into remembrance) at length has
taught, how to prepare aright, that they may be purged off, and very much allay
or totally to overcome their Fury, by liberally blooding such, as are of full
Age, upon the day that precedeth the Purging. 4. You must consider that
Hippocrates does teach in this place, that if he who is affected with a Fever
has taken a purgative, and, perhaps, does escape the hazard of that day; shall
instantly, h.e. at that same very time be restored to his Health. Which I have
often observed to be true, and that Feverish Boys have shaken off all the
Symptoms of their Fevers, after the first Purgative has ended its operation,
but especially in the spring time or Summer.

These things then being premised. I say that Hippocrates did judge aright of
the deadly effects of Purging Medicaments, as those of his Age, being very
strong, were unskilfully given in hot Fevers, not having let blood before hand:
But, we take a soone^ and more secure method for the recovering them to health,
if blood be liberally let of those of full Age, and especially if they be of a
Sanguine or robust constitution, upon the day that preceedeth the purging; or
if the bodies of young ones be prepared with testaceous Medicaments and such as
do blunt the Acid, that the chief cause of the Fever may the better be utterly
purged off, than can be, by whatever Cordials or Diaphoreticks.

But the true and chief reason, why purging in Acute Diseases has been so ill
thought of, by very learned Physicians, seement to me (quietly and under thumb)
to be this: because viz. they did drive, as people speak, the plough before the
Oxen, h.e. they did purge before blooding, or at least having no thought of it,
where it was most requisite, did rashly give some one of the strongest
Purgatives.

Albeit, that any notable Translation of the subject matter of the Fever unto
the Lungs, and Chin-coughs, ^o advise Blood-letting for the youngest Infants,
yet it is most evident; that it is not a Remedy naturally convenient for them,
neither is it more contradictory and unfitting for this most tender, then
decrepit Old Age. And therefore its help is not to be invoked for all the
Diseases of Infants, except in the Chin-coughs, or any other Coughs that do
attend and are concomitants of Fevers that do suddenly begin; and unless for
grievous contusions, which do sometime occur. For it is not supposible that
Infants being nourished with thin and slender Food, should be affected with a
true Plethory, however florid they be They do all abound with Humidity, which
is easily changed into a Praeternatural Acid, the cause of all their Diseases.
Neither can I be made believe that blood-letting can alter and correct an humid
Constitution, especially when it has already degenerated into Acidity.

There are some who, through a^ obstinate itch of contradicting, o^ blame and
accuse the use of Blood-letting even for people of full Age. And these are the
Through-followers and Disciples of peaceable Helmont, that most trusty Friend
of the Old Medicine; these happy and fortunate Heirs to so great Secrets, of
which neither Physic or the Commonwealth have been worthy. It Is they, viz.
who have succeeded to a not common sort of Chemistry, unknown to all skilled
Physicians, but which produces wonderful Effects to these Philosophers by the
fire.

All testaceous Medicaments do wonderfully dry, and, therefore, are very proper
for the curing of these Diseases which proceed from too much Humidity, and for
these Constitutions which so much abound with it. But the Constitution of boys
is most humid, because it is of all the most delicate and soft. But they are
also somewhat adstringent, which is lost by burning, yet thereby do they assume
a good deal of Acrimony and Hotness, which are most evident in Quicklime, and
a great many more Chemical Medicaments. But they do also most power, fully
blunt and defeat Acidity, which as naturally attends the corruption of
Aqueous Humidity, as Heat does Fire. Moreover, testaceous Medicaments do not at
all warm their tender bodies; which consideration does easily induce me top
prefer them to all other in the cure of Infants Diseases.

But there are other things for which I recommend the use of Testaceous
Medicaments for Children. Their Stomach is endued with a devouring and
insatiable sort of Ferment, which delicate and liquid Food cannot still and
quiet for any time: Being it must be blunted with Butter which swimmeth long
upon the upper Orifice of the Stomach, or be nourished with Panado or Pudding,
which are not easily cast out of the Ventricle. And I have frequently observed
sick children feeble and dull, only because they were nourished with too thin
and liquid Food. Wherefore, testaceous Medicaments are, upon many Accounts,
very agreeable with the Nature and Constitution of Children; neither does does
that change or alteration made by them, in the Stomach, wear off so soon as
that which is made by Liquid Medicines.

That I may say nothing of very many Fowls, which, when drooping by a Pica or
depraved Appetite, have been recovered by Sand cast amongst, and swallowed down
with their Food, as the Poultrey-women do very well know.

By testaceous Medicines, I do not only mean strictly those made of Shells, but
Coral also, Corallin, both the Bezoars, and the like, which are known to
absorbe Acidity, and are of the same nature, although they be quite of another
Origin.

These Medicaments have been much used by Physicians, but their use, as
adjusted to Children's Constitutions, was either altogether unknown, or was of
very small help and advantage. For their too too spare Dose, wag truly the
cause, why Physicians, in the Watchings and Pains of Infants, fled from these
sure and safe Remedies, unto Opiats, which are by far the more dangerous, if
not hurtful and diametrically opposite to their Nature and Constitution.

And I cannot but relate, how I was once mocked by a very famous Physician upon
this account: When viz. at my desire he was called for assisting in the cure of
a Noble Child, the Heir of very great Possessions, who was ordinarily entrusted
to my care, and at that time was sick of a most dangerous Fever, and when, he
proposing a Narcotick instantly to be given, unexpectedly found me refractory
to his design; You, said he, if so you be resolved, do seem to practice after a
way that is obsolet and out of fashion; to whom I replied; That I did not,
neither would I ever practice for Children as is now the custom. Being, I do as
surely, yea more certainly (unless I be entirely deceived) and, at least, more
safely allay all their Gripes, lessen their Watchings, and assuage their Pains,
by the foregoing Medicaments, than any can do (however they esteem Narcoticks)
by these kind of Remedies, given with the greatest hazard of their life.

I know no such mad admirers of Opiats that ever recommended their use for the
weakest Constitutions; though some, even in this case, have covertly tried
their strength, Remembering, perhaps, the proverb, that dead Men tell no Tales.
But being the Pulse of Infants is of all the most weak, their Constitution
naturally the most tender, and their strength very infirm, I cannot conceive,
why any should make choice of uncertain and dangerous Medicaments for the
curing of Infants Diseases, when safer, yea the most safe may be as easily
purchased.

This also I shall add, that scarce any of their Maladies however tormenting,
did require the least tasting of Narcoticks, properly so called, ever since I
had sufficient knowledge of the most anodyne, yea so poriferous power, for
Infants, of these testaceous Medicaments; providing, they be given in quantity
sufficient for attaining the Design.

But as no Opiats are to be approved of, for Infants Diseases, so neither can I
recommend any liberal use of these hot Medicaments, however salutiferous and
cordial they be in their Name. For the word Cordial has been curiously and
with abundance of artifice contrived for the soothing of all the Gay-women, for
the taking of Country-women, who, very often, dwell far from skilful
Physicians; for good Matrons who, with so great honor, use these Cordials for
all Diseases in their Eleemosynary Practice; and lastly, for pleasing the
ignorant upon all occasions. For who could expect any evil by the taking of a
Cordial? Yet it may be a question amongst Learned Physicians, whether of those
who have ended their days by a natural Death, more have truly died by Diseases
or by these Cordials. It is most certain, that whatever things do increase the
Symptoms of the Disease, augment Drought, make the Tongue dry, or intend the
Feverish Heat, are of all, least convenient for, and agreeing with that tender
Age, that can give no resistance to any Injury that is offered unto it. And
truly, I have always found sundry, that I say not deadly, mistakes attend that
hot guiding of Infants, when I could never observe the least inconveniency from
the frequent use of these temperate Medicaments.

But any may object, that Obstructions must of necessity be produced by the use
of these hard and almost flinty Medicaments, and that these things should
render their most tender Constitution, and the most small passages of their
Body very subject thereunto.

But that we may the better obviate this Objection, you must remember, that the
genuine Parent of all Obstructions is an Acid Distemper, which Infants do
frequently contract from the coldness of the Air and the the tenderness of
their Constitution, however delicate and pure their Food be. And therefore,
whatever things do correct, mitigate or blunt this Acid Indisposition, or can
dissolve Coagulations (all which, these do without the least addition of Heat)
are most fit to remove Obstructions and the great Train of Symptoms, which
proceed from that Cause.

Others perhaps will accuse me, that I do too easily pass by the most famous
Doctrine of the Crisis; and that I may seem to forget the computation of
critical Days, so nicely instituted by the Ancients, and much commended to this
day, by such as admire only things that are past understanding. Therefore, I
say, being the Crisis is only a sudden change in the Disease, either to Health
or Death, it does entirely depend, for as much as I can observe, upon the
method of Cure (especially in these tender ones, of which we speak) and is
hastened or produced by the industry or unskilfulness of Art. For, being he Cure
is mainly stayed upon general Evacuations duly made, these Crudities which are
the cause of Fevers, are sooner concocted than at any other time, part of the
Morbifick Matter is immediately eliminated, and the rest exceeding the natural
strength, gives way to Medicaments dexterously administered. But, when the
Humors are exagitated, and the Spirits driven to greater confusion by
Diaphoreticks and Cordials so called, and the whole stress left upon Clysters,
which never pass the gross Tripes in perfect strength, as the Concoction so the
Crisis, is too late, if ever to be expected, after so learned and so solemn a
Train of Medicines.

But lastly, a Crisis, methinks, is nothing else than the last effort of
Nature, to evacuate with all its power the morbifick Matter by convenient
Passages. And that happens very often with us by sweating, because of the Cross
use of warm Guiding. Though very often by blooding at Nose, by Stool, by Vomit,
and sometime by Urine. All which, do sufficiently prove, that Nature her self,
the best and wisest Physician, did never design or endeavor any other way of
judging Fevers, than by timely Evacuations.

There are many things variously written and maintained by Arguments in this
Learned Age, concerning the use of Precipitating Medicaments in Physic, as
that all Diseases wherewith man is affected, might easily be overcome, and
cas^ off, if we had a perfect knowledge of the proper and specific
Precipitating Medicine fitted to every Disease. But you must observe, that we
are speaking of the Acute and Feverish Distempers of Children, which do
quickly determine of their life; and not of those that are lasting, which give
greater delay to the Curer, and do more safely allow of a curious Trial of the
new Powers of things Again, Precipitation is the separation of the grosser
parts, which by the strength of a dissolving Acid do hang imperceptible in any
clea^ Liquor until they fall to the ground being freed of their Bonds, by the
help of such things as defeat the Acid. Moreover, the Crudity, which we
constantly see in Fevers, is, methinks, the genuine offspring of prevailing
Acidity; and the concoction a sign of its being defeated, and overcome by
Nature. And therefore artificial Purging brings to the ground of the Body
these Crudities which were carried upward, and seems more properly than all
other Medicaments to precipitate, that at length they may be cast out by Urine
or Stool. But also, whatever other kind of Medicaments (tho some airy
metaphysical Brains, Philosophers, as they call themselves, do think quite
otherwise) is endued with a Precipitating Faculty, yet scarce does it, in any
measure, produce that effect, but as it is Cathartick. For neither must it he
thought that Precipitation can so easily be performed in a Body of diverse
parts, various Juices and Humors, and of so many Passages and Windings, as a
Juggling Chemist, by pouring in Liquors of different sorts, does wonderfully
change their Colors, or so soon as he does make his Precipitations, called
Magisteries. Being, then, that Fevers do assault the vital and upper parts, and
so leave no time for uncertain and dangerous Trials, it becomes (...) wise
Physician not only to appease and allay the subject matter of Fevers with
fictitious and precipitating Medicines of no value, but with all speed to root
it out, with such as are true and genuine, h. e. by timely Evacuations.

But being it has been, yea is, the custom of many famous Physicians, to hasten
the defeat of Fevers by Sudorificks, it may much concern us to add something
upon that subject.

So soon as they observe any person seized with an Epidemick Fever, immediately
they dream of, I know not what sort of Malignity, and this they constantly
strive to expel with very hot preserving and sweating Medicaments. In the mean
while, the gentle, meek, and not at all unruly Fever, by the every cure is (if
at all) rendered Malignant. For when the Serum, the common Vehicle for carrying
the Blood through the Veins and Arteries, is consumed by untimely Sudorificks,
it is no wonder that the grosser parts of the Blood are interrupted in their
motion, and do a little Stagnate; and that thereby, the Pulse be weakened, and
does become unequal, surging, tremulous, crawling, and intermitting; and upon
the same Account, the Urine be but little and very crude; and lastly, that
Freckles, Purple Spots, and sometime Pestilential Blemishes, (the sundry
degrees of a forming or formed Gangreen) the chief marks of Malignity do
appear. And the constitution, which a little before, was endued with much
moisture and a benign warmth, is now dried, burned up, and altogether parched,
with the excessive heat of this warm guiding; so that thereby, there does
neither remain a sufficient quantity of Lympha, which is designed to bedew the
parts, neither can the Blood, being now thick, and stagnating every where, flow
or move longer through the Vessels to continue the course of Circulation for
preserving Life.

But I shall only offer to the consideration of these, who will retain and are
blindly in love with that unhappy notion of Malignity (considering that it is a
word that safely cloaketh the deadly consequences of their daily ignorance) the
common practice amongst the Turks, as I was informed by very honest Merchants,
unlearned indeed, but truly rational, and most natural for the cure of the
Plague it self, the greatest of all Malignant Fevers, by the Juice of Limons
largely drunk in Broth, by constant eating confected Limon Peel, and by a
Drink much used amontg hem, called Sherbet, and in plain English, by nothing
else than a cool Diet; in as much as Mithridate, the Treacle of Andromachus,
the Root of the Virginia Dragonwort, and the great Train of our hot
Medicaments, are most luckily, all together unknown to, or in very small esteem
with them. Neither then, is it any wonder that that the Plague (so terrible to
an English Man) does make no so great havoc among them, as a gentle Fever in
Learned Countries.

How silly and childish is it for Physicians to call Fevers Malignant, because
smittle and contagious. For, if Contagion did necessarily indicate or prove the
existence of Malignity, how evidently should we read the Itch, in the Category
of Malign Diseases. In which, tho neither strength does fail, is the Appetite
lost, or the Urine or Pulse differ in any thing from these in healthy People;
and lastly, in which the Animal and Natural Functions are entire. Surely,
Diseases which have any great Inflammation, are not altogether free of
Contagion; as the Plague it self, of which I speak, as the Small Pox, as the
Measles, as the Chin-Cough of Infants, and other Diseases of that kind, which
reckon their Being from intense Inflammation.

But as to what may be said of Sudorificks for Fevers. I do not deny, but that
either natural or artificial Sweating may be of very great use in the beginning
of Fevers, when the Pores of the Skin are only a closing, and when the sensible
or insensible Perspiration are interrupted. But the Sudorificks you are to use,
should be temperate, and not such as create inward Burning. Neither should they
be dry or so spirituous as to add Fire to the Flame, but Liquid and Culinary,
which may supply an abundance of matter for forcing out the Sweat, and may
provoke it, not with its essential, but outward heat.

There is one thing very well worth our notice, neither at all beside the
purpose, which I cannot pass by. That Fever, viz. which raged last year, and
whose History I shall just now give in few words, was also called Malignant by
some Physicians, who are very well known by their great use of Diaphoreticks.

A sort of Fever (with which whoever were effected, did mostly complain of
slight pains which seized all their Joints by course, of a pain of their Head,
especially of the forepart, and lastly of a kind of Giddiness) was so
Epidemick from the middle of May of this last year, for some weeks, that I did
never observe any such, upon whatever account, or in any season of the Year. A
great many whole Families were affected with that Fever at the same time, that
scarce one of many could eschew that general Calamity. But the beginning of
this so Epidemick Fever, did truly seem to me to have its Rise, from the
changeableness of the season of that Year, the sensible Perspiration of the
Body, being then stopped, and the Pores which were very open, being shut up on
a sudden by the excessive Heat of some days hastily changed into Cold. This one
thing we may observe, that never were there so many Sick at one time, and never
so few died. All indeed, that were sick of this Fever did recover Health, as
well by wrong as right ways of Curing, by Blood-letting, viz. by Purging, by
Sudorificks, by all the Women's Cures, whether they were Culinary or Medicinal,
by staying at home for some time, by going abroad, by riding or any other
Exercise, in time of any trouble, and when free of all care, and lastly, by
doing any thing, or not doing. But if any died in this most gentle Disease,
they were young men of very hot Constitutions, and abused with these Spirituous
Sudorificks. The only thing we may yet observe upon this Head, is, that we
should fear, that the nature of this Fever which was so gentle and benign, and
which was so easily defeated as well by improper as healthful Remedies, shall,
perchance, have cruel and deadly effect: Truly, these Gay Women and Common
Quacks, may expect in vain that desired Success from their Cordials, and I know
not what sweating Medicines (when another season of the year shall be very
opposite to their Cure, and any Fever shall appear attended with very terrible
Symptoms) they seemed to have approved in a most gentle Fever and in the
Spring, a time much favoring whatever ways of Curing.

Before we do bring some Examples of Cures performed by the benefits of my
method, I will adjoyn some things that do belong to the most ordinary Symptoms
of Infants; leaning to the curious, such as are commonly to be found among the
Authors.

Among the many Diseases that do threaten sore the life of Infants, there is
none that produces so many grievous Symptoms as their laborious and difficult
breeding of Teeth. The Sickness of nine months (which may more justly be
thought the Source of innumerable Miseries, than the womb) does not expose
Mothers to greater hazard, than Breeding-Teeth does their Offspring. For,
being the Gums of these tender Ones are frequently inflamed, after the same
manner as the other parts of the Body of such as are of full Age (whence come
these most ardent Fevers) because the Teeth cannot arise from their small
holes, we need not wonder, that their tender Bodies are so disquieted with so
many most grievous Feverish Symptoms. From the same Fountain do arise their
Colick-pains, Watchings, Disquiet, Flux or Constipation of the Belly, their
Green Vomit and Excrements, the Thrushes, Fevers, Convulsions, and the like;
all which do easily yield and surrender to, almost, the same method (having
always respect to their Age and the violence of the Symptoms) of allaying and
contemperating the Acid, and afterward purging it off; except, that the Disease
shall change its nature from one, which by its continuance, gives time to the
cure, into such as is Acute, be very complicat'd and has takes sure footing in
the best parts of the Body, that it cannot be cured; o^ these Evils be twisted
in, and bre^ with the first Life of the miserable Infant.

There is a Twofold time, troublesome to Infants in the Breeding of Teeth: the
first is, when the Tooth essayeth to break out of the Jawbone; and in which,
the outward part of the Gum is circumscribed with a sort of white Circle
without any Smelling. The other is, when the Tooth becomes bigger and larger
continually swells the Gum, makes Inflammation, and does endeavor to break
through with all its force. The Chyrurgeons do unskilfully cut the Gums of the
Infant, in this first effort of breeding Teeth, as well as in the second, that,
viz. the Teeth may more easily break through, so the Wound is promiscuously
inflicted without any necessity, and very often with as little help, when upon
the second occasion (which should be diligently observed) it is only requisite.

There is something else to the same purpose not unworthy our observing. That,
viz. some Chyrurgions, when they are ordered to lay open the Swelling Gum, do
it with a common Lancet; which has ruined a great many. For being a Cicatrix
is so easily induced upon a Wound made by this thin Instrument, neither does
there any hole abide, through which the Tooth may break, so this operation is
altogether useless, and all other Remedies are neglected for the time.
Physicians, therefore, should take care, that this Incision be made with a more
convenient Instrument, whether that be a Pen knife, or any other, which rises
in the back like a Razor.

Being Thrushes do proceed from the sharp Vapor of that inward Flame, which
does fret and pinch the tender Skin of their mouth, even as the other inward
parts of the Body; we should only make choice of these things that do most
powerfully defeat and blunt this Acrimony. But Gargarisms and Medicines for
washing the Mouth are of no use in this case. For Infants can, by no means,
wash their Mouth, unless it may be thought to be done accidentally in the
swallowing down; because every thing that is given them to wash with, must go
further; yea, that every Humor which by Coughing, is cast into their Throat,
immediately falls into their Stomach, if it be not attended with Vomiting.
Neither is that stuff, whereof Gargarisms are made, so entirely innocent, that
they can safely be given to Children. It Is certain, that these Thrushes
(however they disturb or hinder their Sucking) shall be removed by Testaceous
and gently purging Medicaments; neither do I see, why we should too learnedly
use so great Art for the attaining of that Design, when fewer and more simple
Remedies may have these most safe and excellent Effects.

But the reason, why the superfice of the mouth is so convenient for the
producing of Thrushes, when no parts else of the Body are blistred, is, because
the same Skin which cloatheth the mouth, is communicated by a continued Series
by the Gullet unto the Stomach. Wherefore, these sharp Vapors, which do
proceed from a preternatural Effervescency of the Body about the Hypochondres,
are carried upward, as from a Caldron, by the vent of the mouth; and do very
easily communicate their blemish to the membrane of that part. Therefore does
the delicate taste of the tongue so readily distinguish all relishes. Lastly,
upon this account, are Physicians, by their looking upon the Tongue, able to
judge of the prevailing temperament of the Body.

The Flux of Infants proceeding from a mixture of Humors falling down into the
Intestines, or from a swelling of Bile with an Acid, which is in great
abundance in that place, is neither to be arrested by Astringents properly so
called, or Narcoticks. For Astringents, do cause a reflux of these sharp
Humors upon the more noble parts; which does cast such, as are of the most
humid and fluid Constitution, into the greatest danger of their life.
Narcoticks indeed do allay, for some time, the furios swelling of the Humors,
that, as often, they may afterward break out, with greater force. Moreover, the
delicate strength of these young Children, and which is much weakened by the
Disease, is seldom able to endure the mighty operation of Opiats, but with the
greatest hazard. But such Medicines as do appease that sharpness, the great
spring of all their trouble, are given with greater safety, and are more
agreeing with their Constitution. Though the use of Diascordium and the like,
which do consist of both these sorts of Medicines, be in such cases (where
there is no Fever) of very great use and advantage; yet it is well known, that
these do not want their danger in the Fevers of Infants: and that Chalk,
Coral, Pearls, and others of that kind which mitigate these unruly Humors,
without the kindling of new heat, that at length they may be purged off with
Rhubarb, are of wonderful use for the overcoming of these Symptoms, and
bringing a more safe Relief.

It is most evident, that they are of as great use in Vomiting as Fluxes. For
so long as that which is the trouble lodges in the Region of the Stomach, and
Acidity does most exert its power in the first Passages; these Medicines do
impart what strength they have, pure and entire unto the Ventricle. Vomits, as
the Salt of Vitriol, Vomiting wine, Emetick Tartar, etc. seem to some, by far,
preferable to all other Medicines; but if considerations from their tender Age,
and great feebleness have any place in giving of Vomits, and if the easy
solution and purging off of Coagulations can be procured effectually enough,
yea, more safely by things that offer no violence to Nature, and bring the like
into no danger, than by Vomiting or Stupifying Medicines; truly a prudent
Physician will abstain from, and abhor all such.

Neither do they only avail in all Fluxes, but for the Gripes of Infants, from
whatever cause; for which, they are not only excellent, but Proper and
Specific, If there be any such; I do not think the Jesuits Bark (the best of
all the Medicaments of this Age) more Specific for Intermitting Fevers,
neither Opium (that other famous Medicine) more properly to allay Watching and
Pains, that these afore-mentioned Testaceous Medicines do the Gripes of
Infants. For albeit, any curious person may perhaps find among th'almost
innumerable Experiments that do happen, by so many Infirmities borrowed from
Mothers, in the great variety of Constitutions, some single instance here and
there, that may impugn my Hypothesis, yet, that is to be entirely attributed to
the Constitution very much depraved, and not to any defect of the strength of
the Medicine. It is most certain that the Barks it self, commended all the
World over for a Specific, is not altogether convenient for Asthmatick people
either affected with an Intermitting or remitting Fever. Yet it is most
deservedly esteemed the best of Specificks for Diseases of that kind, and
especially for those of the first.

Yea, our Testaceous Medicines, to which if you add a little Castoreum, shall
be found of more innocent Faculties, and to have greater force against
Convulsions (or Epilepsies, very often improperly, so called) either from the
decay of strength, or from the sharpness of the morbifick Matter, extimulating
the Nerves (however they have hitherto been thought trifles, and of no value by
some) than either the Antepileptick Waters which warm, very much, these tender
ones, or the Volatile Spirits which, like fire, break through all the parts of
their Body, and which very often do produce most ardent Heat from a very small
beginning. For being, the inward coat of the Stomach is wholly Nervous, and,
therefore, the fitter to transmit the virtue of the Food and Medicaments into
the inward parts of the Body, and being, the Spirits of this, as these of the
other parts of the Body are irritated, and set on irregular motions, I think it
most necessary, that the cure be performed with these Remedies, which absorbe
the Acrimony that offends the Nerves, and truly allay the tumult of the
Spirits, and induce sleep without stupefaction, and not with such, as make
greater Confusion and increase that Heat which so much abounds.

Very many things esteemed Specificks for Convulsions (whose Names I conceal,
being they are most common in the mouths of all) have been commended as well by
the greatest Authors, as the most famous Practitioners. Yet their Virtues (for
as much as I could observe) did never answer my expectation. In the Convulsive
Paroxysms of Infants, seeing they do constantly arise from the sharp Matter of
the preceding Gripes, that does vellicate the Nerves, those things which
obtund, allay or blunt the Acid without any new heat or warm'th of Body, one
those which carry off the Acidity, thus Defeated and despoiled of all its
Angles, shall at length, after all other things tried in vain, be found only of
sufficient force for vanquishing this formidable Symptom.

I had a great confirmation of this assertion, in the Daughter of James Lowry,
a Girl scarce a year old, who was seized with the greatest, the most violent,
and most frequent Convulsions that ever I did see, which had disquieted her
Lips, Eyes, Joints, yea and all her Body with very small intermission for many
days before I visited her. She was very pale and of a most formidable aspect,
her Belly was constipate, and the little that was cast out was very green. She
howled with a high voice, for as much as her strength seemed to be cast down,
so that she raised the compassion of the Neighborhood. During all these
Convulsions and Colick-pains, she scarce consumed a spoonful of Food, but was
sustained by some sort of Cordial. I assisted and happily cured this miserable
Infant with no other Medicaments, but some Ounces of Crab's-eyes, mixed with
Crystal of Tartar. She was constrained to swallow down a scruple or more of
this most simple powder, every hour, in Pennyroyal Water, or the like; after
the frequent giving of them, she fell upon sleep, and had these Convulsions
much lessened. I ordered a Clyster of sugared and salted Milk to be frequently
injected; until at length, the Crystal of Tartar (which does not only purge
very gently, but is also, very aperient, if it be taken in sufficient quantity)
had made way for it self down ward. By these few and no greater Train of
Medicines, was this Infant, seemings devoted to Death, unexpectedly indeed,
recovered to perfect Health. But I do not understand (that I may quietly say
so) why we should further torment these tender Ones vexed with Convulsions, and
destroyed with Watching and Disquiet, with Vesicatories applied to their Neck
or other Parts, being that kind of remedy seems more proper and designed to
rouse from stupefaction those that are affected with a Coma.

Why may not I add that, since I first used this commended method for the
curing of Infants, at my first entry I have seen many seized with Convulsions,
and some so weakn'd with them, that they had no strength to swallow down any
kind of Medicament, but that I do not remember of any of these tender ones,
that, being perfectly cured by the use of these Powders, ever suffered a
Relapse.

The Small Pox and Maesles of Infants, being, very often, a gentle and calm
effervescency of the Blood, they are not so sick, when neither the assistance
of Physicians is desired, nor the great Skill of the Nurses, who think so well
of themselves, is craved. But when the unruly force of the Blood does justly
require the help of the Physician, the Testaceous Medicaments, so frequently
spoken of, have the same effects with Children, that Narcoticks have with
People of full Age. But these Volatile Spirits, which are, so much used, the
Cordial Waters- Mithridate, the Treacle of Andromachus, and the rest of these
hot Preserving and Diaphoretick Remedies, are chiefly to be eschewed, which are
designed to thrust out, with more haste than good speed, these Pushes; but
which instead of being Cordial and Expulsory, as is pretended, do very often
change the naturally gentle Small Pox, into such as are more dangerous; and do
move, disturb, and turn inward the Measles, otherwise easily disappearing from
upon the Superfice of the Skin, introducing deadly Difficulties of breathing
and thoaking Catarrhs; and lastly, they seem most designed to inflame the
Blood, which is yet but moderately and slightly warmed.

Reflecting upon the nature of the Small Pox, I have frequently admired, how
this hot kind of guiding has so much prevailed, not only among the foolish
Nurses, but Physicians, otherways, very learned; being this Disease is so very
hot; and, being all Suppurating Medicines, properly so called, which are
ordinarily applied to any one or more swelled parts of the Body, that tend to
Suppuration, should be, by the general consent of all Physicians and
Chyrurgeons, very temperate; as are the Roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, the
Leaves of Mallows, Althaea, Bear-foot, the Meals of Lin-seed, Foenugreek-seed,
Wheat; Butter, Fat, Oil, the Yolk of an Egg, Mucilages, Marrow, and the like,
which are not hot. For hot Remedies either taken inwardly or outwardly applied,
are truly discussing and ratifying, and of a quite contrary nature to the
former. Moreover, these do really disturb Nature in her work of Suppuration,
and necessarily drive all into a strange confusion. Wherefore Testaceous
Medicaments, whose strength and virtue is most temperate, which in their benign
and gentle Nature are next to those that suppurate, which exceedingly resist
the Universal Corruption of the Body; and, lastly, which neither interrupt the
Animal or Natural Functions, or render them irregular; are of all the most
eligible for the cure of the Small Pox.

I could maintain, at more length, this Cause, and so, extend the limits of
this Work beyond measure. But I will not longer detain the Reader with
Scholastic Impertinencies, which are altogether useless in Practice. I will
not not hunt after an Umbrage and Shadow, of more than ordinary Learning by the
specious Citations of Authors, cavilling among themselves; and lastly, I will
not subtly undermine the Opinions of other men, that I may triumph over their
Ignorance, and that, upon any account, I may establish my own. For I know very
well, how hard a task it is to enquire narrowly into the verity and truth of
things. I know that he has come nighest to the Truth of any thing, who shall
be found to have erred least, however men do upon any trifling occasion let up
their Crests, and assume a degree of perfect Knowledge in this or another
Science, when Men can make no progress beyond the natural Limits of their
Weakness and Frailty. And truly, the more knowing any Man is than another, the
more humbly and submissively does he demean himself. But there seems to me,
to be a certain moderate comprehension of things, and bounded with the same
proportion of Knowledge, diffused by degrees upon every Age, that, viz. none
may unjustly upbraid the other of ignorance. Truly, we have lost, by the great
changes of humane Affairs, very many things which might perpetuate the Memory
of some former Age. Neither are there wanting in the present Age (whatever
th'envious may deny) Discoveries that deserve the best Praises, which shall
Nobilitate the Art of Physic, while an Art, and hand it down so refined, to be
sacredly preserved by Posterity.

And now I shall give some Examples of Infants, cured by this our method; but
not with that design that these my small and pitiful Endeavors should be
preferred to all other more learned Methods; for I cannot determine what others
of better Judgment may do. Thus only, I do send unto the World and for its use,
such things as by my Experience, are found to be really true, or very near to
the truth (leaving always to others the same power of judging we have assumed
to our self) and which I doubt not, may be of great use to some.

Observation I.
A Very Noble Infant, the Eldest Son of the most Illustrious Lord, Charles
Marquess and Earl of Worcester (a Man of an Infinite quickness of Spirit, and
very capable for the greatest Offices in the Kingdom, whom all the Changes and
Vicissitudes of Humane Affairs could never divert from his singular Integrity)
being of a very succulent and sanguine Habit of Body, but whose Nerves were
very weak, and very often troubled with an Acute Fever; but its Matter did most
especially derive it self into his Lungs. In the mean while, his Lordship was
affected with a grievous difficulty of Breathing, which, especially, in his
sleep, was most sensible to Bystanders, A Paleness did seize his Beautiful
Face, Drought especially, and violent and burning Heat of Skin, with Tumbling,
and continual Disquiet, did oppress him.

I let him Blood somewhat largely from his Arm, and then most succesfully used
that method which I have described, whereby the Fever, with all the other
Symptoms were defeated, and Health restored.

But the first time that I visited that Noble Infant, was upon the 14th. of
June, 1685. when he was 14 months old. But he was much weakened by a Chin-Cough
at that time, when he was first committed to my care; Doctor Short, a most
Excellent Physician, being called to my Assistance. And by our common Advice,
were taken four Ounces of Blood from his Right Arm: Truly, I did propose, a
more liberal use of Pearls, and such things, which allay too much Acidity; and
in the mean while a spoonful of the Juice of Pennyroyal sweetened with Sugar
Candy, to be given twice or thrice in one day, and every third day to be gently
purged with Manna; to which method, as both the most safe, and as approved by
me upon other occasions, this Gentleman, of singular Sincerity, and excelling
not only in the knowledge of his Profession, but also in his good Humor, did
easily assent. And so that most Noble Infant next Heir after his Father, to the
most Splendid and August, next to the Royal, Family, of the Duke of Beaufort,
recovered Health (as I did publicly foretell at that time) in ten days time,
who, in the Opinion of the other most famous Physician, seemed not possible to
be cured in the space of three Months.

Moreover (by the Blessing of God) I did restore to former Health, the same
most Noble Infant, now five Years, old when sick of a continued Fever, and
chiefly complaining of his Head and Belly by course, but next being tormented
with most violent Gripes upon the Region of the Ilium (so that they were very
like to the Iliack-Passion) with a very weak Pulse. But we must observe, that
when this was changed from a most Acute and Continued, into a most safe
Intermitting Fever; whose Paroxysm had not its beginning with shivering and
cold (as ordinarily) but with a dry Cough, which lasted the whole Fit; and
which recurred every day after Dinner; I resolved to try the Virtue of the
Jesuites-Powder. But all its advantage was fleeting, and merely palliative,
until some drops of Blood, forced from his Nose, by the strength of the Fever,
and violence of the Cough, did encourage me, who before was a little Refractory
(because his natural strength was much exhausted by the Disease) to take, at
least six Ounces of Blood at his Arm; and to purge him next day. After which, a
strengthening Julep, designed for carrying off the Remains of his Cough, did so
perfectly cure that weak Infant, that daily he became more healthy, until he
arrived at its Perfection, which he enjoys at this time.

Observation II.
I Did treat after the same manner, the same Marquess his Daughter, Lady
Elizabeth, a Girl eleven months old, being of a plump and thick Habit of Body,
seized in the beginning of the Spring, but a very cold Season, with an Acute
Fever, and a Cough almost Convulsive; and did reduce her to perfect Health in
almost as short time (considering both Seasons of the Year;) I only added about
the end some Drops of Sweet Elixir Proprietatis to these Powders.

Observation III.
THe only Son of the Earl of Pembroke (a Nobleman not only well endued with
the ancient Splendour of his Ancestors, but with all excellent Gifts of mind)
being Seventeen Weeks old, was troubled, in the beginning of February, with
Colick-Pains, Green Excrements, Thrushes, perpetual Disquiet, and startling of
his Limbs. His Ears, from which a certain Humor (after the manner of Infants)
did flow i^ great abundance, were entirely dried up. Yet, by the use of the
mentioned Remedies, he recovered in the space of six days.

of the compound Powder of Crabs Claws i. of Pearls prepared ii. of
Sal-prunell. i. M. and make a Powder to be divided in eight equal parts. Let
him have one immediately in a spoonful of the following Julep, drinking another
after all.

of the Alexiteriqus Milk Water, iv. of Pennyroyal Water, ij. of the compound
Poeony Water, iij. of Pearled Sugar, i. M. and make a Julep.

Two days after the Illustrious Infant had taken the prescribed Powders, for
the allaying of his Pains, with their designed Success; I gave him the
following solutive Syrup upon the third, by which he was gently purged, and put
from the least suspicion of Danger.

of the Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb, of purging Thorn ana j. of the best
Rhubarb in Powder, gr. ^ij. of the Tincture of Saffron gut. x. M.

Thereafter, I continued him the next two days with the Powders, and I purged
him upon the third as before. After all these, his Sickness did entirely
vanish, the lurid and pale Color of his Face became vivid and sprightly, and
his Ears began to weep as before.

Observation IV.
THe most Honorable Lady Catherine, Daughter to the same most Illustrious
Earl, being three years and a half in Age, was affected with a Lent Fever,
which had most irregular Paroxysms, but she particularly complained of a
grievous pain of her Head, an sometimes of her Belly. She had an aversion to
all sort of Food, and was now and then so sleepy, that all the Family suspected
her Disease to be the Small Pox; she was several times troubled with starting
of her Nerves, and sometime with a dry Cough in her Sleep. I prescribed the
following Medicaments.

of the Alexiterious Milk Water vj. of the Plague Water ss. of prepared Pearls
j. of the simple Powder of Crab's Claws ij. of refined Sugar ss. M. and make a
Julep. Of which let her have three spoonfuls every fourth hour, carefully
shaking the Glass before you pour it out.

of Socotrine Aloes i. of the tops of the lesser Centaury, of the Leaves of
Savine dried ana ss. of Burgundy-pitch i. of Venice Turpentine, as much as is
sufficient. Make a Plaster to be applied upon her Navel.

The next day she continued the use of the Julep.

She had a Vesicatory applied underneath the nap of her Neck.

There was a Clyster of six Ounces of sugared and salted Milk injected, because
she was constipate in her Belly.

of the black Mineral, of sweetened Mercury, ana gr. vj. of Marmalade of Quinces
ij. Make a Bole to be given at Night.

The day after, she took this Purgative Syrup.

of the Syrup of Purging Thorn ij. of the Countess of Warwick's Powder, gr. vj.
of the best Rhubarb in Powder, gr. xij. of the Tincture of Saffron, gut. xx. of
Black Cherry Water j. M.

Half a Dram of the Crystal of Tartar was given her in a draught of Posset, to
sharpen the Purgative.

That night she got four spoonfulls of the foregoing Julep at Bedtime.

The following Mixture was, upon the fourth and fifth day, in addition to the
former Prescriptions, ordered to be licked up frequently.

of Corallin ij. of the dried leaves of Mint in Powder i. of the simple Powder
of Crab's Claws i. of the Syrup of the Balsam of Tolu, of Althaea ana i. of
Orange Water ss. M.

The Bole prescribed before, was renewed upon the night preceding the sixth
day; as also the purging Syrup the next morning by which this very Noble Lady
did vomit up, about noon, a Worm of ^ span long. Upon which, she was freed of
all her Maladies.

Observation V.
THE much Honored and only Daughter of the most Serene Prince, James Duke of
Ormond, scarce yet a year old, was much troubled with a loathing and desire to
Vomit; as also she was much fretted with green Excrements, and therefore with
Gripes. I did easily remove these Colick-pains with a powder of Pearls given
from gr. viij to ss in a spoonful of Mint-Water, thrice a day and did gently
purge off the morb^ sick Matter with gr. vi. or ss of Rhubarb in a little of
the Syrup of Cichory with Rubarb; by which her gre^^ Excrements got a better
Color* and, her Pains being removed, she enjoyed her days in great ease. And
her Loathing and Vomiting, her Stomach being now corrected, did cease.

Observation VI.
THE only Daughter of that excellent Gentleman, Mr. Foot Onslow Esquire, at
Kensington, a Member of the present Parliament, and descended of a very rich
and flourishing Family in the County of Surrey, being six months old, was
troubled for some time, with a dangerous and extraordinary Fever, such as some
^all Malignant. Her Excrements were Green, the Color of her Face very pale,
and much like that of Lead. Thrushes did utterly hinder her Sucking; and some
unusual Symptoms did very much threaten her Life. She did raise her Chin as
high as possible, and did constantly cast back her head, that I, at my first
seeing her, did suspect, there might be some Imposthume sticking to her Chaps,
or some sudden stifling. I ordered fifteen Grains of the mentioned Powder to be
given her at a time, according to the method before described. But as often as
she took them, there did arise such a sensible Ebullition, as* never observed
before in any Infant For all things turned so irregular and she seemed to be in
no less hazard, than may be expected by a total Suffocation. But it did truly
resemble that ordinary boiling that is by the mixing of an Acid and Alkali in a
Vessel. Moreover, this effervescency being over, she did run out in sweat on
all parts. Yet neither was that Symptom at all diminished, or the rest, any way
changed to better, after a great many Doses of the Powders, and the subsequent
Purging. Therefore, a^ length I gave her at night, of sweetened Mercury and
flower of Brimstone ana gr. iv in a little of the Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers;
and did reiterate the same things next morning for correcting or averting that
great corruption of Humors. But she did vomit up a great deal of putrid,
stinking Matter, variegated with Blood, and of as party Colors as a Rainbow,
not long after her taking the second Dose in the morning; after which she
immediately became better, and those Powders, from which she was just now
utterly averse, being given gain did profit her much, no Ebullition arising
from their use. Thereafter also was she able to weep strongly and cry out.
About this time, begun a Cough which was somewhat troublesome; but was soon
defeated. So soon as these Trushes did disappear, as soon did the Fever
evanish, her ^risk Color was restored and this infant, deservedly thought
desperate by all, did suddenly recover her former Strength.

Observation VII.
THE only Son of Mt. Burton, Captain of an East India Merchant^^ip being but
eight days old, was affected with Gripes, Green Excrements and continual
Disquiet. Moreover, these Thrushes did so cover, as a white Scurf, the inner
parts of his Lips and whole Mouth, that he was not able to lay it nigh, at
least not to suck, his Nurse her Breasts. For him, then, did I prescribe after
this manner.

of Pearls prepared ij. of the simple Powder of Crabs-claws j. M. and make a
Powder to be divided into eight Doses. Let him have one thrice a day, at a
convenient season, in a spoonful of the following Julep.

of the alexiterious Milk Water ij. of Penniroyal water j. of pearled sugar
iij. M.

On the first day, and thereafter, these Gripes were allayed, and calm sleep
procured.

Upon the third he took the following Purging Syrup.

of the Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb ij. of the Powder of Rhubarb gr. vi. of
Rose Water gut. xxx. M.

That same evening he got one of the fore going Powders.

Upon the fourth day he begun to suck, the Thrushes then disappearing, and his
Excrements were not at all green. Notwithstanding he continued, all that, and
the fifth day, in the use of the Powders.

Upon the sixth, he took the Purging Syrup with ss. of the best Rhubarb in
Powder, in place of the vi. grains he had taken before. After all which, he
perfectly recovered.

Observation VIII.
THE Daughter of Mr. George Sclater (a Divine, well instructed in all kind of
Learning, Rector of the Parish of Hayes near Bromely) being about ten months
old, was affected with a most violent Flux, at the time of Breeding Teeth, that
she was almost dead, and given over by all as desperate, because of her
frequent Stools (which were green, and no fewer than 40 or 50 in one day, as
her Parents informed me.) I gave her a scruple of the mentioned Powders, at
least, every fourth hour; but oftener in the beginning, even until the Flux did
much remit, the sharpness of the Bile was allayed, sleep also procured, and the
former strength somewhat renewed. Upon the third day, I did drive out of the
Body the Humors, so prepared, with Rhubark; which can never be sufficiently
commended, which does not only confirm the strength of the Weak Parts, but also
does remove and most pleasantly purge off Impurities. I continued in giving
these Powders thrice every day until the third, upon which I did renew the same
Purge. After these, she was perfectly cured.

Moreover, I shall add here: That as I do easily adjudge the Victory to
Rhubarb, as a Purgative, of all, the most agreeing with Infants affected with
Fevers or any other Sickness; so neither can there be any thing found that is
naturally more unsafe and dangerous than Aloes, which is so much commended, and
which is most hurtful (however Sacred its Preparation may be named) to such as
are Feverish, both because of its intense Heat, and fretting faculty, which is
most opposite to that tender Constitution. And I, if it were my Humor, could
confirm the truth of this assertion, by a very incredible Account of a most
Noble Infant scarce yet 4 years old, being affected with a Lent-fever, who, in
the space of two days, was brought to that pass, especially by the use of Hiera
Picra in a hot Vehicle as is customary, that the Taches of his Intestines
suddenly made by it, which Anatomical Inspection did make known, did far exceed
all belief. But this I do pass, remembering that we should speak nothing but
well and honorably of those that are dead, so also concerning those that are
alive.

Observation IX.
THE Daughter of a certain Gentleman, but four years old, was affected in the
Summer of the Year 1687. with the most violent Fever that ever I did see upon
any of that Age; her habit of Body was very lean, her drought insatiable, the
Heat of her skin was sharper than any of these years, so that any that touched
it, were scarce able to endure this inward burning for any time* In the mean
while the Parotid Glands did torment her, and were a little swelled, her
cheeks, for the most part, were very red; and she did decay in continual
anguish and disquiet. It was evening when I did first see her in this
condition. I did instantly order for her ss. of our Powders made a little
Expulsory, to be renewed, a little after, in a spoonful of Penniroyal Water.
The same thing were reiterated next Morning, but about two hours after her
Mornings Draught, a good deal of blood did run from her Nose, and her whole
Forehead was livid and somewhat swollen with much Redness here and there, as she
had been newly banged with cudgels: A round crimson colored spot of two inches
breadth did appear under her left Temple; At which being Nothing discouraged,
but thinking it a very good Omen, I did order her the use of those Powders that
blunt Acidity for that day, only, they were made less expulsory, but upon the
next, h e. upon the third, after I was called, I did not doubt to give her the
Purging Powder, well sharpened with the Crystal of Tartar, although her Fever,
Heat, and Drought were nothing abated; by these she had five or six Stools.
Lastly, this very day did her Fever evanish, by the evening she had no drought,
and the Heat of her Skin was as temperate to the touch, as it is in her best
health, so that the small Infant, about even, did cry out, How well am I now?

Observation X.
THE Daughter of Mr. Golton, a well born Gentleman, being a year old, of a
Plump and very Fat Constitution, became Feverish in the month of November by
Breeding-Teeth; her drought was Insatiable, her Face very pale, only there was
somewhat of a Green mixed with the wanness, so often as, being to suck, she put
her Mouth to the Breasts, as often was she forced to give over, because of a
violent Cough which did begin at that time; by which Symptom being advertised,
I did suspect that her Uvula was swelled and inflamed. Moreover, her mouth was
very much hurt with Thrushes, that she could never be induced to open it unless
she was some time forced, by stopping her nostrils, to breath, and by that
means to receive Medicaments. Her Excrements were very green, and of a Sour
smell, with continual tumbling, which did indicate that she was troubled with
Colick-pains. Her breathing, when asleep, did strike the ears of the
bystanders. Moreover she could not weep till, after a week, by the constant use
of these Medicaments the sickness was much quelled, and the ordinary crying of
Infants did return. All the symptoms did evidently remit after the operation of
the Second Purgative; and by the third, the brisk Color with a most pure white
did by degrees return to her Face, her Eyes became lively, and at last she did
enjoy most perfect health.

I shall add also an extraordinary example of a Chronick Disease, which is not
much beside the purpose, neither altogether unuseful.

Observation XI.
ISaac Pope being thirteen years of age, was so pined away with a Consumption,
by worms (as it proved) that he was much liker a Skeleton than a live Boy: His
Face was like that of one raised from the Grave, his Eyes hollow; his Nose
sharp, and his bones only covered with skin: By this Disease he became
senseless, and altogether void of reason; and scarcely could his rattling joints
carry him from one end of the room to another with the swiftness of a Snail:
All his Excrements, whether by Urine, or by Stool, fell involuntarily in the
day time into his Breeches, and in the Night upon the bed; I gave him from 25
grains to ss. of my black Mineral, which I much use, Morning and Evening,
purging him gently every fourth day. By which he voided a great many worms, and
a little after became very plump.

But I shall not grudge to describe the preparation of my Black Mineral,
because not to be found in any Author, that I know, and may be of very god Use.

of Quicksilver four parts, of Flower of Brimstone three; stir all well in a
glass mortar, until all the globules of the Mercury do utterly evanish and the
mass be reduced to a gray Color, which turns very black after that it is kept
some time.

The ordinary way of making the black Mineral is by mixing equal parts of
Mercury and flower of Brimstone, and Burning, until a kind of useless Earth
does remain, after the Combustion, in ofrm of a Powder, which is but half the
quantity of the Mass: whose genuine and natural virtue is lost by the fire, or
if not, it cannot surely enough be determined what its strength is which may be
said of a great many other Preparations made by Fire.

I prefer this way of preparing it, to all other, both because tho given in
however so great a quantity, and however often, it never exciteth Salivation,
which cannot be convenient for that tender Age, and is most formible to
bystanders; as also, because it is made up after a simple and natural way,
without any help from too too curious Art, which puts no value upon any
Medicaments, but such as have passed the Fire, that thereby they may become
purer and more freed from their, I know not what, natural filth; when tho they
are very often changed from their best state and their excellent natural
Virtues, into such as are worse, more unsafe, and entirely new. But also the
undaunted Volatility of Mercury which has cost Chemists so much labor in
Fixing it, is very easily subdued by the small work of the Pistil and Mortar.

I might adduce a great many more Examples, if I could discreetly incroach upon
the patience of my Reader, by dwelling longer upon the same thing.

I might renew and deservedly approve of that good and old custom of easily
preventing a great many Diseases of Infants and Children, by safe and known
Remedies, which do much resist the corrupting of Humors, and were given every
month. Seeing, viz. the most tender nature of Infants is most subject to all
impressions, as well external as internal, and seeing Crudities and Indigestion
do so abound with these tender ones, a prudent Physician should correct and
amend these Dispositions and Diseases, which cannot be altogether removed in so
delicate and weak a Constitution.

I could, at length, debate, whether it were safer that newborn Infaents
should rashly be resigned, as is customary, to the care of a Hired Nurse, that
Parents, viz. at the last may hear of the great hazard of their Infants, when
they have already ended their innocent life through the carelessness and fault
of Nurses, or whether they should rather be weaned when first born; whether
mothers themselves should become nurses; or lastly, whether the nurse, when
necessity does require one, should be maintained at the Mother's Houses, and by
their care be diligently kept up from the Embraces of her Husband.

But it is now high time to remove an Objection as well of some Physicians,
which are happy Practitioners, as of all those who have most diligently
enquired into the nature of simples for the use of Physic: they sc. will blame
my Method as too simple, and not equipped with things commonly known, and much
wanting that Variety of Prescriptions which is so very requisite for a learned
Physician, and which often over abounds amongst Authors, yea, they will
accuse me, that I am either altogether ignorant of, or have unjustly slighted,
the Chemical Preparations long ago commended in the Works of almost all the
Authors.

Let them, then, remember, that a Physician is the Servant of Nature, and that
Nature cures Diseases. Let them complain, that they came naked into the World,
that Nature is content with a few things, and that Art should imitate, or
rather adumbrate Nature as much as is possible. They may know, that I think
him, who prescribes too long or too many Forms of Remedies, to offend through
Ignorance or deceit.

And as to Chemistry, I do more endeavor to understand it, than to lay any
great stress upon its Promises. I shall not mention hong long I lodged with the
most Famous Lemery, the great Honor and Ornament of the Spagyrick Art, and of
this Age (as to Chemistry) in his House at Paris. And if Physic not very much
abounded with genuine and natural Ways of curing, when Chemistry not long ago
pretended to the chief place in Medicine, I doubt it would have afterward swollen
so much with Chemical Preparations.

For what end should Physicians have betaken themselves unto unknown, unsure,
and most dangerous things, even those Sanctuaries of Ignorance; unless that
some notable jealousy had arisen from things so well known, and tried by many?
Surely they had not snatched so greedily at the Shadow, forsaking the
substance, if no Charm had appeared in the trembling Light. But I would not
rashly despise Chemistry as confined within the bounds of Pharmacy, neither
would I have any to extol it un awares as diffused beyond the limits of Physic

It is very observable in how great Poverty, these great favorers of Chemical
Preparations, and the zealous Enemies of the old way of curing (that I may say
nothing of the common Chemists and Quacks, who adulterate every thing, and make
great promises without performance) if you except very few, do live, though
they do not doubt to promise Golden Mountains (as people speak) to the too
credulous, ignorant, and covetous. But though it be true, that Riches and Power
are not given, to wise and knowing Men, and such as are best skilled in every
Trade, conform to their Demerit; yet I think it most probable, that Their great
Poverty has most its rise from the hurt and great Bane of their Medicaments or
famous secrets: and that a great many of them (because of their destructive
partaking or incorporating with the Fire) are most unuseful for, if not
altogether contrary to the Health of Mankind. For if for the most part, they
were of any use for Men, or if their strength were answerable to their
promises, although they could not enrich this, or the other Chemist; yet, its most
sedulous Artificers (even as an ordinary gain does always attend the great part
of all other careful Tradesmen, who make profession of any thing for public
use) could not be so frequently frustrated, in their hopes of getting Riches.
If I intended to advise my dearest Son, what method he should take to scrape
together a great abundance, or, at least, a sufficient Portion of Money; by my
persuasion he should be of great integrity of life, that he should circumveen
no man deceitfully, neither that he should take pains in coining Lies, whatever
kind of Life, or whatsoever sort of Trade he did designedly lead, for
increasing Riches. And I would no less inculcate to him, that this is, of all,
the best way to live in miserable Poverty (however the cozenings of some Crafty
Knaves, who have long practiced falsehood, may succeed for some time) not to
perfidiously overreach others, to tell lies for truth, and at any rate to act
the part of a wicked Impostor, or unthrifty Man.

But that we may return to Chemical Preparations: I cannot but esteem the Works
of Nature far more excellent than those of Art; yea, with Galen, that they are
greater, and do exceed all Commendation; however, they be despised by some, and
Nature her self accused as unactive by Epicurus. Wherefore, our most divine Old
Man does justly say, (...). That Medicine is best practiced according to the
prescript of Nature.

But that we may come to a close, I would not have such, as do so much esteem
and are delighted with the Art we speak of, still ignorant, that scarce any
Chemical Preparations (as its true Sons, if there be any such, have often
complained to my self) are to be sold at this time, which are not fictitious,
and adulterated upon the base account of Gain.

Lastly, some may object, that Blood-letting can never be convenient for that
tender Age, much less to become necessary upon some occasions.

I reply, that Blooding, even of the Youngest Infants, was appointed of old by
the command of the Supreme God, the Greatest Physician, in the Decree of the
Circumcision; that great Hemorrhagies did often attend it, and which were very
difficultly stopped, unless by exquisite Remedies prepared for that end; and
yet the Jewish Writers, which is very observable, did boldly aver, That not one
Infant of a thousand was a-missing or died untimely, only because that Blood
was let this way.

May the greatest and best God, from whom, as from an unexhaustible Fountain,
every good and propitious thing does flow, upon whose favor the happy Success
of the Art of Physic, more than any other, does continually depend,
countenance with his wonted Goodness, these things which I have written with a
sincere Mind, that they may tend to the Public, which is always to be preferred
to any private advantage.

FINIS.

