AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Right Reverend Father in God JONATHAN
Lord Bishop of Exeter in his late Visitation of Exeter College in Oxford.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER 1690.

An account of the Proceedings, etc.
THE Bishop of Exeter has so tender a regard to the interest and reputation of
all the Members of that College, with the protection whereof his Lordship is
entrusted; that as he could not easily, without repeated provocation, be
induced to pass Sentence against any of 'em; so he was not, without very great
reluctance, persuaded to allow a publication of his proceedings; since however
it might vindicate his Lordship's Justice, it must at the same time expose
those things to the eye of the world, which his Charity had much rather have
concealed. But finding that his late Visitation has occasioned abundance of
discourse, and that reports have been generally made more according to the
inclination of the Relator, than the truth of the matter, He is at length
prevailed upon both for his own and his Order's sake, to allow a plain and
impartial Narrative of matter of Fact: wherein there are diverse circumstances,
which might have been fairly represented with great advantage on his Lordship's
side; but he rather chooses to have a plain account, with Copies of Authentic
Vouchers to confirm it, allowing no reflections but what they make, and to
leave the judgment upon the whole matter to the indifferent Reader.

I shall therefore endeavor in the following Report to imitate not only the
Justice but the Moderation and Temper of his Lordship in his proceedings; I
shall touch the offenses of no man any farther than they justify his sentence;
but confine my self to the evidence given before him; and neglect the great
advantage of a farther enquiry.

To try the merits of this Cause there need no niceties of Law; the bare
delating of such crimes as were complained of, was a sufficient cause of a
Visitation: which had never been obstructed with such open hostility, and so
much unaccountable ill manners, nor so wretched a Plea chosen as that to the
Jurisdiction of an Ordinary, had there been any other way to divert an enquiry
into those actions, which the Persons delated knew could neither be denied nor
defended.

The Punishments have been so easy and moderate, that no man, besides the
Rector, has so much as a color of complaint. Many of those Gentlemen that
abetted him are such, as the Bishop could wish engaged in a better Cause, and
such as I doubt not, will lay hold on that opportunity, which his Lordship has
been pleased to afford 'em, of uniting them-selves to the founder part of the
Society; and of owning that Visitatorial power, to which, after so favorable
treatment, they are in Gratitude as well as Justice obliged to submit.

As to the late Rector himself, it is not much to be wondered at, if he still
retain a place in the good opinion of some few, who mistake the merits of the
cause, having implicitly received an account of the Process from those very
persons who were liable to the Sentence: But now when the charge and proofs are
both made public; when so many and so great offenses appear so plain and
undeniable; when the Visitor's enquiry has brought to light a secret practice,
upon which the whole University has thought fit to pass so Solemn and so
Unanimous a Censure; it is reasonable to believe that those only will openly
defend his Cause, who secretly abett his opinions.

Having now said as much as I thought requisite by way of Introduction, I
should next proceed to the Visitation it self; and recite the offenses that
went before it, the opposition that was made to it; the peaceable execution of
it at last; and the just, and moderate sentences, that were passed in it. But
since the exceptions of the Rector to the Visitor's Authority are chiefly
grounded on some former procedures of his Lordship in Mr. Colmer's Appeal; I
think it necessary to take the rise of this discourse, higher than I at first
designed; and in the following method, to give an impartial account,

1. Of the Expulsion and Appeal of Mr. Colmer.

2. Of the Proceedings of the Bishop, and his Commissary upon the Appeal.

3. Of the Crimes of the Rector, and others, that occasioned the General
Visitation.

4. Of the General Visitation it self: of the Evidence there given; and of the
Sentence there pronounced.

Upon the first head it will appear, that, whether Mr. Colmer be innocent or
not, the Bishop had such Presumptive proofs of his Innocence; as must in
justice oblige him to receive his appeal; and to grant a re-hearing.

Upon the second, it will be evident, That the Bishop gave the Rector all
imaginable advantage for the Conviction of Mr. Colmer; and consequently, That,
if he be guilty, it is a new crime of the Rector, and of him only, that he is
exempted from punishment.

Under the two last heads, The Offenses charged upon the Rector, will be fully
made out.

And, throughout the whole discourse, the grounds upon which the Visitor
proceeded will be occasionally given; and the cavils of the Rector against his
Authority will receive short, clear, and satisfactory answers.

1 Concerning the Expulsion and Appeal of Mr. Colmer.
Mr. Colmer was a Gentleman, whose demeanor in the College had formerly been
such, that it much recommended him to the favor of the Rector, and his family.
The Rector in a printed paper openly professes, that he held a greater
familiarity with him than is usual between the Rector, and a Junior Fellow of a
College. What were the secret springs either of this intimacy, or of distaste
afterward, as things transacted in a family, we think it not fit to publish,
but what appeared above board was as follows.

About December then 1688, when Sir Kingston stood Candidate for a
Chaplain-Fellowship; the Rector vehemently espoused his interest, as knowing
that he could afterward command his Vote, and by it, (as he himself professed)
make the division of the College so equal, that the sole absolute power of
determination in all causes should fall upon him-self. And since, Mr. Colmer,
being not ignorant of Mr. Kingstons manners, and former demeanor in the
College, nor insensible of the Rector's design in promoting him, thought it his
duty to concur with many of the Fellows in opposing this Election; The Rector
openly declared, that he would upon that account compass Mr. Colmers Expulsion.
In order to this, some months after, he charges him privately with
incontinence; and endeavors to frighten him into a resignation of his
Fellowship. When that project failed and Mr. Colmer insisted on his innocence;
and seemed not at all apprehensive of any danger on that account; The Rector
accused him before the Vice Chancellor; and procured his warrant to summon one
Smith before him, and to take his depositions. The Testimony of Smith was so
far from charging Mr. Colmer, that it wholly justified his innocence; and the
other allegations of the Rector seemed so trivial, and incoherent, that the
Vice Chancellor thought fit to dismiss the cause. When this design therefore
met with no better success than the other, the Rector desisted from the
troublesome course of examining Witnesses before a Magistrate, and resolved on a
more compendious method of expelling him by bringing the Cause before himself.
Accordingly on Oct. 10th. 1689. The Rector called a meeting of the seven Senior
Fellows, and told them that the occasion of it was a business in which he was
to act the part both of an Accuser, and a Judge; and he might have added, of a
Witness too: For, upon the Trial, he accused Mr. Colmer of lying with one Ann
Sparrow, who had lately been delivered of a Bastard: and for evidence, he took
his voluntary Oath, that Smith after much importunity used with him in his
Closet to confess at whose expense he maintained the Woman, desired time to
speak with his Friend. This Friend, the Rector was resolved should be
interpreted Mr. Colmer; and thence inferred that he maintained the Woman and
was Father of the Child, though Smith, who appeared at the meeting, avowed, that
he knew no such thing of him; and that the Rector misrepresented his words; and
mistook his meaning. Upon no other Oath than this, founded upon a false
surmise, taken by him, who was his Judge, and professed himself his Accuser,
Mr. Colmer was declared legally convicted of incontinence.

There were indeed other Allegations in this Cause; but those, bare
Allegations, without proof; and not sufficient to justify the Charge, if they
had been proved. It was said that the Rector's wife said, that a certain maid
said to her; That she had formerly said to another Woman, That Mr. Colmer was
uncivil to her; But the Maid, that was said to have said this, though in Town,
was not produced; and the Woman, who was said to have received the complaint,
was there present, and denied it. Traditional stories, Hear-says and Reports
were urged against him; but the authors of them, though Servants of the College;
and subject to the Rector's Summons, were not called, nor produced. On the
other side two Divines attested upon Oath, That the party, which was with
Child, not only acquitted Mr. Colmer before them, but owned, that she had been
dealt with to accuse him. Against this plain, and express evidence, and against
the Testimony of Smith, who was said to be his Accuser, The equivocal
expressions, general words, and frivolous discourse of some talkative Women,
ill attested, without Oath, and at second hand, were received and credited; and
upon these Proofs, and upon this process only, Mr. Colmer was expelled; and
divested of his Freehold.

It is natural for men, that use such process as this, to shun a re-hearing;
and therefore it is no wonder, if now the Rector pretended, That this his
interlocutory sentence was conclusive; and final, and that Mr. Colmer was by
Oath barred from any appeal to the Visitor. If the Statutes and the Oath, that
was founded upon them, had been capable of such a sense, it would have been a
great hardship on Mr. Colmer, who avowed his own innocence, to have been
necessarily exposed either to the scandal of Fornication, or to the guilt of
Perjury. However he was resolved to consider his Oath, to undergo his
misfortune, and to proceed no otherwise in his appeal, than it was permitted,
and warranted by Statute. But, Upon the perusal of the Statutes; and the
consideration of the evidence given against him; he was himself convinced; and
was confirmed in his opinion by Dr. Bouchier, Professor of the Civil-Law in
Oxford; that he had free liberty; and just cause of appeal to the Visitor. The
Motives, that prevailed with him to think so, were such as these.

1. That the Oath, See the Probationers Oath. Si contingat me (quod absit)
juxta formam and exigentiam Statutorum, a praedicto Collegio, Expelli seu
amoveri etc. Nunquam etc.
being accessory to the Statute, did only restrain those Persons from vexatious
appeals, who were expelled according to the appointment and direction of the
Statute; and according to the form therein laid down, and prescribed.

2. That, (the Statute requiring In the Statute, De Causis propter quas
Scholares privari debeant. Siquis Scholarium vel Electorum; adulterii.
incontinentiae, haeresis pertinacis, homicidii voluntarii etc. legitime
convictus fuerit; ipsum perpetuo exclusum etc. decernimus.
a legal conviction; and the Proofs in Mr. Colmer's Case being so far from
making a legal conviction, that they were not sufficient to make a man of any
reputation suspected) Mr. Colmer was not Statutably Expelled, and consequently
not barred from appeal.

3. That in the Oath itself the word Si contingat me posthac per Rectorem aut
in hujusmodi interesse habentes, corrigi, puniri, aut a dicti Collegii
sustentatione ejici, and expelli, excludi, privari, velamoveri propter mea
forsan demerita, ipsum Rectorem etc. nunquam persequar; molestabo vel
inquietabo, etc. quantumcunque alias mihi probitatis, and vitae merita
suffragentur.
mea shows plainly that the Demerita must be in a true; not in an imputed
sense; as must the alias probitatis merita which are opposed to them; and
therefore it follows; either that a Person innocent of the crime objected may
appeal; or that he must be forced to own that by virtue of his Oath, whereof he
is not guilty; which were great impiety.

4. That, Si-etc. Ipsum Rectorem, seu alias Personas, seu eorum aliquem
occasion Expulsionis, vel correctionis hujusmodi nunquam persequar, molestabo,
vel inquietabo; per me, alium, vel alios; seu ab aliis persequi, molestari, seu
inquietari ea de causa, quantum in me fuerit, permittam: sed pure, sponte,
simpliciter, and absolute omni actioni contra Rectorem, aut alios dicti
Collegii Scholares, quomodolibet appellationi, and querelae in ea part
faciendis; ac quarumcunque literarum impetrationi, precibus principum,
Praelatorum, Procerum, magnatum, and aliorum quorumcunque etc. renuncio, de
Juramento Scholarium.
it is the plain design of this Oath to secure the College from any action at
Law, or any other disturbance from abroad; and that in the recital of the
different appeals, and remedies, which are there prohibited, That of appeal to
the Visitor, which was most obvious to be thought on, is not expressly mentioned
nor forbidden: and therefore that those General words, may in an equitable
sense be intended to restrain the party from all appeals to an Extraneous, not
to a domestic Court; to one that is a foreign Judge, not to a Visitor, who is
a part, and the first Member, of the College.

5. That these interpretations of the Oath ought to be received, as being most
consonant to Law; and such as are least tending to establish arbitrary power;
and to ex^lude legal remedies against wrong-doing.

Mr. Colmer therefore finding that he had liberty of appeal from grievances;
and knowing that none could receive his appeal, but the Ordinary; made his
application to the Bishop of Exeter, Successor of the Founder of that College,
Patron, Ordinary and Visitor thereof. He insisted much on his own innocence,
represented to his Lordship the injustice of the Rector's procedures, the
invalidity of the evidence against him; and the credibility of the proofs
offerr'd in his favor. Among other things, he showed to his Lordship the
Affidavit made by Ann Sparrow, the Mother of the Bastard Child; who being put
to her Oath before an Alderman of Oxford, acquitted Mr. Colmer; and named the
Person one Roberts, who had tempted her to accuse him. His Lordship was farther
informed, that a great part of the College were so sensible of the injuries
done to him; and so much at variance with his judges on that account; that,
without the Ordinarie's interposition, these differences could not probably be
composed. And lastly he begged of his Lordship to receive his appeal; to grant
him a new hearing only; That so the proofs of his innocence, and his guilt
might equally be produced; and, according to the just weight of either of them,
the Sentence against him might be confirmed or annulled.

My Lord of Exeter had now a very difficult choice either of taking upon him a
long, expensive, and withal an invidious trouble, or of neglecting his duty,
and hazarding the rgihts of his Successors. The contentious humor of the
Rector, which in former instances had sufficiently discovered itself, gave him
prospect of opposition; and his Lordship was not insensible that the Nature of
the Cause, which was brought before him, was capable of misconstruction. But
these Prudential Dissuasives weighed not so much with him, as the stronger
motives of honor, justice, and conscience, which induced him to receive the
appeal. He was sworn to preserve the rights of his See; and this of receiving
appeals and visiting Exeter-College was not only one of them, but so much the
more necessary to be preserved, as his Lordship's Diocese has a more than
ordinary relation to that College. He knew, that these arbitrary, and illegal
Methods, however now supported by specious pretenses, might easily on worse
occasions be drawn into precedents; and might give color for the usurpation of
such an uncontrolable power, as neither was just nor fit for such a Rector to
enjoy. And, as to this Case itself, the dismission of it by the Vice-Chan: the
hasty, and unstatutable proceedings of the Rector, the resentments of part of
the College on that account, the invalidity of the evidence against Mr. Colmer;
and the contradictory testimonies of credible witnesses then and since offered,
were sufficient pleas for a farther enquiry. Since therefore the Appeal was
neither frivolous nor vexatious, his Lordship was convinced, that the admission
of it was not a matter of favor, but justice; and that he, as superior judge,
ought of right, and equity to receive it.

His Lordship was thus satisfied of the justice of the Appeal; nor was he less
convinced of his power of receiving it. He had good reason to think, that the
Law, and the College Statutes supported this his authority; and the arguments,
on which he chiefly grounded his opinion, are (for the satisfaction of others,)
here recited, and made public.

1. Since, as it is evident in this Case, A Fellow may appeal; there must be a
competent Judge of the Appeal; and not only no other immediate Judge, than the
Bishop, can be assigned; but all other See the Statute concerning Visitation.
Cui quidem Reverendo Patri, ac Deputato, ac praeterea nemini tanquam Patrono,
and Ordinario Visitatori, vigore praesentis Statuti, plenam concedimus
potestatem etc. Et nulli alii: ibid. etc.
Judges are, in causes relating to the College, expressly by Statute excluded.

2. The force of the word Ordinarius does necessarily import universality of
Jurisdiction; and therefore where no intermedial Jurisdiction is placed any
where else, this, to prevent the defect of justice, must be let in.

3. Although, by the Statutes, the Visitation of the whole College be restrained
to requisition, or five Years; yet Patronos, and Visitatores relinquimus, ut ad
alvearium conservandum invigilent; ut Statuta dicti Collegii firmiter
observentur etc. See the Statute concerning Visitation.
the words in the beginning of the Statute are general, and apt for an
universal provision; and cannot be satisfied by a Quinquennial Visitation of 3
days; nor by one upon requisition; For there may be a combination of the
majority of the Seniors, who only have power to desire it.

4. The Visitor was upon like reasons limited to a Quinquennial as a Bishop to
a Triennial Visitation; It was the only design of the Canon in one Case, and of
the Statute in the other to prevent the Charge of Proxies, and Sportulage; and
therefore as a Bishop when barred from Solemn, and costly Visitations, is not
restrained from exercising the ordinary acts of Jurisdiction; so neither,
during the Quinquennial Term, does a Visitor's power cease; but upon Emergent
occasions, in any grievance, or Appeal, without any Charge of the College,
Exerts it self. The General enquiry into matters undetected in both cases is
limited; but the Cognizance of matters delated to them is in neither restrained.

Upon the whole then, the Bishop was sensible, that Mr. Colmer having a
presumptive greivance done him in a matter of a high nature, had free liberty
of making an Appeal; that his Lordship, as Ordinary, was Judge of Appeals; and
therefore since the Appeal was lawful, and the matter of it just, and
equitable; and the Cognizance of it lay before him, the Visitor as in justice,
and prudence he ought, received and admitted it.

2 Concerning the Proceedings of the Bishop and his Commissary upon the Appeal.
There can be no greater Evidence of the calmness, and deliberation; which his
Lordship used in his proceedings upon the Appeal, than the great distance of
the dates between the Appeal and the Commission: the one presented on the 24
Oct. 1689. and the other was not granted before the 21 of Feb. following.
Indeed his Lordship being willing, not to expose the authority of the Rector,
at first tried the mildest and most private methods of enquiring into this
Cause, and adjusting it. He, by letter required 2 of the Fellows, and as many
more as the College should think fit, to attend him at London; and to bring
with them a Copy of the proceedings against Mr. Colmer, and resolved, if any
Evidence could be offered by them, to confirm the Sentence against him. This
was so just; and so reasonable a demand from a Visitor, that I doubt not, the
Reader will be surpised to hear, that it met with a denial. A Letter, or
rather, a Remonstrance was sent by the Rector; and in it the Visitor was
acquainted, that no Appeal at all lay in this Case, and if any, should lie the
matter would not fall under his but the V. Ch's. Cognizance. What slender
grounds there were for these pretenses, will herafter appear; at present, I
shall pursue the Relation of Matter of Fact; and give you the success of this
answer. Upon this refusal, which was a new presumption of guilt; and upon the
repeated instances of Mr. Colmer; his Lordship being, immediately after
Parliament, obliged to attend the care of his Diocese, granted a Commission,
and entrusted this Cause, to Dr. Masters his Commissary. If there was no other
proof of his Lordship's impartiality in this affair, there never was a clearer
instance of it given, than in one circumstance of this Commission. For though Mr.
Colmer's Lawyers did, not without color of Law, insist, that such Commissions
of rehearing ought to admit of no more Evidence, than what, in the last
instance, had occasioned the first Sentence; yet because his Lordship had heard
that the Rector had obtained some fresh proofs of Mr. Colmer's guilt, he was so
kind to Dr. Bury, and so little favorable to the Appellant, that he gave the
Rector leave to bring in what fresh matter he could to justify his former
judgment. So that though the former Evidence had been defective; and the process
upon it illegal and arbitrary yet was the Bishop resolved to expose the
Appellant to any fresh charge; and not to suffer him, if guilty, to take any
advantage of the Rector's hasty, and Exorbitant proceeding. This single
consideration would acquit My Lord of Exeter from any partiality to Mr Colmer;
and yet, since this sometimes has been, without any ground, objected to his
Lordship. I shall take leave to anticipate one passage of the like nature in
his General Visitation; and to give it place here. When the Bishop had by
Letter, and Commission endeavored to Convict Mr. Colmer; and found at last,
that the Rector, and his party would not be brought to accuse him; His Lordship
in his Visitation, among the Articles exhibited to those Fellows, who owned his
Authority, made this One: to discover to him any Person in the College who was
guilty or suspected of Incontinence. When in their answers no body was returned
suspected of that Crime; But the Rector himself; When no proofs against Mr.
Colmer were produced; and two Material Affidavits which are here annexed, were
offered and taken in his favor; His Lordship according to the Method of legal
Process was obliged to acquit, and restore him. But at the same time the Bishop
openly said to him? I was resolved to have Expelled you my self at this
Visitation; If I could have by any means obtained legal proof of the crime
alleged against You; And I do now admonish You to prostrate Your self before
God with Prayers and the sharpest repentance; If Your Conscience upbraids You
with the guilt of this Lewdness.

After this short digression (which is a full answer to the Charge of
partiality in his Lordship) it is necessary to return to the Commission it
self, and to give an account of the Acts done by Dr. Masters in pursuance of
it. The Commission it self, being granted on Mr. Colmer's request, was wholly
restrained to his Cause: the Powers given were of no farther Extent, than to
the Matter of the Appeal; and the Process upon it was suitable to the
Commission. Whether we look on the Citations that were served, or the Judicial
Acts, that were Executed; these limitations are every where strictly observed:
And more remarkably, when the Sportulage, which is due to the Visitor's
Commissary upon a Visitation, was offered to Dr. Masters, he refused the
present; and disavow'd his coming upon a Visitation, as he had before done in
Court. So groundless altogether are their arguments, who maintain, that this
particular enquiry into Mr. Colmer's Case only, and that Civiliter, can be
intended or taken for the Visitor's General, and Solemn Visitation which is
always Criminally.

When Dr. Masters came into the Chapel, he read his Commission; and acquainted
the Rector with the liberty there given him, not only to justify his former
proceedings against Mr. Colmer; but to give in any other fresh Evidence against
the Party Expelled. The Rector was so far from complying with these just and
equitable demands; that he openly denied the jurisdiction of that Court; and
set out the bounds, or rather the infinity of his own uncontrollable power. He
said, That he might Expel all his Fellows if he pleased; that he was absolute,
and accountable to None; and that however arbitrary his Government might be,
there was no remedy to be obtained against it. At last having 3 days given him
to make out his Charge against the Appellant, he made no other use of it, than
to draw up two protestations against the Visitor, with a postscript of
Allegations against Mr. Colmer. In the first, it was alleged not only that no
Appeal in General could lie in this Case; but that if any lay, the Visitor was
not the Competent Judge of it, but the Vice Chancellor. The Commissary was
abundantly satisfied, as of the Lawfulness of the Appeal; so of the
Jurisdiction of the Visitor in Cases of Appeal, and pronounced for the
validity of the same. He knew that the Vice Chancellor (whose right he would
have been very tender of) neither had any title to the Cognizance of this Case,
nor laid claim to any. It Is true indeed, that by the Rector's Oath, if there be
any strife or discord between him and his Fellows, he is obliged to stand to
the Arbitrament of the Chancellor, or in his absence, of the Vice Chancellor of
Oxford.

But I Since no Jurisdiction is given to the Vice Chancellor in the Statutes
over the Fellows they are not obliged to own him as Judge; But the Rector only
is bound to submit to him, as Arbitrator. The Fellows therefore must not
necessarily have recourse to him; but, upon recourse had, the Rector is sworn
not to decline his decision.

2 That Part of the Oath extends to those private Contests which the Rector
shall have with the Fellows in his Personal Capacity agreeable to the Law of
the University; but not to those that shall arise, when he acts Collegiately in
Concurrence with the Majority of the Seniors. In the one Case, this intermedial
arbitrament, for the ease of the Visitor and of the Fellows, is allowed: and
the Fellows have the Security of the Rector's Oath for his acquiescence. In the
other, the Cause is immediately devolved to the Ordinary.

3 At the hearing of this Cause, the Rector expressly denied, that the
Vice Chancellor, or any other ought to intermeddle in it.

This, and this only was the Exception taken to the Jurisdiction; nor were the
Allegations against the Appellant more Weighty or Material. The crime of
Incontinence in General was objected to him; and some Collateral circumstances,
which should make out the Charge, were recited, and tendered to the Commissary.
But when Proof of them was required from the Rector; it was answered that he
was not obliged to give it; When a Lawful Cause of Expulsion was insisted on,
it was pretended, that a reasonable Cause was sufficient, and when a reasonable
Cause was to be desined, it was such as the Rector and the majority of the 7
seniors should think to be reasonable.

The Commissary was sensible; That a legal conviction must be founded on such
evidence, as is agreeable to the rules of law, and justice; and that an
uncontrolable power of judging that to be evidence, which is not so, is
equivalent to an arbitrary power of expelling men without evidence. And
therefore since there was no other evidence of the Rector's despotick, and
absolute power, but his own allegation; since there was no cause of the
Appellant's expulsion given; and no proof of any crime so much as offered, The
Commissary as he was obliged by Law, and Justice, reversed the Rector's
interlocutory decree; and by a desinitive sentence restored Mr. Colmer.

It is evident now that the Rector had all advantages allowed him of
justifying, or of corroborating his sentence; That more than usual time was
granted to him for the obtaining fresh proofs; and an Extraordinary liberty was
afforded him of producing them; and that, in short, if Mr. Colmer be guilty, he
ows his impunity not to the Favor of the Bishop; but to the obstinacy of the
Rector.

3. Concerning the Offenses of the Rector and Others, which obliged the Visitor
to make his solemn and General Visitation.
Nothing but the concurrence of so many exorbitant crimes, as at this time
appeared in the College, could have persuaded the Bishop to Visit the College
in person; and to wave those just excuses, which his business and indisposition
of body now afforded him; It will be necessary therefore, before we enter upon
the Visitation itself, to give a previous account of those offenses, which
occasioned it; and to begin with that, which we cannot name the first, nor the
greatest; but which has nearest relation to the former discourse; and may
therefore not improperly be placed next to it. As Soon as Mr. Colmer was
reinstated by the Commissary; he was, immediately after his departure again
Expelled or rather disowned by the Rector. The pretenses and colors upon which
he now proceeded, and the management of this process were more surprising, even
then his former conduct in this affair. He cited Mr. Colmer to answer to a new
Charge; and at the meeting disir'd a Public Notary to attest; That he did not
own him to be a rightful Fellow of the said College, but a pretended Fellow;
and as such, he would proceed against him, upon farther evidence of
incontinency. Now it is not easy for a less subtle man, than the Rector to
imagine, why he should deny him to be Fellow; and yet proceed against him. If
he was Fellow, why disavow'd? and if not, how could he fall under his
jurisdiction? The Rector's authority over him was founded on Mr. Colmer's
relation to the College; and why should the one remain, if the other was
determined? If Dr. Masters proceedings were valid, why is Mr. Colmer's right
disputed; and if there was a nullity in them; why is his present right implied,
and confessed by a subsequent Expulsion? Mr. Colmer therefore told the Rector,
that if he would not own the Sentence passed by the Bishop's Commissary he
thought he had no jurisdiction over him; There being no Statute provided for
the Expulsion of Intruders, and pretended Fellows. But if the Rector would own
that Sentence, he was ready to answer to any new Charge, from which that
Sentence did not clear him. The Rector persisted to deny the Commissary's
authority: and upon that account only Mr. Colmer thought it not advisable for
him, nor a duty incumbent upon him to submit to the Rector: who upon his own
Principles had no jurisdiction: and from whom there could be no expectation of
justice by what he had said, and heretofore done. He left the Room therefore:
and in his absence, part of a Paper which the Rector had formerly Printed,
concerning Mr. Colmers Case: was read before the Seniors: and, upon this
evidence, without any witnesses called, or proof given, Mr. Colmer's name was
struck out of the book: and somewhat was declared: either that he now was not,
or that hereafter he should not be Fellow. And now, since we have had occasion
to mention that Paper, we should not let it go without some particular remark:
and its due Character: It is designed for the sum total of all the Rector's
evidence, and the defense of Mr. Colmer's Expulsion: and is wrote, with as much
prudence as the affair itself, of which it treats, was managed with as much
decency, as Mr. Colmer would wish to his adversary: and with as much truth, as
we might justly expect from a man of the Rector's principles.

These unjustifiable proceedings carried on so rudely, at this time, in such a
manner, must be intended and taken as direct affronts to the Visitor, and his
authority. However his Lordship's resentments were not so heightened by these
injuries done to himself: as by the other scandalous offenses of the Rector;
which were levelled against his Savior. For not long before this time, an
Heretical book, entitled the Naked Gospel, was published by Dr. Bury; in which
with some weak arguments, and disagreeable mirth, The Author endeavors to
confute the divinity of Christ; and to expose it.

The Godhead of our Savior (who in some places is named a Crucified Vagabond)
is declared to be a dangerous and impertinent Speculation, and (to speak in
this Author's Idiom) a silly Qnestion, and a Push-pin point. The Fundamental
Articles of our Faith are there styled Gross impositions; and matters of no
certainty, nor perhaps of credibility. The Council of Nice is by him
represented as an ignorant, and Partial Synod; and the Decrees of it such, as
were made according to the interest of Parties, not the merits of the Cause.
His way of reasoning is much like that, when heretofore he pretended to sole,
unqualified, and incommunicable power from the words in the College Statutes:
sit unus Rector; though in other places the officers and seniors have a joint
authority; and are Commissioners with him. In short, all the absurd and
desperate opinions of the Anti-Trinitarians abroad are here repeated, and
avowed: all the old misapplied citations, of which the more learned Arians are
now ashamed, are here revived and enforced; and indeed the whole System of the
Socinian doctrine is by this Plagiary transcribed, and made his own with the
new additions only of worse language, and less decency. This book the Rector,
being then Pro-Vice-Chancellor of Oxford, carried to the Press; and, by the
authority of his Character prevailed with the Printer to print it without any
other license. As Soon as it was finished; he dispersed it to some Friends; and
intended, as he himself since professes, to have presented it to Convocation.
But when his Friends had dissuaded him from so dangerous an attempt; He
resolved in a second Edition to mollify some harsh expressions, to carry on the
same design with more cunning; and to give as great a stroke to the Divinity of
Christ, with more security to himself. Thus this Blasphemous Treatise, with
some few variations, sometimes altered for the better, more often for the
worse, was published by him, and his confident Sir Kingston, with more
openness, and assurance than the former.

It was time now for the Bishop to be mindful of those earnest entreaties and
prayers, by which the Founders of that College have adjur'd him to preserve the
Christian Faith in it. He foresaw the sad consequences, which must necessarily
ensue if Dr. Bury, were permitted, in such a Station, by the power of his
irresistible authority, to publish such doctrines; and to enforce them. This
book of the Rector's was not more complained of to the Visitor, than his life;
and his Morals discredited the College as much as his Speculations. He openly
sold the offices and places of the College; and consequently the Collegiates
were exposed to the impositions of those, who had purchased a right of
defrauding them. His Chastity was said to be so notorious; that he seemed to
have other designs in Expelling Mr. Colmer, than the punishment of Vice; and to
have acted more like a Rival, than a Judge. His indifference to order in the
Chapel; His neglect of discipline in the House; His not maintaining of
Lectures, etc. made the whole College, as far as in him lay, one continued
disorder. So that the Dissentions of the Fellows upon these arbitrary
proceedings grew high; and, without the interposing care of the Visitor, there
was no prospect of quiet, and agreement. It was easy now to foresee, that
nothing could put a stop to the approaching ruin of the College, but a
Visitation: no other way was left of reforming these Enormities; or of
composing these Divisions; no other method could prevent the change of this
Nursery of Religion, into a Seminary of Socinianism; and therefore his Lordship
was resolved to discharge the great trust, which was happily reposed in him:
and so far to imitate his Noble Predecessor, who had at great expenses founded
that College, as to exempt him-self from no trouble, or charge, in reforming,
and preserving it.

4. Concerning the Visitation it self, the Evidence there given, and the
Sentence there pronounced.
HItherto, in all the former proceedings, no other power was allowed to his
Lordship by the Rector, but a General Visitation: The Universal authority, which
the Statutes repose in him, was according to his interpretation, wholly
resolved into a Quinquennial Enquiry: and all the General words, which give
Latitude, and full Extent to his power, were pretended to have reference to no
other, than this Jurisdiction. His Lordship therefore being willing to reform
the College not only by Legal, but Unexceptionable methods, appointed the 16 of
June 1690. for the day of his Solemn and General Visitation to be held in the
Chapel, and served the College with a previous Citation in order to it. Now
was it hardly to be expected, that the exercise of this unquestionable power,
which had always been owned and confessed, could afford any color of dispute,
even to those, who always thought it more wisdom to put of their own Trial,
than to make their Defense. And yet, when the Bishop went in Person to the
Chapel; where the Rector, and Fellows had been cited to appear, he found the
doors designedly shut against him. Nine of the Fellows, indeed who were
sensible of the Rector's Arbitrary proceedings, and of the Bishop's undoubted
Authority, attended his Lordship, and owned his Visitatorial power. But the
Rector and some Fellows with him appeared; and in a very tumultuous manner in
the open Quadrangle offered a Protestation against his Authority; and would not
permit him to have any entrance into the Chapel; which was the proper place
for them to tender the Protestation, and for him to receive it. Other
indignities and disrespects were then offered to his Lordship, which, by his
order, I forbear to report; even the indecent behavior of Sir Kingston, which
deserves a particular mention, but that it would force such reflections, as I
make it my business to avoid.

The substance of their Protestation was this, that the Bishop's power of
Visitation is not general, but limited and restrained to once in 5 Years, that
Dr. Masters by a Commission from the Bishop lately exercised acts of
Jurisdiction, and Visitation in the College, in restoring an expelled Fellow;
and that therefore within the term of 5 Years, which was not yet expired, his
Lordship was barred from any other Visitation.

This Argument or rather Cavil is so very weak in it self; and supported by so
little color of reason, that it is necessary to beg the Reader's pardon for
troubling him with a solid confutation of it: For it is evident, beyond
dispute, That

1. The Nature and being of a Court can be no other, than what is granted in
the Commission, on which it depends: and therefore since the Commission, which
is here annexed, is restrained to the Cause of Appeal only, the acts of the
Commissary were, and must be agreeable to it, and are null in themselves, if
they exceed those restrictions.

2 The nature of a Visitation is a voluntary enquiry into matters criminal, and
correction thereupon; But the Matter transacted by Dr. Masters was a nude
Cognition of a grievance done to a certain Person, at his instance, and ended
in Restitution only.

3 The nature of a Visitation of a College requires it to be general, both as
to Crimes, and Persons; But to this Court were called those Persons alone, who
had been partakers in the personal wrong.

4 The Commissioner openly declared; that he did not then come upon a
Visitation; and therefore refused the Sportulage, in that Case appointed by the
Founder.

5. The Rector, who gives a new authority to the Commissary, when gone,
Protested against him, when present; The Judicial Acts, that he did, were
neither owned nor observed; and the Process upon the Appeal, which is now said
to be a Visitation, was then pretended by the same Man to have been invalid,
and null.

The Visitor therefore esteeming the injury, and violences offered to him, as
an invasion of the Prerogative (the Visitatorial power being first derived
from, and confirmed by the Crown) applied himself by Petition to their
Majesty's in Council.

The application to Council in things of this Nature has allways been
warranted by Custom; the Precedents of their final decision, or arbitration are
not few, and their orders have usually by mutual consent of both Parties been
obeyed. But now the Rector openly declared that he would not acquiesce in their
determination of the affair, nor be concluded by it: whether upon notice of
this, or whether their Lordships did not take this Cause to fall under their
Cognizance, or upon any other motives (which being things secret and uncertain
it is not proper to enquire into) Their Lordships thought fit wholly to dismiss
this Cause from that Board; and to refer the Visitor to the usual course of Law.

The Bishop finding himself left to the methods of Law, again took the advice
of the most learned Council in the Laws, both Common, and Civil, and was by
them satisfied in these three points; which in the precedent discourse have
been stated, and settled,

1. That he, as Ordinary, had power of receiving, and determining Appeals.

2. That the Commission made to his Commissary was only a Commission of Appeal
restrained to the hearing and determining of the cause of that appellant only.

3. That being constituted by the Statutes Visitor and empowr'd without
requisition to visit once in five Years; and the execution of that Commission
not being a Visitation, the Bishop might Visit, as soon as he thought fit.

His Lorship being thus confirmed in his opinion, went down to Oxford in his
way to his Diocese, with a resolution to Visit; but to deferr his Visitation,
till the meeting of the Parliament should oblige him to return to London.
During his stay the Rector convening all the Fellows in an insulting manner
told them, that he had defeated the Bishop's design of Visitation; and had
thrown him flat on his back; farther adding to that part of them who had
submitted to the Visitor, that though he had power to expel them, yet now he
would only Register them: But they were not to look on this as a Pardon, but as
a Reprieve; For that they should continue at his Mercy, and removable at his
Will.

Whereupon, Complaint of these Arbitrary proceedings being made to his
Lordship, then at Christ-Church; He being sensible, that inevitable ruin to the
College must follow, if some speedy stop was not put to the Rector's Exorbitant
designs, resolved immediately to proceed to a Visitation, and served a Citation
on the Rector, and Fellows (being then in Town) to appear after some few days
in the College Hall.

At the day appointed, two hours earlier, than usual, the Rector ordered the
College prayers to be said, and after the end of them, instead of opening the
gates, as he ought, he ordered them to be more firmly barred, and secured;
resolving, as he had before kept the Bishop out of the Chapel, now to double
his rudeness, and shut him out of the College. The Bishop knowing his temper,
and apprehending such usage from him, resolved (as he had been before by his
Council advised) to have kept the Visitation as near the College as
conveniently he could; but hearing afterward that the Doors of the College
were opened; and that a great uproar was occasioned thereby; he went with all
convenient speed to put an end to the confusion; and to proceed, as quietly as
might be in the Visitation.

How the Gates were opened, or by whom, the Bishop knows not; and less can he
understand, by what color of Law, at that time, they were shut up. But
probable it is, since the Gates were opened from the College side, that some of
the Fellows finding themselves unstatutably confined by the Rector, and having
no prospect of liberty within the three days appointed for the Visitation,
thought fit to free themselves from an illegal and arbitrary Imprisonment. And
if any tumult happened on that account, the guilt of it must certainly lie on
those, who by their unjustifiable act first occasioned it; and afterward, by
their rude, and violent interposition, promoted it.

As soon as the Bishop came into the Hall, the Rector with like rudeness, as
formerly, threw in the former Protestation against the Bishop's Jurisdiction.
The Bishop however permitted that the Protestation should be read, (as far as
the Fellow, that accompanied the Rector, could read it,) and upon the Rector's
desire, promised that it should be entered in the Register. His Lordship farther
desired the Rector to sit down, who returned this answer only to the Civility:
No I will stand by what I do. After this indecent language, in a Contemptuous
manner, He went out of the Hall; and refused to attend the Visitation; or
indeed, the Issue of his own Plea. Now however a Plea to a Jurisdiction may
exalt a man against him who has no Jurisdiction at all; yet against a known
Ordinary Judge in case he should seem to intermeddle beyond his Jurisdiction,
great Temper, and Reverence is to be used; the matter is to be debated before
him; and his judgment is to govern the question till farther Appeal. With all
which the shutting up the Chapel Door at one time, and the College-Gates at
another, the flinging in a Protestation, and rudely receding without expecting
the Success of it, are very inconsistent: a defense, clothed with these
circumstances, is so far from tempering the Contempt, that is adds thereto
Enmity to the Judge, and despite to the Law; than which there can be no
greater aggravations.

However his Lordship without taking notice, or advantage of these indecencies,
ordered the Protestation to be read throughout; and Proclamation to be thrice
made for the Rector and protesting Fellows to appear; and to justify their
protestation; and to hear his Lordship's Judgment therein: but when none would
answer, tho diverse of the protesting Fellows were present; he observed the
usual forms of process; and proceeded on regularly in the business of his
Visitation. The Articles of Enquiry were read; and the Bishop, as by Statute
directed, gave an Oath to such of the Fellows, as owned his Lordship's
Authority; and obliged them to discover to him such Enormities in the College,
as by public fame, or otherwise should come to their knowledge. It is not
thought convenient, nor is it consistent with Statute, to discover the names of
those that detected each crime; But in General the returns upon Oath to the
Interrogations were these;

1. That the Rector was the reputed Author of a Book, called the Naked Gospel;
that he sat at S. Athanasius's Creed in the Chapel; that he was generally
suspected of Heresy; and did not read Prayers in the Chapel as often, as by
Statute he was obliged

2. That he pretended to an Arbitrary, power over the Fellows; and had put some
of them out of Commons for obeying the Inhibition of the Visitor in Mr.
Colmer's Case.

3. That he had sold Places and Offices in the College, particularly those of
the Cook, and Butler; and proposed the Illegal Exaction of Bonds from the
Fellows, who should thereafter be Elected, whereby they should engage to seek
no reparation if he expelled 'em.

4. That he was by public Fame, upon probable grounds suspected of
Incontinence.

5. That Dr. Hern, having a Parsonage, above the value limited in the Statute;
kept his place, contrary to the intent of the Founder.

6. That Mr. Vivian was Elected into Mr. Colmer's place being then full.

7. And lastly: That Divinity Disputations were seldom held: the Philosophical
Lectures performed by Deputies; the Catechist's Duty not observed; and in
short, the whole Discipline of the College neglected.

The Visitor seeing the Rector and others charged with some of these Crimes
upon Oath, and suspected of others, called them again in Court to answer to
these Accusations: and when they could not be brought to appear, his Lordship
thought fit, not to punish the contempt of the Rector till he had taken all
farther just, and legal methods of detecting the Crime, and expected his
submission and innocence to the last day. In the mean time his Lordship found,
that some of the Fellows, who factiously abetted Dr. Bury in these his
arbitrary proceedings could not be brought to appear before him, and to own his
power: this great, and repeated contempt met with no other punishment than a
suspension ab Officio and Beneficio, for three Months, and farther, till they
should be brought to own his Authority. And since Sir Kingston, the Person who
had before rudely affronted the Bishop, immediately upon his Suspension, the
same day, exercised his Office in the Chapel, upon the doors whereof the
Sentence had been affixed; the Bishop according to the direction of the
Statutes, upon so great a contempt, heightened with so many aggravations,
thought fit, to Excommunicate him.

The substance of the Evidence, which was taken before his Lordship, and upon
which his Sentences were grounded, was in short this which follows. As to Dr.
Hern, it appeared by the Register of the Lord Bishop of London; That he was
Admitted and Collated to the Parish of St. Anns 1 Apr. 1686. and upon comparing
of the Statute of the College, with the Act of Parliament relating to the
Rector of that Parish; it appeared, that such maintenance was by the Act
settled, and such residence enjoined, as is wholly incompatible with his
Fellowship. The Condition of his Parsonage is, that he shall reside upon it
four parts of five in the Year; and the Condition of his Fellowship is, that he
shall not be absent from the College above fifty days. All livings rated above
8 l. per Annum in any public Records are inconsistent with a Fellowship; and
upon this, 100l. are settled by Act of Parliament: besides several rents, and
other perquisites.

Dr. Hern, by this direct clear, and authentic Evidence, had no right to his
Fellowship; and by his former acts in matters of the like nature, had no Plea
for favor: He having been instituted at one time, to Blandford, and at another
time to the Rectory of Hayman in Dorset-shire, took occasion still to keep
himself free from the danger of the Statute; by a resignation at Eleven month's
end; and thus, by observing the letter of the Law, eluded the design of the
Legislator. The Rector had often openly threatened him with Expulsion on these
accounts; but he knew the methods, that would pacify this Governor, and was
careful to prevent, at least to appease his Indignation. The Visitor saw
therefore that it was a Crime of the Rector and the College, not to have
declared his palce void long since; and therefore, now at last took away that
Scandal from the College by removing him.

Concerning Mr. Vivian, it appeared that he had been elected into Mr. Colmer's
place; which was never void: since Mr. Colmer was not then Statutably Expelled;
and the business of his Appeal was at the time of the Election depending before
the Visitor. And since Mr. Colmer, now appeared, and was ready to answer to
what ever could be alleged against him, and neither in the detections of the
Fellows, nor otherwise was charged with suspicion of Incontinence; and by the
Oath of two Persons, that appeared in Court, was acquitted from the former
Accusations, the Visitor could find no cause to displace or expel him.

And lastly as to the Rector, Litchfield the Printer of the Naked Gospel, came
into Court, and attested upon Oath, that he received that Heretical Book from
his hands; and was Authorized by him, being then Pro Vice Chancellor, to print
it. It was swore that the former Cook, and present Butler gave him, one 150 l.
the other 170l. for their Places; and the Bond itself for the Payment of the
Money with the Rector's Receipt in his own hand on the back of it was brought
into Court. Concerning the 4th. Article, three Affidavits were taken, which out
of respect to the Rector's Character, it is thought fit at present to conceal.

His Lordship was now fully satisfied, that it was not consistent with the
interest of the College, the reputation of the University, or the pious design
of the Founder; to permit the Rector, any longer to maintain such a Station, as
he now had in the College, and University. His Lordship therefore found himself
obliged to deprive him, which he resolved to do confining himself strictly to
those methods, which the Statutes direct in the deprivation of a Rector. And
therefore, since there are some words in the Statute that seem to desire, and
recommend to the Visitor a concurrent Vote of the Majority of the Seven Senior
Fellows there present, to strengthen, and confirm his Act of Deprivation, the
Visitor took the consent of Four of them accordingly; whose names are
subscribed to the Instrument hereafter annexed. If exception be taken by any,
to the Persons concurring, as being not really the Seven Seniours of the
College; they may know that the Bishop was satisfied, that the Statute was
sufficiently observed in the concurrence of those that subscribed to the
Deprivation. For

1. The Statute by maxim Seniores rather directs than commands the Concurrence
of the Seniors. The Founder requires indeed the consent of Four Fellows; but he
wishes only, that if it be possible, those Fellows, that consent may be the
Seniors. Neither were those the very Seniors that Expelled Mr. Colmer, but only
the Seniors present.

2 The constant usage in this and all Colleges interprets those words of the
Statute. The concurrence of Seniors to all public Acts, is always understood
to mean the consent of those that are (not absolutely and truly the Seniors of
the College, but) the most Senior of those that are present; and he, that by
his own crime, incapacitates himself from performing any Acts of his place, is
by the rules of Law, and Reason, reputed as absent.

3. It would be absurd in expelling a Rector to require the Consent of those
Fellows who are participes criminis; and are by the Visitor him-self, upon that
contempt, already suspended ab Officio, as well as, a beneficio; and so made
incapable of giving any legal concurrence.

His Lordship having thus according to Law deprived the Rector, knew how little
submission was to be expected from him; and therefore thought it necessary to
enforce his Sentence. The only Method of doing it was such, as the Statute
directed; and since in Cases of Obstinacy, Censures are there expressly
prescribed, by which must be meant Ecclesiastical Censures (this, as all other
Colleges in Oxford being exempted from Episcopal and Metropolitical
Jurisdiction; and immediately subject to the Ecclestastical Jurisdiction of the
Visitor thereof, if he be a Person Competent and fit to Exercise such Authority)
the Bishop as Ordinary, thought convenient to give the Rector Seven days after
monition for his removal; and in Case of farther Contumacy, pronounced him
Excommunicate.

The account of the Visitation being thus given it may not be immaterial to
add; that upon his Deprivation, such of the Fellows of Exeter College, as were
capable, according to the order appointed in the Statutes, proceeded to the
Election of a New Rector; and Unanimously chose Mr. Painter, a person of
unexceptionable worth and integrity.

And lastly, for the Honor of the University of Oxford, it must not be
omitted, that immediately afther this discovery of the Author of the Naked
Gospel, which was made by his Lordship; The University, being now sensible of
the place, where the book was Printed, and of the Author himself, who had
perfidiously used the color of their authority in publication of it, by a
solemn Decree condemned that Heretical book, and particularly several
propositions therein contained; and ordered it to be publicly burnt in the
Schools.

Thus have we now given a full account of an intricate Cause; intricate only,
as designedly perplexed by those, who, being afraid of the Sentence have
disputed every step of the process. And indeed, if we look back, and take a
review of the whole Cause, it will be easy to observe, That, the strength of
the Adversaries consists more in the number of their Cavils, than in the force
of them. For first is it not evident, that by Law, and the Statutes of the
College, no man ought to be divested of his Freehold without legal conviction?
Was there any concludent circumstance, in Mr. Colmer's Case alleged, upon which
he could be legally convicted? at least was there any proof of such allegation?
If we let in the supplemental evidence, which was taken after the Sentence, and
therefore cannot in equity, justify, or support it; even in that, there is
hardly ground for jealousy, much less for certainty. Where the same man is
Accuser, sole Witness, and Judge, are not the proceedings, if not null, yet at
least, justly suspected? And, where there is ground of suspicion ought not the
Ordinary to admit an appeal, and to allow a rehearing? If there was not
therefore such proof, nor such legal process against Mr. Colmer, as the Statute
required; it is evident, from the Statute itself, that he is not barred from
appeal. It Is apparent it was not the design of the Founder to make the Rector
absolute, and uncontrollable; and to set up a Court in his breast, from which
no writ of Error, or appeal should ly. At least, it is not easy to imagine why
Mr. Colmer should be more forsworn for appealing, than the late Rector now is:
Both were expelled by competent Judges; both are equally barred from appeal;
and the only difference between them is, that there are legal proofs against
the latter, but not against the former. If therefore an appeal is to be
admitted, who but the Ordinary is the Proper judge of it? and what application
upon such grievances has ever been made to any other, than the Visitor? In all
other Colleges, where the Visitors are restrained from the frequency of solemn,
and chargeable Visitations; the power of receiving appeals oftener, has either
not been disputed, or upon dispute, adjudg'd to them, and admitted.
Extraordinary emergencies have always been allowed to have speedy remedies; nor
is it reasonable, that no redress should be obtained, till either the grievance
be of five Years standing, or till the parties obnoxious desire a Visitation.
If the Rector, and the majority of the seven Seniors, spend the revenues of
the College, and commit dilapidations; can there no stop be put to the
exorbitance till the Quinquennial term is expired? And is not the College to be
visited, till it shall be wholly ruined? The Bishop then had power of receiving
appeals; and as there never was a greater necessity for the exercise of that
power than in this instance, so was there never more moderation used in the
acts of it. What interest could the Bishop of Exeter have in this Cause, but
the performance of Justice? and what design could the Rector have in not
producing his former proofs, but the establishment of an arbitrary and
uncontrollable jurisdiction in him-self? It is plain then, that the Commission
of appeal was upon just motives legally granted; and is no less evident, that
it was wholly restrained to the matter of the Appeal. What right had Dr.
Masters to Visit Exeter-College, but by a Deputation from the Bishop? And how
can the Deputation appear, but by the Commission? If there be no Commission
then that enables him to Visit; if the powers given in the Commission of Appeal
are not General, but subject to restrictions, and determined: it shall be
allowed that the Commissary did make a Visitation, if it can be proved, that he
could make any. The Commissary, acting by a limited Commission, confined
him-self strictly to the bounds of it; but if he did not; his acts, as
supported by no authority, were null and invalid; and as they could not affect
the College, so neither could they prejudice the Bishop's right to a future
Visitation. If the Restitution of Mr. Colmer was such a judicial Act, as a
Visitor only can exercise; and if Dr. Masters had power of Visitation; why was
it protested against as a null and inautoritative act? and why was it never
admitted to be of any force by the Rector, till it was pleaded, as a bar to
the Jurisdiction of the Visitor? Since therefore Dr. Masters did not Visit, the
Bishop was not now restrained from his right of Visitation; and if he had right
of being Judge, there is none, even of the Rector's Friends, that can dispute
the equity of the Sentence. Bribery, Heresy, and Incontinence, clearly made
out, and proved, are certainly sufficient to make a Governor of a College,
unworthy of that Station. And now if the Sentence of Deprivation was rightly
inflicted; it was necessary, that all legal Methods should be used, which could
enforce that Sentence. And since the Founder had directed the Visitor, who was
always to be a Bishop, to the use of Ecclesiastical Censures; Excommunication
was the last and only remedy, whereby the late Rector could be obliged to
Submission.

It is clear then, that as his Lordship's designs were honorable and just; so
his Methods of pursuing them have been Statutable and legal; and that the
justice of his Sentence does not more plainly appear than the legality of his
Process. It is clear at last, That the late Rector's arguments in Law, are as
bad, as those which he uses in Divinity; and that his Plea is no more true,
than his Gospel.

The Copies of the Authentic Papers and Instruments referred to in the
Preceding Account.
1. A Copy of the Statute of Exeter College; upon which Mr. Colmer was expelled
by the Rector.
CUm inter Homines nihil sit magis decorum, quam morum honestas, nihilque
hominem a bellua magis discernat, quam probitas vitae, modesta cum aliis
conversatio, ac in injuriis, si quae inferantur, patientia. Nos igitur haec
expetentes statuimus, ac in visceribus Jesu Christ obsecramus Rectorem,
Scholares, and electos omnes praesentes, and futuros, uti in omnibus and super
omnia unitatem, and mutuam inter se charitatem, dilectionem, pacem, and
concordiam semper habeant, and observent, and pro eis semper fovendis, and
alendis pro viribus enitantur. Quod si quis Scholarium, vel electorum,
adulterii, incontinentiae, haeresis pertinacis, homicidii voluntarii, perjurii
manifesti, crebrae ebrietatis, alteriusve publicae turpitudinis, coram Rectore,
subrectore, Decano, and quinque aliis Scholaribus maxim Senioribus, vel majore
part eorundem, cum dicti Rectoris assensu, legitime convictus fuerit, ipsum
perpetuo exclusum, and privatum ipso facto a dicto Collegio, nulla alia
monitione permissa, virtute praesentis statuti decernimus.

2 A Copy of the Commission granted to Dr. Masters; limited only to the Cause
of Mr. Colmer's Appeal.
JONATHAN Providentia Divina EXON Episcopus, Collegii Exon in Academia Oxon
Patronus and Visitator, Dilecto nobis in Christo Edvardo Masters, Legum Doctori
Vicario nostro in spiritualibus generali and Commissario nostro legitime
constituto Salutem, Gratiam and Benedictionem: Cum ex Part Jacobi Colmer
Collegii Exon praedicti Artium Magistri nobis monstratum extitit, Quod licet
inter Caetera in Statutis Collegii Exon praedicti specialiter Statutum,
ordinatum, and provisum est in Rubrica de causis propter quas Scholares Privari
debeant in hac quae sequitur verborum forma, aut Consimili in effectum viz.
Quod si quis Scholarium vel Electorum, Adulterii, Incontinentiae, Haeresis
Pertinacis, Homicidii voluntarii, Perjurii manifesti, Crebrae ebrietatis,
alteriusve Publicae turpitudinis, Coram Rectore, Subrectore, Decano and quinque
aliis Scholaribus maxim Senioribus vel majore part eorundem cum dicti
Rectoris Consensu legitime Covictus fuerit: ipsum Perpetuo exclusum, and
Privatum ipso facto a dicto Collegio, nulla alia Monitione praemissa, virtute
Praesentis Statuti decernimus etc. Nihilominus Arthurus Bury Sacrae Theologiae
Professor and Collegii Exon supradicti Rector, Georgius Verman Sanctae
Theologiae Baccalaureus Subrector, Ezra Cleveland Artium Magister Decanus,
Thomas Lethbridge Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaureus, Richardus Hutchins Sacrae
Theologiae Baccalaureus, Benjaminus Archer Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaureus,
Samuel Adams Artium Magister, Philippus Thorn Artium Magister quinque Socii
maxim seniores in dicto Collegio, aut eorum saltem Pars major in omnibus minus
just, nulliter and inique (eorum Reverentia semper salva) Procedentes objecto
ei incontinentiae Reatu cum quadam Anna Ancilla, nuper Puerpera, nullis autem
editis desuper Probationibus saltem legitimis aut de jure sufficientibus, de
facto quantum in illis fuit, cum de Jure non potuerint, praefatum Jacobum
Colmer, nullatenus legitime Convictum, a dicto Collegio Excluserint and
amoverint: Cumque dictus Jacobus Colmer Sentiens se ex Praemissis, Nullitatibus
and Iniquitatibus and Injustitiis enormiter laedi and gravari ab eisdem and
eorum quolibet and omnibus exinde sequentibus ad nos Exonien. Episcopum
praedictum and Collegii Exoniensis memorati visitatorem legitimum rite and
legitime appellaverit, deque nullitate and iniquitate Praemissorum omnium and
singulorum aeque Principaliter dixit querelatus and conquestus est ac deinde
nobis supplicari fecit quatenus nos opportunum Remedium super his sibi
providere dignaremur, nos igitur hujusmodi supplicationibus favorabiliter
inclinati ac Justitiae Complementum aeque in Praemissis fieri and ministrari
volentes, Tibi de cujus sana doctrina conscientiae puritate and in rebus
gerendis dexteritate plurimum in hac part Confidimus, Ad Cognoscendum and
discutiendum hujusmodi causam Appellationis and querelae Nullitatis and
Iniquitatis praedictam, totumque negotium principale cum suis incidentibus
emergentibus dependentibus annexis and connexis quibuscunque? Et ad audiendum
hinc inde proposita and proponenda and ad probationes admittendum and
recipiendum juxta formam statutorum dicti Collegii and juris in ea part
exigentiam, eandemque causam plenarie and finaliter determinandum,
sententiandum and finiendum and generaliter omnia and singula alia faciendum,
exercendum and expediendum, quae in Praemissis aut circa ea necessaria fuerint,
seu quomodolibet opportuna, (vocatis primitus coram vobis praefato Jacobo
Colmer, nec non praefatis Arthuro Bury, Georgio Verman, Ezra Cleveland, Thoma
Lethbridge, Richardo Hutchins, Benjamino Archer, Samuele Adams, and Philippo
Thorn, ac Caeteris de Jure in hac part vocandis) vices nostras Committimus ac
plenam in Domino (Tenore praesentium) Concedimus potestatem, cum cujuslibet
legitimae coertionis potestate. Assumpto tibi Thoma Tyllot Registrario nostro,
Notario Publico, eoque absente vel Impedito alio quocunqne Notario Publico
partibus praedictis indifferente. In cujus Rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum
Episcopale Praesentibus apponi fecimus Dat. Vicesimo primo die mensis Februarii
Anno Domini (Stylo Angliae) Millesimo Sexcentessimo octogesimo nono: nostraeque
Consecrationis Anno quinto and Translationis Primo.

J. Exon.

3 The Affidavits of the two Persons present at the Labor of Ann Aris, who was
delivered of a Bastard Child; and, at her Labor, acquitted Mr. Colmer from
being Father of it July 25. 1690.
WHich day appeared personally Mary Herne, Wife of William Herne of the Parish
of St. Michael in the City of Oxford Labourer, and declared that she was
present at the Labor of Ann Aris, who was delivered of a Bastard Child, and
she did then declare upon her salvation, that no body had to Do with her, but
Ferdinando Smith, and that he was the Father of the Child, which she so
declared upon the Midwifes three times pressing her to speak the Truth, and not
to wrong any Gentleman, there being then present Marian Holton the Wife of
James Holton of the same Parish.

Eodem die jurat cor. Domino Episc. Mary Herne.

Eodem die.
WHich day appeared Personally Marian Holton Wife of James Holton of the Parish
of St. Michael aforesaid Labourer, and declared that she was present at the
Labor of Ann Aris who was delivered of a Bastard Child, and she being then
twice pressed by the Midwife, to declare who was the Father of the said Bastard
Child, declared that Ferdinando Smith the Elder was the Father of the said
Child, and that no body else had to do with her, there being then present Mary
Herne aforesaid.

Eodem die jurat cor. Domino Episcopo. Marian Holton

The like Affidavits of the Midwife, who delivered Ann Aris; and of Mrs.
Banister who was present at the Labor, were taken before Sr. William Walker
14. Jan. 1690.

4 The Certificate and Deposition of Alderman Fifield concerning the
Examination of Ann Sparrow taken before him Oct. 29. 89.
THese are to Certify whom it may concern, that Ann Sparrow having been
delivered of a Bastard Child, I being a Justice of Peace was desired to Examine
the said Ann Sparrow upon her Oath, which I did do accordingly upon the 21 day
of this present October 1689. the said Ann Sparrow did then declare upon the
Oath that she took, that Mr. James Colmer of Exeter College was not the Father
of the said Bastard Child, and did also then upon her Oath declare that the
said Mr. Colmer never had to do with her, and that his name was put into her
Mouth by one Goodwife Roberts, witness my hand

Octo. 29. 89. Tho. Fifield.

Vicesimo quinto die Martii Anno Dom. 1690.
MEmorandum, This day Tho. Fifield Alderman of the City of Oxford, and one of
their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of that City, made Oath before the Right
Worshipful Dr. Edward Masters Dr. of Laws, and Commissary to the Right Reverend
Father in God Jonathan by Divine permission Lord Bishop of Exon, Patron and
Visitor, Ordinary of the College of Exon in the University of Oxon, That the
Certificate hereunto annexed is all of this Deponent's own hand Writing, and
that the contents thereof were and are true, and were so had and done as is
there set down and Expressed.

Tho. Fifield.
Jurat Coram me

Ed. Master Commiss. Act.
in praesentia mea Jo. Greeneway Not. Pub. and Reg. assumpt.



5 A Copy of the Statute of Exeter College concerning the Visitation of that
College.
ADEO pronum and ad malum proclive est humanum genus, and uti quotidie videmus,
varietas temporum optima quaeque aufert and mutat, ut non sit in nostra
potestate eas condere Leges, and Statuta quae non violet aliquando astutus and
versipellis, aut male interpretando, aut aliquid fraudis ingerendo, aut
excogitando modum, quo nodum quamvis Herculeum dissolvat; Nos eam ob causam, ea
quae duximus nostro tempore utilia, and commoda, inferentes, quod ad ea
conservanda, recteque interpretanda attinet, confidimus authoritati, and
benignitati Episcoporum Exoniensium, successorum nostrorum, quos dicti Collegii
patronos, and Visitatores relinquimus, ut illi ex sua liberalitate, and mera
benignitate adducti, ac fervida charitate in fidem Christianam inflammati, ad
hoc alvearium conservandum invigilent, ut Statuta and ordinationes dicti
Collegii firmiter observentur, virtutes and disciplinae nutriantur,
possessiones, and bona spiritualia and temporalia, prospero statu floreant,
jura, libertates, and privilegia defendantur and protegantur. Ea de causa
liceat domino Episcopo Exoniensi, qui pro tempore fuerit and nulli alii nec
aliis, quoties per Rectorem dicti Collegii and in ejus absentia Subrectorem,
and quatuor alios ad minus ex septem maxim Senioribus Scholaribus fuerit
requisitus, nec non absque requisitione ulla, de quinquennio in quinquennium,
semel, ad dictum Collegium per se, vel suum Commissarium, quem duxerit
deputandum, libere accedere. Cui quidem Reverendo patri ac deputato suo,
(praeterea nemini) tanquam Patrono, and Ordinario Visitatori, vigore praesentis
Statuti, plenam concedimus potestatem, ut super omnibus and singulis
particulis, and articulis in dictis Statutis contentis, ac de quibuscunque
aliis Articulis, Statum, Commodum, aut honorem, dicti Collegii concernentibus,
aut quae in dicto Collegio, aut aliqua illius persona fuerint reformanda, aut
corrigenda, Rectorem, Scholares and Electos interroget, and inquirat, cogatque
eorum unumquemque in virtute juramenti, and per censuras si opus fuerit, ad
dicendum veritatem de praemissis omnibus and singulis, etsi super eis, non
fuerint specialiter requisiti, excessusque ac negligentias, crimina, and
delicta quorumcunque dicti Collegii qualitercunque commissa, and in ea
Visitatione comperta, secundum excessus, exigentiam, and criminis aut delicti
qualitatem debite puniat and reformet, caeteraque omnia and singula faciat, and
exerceat, quae ad eorum correctionem and reformationem sint necessaria, aut
quovismodo opportuna, etiamsi ad privationem aut amotionem alicujus scholaris,
vel electi ab eodem Collegio, Statutis and ordinationibus id exigentibus,
procedere contingat. Quos quidem Rectorem, Subrectorem, Scholares, and Electos
ac praeterea ministros quoscunque and famulos, praedicto Domino Episcopo and
suo Commissario, sed nulli alii, volumus and praecipimus effectualiter
intendere and parere. Statuentes insuper, ut nullus in visitationibus
praedictis in dicto Collegio faciendis, contra Rectorem, Subrectorem, aut alium
ipsius Collegii quemcunque dicat, deponat, seu denunciet, nisi quod verum
crediderit, seu de quo publica vox vel fama laboraverit, contra eundem in
virtute juramenti, ab eo prius Collegio praestiti. Ordinantes praeterea ut
Dominus Episcopus Exoniensis, cum in persona propria visitare, and praemissa
facere dignetur, Rector and duo Scholares ex praesentibus, maxim seniores,
unam in Collegio refectionem, quadraginta Solidorum expensas non excedentem,
eidem Episcopo humiliter and reverenter offerant. Commissario autem, cum
praemissa fecerit, duas refectiones in Collegio vel viginti solidos, per manus
Rectoris de bonis Collegii persolvi concedimus, pro omnibus and laboribus and
expensis in hac causa tam in itinere quam in Universitate, tempore hujus
Visitationis. Itaque Dominus Episcopus quadraginta solidos, Commissarius vero
viginti Solidos in uno, and eodem anno, pro actu Visitationis, ad sumptus
Collegii non excedat, nec inceptam aliquam Visitationem, ultra duos dies
proxime sequentes, aut ex causis urgentissimis and rarissimis, ultra tres dies,
prorogari aut continuari ullo pacto volumus. Sed lapso, and acto illo biduo,
and quando ex causis praedictis ulterius prorogatur, triduo transacto, eo ipso
Visitatio illa pro terminata and dissoluta habeatur. Etsi quae in ea compererit
corrigenda and reformanda, quae brevitate temporis corrigere and reformare non
potuerit, ea Rectori in scriptis tradat, qui ea omnium secundum formam and
exigentiam Statutorum sine dilatione, quantum in eo erit, corrigere and
reformare tenebitur, sub poena contemptus. Praedictorum quoque Reverendorum
patrum Exoniensium Episcoporum, and Commissariorum suorum quorumcunque
conscientias apud altissimum, quantum possumus, gravius oneramus, ac in
visceribus Domini nostri Jesu Christi hortamur, and obsecramus, ut in faciendo
and exequendo praemissa secundum Apostoli doctrinam, non quaerant quae sua
sunt, sed quae Jesu Christi, solumque Deum habentes prae oculis mentis, favore,
timore, odio, prece, aut pretio, coloribus and occasionibus postpositis
quibuscunque, inquisitionis, correctionis and reformationis officium diligenter
impendant, and fideliter in omnibus exequantur, sicut coram Deo in ejus extremo
judicio in hoc casu voluerint reddere rationem. Statuimus praeterea, ut Rector,
Subrector, Scholaris, aut alius quispiam cujuscunque sortis dicti Collegii,
super excessibus vel delictis, in visitationibus and inquisitionibus per dictum
Episcopum Exoniensem vel ejus Commissarium, ut praemittitur, faciendis,
accusatus vel detectus, copiam compertorum, vel detectorum hujusmodi sibi
tradi, edi, dari, ostendi, aut nomina detegentium vel denuntiantium sibi exponi
aut declarari nullo modo petat; neque ipsa comperta and detecta, aut nomina
detegentium tradantur eidem aut ostendantur; sed super eisdem compertis, aut
detectis, statim coram ipso, Domino Episcopo, vel ejus Commissario personaliter
respondeat, ac correctionem debitam subeat pro eisdem secundum nostrarum
Ordinationum, and Statutorum exigentiam and tenorem, cessantibus quibuscunque
provocationibus appellationibus, querelis and aliis juris, and facti remediis,
per quae ipsius correctio and punitio differri valeat, seu alias quovismodo
impediri. Si tamen ad privationem aut inhabilitatem Rectoris aut Expulsionem
Scholaris alicujus, per Episcopum aut ejus Commissarium agatur, tum ostendantur
ei detecta, quibus si non poterit rationabiliter, and honest respondere,
suamque innocentiam probabiliter ostendere, and sese super objectis just
purgare, amoveatur sine appellatione aut ulteriore remedio, dummodo ad ejus
Expulsionem concurrat consensus Rectoris, and trium ex septem maxim senioribus
Scholaribus tunc in Universitate praesentibus, sine quorum consensu, irrita sit
hujusmodi expulsio, and nulla ipso facto. Et insuper, si contra Rectorem ad
amotionem ab officio, per hujusmodi Domini Episcopi Commissarium, etiam
consentientibus quatuor ex septem maxim senioribus supradictis, procedatur,
non negamus ei omnes exceptiones, defensiones justas and honestas apud ipsum
Dominum Episcopum Exoniensem, dummodo ulterius non appellet, non obstante hac
ordinatione praedicta, aut aliis quibuscunque.

6 The Deposition of Rob. Harding Cook, concerning the Sale of Offices by Dr.
Bury with the Bond annexed. July 25. 1690.
WHich day appeared personally Robert Harding of Islip in the County of Oxford
Inholder, and by virtue of his Oath, deposed that William Harding this
Deponent's Father, was for several years before, and to the time of his Death,
which happened about the Month of May 1672, Cook of Exeter College in the
University of Oxford, and after his Death, He, this Deponent, went to the Dr.
to know how he should dispose of himself, and told him that he had promised to
be kind to him, and thereupon he treated with him for the Place of Cook of the
said College, who told this Deponent that he should have the Place cheaper by
Fifty pounds than any other Person, and thereupon they came to an Agreement,
that this Deponent should pay him One Hundred and Fifty pounds, for the said
Place of Cook, and this Deponent entered into a Penal Bill in the Sum of three
hundred Pounds for the payment of one hundred and fifty Pounds to the said Dr.
Bury within a Month after the Date of the said Bill, and thereupon the
Deponent was admitted into the said place, and he afterward paid off the said
Penal Bill to the said Dr. Bury, and had his Receipts for part of the same on
the back of the said Bill which he wrote with his own hand, and that after he
had paid off the said Penal Bill, the said Dr. Bury delivered the same up to
him, being the penal Bill hereunto annexed.

Eodem die jurat cor. Domino Episc. Robert Harding.

KNow all men by these presents that I Robert Harding of Oxford Cook do justly
owe and am indebted to Arthur Bury Doctor in Divinity, Rector of Exeter College
the sum of one hundred and fifty pounds good and lawful Money of England, one
month after the Date of these presents; To the which payment well and truly to
be made, I bind my Self, my Heirs, Executors and administrators in the sum of
three hundred pounds of Lawful English Money firmly by these presents: Sealed
with my Seal, Given the fourth day of June in the four and twentieth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the second etc. Anno. Dom. 1672.

Sealed and Delivered in the presence of Francis Southcote. Jane Southcote.
Mary Southcote. Robert Harding.
Received in part of this Bill Eighty pounds.

A. Bury.


Received more Mar. 14. 40 pounds.



The like Affidavits were made by William New Butler, who paid the Rector 170
pound for his place; and by Hedges the Cook, who paid Robert Harding 150 pounds
for Resigning the Place; and gave 50 to the Rector for consenting to his
Resignation.

7 The Deposition of Leonard Litchfield Printer, who printed an Heretical Book
called the Naked Gospel Published by Dr. Bury; since Censured and Burnt by the
Unanimous Decree of the University of Oxford. July 14. 1689.
WHich day appeared Personally Leonard Litchfield of the University of Oxford,
Printer, And deposes, that I Printed a Book Entitled the Naked Gospel for Dr.
Bury, who paid me for my Work, and told me, if any one questioned me for it, I
should say that I had the Pro-Vice-Chancellor's leave he being then
Pro-Vice-Chancellor as he told me, and at another time, told me he would bear
me harmless. Not long after he sent for me, and said that it gave some distaste,
and that he would make such Alterations, as would take off the offense that it
gave, after which he ordered me to Print the Sheets H, and I, and as I
remember, the last half sheet, and told me that he had not disposed of many,
and ordered me to Print of these Alterations about 400 or more, the full Number
at first was 500. He also told me he intended to leave out the sheet K, and
then to Publish it with these Alterations.

Eodem die The same Mr. Litchfield made Oath that he verily believed what he
has here wrote down and set his hand to, is True. Leonard Litchfield.

8 A Copy of the Statute, whereby Dr. Hern's Place is Declared void.
De promotione and causis deserendi Collegium.
STatuimus, ut si quis hujus Collegii Scholaris cujuscunque status, aut
conditionis, uxorem duxerit, aut matrimonium, vel sponsalia contraxerit, aut
alicui obsequio, officio aut exercitio, per quod a studio in Universitate
Oxoniensi, ultra unum Mensem in Anno, praeter quinquaginta dies, superius in
Statuto de Exitu ab Universitate, and venia petenda precedente praeexceptos,
impediatur, se commiserit, immediate posteaquam aliquod istorum Rectori vel in
ejus absentia Subrectori certo cognitnm fuit, omne jus and titulum quem in hoc
Collegio habuit eo ipso amittat, and ab illo primo notitiae die, in numero
Scholarium ejusdem nunquam postea numeretur. Si vero praedictorum Scholarium
quispiam, patrimonium, haereditatem, feodumve seculare, prebendam, aut aliud
consimile, aut Annuam pensionem ad terminum vitae duraturam ad Annuum valorem
communibus Annis December Marcarum, ipse vel alius ad ejus usum, and commodum
assequutus fuerit, tunc eum infra annum a tempore assequutionis alicujus
hujusmodi haereditatis, patrimonii, pensionis aut feodi, continue numerandum
authoritate presentis Statuti, ab hoc Collegio amotum fore Statuimus ipso
facto, ac postea pro non Scholari penitus haberi.

Quod si quispiam Scholarium praedictorum, beneficium Ecclesiasticum, quod
publicis, regiisve munimentis Octo Librarum annuo valor taxatum sit, pacifice
adeptus fuerit, eum per Annum unum, and non ultra, in hoc Collegio Scholarem
manner permittimus: Volentes ac etiam decernentes, ut post lapsum illius anni,
immediate, nisi intra Annum eundem ipsum benesicium effectualiter and sine
fraud ulla, and absque pensione aliqua, totaliter dimiserit, ipso facto pro
non Scholare habeatur.

9 A Copy of Part of an Act of Parliament Anno 30. Car. 2. Entitled, an Act
for making Part of the Parish of St. Martin in the Field a new Parish, etc.
whereby it is evident, that Dr. Hern, who is Rector of the said Parish, has a
greater Maintenance settled by Act of Parliament; and is obliged to a longer
absence from the College, then is compatible with the Statutes of the College.
BE it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Rector and all other
succeeding Rector's of the said Parish, shall have, take and enjoy, such and
the like Oblations, Obventions, Mortuaries, Easter Books, and Ecclesiastical
Duties, as the Vicar of the Parish Church of St. Martins now enjoys, which
shall arise and grow due within the said Parish, and also, an Annuity or Yearly
Sum of One hundred Pounds, to be Charged and Assessed upon all and every the
Inhabitants, Owners and Occupiers of Lands, Houses, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, or any personal Estate Rateable to the Poor, in such manner as
is hereafter limited and appointed; Provided allways that such Rector and
Rectors shall and are hereby enjoined to Reside four parts of five in every
Year in the said Parish.

10. The Sentence of Deprivation pronounced against the Rector.
IN Dei Nomine Amen: Nos Jonathan, permissione divina Episcopus Exon: and
Collegii Exon: in Academia Oxon: Patronus, and Visitator Ordinarius, in negotio
Visitationis dicti Collegii rite and legitime procedentes, inspecto toto, and
integro processu in Visitatione hac nostra hactenus habito and facto, eoque
diligenter recensito, de and cum consensu Ezrae Cleaveland, Gulielmi Read,
Johannis Harris, and Johannis Bagwell Artium Magistrorum quatuor e Scolaribus
septem maxim Senioribus dicti Collegii in Vniversitate presentibus, and
consensus suos per manuum suarum subscriptionem significantium, Arthurum Bury
S. T. P. Rectorem dicti Collegii Exon, propter ejus manifestam, and multiplicem
contumaciam; and circumstantiis variis aggravatam in non submittendo se
Visitationi nostrae ordinariae; sed contumaciter se absentantem (quod quidem
repetundarum and criminum aliorum enormium coram nobis detectorum, and
probatorum, imo haeresis metu fecisse videtur,) Officio Rectoris dicti Collegii
Exon and omnibus and singulis juribus, Commoditatibus and emolumentis, jure,
and nomine hujusmodi officii rectoris sibi quomodo competentibus sive
pertinentibus privandum, and ab eodem Officio amovendum fore de jure debere
pronunciamus, decernimus, and declaramus; sicque eum privamus, and amovemus per
praesentes; Eundemque Arthurum Bury pro non Rectore dicti Collegii in posterum
haberi, and censeri volumus, and decernimus; ac Officium suum Rectoris dicti
Collegii ad omnem juris effectum vacare, and vacuum esse pronunciamus,
decernimus, and declaramus per hanc nostram Sententiam definitivam; sive hoc
nostrum finale Decretum, quam, sive quod, ferimus; and promulgamus in his
scriptis.

Ezra Cleaveland. Guil. Read. oh. Harris. Joh. Bagwell. J. Exon.


FINIS.

