THE Minister of Cirencester's ADDRESS TO THE Dissenters of his Parish.
Occasioned by the DEATH of Their PREACHER. Together with the ANSWER that was
made thereto, AND His REPLY to that ANSWER. To which is prefixed, A LETTER
relating thereto, from the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Edward Lord Bishop of
Gloucester.

ECCLUS. xxi. 15. If a skilful Man hear a wise word, he will commend it, and
add unto it: but as soon as one of no understanding hears it, it displeases
him, and he casts it behind his Back.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. and are to be Sold by Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, London; and I. Barksdale, Bookseller in
Cirencester. School.

To the Reverend MR. JOSEPH HARRISON, MINISTER of Cirencester.
SIR,
I Have read your Address to the Dissenters of your Parish, with the very idle
and trifling Answer thereto, and your Reply to that Answer; and advise you to
publish the whole, unless you can be content (as I know you cannot) to take so
much good pains to little purpose. Your Address is a very Commendable Instance
of your Hearty Concern conscientiously to discharge that Great Trust which is
committed to you; and your Defense thereof is as good a Proof of your being no
less able than desirous to do the Office of a Pastor, even toward those who
refuse to own you as such.

I wish the most Sincere in the several Sects which have renounced Communion
with us, could but think it possible that they may be in an Error, and
thereupon be persuaded to read, with any Impartiality, what is written against,
as well as for, their Separation: I should not then doubt, but this Deplorable
Schism would wear off apace, among those who make not a Trade of it, and are
not Wolves in Sheeps Clothing; since I am most certain, that the Errors of
Popery are not more plainly detected and exposed, than have the Principles of
our Protestant Separatists been abundantly confuted, and the great Vanity of
their Pretenses demonstrated, to all that are capable of Seeing with their own
Eyes.

That GOD would Bless this very good Endeavor of Yours, to the Reducing of
such to His Church as are gone astray, and the more Confirming those, who have
hitherto been kept by his Grace in the Communion thereof: And, that He would
crown all your Labors with happy Success, and make you as instrumental to the
Reforming of the Lives of your People, as the Rectifying of their Judgments, is
the most Hearty and Humble Prayer of,

SIR, Your very loving Friend and Brother, EDW. GLOUCESTER.

To My Well-beloved Friends and Parishioners, Who do not frequent the Communion
of the Church.
Though it has pleased God to take away him whom your Selves had Appointed and
Settled here, as a Distinct and Peculiar Teacher of your own, yet I must tell
you, that this Parish is not yet (through God's Blessing) deprived of a Minister,
who will be ready, to the utmost of his Power, to serve every Member thereof in
the great and concerning Interest of their Souls.

It is I my Self, who am here placed according to the Laws of God, and by the
Laws of the Land, and I do now offer my Self (before you make Choice of any
other) to Minister before God, and for You, in all the Offices of Religion,
according to the Order and Constitution of that Primitive and Apostolical
Church Established among Us, to which I am inseparably tied by my Reason and
Conscience, and in all manner of Sacred and Solemn Obligations.

This Church, my Brethen, is the Church you ought to Hold Communion with, Our
Parish Church is the place where you ought to Serve and Worship God; and I (how
unworthy soever) am the only Person whose proper Business it is to Perform any
Ministerial Office in this Parish, and against whose either Life or Doctrine, I
hope, no just Exception can be made.

I do therefore most passionately Exhort, and earnestly Beseech you all, in the
Bowels of Jesus Christ, that you will, as you tender the Peace of Church and
State, and the Welfare of your own Souls, steadfastly Adhere to the Communion
thereof.

If your Separation is grounded upon real Scruples of Conscience, you should
certainly Endeavor to have them Answered and Removed; and I shall be very
ready, and I trust in God, able to give full Satisfaction to any One that shall
desire it of Me.

But if the Reason of any One's dissenting from Us be only Humor or Prejudice,
he can never think that either of them will bear him out at the Great Day, for
keeping up a Schism in the Church of God, and Rending and Dividing the Body of
Christ.

Before you Resolve to carry on the Separation, I Entreat You, for your own
Soul's sake (for whose everlasting Happiness I have a tender Regard) to
Consider well the Grounds and Reasons upon which you do it, for Schism is not
certainly so slight a Matter, and so small a Crime, as some People think it to
be.

And if nothing will dissuade you from Maintaining the Divisions among us by
bringing in another Preacher, I hope you will take Care that he be a Person of
Prudence and Temper, One that will strictly Confine Himself within the Bounds
and Limits of the Act of Toleration, and who will be very cautious of doing any
thing that will give Disturbance in a Parish, which is at present in a very
peaceable and quiet state, notwithstanding the Differences among Us as to some
matters of Religious Concern; as to which also I most humbly Beseech God, in
his due time, to Unite Us.

I am Your Affectionate Pastor, and Sincere Lover of your Souls,
JOSEPH-HARRISON.

THE Ministers Reply to the Dissenters Answer to the foregoing Invitation of
them into the Communion of the Church.
Most Dearly Beloved in Christ;
I Cannot express how, much I am concerned, that the PAPER which I sent among
you upon so Christian an Errand, and the Message it contained, expressed in so
inoffensive and obliging a manner, and writ with that Sincerity and Purity of
Intention, as if I had been immediately to have Answered for it at the dreadful
Tribunal of Heaven: I cannot I say, express my Concern, that such a Paper as
this should be so far from having any good Effect upon those it was sent to, as
to exasperate them against it, its Author, and the Church, into whose Communion
its business was to invite them, to so high a degree, that when I labored for
Peace, and spoke unto them thereof, they made themselves ready for Battle.

As for the Reflections and uncharitable Censures which have been made upon me,
either upon the Account of this, or any other Matter, I do most heartily
forgive them, and humbly beseech God to do so too; and also to support me with
Courage and Patience under all the Opposition and Contempt which I have
already, and must expect to meet with, even in the Discharge of my Duty: And
this is all the Return I shall make to them.

But forasmuch as my kind Invitation to you is Answered, not by an humble and
modest Excuse of your selves, but by a Paper which is stuffed with false
Accusations of our Church, and uncharitable Censures of those in Her Communion,
I think it will become me to endeavor, not only your Conviction, by showing
you how ill a Defense you have made, and how weak those Arguments are, which
are here brought in Defense of your Separation from us; but also to Vindicate
our Church from the ill-grounded Charges there laid against Her of Idolatry,
Judaism, Popery, Schism, Unlawful Impositions, Superstitions, and Traditions.

Heavy Charges these are, and yet they are all either expressed, or clearly
employed in this Paper, and the Sentence of Damnation passed upon us into the
bargain. I shall not stand to Examine into the Charity of the Man that writ it,
but into the Arguments he produces to prove all these things; and if they do
appear to have no solid Foundation, but on the contrary, to be weak and
sallacious, or rather no Arguments at all, you must either Renounce the
Separation, and come to Church, or bring better Reasons for your Refusal so to
do; which I believe your Cause will not admit of, or that however none of you
can do it.

I am not much concerned to know who my Answerer is, only I shall say, that if
he had thought fit to have sent his Paper to me alone, with his Name subscribed
to it, I should have contented my self, that the Matters in Controversy should
have been amicably debated, either in private Letters, or in private
Conversation, betwixt him and me alone. But since he has sent it abroad, and
put it into your hands, to harden you in your Separation, and widen the Breach
between us, I cannot think that I have discharged my Duty toward you, till I
have showed you the weakness of those Arguments, by which, those that call
themselves the Authorized Ambassadors of Christ, pursue those Unchristian Ends.

Whether the Answer I have returned be sufficient, I must leave to your
Judgments to determine, but that you may better apprehend the Force of what is
said on both sides, I have faithfully transcribed the Answer to my Paper,
according to the Copy I met with, and replied to it Paragraph by Paragraph.

Read both then without Prejudice, and God Almighty enable you to Judge
righteous Judgment, and give you Grace sincerely to Act according thereto.

ANSWER.

Sir, I have lately received a Paper, with your Name subscribed to it, which
makes me think that it is of your own inditing; and were all in it according to
the Rule we ought to walk by, the Word of God, I should have been silent
without making any Reply against it; but when you tell us our Parish is not
through God's Blessing deprived of a Minister, who will be ready to the utmost
of his power, to serve every Member thereof, in the great and concerning
Interest of their Souls: For my part, I should most readily accept of your
Offer, were you but duly qualifyed for so great a Work.

REPLY.

I should not have known what he meant by his telling me, he believes it to be
of my own inditing, had I not heard that some of the Party questioned it, and
endeavored to blast the success of it, by denying me the Reputation of
composing a few Lines, so easy for any body to have done; and wherein the main
thing commendable, is the honesty of the design, and that it is better English
than the Answer to it. But what if in consideration of the great Abilities of
the Persons I sent it to, and the severe Examination, I might justly presume it
would fall under, by the Learned Ambassadors, I had called in the Assistance of
my Brethren, what Fault had I been guilty of? Or, What just Ground of Exception
was That against the Matter of it? And suppose a Number of us should be in
Consult for two Months together, how to Reply to their Answer to a poor Paper
that was (as it easily might be) drawn up, transcribed into several Copies, and
dispersed abroad in two or three days time; could those quick Gentlemen
handsomely find fault with us? Or would this be any thing to the Merits of the
Cause? No, this could not be; for he himself says, That if all in my Paper were
according to the Word of God, he would have made no Reply. But then he should
not have Replied, without showing wherein 'twas contrary; which he has not
directly offered at, as to any one Line thereof. Nor should he, or any of the
Party reject the Offer of my Service, upon the account of my being Vnqualified,
without showing wherein it is that I am so. If he mean Personal Qualifications,
I will only say with St. Paul, Who is sufficient for these things? But be my
Defects never so great, yet if I am ready, to the utmost of my power, to
promote the Salvation of every Soul in my Parish, I doubt not but to come off
well at the Last Day, and that (whether you will or no) God will graciously
accept my sincere, though weak Endeavors. But Mr. Baxter tells you, Poor Man's
Family Book 4 Ed. p. 316.
That if the Minister of the Parish be tolerable, though weak and cold, if you
cannot remove your dwelling, then public Order, and your Souls Edification
must both be joined as well as you can.

ANSWER.

I confess you tell us you are placed here according to the Laws of God, and
that your Church is the Primitive Apostolical Church, but I am well-satisfied,
that you are not able by Scripture to prove either of your Assertions.

REPLY.

And so I tell you still, and though confident Assertions of Christ's Authorized
Ambassadors may go a great way with poor ignorant People, who are deluded into
that Opinion of them; yet I am well satisfied he cannot disprove me by
Scripture: And this is what he ought to have attempted; for since as to my
Orders, (without which I hope he does not think I act) I am upon the same
bottom with all the Clergy of England, till he shows wherein our Church
deviates from the Ancient Church, I shall esteem it a sufficient Proof,
(equivalent to an express Text of Scripture) that I am placed here according to
the Laws of God; because I was Ordained and placed here by those, John 20.21
Tit. 1.5.
with whom Christ has left the Power to send forth Laborers into his
Vineyard; and that our Church is Primitive and Apostolical, because its Faith,
Worship, Government and Discipline are such.

ANSWER.

As to your being inseparably tied by Reason and Conscience, and all manner of
sacred and solemn Obligations, Sir I am heartily sorry for you, and look upon
it as your great Unhappiness that you are so confined.

REPLY.

If this Person had any real occasion to be sorry for me upon this score, I
should heartily thank him for his Pity; but undoubtedly it is the great Duty,
and the great Happiness of every Man, sincerely to follow the Dictates of his
Reason and Conscience, and strictly to keep the sacred and solemn Obligations
he lies under.

ANSWER.

Although you tell us this Church is the Church we ought to hold Communion
with, and our Parish Church the Place we ought to serve and worship God in, and
that you, how unworthy soever, are the Person whose proper business it is to
perform any Ministerial Office in this Parish, this Doctrine I doubt not but
will take with the Church of Rome; for they will tell you, that their Church is
the Church you ought to hold Communion with, and the Parish Church, the place
you ought to serve and worship God in, and will give as good Proofs for what
they assert as you have in your Paper.

REPLY.

I wish with all my heart that this Doctrine would take with those of the
Church of Rome in this Kingdom; but if he means that Papists may urge the same
thing to invite Protestants into their Communion, I would fain ask this Man,
whether he does in his Conscience think, that they may do it, upon as good
Grounds and Reasons as we do? For that is the Question, and not whether they can
give as Good Proofs as any I have in My Paper; for as there was not room, so
neither was it the Business and Design thereof to give Proofs. To those who
wanted them, and desired them of me, I offered to give the best Satisfaction I
was able.

ANSWER.

Sir, As to your Life and Doctrine against which you hope no just Exception can
be made, it is best known to God and your Conscience how you have lived, and
what Doctrine you have preached and believed: Only I shall say this, that if
you can make it appear you have lived and preached according to the Rule Christ
has set us, you may expect Peace and Comfort at the last day, but till then
you may never expect us to embrace the Exhortation, although we tender the Peace
of Church and State and the eternal Happyness of our own Souls above all
earthly things, and do hope through Grace steadfastly to hold Communion with
that Church whereof Jesus Christ is the Head, against which the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail.

REPLY.

It is a strange way to put me upon the Proof that my Life and Doctrine has
been according to the Rule Christ has set us. He should rather have asked
those that have heard and conversed with me. If he, or any of those whose Cause
he espouses, have any Objection against either, let them, in the Name of God,
speak and spare not; let them be as inquisitive as they are desirous to find
Faults. I fear not the utmost Effort of their Malice: But do thou, O God, be
merciful to me a Sinner: Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for
in thy sight shall no Man living be justified. If nothing appears against
either my Life or Doctrine, you ought in Charity to believe both to be
agreeable to God's Word, and then (according to your Champion himself) to
embrace the Exhortation I made you.

You may pretend as great a Tenderness as you please for the Peace of Church
and State, yet it is undeniable Matter of Fact, that by the Separation, both
are mightily disturbed and disquieted; and though I am unwilling to carry the
Controversy so high, as to dispute, whether (according to the Laws and Rules
of Catholic Communion) you do hold Communion with that Church of which Jesus
Christ is the Head: Yet I beg leave to tell you, that Jesus Christ is not the
Head of this or that particular Sect or Party of Christians only, but of the
whole Catholic Church, of which our Established Church being a true and sound
Part or Branch, by virtue of your Profession to hold Communion with that, you
will (if you drive the Argument as far as in its just Consequence it will bear)
find your selves obliged to hold Actual Communion with this. But to save my
self the trouble of pursuing this Argument as far as it will go, I refer you to
the Case of Church Communion, stated by a learned Hand for your right
information. And I pray, as Mr. Baxter advises you, Poor Man's Family-Book. p.
273.
endeavor to understand the right Terms of Church Communion; especially the
Unity of the Universal Church, and the Universal Communion which you must hold
with all the Parts. And hereupon I desire you will let me ask you, whether or no
you do not really believe the Established Church of England to be a true Church
of Jesus Christ, a Church of which he is the Head, and with which he holds
Communion? The most eminent and sober Nonconformists, as it can and has been
proved, Case of Lay-Communica.
have owned Her to be a true Church; that She is sound and true as to her
Doctrine; that her Worship, for Matter and Substance, is good, and for
Edification; that her Ministry is true, and the same for Substance which Christ
has established. Nay, they have not only owned the Church of England to be a
true Church, but have looked upon it as the most valuable in the World, both as
to the Church it self, and as to the Ministry of it: And I dare be confident,
that there is not an honest true Presbyterian in England, but will say (if he
will be ingenuous) that the Church of England (by which I always mean that
Established Church from whose Communion you separate) is a true Member of
Christ's Body, and that Christ holds Communion with her. Now (as the
Presbyterians of old asked their Brethren of the Separation, Friendly Deb. part
I. p. 165.
so ask I you) If we be a Church of Christ, and Christ hold Communion with us,
why do you separate from us? If we be the Body of Christ, do not they that
separate from the Body separate from the Head also?

ANSWER.

Sir, give me leave to tell you our Separation is grounded upon real Scruples
of Conscience, and there is but one way I know of to Answer them, and that is,
to take away the Cause of them; for I can assure you, that it is neither Humor
nor Prejudice that is the Cause of our Dissenting.

REPLY.

If you have not endeavored all you can to have your Scruples satisfied and
removed, you do thereby show your selves to be glad of them, and that therefore
Humor and Prejudice have the greatest share in your Separation. But if after
your best Endeavors for Satisfaction in those matters which make you withdraw
from our Communion, you cannot obtain it; your Case is the more pitiable, and
the more excusable, and I am by no means concerned at the Liberty which is
indulged you. But to Answer your Scruples at so dear a rate, as the taking away
our Liturgy, and the abolishing of Episcopacy, ( which you do more than
intimate is the Cause of them) is what, I hope, our Governors will never
consent to; for (make what use of it you please) I do think them more valuable
than your Company at Church, as earnestly as I do desire it.

ANSWER.

But if you would know, I will tell you, it is the Liturgy, or Service Book, in
which you impose such things on us, in order to Church Communion, as the Word
of God has not required, but on the contrary forbidden. Prove. 30.6. Add thou
not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar. Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Ye shall not add unto the Word, I command you; neither shall ye diminish ought
from it. What will ye then say for your selves, when God shall say unto you,
Who has required these things at your Hands? Sure I am, to do more in the
Service of God than He has required, will but Undo us; therefore the Wise Man
exhorts, Be not righteous overmuch, why should thou destroy thy self?
Remember Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their Company, who for doing what was
not required, were all consumed, the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed them
up.

REPLY.

Now he speaks out. And though the things you mainly scruple at, such as the
Cross and Surplice, are more properly Instances of Obedience to Human Authority
than Terms of Church Communion, which may be held by a Lay-Person, in the more
constant Services of Prayers and Preaching, without joining in those things he
dislikes; yet if it be true, that the things imposed in our Liturgy are
forbidden by God, then I own, that the fault of the Schism lies in us, and that
you have very good reason for your separating from us. And if this Assertion
were but as well proved, as it is confidently asserted, I would never again read
the Service Book: But if you think me duly qualified for so great a Work, will
Preach to, and Pray for you in the Mault-house; though I have hitherto most
affectionately loved the Habitation of God's House, and the Place where his
Honor dwells, and was always glad when they said unto me, We will go into the
House of the Lord. Let us therefore well examine the Proofs he produces for an
Assertion delivered with so much Confidence, to say no worse of it.

He alleges two Texts of Scripture which are useless and impertinent, till it
be proved, that we make real Additions to the Word of God. Those he mentions in
the Psalms shall be considered by and by. That which I presume he here means,
is, that the things enjoined in our Service Book, being not commanded by God in
his Word, are Additions to it; and that therefore these two Texts of Scripture
are an undeniable Proof of the Unlawfulness of them, this must be his meaning,
if he has any at all in what he says, and I think I have represented it with
all the Advantage he can desire.

But now, if We are guilty of making Additions to the Word of God, we either do
what that forbids, or Appoint somewhat else instead of what God has appointed;
or We add such Expositions to the Commandment, as the End of it is thereby
frustrated; or we make that which is not the Word of God to be of equal
Authority with that which is; or else we give the same Efficacy to Humane
Institutions as God does to His: But he can never charge us with any of these.
and how then can he charge us with Additions to the Word of God? for adding, is
adding to the Substance, and making the thing added of the nature of the thing
it is added to; but when the Substance remains entire, as much after this
Humane Appointment as it was before it, it cannot be called an Addition to it,
in the sense the Scripture takes that word in.

But to the Argument which these Men draw from Deuter. iv. 2. Dr. Fowler,
Christ. Libert. p. 183.
(our present Bishop) a great while ago, replied, That if they be not mistaken
in the Sense of these words, they will prove more than is intended to be
proved, or than they would have true; namely, that nothing is to be done out
of, as well as in, the Worship of God, but what is expressly and particularly
commanded. But Episcopius (who may be listened to in this matter, because no
Episcopalian) has showed that these words [Ye shall not add unto the Word
which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it.] are no new
Precept, but only signify, Ye shall not transgress the Commandments of God, by
doing any thing contrary to them, which is to Add; or by omitting any thing
Required by them, which is to Diminish.

And therefore, though ignorant People may be scared with the improper
Application of that of Isa. 1.12, yet it cannot belong to us, who place no
farther Religion and Acceptableness in our Prayers and Services, than as they
are accompanied with that Sincerity, Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, without
which God told the Jews He had no delight in their Sacrifices, though they were
of his own appointing; nor had required them to tread his Courts without these
divine Qualifications. But if We must Answer to that Question, Who has
Required these things at your Hands? then I tell You (for God knows it, and we
are not afraid to appear before him upon that account) that forasmuch as these
things are no where forbidden, We comply with them in Obedience to that Word
which requires us to obey them that have Rule over us, Heb. 13.17. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and to submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake.

And if this be the Word of God, how comes this Man so uncharitably to
pronounce the Sentence of Damnation upon us, and tell us, we shall be But
undone, (as if that were not Punishment enough) for doing more in the Service
of God than He has required? Why, he grounds it upon Eccles. 7.16, and Numb.
16.

As for the Exhortation of the Wise Man, (if the best Commentators I have seen
understand it right) it is the best Advice I can give to you, it being
interpreted of Heat and Zeal more than needs, without Reason and Discretion;
which as it makes all the Schisms in the World, so produces a great many other
Evils. I appeal to the whole World, whether it is not properly Returned upon
you, who are transported into an excessive Z^^l and Rage against innocent
Ceremonies, and mere Circumstances of Worship, and which are declared to be so,
and no way Essential to Religion by that Church which uses them. And to this
you must give me leave to add the other part of the Verse, (which he left out)
neither make thy self over-wise: Do not (without some better Grounds) oppose
your private Opinion to the Judgment and Authority of a whole Nation: And, in
particular, of as Pious and Learned a Clergy as any the whole World can show.
Consider that it is possible you may be mistaken, and that it does not become
you to Assume that Infallibility to your selves, which you deny to the Church
of Rome.

As for the Example of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, if it be well considered, our
Case cannot be made Parallel to it: But it highly deserves your Consideration,
whether you are not in some measure guilty of the like Crime; which did not
consist in doing what was not required, but in Actual Rebellion against Moses
and Aaron, the Ministers of God; and therefore against God himself. What a
strange Consequence then is this! Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their Company,
were all consumed for murmuring and revelling against Moses and Aaron; and
therefore we shall be undone for obeying the Commandments of those God has
placed over us. Certainly there is a more natural Inference to be drawn from
this amazing Instance of God's Judgments upon disobedient Persons, and were
there not a strange Mist before your Eyes, you could not but see it, and make a
more suitable Application of it.

ANSWER.

Sir, give me leave to tell you, that whatsoever is placed in God's Worship
without the Command of God, is an Idol; for none has Power to Ordain or Place
a Ceremony in Christ's Church but himself, who is King of it. A clear Proof you
have, Numb. 15.30. And it shall be unto you for a Fringe, that you may look
upon it, and remember all the Commandments of the Lord, and do them, and that
you seek not after your own Heart, and your own Eyes, after which you used to
go a whoring.

REPLY.

I believe never poor Man undertook such a Task as I have done, to Answer so
much Impertinence. But since I have begun, I must have Patience, and that will
carry me through it all. He would fain possess the People (among whom this
Paper was to be shown with so much Triumph) with an Opinion, that we have Idols
in our Church: But does he think that I can swallow things without chewing, as
they do? That he begs leave to tell me, that whatsoever is placed in God's
Worship, without the Command of God, is an Idol; i. e. it is the Representation
of some Divine or Beatified Object, which is as such propounded and set up for
Adoration. Was there ever such a wild Assertion? Or could any Man think it
possible, that he should so luckily hit upon such a Text of Scripture to prove
it by? God Commands the Children of Israel to put Fringes upon the Borders of
their Garments, to be a Remembrancer to them of God's Commands and their Duty
of Obedience; ergo, whatsoever is placed in God's Worship, without the Command
of God, is an Idol. Where the Consequence is, I profess, I cannot see: But if
your Eyes are clearer than mine, I desire you to examine the strength of it in
another Instance, besides that of the Cross and Surplice. The laying the Hand
upon, and kissing the Book, in the taking of an Oath, (which is both a Natural
and Instituted part of Worship) is appointed without the Command of God, and
therefore the laying the Hand upon, and kissing the Book, is an Idol, or rather
the Book it self. A clear Proof you have, Numb. 15.39.

But possibly I may carry this Matter further than he intended. He took it
perhaps for an undoubted Truth, which wanted no Proof, that whatsoever is
placed in God's Worship, without the Command of God, is an Idol; and therefore
he might not urge this Text of Scripture for the confirmation of that, but to
prove, that none has Power to Ordain or Place a C^remony in Christ's Church,
but himself, who is King of it. But since he herein directly opposes one of the
Thirty nine Articles, the Opinion and Practice of the whole Church of God, and
even St. Paul's Direction to the Corinthians, to appoint whatsoever shall be
tending to Decency and Order; he should certainly have given some better Proof
than a Text out of the Old Testament, which does not relate to the Worship of
God; and which, in my Opinion, would much better have proved, that the
Parliament should not have enacted, That Poor Persons Receiving Parish
Collection shall, in an open and visible manner, wear a Badge, and that too
upon the Shoulder of the Right Sleeve of the uppermost Garment; because, as one
of them once told me, (when there was formerly such a private Order among our
selves) it was no where commanded in the Word of God that they should be marked
like Sheep.

ANSWER.

Again, that which is Man's Device, and has been an Idol in God's Worship,
must of necessity be an Idol still in the Worship of God; but the Ceremonies
mentioned in the Service Book have been Idols in God's Worship, as the Cross
and Surplice; ergo they must be Idols still in the Worship of God. Read Josh.
7.13, there the Lord Commands Joshua, saying, Up, sanctify the People, for
thus says the Lord God of Israel, there is an accursed thing in the midst of
thee, O Israel. Nay, God tells Joshua, he would not be with them any more,
except they destroyed the accursed thing, i. e. the Babylonish Garment which
Achan had taken and hid in the midst of his Tent. For this he and his Sons and
his Daughters, and all that he had, must be stored with Stones, and burned with
Fire.

REPLY.

I shall take his Syllogism to task presently: But beforehand I cannot but
observe what an excellent Textuary this Man is, and how happy in his
Application of Scripture. I have read the seventh Chapter of Joshua, and I
refer him back again thereto, and also to Co. 6, v. 17, 18. where Joshua
accurses Jericho, and every thing in it, and forbids the Israelites, under the
Penalty of bringing a Curse upon the Camp, to meddle with any thing therein:
But Achan, contrary to this express Prohibition, had taken the accursed thing,
and had also sto^^^ and dissemoled also, and put it amongst his own Stuff, Chapter
7, Ver. 11. What was this accursed thing which he stole? Ver. 21, It was a
goodly Babylonish Garment, and Two hundred shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of
Gold of Fifty shekels weight, them he coveted and took. So that, you see, the
Reason why Achan was so severely punished, was his absolute Disobedience to the
Command of God, in taking of that which God had cursed: his Stealth,
Covetousness, and Dissimulation. Now what is the Consequence of all this? Does
it appear that the Babylonish Garment was a Surplice, or so much as used in the
Worship of God; or that the Wedge of Gold was a Cross or that Achan's Crime in
stealing the Garment was greater than that of stealing the Two hundred shekels
of Silver? Though this learned Expositor explains the accursed thing by [that is,
the Babylonish Garment]. But if the Babylonish Garment had been a Surplice, and
used by them in the Worship or God, what then! was it therefore an Idol, and an
accursed thing, and therefore to be burned? I answer positively, No; because
for that very reason, all the Silver, and Gold, and Vessels of Brass, and Iron,
were to be brought into the Treasury of the Lord. But all the Silver, and Gold,
and Vessels of Brass, and Iron, are consecrated unto the Lord: they shall be
brought into the Treasury of the Lord, Chapter 6.19. And this I urge as an Argument
against his Triumphant Syllogism; every Proposition of which, and the
Consequence also, I utterly deny. For, 1st, That which has been an Idol in
God's Worship, must not of necessity be an Idol still, if it was not an Idol in
its own nature, or made so by a standing and positive Law. I deny his Minor
also; for, allow that the Cross, and Surplice, and other Ceremonies, have been
used in Idolatrous Worship, yet it does not follow that they were Idols, unless
they had some Prototype, or represented some Divine Object, and were set up for
Adoration. Things lawful in themselves may be used in Idolatrous Worship, such
as Time, Place, Habit, and Posture; but the^ i^ no more follows from thence,
that they were Idols, than that the Vessels of Brass and Iron, before
mentioned, were Idols; or that the holy Water and Vestments are Idols, which
are used, when they say Mass, in the Church of Rome. But supposing that both
his Propositions are true, yet his Consequence is very false, That the Cross
and Surplice must be Idols still, Answer to the Unlawfulness of Com.
Pray-Worsh. p. 9.
or (as I suppose he would now word it, if he had it to revise again)
Idolatrous: For when Idolatry is not in the Nature of the thing but in the Use,
take away the Use and the Idolatry cease; and consequently it may be lawfully
used where there is no Idolatry in the Worship, and no Idolatry in the use of
it: And if it be not to be used, it is not because it is unlawful in it self to
use it, but because it is forbidden by God, as was the Case among the Jews, or
because of some Circumstances that make it inconvenient and dangerous. 1 Cor.
1.25, 25.
Thus it was lawful to eat that Meat which had been offered to Idols, when it
was afterward exposed to sale in the Shambles, or set upon the Table at an
Entertainment, because it was thereby restored to a common use. It is then no
more Idolatry to use a white Garment, (or a Ceremony) or a Temple, or observe a
Day, or to use a Prayer that has been used or observed in Idolatrous Worship,
or by an Idolatrous Church, than it was to eat Meat that had been offered to
Idols. Purify the Gold, and separate the Dross from it, and the Gold is not
the worse for the Dross that was before mingled with it. Scrape the Walls, and
cast out the infected Materials of it, so that the House be freed from the
Leprosy, Numb. 14.41.
and it might have been as well inhabited as if it had never been infected. And
this is the Upshot of that Charge of Idolatry, which he would fain fasten upon
us. He can produce nothing that is Idolatrous among us. The Cross and Surplice,
he says, have been used in Idolatrous Worship; but if we allow him what he
says, it does him no Service, forasmuch as the Abuse of things in themselves
lawful, even to Idolatrous Purposes, is no Argument against the lawful use of
them. And this is Answer enough to what he says about the Original of the
Surplice; for let its Parentage be as base and scandalous as he would have it
thought to be, yet it does not make the Use of it Unlawful, if the thing it
self is not so.

ANSWER.

The Unlawfulness of this Babylonish Garment will further appear, if we look
into the Original whence we had it. Some Authors tell us, we have it from
Heathen Rome, which in her Idolatrous Service did apishly imitate Aaron's
Garments; as it is instanced in the Reign of Numa, eight hundred Years after
the Law. Others tell us, we have it from the Druides, the mad Heathen Priests
among the Gauls and Brittons, or from the Antichristian Rome, or lastly, from
the Priestly Office of Aaron, which Heathen and Popish Rome has impiously
followed, denying thereby the Lord Jesus to be came in the Flesh, who with his
Graces was typified out by those goodly and beautiful Garments, which being
Shadows, are done away, and Christ the Body is come. For us then to imitate
them in their Relics, or to devise a Priestly Garment of our own head in God's
Worship, is to rob Christ of his Honor exceedingly, and to make our selves
deeply guilty of Will Worship: For had not God clothed those Garments in the
Law with a particular and punctual Command for Matter and Manner, they had been
ridiculous things; They made the holy Garment, says Moses, as the LORD
commanded, Exodus 39. which latter words [as the Lord commanded] are repeated
nine several times in this Chapter, intimating, they did not swerve one jot
from God's Direction, teaching all God's Servants thereby, that they contain
themselves within the Limits of God's Word, and bring nothing into the Service
of God of their own invention, for the Apostle calls that Will Worship.

REPLY.

This Babylonish Garment he has mighty Spite to, and to render it the more
odious, he would gladly derive its Pedigree, but he is not Genealogist enough
to do it. Authors, he would have me know he has read, but who they are he is
afraid to tell, lest it might be made appear he has read none of them, or has
made as bold with them at he has done with the Bible, and misinterpreted and
misapplied them, as he has done this sacred Book; or that, however, they are
such deep learned Men as himself, who know nothing of the matter. The Surplice
is derived from somebody, he knows not who, either from Heathenish or
Antichristian Rome, from the mad Heathen Priests, or from Aaron's Garments,
which were good and beautiful in themselves, and yet had been ridiculous, if
God had not appointed them. What if I should say, some Authors tell us, it was
derived from Christ and his Apostles; how would he disprove me, or prove that
it was not? But what if, without enquiring from whom it was first derived, or
by whom else it was or is used, I should say, as I do, that it was a Garment
used in the Primitive Church, as an Emblem of, and an Admonition to the Priests
of that Purity and Innocence, wherewith they ought to be clothed; and that we
use it in conformity to their Practice, and for the same reasons; and withal
thinking it a decenter Garment to perform Ministerial Offices in, than either
Coat or Cloak; what, I say, can he urge against this? or, what Reason can he
give why the Governors of the Church may not prescribe what Habit for the
Clergy, whether in the time of Divine Service, or out of it, which they shall
think most grave, and most decent? Or if he will tell me why a Dissenting
Preacher goes in Black, rather than in Yellow; if there be any thing of Reason
in what he says, I will improve it into one, for wearing the Surplice during
divine Administrations.

But what if this be taken from the Garments of Aaron, as he knows not whether
it is or no? Why! Then those that use it, do thereby deny Christ to be come in
the Flesh; but for what Reason does he say this? Because Aarons Garments were
Types and Shadows of Christ, who being now come, they are to be done away. If
he is such a Logician, as really to think this to be good Arguing, yet it will
not at all conclude against the Use of the Surplice, till he has showed first,
what it was that was typifyed and shadowed out thereby, which is now Abolished
by Christ; and proved secondly, that it is used by us out of any Judaizing
Principle.

What this weak Man means by imitating them in their Relics, I know not; but I
leave it to be tried by what has been already said, whether To devise a
Priestly Garment of our own head in God's Worship, be to rob Christ of his
Honor exceedingly, and to make our selves deeply guilty of Will Worship. But
let me a^k him, Does the Scripture any where say so? Or does the Apostle any
where call this Will Worship? Why does he not quote Chapter and Verse? Or
deduce it by some Logical and Natural Inference? No body I hope will believe
this Man, purely upon the score of his Confidence: God having clothed those
Garments under the Law with a particular and punctual Command, the Jews had
been guilty of manifest Disobedience, if they had not made them as the Lord
commanded; but being goodly and beautiful Garments, they could never have been
esteemed ridiculous, if God had commanded nothing at all about them And his
commanding them, is I think, a good Argument, that in themselves they were not
so. It is, I must confess, very observable, that there is so much Humane
Learning in this Man and his Party, that they can count Nine, but what if God
had commanded Ninety times in one Chapter, that the Aaronical Garments should
only be made so and so, is it any thing to us, who, according to himself, are
no ways concerned in those Ceremonies and Shadows of the Law, and to whom God
has not given one particular direction in such Matters, but left us to the
general Rules of Decency and Order, and the Custom of the Churches of God? We
are therefore left at liberty, to use such Garments, as shall be judged most
agreeable thereto; God under the Gospel, having neither forbidden, nor
commanded the use of any: If it can be proved He has, then farewell Surplice.
And here I cannot but wonder, that since this Man joined the Cross with the
Surplice, in his General Charge and Indictment, he did not also as particularly
plead against that Ceremony, and endeavor to expose it, by deriving its
Pedigree likewise. But as to the Lawfulness of the Use of the Cross, I refer
the Reader to the Case of the Cross in Baptism, by Dr. Resbury.

This old Plea for Separation has been again and again answered by those who
have writ in the defense of our Church; but, to make short work on it, I will
only ask whether this that you assert; Namely, that we are not to bring any
thing of Man's Invention into the Service of God, nor use any thing in his
Worship, but what he has commanded, be the word of God, or? If it be not, how
come you to impose it upon us for such, or charge that upon us for a sin, which
is not the transgression of any Law? If it is the word of God, then it is
either expressly such, or it is a clear Inference and Deduction from his express
word. You cannot pretend the former, and therefore that which you say; is, that
it clearly follows from God's particular prescribing the Garments of Aaron, and
(to give this Man another Argument) the whole Levitical Service. The
Consequence remains still to be proved: and against the Truth of it, I urge the
Practice of the Jewish Church, who made no scruple of ordering diverse things
for which there was no Command, and yet they were never blamed for them by the
Prophets, or our Savior. Particularly David's design of building an House
without God's Command, 1 Kings 8 3.
or his so much as speaking a word to him about it, was so far from being
Faulty, that God commended him for it. 2 Chronicles. 30.23.
Hezekiah continued the Feast of unleaveed Bread seven days longer than the
time appointed by the Law. Mordecai and Esther made an Ordinance for the yearly
Observation of the Feast of Purim, without any Command from God that we read
of. Of the four Fasts mentioned Zach. 8. there was only One Commanded. Est.
9.20. Zech. 8.19. 1 Mac. 4.9. John 10.22. Mat. 26.30.
The Feast of the Dedication is known to be of modern and humane Institution,
and yet it is as well known that our Savior honored it with his Presence.
There was no Appointment for the singing a Paschal Hymn after the Passover, and
yet our Savior and his Disciples observed that Usage, and which therefore will
not, I presume, be said to be sinful. Now if the Addmittance of certain Usages
not commanded was not sinful under the Law, where the manner of divine Worship
was particularly specified, how comes it to be so now under the Gospel where
there is no such particular Prescription, nor hardly any thing more than such
general Rules as I have before mentioned, which are to be respectively applied
by Superiors and Inferiors; such as, let all things be done decently, 1 Cor.
14.40. 1 Pet 2.13.
and in order; and submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's
Sake.

This seems to me to be Answer enough to what this Man has said about the
Unlawfulness of using any thing in the Worship of God, but what he himself has
commanded; but that I may if possible confute and silence, if not convince the
Urgers of this grand Objection, and even those who may perhaps manage it after
a better Manner, than this weak Arguer has done: I will present to your
Consideration what the Right Reverend the Bishop of our own Diocese has with
great clearness written upon this Subject. It is indeed a great deal to
transcribe, but it is so full and pertinent to the business in hand, that my
pains therein will be well bestowed, if you will but vouchsafe it an impartial
Reading.

In his Discourse of Christian Liberty, Chap. 13 p. 176. he is speaking to that
Notion of Christian Liberty, which makes it to consist in Freedom from those
Laws of Men, that command things indifferent relating to Religion and the
Worship of God; and makes it appear to be wild and false by these
Considerations.

First, This Notion of Christian Liberty tends to introduce sad disorder and
confusion into the Churches of Christ, and will certainly do it if practiced
upon. I need not go about to Prove, that the Order of Ecclesiastical as well as
civil Societies consists principally in the due Regulation of things in their
own Nature indifferent.

St. Paul has enjoined that in the Church, all things be done decently in
Order, 1 Cor. 14.40. But how shall they be so done, if it be a Violation of our
Christian Liberty to have any thing imposed upon us by our Governors for
Decencies and Orders Sake? Particular Rules being not given us in Scripture
about this Matter; which to be sure would have been, were they not left to the
Determination of the Governors of each Church, upon supposition that it is
possible to give such as would well suit all Churches.

Calvin, upon those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you Brethren,
that you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them
to you, does thus express his sense about this matter: Says He, we know that
every Church it left free to appoint a Form of Polity for it self, because our
Lord has prescribed nothing certain. And he speaks this, you see, not as his
own sense only, but as the sense, and that undoubted too, of his other Brethren
of the Reformation: Whose Judgment, were it needful, we might largely produce
to the same purpose. But there is no need of it, those very persons, who have
been most zealous for the contrary Opinion, being forced to contradict it in
their practice: And, for Orders sake, to determine such things in their several
Church administrations as are left perfectly undetermined in Scripture, (of
which might be given very many instances) notwithstanding their Clamours
against the Church of England upon this, as modest as she is in her impositions.

Secondly, This Notion of Christian Liberty is so great an infringment of the
Liberty Christ has left to Ecclesiastical Governors as not to leave them so
much as it is certain the Governors of the Jewish Church were invested with,
who yet were bound up and determined in a very great number of Particulars.

Over and above the Multitude of Rites and Ceremonies which God himself did
annex to the substance of his Worship, we read of not a few others that were
added by Men. We have a large Account of such in Maimonides, in his Book de
Cultu Devino, and the Holy Scriptures themselves present us with diverse such
without the least intimation of God's dislike of them.

Besided some of those which I mentioned, He gives other Instances viz. King
Solomon's Hallowing the middle part of the Temple for Sacrifices, 1 King. 8.64.
The se^ hours of Prayer in the Temple, Acts 31. Several Alterations, and
particularly that of the Gesture, in Eating the Passover; the which Christ
declared his Approbation of by his Conformity to them, Mat. 26.20. Those two
known Rites of the Jews, not commanded in the Law, viz. that of joining Baptism
with Circumcision in admitting Proselytes, and that of Post Coenium, or Feast
after the Passover. And these two our Savior was so far from condemning, upon
the score of their being of Humane Institution, that his two great Sacraments
received their rise from them.

The Texts which are chiefly urged, to prove the Unlawfulness of bringing any
thing into the Worship of God, but what He has himself prescribed, are those
in the Old Testament, wherein God declares his Displeasure against some of the
Israelites, for doing those things which he commanded them not; and one in the
New, but cited out of the Old, where our Savior reprehendeth the Pharisees for
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

Those Texts in the Old Testament are Lev. 10.1, Deuteronomy. 17.3, Jer. 7.31, C^^p.
19.5, Chap. 32.35. But I wonder that those who produce these Texts for such a
purpose, could not see without our showing it to them, that they all speak of
such things as God did not only not Command, but had strictly Forbid.

In Lev. 10.1, the thing which God says He commanded them not, was Nadab and
Abihu's offering strange Fire before the Lord; which was an Act of Disobedience
to a most express Law, Chap. 6.12, 13.

That in Deuteronomy. 13.3, not commanded by God, was a most heinous Sin and a black
Transgression of the First Commandment, viz. Serving other Gods, and
Worshipping of them, the Sun, the Moon, and the Host of Heaven.

That not Commanded, Jer. 7.31, was not only contrary to the Law of God, but a
horrible Wickedness condemned by the Light of Nature, viz. the burning of their
Sons and their Daughters in the Fire, in the Valley of Hinnom.

That which God says, He commanded not, neither came it into his mind, Jer.
19.5, was the same Unnatural Wickedness, viz. the burning their Sons with Fire
for Burnt-offerings to Baal; and that in Jer. 32.35, was the causing of their
Sons and their Daughters to pass through the Fire unto Molech.

But what does God's condemning such abominable Practices as these signify,
toward the proving it unlawful to use or impose certain innocent Rites and
Circumstances in Divine Worship, which are not expressly and particularly
required by God; but may be truly said to be in the general required by him, as
such are necessary to the decorous management of his Worship, and agreeable to
the forementioned Rule, of doing all things decently, and in order?

And whereas the Urgers of these Texts for tire 'foresaid purpose do reply to
us, that though they cannot deny but the Instances of the things not commanded
mentioned in each of them, are things also prohibited, yet they are pertinently
insisted upon by them, because it is tacitly implied in God's expressing them
as things only not commanded, that things not commanded in his Worship offend
him as well as things prohibited.

To this I briefly Answer, that this is subtle Arguing indeed, except it can
be showed, that God does any where condemn the doing in his Worship what is
lawful in its own nature, and no where forbidden by him, under the notion of a
thing not commanded; which I dare affirm cannot be showed. And I add, that
nothing is more absurd, than' to build Doctrines upon Idioms of the sacred
Language; but this is too commonly done by the Men we are now dealing with; as
I am able to show in too many instances.

And if we should turn the Scales, and argue thus: such and such things are not
forbidden by God, therefore they are commanded; we should not be guilty of a
grosser Absurdity than they are, in inferring from God's not having Commanded
them, that he has therefore Forbidden them.

And as to that Text in the New Testament, Mat. 15.9. But in vain do they
worship me, teach^^ for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. It is manifest, that
that which is condemned in the Pharisees here is the setting up of their own
Constitutions instead, or in the place of God's, and those too contrary to
God's Commandments. This is evident from the Context. Our Savior says, ver.
3, Why do you transgress the Commandments of God by your Traditions? That is,
says Irenaeus upon these words, They did not only frustrate the Law of God by
Prevarication, mixing Wine with Water; but they also set their Law in
opposition or contradiction to the Law of God, etc. And, that so they did,
appears by what follows, ver. 4, 5, 6. for God commanded, saying, Honor thy
Father and Mother, etc. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or his
Mother, it is a Gift by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and honor
not his Father, he shall be free. Thus have you made the Commandment of God of
none effect by your Tradiction. And next follows a Citation out of Isa. 29.13,
according to the Septuagint, whereof these words are part, viz. Ye Hypocrites,
well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people draw nigh unto me with
their mouth, and honors me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.
But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

We will also consider these words as they are recited by St. Mark, Chapter 7.7,
with the Verse following, Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men: For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye
hold the Tradition of Men, as the washing of Pots and Cups, etc. That is,
according to Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase upon the place, You are those Hypocrites
that profess great strictness in Performances toward God, and practice in some
external things more than God commands you, and impose those on others, as the
Commands of God, when they are only Humane Ordinances. As for the inward Purity
of the Heart, and Actions, to which all God's Laws of Washings did refer, you
take no care of them, transgress against this substantial part of Religion in
the fonlest manner, and spend all your Time in these External Superfluit^^s,
washing of Pots, etc. the Ordinances of your Rabbis only.

But, what are the hypocritical and wicked doings here condemned, to Governors
determining of External Circumstances of Administration in the Worship of God,
which are not only innocent in themselves, but also not set up in the place of,
or justling out, any thing commanded by God, nor yet imposed as the Commands of
God. But who can have the Forehead to fasten such high Presumptions as these
upon our Church? But I proceed,

Thirdly, As this Notion of Christian Liberty is an enfringement of the Liberty
which is left to Governors, so is it also greatly injurious to the Peoples
Liberty: for it is a very highly to be prized Instance of the Peoples Liberty,
that they may, without giving God an Offense, conform to such Laws as oblige
them only to indifferent things. And it will be an intolerable straitning and
confining of our Liberty, it will be a very Bondage to us, to be always
obnoxious to the Penalties which are the Sanctions of such Laws, and to other
manifold Inconveniences that follow upon disobeying them.

Christian Liberty, according to this Notion, is so far from being worthy of
our Savior's purchasing, that it is infinitely more desirable to be without it,
in regard of the extreamly-mischievous Consequences which follow upon
quarrelling with Authority about harmless matters, which have not the least ill
influence upon your Souls, whereby not only those who refuse Obedience are
exposed in their own Persons and Families to great Evils, both Temporal and
Spiritual, but also the whole Community, the Church and State too, by their
means. This we all know, at this day, by very sad Experience. This, I say, is
such a Liberty as is the occasion of lamentable Mischiefs, both public and
private, but I am wholly to seek what Good can accrue thereby, and therefore we
may safely warrant it to be no Liberty of our Blessed Savior's procurement,
but the contrary.

If we were well instructed in the Nature of the Gospel Dispensation, we should
be very certain, that whatsoever does no way tend to the depraving of our
Souls, and the bringing us into Bondage to Sin, (which we have proved to be the
only Opposite to our grand Christian Liberty) cannot be unlawful to us
Christians, because not prejudicial to the ultimate Design of the Gospel, which
is the making us free from the Dominion of Sin. To which Design we have showed
all the Precepts of our Savior, the Promises and Threatenings, (and I may add
Doctrines too) are subservient. And on the contrary, we may be as sure, that
whatsoever is apt to hinder the promoting of this Design must needs be unlawful
under the Gospel; as all that are not blind, or do not shut their Eyes, may
easily see this same pretended Christian Liberty most sadly does.

And there is nothing more apparent, than that Obedience to Authority, in all
things not forbidden by the Divine Laws, does mightily tend to the promoting
Peace, Love, Humility, Self-denial, and the like Christian Virtues: But
Disobedience in such matters does as much occasion the gratifying of those
Devilish Lusts, Pride, Uncharitableness, Contention, Wrath, Sedition, etc.

Fourthly, Those that pretend it to be such a Violation of Christian Liberty,
to be obliged by Men's Laws to things indifferent, if they will be true to
themselves and their own Principles, must not only refuse Obedience to the
Injunctions of such things, but to the Prohibitions also of such things; as
they must not do such as are commanded to be done, so they must do such as are
commanded to be forborne; for it is as great an infringement of our Liberty to
have indifferent things forbidden us, as to have them imposed upon us: It Is a
no less intrenchment upon it, to be tied up from what we may, antecedently to
the Magistrate's Authority, do, as to be commanded what we may omit.

So that if the things which the Dissenters now Refuse to do, because
Commanded, should hereafter be Forbidden by Authority, they would be obliged,
in order to the Maintenance of their Christian Liberty, to be every whit as
zealous for them as now they are against them: Nor were they so honest as they
should have been, but false to this their Principle, and shamefully betrayed
their Liberty, in so patiently submitting, when time was, to the severe
prohibition of the same things, though it was by an usurped Power too.

What a strange Liberty is this, which, in its natural consequences tends to
make People so Humor some, Cross grained, and Opposite to Government! Surely
it cannot be Christian, but the most Unchristian Liberty.

If this Free-dealing should offend any, I should be sorry for it, but must
withal take Leave to tell the Offended, that it is an Evidence of exceeding
great Weakness, not to say worse, to be Angry with those who endeavor in the
Spirit of Meekness to convince us of our dangerous Mistakes. But such is the
Fate of Conscientious opposing Popular and Prevailing Errors, that it seldom
meets with better Success than kindling the Passions, and sharpening the
Tongues (and Pens too) of those who are most obliged to be thankful for it. But
Wisdom is justified of her Children.



What Answer can be returned to this Discourse I cannot see; but if,
notwithstanding all that can be said, these Men will still persist in it, as
their modest and humble Opinion that the Bishop, and all the most learned Men
of the Christian World are mistaken, and that, let them say what they please,
they do believe it to be really true, that nothing is to be done in the Worship
of God, but what he himself has expressly Commanded; then I must ask, how they
come so sharply to accuse Us of the breach of it, with whom the Cross and
Surplice are no parts of the Worship of God, when the charge falls as heavy, if
not much more heavy upon themselves; who not only sprinkle in Baptism, and sit
at the Lords Supper without any Command, but sing their Preachers Hymns to the
Praise and Glory of God; and who worship God in a conceived Prayer of their own
Invention, to the utter Exclusion of that Prayer, which our Savior in express
words has taught them when they Pray, to say, Luke 11.2. where it is delivered
upon a quite different Occasion from that in the other Gospel. St. Matthew
indeed brings in our Savior delivering this Paper, as a Pattern to square ours
by; but St. Luke as an express Form of Words, which when we pray, Mat. 6.9.
we are punctually to make use of. But strange as it is! these Men, who would
be thought the most sanctified Persons of the place they live in, will rather
implicitly own themselves so wicked as not to be fit to use this Prayer, than
admit of such an undeniable Argument as that is of the Lawfulness of a set Form
which I must confess, I wonder this Man I am now dealing with, took no Notice
of. But I conclude from his silence herein, that their real Opinion is, that
those Invectives which they so commonly use against Forms of Prayer in general,
and ours in particular, are only fit to amuse ignorant people with, and not
well enough grounded to be openly defended, though they help to keep up a
Party. Since there fore he durst say nothing about this, I pass it by, and if
there be any well-meaning people among you, that are disatisfied therein, I
refer you to those two unanswerable Treatises writ by Dr. Scott in Vindication
of public Forms, and to Dr. Beveridges Sermon upon that Subject, to convince
you of the Usefulness and Excellency of our Common Prayer. That which gave me
Occasion to mention this, was the instances I pitched upon to show, that you
not only used things in the Worship of God without the Command of God; but that
(swerving from the Example of the Jews, whose doing as the Lord commanded Moses
you so much insist upon) you omit that which Christ himself particularly
prescribed in the Worship of God. How highly absurd therefore is it for any one
to object that to another, of which he himself is no less guilty; nay much
more, when besides what I have already urged, it is done with this disadvantage
of Inequality; that the Inferior who owes a defference to Authority in things
doubtful and indiferent, seems to obtrude upon the Superior that which he would
not have the Superior to impose upon him. There is yet one thing more which I
would gladly know of you who speak so much of doing nothing about the Worship
of God but what Christ has commanded, and it is this: What Law of Christ is
there which enjoins you to hold your Meetings just then when the public
Service of God established by Law is performed? This is neither the Law of
Christ, nor the Practice of a great many of your Brethren in other places; nor
can you assign any truer reason for it, than that you are not content to enjoy
your own way of Worshipping God, but you must also undermine, and subvert ours;
which you are obliged to join in, though not under the Penalty of the Law, yet
in point of Conscience and in Obedience to the preceptive part of it.

Upon the same Accounts likewise you are as guilty of Will Worship as we are,
granting it to be true that to bring any thing of our own Invention into the
service of God be Will Worship.

But this being a word that you often make use of, especially in your
Calumniating of us, I will venture to give you the Meaning of it, that you may
both understand it, and know how rightly to apply it. This word is not used
above once in the whole Bible, and that by St. Paul, Col. 2.23. and therefore
he must be his own Interpreter, and we must fetch the Meaning of the Expression
from the Matter wherewith it is connected. If you look a little back in that
Chapter, you will find the Apostle forbids worshipping of Angels, verse 18, and
then he speaks against such superstitious people, as made it unlawful to Marry,
to eat some kind of Meats, to touch or come near some things, none of which God
has made sinful, but they were the mere Commandments of Men, verse 21, 22. Now
those that were of this Humor he immediately after, ver. 23. charges with
Will-woship. So that according to the Judgment of the Learned (which I hope I
may have the Liberty of quoting as well as my Antagonist.) A Will Worship is
erected, when either the Worship due to God is given to a Creature, or when any
thing is so enjoined to be done, or not to be done, as if it were the Will and
Commandment of God, when it is a mere Constitution of the Will of Man.

Having now found out what Will Worship is, let us impartially examine who are
most guilty of it, You or We. And because I may be thought partial in this
Enquiry, or however not duly qualified to make it, let the learned Man (now a
Reverend Father of our Church) that assisted us in finding out the Meaning of
Will Worship, state the Case betwixt us, and let us on both sides rest
satisfied in his Determination. He is speaking to a Person of the same Kidney
with the Man that has engaged me in all this trouble, and thus discourses him.

Friendly Deb. part 1. p 93.
I am sure you will not make us guilty of the first sort of Will Worship,
because none are more against it than we. As for the second, Our Church has
declared to all the World that none of those things you boggle at, are imposed
under the Notion of necessary, or religious in themselves, or as commanded by
God; but are of an Indifferent Nature, and only used as decent and comely in
the Judgment of the present Governors, who can alter these things, and
constitute something else in their room, if they see it fit; Preface to the
Com. Prayer.
which they could not pretend to, did they think them necessary. But then, as
our Church is not guilty of Will Worship in the Apostles sense; so, on the
other side I know not how to excuse those from that very guilt, who oppose what
is ordained among us as unlawful, and forbid us to use those Rites and Orders,
because sinful things. For they make that to be necessary to be forborne and
left undone, which God has not made so, but left indifferent; and so they in
effect, condemn those as sinners whom God acquits from all blame. As those in
the Apostles Discourse, said, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, so you say,
Knees not, Pray not by a Form, Wear not a Surplce, etc. Now since you think (as
those Men did) to please God by not doing those things which he has no where
forbidden; I do not see but you commit the very fault which the Apostle
reproves, i. e. you make that necessary not to be done, (if we will be true
Worshippers of God) which he has not made necessary not to be done, but left
us at Liberty to do it if we please. By which means you make a Religion of your
own, and study to honor God by abstaining from these things, by which he never
said that he was dishonored. O that all tender Consciences would seriously
consider this; for they would soon discern that your Ministers by forbidding
those things now in dispute, lay greater Burdens upon the Consciences of their
Brethren, and clog them with more duties, than God has laid upon them. Whereas
we, who think those things may be done, lay no other Burden upon the
Conscience than what God himself has laid; which is, to obey our Governors in
all things, wherein he himself has not bidden us to do the contrary.

ANSWER.

I shall only touch of Additions in the Service Book, there are added three
whole Verses to the Fourteenth Psalm, and one Verse to the Thirteenth Psalm.

REPLY.

If it be granted, that there are those Additions he speaks of, yet it was not
the Mistake of the Common Prayer Book, but of the Translations which the Common
Prayer followed, viz. the Septuagint and Vulgar. But I wonder how he came to be
so cautious as not to call these Additions to Scripture, for that certainly was
his meaning. The Additions to the 14th Psalm are accounted for in one of the
old Bibles, by this Note; That of this 14th Psalm, the 5th, 6th, and 7th
Verses, which are put into the Common Translation, and may seem unto some to be
left out in this, are not in the same Psalm in the Hebrew Text, but are rather
put in more fully to express the manners of the wicked, and are gathered out of
the 5th, 140th, and 10th Psalms, the 59th of the Prophet Isaiah, and the 36th
Psalm, and are alleged by St. Paul, and placed together in the 3d to the
Romans. But the saying, that there is a Verse added to the 14th Psalm, is a
notorious Falsehood; there are only these words, I will praise the Name of the
Lord most Highest; which are in the seventh Psalm, and the last Verse.

What then can this Man be thought to mean? Would he insinuate, that these
Additions are Inventions of our own, or that they are inserted by the Church,
upon some wicked selfish design? I hope it appears that they were not, nor we,
upon the score thereof, obnoxious to the Penalty of Deuteronomy. 4.2, before quoted by
him. But I would fain know whether they are not deeply guilty of the Crime they
charge us with, who teach, That nothing is to be used in the Worship of God,
but what is prescribed by God himself; for if that be not a Scripture Truth,
then what an Addition is this? Do not they who teach this for a Scripture-Rule
and Precept, impose upon Men's Consciences as much as Papists, and like them and
the Pharisees of old, teach the Traditions of Men for the Doctrines of God?
Nay, is not this directly contrary to the Gospel it self, 1 John 3.4. Romans 4.15.
which tells us, that Sin is the Transgression of a Law; and that where there
is no Law, there is no Transgression? And thus you all along see with how keen
an edge those Weapons turn upon you, which you make use of in fighting against
us.

ANSWER.

In a word, I may say of all the Ceremonies in the Service Book, as one of your
own Church says of the Succession of Church Officers, and in particular that
of Bishops: He tells us, That our English Bishops received their Orders in the
Communion of the Church of Rome, and ergo they had as good Orders as any of the
Church of Rome; they must needs be as good when they are the same: But it is but
a weak Proof for the Succession of their Bishops, when they must go to Rome for
it.

REPLY.

One would think it were high time for you to have done with this old
Accusation of Popery, and that you should have more Prudence, than to give us
Occasion to upbraid you with your fawning upon, and sneaking to it in the late
Reign, while the Bishops and Clergy of our Church made such a brave and
vigorous Defense against it, even to the hazard of their ALL. If indeed it be
true, that our Bishops received their Orders in the Church of Rome, then his
[ergo] is good, and the only good one he has made in this Paper, and the
Argument is a good one against the Papists, and no weak one neither for the
Succession of Church Officers against you, if you pretend to impugn it; which
if you do, it lies at your door to prove a failure in their Succession, since
our Bishops are in possession of their Authority. He ought to have quoted his
Author, for a Reason before mentioned. But, what if it be true, is therefore
Episcopacy unlawful, or the Succession of our Bishops not good? He may as well
argue, that the Water is not good, or comes not from the Fountainhead, because
the Conduit through which it is conveyed is faulty. But since this Man questions
the Succession of our Bishops, and upbraids us with having our Orders from the
Church of Rome, it is but reasonable to demand, Whether your Preachers have any
Orders at all? and if they have, Whence they had them, and through what Channel
they were conveyed down to them; and whether you have any Arguments to urge for
the Validity of Their Orders, which we cannot with much more reason make use of
to prove the Goodness of Ours? But we may see how far Envy and Malice will
sometimes make People overshoot themselves. This Man, rather than not send
forth his Bolt at our Bishops and Clergy, will strike at the whole Reformation,
and call in Question the Validity of the Orders of all the Reformed Churches:
of Luther and Calvin himself, nay, even the Authority of their own Ambassadors.

As for our Ceremonies, though they be superstitiously abused by the Papists, yet
that is no Argument against the present use of them in the Church of England,
who retains them not because they are of Rome, but of an Ancienter date than
that now corrupted Church; and if they are therefore unlawful, because they are
used by her, then every thing done in that Church is so, which, I suppose, you
will not say. We only reformed from the Errors and Corruptions of that Church,
and not from what was Apostolical, Primitive, and Innocent, because they used
it. And whatever Opinion these People would have others entertain of them, yet
their admired Mr. Calvin declares in express words, that He would not have any
Man think him so Austere, or bound up, as to forbid a Christian, without any
Exception, to accommodate himself to the Papists in any Ceremony or Observance;
for, says he further, it is not my Purpose to condemn any thing but what is
clearly evil, and openly vicious. But for a full Answer to all you Object
against us upon this score, I refer you to the Case of Symbolizing with the
Church of Rome, by Dr. Eowler, our present Bishop, where he quotes those very
words of Mr. Calvin.

ANSWER.

Sir, we desire not Separation, but Reformation; for, I hope, we have all of us
so tender a regard for the everlasting Salvation of our own Souls, that we
shall endeavor to make choice of such a Minister as may be able to divide the
Word of Truth aright, and give to every one their Portion in due season.

REPLY.

I have observed but very little Coherence in any part of this Paper, but I see
none at all in this Clause; on the contrary, the very design of choosing another
Minister is a Proof beyond denial of your Desire of Separation. Your
Reformation was the drift of my Paper, and it is Nonsense for you to retort it
upon us, till you have given some better Proofs, that there are really such
Faults in the Constitution of our Church, as ought to be amended. But if the
Reformation you desire be as to Matters which you either have proved, or can
prove, to be really evil, I doubt not but the next Convocation that sits will
readily gratify you herein; nay, I verily think that they would take away some
of those Ceremonies you scruple, or however leave the Use of them to every ones
liberty, as the Canons of 40 have done, Bowing toward the East; if you could
secure them against the evil Consequences of unnecessary Alterations; or give
them sufficient Grounds to believe that the Dissenters of this Kingdom would
then Unite in the Communion of the Church; or that the major part of you, who
are distinguished from the other Sects by the Name of Presbyterians, would
thereupon come over thereto; or indeed, that such a Method of proceeding would
not drive more out of the Church than it would bring in.

But if the Reformation you talk of be such as would maim, and wound at least,
if not Unchurch us, or however lay us open to all manner of Confusion, it is
unreasonable you should be complied with, and you do thereby plainly show your
Desires to be either after Ascendency over us, or Separation from us. Of which
another Evidence is, that you use no Endeavors to get your selves satisfied of
the Lawfulness of joining in our Worship. You only read Books, and hear Persons
of one side. You are full of Prejudice against us, and are glad of any Pretense
to separate from us. You cry out against the Common Prayer, but pray let me ask
you, and answer it to your Consciences, Have you ever seriously and impartially
read and examined that Book? Have you a desire to hold Communion with us, if
you could persuade your selves that you might lawfully do it? Have you proposed
your Scruples to the Divines of our Church? or, Have you read what they have
written in order to your satisfaction? If you have done all these things, then
you have acted fairly. But then let me ask again, Have you met with any of your
own Teachers, that are able to give a sufficient Answer to their Arguments?
They may possibly put you off with Noise and Clamor instead of true Reason;
but certain it is, they have none of them yet answered those excellent things
that have been writ in the defense of our Church. If they think their Cause so
good, and themselves able to defend it, let them try their Skill at Mr.
Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, and the several Treatises writ by our Divines
in the Reign of King Charles the Second, not above two of which were ever
answered; but those Answers were Replied to, without ever a Rejoinder; some or
all of which I would have those among you, that have Time and Capacities for
it, to peruse, particularly those that I have already had, or shall have,
occasion to mention or refer to, as also a Persuasive to Communion with the
Church of England, by the late Bishop of Chichester; and The Case of
Indifferent Things, by the present Bishop of that Diocese; The Discourses about
Conscience, and a Scrupulous Conscience, by the present Archbishop of York, and
Dr. Calamy; wherein you will be informed how far that Pretense will and will
not bear you out in your Separation. Our Church is freed from the Imputation of
Popery by Dr. Hooper, and all your Objections against the Common Prayer
answered by Dr. Claggett and Dr. Comber; which latter has largely and devoutly
Explained and Paraphrased upon every part of it. Mr. Evans has in two parts
stated and resolved for you the Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament. And
several more Discourses there are, all writ with that Candor and Calmness,
which, if you have leisure, is sufficient to invite you to peruse and consider
them. And indeed one would wonder, that after so many excellent Tracts writ in
vindication of our Church, there should be such a Person as a Dissenter in
England. I have all or most of these things by me, and the Use of them is at
the service of any of you, that will desire and accept of it; but you must put
in practice the Advice of Epictetus, which is, to seek after Truth with the
indifference of Travelers, who matter not whether their way be to the right or
left, or forward, so that it lead them to their Journeys end.

ANSWER.

Sir, as for your accusing us of Schism, the keeping it up in the Church of
God, and rending and dividing the Body of Christ, and all for separating from
those Errors the Church is guilty of, from which we have a Commandment to
separate our selves; Come out from amongst them, says the Lord, and touch not
the Unclean thing, and I will receive you; now whether it be right to obey GOD
or Man judge ye. Now, if you can make it appear that it is Schism to obey GOD
rather than Man, and that it is a rending and dividing the Body of Christ, when
we contend but for the pure Administration of his Ordinances according to his
own Appointment. Now if you can prove this, I will yield you the Cause.

REPLY.

Your saying that I accused you of Schism, the keeping it up in the Church of
God, and rending and dividing the Body of Christ, is false, I did not
positively charge you therewith. I signified to you the Guilt and Danger of
that Crime, that you might take care not to incurr either, by separating upon
Humor or Prejudice, without just Grounds and Reasons.

And I was purposely thus cautions in expressing my self, that I might not
baffle my own Design, by saying any thing that might disoblige or exasperate
Persons whom I had some Grounds to suspect were self willed, and too inclinable
to be soon angry; but since you will force me to speak out, I Will tell you my
Mind freely; and because this Man seems to exult in vindicating you from that
Charge, and says it wholly upon us, I will endeavor to make it appear, that
notwithstanding any thing he has said, you are Schismatics still.

That therefore which I do say, and for which I have both good Reason and good
Authority, is this, that forasmuch as you withdraw your Communion from that
Church (that I mean to which I invited you) with which you lawfully may, and
with which therefore you ought to communicate, you cannot be excused from the
Sin of Schism, at least as to the Matter and Outward Act of it; because,
wherever there is an Actual Separation from a Church with which we ought, and
with which we may lawfully communicate, there is an Actual Schism commenced,
let the Pretense for the Separation be what it will. How far you are chargable
before God with the formal Guilt of Schism, I know not, I must leave that to
your Consciences and the Searcher of Hearts, who knows whether your Separation
be occasioned through the fault of your Wills, or the weakness of your
Understandings; whether through Passion, or Humor, or Interest, or from the
misfortune of your Circumstances as to Education, or any other matter: I hope
the best, and judge as charitably as I can, and that is as charitably as any
Man living. This was, and this is still my real Opinion, and there is nothing
said in your Paper to induce me to alter it; for, unless the Errors you
separate from be such as make Communion absolutely unlawful, you can never
produce a Command to withdraw your Communion from the National Church, where
the Divine Providence has placed you, and especially from that Church wherein
you were born and baptized. That 1 Cor. 6.17, which you pretend as a Command,
will not stand you in the least stead, till you have proved our Service to be
Idolatrous, and we Unbelievers, of whom you will find that the Apostle speaks,
if you will but look to v. 14, and as the Margin directs you to Isa. 52.11,
whence these words are cited, where the Prophet bids the whole Body of the Jews
to fly out of Babylon; and therefore it must be something worse than gross
Ignorance to apply it to such a Separation as you are in.

I doubt not but the Errors (as you call them) mentioned in this Paper, are
thought by you to be the greatest of any in our Church, and yet even these have
been abundantly vindicated from that Imputation; and Christ's own Ordinances
are Administered by us, according to his own Institution, without any such
Defect or Addition, as alters their Nature, and destroys their Virtue. And what
purer Administration and Ordinances Men would have, than those of our Savior's
own Institution, without any corrupt and sinful Mixtures to spoil their Virtue
and Efficacy, I cannot tell; nor durst this Man positively say in his Paper,
that Christ's Ordinances are not thus purely Administered by us, notwithstanding
his sly and malicious Insinuation to the contrary. But granting, that in the
Administration of Christ's Ordinances there be some particular Modes and Rites
accompanying them, which are not commanded in the Gospel; if they are such as
do not destroy the Efficacy, or alter the Nature of the Ordinance, they cannot
be pretended unlawful, or the Ordinance ever the less purely Administered,
because the Unlawfulness of any thing depends upon its being forbidden, and the
Purity of Divine Administrations upon their Agreement with the Institution.

Thus the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is administered exactly according to
the Institution of our Blessed Savior, and because it is the most solemn part
of Christian Worship, and delivered to the Receiver with a most devout and
affectionate Prayer, that the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was given and shed for him may preserve his Body and Soul unto Everlasting
Life, and therefore requires the utmost Devotion and Reverence of both Soul and
Body, it is ordered to be received kneeling. Thus also is Baptism purely
Administered, and after the Person is baptized, and solemnly received into
Christ's Church, he is signed with the Sign of the Cross, in tok^ that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, but
manfully to fight under his Banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and
continue Christ's faithful Soldier and Servant unto his Life's end. And at the
Baptism of Infants, Persons are deputed by the Parents, exp^icitly in the
Infant's Name, to make that Vow and Stipulation which those who allow of their
Baptism must however suppose to be tacitly and implicitly made by them; and
also to give Collateral Security to the Church for the Religious Education of
the Infant; the design of which Institution was, to provide against the
Remisness or Mortality of the Parents, whose Obligation to breed up their
Children in the Fear of God is never the less, but is, on the contrary, thought
to be already so great, by the Laws of Nature and Religion, that they
themselves cannot be more strictly bound. It is indeed to be lamented, that the
Regard to this Appointment is not answerable to the Piety and Excellency of its
design, but it ought to be considered, that that is the fault of the Men, and
not of the Constitution, and that those who object against it upon this score
may themselves help to remedy it. Now if, when Christ's Ordinances are thus
purely Administered, it be not a rending and dividing the Body of Christ, so
highly to contend for such Modes of Administration, which are not more
Scriptural, but only more agreeable to their own Fancies, as to separate from,
and break the Peace of Christ's Church; if, I say, this be not a rending the
Body of Christ, I know not by what Name to call it, and I believe my Opponent
will be hard put to it to give it a more proper one.

But allowing that those you insist upon be Errors; Are they fundamental ones?
Are they destructive of true Christian Faith and Practice? Did I not know the
Power of Passion and Prejudice, I durst be confident you will say they are not;
but, however, I positively assert they are not, and defy all the Dissenters in
England to prove that they are. If they are not, then your own Writers shall
instruct you in your Duty. Private Brethren, says Mr. Noys, may not separate
from Churches, and Church Ordinances, which are not fundamentally defective
neither in Doctrine or Manners, Heresy or Profaneness. Dr. Owen asserts, That
many Errors in Doctrine, Disorders in sacred Administrations, irregular walking
in Conversation, with neglect and abuse of Discipline in Rulers, may fall out
in some Churches, and yet not evacuate their Church State, or give sufficient
warrant to leave their Communion, and separate from them. Mr. Cotton says,
Unless you find in the Church Blasphemy, or Idolatry, or Persecution, (i. e.
such as forces them to leave the Communion) there is no just Ground of
Separation. Observe, says Mr. Baxters, (in his Catalogue of the Faults of nine
Churches in Scripture) that no one Member is in all these Scriptures, or any
other, commanded to come out and separate from any of all these Churches, as if
their Communion in Worship were unlawful: And therefore before you separate
from any, as judging Communion with them unlawful, be sure that you bring
greater Reasons than any of these recited, were. And this Advice he gives to
his Brethren, Teach them to know that all Men are imperfect and faulty, and so
is all Men's Worship of God; and that he that will not communicate with faulty
Worship must renounce Communion with all the World, and all with him. Mr.
Calvin assigns two Marks of the visible Church, the Word of God truly preached,
and Sacraments administered according to Christ's Institution; and says, That
although there be many Faults and Corruptions in such a Church, yet as long as it
retains those Marks, Separation from it is not justifiable; nay, although some of
those Faults be about Preaching the Word, and Administrations of Sacraments;
for says he, all Truths are not of equal Moment; but as long as the Doctrine
according to Godliness, and the true Use of the Sacraments is kept up: Men
ought not to separate upon lesser Differences; but they ought to seek the
amending what is amiss, continuing in the Communion of the Church, and without
disturbing the Peace and Order of it.

I had not, I own, the Opportunity of consulting every one of these Authors;
but I have given you their sense and very words upon the unquestionable
Authority of those two Reverend Bishops of our Church, the present Bishop of
Worcester, and the Bishop of Chichester. The former whereof, in his
Unreasonableness of Separation, has with great Evidence proved, that all the
Old Non-conformists did think themselves bound in Conscience to communicate
with the Church of England, and did look upon Separation from it to be a sin,
notwithstanding the Corruptions they supposed to be in it. And the latter, in
his Case of Lay-Communion, produces the concurrent Testimony of the most
eminent Non-conformists, that there is nothing required in the Parochial
Communion of the Church of England, that can be a sufficient reason for
Separation from it; and though he has collected the sense of a great many, yet
you may believe him, when he tells you, that for One Hundred, he could easily
have produced Two, if the Cause were to go by the Poll. These Reverend Authors
do not put their Readers off with only telling 'em, that the Learned observe,
and some Authors say so and so; but they quote Book and Page, and which
therefore, if you have a Mind to be further satisfied, you your Selves may
consult. Those Nonconforming Ministers might probably be under such Prior
Engagements, or dislike some things so far, that they could not satisfy
themselves in making the Declarations and Subscrpitions which are required of
Ministers, in order to preserve the Peace of the Church, and the unity of
Christians, which does so much depend upon that of its Officers and Teachers.
But there being no Declarations or Subscriptions required of the People, nor
any thing more, than to attend upon, and join in the Worship practiced and
allowed in the Church, they, according to the Doctrine of those Gentlemen,
ought not to separate. To which I shall not need to add any more, than that
remarkable Annotation of the Reverend Mr. Pool, upon Luke 2.41. One thing, says
He, there is observable: The Pharisees and Scribes and Priests had in those
days much corrupted the Worship of God by their Traditions, yet they retained
the Substance of Gods Institution: We find both our Savior and his Disciples,
and other people of God not wholly forsaking the Jewish Church because of its
Corruptions: Yet we cannot think they joined with them in any thing of their
Will Worship; from whence we may learn a tenderness as to a total Separation
from a Church, and the Lawfulness of attending divine Ministrations, though
attended with Vsages which we approve not, provided there be no Idolatry in the
Service.

And the Truth of it is, if Separation be justifiable, upon the Score of some
small (whether real or fancied) Errors, which may be in any Church, then
Communion must not be held with any part of Christ's Church if not with ours*
for she is certainly as free from Error as any Church in the whole World, and
the living in her Communion, like Members of so Holy an Institution, as safe a
way to Salvation as any I know in the world. And I so firmly believe what I say
in this matter, that I challenge all her Adversaries to Compare ours, and other
Churches with the word of God, and the Primitive Church; and if they cannot
produce one that is freer from Error in Doctrine and Worship, than she is, or
comes nearer to the Primitive Pattern; nay, if amongst all Competitions and
contending Sects among us, there is not one to be found, that delivers the
Truths of the Gospel with greater purity and sincerity: That does teach a
Religion more holy and useful; that lays greater stress upon a pure Mind, and a
blameless and undefiled Life; that does give more forcible Arguments for
Virtue, or more powerful Disswasives from Vice; the^ I hope you will have
better thoughts both of her, and my Invitation of you into her Communion; and
be convinced that you have no just grounds to continue in your Separation, upon
Pretenses of Impurity in her, or greater Purity elsewhere.

But I would have you speak out: Is Communion with us sinful, or is it not? If
you say it is, you say it without Proof; you therein contradict the Opinion of
the most eminent of the old Presbyterians; you oppose your selves to the
Opinion and Practice of the most candid and most honest among those now alive,
who do not wholly separate themselves from our Communion; and if your own
Teaches will be true to their real Sentiments, I dare be confident, they will
not say so; nay, you do herein condemn your own Practice of occasionally
joining with us now; and unless you will declare, you were then mistaken in
your Judgments, you make your selves guilty of base Hypocrisy in constantly
joining with us, when the Penalties of the Law were inflicted upon those that
refused it. If you say that Communion with us is not sinful, and that therefore
you may occasionally join with us; then let the Assembly of Divines draw the
Consequence; who say, that to separate from those Churches ordinarily and
visibly, Misch. of Sep. p. 20.
with whom occasionally you may join without sin, seems to be a most unjust
Separation.

That which you quote for One, I have showed to be no Command for you to leave
our Church; nor can you make it any way applicable thereto, till you have
proved that there is something taught or practiced in our Church, which is as
bad as the unclean thing, there spoken of. But did I, or ever any Man else say
that it was Schism to obey God rather than Man? And therefore what need he put
me to prove it? But that is not your Case, my Brethren, you causelessly and
wilfully separate from a sound part of Christ's Church, and if that is not
Schism, I will yield up the cause for ever. But let us more particularly
examine this man's Notion of Schism, and see whether, even according thereto,
you be not guilty of it.

ANSWER.

I know Schism properly signifies a Cutting in two, a disagreeing in M^^^^, a
Division in the Church of Christ, consisting in an Unity in matters of Faith,
so that they are truly Schismatics that are divided from the External
Communion of the true Church, viz, that do not own all the Ordinances of the
true Church, or if they own them, do not live in the Exercise of them* these
are the Persons that are guilty of Schism. Now how deeply guilty of Schism you
are who charge us with it, I shall leave all honest Men to judge. Now if you
cannot prove that we own any thing in point of Doctrine or Discipline in our
Church that is not according to the word of God, how can you have the face to
accuse us of Schism? If you have any thing to Accuse us of in point of Doctrine
or Discipline let us have it, and I doubt not but we shall be able to clear our
selves of all your false Accusations.

REPLY.

Schism he knows not well what to make of; he gives me the (...) signification
of the Word it is true, but when he comes to apply it, he says it is a Division
in the Church of Christ consisting in an Vanity in matters, of Faith; either as
if the Unity of the Church consisted only in an Unity in matters of Faith, or
that Schism were a Separation from the true Church in matters of Faith: But
besides Unity in matters of Faith there is an Unity and Communion of Saints in
Worship; and whether he knew it or no, if he separates from the true Church in
Matters of Faith, he is an Heretic more properly than a Schismatic; for a Man
may be a Schismatic, and yet be right as to the main Articles of Faith. If he
is divided from the external Communion of the true Church, he is a Schismatic;
or to explain it in other words, if he does not own all the Ordinances of the
true Church, or if he does own them, does not, however, live in the exercise of
them, viz in the external Communion of the true Church, this person is guilty
of Schism.

Now I leave all men that have sense, as well as honesty, to Judge, whether you
or we are divided from the External Communion of the true Church, and
consequently which are Schismatics. We own all the Ordinances of the true
Church, and live in the Exercise of them. We are in Communion with all the
sound parts of Christ's Church all the world over. They own our Church as their
Sister, and give her the right hand of Fellowship, and highly condemn you for
your separation. The Church of Rome only accuses us of Schism, and the Charge
would be good against ours with respect to her, if we had no better reasons for
separating from her, than the Dissenters in England give for their Separation
from Us. Our Separation from the Church of Rome has been sufficiently cleared
from the Charge of Schism, and when you have brought as good Arguments, in
defense of your dividing from External Communion with us, we shall then
pronounce you not guilty of it neither. But, till then, till you prove that
ours is not the National Established Church, with which you lie under an
Obligation to Communicate; that this established Church is not a sound part of
the Church of Christ, and that she imposes sinful Terms of Communion; till I
say, you have done all this; I shall continue my Accusation of Schism, as long
as you continue in your Separation; and put as good a Face upon it, as the
Godly Learned of old did; who say, That every unjust and rash Separation from a
true Church (i. e. when there is no just, Friendly Deb. part. 1. p 166.
or at least no sufficient cause of the Separation) is a Schism, and that there
is a Negative and a Positive Schism. The former is, when Men do peaceably and
quietly draw from Communion with a Church, not making head against that Church,
from which they are departed: The other is, when Persons so withdrawing do
consociate and withdraw themselves into a distinct opposite Body, setting up
Church against Church; which Camero calls a Schism by way of Eminency: and
farther (...), there are four Causes that makes a Separation from a Church,
(...). First, when they that separate are grievously and intollerably
persecuted: Secondly, when the Church they separate from is Heretical: Thirdly,
when it is idolatrous: Fourthly, when it is the Seat of Antichrist. And where
none of these four are found, there the Separation is insufficient, and Schism.
Now we are fully assured, that none of these Four Causes can be justly charged
upon our Congregations, therefore you must not be displeased with us, but with
your selves, if we blame you as guilty of positive Schism. This was the
Presbyterian Doctrine in those Blessed Days of 49, to those who stood in
divided Congregations from them: And, if it was good Doctrine then, I am sure
it is much more so now, as coming from Us to You.

In what sense you call your separate Meetings a Church, I know not; but if you
think that they deserve that Name more than the Quakers, or Anabaptists, or
Independants, who all assume that Title to themselves, then I must tell you
that I take your Church to be a Schismatical Church; for let your Faith be as
right as that of the 3 Creeds, and your Discipline (if you have any) as free
from fault, as you would have the world think you to be; yet if you are divided
from the external Communion of the true Church, in the exercise of the
Ordinances of the true Church, i. e. if you do not join with the true Church in
Prayers, hearing the Word, and receiving the Sacraments, your own Paper makes
you Schismatics; and I must freely own, I do not see how any Man can be
acquitted therefrom, who being a Member of a particular established Church,
does, upon any pretended Offense taken against such Rites, Modes and
Ceremonies, (which are thought convenient by that Church) separate himself from
the public Worship, when the Substantials and Essentials thereof are so
unexceptionable as ours are.

But forasmuch as your Notions and Discourses about the true Church, and about
Schism, seem to be so confused and extravagant: Before I dismiss this point, I
desire you will give me Liberty to instruct you in the meaning of a Christian
Church, which I am apt to believe you do not rightly understand.

Now, among the several Acceptations of the word Church (one whereof belongs to
the place consecrated and set apart for the public Assemblies of Christians)
the Church in the Language of the New Testament (of Intelligent Writers, and
indeed of all Men that understand themselves, when they talk about it,
especially with Reference to Communion) does generally signify the Christian
Church, either as it is Catholic, or as it is Particular.

The Christian Church, considered as Catholic or Universal, signifies the
whole Body of Christians, dispersed upon the Face of the whole Earth, and so it
comprehends all Persons, and all particular Churches professing Christianity.
And whosoever shall make a Defection, or Separation from this Church will be
found guilty of a manifest, dangerous most abominable Schism, or rather
Apostasy.

This general and Universal Church, though but one body, is yet made up of
several particular Members, or Churches; and by a particular Christian Church,
we understand a Number of Men, of the same Country; professing Christianity,
formed into a Society under lawful Governors, and governed by such Laws and
Rules as are not different from, but agreeable to the Laws and Rules of the
Catholic Church. And if any Man or number of Men, who are Members of that
Society, shall, without just cause separate themselves from the Communion
thereof, he or they so doing, are certainly guilty of Schism. Such a Church as
this, was the Church at Corinth, the Church at Jerusalem, the Church at
Ephesus, the Church of the Thessalonians, the Church of Laodicea, the Church of
Smyrna, the Church of Pergamus, the Church of Thyatira, the Church of Sardis,
the Church of Philadelphia; and such a Church as this is the National
Established Church of England, which through a Collection of several Parochial
Congregations, is yet properly but one particular Church, by reason of the same
bond of Faith, Worship and Government, whereby they are all United, and so make
one, true, sound, and pure part of the Catholic or Universal Church. Except
then, there be a more just cause of Separation than you either have alleged,
or can allege, it must be a very great sin to erect new Churches, and separate
in the Acts of Prayer and Sacraments from the Body of a Church and Nation. For
so at Corinth St. Paul told them, whilst one was for Paul, and another for
Apollos, and there were divisions among them, they were Carnal, and walked as
Men, 1 Cor. 3.34. And at Rome he bids them mark them who cause Divisions and
Offenses, and not adhere and associate with, but avoid them, Friend. Deb. par.
1. p. 165.
Romans 16.17. or to enforce this in the words of the Presbyterians, whereby they
of old pleaded for Unity and Uniformity, We are loath to speak any thing that
may offend you, yet we entreat you to consider, that if the Apostle call those
Divisions of the Church of Corinth, (wherein Christians did not separate into
diverse formed Congregations of several Communions, (...).
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) Schism, 1 Cor. 1.10. may not your
secession from us, and professing you cannot join with us as Members, and
setting up Congregations of another Communion, be more properly called Schism?

And I must tell you further, that it is never the less so in you, upon the
Account of the Act of Toleration, which cannot, nor does not pretend to exempt
you from the Duty of Conformity, but only from the Penalties of Nonconformity.
Your Separation is not one Jot the more reasonable, or more just than it was
before; and those that were concerned in the drawing up of this Paper seem to
be sensible of this, in that they do not urge the Plea of Toleration, but put
their cause upon another Issue, viz. the Merits of it. But however, Mr. Norris
has cleared this case, in his Charge of Schism continued, notwithstanding the
Toleration.

And now that I may be even with my Gentleman for his Idol-syllogism, I sh^^^
Sum this whole Matter in a Syllogism; all the parts whereof have been
sufficiently proved to be as true, as that was proved to be false; and it runs
thus, Whoever separate from a Church, with which they may lawfully communicate,
are guilty of Schism:

But you separate from a Church, with which you may lawfully communicate;

Therefore you are guilty of Schism.

Or if you would rather that I should put the Argument into form, in your own
Words, it stands thus,

Whoever are divided from the external Communion of the true Church are
Schismatiks.

But you are divided from the external Communion of the true Church;

Therefore you are Schismatics.

The Major or first of these Propositions is your own.

The Minor or second Proposition, is true also, because it is undeniable that
the Church of England is a true Church, and too sadly apparent, that you
separate from external Communion with her in the Exercise of Prayers and
Sacraments, the Ordinances of the true Church; whence the Conclusion
necessarily follows, that you are Schismatics.

And if so, then I beseech you lay to Heart the words of Mr. Ball, one of the
most learned and judicious Non-conformists before the Wars, as Dr. Stilling
fleet styles him in his Mischief of Separaton, where he quotes him for them,
Misch. of Sep. p. 29.
speaking of Separation, he calls it, a Renting the Church, the Disgrace of
Religion, the Advancement of Pride, Schism and Contention, the Offense of the
Weak, the Grief of the Godly who be better settled, the Hardening of the Wicked,
and Recovery or Rising again of Anti-Christianism; nay, even persecuting the
Lord Jesus in his Host, which they revile; in his Ordinances which they
dishonor; and in his Servants, whose Footsteps they slander, whose Graces they
Despise, whose Office they Trample upon with Disdain.

ANSWER.

And I hope God will so direct us in Choosing our Minister that we shall make
choice of such a one as will eandeavour to keep with in the Bounds and Limits
of the Laws of God and Man, and in particular the Act of Toleration, and one I
hope that will give no Disturbance in the Parish, unless you will be disturbed,
as I fear you are and have been for the Preaching of the Gospel; you know such
Men there were in the Apostles days, these Men say they do exceedingly trouble
our City, you know who they were that were accused, those who were the Faithful
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ.

REPLY.

I did not desire you to take care in the choice of a Minister, there is no
Room for that as long as I live, and I am not legally dispossessed. But if you
must have another Preacher, who, in your Judgments, is better qualified than I
am, I wish still that he may be a Man of Prudence and Temper, one that will
strictly confine himself within the Bounds and Limits of the Act of Toleration;
which restrains him wholly to the Meeting House where he is licenced, in the
Exercise of his Talent of preaching; gives him no Indulgence to perform any
other Ministerial Office either there, or in any other place; nor to Rail, and
Revile, or speak against the Church and Common Prayer, either in his Sermons,
or elsewhere; nor to go about to seduce People from the Established Service,
and their own Proper Minister. There is no Toleration that I know of for these
and the like Practices to either him or any other, and therefore I think it is
good and kind Advice both to you and him, to keep within the Bounds of that
Act, for fear an Enquiry should be made, whether all such, who do not observe
the Conditions of the Indulgence, be not as liable to the Law as if they had
none.

But let him be as cautious as he will, not to transgress that particular Law,
he must not pretend that he observes all the Laws of God and Man, if he sets up
Altar against Altar, Church against Church, and Heads a Separation from the
external Communion of the true Church of Christ; and be he who he will, and let
his Pretense be what it will, if he sets himself here in Opposition to me, and
that true Church of which I am a lawful Minister, I must say of him that he
does exceedingly trouble our City; and that too by Teaching Customs which are
not lawful for us to Receive neither to observe, being Members of the Church of
England; 1 Cor. 11.16.
for if any Man seem to be contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the
Churches of God: from whence we may (by the way) observe, that the Apostle
disputing, concerning an Ecclesiastic Ceremony, with the Corinthian Church,
appeals to the Custom of the Churches of God, as sufficient to confute even the
most contentious, without any express Determination of the word of God, in
matters of that Nature. I know very well who they were that said these men do
exceedingly trouble our City, and of whom they spoke it, and upon what
Principle they spoke it; and I know that your Application of it to me is not
Parallel in any of these; but I am sure that the Expression, as applied by me,
is, as to the matter of Fact, true; and I know further that they were the
Children of Edom, that cried out upon Jerusalem, Down with it, Down with it,
even to the Ground.

It is, I do own, a daring and provoking piece of Impudence to have a Company
of Vzziah's (unto whom it appertains not to burn Incense unto the Lord, but
to the Priests the Sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn Incense)
compared with the Holy Apostles of our Blessed Savior, who gave such
undeniable Proof of the Divinity of their Commission. And a good Man cannot but
be troubled at the Injustice and Confusion of breaking in upon sacred Rights,
and invading Holy Offices: But however I do assure you, that having (as I hope)
now discharged my Duty to the full in this particular, I shall give no farther
Disturbance to my self, than to lament our Divisions, and beseech God to
compose them, and to take what care I can to secure the Rigths and Privileges,
which do yet belong to the Church and Minister of this Parish, from being
either withheld or encroached upon. And this, as it is all the Disturbance or
indeed Incivility that I have offered you (notwithstanding sufficient
Provocation) during the time that I have been in this place; so need you not be
apprehensive of any other from me for the future. Only forgive me that Wrong,
and give me leave to maintain my Fidelity to the Church; to be firm to my
Subscriptions and my Vows of Ordination; constantly to use and (as well as I am
able) to defend that Liturgy, which I have solemnly testified my Approbation
of, in the Presence of God, and in the face of his congregation. Pardon me in
these things, and excuse me that I am resolutely bent not to speak beneath the
Dignity of my Function, and the Station I am in; and you may depend (according
to the Opportunities you give me of performing them) upon all the good Offices
which can reasonably be expected, from either a good Neighbor, a charitable
Christian, or an honest Minister.

ANSWER

Sir, You charge us with causing Divisions among us, by bringing in another
Preacher; as if the Preaching the Gospel by the Authorized Ambassadors of God
were the only Cause, whom, alas! you do not consider it is the unlawful
Impositions, Superstitions, Traditions, that is the principal Cause of those
Divisions that we are among us; for all those are removed, we cannot be united.

REPLY.

And notwithstanding this impertinent Cant, I say still, that the bringing in
another Preacher does, and will maintain the Divisions among us; and further,
that such Preachers are the main, if not the only true Causes of them, through
the just Judgment of God upon a sinful People, who have not lived answerably to
their holy Profession, and that Excellent Church which God in wonderful Mercy,
and by miraculous Providence, has established and preserved among us. And I
shall always be of that Opinion, till it is proved, that those Men are
Ambassadors authorized by God to preach the Gospel in this Nation; and that
there are any unlawful Impositions, Superstitions, and Traditions in our
Church, which are a just cause for the People to forsake their own Pastors, and
give themselves up to the guidance of those Intruders.

And this is a sufficient Reply to his complemental Conclusion with the false
Accusation of Unlawful Impositions, Superstitions, and Traditions; clamorous
Phrases, which every ignorant Wretch can make use of when he has a mind to
reproach our Church. Methinks it would have been but fair dealing to have made
good this Charge, by showing what Unlawful things we impose, wherein we are
superstitious, and by what Traditions we make the Word of God of none effect:
But he knows, that to cry out against any Man of a different Opinion, is enough
to raise the whole Discontented Party against him.

If he thinks he has given sufficient Proof of Unlawful Impositions in our
Church, I think I have proved he has not; and in reference to whatsoever is
imposed upon us, merely by the Churches Authority, I shall only further say,
That none of the things imposed are Unlawful in themselves; that to abridge
Authority is the exercise of their Power in things of a middle nature, that are
of themselves indifferent, and neither simply good or evil, is to cancel and
make Authority useless, because their Power lies mainly in things of that
nature, since things that are simply and absolutely good are commanded by God
himself, and things that are in themselves evil forbidden by him; that if,
where some are empowered to give Orders, others are not under an Obligation to
observe them, Authority is nugatory and ridiculous; and, that before these
latter days there were never any Christians in the World that held themselves
bound not to do a lawful thing, merely because it was commanded and imposed
upon them; which makes Obedience and Observance of those things a Duty in us,
which before they were clothed with a particular and punctual Command, were no
ways obligatory.

What this Man means by Traditions I can hardly guess. As for Traditions about
Matters of Doctrine, we hold none, but those which are delivered to us in the
Writings of the Penmen of Holy Writ; and for the proof of the Authority of
those Sacred Books, we look upon the written Tradition of the Church to be a
good Argument. If by Traditions he means the Customs and Ceremonies of the
Church, then they have already been considered as far as he gave me occasion to
do it. And I shall only add, that I do believe what the Church of England
declares in the 34th Article of her Religion, That whosoever, through his private
Judgment, willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions ( i. e.
Customs) and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of
God, and be Ordained and Approved by Common Authority, ought to be rebuked
openly, etc.

As to the Charge of Superstition, it will most certainly fall where that of
Will Worship did; and the same Instances prove you as guilty of the one as the
other. Presb. of Scotland.
What this Man's Notion of Superstition is I cannot tell, but (to use the Words
of a judicious Author in this case) I look upon the Men of his Way to be the
most superstitious People upon Earth; Enquiry into the new Opinion, etc. by A.
M. D. D. p. 295.
they declaim against things in their own nature innocent and useful, as if
they were forbidden by God. When we represent to our selves the Deity, as one
that is pleased with the imaginary Notions that we groundlesly entertain of
things, this is the Superstition that poisons the Soul and all its Faculties.
When we say, that such a thing is forbidden by God, only because we forbid it
our selves, this is to teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; but to
regulate Actions that are indifferent in their nature, according to the prudent
determination of our Superiors, cannot fall under that Censure, else all
Societies, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, must be involved in the Guilt. When
we say things are unlawful that are not unlawful, when we prefer Human
Institutions to the Commandments of God, when we overvalue things beyond their
own Nature, Dignity, and Order in which God has placed them; when we esteem
the Means more than the End, and separate the Ecclesiastical Laws from their
Relation and Subserviency to the Laws of God; when our Thoughts and Notions of
things are so confused, that we mistake their subordination one unto another,
and practice according to such Notions; then we put light for darkness, and
darkness for light. Our best Performances must needs be tainted with Folly an
Superstition, and we worship God not according to the dictates of true Reason
or Revelation, but according to the dark Idea which we form to our selves: This
is Superstition in its true colors. p. 305.
Superstition is a piece of blind Service, and therefore unacceptable; a
Bastard kind of Worship, that proceeds from Pusillanimity and Unreasonable
Fear. p. 307.
If we struggle for the Opinions and Fancies that are but of yesterday, in
opposition to the Doctrine and Practices of the Catholic Church, we believe
our selves rather than the Gospel, we are superstitious in the strictest
Notion; and to set up our own Decrees against the Suffrage of so many Ages, is
Arrogance and Vanity in the highest sense.

Fr. Deb. par 1, p. 95.
Or, in shorter and perhaps plainer terms, Superstition is a needless Fear in
matters of Religion, which makes a Man either not dare to do those things which
he has a liberty to do, or think he must upon pain of Damnation do those
things which he may as well let alone.

So that, if either all, or any part of this be a right Account of
Superstition, we are as free therefrom as from Unlawful Impositions and
Vnjustifiable Traditions: And it appears, that there is no necessity that any
thing be removed, but that superstitious Humor and untractable Temper which
reigns so powerfully among your Party, in order to accomplish that blessed
Union which all good Men Endeavor after, and Pray for.

And now, my Brethren, upon a serious review of what I have written, I do think
that I hare returned a full and more than sufficient Answer to that Paper which
was drawn up in defense of the Cause of Separation, and triumphed in (even to
my Face) as Unanswerable. I have followed the Author of it step by step, and
have not omitted to take notice of the most impertinent thing he has said. The
close Attendance which I have given to so silly and trifling a Scribbler cannot
be Answered for any other way, than by telling the real Truth, which is, that I
thought my self in Duty bound with Meekness to instruct those, in my own
Parish, that Oppose themselves, though with never so weak Arguments; that I
cannot think it becomes us, who have taken the Ministry thereof upon us, to
suffer so excellent a Church to be run down, and its Constitution publicly and
privately decry'd, and in the mean while stand still, as it we were either
afraid to speak, or else had nothing to say in its defense; that though the
Prejudices of its Adversaries are, it is to be feared, too strong to be
removed, it is however proper to show the Weakness of their Arguments, thereby
to keep its own Members firm in its Communion, and to Arm them against the
slight of M^n, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive: And
if I can but obtain this, by the pains I have herein taken, I shall have no
cause to repent thereof.

These are the Principles upon which I have acted in this whole Affair, and
therefore though you may deprive your selves of the Benefit thereof, by unkind
Resentments and uncharitable Censures of this Work, yet you cannot rob me of
the satisfaction of having done what I took to be my Duty, nor spoil the
Acceptableness of an honest and well meant Endeavor, with that God who neither
sees nor judges as Man does.

Where Obstinacy and Perverseness put a Bar in the Way, and Men's Judgments are
corrupted with Passion and Prejudice, there can be no Hopes of doing good. But
they who, divesting themselves of all these, are really desirous of it, may, I
hope, receive some Satisfaction from the Considerations I have offered, however
in the Books I have referred the Reader to.

I beseech you therefore to reduce your Judgments to an even poise, impartially
weigh and consider things, and for a conclusion of all, suffer the Word of
Exhortation from your own Reverend Mr. Baxter.

I advise you, Poor Man's Family-book. p. 316.
that if there be Parish-Churches orderly settled under the Magistrates
Countenance, whose Teachers are sound, and promote the Power of Godliness in
Concord, though an able Minister should gather a separated Church in the same
place, out of that and other neighboring Parishes, and should have stricter
Communicants and Discipline, be not too forward to join your selves to that
Separated Church, till you can prove, that the Hurt that will follow by
Discord, Offense, Division, encouraging of Schism and Pride, is not like to be
greater than your Benefit can compensate. Indeed, he says, where Liberty is
such, as these Mischiefs are not like to follow, (as among us you see they do)
take your Liberty, if your Benefit require it. But then he adds in the very
next words, If this Separated Church be a factions Antichurch, set up
contentiously against the Concordant Churches, though on pretense of greater
Purity; and if their Meetings be employed in contention, and reviling others,
and making them odious that are not of their mind, and in killing the Love of
Christians to each other; and in condemning other Churches as no Churches, or
such as may not lawfully be communicated with, and in puffing up themselves
with Pride, as if they were the only Churches of Christ; avoid such Separated
Churches, as the Enemies of Love and Peace.

p. 321.
Do not peevishly pick Quarrels with the Prayers of the Church, nor come to them
with humor some Prejudice; think not that you must stay away, or go out of the
Church, for every passage that is disorderly, unmeet, yea, or unsound or
untrue; for the Words of Prayer are the Work of Man. And while Men are fallible
imperfect, and sinful, their Prayers, and Praises, and Preaching will be like
themselves: And he that is the highest Pretender and the peevishest Quarreller
has his own Failings.

p. 274.
Division is wounding, and tends to death; abhor it as you love the Churches
Welfare, or your own. The Wisdom from above is first pure, and then peaceable;
never separate what God conjoyneth. It is the earthly, sensual, devilish Wisdom
which causes bitter Envying, and Strife, and Confusion, and every Evil Work.
Blessed are the Peacemakers.

This Advice is so proper and applicable to your Case and Circumstances, that I
only need to add the Words of St. Paul, which I desire every Soul in my Parish
to look upon with as much Regard, as if they had been immediately and
particularly spoke to them by the blessed Apostle himself.

Phil. 2.1, 2.
If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if
any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels of Mercy, fulfill ye my Joy, that
ye be like, minded, having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind.

Heb. 12.14.
Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the
Lord.

I am Your Faithful and Affectionate Pastor, Jos. Harrison.


