A TREATISE OF THE Great Antidote OF Paracelsus, Van Helmont, Croulius, And by
them called THE Elixir Proprietatis Showing the true way of preparing of it,
and the wonderful Cures they have performed thereby. And also this Authors
Experience thereof.

Written by J. H. a Lover of truth, and made public for the good of all that
stand in need thereof.

London, Printed for the Author, 1666.

To the Reader.
REader, I have here set before thee the opinions of these great Philosophers,
concerning this incomparable Medicine, pardon me if I have not so fully
explained their meaning as possible thou can wish; If this finds exceptance
with thee, then expect suddenly a large discovery of this nature; in the mean
time give me leave to tell thee, there is no cure mentioned in my
Experimentals, but I am able to give a sufficient account from credible people;
to name them; it is possible, would be to some prejudicial therefore I omit it;
and I will assure thee that I have been a diligent Searcher into the secrets of
things for the finding out of good Medicines two Apprentiships, and could never
find a surer or safer nor more effectual Medicine than this. If thou benefit by
it, thank God, if not, blame me. Farewell.

From my House in Crouched-friars, at the Sign of John Baptis Van Helmont near
Tower Hill. J. H.

PAracelsus in his Archidoxes, has these words, R. Myrrh, Alloes, Safforn, of
each a like quantity, A Vessel so called.
put them in a Pelican well closed two months in a sand Furnace, with a gentle
heat, after put the matter in a Limbeck, and Distill over the Oil without
burning, circulate this Oil for a Month, and after keep it for use.

He says that the virtues of all natural Balsams, are in this one Medicine
contained, and that it does above any other Medicine keep back old Age; he adds
further, that the Age of a man will be too little for the discovering of all
the virtues therein contained.

That great Philosopher John Baptist van Helmont in the 458. page. prescribes
this way of making of it.

R. Myrrh, Alloes, Saffron, of each an Ounce, being beaten, put them into a
large Glass with a long neck, Commonly called Boulthed.
close the neck of the Glass, and put it in a gentle heat for fear of breaking
the Glass, let it stand until you see a clear Oil circulate, then break the
neck of the Glass, and pour on a pint of Cinnamon water, and Distill it in
Putting the Glass in boiling water.
Balneo till no more will assend, then keep it for use. This Medicine, says
he, cures the obstructions of the Lungs, called Asthma, the Convulsions, the
Appoplex, Palsy, Deadly Consumptions acconnted by the Galanists.
Atropha *Tabes, all Agues, and (says he) a man that had taken the holy
Sacrament, and the extreme Unction, being so far wasted with the third day Ague
(which is the shame of Physicians) was so far cured by this Medicine in so
short a time, that I dined with him the next day.

Crollius in 250. of his Basilica Chyomica, or Royal Receipts, R. Myrrh,
Alloes, Saffron of each four Ounces, powder them, and put thereon so much
*Alcalizate Spirit of Wine, as will reduce them to the form of paste, then put
so much Oil of Sulphur made by a Bell still as will color the matter black,
then pour on Spirit of Wine tartarized 4 fingers over, put them in digestion
two days, separate the tincture, then pour on good Spirit of Wine, and
circulate it two months, separate the tincture, and destil the fecis by a
gentle heat.

The first Spirit that comes over add to the tinctures, and (says he) it will
be far better then the common distilled for the virtues of it, he has the
words of Paracelsus, and adds further, that it most powerfully assists nature
against the decays that old ages bring, removing the obstructions of the Lungs
and Chest pipes: prevents popular Infections, and Infectious airs, and
Pestilential Fevers, removes all pestiferous humors in the Stomach and
Bowels, and eases all pains there: Takes away the obstructions of the brain,
curing the Turning in the head so called.
Virtigo, A pain in one half of the head.
Meagrim, the dimness of the sight, comforts the memory, prevents the Palsy,
and Gout, quickens the Intelects and all the senses, breaks the Stone in the
Reins or Bladder, comforts the Heart, and expels Melancholy, and takes away
that intolerable pain in the Belly, called the Illiaco passio, carries away
Salt humors insensibly, and all surfeits from intemperance of Diet or Drink,
cures the third day Ague, and the Hectic Fever, and brings forth congeiled
blood, and speedily heals inward Ulcers and Wounds; further, says he, all
Diseases proceeding either from heat or cold, this Medicine does by an occult
property heal.

Having formerly seriously considered of these Authors, I find Van Helmont in
the 626. page, not only to find fault with the preparation of Paracelsus, but
also not to seem to follow or allow his own middle way, as he calls it; but
says, that it is best prepared by a Dissolvent. Now of Dissolvents there is
two, according to his and Paracelsus Doctrine; the great Dissolvent, as they
call it, is the Alkahest, of what it is made of, or how, neither mention. The
other is the volatile Salt of Tartar, volatised with Spirit of Wine, of which
Van Helmont gives a large account, where he says that in uniting the Spirit of
Wine with the Salt of Tartar, that of one Pint of Aqua-vitae, is made half an
Ounce of Medicine, the rest in the Conjunction is converted into his own
Element of Water; and says he, that which is done with the volatile Salt of
Tartar, is equal to that which is done with the Alkahest, only this, that the
Alkahest is separated from the Medicine by Distilling, and the volatile Salt of
Tartar remains united to the Medicine: Now Crollius his tartarifyed Spirit of
Wine should be that volatile Salt of Tartar, and I should like his preparation
was his Oil of Sulphur left out, for that is an Albortive in Philosophy, and
some other small errors he has there, in which my paper will not now give me
leave to speak of, for I am tied to two sheets: I shall now tell you how I
prepare it, and what virtues I have found by it in this term of years since I
was Master of it; my way is this, R. Myrrh, Alloes, Saffron, of each four
Ounces, bruise the Myrrh and Alloes, and put them into a boult head, with the
Saffron, pour thereon a pint and half of volatile Salt of Tartar, volatified
with spirit of Wine, according to Helmont, which he and Paracelsus call
circulatus minor, set it in an ash Furnace, with a gentle heat till the
ingredients be fully dissolved, and the bitterness and gummousness be fully
gone, a few earthly fecies will remain in the bottom, which separate and keep
the spirit for use. This Elixir thus prepared, will in color resemble the pure
sound Arterial blood of a Healthy man, and in smell and taste will be very
pleasant, in which the Myrrh and Saffron will plainly appear, only their
bitterness will be gone, and in stead thereof a pure fragrancy remaining. This
Medicine thus prepared, is that which I have had experience of for some years,
for which I owe eternal thanks and praise to Almighty God: for had I not had
this, (though I have many others by which I have performed many excellent
cures) yet for all them, I had not been here to have writ this, for in the
height of the Sickness in August 1665. I was taken with a Lethargy with that
violence, that for the space of seven days I could take nothing but drink, my
drink was sometimes Sack, and sometimes Ale; sometimes I was senseless for many
hours together, and when I recovered my senses a little, I did still call for
and took this Medicine, and by Gods blessing on it, was perfectly cured, though
it was reported with much confidence, that I was both dead and buried, and by
no inconsiderable persons neither, and at the same time all my Family was most
dangerous Ill, my Son, a Child of eight years old, was taken with an
Impostumation in his Neck near the jugular Vein, which Distemper he had two
years before in the same place, when formerly coming out of the Country, was
taken with it the next day, and now by reason of my illness, I could not so
mind it, but that it came to a suppuration, and I being a little recovered, was
much troubled to see, but in short time brought forth the matter and healed it,
and since he has continued well. My daughter of the age of ten, had a Blane on
her Breast, but did not keep the house four days for it. My wife had a
Pestelential Fever, but was cured of it in three or four days, though in the
beginning of the Fever, by taking this Medicine, there came forth many Fever
Spots, and the Nurses seeing them, did conclude she had the Tokens, and it was
talked publicly abroad, that I had cured her of the Tokens, which thing I
absolute deny to be within the reach of any Mortal Man to cure the real Tokens,
though there are many sorts of Spots not much unlike, which are as easily cured
as the Disease they proceed from, as Surfeit Spots, Purple or Scurvy Fever
Spots, and such like; but the Tokens are, I am confident, Marks sent from God,
and it is as impossible to cure any that once have them, as to contradict the
Divine Decree; and besides my own Family, many came to me both in my sickness,
and before and after, so that there was not a day during the Visitation, but
from Visited houses, and some that had running Sores, came daily to me, which I
no more refused, then the soundest and healthiest bodies, nor shall not God
willing upon a just occasion, nor to Visit a Friend or Acquaintance in the
greatest of Dangers, for I have seen many that have had many Sores and Blanes,
some that have had the Tokens.

And those that had Risings, I always advised them to anoint the Rising with
Oil of Lillies, and Oil of March Mallows, of each a like quantity; and if
they broke, as some did, then to apply only that Ointment called Vnguentum
Apostolorum, and any Plaster to keep the Lint that the unguent was on to the
Sore, and to take daily this Medicine inwardly, according as I shall afterward
direct. So doing they have been perfectly cured by Gods assistance and this
Medicine, and never troubled any Chyrurgion, though sometimes there has come
forth a large Core, Neither is this Medicine only for this Disease, as the
Authors mention and my own experience have found, for the greatest part of my
Practice has been this many years, and is to this day, in those Distempers
which are by the common Physicians accounted uncureable, and I have wrought and
still do on many other ingredients both Vigetables, Minerals, and Metals, and
yet in all of them, I could never find neither so safe, nor so speedily
effectual a Medicine, as this one which being of a Solar nature (that is
cordial) that as the Sun by his Beams removes all fogs and vapors from the
earth, so this Medicine expells all venomous and obnoctious humors from the
principle parts of the body, or as Van Helmont says, passes to the Limen of
the fourth concoction, removing all praeternatural coaggulations, though they
never so obstinately add here to the Vessels, casting them forth by Urin and
Sweat for it is so general a cleanser of the blood, that had I not seen the
effects, I should not have believed it, for I have applied it both to persons
in Pleurisies and Quincies, and in one hour the party has been left perfectly
at ease going to sleep, and in their sleep have been in a small sweat, and have
waked well, not losing one drop of blood, as the common custom is.

The like have I done by the Squincy, and in Fevers, of which I can verify,
the saying of Van Helmont in the 458. page. Hoc medicamine tam quartanam quam
continuam statim absolvi: For I have often cured a Fever in two or three days;
the small Pox, which is a rotten putrid Fever, I have cured in three days,
the venom being breathed forth in a small gentle sweat and the party perfectly
well, and not any of the Small Pox has ever come to matter, though they have
been before much swelled with them; the Hectic Fever, which will not admit of
bleeding without Death, is by this Medicine suddenly cured: The Convulsions I
have frequently cured even where there has been no hopes of life according to
common reason; and I do my self, and advise all my friends to give of it to
their Children, first after they are born, six drops in a Spoonful of Ale; and
I have had several that have given me thanks, and I always find the Child the
better for it for a long time, and if the Mother of the Child take it so soon
as she is delivered, it will ease her of after pains, and prevent the vapors of
the Mother, being taken for a few days night and morning in Fear not the heat
of the Sack for no Fever will ever trouble you if you take this Medicine.
Sack, fasting one hour after. I have had many Patients of the Muther-vapou^s,
and been long in the curing of them, though I used the best means I could
devise; but since I have made use of this Medicine for that sad unquiet
restless Distemper, I have found that a few days will cure it, except the
party be old, and have had it many years, and then some longer time must be
allowed, and by Gods blessing, you will not miss your expected desire. I cannot
explain things as I would do, for want of paper; but I shall give it you in
brief as plain as I can: and that I may do it more methodically, I will take
the Diseases of the Head not yet mentioned. The Disease of the head called
Tutanus, which is the Subliming of an offensive matter in the Brain, as whereby
the senses are suddenly suppressed, one Dose of this Medicine brings the party to
their senses presently, and being taken night and morning according to order
quickly rids them totally of so unwelcome a guest. For the Palsy I have
several times cured the worst sort of them, that is, the Palsy in both sides;
that in one side is but a trifle to the other, for in one there is but part of
the Brain obstructed, in the other it is all obstructed. The Swimming in the
head which is a forerunner of Melancholy, is presently by this Medicine cured.
Many are, by reason of bruises, troubled with Impostumations in the head,
which, after having taken this Medicine, do cast forth much corrupt matter by
the Nose, and after become well, and sometimes the Hearing is obstructed, and
sometimes the Sight grows dull by reason of a foul humor in the Brain, which I
find is much helped by this Medicine: And although I have Spirit of Eyebright
in the house, and Essence of Sullandine; yet I prefer this Medicine before
both, for the dimness of the Eyes, which I, by much working in the Fire and
Mineral fumes cannot avoid the often receiving damage both to the Eyes and
Brain. That Disease called the Tremor, I have cured in Fourteen days, when the
shaking was so violent, that if you held the hand still, it would force the
body to move; and one thing I am to inform those that are Lovers of Children,
when a Child in the month is froward, either by reason of some crudities it
received from its Mothers overmuch eating of fruit and trash, or from hurt or
bruise in the birth, or by reason of wind; then for some Diascordium, says the
Nurse; and that, says she, is a harmless thing, and will bring it to sleep:
for, says she, it is peevish for want of sleep, and then the Mother presently
consents, though it proves the Child's ruin, for though they do not give it so
much as contains so much Opium, as to cause it never to wake again, yet that
little cold poison is the worst of poisons which will lodge in the body till it
either brings the Convulsion fits, or, if the Child be so strong of nature to
pass that danger, then after succeeds either the Rickets or a Weakness in the
Limbs. Which want of knowledge many after repent when it is too late. I had
rather any Child of mine took Mercury, then half its weight in Opium, for I can
speak by experience of what I have seen in Children whom I have seen after they
were born, and what they are brought to by this error. Next, in the middle
Belly that is incident to the Palpitation of the heart, and fainting fits, from
a wind contained in the Arteries, for which this Medicine is a present help. As
for the Tabes, a Consumption from a corruption of humor always accompanied
with a Cough, this Disease flies before this Medicine, as combustible matter
wastes by fire.

I have at the writing of this, a Patient, which when he came to me had a great
Looseness, and no Stomach to eat; after being upon recovery, he by his own
carelessness in overwalking in the extreme heat, and drinking when he was hot,
and lying on the ground, was again so bad, that he could not walk half a mile:
but since, by the blessing of God on this Medicine, he can walk lustily, and
has a reasonable good Stomach, and what he eats disgests well with him; and I
question not but he will suddenly have no more need of my help. There happens
many times a windiness in the Pleura, that is a skin within the Ribs near the
Heart, which by delays proves dangerous, always coming with a dissiculty of
breathing, which is by this Medicine removed presently, and by taking of it
three or four days together, is fully cured; the windiness of the Stomach is
presently expelled by it.

The Scurvy, a Disease seldom taken notice of by people till their Teeth drop
out, or a Dropsy follows them, or the Jaundies; and then what will they not
do to be cured. They that have any of the three, or two of them, or all the
three, let them take this Medicine and it will rid them of their grief: but
observe always, the more Disease is plicated, the longer is required for to
continue the taking thereof. Always observe, fixed Diseases require the longer
for the removing, and are for the most part in less danger of death. Many are
the Diseases incident to the lower Belly, as the Spleen, causing either a pain
in the side or sometimes sending up vapors into the head, causing unquiet
sleep, makes those that are troubled therewith to be peevish, produces
Melancholy, it being the seat and receptacle of Melancholy. He or she that
takes this Medicine shall find a pain and tearing near the Spleen after an
evacuation of much Wind downward, the Spleen being so near the Hypocondriacks,
that seldom one is well and the other obstructed, but commonly both together.
I had a patient near six years ago, that was in a deep Melancholy, that if he
see any one laugh would be very angry: always he desired this Medicine, after
he had once taken of it, though he had others by: I have cured many Melancholy
people, but by the taking this Medicine when the obstructions opened, he broke
so much wind backwards, that the neighbor at the next house wondered what noise
that was; and after that, he was cured in a little time. That Disease the
Seamen call the Belly ache, which in the West Indies kills so many brave men for
want of help, had they with them but a small Glass of this, they might be
thereby preserved, for it would quickly remove that intolerable pain, and send
the cause forth at the back-dore; There is no Medicine in the world will suit
better with those that go long Voyages to Sea, especially into hot Countries:
for let them carry it to what part of the world they will, and keep the Glass
close stopped, it shall not lose any thing of its virtues; for neither the heat
of the Summer, nor coldest frost that is, will take any more impression on it
then on a stone: That which will not preserve it self, cannot help to preserve
another: Those that have the Muther-fits, if they take but a dose of this when
they find the Fit a coming, it will prevent it. All sorts of Fluxes is by this
Medicine cured, sometimes a Looseness and Vomiting is caused by reason of a cake
of Worms, which is always accompanied with much Phlegm: this Medicine breaks
the bed of Worms, and leaves the Patient fully recovered, though few but have
therewith a strong Fever, which is cured also. There is a Disease which is
called Lupus Phlegmaton, but by many foolishly taken for the Dropsy
Tympanities, the Belly being swelled to a great bigness, by reason of a cake of
congealed phlegm. I had this Spring a Gentlewoman of near 50 years in this
Distemper, and taking this Medicine three weeks or a month, found little
alteration, but then did begin to be loose, voiding much phlegm; the next day
she vomitted and was loose and the vomitting, continued for two days, and
every day came from her many Basins full of phlegm, and at the end she ceased
both vomiting and looseness having voyded that which was the cause of her
Distemper: during all the time of her Illness, she still continnued taking this
Medi- and now is happily rid of her Disease. This Medicine is both a great
cleanser and strengthner of the Spermatick Vessels in men or women, thereby
begetting fruitfulness in both Sexes; for it does search every corner of the
body, and cast forth what ever is offensive to nature. Some years ago, there
came to me a woman big with Child, whom her Husband had given a Clap; and I did
not only cure her of it during her going with Child, but also the Child: so
that when it was born, it was as fine a Child as you shall see, and did thrive
as well for some years: but I hear both the Mother and the Child dyed in the
Visitation. The Difficulty of making water does arise from several causes, as
from wind, from the stone, and from a slimy matter furring that passage of the
Urine; and sometimes by a carnosity of the three first, I have had experience
and find them easily helped by this Medicine: the Stone only desires a long
time for the breaking, and yet I sent some five years ago this Medicine to a
Person of quality, and in Fourteen days after they sent me word that it had so
broken the Stone, that there had come away too spoonfuls of Sand every day, for
a long time; and when there was no more left, there was no more to be expected.
Now whether this was the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, I know not; for the
Patient was a hundred Miles from me: but this I do not question, but it will as
well reach the Bladder as the Reins; for I once applied it to a person that had
an Ulcer in the neck of the Bladder, a man of near fifty years old, there was a
tumor betwixt the Scrotum and the Fundament, they boch being broken before I
knew it, so that the Urine came forth there every time he made water, and
always in making water he had a great smarting in that place, after, as well
as before the irregular passage of the Urin was stopped; yet I could find no
Medicine that he found so much good by: but in short time he was by this
perfectly cured, without the least obstruction in making water, although it
brought away much mattery substance during the time any thing of corruption
remained there. The symptoms by which you may know the Ulcer in the Bladder or
the neck of the same, are a pricking pain after making water in the end of the
yard in men, and in woman in the passage of Urin: sometimes there comes away a
mattery substance with the Urin, sometimes like hairs will appear in the Urin,
sometimes both, sometimes a smarting in making of water: and when there is
nothing of the Venereal Disease, when these symptoms appear, then you may
conclude there is an Ulcer either in the Bladder or in the Neck of the same:
and in outward Ague-sores, I have seen its effects, for being taken inwardly
without ever applying any thing outwardly but a scorched rag, the sores have
run till the matter has been fully taken away, and they have healed of their
own accord: the Patient taking this Medicine daily till they were fully healed,
after has continued well many years, and I question not but most sores may be
so healed, and the most venomest of Ulcers, Cancers, etc. may be made by the
taking of it more apt to heal, for as they do proceed from a venomous humor,
so this Medicine does expel the greatest of venoms. For when I have been by
accident in Mineral fumes that will poison any man to continue in, I have taken
no other Antidote against them. I confess I never tried it against poisons, but
do verily believe, it will most potently expel any sort of poisons, it will so
speedily remove peracute Diseases: the Dropsy will fly before this Medicine
for the Liver being freed from obstructions and the Urinary-passage, nature
will do the rest, unless it be accompanied with a Consumption, and then there
is but small hopes of a cure. The Piles, a distemper much following Melancholy
people, and oftentimes that sort called the blind Piles, which always with a
vehement pain and burning, as though fire was in the place, by the taking of
this Medicine, it does much mitigate the pain and by degrees takes it fully
away, but does not fully stop the bleeding Piles, for that is the sink of body,
and would be much injurious. Ruptures called Broken Bellies, which proceed from
wind or water, this Medicine does speedily take away. A Rupture, is a wind in
the lower Bowels causing an extention of the Peritonaeum, and in men and boys
the Bowels extending the Kall, so that they fall into the Scrotum or Cod; and
the obstructions of the Bowels being removed, the Distemper has no place to
lurk in. I have had them that have had this distemper some years, and then I
ahve caused them to wear a Trusse; and I shall always choose a Steel-Trusse
before any other, it being well made and fitted. But what need I spend so much
time and paper in mentioning particulars; since there is no Disease that I have
met with, but this Medicine will cure: for I find that the obstructions being
opened and the parts strengthened, there can remain not any thing of a Disease
in any part of the body. Now I shall direct how I always order the taking of
it, my advice is to take it Night and Morning in a glass of Sack, and fast one
hour after, but not longer. In the morning, the quantity to a strong body,
threescore drops, to a Child new born six drops, to one of a year old ten
drops, of four years old twenty, and to one of twelve years old forty; always
observing that some are as strong at six years, as others at ten, and then the
dose is to be according. Those that take it against Infections, need not take
above twenty drops, and only in the morning, unless they go where infected
people are, and then it is necessary to take it as often as they come where
danger is. Sometimes it will be needful for those that have the infection, If
they take it out of order it will do no harm though but little good.
and have had it a day or two before they take it for them, then to take it
four times a day, in the morning, and at ten before noon, and at four
afternoon, and at night. Those that are taken either with Plurisie, Quinsie, or
any other peracute Disease, let them take it so soon as the Disease appears,
and if the first Dose does not move it to their minds, then let them take it
again two hours after; always putting themselves into bed so soon as they have
taken it: and if they be dry, let them drink as much drink as they will in
reason desire; but always I forbid them small beer: it being of a crude
quality requires the more concoction, and so hinders the operation of the
Medicine; but those that are not lovers of strong beer, let them mix Sack with
their small beer, and they will find that the less quantity of drink will allay
their dryness: I omitted in my preparation to tell you that my Tartar that I
make my Salt of is red, according to Raymund Lulley in his Testamenta nova,
where he teaches the making of the Mercury of the Philosophers: Now a word or
two to my Brother Tyro, let me advise thee when thou go about any Chemical
preparation, first to learn to know the threefold Salt in nature, the
threefold Sulphur, and the three fold Mercury; and the sympathy and antipathy
in them; their separation and union; and the cause of their not uniting the
degrees of heat and cold required for their putrefaction: understand these, and
then thou may be in hopes of accomplishing some part of thy desire: for if
thou failest in any of them, thou will lose thy labor.

A word to those that take this Medicine: be^o^e they take it, let them
seriously consider whether they can have patience in fixed Diseases, to
continue the taking of it, as in old settled Griefs will be required, and if
they cannot, I desire them to let it alone: if they will take it, then let them
in the first place desire a blessing from God on it, and then questionless they
shall obtain their desire; and having obtained their desire, let them return
thanks to God for it; always concluding they that receive any thing of good,
and not giving thanks to God for it, do but rob God. For order in diet, let the
Patient eat what is most agreeable to the Stomach, The Archeusis is the best
Schoolman in diet.
always observing that the Stomach better knows what will agree with it, then
the Doctor does. For perfume against infectious airs, I always had Red
Saunders and Rosmary of each a like quantity, and do approve it best, as the
one comforting the heart, the other the Brain; and this I prefer before that
commonly made with Brimston and Niter, which burn both Cloths and Hangings
where ever it comes. I could easily prove it Inimical to nature: but I say no
more lest Mr. Whiteaker rail against me, as he does against Van Helmont for
speaking truth.

This Elixir truly prepared, is to be had at this Author's house in
Crouched-Fryers near Tower Hill, at the Sign of John Baptist Van Helmont: the
price of a whole Glass is five Shillings, and a half Glass two Shillings six
pence; and at Mr. Radfords in Queen Street near the Blew Bell; in
Westminster Hall at Mr. Gavills, the Sign of the Faulkon, and at Mr. John
Playford 's Shop in the Temple. Sealed with the three Lions Rampant, and no
where else.


