Funeral Sermon Preached upon the DEATH of Mrs. Rebecka Goddard, November the
13th. 1692. At JOYNERS-HALL.

By THO. HARRISON.

James 5. chapter 9, 10. v. Take my Brethren the Prophets, who have spoken in the
Name of the Lord, for an Example of suffering affliction, and of patience:
Behold we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
and have, seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of
tender mercy.

LONDON, Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey.

THE Epistle Dedicatory, TO The Husband and Parents of the Deceased Mrs.
Rebecka Goddard.
WORTHY FRIENDS,
THe doleful Separation which that God in whose Hands all our Times are, has
lately made between you and your near and dear Relation, having occasioned my
Preaching the following Sermon, the Dedication is justly yours: Though at your
desire I did compose it for a Public Auditory, I never designed to expose it
to public View. Many worthy Men having written largely and excellently upon
Subjects of a like Nature, I was unwilling to cast in my Mite among their
larger Sums, and feared it would look like a piece of Conceited Folly to
thrust my slender unpolished Discourse into the vast crowd of substantial and
elegant Treatises which have already appeared upon the Public Stage: But
seeing you desire that what God has Blessed to your selves, may be Published
to others, I thought I might look upon your Request as a Call from God to that
which was always contrary to my own Inclination, therefore I hope none will
Censure me for Complying with it: God works sometimes by small means, for he is
not tied to any; he has sometimes rendered mean Discourses preached or penned
more successful than those of a more excellent Composure. That the ensuing
Discourse may be farther useful to you, and may be blessed to the Instruction
and Consolation of others, into whose Hands it shall come, that God would make
up your Loss by clearer Manifestations of his Love, and more plentiful
Communications of his Grace to your Souls; that this Rod may like that of
Aaron, blossom and bring forth the peaceable fruit of Righteousness; that you
may be made yet more to bless that God who has snatched your dear Relative
from your Embraces, is the unfeigned Desire of

Your Affectionate Friend and Servant, T. H.

A Funeral SERMON, etc.
JOB 1. chapter 21 v. latter part. -- The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the Name of the Lord.


THese are the Words of Holy Job, who was an eminent Example, both of suffering
Affliction and of Patience under it.

If we look into the beginning of this Chapter, we shall find that he was in a
very prosperous and flourishing State and Condition; and yet a very upright
Holy Man. Greatness and Goodness are very rare Conjunctions, but they met
together in him: When he was full, he did not forget God, neither when he waxed
fat, did he ( Jeshurun like) kick against him: His temporal Riches did not
impoverish his Soul, the World did not alienate his Affections from God, which
greatly evidenced the Strength and Vigor of his Grace; but if we fix our Eyes
upon the latter part of the Chapter, we shall see a great and sudden alteration
made in his outward State, he soon rolled down the Mount of Prosperity into the
lowest Vale of Adversity; one Messenger treads upon the heels of another,
bringing doleful Tidings concerning the flight of his outward Comforts from
him, and the last Messenger was laden with the heaviest Tidings, who brought
the News of his Childrens death, by a terrible stroke of God's hand. A Man's
Children are more valuable than all his worldly Substance; they are a part of
himsellf, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone. The loss of an Estate is
like the plucking off a Garment, the loss of a Child is like the tearing off a
Limb from the Body. God seemed to empty this good Man from Vessel to Vessel, to
lay Stripe upon Stripe: Deep called unto Deep at the Noise of Jehovah's Water
spouts, and if not all, yet a great many of his Waves and Billows passed over
him. It was certainly very terrible unto him, and must needs be so to us, for
God to repeat his strokes, and multiply our Afflictions; before we have ended
our Lamentations for the loss of one outward Comfort, to behold and attend the
Funeral of another. Before I pass this, give me leave to Observe, That sharp
and sore Afflictions are often times the Lot of God's dearest Children in this
Life.

They who have a large room in God's Heart, are often very severely Disciplined
by his Rod: They who do most carefully eschew the evil of sin, are frequently
exercised with the evil of Suffering. Let us make this profitable Use of this
Note, viz. Not to conclude our selves to be the Objects either of Divine Love
or Hatred, from any of the external Dispensations of Divine Providence toward
us. We cannot Warrantably draw any such Conclusions from such Premises. God may
load thee with Common Benefits, and yet not remember thee with the Favor which
he bears to his own People: He may Visit thee with great Afflictions, and yet
thou may be Visited with his spiritual Salvation here, and his Eternal
Salvation hereafter. Thy Wife may be as a Fruitful Vine, thy Sons like Plants
grown up in their Youth, and thy Daughters as Corner stones polished after the
similitude of a Palace, and yet thou may not be broken off from the wild
Olive Tree of Corrupt Nature, nor engrafted into Christ the Noble Vine and the
good Olive Tree: Thy Root may be dry, and thy Branches wither and be lopt off,
the Desire of thine Eyes, and the Fruit of thy Body, may be taken away by
terrible strokes, and yet God may be the strength of thy Heart and thy Portion
for ever.

Now let us Observe Job's Carriage and Deportment under this dark and gloomy
Providence; and this may be gathered both from his Gestures and Expressions.

First, From his Gestures, Ver. 20. Then Job arose, and rent his Mantle, and
shaved his Head, and fell down upon the ground and worshipped: His renting his
Garment, and shaving his Head, were signs of his great Sorrow. When Jacob
supposed Joseph to be dead, he immediately rent his Garment, Genesis 37. chapter 34.
v. And after Abner's Death, David to express his Sorrow, rent his Clothes, and
commanded all the People that were with him to do the like, 2 Samuel 3. chapter 31.
v. And we find that Baldness is often joined with Mourning and Weeping in the
Scriptures; Cut off thine Hair, O Jerusalem, cast it away, and take up a
Lamentation, etc. Jer. 7.29. so Amos 8.10. Mich. 1.16. and several other
places. His falling down upon the ground and Worshipping, were signs of that
Honor and Homage which he tendered unto God, in and under the Affliction. It
is very Observable how Job divides himself between his outward Comforts and his
God, the former have his Sorrow, to the latter he gives Worship.

Secondly, From his Expressions, Ver. 21. Words are, or ought to be, the
Interpreters of our Hearts, and a Comment upon our Actions. Least some
observing Job in such a Posture, might think that he was beside himself, and
thrown into a Frenzy by these doleful Tidings, he declares the Frame of his
Heart, and the meaning of these forementioned Actions, by these following
Expressions; Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return
thither. These Words are, as I conceive, used by him as an Argument to support
his own Spirit under his present Afflictions; q. d. Although I am now in a Naked
Condition, stripped and deprived of mine outward Comforts, yet, I have no Cause
to Murmur, for I brought nothing into the World, neither can I carry any thing
with me out of it; and then, says he, in the Words of my Text, The Lord gave,
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

These Words may be divided into two general Parts.

1. Two Propositions, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away.

2. A natural and necessary Inference and Conclusion from them both, Blessed be
the Name of the Lord.

I shall speak to both.

First, Two Propositions or Assertions. (1.) The Lord gave. (2.) The Lord has
taken away.

First, The Lord gave: q. d. The Lord gave me those Outward Comforts and
Enjoyments; that Wealth, those servants and Children which I lately had, but am
now bereaved of. From hence I shall Observe,

Doct. That all our Outward Comforts and Temporal Enjoyments come from, and are
the Gift of God.

God is the giver of every good and perfect Gift, James 1.17. Not only of the
best and most perfect Gifts, but also of those that are good and perfect in
their kind. Temporal as well as Spiritual and Eternal Blessings are streams
flowing from this Fountain of Goodness.

In the Prosecution of this Point I shall do two things.

First, Lay down some Explicatory and Demonstrative Propositions.

Secondly, Present you with some Practical Applicatory Inferences.

First, I shall lay down some Explicatory and Demonstrative Propositions.

First Prop. The God is the efficient Cause of all our Creature Comforts: Every
good thing that we enjoy is God's Creature; for as every Creature of God is
good, so nothing is good but what is his Creature. Sin which is essentially
evil, is not God's but the Devil's Creature. Our near and dear Relations must
own God only for their Creator. Though Parents are the Instrumental Causes, yet
God is the Principal Efficient Cause of their Children's Beings; though their
Bodies were formed of their substance, yet they were formed by God's Omnipotent
Arm; by him they were fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139.14. and he
animated and informed them with a rational Soul, therefore is he called the
Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. and the God of the Spirits of all flesh, Numb.
16.22. Hence,

Second Prop. God has an Original Right to, and Propriety in them: He must
needs be the sole Proprietor of those things whereof he is the sole Creator.
Those Bodies and Souls must needs be his, who derived their Being from him. The
first Cause of every thing has an unquestionable Dominion of Propriety in it
upon the score of Justice. By the Law of Nations, the first Finder of a
Country is esteemed the Rightful Possessor of that Country: And the first
Inventor of an Art has a right of exercising it.

Thirdly, All the Outward Comforts which we enjoy, were bestowed upon us by
God; they being Created by him, and he being the rightful Lord of them, we
cannot enjoy them 'till we receive them from him: The Right and Title which we
have to them is not Primitive but Derivative. Some of our Relations (at least)
might have had an Existence, and yet we might not have had an Interest in them.
Have thou a good Husband or Wife? as God's Creating Power gave them being, so
his wise and gracious Providence made them thine. He allotts one Person for a
Conjugal Union with another, and by his Providence, and that sometimes very
strangely and wonderfully, brings about and effects it.

Fourth Prop. All those excellent Qualities which any of our Outward Enjoyments
are the subjects of, whereby they are rendered very Comfortable and Delightful
to us, proceed from God: All the natural and acquired Endowments of the Body
and Mind, which endear Relations to us, as Beauty, Ingenuity, a good Natural
Temper and Disposition, as well as Grace, which is a supernatural Endowment of
the Soul, are bestowed upon them, by the Fountain of all Perfections. He
curiously formed their Bodies, and dignified their Minds with these
Intellectual Qualities.

Fifthly, Whatsoever we receive from God, flows from the Free Grace and
Sovereign Goodness of God: This is indeed the proper Notion of a Gift; It is a
good thing freely bestowed upon us. When we receive some good from another
which he is not Obliged to give us, it may properly be styled a Gift. Now in
this sense all our Temporal as well as our Spiritual Enjoyments are the Gifts
of the Supreme Being: He is under no Engagement or Obligation to any of his
Creatures, but what he voluntarily and freely enters into and lays himself
under: We are less than the least of his Mercies, and unworthy of the smallest
of his Favors. Have any of us a Wife, Children, or any other Relations, which
greatly add to the Comfort of our Lives, we must say concerning them, as Jacob
did to his Brother Esau, concerning his Children, these God has graciously
given thy Servant, Genesis 33.5.

Sixth Prop. When God bestows any Outward Comforts upon us, he does not divest
himself of, nor make over unto us an absolute Propriety in them. Among Men
there are several sorts of Gifts, or several ways of giving: Sometimes Men
cannot be said to retain any Right to those things which they have given unto
another: All the right to the Gift passes over from the Giver to the Receiver
by Virtue of the Donation; and the Person that gave it, cannot without a Breach
of the Rules of Justice reassume it, without the Receiver's full Consent. But
other things are so given by Men, that they still retain their right to and
Propriety in them, or indeed they are rather lent than given: We have an
Instance hereof in Places of Profit and Trust, which are bestowed by Princes
upon their Favorites, during their Pleasure: This Donation is not absolute, so
as to divest the Sovereign of his Right to them, for he can take them away when
he pleases, without committing any Act of Injustice. And of this latter sort of
Gifts are those outward Comforts which we receive from God. He did not divest
himself of the Propriety when he granted us the Use. Our Relations are His, and
not Ours, even when they are in some sense Ours: Though they may be Ours in
opposition to Men, yet they are not Ours in opposition to God; they are granted
us only for our Use, as the Collar of Esses, and Sword, and other Ensigns of
the Chief Magistrate in the City pass through many Hands in regard of the Use
of them, but the Propriety remains in the Community and Body of the City. I
shall now

Secondly, Present you with some Practical Applicatory Inferences.

First, Hence I Infer, That God is more excellent, and consequently ought to
be more highly prized and valued by us than any of our Outward Comforts: The
Donor must needs transcend the Gift in Worth and Value: It is impossible for us
perfectly to Conceive how far God transcends in Excellency those good things
which we receive from him: And the more excellent any Object is, the greater
share ought we to give it in our Esteem and Love. We are all too prone to set
up our outward Comforts in competition with God, to set them down in the Throne
of our Hearts, a Seat only becoming the Father of Spirits. Let us make all our
Temporal Enjoyments strike Sail to that Supreme Being who gave them; let him be
the Darling of our Souls, and the Sovereign of our Affections.

Secondly, Hence I Infer, That we ought thankfully to ascribe the Glory of all
the good things which we enjoy, to God: We must not Sacrifice to our own Net,
nor burn Incense to our own Drag: We must not attribute those outward Comforts
which we are partakers of, to our selves or any of our Fellow Creatures as the
principal Causes of them; but must own them to be the Gifts of God, and bless
his Name for them. His Goodness to us Calls for our Thankfulness, and his
Sovereignty over us Calls for an higher Elevation of it. A Smile from a Prince
is more valued, and thought worthy of greater Gratitude than a Present from a
Peasant. What is Man, that Thou so great a Sovereign art mindful of him, to
bestow this or that Favor upon him! is but a due reflection upon every
Blessing that we receive.

Thirdly, Hence I Infer, That all our Outward Comforts should be Improved by
us to the Glory of God. Nothing is more reasonable, than that he who is the
first Cause should be the last End, than that what is bestowed upon us by
Divine Bounty should be Improved by us to God's Glory. We ought not to Napkin
up, but to lay out our Talents; and such are all our Outward Comforts, we
receive them as Stewards, and therefore must be accountable for them to our
Supreme Lord. O that when he shall Call us to give an Account of our
Stewardships, and we must be no longer Stewards, we may give up our Accounts
with Joy and not with Grief.

I proceed now to the Second Proposition laid down in my Text; The Lord has
taken away.

There seems to be something of difficulty in understanding this Assertion: You
will be ready to say, Was it not told Job by the Messengers, that the Caldeans
and Sabeans came and took away his Cattle, and plundered and pillaged his
Estate, that the Fire consumed his Sheep and his Servants, and the Wind blew
down the House upon his Children, and had not Satan a hand in all this? How
then could Job charge this upon God? Does not this look like the Blasphemy
which the Devil expected out of his Mouth? I Answer, Hereby Job only sets forth
the Supreme Power and Sovereignty of God, in ordering all things; and shows
that the Devil, Wicked Men, and other second Causes, could not have effected
these things without a Divine Concurse. And this was no Stain to the Holiness
of God, nor any reflection upon his Justice; for that Action which is impure
and unrighteous in the Creature, is holy and righteous in God. Though Men
injuriously dispossess us of our outward Comforts, God does it justly; though
Men's Ends are base and sordid, God's are Noble and Excellent. From this Branch
of the Words I shall present you with the two following Propositions.

First, That there is a Vicissitude and Uncertainty in all our Outward Comforts
and Temporal Enjoyments.

Secondly, That when we are deprived of any of our Outward Comforts, we must
acknowledge the Efficiency of God therein.

First Prop. That there is a Vicissitude and Uncertainty in all our Outward
Comforts and Temporal Enjoyments: Though spiritual Blessings are stable and
durable, these Gifts of God are so without Repentance, that they shall never be
taken away from us; yet Vanity is written in legible Characters upon all our
Temporal good things: They are not only Vanity because they cannot satisfy us
while we have them, but because they are transitory and short-lived. When our
Mountain seems to stand strong, it is a vain thing for us to say, We shall
never be moved. We may upon this account say of all Outward Comforts in general
as the Wise Man does of Riches in particular, They are not, because they make
themselves Wings, and fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven, Prove. 23.5. Job had
Cattle and Children, but now they were all gone from him; our living Comforts
are dying Comforts. Death frequently rends those from Men's Embraces who were
of all Mortals nearest and dearest to them; this is a Truth which almost every
Day's Observation will sufficiently demonstrate to us. Do not we see them who
had Children one day, Childless the next; and those who had Wives one day, to
be Widdowers before the next? Let us strike this Rock, and see whether we
cannot fetch Water from it; let us look into the Bowels of this Lion, that we
may find some Honey in it; let us consider what Improvement may be made of this
doleful Truth.

First, Hence I Infer, How unreasonable it is for any of the Children of Men
to place their Happiness in the fruition of Temporal good things: This is a
great evil under the Sun, that which the generality of Mankind are guilty of;
but did they act like reasonable Creatures, they would not place their Felicity
in those things which are fading and uncertain, but in those things which are
durable and lasting. Oh that I could dissuade my self, and you from this Piece
of Folly! Have we Relations who are extraordinary Comforts to us, let us not
make them our chief good, nor esteem them our highest Happiness, for within a
few days their Breath may be stopped, and how miserable shall we then be, not
only in reality, but even in our own Apprehensions! then shall we say with
Micah when the Danites had taken away his Idol and his Priest, What have I
more? Judges 18.24. Let us make God our highest Happiness, and place our
Felicity in Conformity to and Communion with him, and in the Fruition of him,
who is an unchangable and an everlasting good, whose Perfections never leave
him, and who never leaves any that truly enjoy him.

Secondly, Hence I Infer, That we ought diligently to improve our Outward
Comforts, while they are continued with us: I shall instance particularly in
Relations. Let us do what good we can to them, let us Instruct them in the
things of God and the great Concerns of another World; let us as much as in us
lies endeavor the Salvation of their Souls, and let us strive to receive what
good we can from them, for we know not how speedily Death may make a separation
between us and them.

Thirdly, Hence I Infer, That when we enjoy any Outward Comforts, we ought to
be continually expecting and preparing for the loss of them: Let us not think
that we shall always enjoy them, but look upon them as fading and uncertain;
let us endeavor to wean our selves from them, to use them as if we used them
not: In this respect, let those who have Wives and Children be as if they had
none. That Affliction which comes unlookt for, usually comes unprepared for:
The more loose we sit from our outward Comforts when we have them, the more
easily shall we part with them. Jacob could better part with his ten other Sons
into the Land of Egypt than with his Benjamin, that almost brought his gray
Hairs with Sorrow to the Grave. No wonder if we immoderately grieve for those
things when absent, which we immoderately Love when present: By dying daily to
them, let us prepare to follow them to their Graves.

Fourthly, I Infer, How unreasonable it is for us to be surprised, when any of
our outward Comforts are removed from us: These fiery Trials should not be
thought strange of by us, for no strange thing has happened to us. If we
thought them durable, we were mistaken about them; and if we thought them
uncertain and vanishing, why should we be surprised when they disappear? It was
an excellent saying of a Heathen, when one told him of his Son's Death, Sciebam
me genuisse mortales, I knew that I begat Mortals. O Parents, did not ye know
that your Daughter! O Husband, did not you know that your Wife was a Mortal! be
not then surprised at her Dissolution.

Fifthly and Lastly, Hence I Infer, That we ought all of us to prepare for our
own removal from our Relations. As our Relations who are Comforts to us, so we
who are Comforts to them, are fading Dying Creatures: How soon our living
Relations may walk the Streets in Mourning for us, as we have done for those
who are already gone to their long Home, we know not. The daily Instances of
Humane Frailty which are given us, should put us upon Considering and Preparing
for our latter End, that we may not be hurried from our Relations Embraces into
everlasting Flames, but may enter into Abraham's Bosom. Let none of us deferr
the great Work of Preparation for Death, for we know not how soon we may enter
into its gloomy shades. Job's Children were snatched away suddenly, and so are
many others. Death is not always ushered in with the formality of a long and
lingering Sickness. Our deceased Friend did not lie long upon her Bed of
languishing, but was quickly carried off the Stage by that Distemper which
seized upon her. It is not long since she was Worshipping God with us in this
Assembly, and now she is gone into the Congregation of the Dead: Therefore be
ye also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man comes,
Matthew. 24.44. Let not those who are Young put off this Business of highest
Concernment to Old Age, for young ones are often taken away by the stroke of
Death. Our Deceased Friend was like a pleasant Flower, in her blooming Age,
blasted by the Wind of Death; the Days of her appointed time were but few,
before her Change came: Remember therefore your Creator, Oh young Ones! in the
days of your Youth, for it may be ye may not live 'till Old Age comes: Your
Maker may soon take you away. Get an Interest in Christ, who has abolished
Death, and brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel: So when you
come to dye, may ye cheerfully resign your Souls to him, and he will receive
them into his Divine Embraces. Whatever your Judgments are now, when you come
to lie upon a Death bed, you will think an Interest in Christ more valuable
than the whole World, if you are not extremely stupefied. The Hopes which our
Deceased Friend had of this, carried her comfortably through the Valley of the
shadow of Death. Thus much for the first Proposition.

Second Prop. That when we are deprived of any of our Outward Comforts, we must
acknowledge the Efficiency of God therein. The Lord has taken away. Whoever is
the Instrumental, God is the Efficient Cause of all our Afflictions. The
Manichees of old tell us of two Beginnings, or two Gods, the one a good God,
and the other an evil God; the former they asserted to be the Author of all
Good, and the latter to be the Author of all Evil; the former they called A
giving God, and the latter A taking God: But my Text will sufficiently confute
that horrid Notion, for Job ascribes the Donation and the Removal of his
Outward Comforts to the same Divine Being, as the first Cause of both; and
indeed it was necessary that he should do so, because there is but one God.
Yea, many Heathens taught better Doctrine than these Heretics; for they
feigned that their great Jupiter had two great Vessels placed at the Entrance
of his Palace, whereof the one was filled with Good, and the other with Evil,
and these he dispensed according to the Dictates of his own Will, among the
Children of Men. But not to trouble you with Poetical Fictions, the Scriptures
frequently assert this Truth; says God, Isa. 45.9. I form the light, and create
darkness; I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things: Says
the Church, Lam. 3.38. Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil
and good! When any of our dear Relations are taken away by Death, they fall by
the stroke of God's Hand; says God to the Prophet Ezekiel, Son of Man, behold I
take away from thee the Desire of thine Eyes, with a stroke, Chapter 24. v. 16. The
Diseases of which our Relations dye, are only the means w hereby God brings
about his designed End, even their Dissolution. These Winds God holds in the
Hollow of his Hand, and lets them loose at his pleasure, to blow poor Mortals
from the River of Time into the Ocean of Eternity; and this is no Impeachment
at all to Divine Goodness. Punishments themselves are not Moral Evils in the
Person that inflicts, though they are Natural Evils in the Person that suffers
them. I need not insist farther upon the Proof of this Point, but shall present
you with some Inferences from it.

First, Hence I Infer, That when we are Threatened with the Privation of any of
our Outward Comforts, it is our wisest and safest way to apply our selves to
God for the Continuance of them: We may allowably pray for, and deprecate the
removal of our Temporal Enjoyments, provided we do it with Modesty and
Humility, with these necessary Limitations, If it be agreeable to his Will, If
it may be for his Glory and our good, to bestow them upon us, or continue them
with us. Though we may make use of all lawful Means to obtain and preserve
Temporal good things, yet we must not forget to apply our selves unto God,
whose Blessing alone can render them effectual. Physicians will be of no Value
for the recovery of our languishing Relations, unless God sends forth his Word
and heals them.

Secondly, Hence I Infer, That they deserve to be reproved, who when they have
sustained any Losses, reflect upon, perplex themselves about, and ascribe those
Losses solely or principally to second Causes: We are very prone in such Cases
to blame Instruments, instead of eyeing the Providence of the principal
Efficient; to resolve all troublesome Events into the malignity of Second
Causes: This part of practical Atheism we are apt to be guilty of, tho common
Observation might be sufficient to Confute it. The same second Cause which
produces such an effect at one time, or in one Person, shall not produce the
like at another time, or upon another Person. Why should we ascribe the Death
of our Relations principally to the Malignity of the Distemper wherewith they
were seized, when we see others surviving the same Distemper, when attended
with the same dangerous Circumstances?

Thirdly, I Infer, That when any of our Outward Comforts are taken away from
us, we should diligently enquire into the end and design of that separation
which has been made between us and them. Though the Ends of Humane Acts are not
always worthy of our search and enquiry, yet the ends of Divine Acts are always
so: God has Noble and Excellent Ends in all his Operations. Let us therefore
at such a time address our selves to God in the words of Holy Job, 10. chapter 2.
v. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me.

Fourthly, I Infer, The Folly of those who put their Trust, and place their
Confidence in any thing as a security from Death. Were they who go to their
long Home only taken away by Men, then there might be some probability of
warding off the fatal blow; but seeing they are taken away by God, what can
prevent it? Can you think that the great Jehovah will be charmed by your
Beauty, or overpowered by your Strength? Are there any Forts or Towers into
which he cannot enter? Can you fly into any remote Country where his Arm
cannot reach you? Will the Great God have any regard to your Worldly Riches, or
Temporal Grandeur? By none of these things can you deliver either your own, or
others Souls from Death, or hinder them from going down to the Pit. Thus much
for the first part of the Words, I now proceed to the second.

Secondly, We have a Natural and Necessary Inference, or Conclusion, from both
the forementioned Propositions, Blessed be the Name of the Lord: In which words
we have two things contained, viz.

First, An Object, The Name of the Lord. This Phrase has various acceptations
in the Holy Scriptures: But there are two things which I conceive may be
intended by it in this place; and indeed the latter is plainly included in the
former.

First, By the Name of the Lord, is intended God himself. The Name of a Person,
or Thing, is often put for the Person, or Thing named: Thus 1 Acts 15. The
number of the Names together, were about an hundred and twenty; i. e. the
number of Persons, they being numbered by their Names: So 44 Psalm. 5. and
several other places.

Secondly, By the Name of the Lord are intended the Attributes and Perfections
of God: By them is his Nature discovered unto his Creatures; and indeed all his
Perfections are inseparable from his Essence.

Secondly, We have an Act which was exerted upon this Object, and that is
Blessing. By blessing God, we are to understand, either what we express in
Words concerning God, or what we think concerning him. God is blessed by his
Creatures, when his glorious Perfections are published with Praise and
Thanksgiving; or when they have high, great and glorious Thoughts of him; when
they inwardly reverence, Honor and Love him: The former is a Blessing with the
Tongue, the latter is a Blessing with the Heart; the Tongue blessing without
the Heart, is but a tinkling Cymbal; the Heart blessing, without the Tongue,
makes sweet, but still Music: both in Consort make that Harmony, which fills
and delights both Heaven and Earth. When Job says here, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord, we are to understand it both ways, Job speaks out the Blessing of God
with his mouth, and likewise had high and honorable Thoughts of him: From
these words I shall present you with the following Observation,

Doct. That it is the Duty, and will be the Disposition of the People of God,
when in a right frame of Spirit, to bless a taking as well as a giving God.

This is indeed a very hard Work, but it is a very necessary Work: God's People
are not at all times engaged in it, but they are so when in a right frame of
Spirit. In the Prosecution of this Point, I shall take the following Method.

First, I shall more particularly show you, what is intended by, or employed in
our Blessing a taking God.

Secondly, Endeavor the Proof and Demonstration of the Doctrine.

Thirdly, Make some Improvement, and Application of it.

First, I shall more particularly show you, what is intended by, or employed in
our blessing a taking God. This I shall do, by laying down the following
Propositions.

First Prop. This is not exclusive of a holy mourning for the loss of our
Outward Comforts: At the same time that we bless God who has taken away what
we once enjoyed, we may Mourn for our Loss. These two (as plainly appears from
the Text and Context) were joined together by Job; and their Conjunction was
approved by God, as appears from the words following my Text, In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. Mourning is allowable, if we exercise a
Christian Moderation therein.

Second Prop. Our Afflictions are not in themselves the proper Subject of
Thanksgiving. Outward Comforts being in themselves good things, the loss of
them absolutely considered, is an evil: Now the proper Subject of Praise is
something that is Good.

Third Prop. Blessing God is absolutely exclusive of, being directly opposite
to every thing that is employed in Cursing him: Blessing and Cursing are
Opposites. To Curse God, is to Blaspheme him either in our thoughts or words;
to think or speak unworthily, or unbecomingly of him: there is a Cursing God
with the Heart, as well as a Cursing him with the Lips. We Curse God, when our
Hearts are embittered against him, or our Tongues sharpened to wound his
Honor: Therefore they that Bless him, will not either think or speak
unbecomingly of him; they will not either mentally or verbally Murmur and
repine at him; they will not Question his Justice, Reproach his Goodness, or
Accuse his Providence.

Fourth Prop. Blessing God implies the Exercise of Patience, and our thinking
and speaking honorably of God under affliction: The Soul who blesses God,
accounts and acknowledges God to be glorious in Holiness, Justice, Goodness and
Truth, when he strips him of his Outward Comforts; he justifies God in all his
Dealings with him; the Language of both his Heart and his Lips is the same with
David's, Thou have dealt well with thy Servant, according to thy Word, Psalm.
119.65.

Fifth Prop. This includes our offering up Praise and Thanksgiving to God
under, if not for our Afflictions: He that thus Blesses God, will Praise his
Name when he takes as well as when he gives; he will return Thanks for those
Mercies which are still continued with him, though he mourns for the removal of
others from him; yea, if he observes Mercy either in the Circumstances of the
Affliction, or in the Issue and Event of it, he will remember to offer up the
Sacrifice of Praise to God, even when he hangs his Harp upon the Willows. I
Proceed

Secondly, To Prove and Demonstrate the Point, and this I shall do more
Generally and more Particularly.

First, More Generally: God is to be Blessed by us at all times, and therefore
when he deprives us of our Outward Comforts as well as when he gives them to
us: This is evident from the Nature of God, our Relation to him, and the
Revelations and Discoveries which he has made of his Will to us. Is God the
most excellent Being? surely we who stand related to him, as Creatures to a
Creator, and as Subjects to a Sovereign, are Obliged at all times to Glorify
him, not by making him glorious, but by accounting and acknowledging him to be
glorious our selves, and Proclaiming him to be so unto others. Is not Praise
and Thanksgiving due from us to him at all times? unless he could cease to be
God, or we cease to be Creatures, we can under no Circumstances be freed from
our Obligation to glorify the Perfections of his Nature. Those terrible
Dispensations of Divine Providence which make a great Alteration in our Outward
State and Condition, neither make nor argue any Change in God. He is the same
when he takes and when he gives, when he empties us and when he fills us. To
suppose him a good God at one time, and an evil God at another, is a flat
Contradiction; it is to suppose him not to be God: And has he not frequently
prohibited those things which are excluded by, and Commanded those things which
are employed in Blessing a taking God. They must be greatly unacquainted with
the Holy Scriptures who are Ignorant hereof.

Secondly, I shall more particularly demonstrate, that this Conclusion
naturally and necessarily flows from the preceding Propositions.

First, We ought to Bless a taking as well as a giving God, Because the same
God who takes them away from us, first gave them to us. The force of this
Argument will be apparent from the two following Considerations.

First, That God who gave them to us, has an unquestionable right to take them
away from us: As I told you before, he retained his Propriety in them, when he
had bestowed them upon us, and may not God do what he pleases with his own? We
may suppose Job speaking to God after this manner, Lord, Thou have deprived me
of my Wealth and my Children, but I will subscribe to the Equity of thy
Proceedings with me, for thou do but exercise thy Sovereign Right, thou
gave them to me, and yet still they remained thine, therefore thou have
righteously taken them away from me.

Secondly, When God takes our Outward Comforts from us, we have reason to Bless
him for giving them to us. We are very prone to be guilty of this piece of
Ingratitude toward both God and Man, our Creator and our fellow Creatures; if
they show Kindness to us for a time, and refuse the Continuance thereof,
instead of thanking them to quarrel with them. Let none of us say, when any of
our Enjoyments are snatched away from us, Better we had never enjoyed them, than
to be so soon deprived of them. Have thou lost a Child, a comfortable Child, a
Child in its ripe Age? thou have reason to bless God that he gave thee a Child,
that he made it a Comfort which might have been a Cross to thee, and has
continued it so long with thee: Have thou lost a delightful Wife, one that was
a Help Meet for thee? thou have reason to bless God that he gave thee such a
Wife, who might have given thee one that would have been a Continual Torment
and Vexation to thee, and that he has spared her so long with you.

Secondly, We ought to Bless a taking God; because it is the Lord Jehovah who
takes our Outward Comforts from us. The Lord has taken away. The Lord, who can
do no wrong to any of his Creatures. The Lord, who is Righteous in all his
Ways, and Holy in all his Works. The Lord, against whom we have sinned, and by
our sins forfeited all our Mercies. The Lord, who had he dealt with us
according to our Iniquities, or rewarded us according to our Inventions, might
have cast us into Hell long ago. The Lord, who is our God. The Lord, who has
done great things for our Souls, who is an alsufficient unchangable and
everlasting Good, who can make up the Loss of Creature Comforts in himself. The
Lord, who knows what Condition is good for us, better than we do our selves,
who manages all things according to the Dictates of his Infinite Wisdom. The
Lord, whose ways are all Mercy and Truth to his People, and aims at their Good
as well as his own Glory in all his Dispensations toward them, who will
support them under Afflictions, and sanctify Afflictions unto them. I proceed

Thirdly, To make some Improvement and Application of this Point, which shall
be only an Exhortation to all in general, and you the Relations of our Deceased
Friend in particular, to this Necessary Duty of Blessing a Taking God.

To enforce this I might present you with many Motives, but I shall only offer
you two, which shall be taken from the Context of that Scripture which is the
Foundation of this Discourse.

First, Hereby you will Disappoint Satan: What was the Devil's design against
Job, in endeavoring the removal of his Outward Comforts, but to make him Curse
God? as is evident from Ver. 11. of this Chap. and questionless he is in the
same Plot against us, when in the like Condition: He would fain Create some
Prejudices against God in our Minds, or draw some unbecoming Reflections upon
him from our Lips: Now as his Design against Job was defeated, when instead of
Cursing God he Blessed him, so will his Plot against us miscarry if we do the
like; and shall not we endeavor to frustrate his Designs who is an implacable
Enemy both to our God and to us?

Secondly, Hereby you will please God. That this Carriage of Job's was
well-pleasing to God, is apparent from his express Approbation thereof in the
words following my Text; In all this Job sinned not, neither charged God
foolishly. This is a Negative Commendation inclusive of an Affirmative one; q.
d. In all this Job acted becomingly, suitably to the Character which I have
given of him, and ought it not to be our endeavor in all things to please God?
More particularly, you my Friends whose Loss has occasioned this Discourse,
have cause to be thankful as well as to Mourn under that stroke of God's Hand
which has been lately laid upon you: God has even in Judgment remembered Mercy
with you, in that he did not take away your Relation by a Violent, but by a
Natural Death; the former is more terrible than the latter, not only to those
who undergo it, but to their surviving Relatives. Moreover, though your dear
Relation was taken away in a short time, after Sickness began to seize her, yet
she did not dye suddenly, God gave you some Warning before he gave that fatal
blow which separated her from your Embraces. Have you not reason to Bless God
for those Supports which he gave her, and those Manifestations and Discoveries
of his Love which he made to her in the time of her Sickness: Had she been
stupid and insensible of her Condition, or gone out of the World full of
Horror, your Burden would have been the greater, though then you ought to
have acquiesc'd in the Will of God, but now you have good ground to Hope that
she is not lost, but gone before; that your Loss is her Gain; that she was
separated from you only in order to her Enjoyment of her Heavenly Father, and
her dearest Husband, the Lord Jesus Christ; that she is gone to that blessed
Place, from whence she would not for a World return to you: That though you
have had a doleful Parting, you will have a joyful Meeting, never to part more.
And would you Bless this taking God? seriously consider those things which I
Proposed to you, to demonstrate the reasonableness thereof, endeavor to clear
up your Interest in him, go forth by Faith to the Lord Jesus Christ, that you
may derive that Grace and Strength from him, which may enable you to do this
difficult Work; so I hope you may say with the Holy Man in the Words of my
Text, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the
Lord.

FINIS
Advertisement.
THe Revelation Unvailed, or an Essay toward the Discovering I. When many
Scripture Prophecies had their Accomplishment, and turned into History. II.
What are now Fulfilling. III. What rest still to be fulfilled, with a guess at
the time of them. With an Appendix, proving that Pagan Rome was not Babylon,
Rev. 17. and that the Jews shall be Converted. By Samuel Petto, Minister of the
Gospel at Sudbury in Suffolk. Price 1 s 6 d

The Life and Death of that Old Disciple of Jesus Christ, and Eminent Minister
of the Gospel, Mr. Hanserd Knollys, who Dyed in the Ninety Third Year of his
Age. Written with his own Hand to the Year 1672. and continued in General in an
Epistle by Mr. William Kiffien: To which is added his last Legacy to the
Church. Price stitcht 6 d or Bound 8 d

Both Printed for John Harrls at the Harrow in the Poultrey.


