A Refutation of the Atheistical Notion OF Fate, or Absolute Necessity.

IN A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, November the
Seventh, School.

BEING The Eighth of the LECTURE for that Year, Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By JOHN HARRIS, M. A. and Fellow of the ROYAL-SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Richard Wilkin, at the King's -Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

JEREM. ix. 24.
Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in
the earth: for in these things do I delight, says the Lord. I Did, in my last
Discourse, begin to Speak to the Second Particular considerable in these Words,
viz.

An Account of some of those Attributes which God is here said to Exercise in
the Earth, and in which he Delights.

On which I did not think it necessary to Discourse particularly; but from
thence took an Occasion to Remove two Great Bars to the true Knowledge of God
and of his Attributes, which Skeptical and Unbelieving Men had raised in the
Way. Which were These:

I. That there is in reality no such Thing as Moral Good or Evil: But that all
Actions are in their own Nature indifferent.

II. That all things are determined by absolute Fatality: And that God himself,
and all Creatures whatsoever, are Necessary Agents, without having any Power of
Choice, or any real Liberty in their Natures at all.

The former of These I did then dispatch, plainly proving the Existence of
Moral Good and Evil, and answering the Objections against it.

I proceed now to speak to the latter; which is an Objection that our
Adversaries are very fond of, and do all of them, upon Occasion, have recourse
to. And it is indeed a great Point gained if they could make it out, and will
effectually destroy all manner of Religious Obligation, and all dread of
Punishment for doing amiss. For as one observes on these Three things all
Religion is founded: 1. That there is a Dr. Cudworth in Preface to his
Intellectual System.
God who made, presides over, and governs all things. 2. That there are some
things (...), in their own Natures good and just. 3. That there is also
something (...), something in our own Power to do, whereby we are Accountable
for our Actions, and become guilty when we do amiss. But there can certainly be
neither Good nor Evil in any Man's Actions, and no Rewards or Punishments can
be the Consequents of them, if nothing at all be in our own Power, if whatever
we act or commit, it is absolutely impossible for us to avoid acting or
committing. Which yet must be the case, if, as they assert, Things are
determined by absolute Fatality; and that God himself and all Creatures
whatsoever are necessary Agents, without having any Power of Choice, or any
real Liberty in their Natures at all.

I shall therefore at this Time, 1. Show you that this is plainly their
Assertion, from their own words.

2. I shall endeavor to show the Groundlesness of of those Reasons on which
they build their Hypothesis.

And 3. from some Arguments, Establish the contrary Position of the Freedom and
Liberty of Human Nature.

1. And that this is the Assertion of the Two great Atheistical Writers, is
very plain, Mr. Hobbs declares himself to be of the Opinion, Hobbs Tripos, p.
297.
That no Man can be free from Necessitation. That Nothing takes beginning from
it self, but from the Action of some other Immediate Agent without it self. And
that therefore, when first a Man has an Appetite or Will to something, to
which immediately before he had no Appetite nor Will, the Cause of his Will is
not the Will it self, but something else not in his own disposing. So that
whereas it is out of Controversy that of Voluntary Actions the Will is the
Necessary Cause, and by this which is said, the Will is also caused by other
things whereof it disposes not, it follows, that Voluntary Actions have all
of them Necessary Causes, and therefore are necessitated. Ibid. p. 312.
This (says he also) is a certain Truth; that there are Certain and Necessary
Causes which make every Man to will what he wills, Ib. p. 306. And then as to
the Deity, I have already more than once taken notice, That Hobbs denies Him
any Understanding, Sense, or Knowledge; Vid. Sermon V. p. 51. Sermon. VI. p. 9.
and asserts him to be without any Ends or Designs in his Actions and
Operations. Which plainly makes Him an Agent absolutely and physically
Necessary; as, indeed, follows also from the Notion of his Being Corporeal,
which the same Writer every where maintains Vid. Sermon. V. p. 49.
.

Spinoza also is very Express in this Matter, as I have already shown Sermon. V.
p. 51.
in some Measure. In mente (says he) nulla est absoluta five libera voluntas;
sed Men's ad Hoc vel illud Volendum determinatur a Causa, quae etiam ab alia,
and haec iterum ab alia and sic in Infinitum Spinoza Op. Posthum. p. 85.
. And in another place, Voluntas non potest vocari Causa libera, sed Tantum
necessaria. p. 28.
And yet on another Occasion, and in another Book, he has these words, Clare
and distinct Intelligimus, si ad Nostram naturam attendamus, nos in nostris
actionibus esse liberos, and de multis deliberare propter id solum, quod
volumus Princep. Philos. Carts. Demonstrat. p. 103.
. Which is as plain and palpable a Contradiction to what he, with the same air
of Assurance, delivers in other places, as can possibly be.

Mr. Hobbs also cannot be acquitted from expressly contradicting himself as to
this Point of Liberty and Necessity; for he tells us in his Reasons for his
Opinion) Hobbs Tripos, p. 314.
That he that reflecteth on himself cannot but be satisfied. That a Free Agent
is he that can do if he will, and forbear if he will. And such an Agent he
allows Man to be, and says he has proved it too. But how he will reconcile
this with his Assertion that no Man can be free from Necessitation, and that
all our Actions have Necessary Causes, and therefore are necessitated, I cannot
imagine. As to Spinoza's Account of the Deity, in Reference to this Point, I
have given a hint or two of it already. He makes God to be the same with
Nature, or the Universe, to be Corporeal and an absolutely necessary Agent; one
who cannot possibly help doing as he does; one who has no Power of Creation,
nor does act according to free Will p. 29. Op. Posthum. and p. 33. 18.
. But is Limited and Restrained to one constant Method of Acting by the
Absolute Necessity of his Nature, or by his Infinite Power. And lest any one
should misunderstand him so far, as to imagine that he means by this, that God
is by the Excellency and Perfection of his Nature, in all his Operations
exactly conformable to the Rules of Justice, Goodness and Right Reason; He
plainly excludes that Notion in these words; Qui dicunt Deum omnia sub Ratione
Boni agere, Hi aliquid extra Deum videntur ponere, quod a Deo non dependet, ad
quod Deus tanquam ad Exemplar in Operando attendit, vel ad quod, tanquam ad
certum scopum collimat: Quod profecto nihil aliud est quam Deum Fato subjicere
Op. Posth. p. 32.
.

Now, I think nothing can more show the wicked Perverseness of this Writer's
Mind, than this Passage; For he could not but know very well that when Divines
assert the Deity to be Essentially and necessarily Good, they do not mean that
Goodness is any thing Extrinsical to the Divine Nature, much less that it is
something which has no dependence upon it: but only that the Excellency and
Perfection of his Nature is such, as that it is in every thing exactly
conformable to Right Reason; and therefore this was certainly a wilful
Perversion of their Sense, set up on purpose to overthrow the Notion of Moral
Goodness in the Deity. But how vain is it for him to tell us, that for the
Deity to Act sub Ratione Boni, is for Him to be Subject to Fate, when at the
same time he Himself Asserts, that God is in every respect a Necessary Agent,
without any free Will, nay, without any Knowledge or Understanding in his
Nature at all? This is so plain a Demonstration, that it was his chief and
Primary Design to banish out of Men's Minds the Notion of Moral Goodness, that
nothing can be more: and therefore though he was resolved to Introduce absolute
Necessity into all Actions both Divine and Human; yet it should be such an one
as should leave no Umbrage for any distinction between Good and Evil, or any
Foundation for Rewards and Punishments. And in this Notion of Necessity, these
Writers follow Democritus, Heraclitus, Leucippus, and that Atheistical Sect;
who maintained that there was Nothing in all Nature but Matter and Motion. And
therefore when these Modern Writers assert that there is nothing in the
Universe but Body, as they do, they run Fate farther than most of the Old
Heathen Patrons of Necessity did. For there was none but the Democritick Sect,
that supposed Fate to have a Power over the Will of Man; and in this
particular, even they were deserted by Epicurus; as I observe below. The
Pythagoreans, Platonists, and Stoics agreed that the Mind of Man was free. And
it is well known that the Stoics did in this Free Power of the Will of Man,
found that arrogant Assertion of theirs, That a Wise Man was in one respect
more excellent than the Gods; for they were Good by the Necessity of their
Nature and could not help it, whereas Man had a Power of being otherwise, and
therefore was the more commendable for being so. There was, indeed, some of the
Poets, and some few of the Philosophers too, who did subject the Gods
themselves to Fate or Necessity. Thus Seneca in one place says, Necessitas and
Deos alligat; Irrevocabilis Divina pariter ac Humana Cursus vehit. Ille ipse
omnium Conditor ac Rector scripsit quidem Fata, sed sequitur, semper paret,
semel jussit. Which Opinion is effectually refuted and exposed by Lucian, in
that Dialogue of his called (...). As also by Lactantius in his First Book De
falsa Religione, Chap. 11. But this, as I doubt not but Seneca and some others
understood in a softer sense than at first sight it appears to have, so was it
the Doctrine of but a few; for generally the Heathens did fully believe that
Prayers and Sacrifices would alter a Man's Fortune and Circumstances for the
better; that they would appease the Anger, and gain the Favor and Blessing of
the Gods, and that Their Nature was not so absolutely Fatal and Necessary, but
that they could freely deal with their Creatures according as they deserved at
their hands. For we find Balbus the Stoic mentioned by Cicero, telling us,
That the Nature of God would not be most Powerful and Excellent, if it were
Subject to the same Necessity or Nature, Qua Coelum, maria, terraeque reguntur:
Nihil Enim est praestantius Deo, Nulli igitur est Naturae Obediens and
Subjectus. So that these Writers tread in the Steps of the worst, and most
Atheistical of the Heathen Philosophers, and maintain a more rigid Fate, and a
more irresistible Necessity than most of them did. But,

2. I come next to show the Groundlesness of those Reasons and Arguments on
which these Men build their Hypothesis of Absolute Necessity.

And first as to the Reasons of Mr. Hobbs. The Chief that he brings against the
freedom of Human Actions are these, says Mr. Hobbs, In all Deliberations and
alternate Successions of Contrary Appetites, it is the last only which we call
Will; this is immediately before the doing of any Action, or next before the
doing of it become Impossible. Also, Nothing, says he, can take beginning from
it self, but must do it from the Action of some other immediate Agent without
it; if therefore a Man has a Will to something, which he had not before: the
Cause of his Willing is not the Will it self, but something else not in his own
disposing. So that whereas it is out of Controversy, that of Voluntary Actions
the Will is the Necessary Cause; and by this which is now said, the Will is
also Caused by Other things whereof it disposes not, it follows that Voluntary
Actions have all of them Necessary Causes, and therefore are necessitated. Again
also, Every sufficient Cause, says he, is a Necessary one, for if it did not
produce its Effect necessarily, 'twas because something was wanting to its
Production, and then it was not sufficient. Now from hence it follows that
whatsoever is produced, is produced Necessarily, and consequently all Voluntary
Actions are Necessitated. And to define a Free Agent to be that, which when all
things are present which are necessary to produce the Effect, can nevertheless
not produce it, is Contradiction and Nonsense; for it is all one as to say the
Cause may be sufficient (i. e.) Necessary, and yet the Effect shall not follow.
This is the Substance of all Mr. Hobbs his Proof against Free Will; in which,
there are almost as many Mistakes as there are Sentences; and from hence it
plainly will appear, that either he had no clear Idea's of what he wrote about;
or else did designedly endeavor to perplex, darken and confound the Cause: For
in the first place, He confounds the Power or Faculty of Willing in Man with
the last act of Willing, or Determination after Deliberating. And consequently
does not distinguish between what the Schools would call Hypothetical and
Absolute Necessity: which yet ought to be carefully done in the Point between
us; for an Agent may be free, and no doubt every Man is free to deliberate on,
and to compare the Objects offered to his Choice, and yet not be so after he
has chosen. Then, indeed, Necessity comes in; it is impossible for any one to
choose and not to choose, or to determine and not to determine; and after the
Election is made, no one ever supposed that a Man is free not to make it. And
therefore if by the Will Mr. Hobbs means that last Act of Willing or Electing,
which immediately precedes Acting, or which is next before the doing of a thing
become impossible, as he expresses himself; he fights with his own shadow, and
opposes that which no body ever denied: for no Man ever supposed Freedom and
Determination to be the same thing; but only that Man before he determined was
free, whether he would determine so and so, or not. And accordingly he himself
defines a voluntary Agent, to be him that has not made an end of Deliberating
Tripos, p. 311.
.

Again, 2. It Is hard to know what he means here, by Nothing taking its beginning
from it self: he is talking about Voluntary Actions, and about the freedom of
Human Nature, and therefore should referr this to the Will of Man: but the
Instances he afterward produces, are of Contingent Things Ibid. 315.
, which are nothing at all to his purpose. But if this be spoken of the Will,
what will it signify? I grant Nothing can take its beginning from itself; the
Will of Man took its beginning from God, and Voluntary Actions (we say) take
their beginning from the Faculty or Power of Willing placed in our Souls: But
what then? does it follow from thence, that those Actions we call Voluntary are
Necessitated, because that they take their Original from that free Power of
Election God has placed in our Natures, and not from themselves? I dare say,
no one can see the consequence of this part of the Argument. And it will not in
the least follow from hence, that the Cause of a Man's Willing, is not the Will
it self; but something else not in his own disposing: Which yet he boldly
asserts. It is the Power of Willing, or that Faculty which we find in our
selves, of being free (in many Cases) to Act or not Act, or to Act after such a
particular manner, which is generally called the Will; and this is commonly
said to be free. Though I think (as one has observed) Mr. Lock, in his Essay of
Humane Understanding.
it is not so proper a way of Speaking, as to say, the Man is free. For besides
that it is not usual, nor indeed proper, to predicate one Faculty of another;
it is hardly good sense to say the Will is free, in the manner now explained;
for that would be the same thing as to say, that a free Power is free; whereas
it is not the Power, but the Man that has the Power, that is free. But however
the Other way of Expression has prevailed and does do so, and I don't think
any one is misled by it into Error; for that which every body understands and
means by saying the Will of Man is free, is, that Man has in his Nature such a
free Power, as is called his Will. Now from hence it will not follow that a Man
is free whether he will Will, or not; for he must Will someway, either to Act,
or not to Act; or to Act after such a particular manner. But it will follow,
that when a Man has made any particular Volition, or has determined the Point
whether he shall Act, or forbear to Act, he is then no longer at Liberty, as to
this particular Case and Instant; for the Determination is then actually made,
and the Man no longer free not to make it. But this proves nothing at all
against the Liberty or Freedom of the Mind of Man.

Again, what does Mr. Hobbs mean by the Will's being the Necessary Cause of
Voluntary Actions? Does he mean that the Will of Man must of Necessity act
freely, and produce Actions voluntarily; if he does, we are agreed; but if he
means that the Will is previously necessitated in every Act of Volition to Will
just as it does, and could not possibly have willed otherwise; this is to beg
the Question, and to take for granted the great thing in Dispute; it is to call
that out of Controversy, which is the only thing in Controversy; which
indeed, when a Man contradicts the Common Sense and Reason of Mankind, without
Proof, is the best way of Proceeding.

But that which looks most like an Argument for the Necessity of all Humane
Actions, is this which he brings in the last place. That Cause (says he) is a
sufficient Cause which wants nothing requisite to produce its Effect, but
such a Cause must also be a Necessary one; for had it not necessarily produced
its Effect, it must have been because something was wanting in it for that
Purpose, and then it could not have been sufficient: So that whatever is
produced, is produced necessarily; for it could not have been at all without a
sufficient (or necessary) Cause; and therefore also, all Voluntary Actions are
necessitated.

Now all this proves to his Purpose (I think) just nothing at all: He proceeds
on in his former Error of confounding the Act of Willing with the Power of
Willing; and of making Hypothetical the same with absolute Necessity; for, not
now to dispute what he says of every sufficient Cause's being a Necessary one;
allowing that when ever any Volition or Determination is made, or when ever any
Voluntary Action is done, that the Will of Man was a sufficient Cause to
produce that Effect; nay, that it did at last necessarily produce it; he can
infer nothing from hence more than this; That when the Will has determined or
willed, it is no longer free to Will, or Nill that particular thing at that
particular Instant; which I don't believe any Body will ever, or ever did deny.
But this will not prove at all that the Will was necessitated to make that
Determination a Priori, and that it could have made no other; which yet is what
he means, and ought to have clearly made out. For the same Power or Faculty of
Liberty, which enabled it to make that Determination, would have been a
sufficient Cause for it to have made another contrary to it, or differing from
it: and then when that had been made, it would have been as necessary as the
former. And therefore that Definition of a Free Agent's being that, which when
all things are present which are needful to produce the Effect, can
nevertheless not produce it, (though I don't think it the best) does not, when
rightly understood, imply any Contradiction, nor is it Nonsense at all. For the
meaning of it is, That he is properly Free, who has the Power of Determination
in himself; and when all Requisites are ready, so that nothing shall
extrinsecally either hinder him from, or compel him to Act, can yet choose
whether he will Act or not.

Thus, if a Man has Pen, Ink and Paper, and a place to write upon, his Hand
well and at Liberty, and understands how to write; he has all things present
that are needful to produce the Effect of Writing; yet he can nevertheless not
produce that Effect; because he can choose after all, whether he will write or
no.

Mr. Hobbs defines a Free Agent to be him that can do if he will, and forbear
if he will, and that Liberty is the absence of all external Impediments Tripos,
p. 314.
; which if he intended any thing by it, but to palliate a bad Cause, and to
amuse the Person he wrote to, is as much Nonsense and Contradiction to what he
himself advances about Necessity as is possible. For how a Man can be said to
Act necessarily, that has no external Impediments to hinder him, or Causes to
compel him, but is free to Act if he will or forbear if he will, is what I
believe no Man can possibly conceive.

Thus we see plainly, that this great Patron of Necessity has very little to
say for his Darling Notion, and that he plainly contradicts and is Inconsistent
with himself. Had he indeed dared speak out, and thought it time to declare his
Opinion freely, he would, no doubt, have proceeded on other Grounds in this
Point, and made use of Arguments more agreeable to his Set of Principles: which
being allowed him, would have demonstrated an absolute Necessity of all things
whatsoever. For he was a thorough Corporealist, and maintained that there was
nothing more in Nature, but Matter and Motion; which if it were true, it is
most certain, that all Things and Actions must be inevitably Fatal and
Necessary; for (as Mr. Lock well observes) nothing but Thought or Willing, in a
Spirit, can begin Motion. The Necessity therefore in such an Hypothesis would
be the true Ancient Democritick Fate, the (...), or, as Epicurus calls it,
(...), a through Material necessity Mechanically producing all Things: or the
Fate of the Naturalists, who held nothing besides Matter and Motion. But this
Notion, for some Reasons best known to himself, he did not think fit to insist
on, when he wrote this Tract against the Liberty of Human Nature. Though his
Successor Spinoza, with a little Variation did; whose Arguments we must next
consider.

Spinoza, as I have formerly showed, was an Absolute Corporealist as well as
Mr. Hobbs; but finding that Cogitation could never be accounted for from Matter
and Motion only, he supposes Cogitation Essential to Matter; and as he makes
but one only Substance in the World, which is the Matter of All Things, or God;
so he supposes Cogitation to be one of the Essential Attributes of this Deity,
as Extension is the other. And from hence he concludes, That all things,
according to the Infinite variety of their several Natures, must necessarily
flow from God or the whole, and must be just what they are, and cannot be, nor
could not possibly have been, any otherwise Ex necessitate Divinae naturae,
Infinita Infinitis modis sequi debent. Op. Posthum. p. 16. 18.
. He does indeed Style the Deity Causa Libera, and say he is only so p. 17.
. But the reason he assigns for it, is only because nothing can compel him to,
or hinder him from doing any Thing; but he expressly denies him to have either
Understanding or Free Will p. 18. Tract. Theol. Polit. c. 4. p. 63.
. And he declares oftentimes, That all things flow from the Deity by as
Absolute a Necessity, as that the Three Angles of a Triangle are equal to Two
right ones. And then as to the Mind of Man, he gives this Reason why it cannot
have any free Will; Quia men's ad hoc, vel illud Volendum determinatur a Causa,
quae etiam ab alia, and haec iterum ab alia and sic in Infinitum Op. Posthum.
p. 85.
. The same thing also he asserts in another Place p. 28.
, and from thence undertakes to prove also, that God cannot have any Free Will;
and withal says, That Understanding and Will, as they are called, belong to
the Nature of God, just as Motion and Rest. and other Natural Things do, which
are absolutely determined to Operate just as they do, and cannot do otherwise
p. 29.
. This is the Argument of Spinoza, to prove that there is no such thing as
freedom in the Nature of Man, but that he is determined in every thing by
Absolute and Inevitable Necessity. And this Necessity also it is plain according
to him, is purely Physical and Mechanical.

As to the Refutation of which, I think, I have already effectually removed the
foundation on which it is all built, by proving that there are such Beings as
Immaterial Substances, and that God himself is such an One, or a Spirit Vid.
Sermon. 4, and 5.
. For all the Necessity Spinoza contends for, depends purely on his Notion of
the Deity; as appears sufficiently from what I have produced of his words. If
therefore it be true, that God be an Immaterial Substance, a Being Distinct
from Nature, or the Universe; and the Creator and Producer of all things, (as I
think I have very clearly proved) it is most certain that the whole Chain of
Spinoza's Argument for Necessity is broken to pieces. For the Reason he assigns
for the necessary Operations of the Deity, are not the Perfections of his
Nature determining him to Good and Just, Lovely and Reasonable things; but that
the Deity being Universal Nature, All things and Operations are Parts of him,
and their several Ways and Manners of Acting and existing according to the
necessary Laws of Motion and Mechanism, are his Understanding and Will: which
Ignorant People, he says, may perhaps take in a literal Sense, and think that
God can properly Know or Will any thing; but that in reality there is no such
thing as Understanding or Free Will in God, since all things flow from Him by
Inevitable Necessity. And if there be not any freedom in the Deity, that is in
the whole, there can be none in Men, or in any other Beings, who are but Parts
of him.

If this indeed be true, that there is no other God but Nature; then it is easy
to see that all things must be governed by absolute Fatality, and be in every
respect Physically necessary; there can then be no such thing as Contingency,
or any Voluntary Actions; and if we were sure of this, it is indeed the greatest
Ignorance and Folly in the World, to pretend to talk any thing about it. But on
the other hand, if there be a Deity who is an Infinitely perfect Being,
distinct from Nature: who Created all things by the Word of his Power, and for
whose sole Pleasure they are and were Created, then none of those Consequences
will follow; but it will appear very reasonable to believe, that God has still
a Care and Providence over that World which he made at first: and that he
delights to exercise loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth;
as the Prophet here speaks: That he has made some Creatures capable of Knowing
and Understanding this, and who consequently have a free Power, as in other
things, so of giving Praise and Glory to so Great and Wonderful a Being, nay,
and of Glorying themselves in being capacitated to attain so Excellent a
Knowledge. And that Man has such a Power or Freedom of Will, in his Nature, is
what I shall now proceed in the last place plainly to prove.

1. And the first Argument I shall make use of to demonstrate this, shall be
the Experience of all Mankind. And this, one would think, should be of great
Weight, and turn the Scale against all the Atheistical Metaphysics in the
World; and so, no doubt it would, were it not wicked Men's Interest to advance
the contrary Notion. Now that we have a free Power of deliberating, in many
Cases, which way it is best for us to proceed; that we can act this way or that
way, according as we like best; and that we can often forbear whether we will
Act at all, or not, is a Truth so clear and manifest, that we are (I think)
almost as certain of it as we are of our own being and Existence; and it is an
unimaginable thing how any Man can be persuaded that he has no such Power Had
it not been a thing Undeniable that the Will of Man is free, and had not
Epicurus, and his Follower Lucretius, very well known that it was a thing which
every one could not but experience in Himself, he had certainly, as a very
Learned Person observes (Dr. Lucas Enquiry after Happiness, Vol. I. p. 156,
157.) followed his Old Master Democritus, and asserted the Mind of Man to be as
necessarily and fatally moved by the strokes of his Atoms, as Natural and
Irrational Bodies are. But this Opinion he was forced to desert, and to assert
the Liberty of the Soul of Man; and 'twas to make this out according to his
Senseless Hypothesis, that he Invented that Unaccountable Oblique Motion of his
Atoms; which Lucretius calls Exiguum Clinamen Principiorum. Lib. 2.
. Indeed, one may by Sophistical words, Metaphysical Terms, and abstruse
Unintelligible Banter, be perhaps a little amused and confounded for the
present. But that any one should by such a Jargon be persuaded out of his
Senses, his Reason, and his Experience, and continue in that Opinion, is what I
do believe never yet befell any Rational and Thinking Man. When Zeno brought his
silly Sophistical Argument to prove there was no such thing as Motion; his
Antagonist thought it to no purpose to return an Answer to what plainly was
contradictory to the common Sense of Mankind; and therefore convinced him only,
by getting up and Walking. And the very same Return will baffle and expose all
the Pretended Arguments for Necessity. For it is plain, He had a Power first
whether he would have walked or not, he could have walked Five Turns, or Fifty;
he could have gone across the Room, or length-wise; round it, or from Angle to
Angle. And I dare say, no Sophistry or Metaphysics whatever would have
convinced him that none of these were in his Power, when he plainly found them
all to be so; any more than he was convinced a Body could not move out of its
place, when he had seen and tried a Thousand times that it would. It Is the same
thing in reference to the Thoughts of our Minds, as it is in the Motions of our
Bodies. We plainly find we have a Power in abundance of Cases, to prefer one
thought before another, and to remove our Contemplation from one Notion or Idea
to another: We can, in our Minds, compare and revolve over the several Objects
of our Choice; and we can oftentimes choose whether we will do this, or not;
and this Internal Freedom in Reference to our Thoughts and Idea's, we do as
plainly perceive, and are as sure of, as we are that we can voluntarily move
our Body or any part of it from place to place. And as I have plainly showed
you above, our Adversaries do grant and allow this when it is for their Turn.

But they will say, though we seem to be free, and do think and perceive our
selves to be so, yet in reality we are not; and it is only our Ignorance of
Things and Causes, which induces us to be of this mistaken Opinion Falluntur
homines quod se liberos esse putant, quae opinio in hoc solo consistit, quod
suarum Actionum sint conscii, and Ignari Causarum a quibus determinantur. Haec
ergo est eorum libertatis Idea quod suarum Actionum nuilam cognoscunt Causam.
Nam quod aiunt humanas Actiones a Voluntate pendere verba sunt quorum nullam
habent Ideam. Bapr. Spinoz. Op Posthum. p. 73. Vid. etiam, p. 37.
; and the Idea of Liberty which Men have is this, that they know no Cause of
their Actions; for to say they depend on the Will, is to talk about what they
do not understand, and to use words of which they have no Idea's at all. To
which, I say, that I cannot but be of the Opinion that it is a good Rational
way enough of Proceeding, to pronounce of things according as we do experience
them to be, and to declare them to be that which we have all the Reason in the
World to think and believe that they really are. And I think we may well enough
own and be contented with the Charge of Ignorance here laid upon us. For the
Case is thus: We think our selves free, because we plainly find and experiment
our selves to be so in a Thousand Instances; and this also these Penetrating
Gentlemen sometimes, as I have showed, do kindly allow; and we are indeed
wholly Ignorant of any Causes that do absolutely determine us to Action; or
which do necessitate us in what we do, previous to that free Power which we
find in our selves; so that plainly perceiving our selves to have this free
Power, and being Ignorant of any true Reason why we should believe we are
mistaken in what we perceive and know, we do, indeed, (such is our Ignorance
and Weakness) embrace the Opinion that there is a Liberty of Action in Human
Nature. And this free Power or Liberty which we find in us, we not being deep
Metaphysicians, call the Will; by which we understand, as I have showed before,
not any Particular Act of Volition, but the Power or Faculty of Willing. And
since we plainly perceive that in many cases we are not determined to Action by
any thing without us, but do choose or refuse, act or not act, according as we
please; and being withal grossly Ignorant of any Cause these Actions have, but
what we find and perceive them to have, we call our free Will the Cause of
these Actions, and say they depend on it: and yet after all, do we not find
out, that we talk about what we do not understand, and use words that we have
no Idea of. But our Adversaries, it seems, have a quite different relish of
things, they soar in a higher and more subtle Region, they will not condescend
to speak common sense in this Matter; Though they plainly understand, (as they
tell us) that they are really free as to many Actions, and can deliberate
whether they will do them or not, purely because they have a free Power so to
do Spinozae Princip. Philos. Carts Demonst. p. 103.
; though they are satisfied that they can act if they will, or forbear if they
will Hobbs Tripos, p. 314.
; yet they say this is in reality a Mistake, and that there is no such thing as
freedom after all, but that all Actions are absolutely necessitated. And as for
the Power or Faculty which is vulgarly called the Will; that sometimes is one
thing sometimes another, according as they think fit to name it. Sometimes it is
an Act of Volition that follows the Ultimum dictamen Intellectus, and sometimes
it is the Understanding itself Spin. Op. Posth. p. 87, 88.
. Now it is nothing but an Idea Ibid. p. 399.
, and by and by a mere Ens Rationis Ibid. p. 399.
, or an Imaginary Cause of Action, which Ignorant Men have fansied that they
have in themselves p. 73.
. So hard is it for Men that fly so high, to have a distinct view of any thing
below. But I proceed,

2. To another Argument, for the freedom of Humane Nature; and that is, the
monstrous Absurdities and Consequences of the contrary Opinion. For the
Assertion that all our Actions are necessitated, it perfectly destroys the
Notions of Good and Evil, Rewards and Punishments, and of all manner of
Obligation both to Divine and Human Laws: and consequently is the most
Destructive Principle, that can be advanced, to the Good of Society. I have
already proved that there is a Natural Distinction between Actions as to Good
and Evil, that this is plainly discoverable by the Light of Reason, and that
all Nations in all Ages of the World have been sensible of it; and if this be
proved, (as I think it has been) we ought not to desert it, only because we
cannot readily solve all the Difficulties about the Freedom of the Will of Man,
which a Skeptical Man may raise against it; much less ought we to embrace an
Opinion that perfectly Contradicts it; as this of absolute Necessity certainly
does. For if all things and Actions whatever are absolutely Necessary, and
cannot possibly be otherwise than they are; there can be no such thing as Good
or Evil, Right or Wrong, Honorable or Base, etc. And why should any Creatures
trouble themselves about paying any Veneration to the Deity, if that he could
not help making them just such as they are? and if he has absolutely
necessitated them to do just as they do? God has, according to these Horrid
Principles, no Natural Right to any Obedience from us, as a free Agent would,
who had out of his own gracious Goodness bestowed so many Gifts and Mercies
upon us. This Mr. Hobbs well knew, and therefore he tells us, That there is no
Obedience due to God out of Gratitude to him for Creating or Preserving us,
etc. Zeviath. p. 187.
but what we pay him, is founded only in his Irresistible Power.

And so likewise, as to Human Laws and the Good of the Government or
Commonwealth where we are placed. No Man, according to these Abominable Tenets,
has any Obligation upon him to obey Rulers, to be just and honest in his
Dealings, to be loving and merciful, helpful and beneficial to his Neighbors;
but he may Rebel, Murder, Rob, and Oppress, without being Subject to any guilt
at all; and if he can but escape Punishment from the Magistrate he is safe
enough, and has no reason to be disturbed in his own Mind; for he cannot help
any of all this, he is under an absolute necessity of doing what he does, and
no one ought to blame him for it. Indeed, Spinoza says, That the Government
may, if they think fit, put such a Man to Death; but not because he is Guilty
and deserves it, but because he is Mischievous and Dangerous to them, and
therefore is to be feared. And when one wrote to him on this Point, alleging,
that if the Will were not free, All Vice would be excusable; he Answers, Quid
inde Spinoz. Op. Posthum. p. 586
? Nam homines mali non minus timendi sunt, nec minus perniciosi, quando
necessario mali sunt.

By which he plainly allows that all Wickedness is excusable, though it be not
always tolerable, as it is not when it becomes formidable. Fear is that which
according to these Men does every thing in the World, in this Case. A Subject
pays Obedience to the Laws, not because he thinks himself bound in Conscience
so to do, or because it is just and reasonable; but because he is afraid of
Punishment if he do not do it. And the Magistrates Punish an Offender, not
because they think he has committed any Fault, or is Guilty of any Crime
properly speaking; but because They are afraid of Him, and under an
apprehension that he is likely to do them a Mischief. And thus a Man that is
guilty of all manner of Immorality, an Assassinator of Princes, a Firer of
Cities, a Betrayer of his Country, a Poisoner, Coiner, a Common Robber, or the
most flagitious Villain that can be imagined, is as Innocent as a Saint from
any guilt of Sin he has upon him; for he is necessitated to do what he does,
he cannot help it, any more than another Man can, that acts virtuously, as it is
called: and therefore he may and ought to have as much Peace and Satisfaction
in his own Mind, and as much Respect and Honor paid him from others too,
provided they are not afraid of him, as ever any Man had.

But will not such a Principle as this be the most mischievous and dangerous to
Mankind that can possibly be? Does it not open a Door to all the Wickedness
that can possibly enter into the Heart of Man to commit? And consequently ought
not all Governments to be afraid, as they themselves would express it, of Men
that vent such Notions as these, so plainly contradictory to, and inconsistent
with the Good of Human Society?

And as this is a most pernicious, so it is the most Impudent and Daring Opinion
that ever was advanced: for it charges all Mankind in all Ages of the World,
with the most gross and palpable Folly that can be: For, besides that it gives
the Lie to the Experience and certain Knowledge of every Body, as I showed
before; it renders all Laws, and Rules of Action, and all the Sanctions of
them, ridiculous: it makes all Advice and Exhortation useless, and to no
purpose; all Censure, Punishment and Reproof is Unjust and Unreasonable; All
Honors and Rewards it renders Unmerited; And all Knowledge, Wisdom, Care and
Circumspection, become by this means, the most foolish and unaccountable things
in the World; for if all things are governed by Absolute Fatality, any one may
see that all these things signify Nothing at all, but it is plain, the Wisest
Part of the World as they have been justly esteemed, are in reality the
greatest Fools and most stupid Idiots that can be: for they encourage Men to
act well, and discourage them from doing amiss, by Elaborate and Studied
Methods, when after all, it is impossible according to this Notion, that any one
can possibly avoid doing just as he does.

Nor can I see how these wonderful Discoverers themselves, that have thus
luckily found out that all Mankind are mistaken in thinking themselves Free,
when they are not so; I cannot see, I say, how according to their own Notions
they can be acquitted from being as Ignorant and Mistaken, and as arrant Fools
as the rest of Mankind. For why do they write Books, and spin out such
Elaborate Treatises as they fancy they do? and why should they set themselves
up above others, and expect Praise and Glory for their fine Thoughts and
elevated Notions? they cannot sure be so Ignorant as to expect to convince any
Body, or to Proselyte any one over to their Opinion? Can any Man help being of
that Opinion he embraces? if he can, he has free Will, and is not necessitated
to hold what he does hold; which destroys all they are so studiously advancing.
But if he cannot alter his Opinion freely, but is absolutely necessitated to
believe what he does believe; how ridiculous is it to pretend to Dispute or
Argue in such a Case? They will say, no doubt, that they are necessitated to
write, and cannot help it: But if the Government should Plead the same thing,
for Punishing them for so doing; they would, we know, make a large outcry
against Persecution, and the Infringement of that Native Liberty, that every
Man has to enjoy his own Opinion. For these Gentlemen make use of Liberty and
Necessity, according as it best serves their purpose. When they commit
Immoralities and Wicked Actions; they then ought not to be punished either by
God or Man, because they are necessitated to do it, and cannot help it. But if a
Government, judging such Notions destructive to the Good of Human Society, and
contrary to the express Word of God, thinks fit to Prohibit the Propagation of
them, and to Punish the Authors of them: How do these Men then Cry up the
Liberty of Human Nature? then every Man's Opinion ought to be free, no
Compulsion must be used, every Man's Conscience is to be his Guide, and the
like. But how ridiculously Vain is all this, according to these Principles? Is
not the Magistrate as much necessitated to Punish as they are to Offend? and
the Government to make Laws as they are to break them? Oh by no means! They
would be free to Sin and to commit Wickedness, and then necessitated not to be
Punished. They would have Men think them necessitated in all their Actions, so
as to excuse them from blame, and they would have the Magistrate free to
forbear Punishing them, though he think them never so guilty. That is, in short,
they would do what they please, and no one should call them to an Account for
it; they would act like Fools, and yet be thought Wise Men; they would proceed
contrary to Reason, and yet have the Reputation of having Principles, and
pursuing the Dictates of Reason and Truth: And they would build themselves a
Reputation in the World by advancing Paradoxes contrary to the common Sense and
Reason of Mankind: by pretending to a higher pitch of Knowledge than their
Neighbors, and by calling all the rest of the World Fools and Ignorant. In a
word they would say, with those in the Psalmist, We are they that ought to
speak, who is Lord over us. This, I am fully persuaded, is what they aim at in
all their Arguments and Objections against Religion, and particularly in the
bustle that they make about this Point, of the Absolute Necessity of All Events
and Actions. Which how weakly they Prove, and how contradictorily they
Maintain, against the Common Sense and Experience of all Mankind, I think I
have sufficiently shown.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
REmarks upon some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth. By John Harris, M. A. and Fellow of the
Royal-Society. In Octavo.


