AN IMPORTANT QUERY FOR PROTESTANTS VIZ. Can Good come out of Gallilee? Or, Can
A Popish Ruler Propagate the REFORMED RELIGION?

London, Printed for G. L. and J. H. 1688.

AN IMPORTANT QUERY FOR PROTESTANTS: VIZ. Can Good come out of Gallilee? etc.
IF the Huffs and Hot-spurs of this Age and Juncture were only among the
Seculars; 't were hopeful that their respective Regulars might reclaim them;
but if they kindle the fire, who should quench it? A blaze or breaking forth
must be otherwise prevented.

Religion and Reason are, or ought to be, the Guides of mankind; by an Examen
of both, the Question in the Front will be answered.

To Parallel any earthly Monarch with the heavenly King of Kings, is too
heathenish for this part of the World called Christendom: And therefore to
animadvert only upon the blindness of those Zealots for Law and Temple, that
said, Out of Gallilee arises no Prophet; That part of Palestine bordering upon
the Gentiles, and influened by the maritine Traffic of Tire, as also with the
People of those twenty Citys near it, which Solomon gave King Hiram; it is
probable they we more heathenish and averse to the Jewish Religion and way of
Worship, then those of Judea, where Christ was indeed born, viz. in Bethlehem,
but educated in Nazareth, a City in that part of the Country called Gallilee of
the Gentiles, where he did his first miracle, viz. in Cana, turning Water into
Wine; notwithstanding which, the Jews believed him not, though it is said the
Gallileans received Him. Job. 4.45

Now if concession of entire consciencions liberty, viz. without constraint or
restraint, be a Christian Gospel practice, though thereby tares be suffered to
grow with the good seed till the World's end; then, it is to be feared, that
those who decry it, do mistake themselves, and the most true Religion;
themselves, by saying they are inward Jews, and (for want of the heart
Circumcision) are not: and the true Religion, by teaching for doctrine the
Commandments of Men, but dis-allowing the precepts or dictates of Christ to
the conscience, without (but especially against) which, all outward conformity
not being of Faith, is fin.

And to let pass the want of an Example in this kind among all our Protestant
Monarchs, for breaking those yokes of the worst kind, both in later and former
years, since the first Christian Emperor Constantine, it is apparent that this
among us is done by a King of another communion then what is called Reformed,
which makes the greater wonder; and why of Offense, rather then Approbation?

That Saul, when anointed King, should be among the Prephets, and he of the
same name, after his conversion, among the Apostles, though a Persecuter before;
was a sudden and unexpected change; but that meat should come forth from the
Eater, and from the strong sweetness, was a riddle that Israell's oppressors
could never understand, till they plowed with a Heifer which was none of their
own.

That Sion should be in pain like a Woman in travel, go forth of the City (of
visible or outward safety) and dwell in the Field (a state of suffering or
Exposure) and after this go even to Babylon, and there be delivered, yea, there
be redeemed by Almighty God from the hand of her Enemies, all which seems a
great Mystery, but is also as great a Truth: and so it is, that God sometimes
chooses the despised things of this World, and things that are not (at least in
appearance) to brings to naught things that are.

It Is obvious, that many Men are this day out-gone, both in their Faith and
Reason, by a Roman Prince, in granting such entire Christian Liberty, which was
hitherto denied by former Protestant Powers of all sorts; and as it was a
despised incredible notion before, so it is now credible, because a real
practice or performance: Let then the visible established Church, take heed,
she be not brought to naught, by the un-seen Church in Legal establishment,
whether it be on her right or lest hand.

Possibly 'twill be said these are but cloudy Allegorys: Therefore to speak
more plainly, A Popish Ruler promotes the Protestant Reformed Religion, by
granting entire conscientious Liberty; whereas a Protestant Church or Ruler,
denying it, Stops it is growth or progress: For these Reasons,

1. As light spreads it self into a House with windows open, so it enters not
when they are shut, but by un-expected cracks or crevises of wind and weather's
making, like those convictions, which grow upon the World by the storms of
Persecution raised against innocent Sufferers: and Man's spirit being the
candle of the Lord, the siery zeal of pretenders to snuff it by humane
violence, tends rather to dim or extinguish it is light, then clear it; at least
if the rare attainment of perfect love, which casts out all fear, be wanting to
revive the flame: therefore whether a Church of secular power, that quenches
the smoking flax, or a Ruler that cherishes it with reviving encouragement,
till it become a shinign flame, be most agreeable to the Principle and Practice
of the Gallilcan Prophet, is a question soon answered.

2. The Popish Ruler by giving liberty does his part very honorably to make
Religion appear bare-fac't; whereas the Protestant Church or Ruler denying the
like freedom, propagate their Religion not so truly as in dis-guise or
masquerade.

3. A Popish Ruler giving liberty draws to his Religion with the cords of a
Man, but a Protestant Church or Ruler dealing by force of more then persuasion
and example, makes beastly marks or impressions, which are altogether
inferior to the glorious conduct of the Divine Nature, and tending much to
debase the Humane.

4. A Popish Ruler by giving liberty, does actually allow of light, both higher
and lower then his own, among the people under him; the Protestant Ruler
denying it on behalf of a Church that pretends not to infallibility, imposing
his measure of light, it appears but dim, if not darkness, to them who for
ought he knows are more enlightened then himself.

5. A Popish Ruler giving liberty of a public way of Worship not agreeable to
his own, seems to have a love for strangers, if not Enemies to his Religion,
which is his nearest concern; whereas a Protestant Ruler denying it, appears to
hate, or at least dis-countenance his very friends, because not of his own
measure.

6. A Popish Ruler by granting conscientious liberty, promotes that
Gospel-variety which is of the new World, while a Protestant Church or Ruler by
restraint to one measure of light, admits not the growth of all those Plants,
which are of the heavenly Father's planting, because he neither knows nor
understands them: the tree of life bears no less then twelve manner of fruits,
yielding them monthly, and her leaves are for healing of the nations, the
benefit whereof is not tasted either by Men or Christians universally, where
the pail of enclosure is for one sort only.

7. A Popish Ruler giving liberty of conscience, convinces Gainsayers, that
his way is right, leading to the true End of saving Souls, by allowing every
one to search and try what is Truth; whereas a Protestant Church or Rulers
otherwise begets suspicion upon the end, though true, because the way is wrong,
or at least right in their own Eyes only.

It Is said that seven is a perfect number, and though more may be added, yet
let these suffice, at least, for one sheet, to evince the possibility of that
to be a truth which is asserted to be improbable.

And further to be yet more plain. The cry is, Protestant liberty is granted
for a while, only to umbrage the establishing the Popish much longer.

This is Charity of a different kind from that which thinks no evil, but
bears, hopes, believes and indures all things: yet admit this liberty should
prove shorter lived than some that wished it an abortive; it is asked under what
Persons in power had it such an avowed birth even thus long, for some bypast
thousands of years? Must we not revert back to those heathen Monarchs, Cyrus,
Darius and Artaxerxes, for a Precedent, who decreed rebuilding the walls of
City and Temple, thereby promoting a Religion and Worship not their own, and to
which they were Strangers?

But further, is Christ preached out of Envy, and shall they who profess doing
it of good will, be sorry or offended? Will it hot make their mission as
questionable, as that Apostle's was clear, who in that case profess't his
rejoicing?

Are Embessadours true to their Prince, who repine at his budding interest
among a people foreign to his own Dominion? can that light wherein the
Everlasting Gospel of the Kingdom shall be published to all nations, admit such
darkness? or its true effect, viz. love to Enemies, consist with such
dissimulation to very Friends, who are only tolerated to Preach in corners,
without public maintenance; and shall they who have it without grudging, and
in the chief places of concourse, be angry or offended at them? For shame let
them forgive this wrong.

Now if jealousy (which is said to be the rage of a man) should provoke a Ruler
against such as cause his Good to be evil spoken of, at whose door will be laid
the offense? And if some weak Protestants should dis-like the way of
Persecuting or Imposing upon Conscience, so as to question the truth of their
own Religion for their sakes that propagate it, by such wrong means, and
incline to those who do otherwise, how will it be answered by such as lay the
Stumbling Block?

It must be acknowledged that all our outward attempts to force Conscience,
though never so Erroneous, are to be exploded by the very light of Nature, as
well as Grace; not only because it is apt to recoile against that which does not
convince, but also a man's Conscience is not in his power: For though Flesh and
Blood can never inherit God's Kingdom, yet in this case it suffers with such
Innocence as if it were holy, because it is not, nor ought to be, the Souls
leader, but follower; and its true fault (though for suffering wrongfully)
would be to assume the contrary.

And if on these Principles, which are common to those of both Religions, as
well the Protestant as the Papist, this Liberty be granted, is it not a Royal
Favor to be shown without difference or distinction, for Charity it self
begins at home? And therefore if it be extended in other matters to those of
the Kings own Communion, in the first place, 'twould seem ungrateful to regret;
not only because it is below Christians to be much concerned for more then their
proper Interests, viz. Of serving God without the fear of men, but also that it
appears a kind of imposure upon a Supreme Ruler, especially that strains his
Anthority to make all the People under him as free as himself, for any of them
to be un-satisfied, in wanting a share of rule in the things of Men.

If Christ's Kingdom be not of this World, his true Disciples should rather
fear then desire to be great on Earth, that thereby they lose the sense or
sight of his more spiritual Realm or Dominion, which is in Righteousness,
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

The charming Privileges of a private Life both for Soul and Body, do far
transcend the vain shows which may be expected to walk in, by those who are
ignorant of a Public, wherein a seeming Ruler over some few, that bare the
Head and bow the Knee, is (if he does his duty) but a real Servant to all.

And if a man has indeed a measure of that true Wisdom which is from above,
'twill constrain his readiness to say in like case as Daniel did to Belshazer,
on his offer of the scarlet Robe, a Golden Chain, and the third place of
authority in the Kingdom, Let the Kings gifts be to himself, and his rewards
to another.

But further, Are not the Protestant Dissenters the Kings new friends, and of
no other then his own making? Which being so, a peck of Salt, according to the
proverb, is but proper to season the confidence of new Acquaintance: The moral
or application of which in this case may be serious, viz. That if the
Dissenting Protestants do become (as Christ's Disciples) the true Salt of our
English Earth, to season the places where their lot is cast, with such savory
Principles and Practice; of Self-denial, Humility, and Holiness, as by Fearing
God and Honoring the King, the People may be convinced of their Religion and
Loyalty, the impute of Schism and Rebellion will gradually vanish, and make
way for their better acceptance. Mean while, if apprehensions should remain
that the Romish Religion is like to be longer lived in England than a
Protestant Toleration; there is one word more then has been mentioned, tending
to chek all such surmises, even besides all those outward arguments already
published, of Solemn Public Declaration, a great overballance in number;
secular Interest, etc.

And that is, The calling to mind, that the most High God rules, who by means
known and unknown, can turn the point of good or ill upon the Deceiver or
Deceived, since both are his; and thereby cause the living to know that he
alone rules in the Kingdom of men, giving it to whomsoever he will, as best
suits his holy ends and concerns in this lower world, whether they be Recieved
or Rejected by present or future Generations.

Yet more particularly: A Kings Prerogative, as second to that of Christ, is
very strong; and as Solomon says, Two are better then One, and a threefold cord
is not easily broken; for if this work of Christian Liberty be of God (which is
indubitable) as well as the King, the conscientious People of all sorts are a
third and numerous Party concerned in its benefit, who by their Faith and
Prayers will make many an Effort at Heaven-gates, rather then lose their New
obtained Freedom.

The Captive Israelites being once set free by the Decree of Cyrus to re-build
the Temple, tho stopped in their Work by his Successors, yet they went on
without any more license upon Earth, being stirred up to it from Heaven by the
Prophets, tho confirmed afterward by King Darius.

Queen Esther's, addressing (un-call'd) to King Ahasuerus, after solemn Fasting
and Prayer, was against Law.

The three Children's not bowing to Nebuchadnezar's Image, Daniell praying with
his windows open as at other times not withstanding the decreed prohibition:

All these were public breaches and affronts to the Laws of those Kingdoms
respectively, and after the Saints aforementioned had broke those Laws to keep
Gods Law, the Kings being convinced, changed their Decrees contrary to their
respective constitutions, and tho they were heathen, yet they owned the true
God and those that served Him, contrary to their own Laws and Religion.

The Decrees of Heaven are indeed un-changeable, but the Laws of Men are
mutuable like themselves; and those Kings or Rulers who change for the better,
as his interest leads them, who is King of Kings, they will find it their own
interest also, to indulge them who are his free or new born People, in
pursuance of what is promised, that Strangers shall build up their Walls, and
their Kings Minister to them, for that Nation and Kingdom which will not serve
them shall perish. Yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted.

It appears then that the interest of the conscientious People, which is
Liberty, has an ascendent over other Nations no less then that part of their
own which would keep them in bondage, whereof Israells being led by a high hand
out of Egypt to do their Sacrifice to God, and Spoiling the Egyptians who had
detained them some time from it, as they also destroyed the seven Nations in
and near Canaan that resisted them, is a great Example.

Therefore is it the Kings wisdom to suspend the Execution of those Laws, which
in themselves are already void on God's account, who being the supreme
Legislator of Heaven and Earth, ought, as the Apostles said, to be obeyed
rather then Men: For if a Law should be made, that Men must not eat when they
are hungry, not drink when they are thirsty, it is not to be obeyed, because
against nature; so if a Law be made, that Men must not pray, when Gods word
says they should do it always and every where, or if a Law be to forsake
assembling together as the manner of some is, which the Scripture plainly
forbids; such Laws are as much against the Heavenly Divine Nature, as those
aforementioned are against the Humane.

Nor is Gods Law made for the Righteous, but for the Lawless and disobedient,
profane, unholy, etc.

And if there be a People in the Kings Dominions, against whom is no
Condemnation, but are free from the Law of Sin and Death, then surely the Kings
late concession of no New Liberty, but that of Conscience, does import, that
his royal intentions are only to free them from Man's condemnation whom he
thinks God does not condemn, for if our hearts condemn us not, then our
confidence toward God is very alowable, not withstanding all that can be said
by the Men of Judea against those of Gallilee.

Nor is this way of promoting the Protestant Religion, by a Roman Ruler more
decry'd by them that disbelieve it, then the Samaritan party was mistaken, when
they thought that Darius would not favor the Jews, of old by decreeing their
re-building the Temple after they had expressed such confidence to begin a new
to do it against the prohibition of his Predecessors.

Now if God ceases not to raise such unexpected Instruments to carry on his
Work, as are or have been mistrusted to check, or obstruct it; how ill will it
become the Leaders or Fathers of our Reformed (at least so called) Church not
to further and improve this late granted Liberty, since it is their place and
profession to help, not hinder all Male-births of righteousness and holiness
whatsoever.

For God cau change the Heart not only of Prince but People also, and 'twill
reflect much upon us called Protestants, to retain a spirit of Persecution and
aversion to Liberty, when Papists themselves shall renounce the one and embrace
the other.

And if the day be come, or near it, wherein it is promised, That the Egyptians
shall know the Lord, do Sacrifice and Oblation, yea, Vow a Vow unto God and
perform it, then we should be cautious of blasting them, whom God snall bless
with a new Nime and Nature; for if this be the season wherein God himself says,
Bl^ssed be Egypt my People, it is not for us Christians to maintain partition
walls longer 'twixt us and the very Heathen themselves, because they are said
to be Christ's Inheritance, and in Every Nation he that fears God and works
Righteousnes^, is accepted of him, how then can we prosper by rejecting such as
God accepts?

Hence is it therefore that this concession of Entire Liberty made by the King
of Great Britain, tends to his immortal Honor, as he is in this manner, not
only a Prince of a very great People, but as by this action he is become a
Nursing Father, to all, of all sorts under him, in their Religious or Christian
Rights, which are much more dear and near to them, then what is Civil; not but
that their enjoyment of both is their Confidence, because the Greater always
comprehends the Less.

And if this entire Liberty had found its happy birth before the the unhappy
Wars broke forth against King Charles the First, it is very improbable, that
their success had been as it was; much more that our present King James the
Second, had been necessitated to raise new Arms against his Enemies; and indeed
the Blood which has been spilt for more then sorty years past, might have been
prevented.

But blessed be God, that better late then never, we can now bid this new
Pranciple and Practice welcome into the old World, which will cause our Swords
to be turned into Plowshares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks, and will instruct
us of this Nation, yea the Rulers and People of other Nations, as they shall
receive and become subject to it, to learn War no more. For this entire Liberty
has made as entire and complete a conquest which is of Hearts, far exceeding
that of Hands, because as the King has set us free to serve the living God
without the fears of Men, so do we avow our selves bound to the King in
interest and duty by stronger bonds, then Slavish Fear or Imposed Oaths can
oblige.

And our defect of duty to the King, will be now no less to our selves, since
his Government is made thus easy, for as his Throne is clothed with double
Honor, so that part of the people, who by his gracious Indulgence are relieved
from their harrasing Catch-Poles and Persecuting Informers, will be doubly
guilty, if denying Caesar his due, because we are the chief Criminals, if not
giving God his due, since the King is pleased so freely to allow, and encourage
it.

And further if the Kings Heart be in Gods hand to turn as the rivers of Water,
what will they resemble, who would dam or stop his Christian and Royal
Progress, but persons of an Earthy Principle and Practice, for those inferior
ends which are not without regret, to be named among us who are called
Christians?

Nor is it for those, who very sensibly feel the warmth of this late and new
Protection to hesitate the Kings prevailing Persuasion of the National Assembly
(when called) to agree to this so Universal a good for Mankind, by freeing
their better and more noble part from those Imposures, with which the more
degenerous sort of men have attempted to Embondage them.

Now in this procedure, who can say less, than, God Prosper and Save (yea Save
Eternally) the King of Great Britain, who having almost incredibly (till
Royally Performed) thus out done, not only all his Home-born Predecessors, but
his Foreign, Best and Greatest Neighbors, whether they be Crowned Heads or
Free-States: If therefore it shall please God to enrich his Royal Heart with
Grace, so as to go on as he has begun, the potent interests of France and
Spain must soon bow to him, as he becomes more justly Aggrandiz'd with the
titles of most Christian and most Catholic King, not only in Europe, but in
the knows World.

FINIS

