PARISH CHURCHES turned into conventicles, BY Serving God therein, and
worshipping him otherwise then according to the established Liturgy and Practice
of the Church of England.

IN PARTICULAR, By reading the Communion Service, or any part thereof in the
Desk.

OR Plain Reasons and undeniable Authorities alleged for the reading of the
second Service, or the Communion Service, when there is no Communion, at the
Altar, or Holy Table, in an Epistle dedicated to all the Reverend Clergy of the
Church of England who read it in the Desk.

By Richard Heart, a Friend to all the conformable Clergy and Laity of the true
and Apostolical Church of England by Law Established.

(...).

Damascen. LONDON, Printed by Ralph Holt, for Obadiah Blagrave, at the Bear in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

Reverend Fathers.
TO seek out an Excuse of this my Boldness, and to arm the Acknowledgment of a
Fault with the Reasons for it, might better show I knew I did amiss, than any
way diminish the Attempt: therefore I intend to carry no other Olive Branch of
Intercession than a clear manifestation of the Truth of such things wherein I
do humbly conceive you Err, some of you; not wilfully perhaps, yet for want of
a due and serious Consideration of the great Obligation of humane Laws in
things which in their own nature are indifferent. One of which is the place for
reading of the second Service; which place, without all doubt, is a thing in
its own nature indifferent: But when a lawful Authority appoints a certain
place, although in its own nature the place remains still indifferent, yet the
use of that place is not indifferent, but becomes necessary by reason of the
command, to which the necessity of Obedience is inseparably annexed.

If this be a false Position, I have nothing more to say, but if it be true,
then do you err in point of Practice, which is not according to the established
Rule, our Church appointing one certain place, and you reading in another; and
so by this means teaching the People this dangerous Principle, that things
indifferent in their own Nature, remain so as to their use after a lawful
Command, for the doing, or not doing of any such indifferent things, as they
were before such Command or Prohibition. A Principle which undermines the
Foundation of the whole Church; and being once admitted, leaves us naked and
defenseless against all the Weapons that are or may be formed, either by the
Papist or Puritan, against the most glorious Church in the World. And if we,
who prosess our selves to be Sons of the Church of England, should embrace this
mischievous Tenet, our Church will be so much militant againsgt her self, that
her Enemies will in a very short time become Triumphant. They seeing your
practice evidently built upon this sandy Fo^ndation, do on all sides hit us in
the Teeth with these things, and laugh us to scorn.

Why do you charge us with Nonconformity and Disobedience to humane Laws, which
are but things indifferent, notwithstanding the Command. (say they) for do not
most of your Clergy esteem them as such, when they omit what Rite and Ceremony
they please, though never so strictly injoined by the supreme Authority? Do
these things oblige our Consciences, and are theirs only free? If it be so,
then we perceive plainly that the only way to enjoy liberty of Conscience, is
to be a Clergyman of the Church of England.

Now what shall we say to these things? If we deny the matter of Fact, our
Church Enemies charge us with Impudence, if we confess it (as to keep our
selves from lying we are forced to do) then they charge our reverend Clergy
with the same Crimes we usually appropriate to the greatest Phanatick, viz.
Disobedience to the lawful Magistrate, and Nonconformity to the established
Orders of the Church. How to avoid the Horns of this Dilemma, I do sincerely
declare I know not.

I should be very glad if any of you would be pleased to tell me a full Answer
that I may give to these troublesome People, who have gagged me so often with
these things, that I am altogether become dumb, and am ashamed to receive so
many Baffles from those Fools who make a mock of Sin.

I thank God I can defend my self well enough against all the frivolous and
captious Exceptions which have been either made or taken by the Recusant or the
Dissenter against the established Doctrine, Discipline and Worship of the
Church of England; but if they talk to me of any thing that is said or done in
our Churches, which is not warranted by the XXXIX. Articles, by the Book of
Canons, by the Book of Common Prayer, or by the constant universal Practice of
the Catholic Church of Christ; they had as good talk to me of the Roman
Breviary, or the English Directory, and I can as soon justify the saying,
either of them in our Churches, as any thing I have before mentioned.

True it is, that we have a most excellent Liturgy established by the Law of
the Land, but in very many places little or no care had that the Subjects may
have it whole and entire, without mangling and curtailing in such a shameful
manner that by these sacrilegious ways our sacred Book of Common Prayer is
become contemptible, and the People are come to this pass, even downright to
declare their abhorrence of our religious Assemblies; when instead of paying
that solemn Worship to God, which by the Laws of our Nation are devoted to him,
we worship him after our own Imaginations, and hereby offer him the Sacrifice
of Fools, which he will in no wise accept.

Although I could instance in sundry Particulars, yet at this time I shall
only name one, which is reading the Communion Service in the Desk, whereby you
take upon you to break an authorized Order of our Church, and to make a new
one: The appointment of which Order pertains not to private Men (as our
Church says very truly) therefore no Man ought to take in hand, or presume to
appoint or alter any public or common Order in Christ's Church, except he be
lawfully called and authorized thereunto.

Either you believe this to be true or false; if true, then you wilfully and
contemptuously transgress and break a common Order and Discipline whenever
you omit or alter a Rite or Ceremony appointed by the Church, which though in
its self considered, is but a small thing, yet by reason of the Contempt, that
is inseparably annexed to the Offense in a Person knowing, and being verily
persuaded of the Truth hereof, it is no small Offense before God, that is in
plain English, it is a very great Sin.

Now if it should so happen that any of you are of another Persuasion, and so
you are Dissenters in your Judgment, as well as in your Practice, why then did
you subscribe to the second Article mentioned in the XXXVI. Canon, and play
fast and loose with God Almighty, and put Tricks upon your own Mother the
Church of England? Do you think that God will be mocked, or permit his holy
Spouse to be cheated? How can you, or any other be said to use the Form
prescribed in public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and none
other, which you have promised to do by your Subscription, which is a sacred
Tie, and yet immediately after willingly omit, or alter any one Rite or
Ceremony, without a great perfidiousness!

As to the Point of reading the Communion Service when there is no Communion, I
do positively assert, that it is appointed by our Church to be read at the
North side of the Holy Table, and that whosoever reads it at any other place,
breaks the Order of our Church, and if he does it through his private Judgment
willingly and purposely (as he cannot be presumed to do otherwise who is fully
convinced that the Church has so appointed it) he does not only offend against
the common order of the Church, but hurts the Authority of the Magistrate,
and wounds the Consciences of the weak Brethren!

Herein I have two sorts of Persons to deal withal, one plainly confessing,
that 'tis-commanded by the Church, and thereby saving me the trouble of a
Proof, but saying withal that he is at liberty notwithstanding the Command, and
he offers some seeming Reasons for his altering the appointed Place, and says
they are sufficient to justify his Practice both before God and Man, and
whether they be so or no, you will see by and by.

There is another sort of men who knowing not how to justify their present
Practice contrary to a plain Injunction of Authority, are forced to make use of
an Index Expurgatorius, and having thereby in their own Conceit quite expunged
the Rubric as to this Purpose, confidently tell me there is no such Command
when there is no Communion, therefore no disobedience to that Authority which
they own, and are both ready and willing to obey.

To every one of you (dear Sirs) who own the thing which others deny, I must
answer with an ex ore tuo te Judico: for you ingeniously confess that it is
commanded by the Church, and yet at the same time most disingeniously prefer a
corrupt Practice of some ill principled men before your known Duty.

And for this you make several Pleas. First, you say it is the Custom of most
Parish Churches to read the second Service in the Desk: and Custom in the major
part of any Society, has the force of a Law, and a Law which is introduced by
Custom, is as much a Law as any Statute Law of the Land, because a Law does not
recipere magis and minus, and if you do obey that Law which Custom has made
so, you are as much obedient to the Law, as he that obeys an Act of Parliament.
But how weak and insufficient this Plea is, judge you your own selves, when you
have well considered the false Notions of such a Custom, which you too fast do
run away with, not making any distinction between corruptela, and consuetudo,
and little regarding the small force such a Custom (setting aside the
Corruption) has to sway any Man's Judgment who is rightly informed of the truth
of this matter.

Now certainly most true it is, that a constant universal Custom or Practice of
a whole National Church has the force of a Law, and ought without all doubt to
be observed; but then you must take this along with you, provided that no
positive Law of the Kingdom intervene to annul that Custom, Practice, or what
you will call it, otherwise the Rule is false: For to plead Custom against
positive Law, is to plead that which was the Law against that which is the Law;
the sole intent of all positive Laws, being to take away the binding power of
all customary Laws to the contrary, otherwise there would be two Laws in being
at one and the same time, commanding the one contrary to the other, which would
certainly breed that confusion which all positive Laws are designed to prevent.

I Pray Gentlemen be pleased to consider what Mischief you do both to Church
and State, by preferring such a Custom as this before an established Law to the
contrary: Do not you by this means turn our golden Liturgy into a leaden
Directory, and the best of Churches into the worst of Conventicles? You may
laugh as much you please, but this is a great Truth, because it is neither the
Place, nor the Number of Persons meeting together that makes a Conventicle, for
these may be Riots, Routs, or unlawful Assemblies: but that which does
constitute it a Conventicle, and from which it receives its true Denomination,
is the meeting in any Place above such a limited Number, and Serving God
otherwise than according to the established Liturgy and Practice of the Church
of England, which may be done in a Church as well as a Barn, as sad Experience
tells. It is only the Observation, or non-Observation of all the Orders, Rites,
and Ceremonies (and none other) which are appointed in and by the Common Prayer
and Book of Canons, which gives it the Denomination of a Church or Conventicle.
If all the Orders be regularly observed without Addition or Diminution, either
in Matter or Form, it is a true Church, and a right Church: but if any thing be
Said, Sung, or done, in Church, or in private Houses (where there are above
such a Number as the Law appoints) as the public Worship of God, which is not
warranted by the Book of Common Prayer, or by some Law of the supreme Governor
both in Church and State, although hereby it ceases not to be a true Church,
yet it ceases to be a right Church, and commences to be a true Conventicle, for
I know no Medium between a right Church, and a true Conventicle, every Meeting
upon the pretense of the Exercise of Religion; being the one or the other.

And so every Person in Holy Orders that officiates at Divine Service, is
either a thorough Conformist, or a Nonconformist, I know no medium in an
Established Church (as ours is) but if there be, I desire to be informed of
these things, to wit, how many, or how few of the established Prayers may be
said? How many of the Rites and Ceremonies may be used? Which may be omitted,
which altered? Which neither omitted nor altered? And yet the same Person doing
or omitting any of these things, may be, and remain a true Conformist, for if
they be not limited to a certain number, then he that uses only the Lords
Prayer, uses part of the Book of Common Prayer, and the most material part too,
and may as truly be esteemed as true a Conformist as he that uses a great deal
more, and yet falls short of the whole, either as to Matter of Form; for
whosoever he be that alters or diminishes willingly in either, he is so far a
Nonconformist, and how much farther he will proceed, no body knows but himself;
but this we know by common Experience, break Ice in one place, it will crack in
a great many more. He that wilfully breaks the smallest order of the Church, is
flesht for greater matters. How true therefore is that saying, MINIMUM NON EST
NON NEGLIGERE MINIMA? And what a great deal of Mischief in the Church would
this small Sentence prevent, if it were believed and put in Practice? for then
there would not be so many Secundum usum's as there are nowadayes. Heretofore
it was only Secundum usum Sarum, secundum usum Herefordensem, secundum usum
Bangorensem, secundum usum Eboracensem, secundum usum Lincolniensem; these were
all prime Places, Cathedralls all, and yet at the beginning of the Reformation
this was thought to be a great Grievance.

But now every Parish, be it never so inconsiderable, prescribes to a Secundum
usum; secundum Usum this Parish, secundum usum that Parish; and so you may go
on, and name all the Parishes of England as far as the Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, and so many several Churches, so many secundum usum's there are, and yet
the Rule by which they be all to walk, is all one and the same. Now from
henceforth (says the Church of England in her Preface concerning the Service
of the Church) all the whole Realm shall have but one Use, and for this very
purpose was a Liturgy composed to remedy the great Diversities in saying and
singing in Churches, a Remedy very sagely contrived, but to no purpose, because
never put in Practice. So much for that.

The next Plea I have heard some of you make use of, is, that the Bishop of
your Diocese does dispense with your Obedience as to several Rubricks, and in
particular to this, which is a plain Confession that it is enjoined by the
supreme Authority, otherwise, what need is there of a Dispensation? which being
so, what Authority has the Bishop, or all the Bishops together (I say this
with humble Submission to that Holy Order, for which no Man has a greater
Veneration than my self) what Authority, I say, have they to dispense with a
Duty enjoined by Act of Parliament? sure I am, that they may as well Dispense
with the woollen Act, or the Act prohibiting Irish Cattle, as with the Act of
Uniformity. Does not the Book of Common Prayer itself, which is established by
the said Act, restrain all Diocesans from making any order concerning any Doubt
arising about the Use and Practice of any thing in the Book, any order that is
contrary to any thing contained in this Book?

Now from hence I argue, If the Communion Service be not appointed by the
Rubric to be read at the North side of the Table when there is no Communion,
and so the reading it in the Desk be not contrary to any thing contained in the
book, why do you require a needless Dispensation, and if it be contrary how can
be Bishop grant it?

When public Orders and Constitutions have been received, and have taken
place, shall general Obedience thereunto cease to be exacted, in case this or
that private Person led with some probable Conceit, should make open
Declaration that A. B. Bishop of, etc. does dispense with me concerning such a
Rubric? And although it is granted that the Bishop himself is a Person in a
public Charge and Authority, and all Curates are bound to obey him in omnibus
licitis and honestis; yet if the Diocesan should command all under his
Jurisdiction to read the Communion Service in the Desk, the Bishops Mandate
without all doubt must give place to the King's Laws, and in all such Cases the
King must be obeyed, and not the Bishop, because it is neither licitum nor
honestum, to obey any subordinate Power, when the Supreme commands otherwise:
Besides, when public consent of the whole has established any thing, every
Man's Judgment being thereunto compared, is private, howsoever his Calling be
to some kind of public Charge, otherwise there could be no means possible to
attain to any Peace or Quietness either in Church or State, unless the probable
Voice of every entire Society or Body Politic, overruled all private of like
Nature in the same.

And this is our Case exactly; for it is determined by the King with the Consent
of the three Estates, representing the whole Body of the Kingdom, where the
second Service shall be said; and this is not alterable according to our Laws,
but by the same full Authority by which it was enacted; not by any single
Person, if he be a Subject, nor by any one of three Estates, nor by all
together without the King, which is sufficient to overruled the frivolous Plea
of a Dispensation, which can never be defended without overturning the
Government, by altering the Frame and Constitution thereof: to such sad
Exigents are they reduced who undertake to defend what they have not beforehand
well considered of: For who would have imagined, that so small an Omission as
this at first sight seems to be, should swell to such a mountainous Crime as to
equal the Popes Pride in contending with the King for the Supremacy, and by
little and little to subvert his Government: which puts me in mind of a Passage
I have met with in Plutarch, which jumps even with the matter in hand.

Paulus Aemylius, a noble Roman, and one of the Consuls, afterward chosen to
be one of the number of Priests, whom the Romans called Augurs; when he did any
thing belonging to his Office of Priesthood, he did it with great Experience,
Judgment, and Diligence; leaving all other Thoughts, and without omitting any
ancient Ceremony, or adding to any new; contending oftentimes with his
Companions in things which seemed light and of small moment, declaring unto
them that though we do presume the Gods are easy to be pacified, and that they
readily pardon all Scapes and Faults committed by Negligence, yet if it were no
more but for respect of Commonwealths sake, they should not slightly, nor
carelessly dissemble, nor pass over Faults committed in those matters: For no
Man (says he) at the first, that commits any Fault, does alone trouble the
State of the Commonwealth, but withal we must think he leaves the Grounds of
civil Government that is not careful to keep the Institutions of small matters
as well as great. The Inference is obvious, and I must leave it to you to make
the Application. And now I have done with the Plea of a Dispensation.

The next is, that it is very inconvenient for the People, who by reason of the
distance of the Place cannot hear, and so are never the better, they neither
knowing to what they should pronounce their Amen, nor when to say it; to which
I answer experimentally, that though sometimes it may possibly so fall out, by
reason of the low Voice of the Priest; yet the same Mischief attends the Desk
as well as the Table: For if the Minister does not audibly and distinctly read
the Prayers (as in too many places he does not) the People are as little
edified by their being read in the Desk as at the Altar; and if they be audibly
and distinctly read, they may be heard as well at the Table, as in the Desk: So
that the Fault (if any be) is not occasioned by the distance of the Place, so
much as through the indiscretion of the Reader, which he may help himself.

But suppose this Inconvenience were general, and as great as you seem to make
it, yet we cannot suppose that the Governors of our Church should be so
short-Sighted as not to discern it, nor yet so imprudent as not to provide a
Remedy for it: But howsoever, be it never so inconvenient, this may be debated
in a regular way, by those who are authorized thereunto, and the Inconvenience
taken away by those who are vested with a legal Power for that Purpose (if they
think fitting so to have it.) But for any private Parish Curate to take upon
him, not only to Dispute, but to Judge of the Convenience and Inconveniency of a
Law firmly established by the Consent of the whole Nation, and thereupon to
alter the Law after his own Model, is no less a piece of Insolence then to take
upon him to be King, Bishop, and Priest of his own Parish, by imposing his own
Laws upon the People, and cancelling those of his Superiors.

Some of you say that it is very indecent for the Priest to go out of the Desk
up to the Altar in his Surplice, and to come back again with his Surplice still
on, to the Homily or Sermon (which by the way, being part of Administration of
the divine Service, is to be performed with the Surplice on) and to return back
again to read the Prayer for the Church Militant, as they are appointed to do.
In Answer whereunto, although my former Answer to the Plea of Inconvenience
might serve very well, yet by the way I cannot but observe that these very Men,
who have been so Eagle-sighted as to spy out this great Indecency; yet when the
same thing is done at another place, they cannot discern the Indecency: For
when a Child is to be Baptized at the Font, they can go out of the Desk in
their Surplice after the second Lesson, and return to the same place without
any Blushing, as if the going up to the East end of the Church in a Surplice,
were a very unseemly Posture, and yet going down to the West end in the same
Garment, were a very comely Gesture. Risum teneatis?

Have you any more to say in your own defense? I pray let me hear it, that I
may leave no Objection unanswered: For if I cannot Answer all that can be
supposed against my Assertion, I had better say nothing; and if there be the
least color of Reason or Argument on your Behalfs, I am willing to admit it,
and stop my Pen, as soon as you have stopped my Mouth with a convincing Reason.

You say that our Governors connive at the Omission of your Duty, they wink at
your Practice, and take no notice of your doings, the Laws are not executed
upon you, as they are upon other Persons, you hear of no Inditements at the
Assizes or Sessions, no Information in the Crown Office, and this to you is
esteemed a sufficient Warrant for your present Practice, this seems to you a
tacit Declaration, that the supreme Power does not desire his Law should be
obeyed in this particular.

And by reason of this Impunity you fancy that it is his Majesty's Pleasure that
you should take this Liberty against his Laws; and therefore, than I am justly
to be Blamed, who being but a private Person have expressed greater Severity
against you than the Magistrate himself; because I have charged you with the
Guilt of Sin, when the Magistrate does not so much as punish you. Whereas in
truth it is not I that lay any such thing to your Charge, but the Church of
England, whose Words I have only quoted, that the wilful and contemptuous
Transgression, and breaking of a common Order and Discipline (as this is,
whereof we now Treat) is no small Offense before God, as I told you before.

Is not this the full Substance of your Plea? and is not this your Logic? You
are not punished for your Disobedience: Ergo, it is lawful to Disobey. You fancy
it is his Majesty's Pleasure that you should not Obey: Ergo, it is so. His
Majesty's Law is not Executed: Ergo, it is no binding Law. What a many
Nonsequiturs are here? What kind of Syllogism will you make of this? There is
such a Steeple as Tenterden Steeple: Ergo, it is the cause of Goodwin Sands, as
good an Ergo as any of the former.

But I must not let this pass thus. You say it is his Majesty's Pleasure you
should enjoy your Liberty in this Matter; it may be so for ought I know, but if
it should prove otherwise, as it is more than an even lay that it does, then
have you been overbold with his Sacred Majesty, by pretending to be of his
Cabinet Council, which is more than probable that you are not.

We his poor Subjects are satisfied with his known Will and Pleasure, publicly
declared in his Laws, without listening at the Privy Council Door to know what
his secret Will is, before it is his Pleasure to make it known: And as soon as
his Majesty graciously vouchsafes to declare any thing in Opposition to that
which is established by Law, I shall obey it with all Submission and Reverence,
humbly and silently acquiescing in the Determination of his Will and Pleasure,
which to me is, and shall ever be a Law as binding as any Act of Parliament
since the Conquest. In the mean time, if his Majesty has whispered this so
softly, that none could hear it but your selves, blame not me who know nothing
of the matter, and yet notwithstanding have great cause to think that my
Knowledge is not inferior to yours in this Particular.

If his Majesty has communicated his private Will to you, speak it out, and
let us know it; and you silence me for ever: But I pray have a care how you
make it an Argument to justify what you do, by saying that the King takes no
notice of that License you have given your self; and do not persuade your
selves, that it is as good as if you had a License from his Majesty himself for
your unlawful Practice, for so I must make bold to call it until I know further
of this matter.

I see no Proof so much as offered at for his Majesty's Pleasure in this
Affair, except it be the Nonexecution of his Laws, which may be imputed to the
Neglect of his Officers and Ministers in the Discharge of their Duty. But if to
serve your turn you will say it is an Argument of his Will and not of their
Neglect; you must unavoidably serve somebodies Turn besides your own, therefore
you had better let this Argument alone, lest some others take it out of your
Mouths, and make use of it against your selves.

Another pretty sort of Argument others make use of, which though it little
deserves an Answer, yet I shall briefly say something to it, and so finish with
you worthy Gentlemen who confess the Command, and yet practice quite Opposite
to it. You say that the People are not pleased with it, otherwise you would
very willingly go up to the Altar, or Holy Table, but if you should, the People
would go out of the Church, and perhaps come no more. In good time! Must the
Orders of the Church hang upon so slender a Thread, as the liking, or disliking
of an ignorant Multitude? Must the Shepherd go whither the Sheep would have
him, and no further, for fear of displeasing the Sheep? Is the Government of
our Church so precarious? If this be the Case, you may shut up the Church Doors
and write over them DOLENS DICO, GEMENS DENUNTIO, SACERDOTIUM QOUD APUD NOS
INTUS CECIDIT FORISDIU STARE NON POTER IT: CITO ENIM ACTUM ERIT DE ECCLESIA
ANGLICANA.

And now I have something to say to you Reverend Sirs, who say that there is no
Rubric, neither was it ever the Intention of the Church, that there should be
one for the reading the Communion Service at the North side of the Table when
there is no Communion; You cannot see such a Rubric. What? are there no
Rubricks at all to direct the orderly reading of those Prayers and other
Religious Duties which are to be performed when there is no Communion? Do you
never Preach but when there is a Communion? Yes, yes, there is a plain Rubric
for it, Then shall follow the Sermon. You can read that Sirs without a pair of
Spectacles I perceive very well; but kind Sirs, according to your own
Construction of the Rubricks, this is only when there is a Communion: for the
next immediate Rubric is, Then shall the Priest return to the Lord's Table.
Can any one be properly said to return to the Place he was not at before? And
if he was at it before, then there must be a Communion, say you; but if there
be no Communion, and the appointed Rubricks serve only for Communion-time, then
there is no Sermon appointed, say I, so that either you must acknowledge that
all the same Rubricks belong to the Communion Service when there is no
Communion, as well as when there is one, or else what will become of your great
Diana the SERMON: Methinks for the dear sake of that Unum Necessarium, that
Magnum Oportet; you should be more kind to that part of the Liturgy, which
gives the sole Authority to your Sermon. I beseech you (gentle Sirs) deal not
so unworthily with your own Mother, as to wink hard against the Light, and
wilfully not to see your way, when She commands you to go up to the Altar, and
yet to be as quick-sighted as an Eagle when you ascend the Pulpit.

How comes it to pass that you should be blinder than the Presbyterians, for if
you do not see this Rubric of Reading at the North side of the Table when
there is no Communion it is really so, for they spied out this hidden Rubric,
and sain would have been rid of it, it being a great Eyesore to them, and they
would fain have exchanged Conditions with you, that they might have been so
blind as not to have seen it; but since they did too plainly Discern it, no
remedy now but to desire the Bishops at the grand Debate at the Savoy, when our
gracious King was first restored to his Crown, that the Minister be not
required to rehearse any part of the Liturgy at the Communion Table, save only
those parts which properly belong to the Lord's Supper, and that at such time
only when the Holy Supper is Administered. These are the very Words of their
Request, by which it appears so plain that a blind Man may see it, that by the
Rubric before the Communion Office, The Priest standing at the North-side of
the Table shall say, etc. The Presbyterians themselves, who are apt enough to
pick holes in the Churches Orders if they be against their Humor, yet could
not do it here; for they could make no other Construction of it, agreeable
either with Sense or Reason, but this; that at all times when any part of the
Communion Service was to be read, there lay an Obligation upon all Priests, by
Virtue only of that Rubric. And the Priest standing, etc. to read that Part at
the Communion Table, when there was no Communion, or else to what purpose was
this Request of theirs? and why did the Reverend Bishops make such an Answer as
they did?

The Answer is this, That the Minister should not Read the Communion Service at
the Communion Table, is not reasonable to demand, since all the Primitive
Church used it, and if we do not observe that golden Rule of the venerable
Council of Nice, let ancient Costoms prevail till Reason plainly requires the
contrary, we shall give Offense to sober Christians by causeless departure from
Catholic Usage, and a greater Advantage to the Enemies of our Church, than
our Berethren I hope would willingly grant. The Priest standing at the
Communion Table, seems to give us an Invitation to the Holy Sacrament, and
minds us of our Duty, viz. To Receive the Holy Communion, some at least every
Sunday; and though we neglect our Duty, it is fit the Church should keep her
standing.

Observe that, and if you find no reason in what the Reverend Bishops say, use
your Liberty still for a Cloak of Nonconformity, and remember it is but a Cloak,
and such a one, as you had better be stark naked than be covered with.

And now it remains that I should produce some unquestionable Authorities to
back my Reasons, that it may appear to all unbiassed Persons, That the Judgment
of all the great Worthies of our Church, who have either occasionally, or on
set Purpose treated of this matter, is unanimously this.

The Communion Service ought to be read according to the Rule Prescribed in our
Book of Common Prayer, at the North side of the Table, as well when there is no
Communion, as well as when there is one.

I will begin with the most judicious Mr. Hooker, who in his fifth Book, Sect.
30. has these Words.

Some (meaning some parts of our Liturgy) are such, as albeit they serve to
singular good Purpose, even when there is no Communion Administered,
nevertheless being devised at the first for that Purpose, are at the Table of
the Lord for that Cause also commonly Read.

The next Authority is the great Arch Bishop Land, second unto the Reverend
Father Hooker, only in time, who in a Speech in the Star Chamber, to which very
few of you can pretend to be Strangers, says thus.

The Eleventh Innovation is the Reading of the second Service at the Communion
Table or the Altar. To this I can truly say that since my own Memory this was
in use in very many Places, as being most proper: (for those Prayers are then
Read which both precede, and follow the Communion) and by little and little
this ancient Custom was altered, and in those places first where the Emissaries
of this Faction came to Preach. And now if any one in Authority offer to reduce
this ancient Course of the Church, it is by and by called an Innovation.
Secondly, with this the Rubricks of the Common Prayer Book agree; for the first
Rubric after the Communion tells us that upon Holydaies, though there be no
Communion, yet all else that is appointed at the Communion shall be read. Shall
be read? that is true, but where? Why the last Rubric before the Communion
tells us, that the Priest standing at the North side of the Holy Table, shall
say the Lord's Prayer with that which follows. So that not only the Communion,
but the Prayers which accompany the Communion (which are commonly called the
Second Service) are to be read at the Communion Table: Therefore if this be an
Innovation, it is made by the Rubricks, not by the Prelates.

Now let us see what the Right Reverend Bishop of Norwich, Dr. Sparrow, says
to this Matter. In his Rational of the Common Prayer p. 239. thus he says.

Private and solitary Communions of the Priest the Church allows not, and
therefore when other cannot be had, she appoints only so much of the Service as
relates not of necessity to a private Communion, and that to be said at the
Holy Table, and upon good Reason. The Church thereby keeping as it were her
Ground, visibly minding us of what She desires and labors toward our more
frequent Access to that Holy Table. Mark the several Reasons, and weigh the
great Authority of this famous Triumvirate of the Church of England, and then
Read the Second Service hereafter in the Desk if you can.

There be some others of no mean Credit in the Church of England, who have
positively asserted the same thing, viz. Dr. Heylin in his Introduction to Arch
Bishop Laud's Life p. 22. Mr. Elborow in his Exposition of the Book of Common
Prayer p. 98. Hammond le Strange in his Alliance of Divine Offices p. 122, 123.
to which I may add a fourth, which is Dr. Combers in his Companion to the
Altar, the Page I have forgot, though the Matter I very well remember.

Now if after all these Reasons and Authorites there remains any Doubt, as I
believe there may do with those that are resolved to doubt, that they may have
some Color for their restless Opposition to the Churches wholesome
Institutions; I have one thing more to say, which because it has wrought upon
some, and not only Convinced them, but Converted, as obstinate as they seemed
to be, I am in good Hopes it may have the same Operation upon some others. Let
me entreat all you that have any Kindness left for the distressed Church of
England, to cast an impartial Eye upon the Forms of Common Prayer, upon several
Occasions of Fasting and Thanksgiving, set forth by Authority, shall I say,
since the King's happy Restoration, or since the blessed Reformation? Peruse
them all if you please, and you shall find that in none of them all is there a
Communion appointed, nor any appears to be intended: but only so much of the
Communion Service is therein prescribed to be Read as on other Holydays is by
the Common Prayer Book appointed to be Read when there is no Communion, and yet
it is said expressly, The Priest standing at the North side of the Table shall
say, etc.

What more clear than this, to tell us the meaning of the Rubric in the Book
of Common Prayer, unless it be the Practice of the Prime Churches in England,
the King's Chapel, the Cathedrals, the two Universities, and many Orthodox
Parish Churches, to wit, that of Dr. Hicks, that of Dr. Sherlock, that of Dr.
Dove, and if I be not Misinformed that of Mr. Pelling, all Famous, Reverend,
and Worthy Divines within the City of London, and I question not but the pious
Example of such conscientious Men, has had an Influence upon some parts of the
Country, some I am sure I know, and others I have heard of; I pray God increase
their Number, not by confounding the Persons of any who do otherwise, but by
converting their Judgments, and confounding those Devices they make use of to
hinder all manner of Impression that can be made upon them either by Reason or
Authority; the chiefest of which I find to be a Ne videamur semel errasse. A
Principle too bad to be owned, and yet too true to be denied: Recommending you
to God's Grace, I take my Leave of you all, leaving this short saying with you,
Veritas est magna and praevalebit.

Christianus mihi Nomen est, Catholicus Cognomen. R. H.

FINIS.

