Mr. HARTCLIFFE's SERMON, BEFORE The LORD MAYOR, etc.

Ashurst Mayor.
Martis xvii. die Aprilis 1694. Annoque Regis and Reginae Will. and Mariae,
Angl. etc. sexto.

THis Court does desire Mr. Hartcliffe to print his Sermon preached before the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Governors of the several Hospitals of this City, on
Wednesday in Easter-Week last, at the Parish Church of S. Brides.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON Preached before The Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR AND Court of
ALDERMEN, AT St. BRIDE's CHURCH, ON Wednesday in Easter-Week, April 11th. 1694.

BY JOHN HARTCLIFFE, B. D. and Canon of Windsor.

May 1. 1694. Imprimatur, GEO. ROYSE.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce over against St.
Dunstan's Church, Fleetstreet, 1694.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Ashurst, Knight, LORD MAYOR, etc.
My Lord,
A Discourse upon Charity (tho it be much below the Dignity of the Subject)
must be welcome to your Lordship, because this Virtue seems so very agreeable
to your natural Temper, as it appears in your Methods of Governing this great
City, which are like those of Charity in a Religious course of Life, prudent,
steady, just and peaceable. Every good Man, in his Station, is bound to do what
he can toward the Amendment of an Evil Age; but the chief Magistrate of so
famous a City, and the worthy Governors of the Hospitals thereof, are great
and eminent Examples, which must have a stronger Power to persuade others to be
good, than any Arguments besides. Now, for all our Diseases, the most
efficacious Remedy is the Practice of Charity, which is very much in the Power
of Rulers to apply well, and with the most probable Success. Therefore that
your Lordship, together with the liberal and generous Patrons of the Poor in
this place, may be found so doing when our Master shall come to call you to the
Regions of the Blessed, where nothing but perfect Charity and Peace reign for
ever, is the Prayer of

Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant, John Hartcliffe.


JOB, Chap. xxxi, V. xix. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or
any poor without covering, etc.
JOB is the great Example of Charity as well as Patience; from whom the Devil,
neither by his temptations nor torments, could extort one repining word in the
midst of his Sufferings: in his deepest groans and sighs we do not hear one
murmur against the Justice or the Purity of God. What an admirable creature is
the innocent, tho afflicted, Man! whose Hopes are raised above this World, and
who bears his Troubles with so much resignation to the will of God: how often
does Satan call him Coward for this good dispositon, in hopes at least to
provoke him to a raillery against Providence, because he knew he had no other
way to conquer him, but by himself. Notwithstanding, Job remains unblameable,
and unshaken by all his assaults; for he deserves not to win the crown at the
end of the race, who does not earnestly strive for it in the exercise of such
Virtues, as become the good fight of Faith; but above all, he must never suffer
any one to perish for want of Clothing, or to starve for want of Bread.

Which Job says, He never did, because he valued the love of his Brother, and
the Service of God, beyond the profits and sordid interests that Men are apt to
be so fond of: it is true, he gives a sad account of his misfortunes and low
condition, in the foregoing chapter; therefore, left those who heard him should
take what he had said to be an argument of his guilt, he sets down in this
Chapter a full, and a very particular relation of his Integrity, laying the
most secret inclinations of his Soul open before them, together with the
actions of his whole Life.

For his Friends had accused him falsely of several Crimes, and had laid things
to his charge, which he knew not, so that in defense of himself he offers many
pleas, among which none was of more weight than this, that he had all along a
natural compassion from his youth: for he says in the Text, If I have suffered
any to perish for want of clothing, etc. then ver. 22. let that guilty arm fall
off my shoulder, or be broken in two in the midst.

These words do in general set forth the practice of a good Man, in the acts of
Mercy and Righteousness, which do, above all others, declare him a follower of
our Blessed Lord; but chiefly they do imply something concerning the Nature,
Manner and Object of those Acts.

For by not suffering any to perish for want of Clothing, we must suppose the
charitable Man to be ever busy and diligent in contriving how to uphold the
life and well-being of an indigent Creature; not that he is always moved to
relieve another upon the Rhetoric of his cries, or to content his own
commiserating nature; not that he is moved to pity by the sight of every naked
arm or leg in the street, which do often impose upon an easy temper: but he
proportions his gift according to his own Ability and the Merits of the
receiver; for the Needs of persons are different, and their Merits unequal;
therefore the bountiful Man bestows whatever he has within the compass of his
possession or his power, that he may feed the hungry, cloth the naked, visit
the sick, entertain the stranger, ransom the captive, ease the oppressed,
comfort the sorrowful, assist the weak, and advise the ignorant.

How much better and more pleasant is it in this manner to deal out our Riches
and our Bread too, than to indulge a covetous humor, serve a corrupt appetite,
or pamper the belly! The Satisfaction being much more rational and suitable to
the dignity of human Nature, to cover the back of our poor Neighbor, whose
rags are God Almighty's Badge, than to set off our own in the finest dress: it
being not only the Duty of a Christian, but more for his Credit, so to educate
poor Children, that they may become useful Men, that from small beginnings they
may rise to considerable fortunes, than to build stately Houses of Pleasure, or
to spend his Wealth in excesses, curiosities or gamings, which are extravagant,
chargeable and full of hazard: for these unlawful ways do frequently so exhaust
Men's substance, that in the midst of their plenty they are unable to give a
covering to the Poor; but the pious and merciful Man is a good husband, very
frugal, and very laborious, that he may have a sufficient supply for the
purposes of a discreet Charity; which loves to enlarge it self, but then it
must be directed with such Prudence as that the good seed may not be sown at
random, and the birds of prey devour it all; but a proper Soil and a fit Season
must be chosen, that those only may partake of them, who are overwhelmed with
Calamities, and are pinched with real Poverty.

In vulgar practice indeed Men care not much for any acquaintance with the
Needy, and are all for doing kindnesses to them whose fortunes do not require
it, or who can return the same again: but the good Man's behavior is like that
of Job, Prove. 29.11. He delivers the Poor when they cry, and does not grind
their face, nor put them off with frivolous excuses, nor does he say to them
depart in peace, when their Necessities call for a speedy relief; he is ready
to assist the Fatherless and Widow, and cannot be so rigid as to exact the
utmost farthing they ow: thus the good Publican recommended himself to our
Savior by this endearing expression, Luke 19.8, 9. behold Lord, half of my
goods I give to the Poor; hence he was called a Son of Abraham, and Salvation
came to his house, so near to the heart of Religion does Charity dwell; and the
holy Scripture does make it such an essential part thereof, that none can be
esteemed Heirs of Salvation, unless they be well reported of for good works,
have brought up Children, and lodged Strangers, unless they have relieved the
afflicted, and have diligently followed every good deed: which whosoever does,
he is made like unto God (the great Benefactor of the World) in the whole Frame
of his Mind, he lives according to the unchangeable Rules of Truth and
Righteousness; by the constant exercise whereof, we have a Taste of Heavenly
Joys, while we live in this Vale of tears; but if we care not to approve our
selves to God, by doing all the good we can to our Brethren, we are so far
already sunk into the miserable state of Hell.

To prevent this Misery, we must be watchful over our Minds, that they do not
fall into a covetous Humor, which is a stain to the Soul, that can hardly be
got out; for other Vices take us but at some times, and from the lucid
intervals they afford us, we gain some time to think of what we have done, and
heartily to repent of what we have acted amiss; but there are other Sins
without any intermission, and keep us as it were in a continual Fit, such as
Covetousness is, which never allows any space to reflect, but ever presses upon
the Sinner, and leaves no room for a sober or a relenting Thought; for the
Judgments of the Greedy are very grossly perverted, so that they hoard up all,
and will not be prevailed with to part with a Penny or a Coat, when they have
many, because they judge a rich Wardrobe and a full Purse to the best things in
the World, and then they imagine themselves most wise when they are most base.
This is the cause why Covetous Men, while they are so, are incapable of being
truly religious, because they are Idolaters, in worshipping a piece of Clay,
and by not regarding the Distresses of their Brethren, they must needs have
very heathenish or very injurious Notions of God, as if he neglected those, who
stand in most need of his help; whereas the destitute and miserable have a
peculiar relation to him, and he has professed himself, in his word, their
especial Friend and Protector, insomuch that he takes particular care of their
Maintenance, and has commanded us to place, what they receive, to his account:
for God has given us leave to reckon him our Debtor for their sakes, which
Debt he will satisfy with an abundant recompense: but if we stop our Ears to
their most earnest Petitions, or withold our hands from giving them seasonable
Aids, this God looks on as a bold affront to himself and an ungrateful repulse:
for thereby we claim an absolute Property in our goods, which we have not; they
are only different Talents entrusted to our Industry and Management, for which
we shall be summoned to a very just and severe Reckoning, how and in what
degrees we have increased or lessened them.

Seeing then we cannot make out any unquestionable Title to the least mite, all
that we have above what will supply our personal Necessities, or answer those
of our Families and Offices, in which we are concerned, must belong to the
Poor, that Corn is theirs which is kept in the Granary, and that Apparel which
is locked up in the Press, that Meat and Drink which the Luxurious consume in
waste is their Due, and that Money also which is barred up in the Chest: all
this the Liberal Man knows very well, so that he believes a Plenty of all
things for no other reason desirable, but as they afford Means to help the
Poor and Needy; so that Mankind seem to be distinguished into higher and lower
Ranks by divine Wisdom and Providence, in order to the exercise of an universal
Charity.

Such a Charity, I mean, as St. Paul describes in one of his Epistles, to be
never hasty in returning any Wrong that it has suffered, but is always willing
to hearken to any fair terms of Agreement. Such a Charity as sweetens Men's
Spirits, and from being rough or sour, makes them kind and affable to the
meanest People, ready to oblige every one with a gentle and humble compliance.
Such a Charity as envies no Man, but is pleased at the Prosperity of others, is
made better by their Health, and rejoices at seeing them cheerful. Such a
Charity as never domineers, but scorns that usual Insolence which is the spring
of many Disorders, and of much contempt of the Poor. Such a Charity as does
never demean it self haughtily or with reproach either in Words or Gestures,
but calmly debates all Matters, that it may not behave it self unseemly. Such a
Charity as is not of a narrow of stingy Spirit, when Men care for none but
themselves, and regard not how their Neighbors fare, so they live at ease; but
it teaches us to lend, not hoping to receive again, to succor those that
cannot repay the Courtesy, and will not suffer us to pass by any fair occasion
of doing a public good. Such a Charity as will not let us be carried down by
the stream of impetuous Passions, when we do we know not what, and beg pardon
for it after it is done, but it keeps all the Affections under Government, that
the Mind may not do any thing unadvisedly or foolishly. Such a Charity as
interprets all the Actions of other Men in the best and fairest Sense, never
suspecting any to be worse than their Deeds declare. Such a Charity as feels a
sympathetick Grief for the Afflictions that do at any time befall others, and
cannot rest till it has wrought their Deliverance. Such a Charity as will
always find some Quality or other to praise in Men, and, as much as may be,
will conceal their Faults, never despairing of the worst of Men, but hopes
still that they may amend and grow wiser. In fine, Such a Charity as thinks
nothing too great to undertake or too hard to undergo for the good of Mankind.

Now if this kind of Charity did but get ground in the World, it would very
much better the Condition and the Manners of it.

I. It would better its Condition; of which the Hospitals of this great City
are a convincing Proof, in two of which we find Medicines for the maimed Body;
but I am sorry that we do not find a Revenue equal to their Charge; which
should be a motive to every good Man to help the present Governors in bearing
the Burden, which this last year has been very heavy, from the Crowds of Sick
and Wounded Persons that press in upon them.

In another we have proper Antidotes for the distempered Mind; and what a
wonderful Charity is this, that can repair the breaches of a broken
Understanding, can reduce its scattered Thoughts to their own place, make a
decayed Sense whole and entire again. What pity it is, what loss to the
miserable part of Men, if this Charity should stand still for want of a
sufficient Income; toward which we should the rather contribute, because they
cannot ask for it themselves.

In another we find Instruction for Poor Children in all such useful Arts as
may have the best Influence upon the future Government of their Lives: for in
this House of Charity Children are brought to Learning by such gentle ways, as
are most suitable to human Nature, and here also we have no striving, but
between Faith and Good Works, which shall go beyond or exceed the other.

In another we have a present Cure for loose and incorrigible Offenders; for
tho Whips are not the Cords of a Man, yet they may serve to drive those to
Virtue, that will not be led by an easier Discipline.

All which Blessings are conveyed to the distressed Sufferers by the hands of
liberal, just and faithful Stewards: what happy Foundations are these, and how
beneficial to our Country, in comparison with the old Monasteries, that were
the Seats of Idleness and Superstition! but the Founders of these well-directed
Charities (since the Reformation) we may emphatically call the Pillars of the
Earth, which would crack about our Ears, and sink under the weight of the
unmerciful and cruel Man, if the charitable and beneficent did not put in their
Shoulders to uphold it. For Charity is the cause why the World does not break
loose, and that human Societies do not disband and run into confusion; which
never could be prevented (as Cardan thought) by one ambitious Man opposing
another, and checking him in his Designs, nor by one Knave discovering another,
nor by one cruel Man keeping another in aw. The Politician perhaps may think,
that the present state of things is kept up by his Art of Government; but this
is no more so, than the Building is upheld by the Antic Figure on the outside,
which seems indeed to bend under the load, when it contributes nothing to its
real Strength and Support.

The Wise, the Noble, and the Strong do not this business, but the weak things
of the World, the righteous and holy Men of every Nation, are the only
sufficient Props of this great Fabric. Wicked and Uncharitable Men, be they
never so great or high, are so far from promoting the civil Happiness of
Nations, or the continuance of things in Peace, that they are ever soliciting
the Judgments of God by the abuse of his Gifts, and provoking his Vengeance
against the Earth. Thus the corrupt and vicious Conversation of the Inhabitants
of Sodom, was the Vapor that ascended up to Heaven, and gathered into a Cloud
of Wrath, and did for a long time threaten that and other Cities; righteous Lot
only bore off the stroke, and hindered this Cloud from breaking upon them, and
when he was removed, they fell into desolation, as in a Moment.

But pious and bountiful Persons do secure the Constitution of the World, they
render both themselves and others more safe and happy. Thus the Lord was with
Jacob, and prospered Laban for his sake; he was with Joseph, and blessed the
Aegyptian's house for his sake: for the Places where they are, and the Persons
with whom they live, thrive by having their Company; they enjoy several
Blessings, and are freed from many Evils, for the sake of their Neighborhood;
for the Wiseman assures us, Prove. 5.33. that the Lord protecteth the habitation
of the Righteous, and the Royal Psalmist says, Psalm. 91.10. There shall no evil
befall him, nor any plague come nigh his dwelling. For every Man who lives to
the benefit and use of others, is profitable to the World, and does much
advance the happy state of it, by the good Offices he is always ready to
perform. Is any body in want? the compassionate Man is prepared to supply his
Wants. Does his very Enemy hunger? the true Christian will feed him, and not
give him Stones for Bread. Is any one overtaken with Misery and Trouble? He
does not only pity, but will come and succor him; like the Levite in the
Parable, he does not pass by the lame and wounded, but pouring in Wine and Oil,
he binds up his Wounds, and takes care of them; nay, he loves Peace so well
among all People, that he will interpose and use his utmost pains to reconcile
those who are at variance, and is, upon fit occasions, inclined to help all
Persons in distress.

Now is not the World the better and easier place to live in for such Men as
these are; considering the uncertainty of all things in it, and the sudden
turnings of that Wheel that carries them about; it may be every Man's case,
even of the most prosperous, to meet at some time or other with Want and
Affliction. Is it not well that there are some who will take pity on their
Misfortunes, and provide for them in the worst Circumstances; and if a
charitable Man be in a more public Capacity or Station, the Effects likewise
of his Bounty are of a more public advantage and extent.

II. So that, Secondly, A Thorough-Reformation of ill Manners must be expected
only from them who make others better, 1. By their Counsel. 2. by their Example.


For the Lips of bountiful and good Men preserve Knowledge; they are ever
instructing their Brethren in the most proper ways of doing good, and are the
Lights of the World, that enlighten the dark corners of it: they are
continually distilling wholesome Advices, which, however at first they may
appear grievous, will insinuate by degrees, and get possession of the
understanding: tho the World is so humoursome and fantastical a thing, that it
will hardly endure to be made better; yet their Admonitions have in them a
great Power of persuasion, and their Examples do strongly move their
Neighbors, to act as they do: for they are every day stirring up those, with
whom they converse, to a serious consideration of God's Goodness, how
plentifully he sends his Rain and Sunshine upon the good and bad; they never
cease putting Men upon the improvement of their time, in the best manner and to
their greatest Advantage, always exciting them to the Love of God and of their
Brethren: they take likewise all convenient opportunities to reprove the
Ungodliness of Men, chiefly their not remembering the Poor and Needy. And it is
not to be conceived how much Good is done in the World this way, and how much
Credit is brought to Religion by this course of Life.

To which if we add their Example, it must be of mighty force to amend a
degenerate Age; for it is a greater Encouragement to go before a Man, and show
him they way, than only to give him direction. It Is true Religion is more
refined and lovely in the Notion, than it is in him who professes it. In the
Definition it is pure and has nothing of Allay, but in the Person it is
attended with Mixture and Imperfection; yet Virtue is more lively in the
Person, has more taking Charms and Allurements, when we behold its Shape in
the Actions of Bounty and Goodness: and although Religion may be represented with
more beautiful Colors in a Discourse, yet Example satisfies us, that there is
nothing in it but what is practicable; for Holiness would seem an impossible
thing and not to be obtained, were it not made familiar to us, and easy for
our imitation, in the Behavior of Charitable Men; did it not shine forth with
the brightest Luster in all their Doings; who, by Counsel and Instruction,
point out the right Path of Salvation; but in their Example, they take us by
the hand and lead us into that way.

It is incredible, of what moment a few good Examples may be to reform an evil
Age; especially if their Stations make them any ways subject to the Notice of
others: for a Man of severe Innocence and Justice, of an inflexible and strict
Integrity, is like so much Salt cast into the World, to preserve the Manners of
Men from that Filth and Putrefaction, which is contracted by vicious Habits.
One of a sweet and humble Temper does make the Conversation of his Neighbors
to be so too: a Man of a moderate and peaceable Spirit, is like so much Balm,
to heal Differences, and to assuage the Violence of irregular Passions; one of
sincere Piety and lively Devotion, may be compared to so much Fire sent down
from Heaven to kindle in others warm Affections for the Service of God, and the
Love of their Brethren: a Man of eminent Sanctity does discountenance the
Wickedness of other Men: one of a prudent and grave Behavior, does restrain
their Vanity and Folly.

In this manner both the Continuance and Reformation of the World must be
ascribed to charitable and virtuous Persons; for they make all others as happy
as they can by advising them to be better, and by keeping them from growing
worse; besides, God does so love Holiness, Justice and Mercy, that he will not
only reward those who practice them in their own Persons, but all, that have
any relation to them, shall be the better. Thus the Faith of Abraham, and the
Sincerity of David, had an Influence upon Israel for many Generations. Thus
Nations and Cities have owed their Safety and Success to the Prayers of such
Holy and Pious Men as can prevail with God, because they are offered to him in
conjunction with their Alms.

Now the best Arguments for our giving of Alms, are, That it is the only Course
we can take, First, To be like our Blessed Savior, Secondly, To do Services
acceptable to God, Thirdly, To save our Souls for ever.


First, We are hereby made Like our Blessed Savior; who went about doing Good;
by which Method he spread the Fame of his Gospel, and made it appear lovely in
the Eyes of all Beholders; for whenever he intended to convert any to his
Faith, he did it by some visible good Works, in the sight of the Multitude; but
he never gained any Disciple by the Conflicts he was pleased to undergo in his
own Mind; for he performed his Fast and his Agony alone, in the Wilderness and
in the Garden. Hence it is, that our Lord commands his Disciples not to believe
him, but the Works that he did; because he thought in the most honorable
Labor to study the Benefit of Mankind, to help their Infirmities, to supply
their Wants, to ease their Burdens. And thus the whole Doctrine of Future
Happiness was introduced by feeding the Hungry, by curing the Lame, and by
opening the Eyes of the Blind.

Let this Mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus. We must then be intent, as
he was, upon the constant Exercise of virtuous and good Actions; for we have an
exact Rule of Life set before our Eyes, that does enjoin us such Duties of
Piety, as will procure the Love and Favor of God; such Practices of Bounty and
Good Will as will govern well our Behavior to our Brethren; and such excellent
Precepts, as will produce, if we obey them, our utmost Content and Happiness.

Thus, in the Life of Christ, God has showed thee (O Man) what is good; and
what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do justly, to love Mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God. So that were we to contrive a way to make our
selves happy, we should fix upon just such Laws as these are, they are so
agreeable to the Composition of our Natures, they require us to perform Duties
so plainly necessary and beneficial to Mankind, so delightful also to our
selves, because therein we follow our Natures, and do gratify the most
importunate Dictates of our own Reason.

Therefore the Principles upon which our Savior obliges us to act, are Love,
Reverence and Gratitude to God, hearty Good Will toward Men, and a sober
regard to our own true Welfare; the Ends of our Doings, which he prescribes,
are God's Honor, Public Edification, and the Salvation of our own Souls; so
that his Conversation, upon Earth, which we are bound to follow, had not one
Spot, nor Blemish in it; there was not one false or uneven Stroke in all this
fair Copy, that we might be secure from doing amiss in transcribing any part of
it; for it was intended to guide us through all the manifold Instances of our
Duty; chiefly those that are most spiritual, and consequently difficult to our
frail Constitutions, general Charity, self denying Humility, and invincible
Patience: which when received into the Temper of our Minds, will render us
truly wise, holy and good. For Christ Jesus, as he is a Mediator with God on
our behalf, so he is a Principle of Divine Life in us; and his Religion does
not that which is permanent and lasting, if it do not obtain this effect upon
us, of reconciling our Minds to his; nay it is but an imaginary thing, if we
have not implanted in us by his Spirit, a pure Heart, a right Mind, clean
Affections, an obedient Will, and a Sound Understanding: Which is effected, if
we order the Actions of Reason and Liberty by the set Rules of a Righteous and
Holy Life. For then we shall walk, as Intelligent Agents should do, who are
baptized into a noble, free and divine Spirit; which Spirit will give us that
Wisdom which, is from above, and is said to be first pure, then peaceable, full
of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, without Hypocrisy; the Planting
whereof in our Souls is that which the Scripture calls the new Creature, and
the being made after the Image of God: to which we may subjoin, That our
Savior pronounces Charity out of a pure Heart, to be the Root of all Moral
Duties, and to be the fulfilling of the Law; which he prefers above the highest
and most mysterious Schemes of Opinion, when he asserts it to be the perpetual
Quality of good Men in the other World, and the distinguishing Mark of his
Disciples in this.

For Secondly, It recommends Men to the Love of God, by Doing such Services as
are most acceptable to him, who has said, that he is better pleased with Mercy
than Sacrifice, that is, all Ritual Duties, such as Sacrifices were, must give
place to Moral, as being most valued by God. Now, Moral Duties may be reduced
to two Heads, the Love of God, and of our Neighbor; these are commanded for
their intrinsic Excellency and Worth, but the Ritual are good only in respect
to these; for to things that are substantially good, we have the first and
highest Obligation, and among these the chiefest is to do good to Men, to
assist them in their Miseries, and as much as we can, to reclaim them from the
Error of their Ways.

These Duties lie at the bottom of all Religion, are woven into the Essence of
it, and do naturally bind us without any particular Revelation from God; for
all Revelation from him supposes us to be Men, and considers the Relation we
bear to each other; therefore when Christ was asked, what was the first and
great Commandment of the Law? he answers, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart and with all thy might, and thy Neighbor as thy self, which he
calls the second and like unto it. Without doubt the Jews expected he should
have pitched upon Sacrifices, or Circumcision, or the Sabbath: but he overlooks
them all, and urges these only as the great Duties of the Law, upon which that
and the Prophets did depend. Whereas the Ceremonial Law of the Jews was to pass
away, and did so not long after; but the Laws of Righteousness was to be
unchangeable, and consisted in the Observation of such things which the Scribes
and Pharisees did most of all neglect; they were lavish and profuse in their
Offerings, that they might be excused, or winked at for the Duties of Charity
and Beneficence; they would bribe the Almighty, with the richest of their
Goods, and the fattest of their Cattle, to purchase a dispensation for their
Vices, and an Indulgence for their Lusts; they would honor and praise him,
spare for no Charges in his Worship, if he would not be angry for their
Injustice, Cruelty and Unmercifulness; they were punctual People in tithing
Mint and Cummin, but they were unnatural to their Parents, and would pretend,
that their Estates were dedicated to a Religious use, when they should have
relieved them.

But our Righteousness must exceed theirs, or we shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; that is, we must rely upon the weightier things of the Law,
Mercy and Judgment; for when these are omitted, all other positive parts of
Religion are so far from being well received, that they are cast off with
Disdain. To what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices, says the Lord,
in the first of Isaiah, I am full of the burnt-offerings of Rams, and the fat
of fed beasts; the reason of which cost was to atone for their defects in the
fundamental Duties of Religion; and so it follows, Your hands are full of
blood, wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well.

There was no other Incense, that could be of a Sweet Smelling Savor unto God,
but their seeking Judgment and helping the Oppressed, their judging the
Fatherless and pleading for the Widow: For this Cause it is the great design of
Christianity, to reinforce these natural Duties, and to bring Men to a
conscientious use of them: so that our Savior begins his first Sermons with
Promises of Blessedness to the Lovers of Mercy and Peace, and tells us, that he
was not come to destroy, but to perfect them; and for this purpose was the
glorious appearance of the Great God in our Flesh, that He might purify to
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works; for pure Religion is this, to
visit the Fatherless and Widow in their affiction, and to keep our selves
unspotted from the World.

By which course, Thirdly, We shall save our Souls for ever; because, of all
the Works that Christians do, these alone of Charity and Mercy have the
peculair Privilege of being brought into remembrance before God at the Day of
Judgment: to the Doers of them he says, Matt. 25. Come ye Blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World; for I
was an hungry and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink, I was a
stranger and ye took me in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye visited
me, I was in prison and ye came unto me, etc. forasmuch as you have done thus
to the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. For this reason
Cornelius his Prayers were remembered and received by God, as Pledges of his
Faithfulness and Love to him, because his Devotion and Fear of God were
accompanied with giving much Alms; his Religion was not a pretense to delude
the People, but it was Truth and Righteousness. For our Judge, at the last
Trial of our Actions, will look into the Almsdeeds that we have done, and if he
can hear any Prayers of the Poor on our behalf, he will bestow his Reward
according to the Fervency of those Desires: not that there is or can be any
Merit in these Works, as the Factors of Rome would insinuate; but God has
promised to make an exchange of everlasting Joys for them out of his mere
Goodness and Mercy: upon this account St. Paul exhorts Timothy, that he advise
the Faithful to be rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation for the time
to come, that they may lay bold on Eternal Life.

For God has been very bountiful to us all, he has given Plenty to some, a
comfortable and convenient Maintenance to the lowest Orders of Men; but all are
Tenants at will, therefore it is very reasonable, that we should pay back a
Rent of what we possess by his free and voluntary Donation. Now the Receivers
of this Rent are the Poor and Needy; for our Judge will declare, at the day of
our Account, that what was done unto them was done unto him; and he tells us
likewise, That in the last hour, many will say unto him, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils? But then will he
profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye Workers of Iniquity.

For all the best of us can look for at the hands of God is nothing but Mercy;
how then can they expect Salvation, that do not any Works of Mercy! Do they
believe the Judge of the World will change the Form of his Sentence for their
sakes! They may as well think that the nature of things may be changed at
Pleasure; for as the Gospel makes the Practice of Religion the only way to
Heaven, so the nature of the thing does make it a necessary Condition for our
Happiness, because our Happiness must be placed in the enjoyment of God: now,
it is impossible that any should have Communion one with another, that are not
of a Temper; therefore it is necessary that Men should be like unto God, if
they would see his Face. Now, nothing can make them like unto God, but the
Practice of Holiness and Charity. Men deceive their own Souls, who imagine they
shall inherit Eternal Life upon any other Terms.

Wherefore if ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them; and the putting
in use the Active Virtues of Religion, is the best way to come to a true
knowledge of it, as the Practice of Trade will give a Man a better Skill in it,
than the Reading all the Books that ever were written about it; so one shall
sooner understand a Country by traveling therein, than by poring upon all the
Mapps, that ever were made of it: For doing the will of God does free our Minds
from Prejudice, makes our Understandings more clear, and so takes away the
great Obstacles of Sound Knowledge; whereby we shall gain a truer Notion of
Christianity, than by any Speculations whatsoever; which when Men have
followed, and have left the Exercise of Virtue, it is too apparent, that
Christianity has prodigiously decayed. For this Disease, the most efficacious
Remedy that we of our selves can use, is not so much the sublime and notional
part of Divinity, as the natural and practicable Doctrines. Although some Men have
thought, in a gross time, the profoundest Mysteries of Religion to be proper
for purifying the Spirits of Men; yet a subtle and nice Age of Disputers for
matters of Opinion, must have other Applications; they must be told, that God
did not reveal his Will to teach us the Arts of Arguing, or to perplex us with
more Skepticism, but to make us more holy, just, and good; not to busy our
Heads in spinning our curious Idea's of Virtue, but to form and govern our
Lives.

Next to the Succor of Divine Power, this is the most likely way to preserve
the Christian Faith among us; the rare Effects whereof we see and admire in
your public Works of Charity, than which neither the ancient nor present World
have shown a nobler Sight: for you do in the most ample manner cloth the
Naked, feed the Hungry, heal the Sick, and provide for the Destitute. If it
were esteemed a great piece of Bravery among the Romans, that they were
delighted in beholding their Slaves and their Captives murder one another; it
is much more so to cherish the meanest Servant, and to let the Prisoner go
free: for it is the peculiar Character of the true Christianity, that it does
not only save the sincere Professors thereof, but renders them more
tenderhearted and kind; our Lord employing no other Forces against the most
contumacious, than Love and Forgiveness, which are impossible to be resisted;
because he that contends against his Adversaries with these Weapons, has not
only his own Virtues but theirs on his side.

What room can there be for low and little things in Minds so usefully
employed? What ambitious Disquiets can trouble those, who have so much Glory
before them, as to view such a number of Children, whose Food and Raiment
(under God) are the daily Works of their hands, by whose Watering these tender
Plants take root in the World, do often grow up to such a Height, and spread
their Branches so wide, that they who first planted them have found Comfort and
Shelter under their Shadow. What Melancholy Passions can overshadow those
Hearts, who have the Blessings of the Poor every day in their Ears? What Anger,
Envy, Hatred, or Revenge can torment those Breasts, whose Thoughts are always
busied about the Ends of Charity? to whom the return of every Year does suggest
a Circle of Charitable Deeds.

Certainly this should, above all other Expedients, bring us to that which all
Parties agree to be our true and common Interest, an Union of Minds, and
extinguish all manner of Differences; whilst every one pursues those Heavenly
Doctrines of Love and Liberality, Mutual Kindness and Friendship; by which the
Eternal Condition of Men is not only in a great Measure secured, but their
natural Reason, and their Temporal Safety are much advanced. It has been
observed, that there is scarce any Language in the World which can properly
signify one English Expression, and that is, Goodnature; and we may say, that
no other Nation can make so considerable a Figure in in the World, if we would
exert this Goodnature in all the Acts of a pious and charitable Life, instead
of being divided about such things, as neither promote true Piety or good
Manners.

For that very Trade, for which this Island is so well situated, in the Nature
of the thing, and in the visible Effects thereof, does not only enlarge the
Minds of Men, as well as their Fortunes, but it makes all Mankind to be of one
Body, by mutual Intercourse to serve the Occasions and supply the Needs of one
another; so that every days Business does insensibly carry you into the use of
one of the highest Graces of Religion: which by continual Practice will take
root more and more in the Heart, and bring forth Fruits of good Works in our
Lives; so that our Faith will not be a barren Notion only in our Heads,
productive of nothing but Leaves of Opinion, but it will employ our Hearts in
Meditation, our Knees in Devotion, our Hands in Distribution and Beneficence.
And this we must observe, that the Constitution of a Country is the same with
the Persons who compose it; so that if they follow Peace and Charity, it will
be made visible by the constant and undisturbed Happiness of the Government to
which they belong.

Therefore when the Gentiles, in Tertullian's time, upbraided the Christians,
that they made choice of a cheap Religion, and bought up no Gums nor Spices,
that used to be spent in the Service of the Gods, and by this means the
Emperor's Customs were also diminished: he makes this Answer, We Christians
spend more in Relief of the Poor, than you Gentiles do upon your Gods, and tho
we use no Gums nor Spices for Incense; yet we do as much promote Trade, by the
vast Proportions of those Commodities we spend in the embalming our Dead; and
if it should happen that the Emperor's Exchequer should lose any thing either
by the Temperance of our Lives, or the Nature of our Religion, we make it up
another way, by paying him his just Dues, which you cheat him of more, than
your Expenses exceed ours.

Like these Heathens, a strange sort of Christians have sprung up, who set up a
Market not only for Gums and Spices, but for Shrines, Images, Lamps,
Holy Water, Agnus Dei's, Beads, Relics, Pardons, Masses and Soul-obits; a
long Inventory of Superstition, which they take into the Service of God, in the
room of Justice, Righteousness and Truth. But now we are delivered from that
Worship, which we may call the Imposture of Priests under the Name of
Christianity; methinks such a time as this should serve admirably well to
revive the Primitive Religion of Christ, and the Charity too of those days;
should moreover breed a generous as well as valiant Spirit in all the People of
the Land. In both these Virtues we hope every day to behold a considerable
Progress, by the powerful influence of a Royal Example. And whatever is to be
added in this, or any such way of Happiness, we are to expect from the many
pious and well-disposed Persons of the Age; chiefly from the worthy Governors
of the City-Hospitals, who are the known Patrons of those that have no Friends,
the helpless Orphan, and the solitary Widow.

For you must give me leave to say, that, to your fatigable Pains and vast
Expenses in the works of Charity, your Country ows much of its Ornament and
Reputation: and at the end of this Life, with what Contentment will the
charitable Man look back upon the good he has done? With what Confidence and
Joy will he look forward to the other World, where he has provided for himself
those Bags that never wax old; such as the Word of God has declared to be his
Treasures in Heaven, which neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, nor Thief break
through and steal.

To these Places of Everlasting Charity and Peace, God in his infinite Mercy
bring us all; to whom be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Praise and
Glory, now and for evermore.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Treatise of Moral and Intellectual Virtues: wherein their Nature is fully
explained, and their Usefulness proved, as being the best Rules of Life, and
the Causes of their Decay are enquired into: concluding with such Arguments as
tend to revive the Practice of them, with a Preface, showing the Vanity and
Deceitfulness of Vice. By John Hartcliffe, B. D. Canon of Windsor.

The Whole Duty of Man, according to the Law of Nature. By that famous Civilian
Sam, Puffendorf, Professor of the Law of Nature and Nations, in the University
of Heidelberg, and in the Caroline University, afterward Counselor and
Historiographer to the K. of Sweden, and to his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburg. Now made English. Printed for Chapter Harper, at the Flower-de-luce,
over against S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet.


