Levamen Infirmi: Or, Cordial Counsel to the Sick and Diseased* CONTAINING I.
Advice concerning Physic, and what a ^hysician ought to be; with an Account of
the Author's Remedies, and how to take them. II. Concerning Melancholy,
Frenzy, and Madness; in which, among^t other things, is showed, how far they
differ from a Conscience oppressed with the Sense of Sin, and likewise how ^hey
differ among themselves. III. A Miscellany of Pious Discourses, concerning the
Attributes of God; with Ejaculations and Prayers, according to Scripture Rule*
Likewise an Account of many things which have happened since the Creation.
To which are added Several Predictions of what may happen to the End of the
World*

The whole b^ing enriched with Phys^^al, Pious, Moral and Historical
Observation^, delightful ^o read, and necessary ^o know.

By D. IRISH, Practitioner in Physic and Surgery* now Dwelling at Stoke, near
Guilford in Surry, where he is ready to Serve any Person, to the utmost of his
Skill.

LONDON, Printed for the Author: And are to be Sold by Isaac Walker, Bookseller
in Guilford, 1700.

To the Worshipful and much Esteemed Mr. Robert Berry, Mayor of the Ancient
Corporation of Guilford in Surry* And to all my Loving Neighbors and Friends.
Worthy Friends,
THat I might pay a more than Momentary acknowledgment for the many Tes^^^^^ies
of Love and Honor I have daily received at your hands ever since Providence
brought me amongst You, I humbly lay at your feet this little Book: And since
Friendship is best preserved and cultivated by mutual Obligations, I will
(which indeed is all I can do on my part) in Return of Your many good Offices*
when ever any of You, or your Friends, are pleased to call for my Assistance,
make it my sole care and design to Administer proper Medicines, as the Patients
necessity shall require.

Another Reason of my Dedication, arises from the knowledge I have of Your Zeal
^or Godliness, and the Propagation of the true Religion, to which I hope this
my little Book will in some measure Contribute. I need no^ stimulate You to the
encouraging of Virtue, and curbing of Vice, since I know that You, according to
the Power God has invested You with, will take care to punish Iniquity, and
maintain the Purity of the Christian Religion, which has suffered so long by
the Remisness of many of its Professors, insomuch that Atheistical Principles
and Practices have strangely gotten ground of Gospel Truths, to the Spiritual
Grief of all the Godly.

And now since I considered that Spiritual and Corporeal Maladies are the two
grand Misfortunes of Mankind, I have in these sheets endeavored to Remedy both.

Physic is chiefly what I Profess, nor am I ashamed since it is of such
Intrinsic worth, that it even adds honor to the most honorable Practitioner:
That it is profitable to the Natural Body, and consequently to the Body
Politic, since the latter consists of the former as a Whole does of its Parts,
must be acknowledged by every one that is Sanae Mentis, and needs not Helebore.
Hence the Wise Gre^ians did not without Reason highly commend Hypocrates, and
the Latins their Corne^ius Celsus, for their Courage in first Ven^uring, and
Wisdom in wading into the Depth ^f this Mystery, and for their transmitting in
their Works this Noble Art to Posterity.

This Art was anciently Valued at so high (...) Rate, that Apollo and
Aesculapius, steemed by some the first Founders of Physic, ^ere adored as Gods
for the Excellence of their ^^vention. Besides, the Word of God, which
^ndeniably Warrants our Esteem for whatso^ver it Extolls, mentions Physicians
by way ^f Honor before the giving of the Law; ^e which does not only
implicitly allow, but ^xpresly Commands (if the Old English Tran^ation be
credited) the use of Physic; see ^en. 50.2. Psalm. 147.3. Exodus 15.26. ^od
gives Medicines to heal, Health is the ^rince, the first Born, as Life is the
King, of ^utward Blessings. The Widow in the Gos^^l disesteemed all her
substance in comparison (...) this Jewel: And Job said, Skin for Skin, and all
that a Man has to save his Life. The Physician, who is Manus Dei, brings ^his
precious Pearl, Health to the oppressed Sick, where God sees it n^cessary for
their futur^ good. God and Nature ( qui nihil frustra agunt) have appointed
Herbs not only for Meat, but also for Medicines, the virtue and value of which
would never be found out, no^ made serviceable to their right Ends, if some did
not employ their time and tallants in search thereof: though it is a task full of
difficulties; for the natures or effects of Simples alter according to the
difference of places in which they grow, and according to the Constitution of
the Persons to whom they are given. How miserable then are those places where
nothing but ignorant Pretenders abound, whose Medicines are usually worse than
Ineffectual, an^ such as take them are delivered up to the Mercy (I should
rather say, Cruelty and Execution) of Ignorant Pretenders. On the other hand,
what a great felicity and happiness is i^ when the Sick and Diseased meet with
Persons both of much Science and Conscience, wh^ ^nderstand and consider the
Cause of Diseases, (...) Nature of Ingredients, the Constitution of ^atients,
the difference of Climates, and the ^roper Seasons of Administering Physic, and
^aithfully, according to these Circumstances, Prescribe and Apply it.

Yet, dear Countrymen, all this without God^iness is not enough, which, as the
Diamond to ^he Ring, adds real Value to all natural and ^cquir'd
Accomplishments, and which is the ^nly Ark for the Soul to be sheltered in when
a Deluge overfloweth. O! how glad would ^^sanctified Scholars be, who are now
cried up for sublime Wits, for the Quintessence of Learning, for living
Libraries, and Divine Eagles, for Magistri Sententiarum, Doctores Angelici,
Seraphici, Subtiles, and what not, if they could pass at the great Day for the
greatest Ignorants, and most illiterate Innocents that ever were in the World.

'Tho' my Practice is Physic, yet have I presumed to Write of Holy and
Spiritual things, because Religion is absolutely necessary in all; and also to
beget in all Men diligent endeavors after true Piety, as the onl^ means to
arrive at a right management o^ their Parts.

The Lord grant that what I have written* may be applied as Medicinal, to the
health o^ my own, and the Souls and Bodies of others* which is the hearty
Prayer of

Honored Sir, And dear Countrymen, Your true Friend, and Humble Servant, D.
Irish.

David Irish, Practitioner in Physic, His Advice concerning Physic.
PHysicians are called by Herophilus* Man^^ Dei, the Hands of God, and not very
improperly, since they are the Instruments he often uses in restoring Health,
and repairing decayed Nature: they ought with no less Cheerfulness and
Diligence help the Poor in their Extremity for nothing, or at most, for a very
small Reward, as the Rich for great Sums, since it is not the Physician, but
GOD that cures; for in Exodus 15.26. God says, He will put away their Diseases,
and heal them, if they keep his Commandments, it should go well with them, and
they should be free from Diseases. In other places God has styled Himself
Jehovah Rophe, the Lord the Physician, and worthily, for from Him comes the
Gift of Healing; therefore, as I said before, Physicians and Surgeons also
are but God's Inst^uments, who act under Him. It Is He only that can command
Health; all the Medicinal means Physicians use are but the order in which he is
pleased ^o work such effects on our Bodies as he sees ^ittest for us. And no
doubt but the Science of Physic ^^de a part of the great Wisdom wherewith God
^^spired Adam; for, questionless, thi^ enabled him to perform the Office of a
Midwife, and to assist Eve in her Extremity; for, as may be gathered from
Scripture, her Travail-Pains were as great as those of her Posterity and Sex
are at this day.

Here it may not be imp^rtinent to observe, That Children, as soon as they are
born, (a good Argument of their Original) call out upon the two first Letters
of our first Par^nts Names; the Males crying A E, A E; and the Females, E A, E
A, as a Token of the miserable Condition Adam and Eve* by their Disobedience,
ent^il'd upon their Pos^^rity; for indeed, by their breaking God's first
Commandment, we had all for ever perished, were not God's Mercy great and
wonderful toward his People, in working a means for their Redemption, as well
as for their Recovery of Health, which is very ea^ie to be understood by the
Angels Salutation, in his using the aforesaid Letters E V A, the Name of the
Woman, (who at first ma^^ us Bondsmen) to make us free, when the Angel Gabriel
inverted their Order, an^ pronounced them A V E to the Virgin Mary.

Since, as is said, God is the great Physician, whenever we are Sick, or any
ways Infirm, let us call upon Him for Help, and He will hear us, being alway^
^eadier to give than we to ask, 2 King. 20.5, etc. consider then what God said
to Hezekiah; Behold, (said he) I will heal thee. And Isaiah said, Take ^ Lump
of Figs, and they took them, and laid them on the Boil, and Hezekiah
recovered, and lived 15 years after, Isa. 38. and John 9.6. which Examples
teach us, that without God the Prescriptions of Doctors signify nothing, but
where God pleases, even ordinary means have great power to procure Health,
which once obtained, Men ought to give Praise to God in perpetual Gratitude for
their Recovery; but Men are in this, as well as in other Duties, too remiss, as
appears by the Ten Lepers which Christ cured, of whom there was but one that
returned Him Thanks* though He expects the same return from all, ( Romans 12* Tit.
2.) especially those He healed and cured of troublesome and dangerous Diseases.

We have his Word to ground our hopes and boldness upon in asking, where He
tells us, That He that hears his Word, and believes on Him, shall obtain
Eternal Life. Now, if upon such Conditions He will give us Eternal Life, we
need not doubt but that He will give us a temporary Health, if He sees that it
be good for us, or condusive to that Life which i^ Everlasting. Therefore let
us, as those that are not without Hope, be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Works of the Lord, forasmuch as we know our Labor is not in
vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

Ex libris nemo evasit artifex, No Man becomes an Artist by Books, only this,
as in most Arts, so in Physic, is undoubtedly true. Believe me, a greater
insight is required to the making of a Physician* than what the best Books in
the World can furnish a Man with; one must have Time and Experience to gain an
acquaintance with the K^owledge of Man's Body, and the Use of Instruments
belonging to the Art; it is Practice that best teaches us the Virtues of
Simples, and which alone can make Medicines called Experienced truly so.

He that is only Book-learn'd, his Skill at best is but Skin deep; Galen
discreetly compares such to those Pilots, who by Books only will undertake to
steer a Ship into any part of the World, though they were never at Sea before;
but the End of such a Man's Undertaking would doubtless be as dangerous to
himself, as the Attempts of a Book-learn'd unexperienced Physician are to those
he first practices on. Yet we have store of young Doctors, some of which not
over-learned, who, as soon as ever they come out of the University, will
undertake to write Prescriptions to the Apothecaries for Medicines to cure the
Sick even of the most obstinate and intricate Diseases, when they are void of
all manner of Experience and full of nothing at best but Noise and speculative
Notions: But since these two contribute little to the Recovery of the Sick,
they are not by wise Men to be relied on, except when no others c^n be had; of
this I will say no more, but tell you what an Emperor did on the like Occasion,
when a young Doctor was brought to him. Doctor, said the Emperor, How many have
thou killed in the time of thy Practice? The young Graduate answered, May it
please your Highness, Not one. To him the Emperor gave his Fee, and bid him be
gone; for, said he, I Will take nothing from such a Doctor that has not killed
any one in his Practice; he may try Experience upon me, and so kill ^e first:
Fetch me an old experienced Physician; for I Have no mind to give beginning to
any Man's Art by my End or Death. Then they brought to the Emperor an ancient,
gray, old Doctor, of whom the Emperor, as of the former, demanded, How many he
had killed in his time of Practice? The Doctor answered, stroaking his Beard
with his Hand, If your H^ghness can number these gray Hairs on my Chin, then I
can tell you the Number of those to whom my Practice proved fatal; but by my
then Killing, I have now well in^orm'd my self of the way of Curing. God have
Mercy, old Doctor, replied the Emperor, I find by your Confession that you are
an experienced Man, I Will venture to take something from you, or by your
Directions, for I know, continued the Emperor, that by the Divine Decree of God
Almighty, all Metals, Minerals, Herbs and Plants, enriched with various Scents,
Tastes, Colors and Forms, grow and spring forth of the Earth, possessed with many
and great Virtues, insomuch, that I hold it a great Offense to attribute to any
other than to the Deity the Benefit of a Blessing adapted for so many Uses;
besides, the Knowledge of the Virtues of these things is no less than Divine in
its Original; for certainly no Man's Capacity could ever attain to the
Knowledge of these things at first, without the Assistance of a Supernatural
Power and Inspiration; this being so, 'twill be easily granted, that when in
the beginning God breathed into Adam the Breath of Life, he then also taught
him the Knowledge of Nature in all her intricate Operations, Faculties and
Virtues, that is, discovered to him, the secret Energy of all things contained
in the Circuit of this Universe; and at this day we see the same God preserves
by means all those Beings he at first made without means. In fine, said the
Emperor, I will not adventure to be preserved by unexperienced Men, lest I
should Shipwreck my self upon the Rocks of horrid Ignorance; but will look for
the Continuance of my Life from those whose Experience, under God, has
furnished them with the Me^ns and Methods of preserving Nature. You see,
Reader, ^n Example of a wise Emperor, to teach thee a Les^on of necessary
Caution

Since the Lord has endowed the Earth and its ^umerous Product with many
Medicinal Virtues, it is (...) well irreligious, as it is foolish in any, to
di^own their Being, or to abhor their Use. From the Lord, as we have elsewhere
said, comes the Gift of Healing* which also appears from Scripture, seeing God
is therein styled, the Only Physician. God was the first Operator, as you will
confess upon calling to mind his taking out one of our Grandfather Adam's Ribs
whereof to make a Woman, which thing was so wonderful, that it may well be
counted the greatest as well as the first Operation. Our Blessed Savior ^ook
his Name from his healing Nature, and to countenance our Practice made use of
ordinary means, as Clay and Spittle, in Restoring Sight to the Blind; not but
that he was able to have alone perfected the Cure by his powerful Word, without
such means, were it not that he meant to show us, by his Example, that with
Means, and God's Blessing thereon, much may be done in Restoring Health to the
Sick, and Ease to those in Pain. It Is above 5700 Years since God first taught
our great Grandfather Adam the Virtues of all things, and consequently
furnished him with the main Materials fit for a Physician and Surgeon; but as
to the practick part, by what I have already said, the latter is more ancient.

Let us be moderate in our desire after Knowledge, lest by a too hot pursuit,
we, with Adam, not only lose what we seek for, but our primitive Science and
Happiness into* the Bargain; therefore let us take our Savior's Advice along
with us, First to seek after the Kingdom of Heaven, and then all other things
shall be added unto us. Let us then take heed, that we set not our Affections
too much upon the things of this World, but rather let us seek after the true
Knowledge of God; but we have no means to know God to purpose but by his Word;
therefore let us study his Word, that we may have Eternal Life, which Word will
in the next World bring us to it* and then we shall know the great Creator of
the World, and us: and since even now all our little Knowledge, Arts and
Sciences, come from God, let us then wholly rely upon Him; for except we abide
in Him we can do no good thing, John 15.16.

Next, I will give you to understand what manner of Men Physicians and Surgeons
ought to be; Omnibus aliis Medicus praestantior unus. They ought to excel
others in fearing God, and eschewing Evil, as much as Divines themselves; for
truly the Divine and Physician convenient in uno tertio; they are both for
Curing; the Divine heals Corpus per Animam; the Physician, Animam per Corpus.
Every Divine is a Spiritual Physician, and every Physician ought to be a
Spiritual Divine, though not by Profession, yet by Practice; for into their Hands
God has put the Lives of those he loved so well, that he Redeemed them by the
Blood of his only begotten Son. St. Luke, the beloved Physician, was a Divine
Evangelist, and commends the Study of those great Books of God, the Book of his
Scripture, and that of his Creatures, since the glory of God, and the good of
his Creatures, ought to be the Mark to which all the Endeavors of Physicians
ought to be directed.

Physicians should by no means give the least Entertainment to such a Monster
as Covetousness within their Breasts; nor ought they to have any respect to
Persons, but go as freely to the Poor for a little Money* or for nothing, when
Need requires, as to the Rich for ample Rewards; for those that give to the
Poor, lend to the Lord, and may be sure God will reward them double-fold. On
the other hand, a Physician is not bound to behave himself in this manner to
the Rich, but may take his Fee lawfully and cheerfully when it is offered; but
there are too many who are willing to have the Physicians Help, but slow in
Paying him. Hence it is observed, that a Doctor appears to his Patient in three
different Forms: First, when he tells the Patient there is hopes; O then he
appears as an Angel. Next, when the Cure is performed, the Patient looks upon
his Physician as a God. But lastly, when the Physician demands his Reward, then
his Patient takes him for a Devil. Thus different Circumstances beget different
Opinions in those hateful Minds that are corrupted by Avarice and Ignorance.
Therefore it* is the Physicians and Surgeons Rule, Accipere dum dolet, to take
the Sound Fee whilst the Sick Hand gives it.

Life is short, Art long, Occasion sudden, Experience dangerous, Judgment
difficult: Hence we may conclude, there are but few good Physicians; and yet it
is not sufficient, though the Physician or Surgeon do their Parts or Office,
unless the Patient and his Attendance do their Duty also, whereby outward
things may be as well ordered as those that are given inwardly; this is the
main Hinge upon which all the rest turn; and therefore ought earnestly to be
pressed, and all too little to make Servants diligent: The Physician ought to be
faithful and cautious in Practice; for Life hangs as it were but by a slender
Thread, and is at best but short, yet is apt to be made much shorter by many
Accidents, and those very small ones too. Art is long, if Theory and Practice
are considered. Diseases are sudden, and if not suddenly removed, may quickly
ruin. Past Experiments, if not well understood, may lead the Physician into
Error; besides, Judgment is very difficult, through the Variety of Diseases
and their Causes, which, by the Fault of the Sick and his Attendance, are many
times not perceived even by Physicians of greatest Abilities.

Astrology, though in many of its parts is accounted ^idiculous, yet is greatly
(if not only) useful for those that study Physic; for without it the pre^ended
Physician can never have the true Knowledge of the Crisis, or Critical and
Judicial Days. It is most certain, that Hippocrates and Galen, the two Pillars
of the Art of Physic, found out the Use of Vegetables and their Natures, as
also many other Physical things, by the Influence of the Stars. But God is the
Governor and Disposer of all their seve^al Virtues; and when they are
transplanted out ^f their natural Soil, they lose their Planetary Vir^ues in a
great measure, yet they continue with the ^ame Colors and Smells, though not so
strong; therefor the Chemical Extractions made from them, where they naturally
grow, are the best of Medicines, ^f administered according to Astrological
Rules, the want of knowing which, is the cause of great Errors ^n many
Physicians; but for finding out any Disease, ^ say with Mepardus, Potius lotium
inspiciendum quam ^astra, That the Vrin is rather to be looked into than the
Stars.

We read in Holy Writ, That the Physician is honorable; understand this of him
that is expert; for one ignorant in his Art renders himself despicable and
ridiculous. Now the way to make him perfect, is to know Nature, and her secret
Operations. It is not the Physician's feeling the Pulse of the Party, or
questioning with him how he feels himself, and in what part of his Body he is
most afflicted, that can give a Man a thorough understanding of his Malady. The
Pulse is deceitful, and the Patient himself is often ignorant: These then, I say,
are not s^fficient grounds for him to proceed upon, and yet without a good
Foundation the Fabric is not likely to be well built, or at lea^t not to stand
long: How, alas, should Man, ove^^ome with the weight of his own Torture^ or
dis^ra^^^d with a too viol^nt Desire for prese^^ Relief, ^^fine the State of
his own, perhaps, unspea^able Misery; and yet, I ^ay, the Cause of a Disea^^
must be first known b^^^r^ the Doctor can make (...) Medicine judicially
pr^^er, or undertake with a (...) Conscience to make a Cure; this being so, the
Natu^^ and Temper of the Patient ought to be known, an^ that can never be
d^^cer^'d by looking on the Patien^ and fee^ing the Pulse, though this is all
most of t^^ ignorant Pretenders ground their Proceeding upon, when as that
which unerringly signifies t^^ Complexion to be Sanguine, Phlegm^tick,
Choleric^ or Melancholy, is not any inferior thing: No, it (...) the Superior
Bodies that best explain the Matte^ Thus Saturn signifies Melancholy, Jove
Sanguin^ Mars Choler, etc. and every one knows, that by the Moon
Convulsion-Fits are foreseen; therefore, (...) Galen, Hippocrates, and all the
rational and ancien^ Physicians and Students of Nature were eminently skilled
in this sort of Astrology; so they esteemed * and with Reason, all Pretenders
to Physic, that were ignorant of Astrology, to be rather Fools than
Physicians. Hence Galen admonishes all Men not to trust themselves in the
Hands of that Physician, (o^ rather ignorant Pretender) who is not skilled in
Astrology, since the Ignorant therein are not abl^ to perform with Certainty
any Cure whatsoever* Besides, what will cure a Phlegmatic Man of a Fever, will
not cure one that is Choleric; and then the pret^nded Physician seeing his
Medicine does no^ work the like Operation as formerly, supposes the M^lady to
be somewhat else, and himself mistaken, ^^d then he falls another way to work;
and so, to be ^^ort, kills the Patient with a great many Thanks (...)
Gratuities both of Money and Gifts; for (as (...) Ignorant about him suppose)
he doing his En^eavour to cure the Sick, ought to be well rewarded, ^^pecially
if he can but talk of this rare Cure, and that excellent Remedy, and preach
himself up, and others (a thousand times more knowing than himself) down, and
now and then use some Latin in his ^iscourse, and flourish it out with hard
Words to ^he Ignorant; I say, he carries it then, whether he ^ave or kill, and
that with a great deal of Credit, as (...) and his ignorant Friends think.
Likewise Blood-^etting, if the Heavens be not duly observed, is of no Efficacy,
and sometimes they hinder Phlebotomy, which the ignorant Surgeon colors with
saying, ^he Party is faint-hearted, or has much Wind in his ^eins, or with
some such like ridiculous Whimsie; for they know no better, being ignorant of
Astro^ogy, which is a speculative Science, very necessary ^n the Administration
of Physic, being counted by the ancient Practitioners of Physic, rather
Divine, than Diabolical or Conjuring. I say more of this than otherwise I
would, did I not greatly desire that all good Arts, especially those I am
conversant in, might be refined from their Dross, and that Knowledge might
still increase upon the Earth.

It is generally taken for granted among the unskilful, that the seventh and
fourteenth Days are critical, which they call the first and second Crisis; but
it is not true; for the true Crisis is thus known, look at the time of the
Parties first falling sick, in what Sign, Degree and Minute of the Zodiac the
Moon is in, and when she comes to the Square thereof, that is the first Crisis;
when she comes to the Opposition or opposite place thereof, it is the second
Crisis; the next Square is, the third Crisis; and the same (...) where she was
at the first falling sick, is the four^^ Crisis, and so go on. Again, the
Judicial Days a^ the middle, between the two Crisis; Critical (...) are known
by Astrology, and no otherwise. (...) Crisis is the sudden Motion of the
Disease, either toward Health or Death. By Astrology also, (...) the sight of
the Urin, the honest Physician may clearl^ discern which way the Disease will
tend. And th^^ much of the Excellent use of Astrology, as the ancient
Practitioners used; and thus far I allow (...) Astrology, believing steadfastly
that the Stars are for Signs, and for Seasons, and that God rules them*
therefore God is the Governor of all things above and here below; and
therefore I pray thus, Hi^ Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. Amen.

There is, that I may speak all in a word, required in a Physician exquisite
Knowledge, long Practice, great Virtue, and good Success. The Sick is to be
patient and obedient, Apothecaries and Surgeons exact, Nurses also must be
careful and diligent in observing the Physicians Directions; nay, the Air,
Linen, Diet, and Beds of the Sick, ought to be convenient, and according to
Direction.

Medicine is an Art, some say a Science, removing Diseases; its Subject is
Man's Body, or indeed, I may say, all things sensitive are its Object; its End
is Health. In it are five parts.

1. Physiologia, which is the Knowledge of the Body, framed of Elements,
Temprements, Parts, Faculties and Functions. 2. Pathologia, which is exercised
about things preternatural; and such are all things that bring Diseases. 3.
Semeiotica is that part of Physic in which is handled the Method of knowing,
as well the present as the future Estate of ^an. 4. Hygeine is that part of
Physic employed out the Preservation of Health. 5. Therapeutica, ^^ich is that
part which respects the Restoring lost ^ealth, and is divided into two parts;
The first con^^^ns the general Method of Curing, proposing all ^les necessary
for the Cure of all kinds of Diseases, ^^ether similar, organick, or common:
The second (...) Rules for the Curing particular Diseases; it is (...)
Practick, being nothing else but the practick ^ethod of Curing each particular
Disease.

Surgery teaches how to contribute to the Cure (...) many Diseases by Manual
Operation; it is in ^^ny things subordinate to Physic; for as some di(...)
Arts into Architectonick or Magisterial Arts (...) Ministerial Arts; so
according to them the Art (...) Physic is an Art Magisterial in a knowing
Phy^^^ian, who not only prescribes a Remedy, but can (...) show the
Reasonableness thereof, when as the (...) Ministerial is that which follows the
Directions (...) the Art Magisterial, without giving the Reason. (...) for
Example. The Art of Breathing a Vein in a ^^rgeon, whose Province is to execute
the Commands (...) the Physician, though he know not the Reason why (...)
Physician so commands.

The Art of Surgery is very ancient, for which ^eason perhaps it is that the
Words to the Surgeons (...) is, De Praecipientia Dei. It Is exercised espe^^ally
on external Parts, yea, and on internal too* (...) far as Hand or Instruments
may reach. It con^^ins four Parts, (the Knowledge of which makes a ^^mpleat
Surgeon) viz. Composorix, Ablatrix, Sepe^^trix, Apposearix; it con^iders
Anotomicks in the ^^ructure of Humane Bodies, etc. Secondly, The ^^ysical State
of the same. It also enquires into the ^isquisitions of things relating to
Humane Bodies; as (...) Preservation, Agitation, and Affections.

The Physician ought first to consider the Maete^^ Medica. Secondly, the
Pharmaica. And lastly, oug^^ to know the Names and Kinds of Diseases, the (...)
affected, the Signs, Causes, Judgments, and vario^^ ^ay^ of Curing all internal
Diseases, whether gen^ral or particular, acute or chronick, happening (...) the
Bodies of Men, etc.

Those that intend to be excellent in these Art ought often to read good
Authors, have freque^^ Commerce with Physicians, Surgeons, Chemists, (...)
Apothecaries; see Preparations, and mechanic Mi^tures, and to frequent
Hospitals, where they (...) see great Varieties. In Summer they should
He^balize. Likewise Travel will much advance the^^ Knowledge. These things, as
they help Experien^^ and Knowledge, will acquaint them with the Mist^ries of
Art, and render them skilful in the Ico^^ and Figures used in Philosophical,
Zoological (...) Chemical Parts, and prevent their being impos^^ upon by
ignorant pretending Medicasters, etc.

Since I have made these things thus known to (...) let it be thy Care, good
Reader, not to adventu^^ the being Shipwrack'd upon the Rocks of horr^^
Ignorance, and of being at once robbed of Heal^^ and Wealth too, by such as
think all Diseases (...) be cured by Chance, which indeed is a Chance some
ignorant Pretenders to Physic and Surge^^ cure one of a Thousand. Indeed some
recover the^^ Health by the successful Endeavors of Nature, (...) under the
Hands of the Ignorant, and this gives (...) unskilful Pretender some
Reputation, though indeed (...) deserve none; for in reality the Patient was
reliev^^ by mere Chance, if what the Pretender gave wroug^^ the Cure, since he
was ignorant of the effect of (...) Medicines, or perhaps his Medicines, as
they did (...) ^ood, so did little harm, and then i^ was the Pre^alency which
endeavoring Nature obtained over ^he Disease which effected the Cure, and in
this cas^ (...) that can be attributed to such Medicine-makers (...) that they,
as I said, only gave the Patient by (...) something that very little or not at
all (...) the Power of Nature.

Many ^^lly Women, and others as ^^mpl^ as they* (...) mix many things
together, which con^^sting o^ ^any medlies of contrary Na^ures, oft-tim^s works
^ery dreadful Effects, for fomenting together they ^ecome poisonous, or what is
as ill, ^est^uct^ve o^ (...) Patient's Life; yet t^es^ they (...) which at best
commonly prove a (...) good (...) nothing. It requires Art and Skill ^o make a
^^ight Mixture, that s^^ll be of a (...) Qua^^^y for the ^isease* and Diseased
^n hand; there must be in it Harmony, if you would have it put the Body in
(...); what Medicine soe^^^ wants this, will put ^^ery thing out of Order,
(...) so (...) the Patients ^e^tr^ction: And this is ^he To^a^ (...) can be
ex^^cted from taking of Medicines from those who ^^ow not how to make up a
Composition proper (...) their Patients Malady.

In the next place, though Physic Books are useful, (...) I would not persuade
any ^o so much Levity, as (...) try all sorts of Medicines they shall find in
Books* (...) may be had in Apothecaries Shops, for he that should do so, shall
scarce ever (...) cured, or know (...) true worth of any one Medicine, but be
ever to (...), and the further he goes, shall be the more out (...) his Way;
whereas, if he find a Man of long ^xperience, honest Principles, and good
Judgment, ^ho consequently is able to make choice of, or com^ound Medicines
excellent in Operation, and curing many Distempers, then those that stand in
Nee^ may best supply their Want by buying such approve^ M^dicines, and so
neither venture Life or Limb o^ the unwholesome and un^xperienced Compositions
o^ ig^orant Pretenders.

The ordinary way of Curing most Diseas^s i^ begun by removing the Ca^se or
Causes whence the Infirmity proceeds, grounded on that Axiom of the
Philosopher, Sublata causa tollitur eff^ctus. The C^use^ of all Diseases are
commonly either breach of Duty or such Accidents as befall us against our Wills
unlooked ^or.

Now, for the Comfort of those that are afflicte^ with any Disease, and desire
Help, if they, or an^ Friend of theirs, think fit to make choice of me, t^
administer such Physic Helps as their Distempe^ requires, I shall be ready and
willing to supply them as re^sonably as can be desired, and shall give them
such Heavenly Counsel as my slender Skill doe^ afford; therefore take Courage
in the Consideration of G^d's Goodness, for He, through the Means o^ timely
Applications of the skilful Physician, (his In^trument for the Recovery of
Health) will, if it b^ for your Souls good, turn your Sickness and Pai^ into
Health and Indolence; this being so, it is hard ^o say this or that Person is
incurable; for I am o^ Opinion, and my Opinion is grounded upon Experience,
that many may be re^tor'd to their former Strength and Health, which have long,
in an untimely Despair, lay languishing under their Distempers* but let not any
despair or distrust God's Ability of giving Success to Man's Endeavors. Let
them make trial of me, or of my most approved, safe, and often experienced
Medicines, skilfully prepared according to Art for internal means. I have also
Remedies for external Applications, of whose Virtue and Efficacy I doubt not,
but by God's Blessing thereon, if used in time, the Sick and Diseased will be
highly sensible; for as far as Physic can pretend, aided by Divine Assistance,
they cure all curable Diseases and Infirmities, proceeding from what Cause or
Causes soever, inward or outward.

To give a Relation of the Causes and Names of all manner of Diseases and
Infirmities, would make too big a Pamphlet to present you withal; but
considering that the Generality of People are poor, and not able to give a
large Fee to a worthy and able Physician, nor to answer the Charge of an
Apothecary's Bill, though but reasonable; I therefore publish this Book, to give
Notice to all Persons, that I will afford my Medicines more reasonable than any
Man can, by reason I make and prepare all my self, and will go when sent for to
visit any Patient cheaper than any Man I know; and for this my Charity I hope
your Experience will crown my Works, and a Blessing attend my Endeavors, in
that I afford Medicines of great Worth for a little Money.

An Account of the Doctor's Remedies, and how to take them.
I Am not ashamed to give an account of what I profess, nor to express of what
my Pills and Tincture are made, that those who are expert Practitioners (who
indeed are only capable to judge of their Excellence) may give their Opinion of
them; and those that desire further Satisfaction of my Abilities, let them
examine those that have made trial of me, and of my Stomach Pills and Tincture,
which are only an extract of the chiefest Simples of the Family of Vegetables
that are Specificks, Hepaticks, an^ Spleneticks.

My Antiscorbutick Tincture is drawn from an Infusion of Scurvy Grass,
Liver-wort, Hearts Tongu^ Tamarask, and Hepatick and Splenetick Ingredients
therefore they are more proper for Curing the Scurv^ with all its crowd of
Symptoms than commmo^ Spirit of Scurvy Grass; and consequently I may justl^
commend my Pilula Stomachica and Tinctura Antiscorbutica; that is, my Stomach
Pill and Tincture against the Scurvy, to be most useful and profitable for al^
those for whom I have the best Wishes; and therefore I advise all my Friends
and Neighbors t^ make trial of these my Pills and Tincture, which will cure
those complicated Distempers intermixed wit^ the Scurvy, by rectifying the
Scorbutic Humour^ by cleansing the Stomach from all peccant matte^ that
hinders Digestion; also they carry off all aci^ or acrimonious - Juice, or any
undigested thing tha^ breeds adust Choler, whence frequent Diseases ar^
derived; therefore it is most proper to take a Dos^ or two of these Pills, to
carry off those Humour^ before one enters upon any other Medicine to effe^^ a
Cure.

To apply things outwardly, as some do to Brea^ings out, or Sores of a
Scorbutic nature, is hurtful for it drives back the Humors into the Stomach
which cause Sickness and Vomiting, want of Appetit^ Pains and Wind in the
Stomach, and adjacent Parts and makes the Stomach to lose its Tone and
Rectitude, and then the Body can enjoy no Health; besides, a bad Chylification
is the original of many Diseases. How careful then ought People to be in
keeping the Kitchen of their Bodies, I mean their Stomachs, clean, since that
would be the only means to prevent Diseases, as well as cure them; nay, this
would so preserve Health, that Men might attain the Happiness of seeing the
utmost of their appointed days with Ease and Comfort.

It was the Opinion of the ancient Physicians, That the Stomach and Spleen
contained a Ferment, which hindered them from performing rightly what they were
intended for, because the abundance of fixed Salt falling upon the Stomach
causes sour and unsavory Belchings, from which also proceeds melancholic,
tenacious, gross and crude Humors, which mixing with the Mass of Blood causes
a Cachexy, which obstructs the Liver, and finally ends in Scorbutic
Distempers. Now my Pills and Tincture are the most excellent means yet known
for their Cure and Prevention, by cleansing and sweetning the whole Mass of
Blood and nervous Juice, rectifying all the Defects and Injuries that putrify
the Blood, which being corrupt, defiles the whole Habit of Body, and is the
Cause of Eruptions, or all sorts of Breakings out; as Itch, Leprosy, Spots,
Ring-worms, King's Evil, and all sorts of Swellings in the Joints, or other
parts, which sometimes turns into Fistula's, or such fretting Ulcers or Sores
that will hardly admit of Cure till the Scorbutic Humors be carried off, and
the Mass of Blood cleansed from the aforesaid Humors, the primary Cause
thereof; therefore you must first remove their Cause, before you can effect a
Cure. Sometimes these Humors break out principally in the Head, and then it
turns to the Scurff or Scald-Head. Sometimes they fall on the Eyes, and produce
Lachrymarious Humors, which endanger the Sight, by breeding Cataracts and
Glaucoma's, and if they obstruct the Optic Nerves, incurable Cataracts follow.
Sometimes these Humors over-heat the Brain, by reason of Vapors which arise
from the lower parts of the Body, sent up to the Head, and then they bring
Deafness, by obstructing the Organs and auditory Nerves, which hinder the Drum
and Anvil from sending the Echo to the Brain, and many times is the Cause of
more stubborn Diseases; as Cancers in the Breast, Gouts of all sorts, Dropsies,
Iaundice, Colic Pains, with Griping in the Bowels, Stitches in the Sides,
Pains and Weakness of the Back, Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentary,
Diaphragma, Tranchea, Arteria, and Stoppage of the Pipes of the Lungs; hence
come Asthma's, and Consumption, Coughs, with Shortness of Breath; and when the
Stomach is stufft with these ill Scorbutic Humors we are afflicted with
Giddiness of the Head, Convulsion-Fits, and lastly with Contraction of the
Nerves. Sometimes by over-charging of Nature with strong Drinks proceed
Vapors, which cause Apoplexies, Belchings, and loss of Appetite. Sometimes
these Scorbutic Humors produce Numbness, and Tingling in the Flesh, and so
turn to a Palsy, with Weakness and Wearisomness, wasting of the Flesh, and
decay of Body; besides, in Old and Young these Humors bring Swooning, and by
coagulating of the Blood hinders its Fermentation, and then the Influx of
Spirit^ to the Heart is stopped. There is no Disease more like Death than these
Swooning-Fits. Fermentation once hindered, any peccant Humors that abound in
the Blood are no longer mixed with its Mass, but soon separates by the Pores of
the Arteries, and so sticking by its Viscidity among the Membranes of the
Stomach, causes Vomiting, when the Patient comes to himself. Let this suffice
for the Cause of Swooning in general. As for the Vterine Swooning of Virgins,
it arises sometimes from the Womb, and shows it self by Anxiety, and almost
loss of Breathing, yet sometimes these Scorbutic Humors by heat condence, and
breed Stone and Gravel, which is the Cause of Stop-page and Sharpness of Vrin;
they may know their Distemper by their Urin, which is thin, pale, venous, and
has red Gravel sticking to the Pot. Sometimes there is a Scum or Cream on the
top of the Urin.

And thus much I thought fit to say of the Scurvy, such as would know more may
consult my little Pamphlet I formerly set out, for the Cure of the Sick and
Diseased, through God's Blessing, by my Famous Medicines, therein mentioned.
This is the Second Edition, for some Reasons I have left many things out that
were in that. In that Book I gave an account of Three Pills and a Quart Bottle
of Diet-Drink, which Three Pills* and Bottle I sold for Three Shillings; but
this that I now offer I afford for half the Price, viz. Three Pills and an
Ounce Vial of this my present Antiscorbucick Tincture are sold for One Shilling
Sixpence, and yet will serve longer than the other, and is more easy to be
carried, it is also as useful as that, having the same Virtues which that had in
curing the Scurvy, and all its complicated Symptoms, which are almost like so
many different Diseases. That was only to be taken Spring and Fall; this may be
taken at all Times and Seasons of the Year; when Necessity requires take it as
follows: A strong Body may take all the Three Pills in a Morning alone in the
pap of an Apple, Treacle, or Honey. They must take immediately after them, and
also now and then betwixt their workings, a little Posset Drink, warm Beer, or
Water Gruel, for the space of two hours, then eat some little fresh Meat for
Dinner, or what is agreeable to the Stomach, that is to say, easy of
Digestion. The next Morning take forty drops of the Tincture in half a pint or
less of Ale, or warm mild Beer; and let such as are afflicted with Aches and
Pains take two pennyworth of Mithridate in a little mul'd Sack every third
Night, keeping themselves in a breathing Sweat for two or three hours after;
but beware of throwing your Bed-cloths off. Keep taking the Tincture every
Morning, and Mithridate in mul'd Sack for Pains and Aches every third Night,
till the Tincture is done, and doubtless you will find much Comfort and Ease
thereby. Note. This is for those of full Years; but such as are 16 or 18 years
old, may take two Pills first at once in a Morning, and thirty drops of the
Tincture the next Morning, and so keep taking thirty drops every Morning in
warm Ale till it is done; but for Pains and Aches, Sack and Mithridate, as
before. Those of 10 or 12 years of Age, may take one Pill and twenty drops of
the Tincture in Ale, as aforesaid. Those from 6 years of Age to 8, may take
half a Pill and ten drops in Ale, as aforesaid. Children that are under that
Age, being Rickety or Weakly, may take a quarter part of a Pill and five drops
in Ale every Morning* give such a little Milk turned with Wine or Beer* and
sweetened with Sugar, and a little Nutmeg in it. Give them this for their
Breakfasts.

Other young Children that are under two years old, being troubled with Worms,
Wind, or Fits, may take three or four drops in new Milk, sweetened with Honey
and a little Juice of Herbegrace, called Rue* Let these take it every Morning
for a Week together, and they will be cured beyond Expectation.

As to those that find an Itch and tickling in their Flesh in the time of
taking it, they must be let Blood, or if they find any flying Pain more from
one place to another, they must bleed, and that will ^ent the Wind and foul
corrupted Blood which is the cause thereof; by this means any may be freed from
all those Scorbutic Humors, in what Nature or Kind soever they appear.

Such as are afflicted with any kind of Fits, must take it in the Morning, and
at other times when the Fit is upon them, give it them in fair Water; but
remember, that all such as take this Tincture, should first take a dose of
Pills to prepare and cleanse the Body, and then the Tincture will effectually
purify the Mass of Blood, and cure them much sooner.

Such as are troubled with the Stone, Colic, Slime, Sand, Gravel, Heat, or
Sharpness of Vrin, must take the Tincture in white Wine, mixed with a little
Ale, every Morning, and withal a little Venice Turpentine wrapped up in Sugar,
every Night, when they take the drops in the Morning, and they will find much
good thereby.

Such as are inclinable to Consumptions, must take it each Morning in Sack,
mixed with Ale; and if they are also troubled with a Cough, take as much Moss
that grows on Oaken Boards, dried and powdered, as will lie on a Shilling, boil
it in new Milk, which drink when they go to Bed, and take the Tincture Night
and Morning, till the Bottle is done, and you will find much Benefit.

I have a curious Scorbutic Mouth-Water and Powder, which to admiration
whitens the Tenth, strengthens and cleans the Gums, and beyond any thing now in
use fastens loose Teeth, utterly expelling the Scorbutic Humor from the
Mouth, which frequently so rots the Teeth, and consumes the Gums, that in many
it causes a stinking Breath. And as there is scarce any thing more becoming
than a white and sound set of Teeth, so, on the contrary, few things disfigure
us more than rotten, black and loose Teeth, yet by the use of this Powder and
Water, with one of which you must rub your Teeth, and with the other wash them,
your Mouth and Gums every Morning, and by so doing you may keep your Teeth
sound and white even to old Age, and thereby prevent those dangerous Pulls and
Pangs which many poor Creatures endure under Tooth-Drawers; besides, though the
Operation be performed by Men of Skill, in such sort as little Pain is endured,
ye^ at best the Patient loses a Tooth, which is a great miss, and the Cause
not being taken away, we commonly see one Tooth drawn after another, till the
Mouth, if I may so speak, is dispeopled of those Inhabitants which God and
Nature ordained for the necessary uses of Eating and Speaking. Therefore I
advise all Persons to make use of this Powder and Water in time, if either they
would avoid that Inconvenience, or take delight to have sound Teeth and a sweet
Breath.

It is also an excellent Remedy for the Toothache; for it seldom fails of
giving Ease in two or three minutes, if a little of the Powder be snuft up each
Nostril, and some of the remaining Powder wet with a little of their own Water,
and applied Plasterwise outwardly upon the pained part. This will give
immediate Ease, as Thousands can testify. The Pric^ of each is One Shilling.

I have also a rare and wonderful Water that has cured many of Cankers,
Cancers, and such like Ulcers as eat away the Flesh. This Water is to be
applied twice a day, by applying Lint that has been first dipped therein to the
corroding Sore.

I have Antimonial Stones, which are the most universal Medicine in use for
Prevention of all Diseases. This Stone is neither hurt by Age, nor does Use in
the least destroy its Virtues. Price but Half-a-Crown each Stone, which is as
good as the Antimonial Cup, which was formerly sold for Five Pounds. You have
with 'em printed Directions how to use them.

I have a Palsical Oil, which, if timely applied, restores useless Limbs, which
became so through some suddden cold Damps, or by reason of watery Humors from
the Brain, which prejudice the Spinal Marrow of the Back, and thereby so
impedes the Nerves, that their Origination is stopped, and thereby also the
Passage of the Animal Faculties is hindered, which, in fine, causes the loss of
the use of Limbs, etc. by many called Palsies; of which Distempers many have
been cured by the use of my Palsical Oil, used according to the printed
Directions given with it.

My Bezoartici Morsuli Electuarii far excells all Lozenges or Liquorish Balls
for curing of Colds, Coughs, and Shortness of Breath. It Is also excellent good
for the Green Sickness.

I have the only Panchimagogum Febrifugum, which is so perfect a Cure for all
sorts of Agues and Fevers, that it can never be sufficiently commended.

My Golden Mineral Powder infallibly cures the Whites, Gleet, Running of the
Reins, Sharpness and Heat of Vrin, and all such Distempers in Men or Women.

I have a wonderful Histerical Spirit, far exceeding any other Spirit yet known
for the curing of all sorts of Fits.

Besides, I have an unparallelled Ointment, which, by external Application, is
good for all sorts of Swellings in Women's Breasts, or in any part of the Bodies
of Men, Women, or Children. It Is almost infallible.

My Powder for the Piles in a short time cures them, being applied to the
Fundament every Night, at your going to Bed.

I have a Medicine which cures all sorts of Worms in Men, Women, or Children.
It Is infallible.

I likewise have Medicines which cure those Distempers only incident to the
Female Sex, which, though for Modesty not here mentioned, yet touching them any
Woman may have private Instruction* and certain Cure from me or my Wife. Only I
will here give you an account, that I have an experienced Medicine, which if
timely applied, or given, to Women in Travail, will procure their speedy
Delive^y with Safety, whether their Fruit be Dead or Alive. I cure Barrenness.

I have a Medicine that will certainly prevent Miscarriage in Women; it has
often been experienced to admiration, insomuch, that you may assure your
selves, with God's Blessing, this will prov^ beneficial to all those that in
time apply themselves to me.

I have many other rare Medicines, which have been much admired for their
powerful Op^rations in relieving such as were afflicted with strange and most
deplorable Distempers; but it is too tedious here to particularize either the
Infirmities or Persons; besides, many are not willing to have their Names and
Distempers put in Print; yet there are few that know me, but know this to be
true. I cure all that are curable, whether they be afflicted with any sort of
Sickness, or Melancholy, Madness, or any strange Convulsion-Fits; also
Blindness, Deafness, Swellings of all sorts, Pains or Lameness, Ioint-Gout or
Evil, Ulcers, Fistula's, Cankers or Cancers in any place. All sorts of Wens, or
any Excrescences that any way deform or incommode the Body. I have cured these,
and many other Infirmities, nay, when thought incurable by others.

I cut Hare-Lips, and in a Weeks time perfectly cure them. Likewise I cut
Wry-Necks, and put them to no Pain, setting the Head upright in less than half
a quarter of an hour, and in an hours time they may go about their Business,
without any Danger or Trouble.

I have also rare Oils and Waters, famous for the Cure of most Distempers of
the Eyes, without Pain or Smart. I couch Cataracts as dexterously as any Man
whatsoever, restoring the Sight thereby in less than half an hours time, so as
they may see to tell Money. No Sight, no Money is required of them. I ask no
Reward till their Sight is restored.

So likewise for Deafness, if I see the Party, I will inform him where the
Defect lies, and what it is that obstructs or hinders their Hearing, and also
cure them if curable.

I dexterously perform all Chirurgical Operations; as Amputations of all sorts,
as cutting off Mortified Limbs, Wens, or Cancerated Breasts, performing the
Operation with Ease, Safety and Speed. I cut for the Stone in the Neck of the
Bladder, or in the Carnosity of the Yard.

I set broken Bones, or dislocated Joints. Limbs sprain'd or out of Joint, I
restore to their perfect Use and Strength, in a short time. I let Blood, and in
all Cases inform People which Vein is most proper for them to have opened,
which is a thing very necessary, since there are Twenty Four Veins Bleedable,
and of them not many know which ought to be breathed for such a Distemper, and
which ought not; for it is not a thing indifferent (as some foolishly think)
which you bleed.

Also, by Virtue of the Magnetic Stone, I draw Teeth, nay, even stumps of
Teeth, with little or no Pain.

As for my Medicines in general, did I not know them to be good, I would never
commend them as (...) do, since I send them no further than I am known or
whither I often go: I am able to justify their goodness and safety, knowing
there can be no mistake in their Preparations, being honestly and carefully
prepared according to Art, not by the hands o^ Servants, but by my own, who
have often experienc'^ them with good success, by reason whereof, many mistakes
and dangers are avoided, and for that I do prepare them my self, I can afford
them more reasonable than others. In fine, if my Directions be truly observed
in their Application, I am well assured they will certainly have the promised
effect, to the Patients Ease and my Credit: Nay, I can by experience affirm,
they fail not where there is any probability of the Patients being cured;
besides, the like was never before Sold upon a more reasonable Proposal than
what I make, which is, that if they find no benefit by them, after they have
made trial of them, let them return the Book, the empty Pots, Viols and Bills,
and they shall have their Money returned them again; and because I know their
great effects to be beyond all other ordinary Means, I make this free and
generous Publication of my assured and much approved Medicines, being both
proper to Cure the Diseased, and excellent in preventing Diseases in those that
are ^ot yet Sick.

And that the good I intend may be the more Uni^ersal, if any person living
remote please to Sell my Medicines for me, they shall have them with Printed
^irections to instruct them in their use.

Any Person may have of me the before mentioned Medicines, or any other proper
for their Distempers, any day in the Week at my House in Stoke near Guil^ord in
Surry, and every Saturday at the Red-Lyon in Guilford, for the convenience of
those that come to that Market; And every Tuesday I go to my House ^t Thorp
near Chersey, and stay there till Wednesday Ten of the Clock, and then go to
the Swan at Chersey ^here I stay till Four in the Afternoon, and then I go ^o
my House in Stoke, but my Son is all the Week at Thorp, to dispose of my
Medicines to all that desire them: He Bleeds very well, and I instruct him in
Physic, and by God's assistance intend to make him ^ Proficient in that Art.

I Resolve any that come to me at first Sight of them or their Urine, what
their Distempers are, and whether Curable or not; for it is not my Principle ^o
delude any with vain hopes, where I find that there ^s no probability of a
Cure; I tell all honestly and ^incerely what will probably be the Event of
their Disease. For casting of Urin, and giving my Judgment thereon, I have only
a Six-penny Reward.

Now, out of the great Love I bear to my Countrymen, that they may not be
imposed upon, I will give you an Account what Fees properly belong to every
Physician and Surgeon, and what they can lawfully demand when sent for, and if
they demand more, you may refuse to give it, which is as follows,

To a Graduate in Physic, one that has taken hi^ Doctors Degree, his due is
but Ten Shillings, thoug^ he commonly expects or demands Twenty.

Those that are only Licensed Physicians, their du^ is no more than Six
Shillings and Eight Pence, thoug^ they commonly demand Ten Shillings.

Now, all that are Sworn Physicians, are obliged t^ go, if sent for, at all
Times and Seasons, Day (...) Night, without a Fee, but when they come to the
Patient, they may choose to give their Advice or Medicines before they are
satisfied who will pay them and if they Act contary hereunto, it will not stan^
good in Law; and when they give in their Bill, the^ must incert all the
Medicines they Administered b^ Name, and if you think or imagine you are charge^
too high, you may show the Bill to some other Pract^tioner, and if he has
reckoned extravagantly, (...) him moderate it according to honesty and Justice
(...) both sides, not undervaluing the Medicines on (...) one hand, or put too
great a price on the other; for if a Physician Sue a Patient, the Rates of the
Medicin^ must be valued by a Jury, part of which must (...) Practitioners in
Physic, so that in the end the Doct^^ will only Recover what the Jury upon a
serious per^sal of the Bill shall think fit.

It Is the same thing with a Surgeon that is sent (...) to set Bones broken or
out of Joint, or to (...) Wounds, or to let Blood, for every Sworn Surge^^ is
bound to go when sent for, though he may choose whither he will act or no till he
know who must pay hi^ A Surgeons just due is Twelve pence a Mile, be (...)
Journey far or near; Ten Groats to set a Bone (...) or out of Joint, and for
letting of Blood one Shillin^ the cutting off or Amputation of any Limb is
(...) Pounds for so doing, with the Astringent and dressi^^ the first time, but
for the Cure, there is no settled Price, therefore he must have what is
Bargained for. And so much for the Fees of Physicians and Surgeons.

I have already said what sort of Men Physicians and Surgeons ought to be; Now
I will give an Account what sort of Men many of them are:

Some of the Pretenders to these excellent Arts are like the Gr^ve, never
satisfied; and if at any time they by chance do Cure the Patients Body, they
are sure (with Aesop's Physician) to leave their Purses in a Consumption, and
even their Houses as empty of Goods as their Pockets of Gold.

Others have little of the Artist in them besides hard words and the Latin
Tongue, mere accidental Accomplishments, as all understanding Men know, and, as
I have elsewhere fully proved, is no ways Essential to the making up of a
Physician or Surgeon. There are others, who, although they have added to their
Skill in Languages the dazeling addition of an University Degree, yet, by being
ignorant of Astrology and Anatomy, are, in the Judgment of Galen, no better
than foolish Pretenders, and with good Reason, for where Essentials ar^
wanting, the fluttering Ornaments of Degrees, Latin and Greek, are but of
small, ^ay, rather of no value at all; and these are indeed of all Quacks the
most dangerous, because the most capable of wheedling honest People into their
destructive hands: I have not time now to give Instances of the Bloody effects
of their Practice; but let this suffice, That some by their bought Titles in
Foreign Universities, and loud pretenses of Practice in Outlandish Hospitals,
become dangerously Popular, and prodigious Proud of their Counterfeit Honor:
But, alas, what danger hangs over the heads of those poor Sick creatures, who
are decoyed into the Snares of Ignorance and Cruelty, by the specious pretense
of feigned Travels, Counterfeit, or at the best, but empty Titles, and
Chimerical Hospitals.

There are not a few who are nothing but Froth, Noise, and Impudence, and by
these Links of the same Chain fetter the easy, unthinking, and innocent People
in the Bonds of a deadly Credulity: These Empericks out-brave their betters,
and boast that they excel most Practitioners, and equal the best.

I have observed in many of them this Evil Custom* that whatsoever an honest
Man shall speak or perform, they will contradict and dispraise, resolving, that
since they have no performances of their own to Boast of, they will discredit
those of other Men's, thinking, by disgracing others, to advance the^^ own
Reputation.

It Is also common for the Servants of Deceased Physicians, to Usurp the Name of
Doctor; These make the Ignorant believe they know much, by reason they Copied
out their Masters Bills and Prescriptions and withal observed their benign
Success when properly applied: But, alas, in these Men's hands the^^ good
Prescriptions seldom work such wholesom^ Effects, because the givers know not
in what quantit^ time, and disease, they ought to be Administered This is also
the fault of many Apothecaries, who^ some skilful Physician has long employed,
but all th^^ is not sufficient to make a Horse Doctor, much less Physician or
Surgeon: No, these Arts are not to b^ acquired without new Labor, great Care,
and lon^ Practice; so that I dare say, most of these, as we^^ as those that
have naught but Greek and Latin, (...) more than they Cure.

There are some Ecclesiastical Men also that Pra^tice Physic, at which some
Phisicians Cavil, but for ^y part, I should very well approve of their doings,
^id they (as they ought) administer Physic to their ^oor Neighbors for
Charity, without any hopes or ^xpectation of a Reward.

In the next place I see a crowd of Women Doctors, whom I have before
Uncharacterized; these, as they are (...) Law and Nature subject to Man, ought
not to ^eddle with an Art far beyond a Feminine strength; am of the opinion,
they would do much better, if ^hey would be more industrious in their Household
^ffairs, in keeping their House sweet and clean, make their Beds well, boil the
Pot, cullice Barley Broth, ^ake Almond Milk, and such like things, than to
^eddle with Physic or Surgery; nay, even Ladies, ^ho pretend to give
Physic for Charity, and yet do ^ccept of Presents of a greater value than a
Conscioable Doctors Fee: These may sit still for any good ^hey do the Public.

There ar^ of late a sort of Erratick Practitioners ^prung up to the scandal of
Art, called Mountebanks, cannot but wonder that People will be so dis-inge^uous
to their own welfare, that they will sooner ^rust themselves with these
Catterpillars, (who stay no ^onger in a place than you feed them with Money)
^han with a known experienced Phisician or Surgeon, that has lived many years
by them, that is able to ^o them Service when ever they have occasion: But ^n
the contrary, I have observed the meanest sort of People, who always plead
Poverty to a Neighbour^ng Phisician, will find Money enough to give to a
Mountebank* who perhaps (in other places where he ^s known) was not thought
Skilful enough to give a Drench to a Horse: These ignorant and impudent
Pretenders, who know nothing of Physic, but mak^ the poor unthinking people
believe them to be (...) fellows; but if diligently observed by an indifferen^
Person, they will ^ind all their discourse to their Auditors, nothing else but
a company of egregious Lie^^ backed with Noise and Nonsense, and have the
aud^cious Impudence to pretend that they have the onl^ Arca^um or Secret yet
known to the Christian Worl^ when at the same time (it is well known to some
that those few things they expose to Sale on the^ Stage, or on Horseback, they
are wholly ignorant (...) the true Virtue of them, which any Artist may ea^il^
discover, by asking them a question or two; for ho^ is it possible that
Tumblers and Rope-Dancers, an^ other illiterate Fellows, who know nothing of
Medicine, should undertake to Cure people of all Distempers, when indeed all
their knowledge lies in (...) making up five or six things they sell in their
Pacque^ one of which they are pleased to call an Ant^do^^ which they say, (if
you dare believe them) expel Poison, and if Mr. Mounteba^k will be pleased to
ma^^ an experiment upon himself first, we shall be bette^ able to judge of his
Medicine: Another is a Balsa^ to cure all sorts of Wounds; an Ointment to cu^^
all sorts of Burns and Scalds; a Dose of Pills which cures all Distempers; also
an in^omparable Stiptic^ Water which stanches the Blood when Legs and Arm^ are
^ut off; but before I give too much credit t^ this much applauded Medicine, I
shall beg the sam^ request of him in this as I did of his Antidote, that (...)
would be pleased try the Experiment upon himself and then I doubt not but he
will save the Hangma^ the Labor: He has likewise another great Secret called
an An^^l^^, which is an excellent Remedy (as he says) against Witchcraf^, but I
think they are Bewich'd that believe him. Never was the World more pestered
with these Impostors, for they creep now adays into small Villages, telling a
Thousand Lies to thrust off their Trash and Trumpery, making the poor ignorant
people believe they are the only Men in the World for curing all Distempers
incident to Mankind: They commonly take half the Money in hand they agree for,
which is more many times than an understanding Phisician would really have for
performing the Cure; nay, they often leave the Patient in a worse Condition
than when they first undertook them. On their Stages they give a large account
of their great performances in Remote Parts, which, if but thoroughly known,
would be found for the most part as false as the Narration is loud and
vociferous. And if at any time they by chance perform a Cure, they are so
ignorant, that they cannot give the Reason for such benign Effects.

I cannot but stand in admiration at the Folly and Madness of such, who will
let such strange Fopperies, foolish Pastimes, and Iack-Pudding Tricks, chouse
them out of their Money, and of what is more precious, their Health too boot!
Who would think that Men would hazard their Lives, (which every one esteems so
dear unto them) by letting these unskilful and ignorant Pretenders, try their
skill (with unknown Medicines) upon their Bodies.

I will appe^al to any Judicious Person, is it not much better to make use of
experienced Men you have long been acquai^ted with, or else have been credibly
informed of their great Success in Relieving Mankind: I wish I could be so
prevalent, to persuade you not to ^rust to Improbabilities, nor to the
Performances of Unskilful Hands, whose Avarice is such, that they will hazard
their own Reputation, as well as their Patients Life, for a small Sum of Money:
It Is their Money they only aim at, when they have gotten that, they have
accomplished their desire: And thus much for these Mountebanks, or rather
Vagabonds, who are in Religion Atheists; in Diet Epicureans; in Habitation
Vbiquitarians; who are of as little Esteem among the best sort of People, as
the wandering Gypsies are among the greatest Professors of Christianity.

And now I am come to a Crew of Cheats (in Balneo Maria) who would fain be
accounted Chemical Doctors, which is much to be questioned whether they ever
made any Process in the Chemical Art, yet they have the confidence to talk and
boast of their preparing the best Medicines that can be performed in that most
Noble Art, when alas, these bragging and bouncing Fellows, are in no greater
Esteem among Artists, than a Mountebank is with an Experienced Phisician: They
make a great noise of a Chemical Water that will cure the Scrubbado, commonly
called the Itch; and a most excellent Chemical Powder, that will restore
decayed Nature, and make them look Youthful, though much stricken in Age; also
a most admirable Arcanum or Secret, which is a long while a Preparing, a few
drops being taken in a Glass of good Sack, will restore a lost Maidenhead of
Seven years standing. If you will take the pains to go into their Elabaratory,
you will find there has been hot doings, by the broken Pots and Glasses, and
other Chemical Vtensils, which had long since gone through the Fiery Trial, but
has of late days desisted from such a dangerous Enterprise for fear of setting
their houses on Fire: From such a crew of Salamander Doctors and
Stage-Mounters, I admonish all people to be aware of, as they tender their own
Welfare.

Now, my Advise is, that all honest People would avoid the dealing with any of
these dangerous Pretenders, by adhearing to the Prescriptions of Experienced
Phisicians, who are the only Men to be confided in.

Finally, I give the Honor of the Success of my Labors unto God Almighty, who
restores all the Afflicted, if it be his blessed Will, to perfectness of
Health, stability of Strength, cheerfulness of Mind, and liveliness of Faith,
purely out of his free Mercy and Bounty.

Lastly, I heartily wish that when this our precarious Life is ended, we may
all be Elevated to those higher Orbs and Heavenly Mansions of inviolable
Happiness, where the Sun shall be no more our Light by Day, nor the Moon by
Night, but the Lord our God remain our everlasting Light and Glory, Amen.

This Reader, is the daily Prayer of Your true Friend and Humble Servant, D.
Irish.

David Irish, Practitioner in Physic, His Advice concerning Melancholy,
Frenzy, and Madness.
I Purpose, dear Countrymen, in this Discourse, to show the difference betwixt
Frenzy, Madness, Melancholy, and a Distressed Conscience oppressed with the
Sense of Sin, with many other things not unprofitable for thee to Read, nor
unbecoming me to Write.

Before I define Melancholy, for the clearer understanding of that wherein I
mean to Instruct you, it will be necessary to set forth the di^erse
acceptations of the word Melancholy, which therefore is very equivocal, for
that under one name it is so differently applied, that it requires several
Definitions according to its diversity of Significations. Sometimes it
signifies a certain fearful disposition of the Mind deviated from Reason, and
sometimes an humor of the Body commonly taken to be the Cause that the Reason
is depraved through fear.

This Humor is of two sorts, Natural or Unnatural, Natural is either the
grosser part of the Blood ordained for Nourishment, which through too great
Plenty or immoderate Heat, overchargeth the Body, and yields up to the Brain
certain Vapors, whereby the Understanding is obscured, or else is an Excrement
ordained to be Emitted out of the Body through so many alterations of Natural
Heat and variety of concoctions, having not a drop of nourishing Juice
remaining, whereby the Body, either in Power or Substance, may be Relieved.

If this Excrement keeps within Bounds, it produces less inconvenience or
trouble to the Body or Mind; but if it corrupt or degenerate further from it
self and the quality of the Body, then Perturbations and Passions are more
Vehement, and do so outragiously oppress and disturb the sedateness of the
Mind, that all the organical Actions thereof are mixed and affected, (I had
like to have said infected) with Melancholy-Madness, and Reason thereby is
converted in^^ a vain fear, or becomes a downright Desperation; and now the
Brain is quite altered in its Complexion, being as it were transported into an
Instrument of a different nature from what it was at first; and I have
observed, that these Humors do according to the diversity of their settling,
fill the Patient with diversity of Passions, and no wonder since thereby they
diversely affect the understanding. In a word, they strangly alter the* natural
Inclination and Affection, especially if by corruption of Nature, Education or
Custom, the Party be rash and hasty.

The ^nnatural is an humor arising of the Melancholy beforementioned, or else
from Blood or Choler, totally changed as it were into another Nature by an
unkindly heat, which violently turns these humors that before were obedient
to Natures Government, and by her kept in good order and decorum, into a
quality wholly repugnant, whose substance and vapors gives such annoyance to
all parts where it passes or is seated, that it makes strange alterations in
Men's Actions, whether they be Animal, Voluntary, or Natural, not depending on
our Will.

And here observe, that all Actions proceed from some faculty, and that Man
being composed of Body and Soul, has two sorts of Faculties, viz. Corporeal and
Spiritual, the Corporeal faculties are such as belong to Man, as he is a living
Creature, and are common to him and even to Plants, or else are such as belong
to him as he is a sensitive Creature, and are common to him and Beasts.

The faculties common to Man and Plants are three, First, The Nutritive, by
which he is nourished, and converts Aliments into his own Substance. Secondly,
The Auctritive faculty, by which he grows bigger. And lastly, The faculty of
continuing his ^pecies, by which in his Offspring his Nature as Man is
preserved or continued.

The faculties common to Man and Beast are three, that is, Sense, Appetite, and
Power to Move. Sense is twofold, External and Internal. The Spiritual faculties
of Man, which are peculiarly proper to him as Man, are three, Understanding,
Will, Memory. Now, the Humors before mentioned, make strange alterations in
Men's actions, from what faculty soever they proceed.

As to the Definition, or what Melancholy ^s, as was hinted before, the things
being diverse, ^^ough the word be the same, yet the Definition must be diverse
also; Therefore Melancholy is of the Humor, or of the Passion: The Humor is
either a Nutritive Juice or an Excrement; at this time then I will define the
Humor to be no other than that part of the Blood which naturally is more gross
than all the rest; and the Excrement to be the superfluity of the same, which
if it putrify, assumes a far different Name, Temper, and Nature, commonly
called Black Cholar.

The Melancholy Passion is a doting of Reason, occa^ioned by vain fear,
procured by the prevalency of ^he Melancholy Humor: We divide this Disease
into Melancholy Cephalic, and Hypocondriack.

A Cephalic is when the disorder has its Residence about the lower part of the
Abdomen, the Brain is ^hiefly affected, which being disturbed, Men frame
^trange Fancies, and monstrous Idea's of things; all Melancholy people are
extraordinary fearful, sad, and ^nactive.

According to the order I have observed in divi^ing Melancholy, it remains that
I now speak of that which is called Hypocondriack, which, for the most ^art,
renders those Afflicted therewith, more stupid ^han any other sort does,
insomuch that they are ^any times deprived of all Sense and Motion: This ^ort
proceeds from Phlegm obstructing the Hypocondria and Spleen.

Hypocrates asserts, that the Soul in this Distemper (...) distinctly affected
with the weightier matter with^n, and so neglects the Bodies Motions, by reason
of ^he Brains stupidity through the aforesaid Humor.

If the Brain be hurt by Communication from or by ^he Spleen, Hypocondria, or
Womb, then the Melancholy Humors are gathered there, and then the symptoms
^ommonly are gathered from the Parts affected, as it ^ppears in Childbearing
Women whose Lechia are ^^opt, or in Maids when their Terms do not flow, the
blood is spoiled and becomes more fixed, and is turned into a Melancholy
Dyscrasie, and that by this mea^ this Distemper arises, for which reason the
Ancien^^ blame the Spleen; but our Opinion is, that rather t^^ Morbid Sourse
than the Disease it self lies there: The Famous Willis thinks that both the
Heart and Bra^^ in this Case are affected; and some think the Corpore^^ Soul to
be the Subject of it. Helmont thinks it li^ out of the Brain, and is in the
Praecordia, and abo^^ the Mouth of the Stomach: Our own opinion in sho^^ is,
that it has its Residence in the Globous frame (...) the Brain, which being the
principal part and fou^tain from whence the Animal Spirits issue out in^^ every
corner of the Body; if they be dull, langui^^ and unactive, the Hypocondria,
Spleen, Liver, Pancre^^ Mesentery, Womb, etc. being thereby deprived (...)
their Firmentations must needs suffer, and be recept^cles of latent Evils.

The causes of excess of this Humor are diver^ and all (except it be received
from the Parent) spri^^ from fault of Diet; now, although Meats and Drin^ chiefly
do yield matter to this Humor, yet, besid^ we may add the Complexions
inclining to such Tempe^ It Is also increased by Perturbation of Mind, by (...)
temper of Air, and kind of Habitation; and that (...) which otherwise would
yield a nutritive Juice (...) the best sort, by these occasions is turned into
the Dregs of Melancholy. To conclude, if either Hum^^^ or Excrement should have
part in moving the (...), no Counsel of Philosophy, nor Precepts (...) Wise
Men, are comparable for calming these (...) Passions unto the Purging Potions
of Physicians; (...) in this case several use the Ellebores of Anticera, (...),
and Colycinthy of Spain, together with the (...) of Alexandria, but I have far
better Remedi^^ than some of them, which my long Experience (...) to be almost
Infallible.

There are several that pretend to cure Melancholy and Madness as well as other
Distempers, but I shall ^ot so mispend my time, as to give an account of ^^ch
Hare-brain'd fellows, whose shallow Capacities and short Experience are unable
to fathom the depth ^f such a Chronick Distemper, but allow every Sect to
^ollow their own Doctors Dictates, notwithstanding ^here are Hippocrites in
Arts as well as Religions. ^ut this by the by. Now to my Subject.

This Melancholy and Excrement, let me tell you, is ^red of Melancholy Juice
drawn off the Milt out of ^he Liver by a branch of the Port Vein, wherewith
^eing nourished, it rejects the rest as mere Excre^ental, and voideth part
into the Mouth of the Sto^ach to provoke Appetite and Hunger, and passes ^he
other part in some Persons by the Haemorrhoid ^eins into the Siege: It
abounds there when it is ^indred of such passage as Nature requires, or else
^y feebleness of the Part it is not able either to suck ^he Melancholy from the
Blood, or discharge it self unto those passages which Nature has thereto
or^ained; such a^e always very hungry and lean.

This Member (I mean the Spleen) of the whole Body is greatest and worst
favored to behold, black ^f color, and evil savoured if tasted, and gives a
^anifest sign of Natures strong desire to that whereto ^t is most like: Hence
the Spleen delights more in, and is better pleased with these muddy dregs, than
it ^ould be with purer and finer Blood, which if it should be offered to other
Parts, they would abstain, ^xcept great want so far overcame their aversion as
^o make them entertain a little of it. Thus much of ^he cause of Natural
Melancholy, both Juice and Ex^rem^nt; it remains next to show, what the
H^mour ^s which raises this or any else called by the Name of Melancholy, and
also to show what Burnt Cholar and causes thereof.

That kind of Melancholy, called Atra Bilis, com^ by excessive heat of the
Parts where it is engend^^ or received, whereby the Humor is made so add^^^
that it becomes of such an exulcerating and frett^^^ quality, as to wast those
parts where it lighte^ This most commonly arises of the Melancholy E^crement
before spoken of, and diverse times of (...) other thick part of Blood, as also
of the Cholar (...) Salt Phlegm which contract such heat, partly by d^stempers
of the Body and partly by Putrefacti^^ which produces an humor breeding most
terri^^^ accidents and pains to the Body, which the Melanch^^^ and gross Blood
does more forcably procure, beca^^^ the grosser the substance is into which it
is receive^ the more violently it consumes. Cholar being (...) Nature of the
hottest temper, carries with it mo^^ degrees of heat than the other Humors.

Now to know whether the perturbations rise (...) the Humor or not: The
perturbations are taken commonly to rise of Melancholy, Cholar, Blood, (...)
Phlegm, therefore we call Men of a hasty disposition Choleric, those of sad
dispositions Melancholy, tho^^ of heavy and dull Phlegmatic, others of merry
an^ cheerful Sanguine.

Melancholy differs from Frenzy and Madness, tho^^ in some respects they are
near a Kin, for they all disturb the Reason; they differ thus, a Frenzy has
always a Burning Fever; those that are taken with thi^ Disease are so Mad, that
they furiously fall upon an^ body, and it is strange and admirable they do no^
destroy themselves, so exorbitant is the Malady; and such was their Infirmity
spoken of in the Scripture, Mat. 8.28.24. They spare not their Parents, nor
^^eir best Friends, but are often most of all invete^^te against them, and it is
no wonder, since they bid ^^fiance to self-Preservation (the oldest Principle
of nature) that they often attempt to lay violent hands ^^on themselves,
therefore great care ought to be ^^ken of them: They are usually Untractable,
Talk^^^ve, with strange Gestures, as Jumping, Singing, ^ancing, and Antickly
tossing their Heads, writhing ^^eir Bodies, and generally look Surly and
Haughty, (...) sometimes they will seem Mild.

The common symptoms which attend most Mad ^^ople, are constant Watchings, and
a prodigious ^^rculean strength; they can endure the greatest (...), Hungar and
Stripes, without any sensible harm; (...) sometimes Swear, Shout, and on a
sudden make ^^^ange Noises; they play Apish tricks, often pulling ^^eir own
Hair, tearing their Clothes, breaking their ^^ndows, etc. they are strong and
never tired out, (...) often muttering something to themselves as if it (...)
about great matters; they are sometimes too ^erry, and often too Sad, they
sometimes Laugh, and ^^^etimes Cry, and are fearful where no fear ought (...)
be, and on a sudden become hasty, frappish, angry, ^^sterous, breaking their
Chains and Fetters, beating (...) pieces Walls and Doors, nay, every thing that
^^nds in their reach to be sure goes to wrack when (...) surly Fit is upon
them; though they sleep little (...) or Night, yet are they incredibly strong;
they (...) very turbulent in their Anger, showing much (...), brawling,
shouting, and frame dreadful (...) by reason of the fiery strength of the
Animal (...), which darts vigorously through all the Pores of (...) distempered
Body; hence also it is that they endure the severest Cold (though stark Naked)
with(...) the least concern: Some say they are not sensible of Cold, etc.
because (as they imagine) the Soul is so bus^^ within, that it does not attend
to what is of less concern without, neither do they scarce perce^^^ any
inconvenience by such things as much annoy others* sometimes they are as Sav^^e
as Wild Beasts, their Eyes look stern, big, and attentive, and they are eve^^
contriving some Mischief, because the Animal Spirit pass furiously through the
Brain, by reason of which they are sometimes so Mad as to reproach and Cur^^
themselves and others, at such times they ought (...) be Fettered.

Madness often derives its Origin from the extr^vagant height of some Passion,
such as Fear, Lo^^ Ambition, Covetuousness, Care, Study, etc. Helm^^ says, it
proceeds from Agony, Fear, Wrath, En^^ Ambition, Love, Pride, great Study,
Care, Shame, etc. The Mad people are frequently solicitous about Ma^ters above
their reach, or about business that no wa^ concern them. Lastly, Some are prone
to Vene^^ delighting much in Company, etc.

The Melancholy person walks in osbcure places, sad and heavy, often museth,
imagining and speaki^^ many ridiculous things, but usuall^ fixes upon (...)
trifle; he will not be persuaded from what he fancy ^or though he fancy himself
a King, a Prince or Proph^^ or indeed any thing else, he will industriously
im^^tate the Person or Character he puts upon himse^^. Some that are afflicted
with Melancholy are weary (...) their Lives, have ill thoughts, talk idly, or
without any order or coherence; they also take pleasure (...) Solitude, are
subject to Weep, and are often tak^^ with a sudden dislike of what they
formerly (...) affected; they are so jealous, that they think eve^^ body cheats
and lays snares for them; they are afr^^^ of being Poisoned, their sleep is but
little, and (...) troubled with strange frightful Dreams; some have a silly
foolish Laughter; and these are the most gene^al Signs.

But to lay open all the Symptoms and their Causes, would take up too much
Room; they ought to refrain from Wines, Spirits, and hot Cordials; likewis^
strong Beer is hurtful, though they complain of a cold^^ss i^ their Stomach or
elsewhere, yet such liquo^s mu^^ be denied them; and indeed as to strong ^rink*
I would have all Men remember the Ancient ^bserva^^on of the Heathen, in
drinking to the Ho^our of their Gods; the first Bowl was, they s^id* ^o Iup^t^^
Olympus, the second to the Heroes, and the ^hird to Jupiter Sospiter* Or take
it thus, The first to their Health, ^he second to their Friend, and the ^hird
to their Rest; what was more than this they ^eckoned Madness, and injurious to
their Health: ^n lik^ manner we Physicians usually attribute the ^^rst Glass to
the quenching of our Thi^st, the second ^o Pl^^sure, the third to Drunkenness,
and the four^h^o M^dness; but if ^hey drink more, you need not ^oubt but they will
make as bad a Bussel and Noise as the ^oudest graduate in Moorfi^lds College,
alias Bedlam* ^or as a ^oaded Ship in a great Storm when the Pilate ^s a Sleep,
or when her Rudde^ is lost, cannot Stee^ ^igh^, so those that have their Senses
overwhelmed ^ith Wine or other strong Liquors, or their Minds ^pprest with
strange imaginations and disorders, ^un against the Rocks of Folly* 'Twas
Pythagoras his Opinion, that all disorders of the Mind or Body, are ^o many
causes of Madness: Therefore let all People ^ndeavour to be moderate in all
things, as well in all ^inds of Studies, as in Meats and Drinks, which supply
^he four Humors of the Body, for if any of them do ^^per abound, Diseas^s
follow at best, if not some sort ^f Mad^ess or other.

For it is no Wonder if that Liquors can
Transform and Change the fickle mind of Man.
As the ordinary cure of all Diseases and ways (...) help Infirmities, are to
be begun with removing su^^ Causes as first procured the Malady, even so the
(...) thing to be done in restoring Melancholy Men, is (...) fortisie the Brain
and Heart, and so bring them to better state of mind and cheer, and this is to
be eff^cted by removing such causes that first procured the^^ Indisposition;
but for perfecting the Cure, if tho^^ that are Afflicted with this or any other
Disease, desire a Physician that will truly and justly proc^ed (...) the Cure
of what he undertakes without any frau^ this is then to certify such, That if
they think ^it (...) make use or choice of Me, I will honestly and
exp^ditiously do my endeavor to restore them to th^^^ former state of Health,
Strength, and Tranquillity.

But now it is time to show the difference betwi^^ the aforesaid Melancholy and
a Distressed Conscien^^ First then, whatsoever molestation arises directly
(...) a proper O^ject of the Mind, the same is not in (...) respect Melancholy,
but has a further ground th^^ Fancy; and if the Molestation proceed from a
con^^deration of things done that are really sinful in themselves, such Trouble
has its ^rigen from Conscien^^ condemning the Guilty Soul according to those
E^graven Laws of Nature, which no Man is void of (...) he never so Mean,
Illiterate, or Rude: This taken nothing of the Body, nor intermeddleth with
H^mours, but gives a direct Wound with those (...) Darts, which many thus
Afflicted most sensibly (...) and complain of. Nay, This Infirmity is of so
(...) Latitude, since all Men are Sinners, that there is one but what, more or
less, betimes labor under it, and some being highly culpable of the breach of
^ods Laws, incur the Punishment of Condemnation* and through the sense of that
miserable Condition, fall ^^to deep Despair: Such say that they feel the Wrath
^f God kindled against their Souls, their anguish of ^onscience is so
intolerable, that they find no releas^ent though Prayers and Supplications are
made unto ^^e Lord for them, by reason that in their own ag^ravating Judgment
they stand as Reprobates to God, ^s excluded from his Covenant, and void of all
hopes ^f inheriting the Kingdom of Heaven, and rest assu^ed, that the
termination of their Life will be the ^eginning of a Condemnation which will
never have and.

I pray you, dear Melancholy Christian, consider God^ ^ercies of old, and your
own former Experience of his ^avours; call to mind those holy Testimonies of
^lection, which no doubt but some of you have in ^^mes past found in your
selves; this done, consider ^hether you are not under some Temptation, than ^as
you imagine) God's Anger; for Satan tempts (...) in the very utmost recesses
of our hearts; for he ^eing a Spirit, it is not to be doubted but that he has
(...) Spiritual access into our Spirits to trouble them, and ^isorder their
Operations by a spiritual or subtle conference, whereby he bears too great a
sway in them* this may seem the more probable, because it is ^bse^v'd, that
these in this sad Condition alter the ^ccent of their Speech, and show great
disorder in ^he^r discourse, it being far otherwise than what i^ ^as before.
Nay, it may seem that their whole Nature is at Satan's beck, and their
utterance wholly ^as he suggesteth; but as to these Speculations, and
Instructions in this matter, I refer you to the Judgments and Resolutions of
Divines, whose Provinc^ it is to consider, and who no doubt will put you i^
mind how the Spirit of God calls Satan the Tempter, the Deceiver of the
World, the Accuser of the Faithful, the Dragon and Old Serpent; and in sine* a
Liar, and the Father of Lies.

Now, if the condition of your Affliction be onl^ some kind of Temptation,
which I doubt not but to make manifest and plain, then ought you to estee^ of
your Case as more Comfortable than through Erro^ you do, and to attend with
Patience the Issue, which in such as have been in like Circumstances, have
afterward given evident Testimonies of Salvation: Nay* such have not only felt
a spiritual Joy and Comfor^ in themselves, but in the end, have also become
abl^ to confirm others, both by their own Examples, and words of great
Consolation from their own Experience; besides, in all kinds of Temptations
there is hopes; Examples of a good Issue are frequent in each kind: Yea, though
the Corporeal inhabiting of Satan is the greatest and fullest of Terrors, yet
the Evangelists testify of many that have been Dispossessed by the Power of
Christ, which Examples are writ for our Instructions against the like
Afflictions, which are Trials only for a Time. All God's Children have their
Salvation founded upon his Eternal Decree of Mercy toward them, it is Published
by the Preaching of the Gospel, and is Written and Sealed in the Hearts of his
Chosen by the power of the Spirit of Adoption, which cries, Abba Father, and
testifies in Measure, to some more, and some les^* according to the
Dispensation of Grace. There is no evident and undo^bted sign of Reprobation in
any while they live* (because they may Repent) only that Sin which is ^^lled
the Sin against the Holy Ghost is not Pardon^^le, and for which the Apostle
forbids us to Pray.

This Sin against the Holy Ghost, Divines expound (...) be an open wilful
Apostasy from God, with a ^^alitious hate against the Profession of his known
truth.

Next unto this Sin is final Impenitence, which ^^nnot be known till Death
makes show thereof, and (...) off all time of Repentance: The first Example
this kind was Cain, who complained that his Sins (...) greater than he could
bear: Such also was the ^^^guish of Esa^, when he found no Repentance after
(...) had sold his Birthright. Saul (if not a Reprob^te) ^t was Possessed, for
the Lord sent an Evil Spirit to ^^crease his Torment; but Judas was wholly
give^ (...) to Satan: This notorious Traitor, this heinous (...) despairing
Sinner before mentioned, Executed (...) Punishment upon himself which all
Traitors ^^serve; he took the Revenge due for the Betraying (...) Innocent
Blood upon himself with his own hands; (...) all whose Consciences are laden
with grievous (...), feel the punishment they Merit in their own ^arts, and
many times are driven to cruel Despair* ^n which nothing either more dishonors
God, or ^^ejudic^s Man. Also the Profane People of the ^orld, that either know
not Christ, or know him (...) vain, outward Profession only; if they finally
con(...) patterns of Iniquity, they will prove in the (...) dismal Examples of
God's Vengeance: But, if (...) greatest Offender Repent, and turn to the Lord,
(...) will wi^h Arms of Mercy receive and embrace (...).

Therefore, do works worthy of Repentance* (...) beware you think no Sin
greater than God's in(...) Mercy, since that Sin which is Unpardonable, is only
known to him from whom nothing is hi^ hence in this as in all Mysteries, it is
the best way (...) acquiesce, and not to search into them further (...) God
has Revealed, by whose Oracles we are i^form'd, that only one kind of Sin
cutteth off all hop^ of Salvation, because it is of such a Nature, that closes
up the Avenues of Repentance, being (...) height of all Iniquity, even equal
with that of (...) Devils themselves, who are shut out of God's fav^^ for ever.

Now let us seriously consider, whether you ha^^ sinned against the Holy Ghost
or not, which if (...)deed you have, as your humor would lead (...) where is
the Renouncing of God's Religion whi^^ you have hitherto professed and heartily
embrac'^ where is that Malice which procured this mischi^^ what Persecution
have you in word or deed (...) against the Truth of God's Word? what Sword
(...) you drawn against it? what Volumes have you (...) against sound Doctrine,
with a known and resol^^ opposition to your own Conscience? if your hum^^^ be
not able to allege such Testimonies against (...) self, what have you to fear
since this alone is tho^^^ to be the Sin against the Holy Ghost? Tho^^ it is
not certain (since God has not any where (...)) what particular Sin it is,
therefore be (...) too Cruel to your self, least by final Despair, (...)
prevent that Mercy you may, by a timely Repenta^^^ obtain.

Therefore, dear Melancholicks, I pray give (...) these imaginary conceits of
distrustful and danger prejudices against your selves, and prepare your he^^^
to receive the Comfort which the word of Pro^^ministreth unto you: Remember
that our Perfec^ lies without us, even in that unspotted Lamb (...) jesus,
whose Sacrifice is all-sufficient for all kinds of Sin. This Perfection we are
to hope for, and attend the ^onsummation of the rudiments of Righteousness:
^his, and the advised consideration of God's Pro^ises in his Word, with means
used, might easily ^elive^ you* and you may again (as David was) be ^esto^^d to
the wonted Joys of the sweet Mercies of ^he Lord.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This is to inform all Persons whom it may concern, that D. Irish does and will
(if God permit) in^truct his Son in the best and speediest way of curing
Melan^holy and Madness. And likewise, those Luna^icks which are not Curable, he
will take them for ^erm of Life, if paid Quarterly; such, and all others, (...)
takes on Reasonable Terms, allowing them good ^ires, Meat, and Drink, with good
attendance, and all necessaries far beyond what is allowed at Bedlam, or any
other place he has yet heard of and ^heaper, for he allows the Melancholy,
Mad, and such those Consciences are Oppressed with the sense of Sin, ^ood Meat
every day for Dinner, and also whole^ome Diet for Breakfast and Supper, and
good Table^eer enough at any time: They have also good Beds and Decent
Chambers, answerable to their Abilities; ^ll which necessaries are daily
allowed and given them according to agreement during the time a^reed for* they
are all carefully looked after by himself at his House in Stoke near Guilford
in Surry, ^ein^ a pleasant place and good Air; and such as ^lease ^o be at
Thorp, his Son looks after them by his ^athers directions, who comes every
Tuesday to see them, and instruct his Son in the true Method of curing such
distempered People.

Note also, That at Thorp any person may have at any time D. Irish's Medicines
of his Son for any Distemper incident to Men, Women, or Children, at reasonable
Rates, and every Tuesday they may there also have D. Irish's Advice.

The Conclusion of this Treatise.
I shall not here give you an Account, dear Countrymen, how to go through with
the Cur^ of Melanchol^ by Medicines and other Means, which I daily experience
to be successful, because I have no other Maintenance but my Practice,
therefore I shall conceal th^se Secrets, and will not impart them to any Person
whatsoever save only to my Posterity, to whom* if God send Life, I intend to
make expert in the Cure, not only of this, but of all other Diseases* But ^s to
you, my intention was not to make you a Phisician, or to give you a Warrant to
adventure upon Practice, as those do, who attempt to Cure diseases* by taking
Medicines upon trust out of any Book they meet with, many of which Medicines
are really insignificant or hurtful in most cases, and many of them though good,
yet are not so to all; for Medicines are like a Tool or Instrument of the
sharpes^ Edge, which if not wisely guided or handled wi^h the knowledge,
dexterity, and judgment thereto belonging, they may bring Death instead of
Health; but i^ wisely Administered, they will either restore or preserve Health;
therefore Men are not to be admitted to administer Physic who have no lawful
Call thereunto, no, the Phisicians hands should be washed pure and clean in the
waters of Understanding and Wisdom, before they meddle with the hidden
Mysteries of Physic. There are too many lewd cozening Va^lets which feed upon
the simplicity of the ignorant, and make the pretense of Physic the cloak of
their Idleness; these knowing nothing themselves, ven^ure t^eir Patients Lives
and their own Credit, upon unknown and unexperienced Receipts, which yet they
boldly Administer, and with them undertake to cure any Disease though ignorant of
the Nature of the Physic, and of the disposition of the Body or Part whereto
they apply it; yet alas, many apply themselves to such, before they will take
the Advice of able and experienced Practitioners, which indiscretion often
turns to their great Peril, many loosing their Limbs, Health, and Life, by such
Men's ignorant proceedings; when as on the other hand, we see by the goodness of
God, with the discreet applications of knowing and honest Phisicians, many reap
great benefit, being by them wonderfully restored to their former health and
strength. The right Phisician is indeed made of God for the health of Mankind;
therefore take courage, for many have been restored to their former State which
lay long languishing under the press^re of such most deplorable Distempers as
might be counted incurable; therefore, you that are any ways by Sickness ^ore
afflicted, ought no^ to despair, nor distrust God's ability, with means used to
r^store you to Health and Peace of Conscience; and when (by God's Blessing on
Man's endeavors) you are Recovered, let it be your Care to keep your self void
of Offense toward God and Man, 'till you put on a glorious Immortality.

In f^ne, as for my self, I humbly desire of the Lord to help me while I am
here in these lower Regio^s, amidst such boisterous Winds and Weather, to
endure all with a Patience becoming a Christian Phisician, and in all things to
obey his Divine Precepts, that when my Soul shall be freed from the Prison of
my Body, she may also be freed from all Sufferings, and translated to the happy
Mansions of my God, to which those Vapors that cause these Storms and T^mpests
can never ascend; there all Tears shall be wiped away from my Eyes, and my
present Sorrows turned into Joy: There, O Lord, thou will give me Beauty for
Ashes, and the Garment of Gladness for the Spirit of Heaviness; and put after
all my many and grievous conflicts with the World, the Flesh, and the Wicked
One, a Crown of Glory on my Head* a Song of Triumph in my Mouth, a Palm of
Victory in ^y Hand, and so to Reign with Thee for ever and ever* Amen. To which
happy State, that all Men may Arrive to, is the daily and fervent Prayer of,
kind Reader, and loving Countrymen,

Your Faithful Friend, and Well-wisher. David Irish.

David Irish, Practitioner in Physic and Surgery, HIS Missellany of Pious
Discourses.
Gloria in ^xcelsis Deo,
Glory be to God on High.
I Here purpose to give a short Explanation of the Great, Infinite, and first
Being, who Named himself Jehovah, and whom we call God; he ^old Moses who he
was, and what he should call him, and agreeable to the Style of Moses, we have
an account of him, Rev. 1. verse. 8. He is the only true Ete^^^l God, who was
before all things, and gave Being to all things; he is Everlasting, and has
his Being of himself; from him all things receive their Being* and in him they
End, says the Lord, Which is, and which was, ^^d which is to come, the
Almighty. -- Had he not ^amed himself, Man could not have told what Name to
have given so incomprehensible a Being, Who made all things by the Power of his
Word, See Genesis 1.

Man as well as all other Beings, had his beginni^^ from God, who is the Divine
Author of Heat, Ligh^ and Life in all C^eatures whatsoever, whom he (...)
preserves and governs in their wonderful Frame an^ Order; he being only
Infinite, Eternal, and all Potent, far above all things that Exist or have
Being i^ follows (since nothing finite can make it self) tha^ all Finite things
are the effect of his Omnipote^^ Power; For without him (says the Sacred
Pages) (...) not any thing made that was made, Joh. 1. Genesis 1. whe^^ we are
told, That in the beginning of Time, (...) Holy and undivided Trinity, God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, made the entire and Beautif^^ Machin of the World,
by which word, World, is mean^ both the Heavens, Earth, and Elements, togethe^
with all their Furniture (if I may so speak) and Inh^bitants: He made all
Animals by Pares, that from them others might derive their Being. The Heave^^
(as many believe) were made incorruptible, and are ordained for the Throne of
the most High, for who^ the Earth is ordained a Footstool, and all that Go^
made he approved of as good, Genesis 1. yet some pa^^ of his excellent Handy-works
soon degenerated from the perfection of their Original state and became ba^
therefore he prepared Hell for Lucifer, the Prince (...) rather Ringleader of
the Defection of the wicke^ Angels, and their Successors, False Prophets, an^
Evil Doers: After this, we read our Savior prepared a place of Honor for his
Saints, where (...) Spirits of the Righteous are made Perfect, and Reig^ with
him. God created the Angels to wait upon and attend him their Maker; but
Lucifer's pride mad^ him uneasy, even in the happiest of Created conditions,
to humble whom, God commissioned Micha^^ the Archangel, to expel him from the
Sacre^ Mansions of God's Holy City for his ambitious Rebellion: This was
quickly done, for the Loyal Champion hurried the Rebel into the lowest Hell;
and in a word, cleared the Palace of God from all the un^ra^eful Confederates,
some of whom it is thought remai^ in the Airy Region, for which reason, perhaps,
Lucifer is called the Prince thereof: Others of the aspiring Legions are
debased, and Rove to and fro, up and down the Earth, seeking whom they may
Destroy: Others were doomed into the heart of the Earth, which in an especial
manner is called Hell, where they remain Tortured and Tormenting all Evil doers
that are Eternally lost for their Iniquities. Finally, as for Lucifer himself,
he is res^rv'd in Chains in the River Vphra^es till the day of Judgment, and
then (...) all his wicked Agents, will be hurried into the most dreadful
Burning Lake.

God created two great Lights to give light to the Earth, and made Stars
without Number to adorn as it were the outworks of Heaven, all which, in
pursuance to God's command, run the course he at first appointed them. In
short, all Creatures which (if I may so speak) people the Elements, are the
handy works of God: Man, though the chief, yet, perhaps to teach him Humility,
was made of the mould of the Earth, and as some think, Adam, the first Man, was
made on a Friday about 3 of the Clock in the After^oon, and out of him Eve his
Wife, who bare several Children; and here I cannot but observe, that the first
War was about Religion, for Cain slew his Brother Abel by reason of his more
acceptable Sacrifice: Thus we may see, that in the Worlds Infancy, as well as
now, Goodness the Mark that Envy aimed at, and Innocence Persecuted by the
greatest Guilt, and Religion suffer by the hand of Hypocrisy and Cruelty; from
which, Good Lord deliver Us.

Though as you have heard, God at first made all things good, yet, besides the
mighty defection among the Angels, there grew also great Iniquity amongst Men*
so that God resolving to wash away the abominations of the World by W^ter,
commanded Noah t^ build an Ark, into which, according to God's appointment, all
living Creatures entered by Couple^ to replenish the Earth anew; but note ^ere,
that (...) some sorts there entered more than two, that No^^ might not want
proper Sacrifices to offer to the Lord* And thus much of Noah's Flood.

The Scriptures both in the Old and New Testament, plainly and copiously
declare the uncommunicable Attributes of the Lord, being the Heralds of his
Truth, and the Witnesses of his Mercies; the Instances they exhibit of his
ample performing the Tenure of his comfortable Promises, are as sufficie^^
Testimonies of his Infallible Truth, as the sending o^ his only Son is of his
Mercy; who, as his last Prophet Sealed up all the written Verities and
Command^we are Bound to Believe and observe: This is the Son of Righteousness,
whose refreshing Beams (...) Mercy shine upon our Souls to eternal Happiness.

Here it will not be amiss to give an Idea or Notion of God, as far as the
weakness of our understanding (...) able to perform; for none can say what the
Essence of God is, or which is the same, give a true and adequate Definition of
this infinitely perfect Essen^e, because he is in all his Perfections In^inite;
^ Spiritual Entity, whose Exis^ence is Eternally of himself* independent of all
other Beings, dwelling in Orbs (...) inaccessable Light, hence the Message
which we have heard of God in the first Epistle of ^ohn, Chap. 1. v. 5. tells
us, That he is of a most Pure, Simple, Holy, Perfect, and glorious Nature,
resembled by no Creature ^o much as by Exquisite Light, in which there is
nothing but clear and exact Brightness, without any ^he least mixture of
Darkness. He is Incomprehensible, therefore none but himself can give an
Account what he is. He had no Beginning, nor can he ever have an End, all times
and things, whether past or to come, are ever present to him, so that as I
often inculcate, it is impossible to speak him fully, yet so far as it has
pleased his Divine Majesty, out of his unspeakable Goodness, to Reveal himself
in his Word to us, we may to the utmost of our capacity express, as that he is
a glorious Spirit, full of Truth, and must therefore be Worshipped in Spirit
and in Truth* Now, there is no way but by consulting his Written Word, to know
in what particular manner we ought to Honor and Serve him.

Though, as is said, whatsoever we can say or conceive of God, comes far short
of his Excellency, yet it is lawful (as far as our weakness can reach) to say,
or rather lisp what he is, still regulating our discourse by the Line of his
Word; therefore, I say, he is an Independent Being existing of himself, Ego sum
qui sum, Exodus I am that I am, says the Lord, that is, he is alone of himself,
for all other things are not, but by him, nay, in him we live, move, and have
our Being, says St. Paul.

He is most Perfect, because he is the Fountain and Origin of all Perfection:
Be ye Perfect (says Christ) even as your heavenly Father is Perfect. He is
One. See (says the Lord) that I am alone, nor is there any other besides me.
And again, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; according to which, we say in
the Belief, I Believe in one God. He is simple, ^or Ioh. 4.24. He is called a
Spirit, now a Spirit is a simple Being, or a Being void of Material
Composition, therefore God, who is in all that he is Superlative, is
consequently most Simple.

He is Eternal; for says the Lord, Vivo ego in aeternum, I live for ever,
Deuteronomy. 22. And the Kingly Prophet cries out, Thou art the v^ry same, and thy
years have no end.

He is Immutable, as he speaks in Malachy 3. I am God, and not changed; which
is agreeable to Reason* thus, That is Immutable, which neither can be augmented
nor diminished; but God cannot be augmented, because most Perfect; nor
diminished because most Simple; Therefore he is most Immutable.

He is Immense, as the Wise Man speaks, Wisdom 1. The Spirit of the Lord has
filled all the World.

He is Infinite, for that is Infinite which has no Bounds, according to David,
The Lord is great, and of his greatness there is no End; besides, he must needs
be Infinite, whose Perfections are all Unlimited.

He is Omniscient, as appears from that of the Psalmist, Thou have understood
my Cogitations afar off, and have foreseen all my ways, and know all things
before they are done.

He is Just, according to that of David, Just is the Lord, and he hath-loved
Justice.

He is most Merciful, for the Mercies of the Lord ar^ above all his Works,
Psalm.

He is most Good, because the Fountain of all Goodness.

He is most True, because the first Truth.

He is Omnipotent, because he can do all that is possible, and from him is all
Power, both in Heaven and Earth; by me Kings Reign, Wisdom.

He is lastly, most Blessed, because he is the Felicity of himself, and of all
things whatsoever.

It Is from the consideration of these Divine Attrites, that multitudes of
Reasons may be drawn to courage us in our Duties: For Example, The con^ering of
God's Justice and Power, will stir up-in us ^ear of offending a Being both Just
and Omnipotent, (...) this fear will prove the beginning of the best of ^isdom*
I mean of an indefatigable endeavor to (...) his Written Laws and
Commandments; and ^^ese Attributes will make us know, that from, and in, (...)
by him, we enjoy Health, Live, Move, and have (...) Being, and that all we
Possess, descends from the ^ther of Light, see Iam. 1.17. Hence we ^ie under
obligation of giving him hearty and frequent ^hanks for the daily benefits we
receive from his ^^unty. Begin therefore every work in God, that ^^ereby it may
by him be Perfected, and for his Ho^^ur and Glory ended. Rely on Jesus Christ
as the (...) Foundation that can be laid for us to Build upon, testi^ieth both
Experience, Practice, and the con(...) of Sacred Writers, whose Example I
purpose to ^low, that with them I may enterprise every thing (...), proceed
orderly, and produce an end to the honor of God, and the good of my self and
fellow ^^eatures.

The Scriptures contain the profound Misterie^ of ^od's Excellence, and Man's
Salvation; they are as ^earned Father says, So folded up by God, that unless
(...) be re^d with that Spirit by which they were Written, (...) that with
humility, and a hearty desire to know and gove^n'd by them, they cannot be
understood; unless (...) Spirit quicken our understanding, they are as a dead
^etter. They have inde^d in them such a miraculous ^ight and depth, that they
may exercise the Wisdom (...) of the most Learned; yet do they also contain
(...) ^asiness and plainness, that the most simple may understand them to t^eir
Comfort and Instruction The difficulties couched in profound Mysteries (...)
abate the Insolence of the Proud, while the comf^^table Promises raise up the
drooping Spirits of humble Believers to the hopes of Eternal Salvation. (...)
Sacred Volume is that wonderful River, which alone both shallow and deep in the
same pla^^ wherein the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant Swi^ It Is only disbelief
and Sin* that make them (...) while Faith and good Works render them easy;
(...) sinful vails of our hearts shade from us their meani^^ nor can we open
their difficulties, but by the Key David, which opens where no Man shuts, and
(...) where no Man opens, which only can open that Sea^^ Book: This considered,
it was not without Reas^^ that Moses called God wonderful, since he found his
Words and Works to be so, even past Man's fin^ing out and discovering. A certain
old Doctor (...) the Church, compared the Old Testament to (...) Moon, and the
New One to the Sun, for that (...) Old Testament borrows its light from the
New, the Moon does hers from the Sun* The Truth (...) the New is contained in
the Old, and the Old revea^ in the New: In a word, they both contain rich (...)
precious Comforts, profound Learning, grave Adm^nitions* desirable Promises,
and dreadful Threatening all which are powerful Motives to Faith and go^^ Works.

The Bible is the Word of God, the Writers wher^of Writ after the dictates of
the Holy Ghost, and (...) they Writ it, even so it was, and even so it is at
(...) present day, and even so it will remain full and inti^^ for he that
caused it to be Writ for our Instr^ctio^ and Rule* will ever preserve ^t for us.

The Writings of Aristotle that Prince of Philoso^hers, are Ancient and
Profitable, as also are many ^ther Books, but in comparison of the Holy Bible,
^hey a^e nothing to be regarded.

And here, since I think an Historical Account of ^he Bible, and its
Translations, will be well received, ^ake ^he following Account.

Two Hundred Forty and One Y^ars before the Hu^anity of Christ, the Five Books
of Moses were Translated out of Hebrew into Greek, at the charge of Pt^lemeus
Philadelphus King of Egypt, by Seventy Do^tors or Learned Men at Jerusalem in
the time of ^Eliazer the High Priest, by which we may un^erstand their
Antiquity, and the great Value they obtained ^ven amongst the Heathens.

Then ^24 years after the Birth of Christ, the Old T^stament was Translated out
of Hebrew into Greek ^y a Jew named Aquila, who was Converted to the Christian
Faith in the time of Adrian the Emperor.

And 53 years after this Aquila, the Bible was also Tr^nslated by Theodosius.

And 33 years after Theodosius, it was Translated by Symmachus under the
Emperor Severus.

And 8 years after Symmachus, the Bible was Translated by one whose Name I have
not, but this Translation was called the Fifth Translation.

After this it was Translated by St. Hieronymus, who mended and Corrected the
Seventy Interpreters, and Transl^ted it out of Hebrew into Latin, which
Translation, with the Amendments of Beza, is now used in ^he Church for the
upholding of the Protestant ^eligion, while the Roman Catholics zealously
stick to the Vulg^r Latin Translation, which, though very Ancient* is not counted
to be very Correct* One Lyra is noted above others to be the best Hebrician,
and a diligent Translator of the Old and New Testaments.

The Bible is full of Divine things, it is the best and highest Book of God,
full of Comfort in all manner of Trials and Temptations; it teaches Faith,
nourishes Hope, preserves Love; and in fine, Teaches that after this poor,
miserab^e, and precarious Life* there is another which is Eternal and
Everlasting.

We ought not to measure and censure the Scriptures according to our Sense and
Reason, as being biased by Passions and Errors, but by diligent Prayer and
Humility search after the Truth, and by often putting this in Practice, the
Spirit of God will direct our Understanding to their true sense and meaning;
it is the Holy Ghost that alone can Teach us here* As well the Divi^e as the
Disciple may without shame learn of such a Tutor, if they intend to confound
Heresies, reduce Schisms, and root out Errors; observe ^he Scriptures (says
Christ) and thou shall live, Luke 10. He Is only a good Pastor that is armed at
all points with the Text, and sufficiently Learned, that is, well grounded in
the Bible; but those that come to this Perfection, have hearts prepared by God:
To those that he Reveals his Word, to them he gives Mouths to utter it; God's
Word is a Fiery Shield, which is of proof against all the fury of Satan; false
Zeal and Error this Shield cannot be battered or crushed by the greatest
Violence: God's Word remains for ever, Protecteth all those that put their
trust therein; this is the Weapon that the Author of the Epistle to the H^brews
calls a Two Edged Sword, for it cuts through all opposition of Carnal and
Diabolical Weapons.

The New Testament was written by Jews as well as the Old, for the Apostles
themselves were Jews, and Paul was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, yet by the Power
of the Word, they not only became Christians, but Converted thousands to the
same Faith, for which in the End most of them laid down their Lives.

It Is observed, that in the Books of Moses, nothing is so often. Rehearsed as
this, I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; the
cause thereof perh^ps was, that they should not soon forget what God had done
for them: Then let us not now forget what Christ has done for us, in Redeeming
us at once from the Tyranny of the Law and Sin.

In the Apostles time the Gospel was Preached, and ^he Believers were but a
little Flock, but now it is further spread abroad: Christ himself said to his
Disciples, Ye shall do greater things or works than I. As if be should have
said, I have Preached in the Corn^rs in the Land of Judea, but ye shall Preach
openly ^n the house Tops, that is, Through the whole Universal World, and shall
make the Gospel known to all Men in all Nations.

But here I desire, and earnestly admonish every good Christian, that he slight
not the plain and simpl^ manner of Style in many places found in the Bible,
^ince they are Evidences of Truth, and not Patterns of Rhetoric: There is no
doubt but what we find ^n the holy Scripture is true, though sometimes it
ap^ears in a mean dress, which indeed is one of the Pri^iledges of Truth, when
Falsities covet the flowers ^f Eloquence to hide their Shame. The Bible
con^ains the Words, Works, Acts, and Judgments of the ^ost High; it is a Book
that makes Fools of the crafty and wise of the World, when yet it is understood
by ^he plain and simple, as our Savior says. The ^criptures are most high and
precious Relics, a ^ountain which can never be Exhausted; in them ^hou find
the Swadling-Cloaths wherein Christ lies, to which the Angels directed the
poor and simple Shepherds: Indeed they seem to be mean silly Clouts, but dear
and precious is the Treasure in them; for we have in them many Promises, and
God is faithful in fulfilling them in Christ, from whom we have forgiveness of
Sins, and are delivered from everlasting Death: God's Word is a Light that
Shines in Dark places, so that those that are shadowed by the greatest Cloud of
Sin and Ignorance, cannot miss being found out by its penetrating Beams, and by
them directed to the paths of Glory* We see in the Example of Adams eating the
forbidden Fruit, how easy it is to be drawn into Sin, and to forget God's
Word, and how hard a work it is to get hearts of Repentance, by the long and
hard task our Savior had to make a Reconciliation with God for our Offenses;
and if we were to be saved by our own Deeds, and not by the Works of Christ, we
should never attain Salvation: Therefore Christ makes our task more easy,
saying, Whosoever relies on me* and believes in my Word, shall have everlasting
Life. Some may ask what is here meant by his Word, I Answer, It Is Christus est
Spiritualiter in Sacramen^^^* The same that he spoke at his Administering his
last Supper, when he said, The words which I spoke are Spirit and Life, the
flesh profits nothing, whosoever eats thereof shall live for ever. He Sealed
it with his Blood* therefore it must be Truth.

Some may say, How can we Eat this his Word* Answer, By laying it up with Faith
in our hearts, and leading our Lives answerable thereto, which done after this
life is ended, we shall never Hunger no^ Thirst more, but shall Live and Reign
with him for Ever: The same is to be understood in Baptism but the Administering
of the Sacrament of the las^ Supper, does show forth his Death till he comes
again, at which time he will Judge the World, then happy will those be who hear
his Welcome, With a well done true and faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters
Joy: And now let us cry out, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The Holy Scripture makes mention of sundry things done at certain hours of the
day not agreeing with the hours of our Account, as in John it is said, The
Rulers Son being healed of his Sickness at the Seventh hour, his Ague le^t him.
And the Laborers that came into the Vineyard, came at the Eleventh hour. And
in the Passion of Christ it is Recorded, That at the Sixth hour there was
darkness over all the whole Earth. And about the Ninth hour he cried with a
loud Voice, and so gave up the Ghost: In which is couched, some think, a
Mystery, for Adam was Created (as it is supposed) on a Friday, about the same
hour of the day as our Savior Suffered: Now, to understand what hours these
were, know that the Jews divided their Artifici^l days into four quarters,
allowing to every quarter 3 hours, and so began the first hour of the first
quarter at the rising of the Sun, and as they followed in order, they call each
hour of each quarter the first, second, or third hour; so that the third hour
of the first quarter they called the third hour, and the third hour of the
second quarter they called the sixth hour, which was Midday, called by us
Twelve a Clock; and the third hour of the third quarter they called the Ninth
hour; and the second hour of the fourth quarter they called the Eleventh hour;
and they called the Twelfth and last hour Eventide: So that the Rulers Son
healed at the Seventh hour, with us called One of the Clock in the Afternoon;
and the Sixth hou^ when Darkness was over the whole Earth, was Midday, called
by us Twelve a Clock; and their Ninth hour, when Christ yielded up the Ghost,
is called with us Three a Clock in the Afternoon: The Laborers that came into
the Vineyard, came at the Elenth hour, about five a Clock in the Afternoon, or
an hour before Sunset.

Likewise they divided each Night into four quarters, called by them the four
Watches of the Night, the first three hours was the first Watch, during which
time, all the Soldiers (both Young and Old) of any fortified Town or Garrison
were used to Watch. The Second three hours they called the second Watch, which
was about Mid^ight, at which time the young Soldiers only Watched. And the
third quarter of the Night containing also three hours, was called the third
Watch, in it the middle aged Soldiers kept Watch. And the last three hours,
called the fourth Watch, was about break of day, in which the old Soldiers only
Watched.

The day is accounted with us for payment of Money, between Sun and Sun; but
for Indictments of Murder, the day is accounted from Midnight to Midnight; and
so are Fasting days, and Festival days, as Sundays, etc.

I will now give you, after this Digression, some Examples which fully prove
the Omnipotence, the Wisdom, and Mercy, and some other Attributes of God: The
first shall be an Instance of three most famous Conjunctions which the
Scripture relate, and which are all worthily wonderfully wondered at, the like
shall never happen again, all being occasioned by the second Person of the
Blessed Trinity his assuming Humanity, which is a mystery wonderfully singular*
and singularly wonderful, even to that degree that the very Angels saw it with
Amazement. The first Conjunction is of God and Man in Christ: The second, of a
Mother and a Virgin in the Blessed Virgin Mary. The third of Faith, and the
heart of Man in every Christian, who truly Believe that a Virgin brought forth
and became a Mother, and though ^ Mother, yet that she, notwithstanding,
remained a Virgin*

Another instance is God's fourfold bringing forth of Man, as Learned Anselmus,
a holy Bishop of Canterb^ry Notes: First, he brought forth Man without the help
either of Man or Woman in Creating Adam. Secondly, a Woman out of Man, without
the help of a Woman, in making Eve. Thirdly, By the help of Man and Woman, seen
in the natural Production of Man. Fourthly, and lastly, his bringing forth of
Man with the help of Woman, and without the help of Man, observed in the
Blessed Virgin Mary bearing our Redeemer Christ Jesus, who never laugh^d, but
as we read in the Scripture, three times W^pt, First, when Lazarus was Dead.
Secondly, over Jerusalem. And Thirdly, upon the Cross, where he delivered up
his Spirit to his Heavenly Father; and these things all prove the said
Attributes of God.

There are four Duties incumbent upon Man, which above others, he ought
diligently to perform, that is to say, To God Fear; To his Country Love; To his
Parents Honor; and to his Neighbors favor: If we duly consider these Duties,
we shall look toward Heaven, despise the World, and prepare a Mansion for our
selves in Heaven.

There are three especially Miserable, First, he that knows and teaches not.
Secondly, he that teaches and does not. Thirdly, he that is ignorant, and yet
l^arneth not.

Among the several Commands our Savior has laid upon us, that seems not to be
the least, where he warns us, Not to Judge, lest we be Judged; for it is said,
With what measure you meet, the same shall be measured to you again. Besides*
nothing i^ more unreasonable than to impute the fault of one Man to another;
but let us proceed in all cases with Clemency and Mildness, remembering that we
all sprang from our Grandfather Adam, and cons^quently are all a Kin to one
another, which the Minister confirms in his Office for the Burial of the Dead,
(though to the meanest Person) in these words, Forasmuch as it hat^ p^^^sed
Almighty God, of his great M^rcy, to take unto himself the Soul of our dear
Brother here departed, etc. So that it plainly appears that we are related to
^ach other: Now, some of these Kindred live in the fear of God, and by honest
and industrious means procure a Livelihood for their Families; others take ill
Courses, and become Reprobates, hated both of God and M^n; and in this Case,
why should any thin^ ill of another for his Brothers misdeeds, though he be so
nearly Allied? I think he ought rather to be pitied by ^very good Christian,
for that he has so wicked a Relation. And since every one must answer for his
own Offenses, and not those committed by Father, Brother, or Friend, let us
abstain from rash Censures, and fly from Evil, and do the things that are good,
tha^ we may live for ev^r, Psalm. 37.27. Again, remember the last day, when only
the Just shall be Saved; then on thy Right hand shall thy crying Sins be
accusing thee, and on thy Left hand infinite numbers of Devils expecting thee,
and under thee the Sulphurous Furnace of Hell burning, and above thee an angry
Judge giving Sentance, within thee thy Conscience tormenting, without thee the
World flaming, when^e to fly is Impossible, and to continue Intolerable: This
will be the sad condition of every one, that while Living, do not refrain from
Sin, or having Sinned, do not truly Repent of their Iniquities; therefore it is
said, Agree with thy Adversary while thou art ^n ^he way; and while time is,
prevent that which oth^rwise in time will be: For as one says, If it be no^
pr^vented, it will be Repented.

It is thought by some that there was no Writing to instruct the people before
the Flood Baptized the Earth, to wash away the Curse which God laid upon it for
the disobedience of our first Parents; yet others subscribe not to this Opinion
of the want of Writing, but more wisely adhere to St. Jude, and to the Learned
Josephus, who writ that Enoch E^ected two Pillars, the one of Brick, and the
other of Stone, wherein he wrote of the Twofold destruction of the World, the
one by Water, and the other by Fire: Some Notion of this was by Tradition (as
some Writers relate) preserved even to the days of the Apostles, Jude 14.

The next thing I shall speak to is, the final end of the World, which will be
effected by the fiery destruction abovementioned: We read in Mat. 24. That the
Apostles asked our Lord Christ about this matter; the Event was, that as for
the day and hour he would not have them to be curiously Inquisitive, because it
is a Secret not disclosed to the very Angels in H^aven, but reserved in the
hidden Council of God; yet Christ gave them some intimation of the condition
and circumstances of the time wherein it should be, viz. That as it was in the
days of Noah* before the Universal Deluge swept away Mankind, so shall it be in
that time wherein Christ shall come to Judge the World in Fire, see Ioh. 1.3.
and Rev. 1. verse. 3.7. But as to the time when it will happen* we are
altogether in the dark, and have nothing to say but the conjectures of the
Learned, who suppose it may continue 6000 years from the Creation, which, if
true, yet would not the time of the World's end, or last Conf^agration be
known, because we have nothing but uncertainties touching the time of the
Worlds beginning.

The World was at first a formless Chaos, till God out of the abundance of his
Goodness, sent forth his holy Spirit, which Dove-like, with mighty out-spread
Wings, sat Brooding on the vast Abyss, and made it pregnant of the World, then
Darkness gave place to Light* and all the fulgent Lamps of Heaven appeared (as
they truly are) Glorious; all Creatures received their Being, and every Plant,
Tree, Herb, and Flower, sprung from the verdant Earth which was raised above
the Waters, every thing of use had Seed in it self, or other means to preserve
its kind, that a second Creation should never be requisite, but as yet, Man,
the Lordly Creature, whose Province was to Rule and Govern the other Creatures,
was wanting: He was framed with more Solemnity than all his inferior Creatures,
being as it were the Product of mature Council and deliberation, stamped after
the Divine Similitude, inspired with the Breath of Life, and Honored with many
advantages beyond what any other Animal can pretend to; the contemplating of
which, long since made the Royal Prophet break out into this Rapture, What is
Man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest him?
Thou made him lower than the Angels, to Crown him with Glory and Worship;
Thou made him to have Dominion over the works of thy hands, and thou have put
all things in Subjection under his Feet, Psalm. 8.4. Moses sets forth plainly
that this glorious Universe, bespangled with sparkling Fires, every where
adorned with wonderful objects, Proclaming the Wisdom and Omnipotence of its
great Workman or Creator, was in Six days made out of an Eternal Privation of
Matter by the Omnipotent Fiat of God: Hence, because that in Six days, the
World, and all that therein is was Created, and because God rested the Seventh
day, it is probably Collected, that in Six Thousand years, which are but as Six
days in God's Account, the World shall ^gain be Dissolved. When (as is said)
God had Created all things, he gave a real Blessing unto them, willing and
decreeing by an Everlasting Law, that Animals should naturally multiply
themselves by Generation. At the making of Man, as is hinted before, God, after
a Divine manner, consulted with himself, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
concerning the Creation of his chief Creature Man, as it were to this Effect,
We have made our several Sub^unary Creatures in great Variety, having given to
them Being, Life, Sense, and Motion, but now let us make the Creature for whose
sake the rest have been Created, consisting of a natural Body, wherein he shall
partake with other Creatures in Being, Life, Sense, and Motion, and of a
Spiritual Nature and Substance, wherein he shall be like to us; he shall be
endu'd with all the faculties of a reasonable Soul, with perfect Knowledge and
Righteousness: Thus in respect of his spiritual Soul, was Man Created after the
Image of God, whom he likewise resembled in Integrity, Justice, and Holiness,
wherewith he was plentifully inspired; his Soul is Immortal, Immaterial,
seperable from the Body, and so Man consisting of Body and Soul, became a
perfect Creature, being endu'd with all things necessary to accomplish both.
God saw it not convenient for Man to be alone, Therefore, out of Man, who was
made of Earth, he made Woman, and g^ve a Spiritual Blessing to them, and said,
Be ye (through that power of Propagation which I give you) Fruitful, Multiply,
and replenish the Earth, and be ye Possessors and Rulers of the same; and God
to show his care to preserve what he had thus made, gave them leave to Eat
freely of every Tree in the Garden, only with this limitation, That of the T^ee
of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, they should not Eat.

In a word, God finished the whole Creation by his mighty Power in the space of
Six days, and on the Seventh day rested, rejoicing in the view of his glorious
Workmanship: Hence God gave a special Blessing to the Seventh day, and Honored
it with this Privilege, That it should be set apart for Rest and Holiness,
that by this means Men might be put in mind of the wonderful work of the
Creation, and might celebrate with holy Zeal the celebrated Rest of their
Creator. Thus I have given an account of the Creation, wherein the Lord God,
(who has Eternal Being of himself) gave a Being to the Heavens* Earth, and all
things therein, which will continue as long as God pleases, and is kept a
Secret in the Mind of God, though, ^s I said before, it is probably Collected,
that in 6000 years (which are but as Six days in God's Account as some suppose)
the World will be Dissolved* Then comes Christ's Thousand Years Reign, who
brings with him an Everlasting Sabbath of Rest; of this Opinion were many of
the Fathers, and also other more modern Writers* who Calculated for the End of
the World thus: They allowed 2000 years before the Law: 2000 years under the
Law: and lastly, 2000 years to be accomplished under the Gospel, the end of
which 6000 years they thought would be accompanied by the last and most
dreadful Conflagration: So then, if we look back, we shall find that from the
Creation of the World, to the Birth of our Savior, is 3948 years, according to
the best Chronographers, to which add the time from our Savious Birth, to this
present yea^ 1700, and you will find that there only remains 352 years,
according to this Account before the End of this World: Then as many are of
Opinion comes the Sabatical Year, wherein Christ will Judge the World.

Here consider the Destruction of Jerusalem as a Tipe, and an assurance of the
Destruction of the World, see Mark 13. But as to the time, many things make it
uncertain, chiefly the Words of our Savior, saying, for the Elects sake, the
days shall be shortened: who knows then, dear Reader, how near it may be at
hand, it may even happen before what I am now Writing be Printed, or before any
one Read it when Published. Touching ^his fatal Day, read 2 Pet. 3. where the
Apostle discourses concerning the fiery D^struction of the World, which will
dissolve and purify all things: Then consider what the Scripture says
touching a new Spiritual Creation; How old things shall pass away, and all
things become new; as ^ N^w Jerusalem d^scending from the New Heavens to the
New Earth, for God's Elect renewed People to dw^ll in, who will have New
Knowledge, and New Names, and Sing every moment New Spiritual Songs and Praises
to God for ever.

What then, Courteous Reader remains, but that all good Christians ought
religiously to e^pect the End of the World, and the coming of Christ, Matthew.
24. and so by a Pious Expectation, prepare themselves for it, and not too
curiously pry into these hidden and unrevealed Secrets, neither imparted to Men
nor Angels, it is God only knows this, who knows all things, and see^h in
all places* let us then every where take heed what we do, since we can do
nothing out of his Sight, for he will require an Account from us for every
thing, though never so secretly done, as well as for every idle word that we
speak* Oh, we must be accountable to him for all the time we have misspent in
this our Pilgrimage on the Earth! All Kings and Princes must give an Account
how they have Governed their Kingdoms, whether they have (as becomes God's
Vicegerents) mildly, lovingly, and carefully trained (by good Examples and
Commands) their Subjects up in the true Worship of God. Bishops and Ministers
of the Word of God (who have taken upon them Curam Animarum, the charge of
Souls) must give an Account how they have behaved themselves in the Ministry,
whether they have fed their Flocks carefully, or fed upon their Flocks. The
Magistrates must give an Account whether they have sought the maintenance of
Virtue, and the confusion of Vice, or discountenanced the former by a shameful
Connivance at the latter. And all Householders must render an Account how they
have governed their Families, whether in Reading the Sacred Scrip^ures, and
offering up o^ daily Prayers to the glory and praise of God; or suffering them
to run without restraint to foolish Pastimes, and into what Vice the dictates
of their depraved Nature lead them: Yea, every Man and Woman must give an
Account before the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, of all their Deceits and
ill Practices in their several Callings: We must render an Account of our
Works, 2 Cor. 5. We must all app^ar before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and
there receive according to what we have done in the Flesh, whether it be good
or Evil: How then will those griping Vultures make their Accounts, that have
Oppression undone their Brethren in very deed: The World is grown so cruel and
hardhearted, that many can see the Poor starve in the Streets and not relieve
or succor them. Nay, the ^ogs have the fragments of Rich men's Tables, not the
Poor, though Lame or Blind, or both; but let such Rich men remember, that if they
would be partakers with the Poor in Heaven, they must let the Poor partake with
them of their good things on Earth; for to feed the Poor, cloth the Naked,
relieve Prisoners, is the same as if such works of Mercy were done to Christ.
The safest way of laying up Treasure is thus, to make a Storehouse of Heaven,
which at last day will afford no less than a Crown of Glory: Make, O Lord, the
way pleasant to me that leads to such an End; it is no matter what Rags or
Colors I wear with Men, so I may walk with my Savior in White, and Reign with
him in Glory, Luke 13.3.

We must Love o^e another, which is the very distinguishing mark of a Disciple
of Christ; as Malice, Hatred, and Revenge, are the badges of an Antichristian
Mind: We must in all things be reformed from the Evil of our ways, especially
from our neglecting God's Service, and the Duties we owe to him; nor must we be
remiss in our Duties to our King, to our Co^ntry, and to our Neighbors; if we
be, we may fall short of our glorious Expectations. Indeed, all Ordinances of
God are as it were the very face of God, and they who worship him therein, do
solemnly ^ppear before him; therefore, at such Seasons all Men are Bound to be
holy and recollected, especially Ministers, when they Read or Preach God's
Word. God requires an exactness of Deportment of them in his Courts, and it is
no wonder, for do but observ^ under the Law, how choice he was about all things
relating to his Worship: The Tabernacle was mad^ of the best Wood, purest Gold,
and finest Linen* In short, every part of it was done according to God'^
Prescription and Order. Such as offer Sacrifice, mus^ be without Blemish, God
expects to be served b^ holy Men in the purest and holiest Manner; pur^ must be
the Person, and pure the Performance; for Men carry the Temple of God about
them, and therefore ought to keep their Hearts and Spirits clean for the
Reception of God; ought they not then to b^ very watchful over themselves when
they are about Religious Duties, esp^cially those whose duty it is to lead and
enlighten others to obtain the Peace of God and Everlasting Rest?

But I Will pursue this Subject no farther, least I should too much r^semble a
Sheep that leaps out of the Fold to lead the Shedheard: I know well every one
has his Infirmity, the Green Sickness is the Maids, and Covetousness the
Disease of some Teachers, who Preach up hospitality and other virtues to the
People, but will not go to the cost of putting their own Doctrine in Practice:
On the other hand, every thing has its Virtue, the Be gathers Honey out of
every stinking Weed, and every Weed is of more value and use than to be thrown
on a Dunghill.

It Is the Apostles advise, That we do all things for the Edification of others;
hence those that can, ought to Read the Script^res, and other good Books, while
those that cannot, ought attentively to give ear and lead their lives according
as the Word directs, see D^ut 6.11.

And to incite the Minds of People to a more strict degree of Piety, it would
not be amiss for Ministers to Write (or if there be enough already Written, to
buy) some Books of Instructions according to Scripture Rules, and give away
once a year to their Parishoners: By this means the Sheep will know the voice
of their Shepherd from the howling of devouring Wolves, and also to keep them
from wandering from Christ's Fold, and running astray after Novelties through the
Wilderness of this World of Errors. I know there are many well-meaning People
who make a Conscience of their doings, and are free from the folly of those
that run to several places, that are not tossed with every wind of Doctrine (as
those commonly are) that like any Preacher better than their own, whom God (by
his Providence) has set over them: These would willingly Read what was thus
given them by their own Shepherd or Pasture; nay, some of the other fickle
headed Men would also Read their Pastors gift purely out of Curiosity; this I
say, would be a ready way to lead them to the house of the true Shepherd* (I
mean not where Christ was Born, at Bethlehem) to Sing Gloria in excelsis, but
where Christ now is, at God's Right Hand, interceeding for all his Servants.

It Is chiefly the Ministers Office to take care of Christ's Flock, who have the
Power of the Keys, the Power to remit Sins, by teaching the Truth of Christ's
Word, and daily Administering the Sacraments, left as Conduit-pipes to convey
his Grace to our hearts; the doing of which being omitted by Preachers, is the
retaining of Men in their Sins; for if Men be so wicked that they will not
^elieve in Christ Crucified, after he has been Preached unto them, then their
Sins are retained, and the Truth is not in them: Good Ministers have the Keys
to open and shut Heaven, by Preaching and Administering the Sacraments to their
Flock; all that truly Believe in Gods Word, which is the only Rule we ought to
follow, shall undoubtedly be Saved.

It is not every one that can Pray or Preach, has Power to remit Sins, no, it
is the Undefiled, Faithful, Godly Ministers, who lead their lives answerable to
the true Doctrine delivered in God's Word that can do it; they open and shut
Heaven as many good Prophets did, by pouring out their fervent Prayers to God
Almighty, do perform great things: One by Prayer staid the course of the Sun,
another by Prayer put it back, and when the Clouds withheld from Raining three
Years, a third offered up his Prayers to Heaven for Rain, and God was pleased
to send dow^ Rain to refresh the Earth, that all things grew, and great Plenty
of all things made glad the he^rt of Man: These instances make it appear what I
before asserted, and that Man has power with God to Theologize Astrology, that
is, to put by, or prevent (by Prayers offered up to God) what the Stars
foreshew to Ensue, by the Phaenomena's whereof, Astrologers were wont to deter
and frighten People from doing ill. Let us fear God, obey his Commands, and
Love one another, and believe in his Word, who promised that whatsoever his
true and faithful Ministers should ask in his Name, should (if necessary) be
granted; according to that gracious saying in the Holy Writ, That ^ what time
soever a Sinner does Repent of his Sins, he shall have Pardon, with this
Proviso, he become a New Creature by the amendment of his Life; such may come
in favor with Christ, the head Shepherd of Souls, who makes intercession with
his Father for all those that Believe in him, and observe his Commandments.

And now to comprise all in a little, remember our Saviors great Commandment,
which was, Tha^ you Love one another; and whatsoever you would that Men should
do unto you, that do you unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets; by
the due observation of these words, we may obtain the Peace of God which
passes all Understanding. Now, to be out of Peace with God is sad and
deplorable, beyond the Power of words to express; Humanity makes us justly
grieve at the loss of a Friend, a good Neighbor, a loving Wife, kind Husband,
or obedient Child; These are indeed great losses, but ought to be moderately
Lamented; but the loss of Christ is so great, that no Sorrow is sufficient to
set forth the sadness of such a State: Other afflictions (as to see Christian
Families scattered by the violence of some grievous Visitation) is to be
Lamented, but is capable of a Comfort from the hopes we have of a gracions
meeting, with ample retributions in Christ; but the very thoughts of being out
of God's favor, is enough to shut the door against all Consolation, did not
his Goodness promise, That at what time soever a Sinner repents, and turns from
his wickedness, he would receive him with stretched forth Arms of Mercy:
Therefore, let us timely grieve for our Sins, and take care never to offend
him, who is able to cast Soul and Body into Hell, and Christ will (as when he
heard Mary weeping at the Sepulcher) no longer absent himself: Mary, said
Christ, she answered, Rabbi, then her heart full of Love and Joy, cleaved to
him, her Arms circled him about, and she hears that Golden Message, Go to my
Brethren and tell them, I go to my Father and to your Father: Thus were her
Sorrows turned into Joy and Gladness: No Christian, it is observed, rises so
high in Divine Consolation, as he that is lowest cast down in Evangelical
Humiliation. Mary was a great Mourner, we seldom have a view of her in
Scripture without Dew on her Face, and Tears in her Eyes, Luke 7.38. and 23,
27. Ioh. 19.25. and 20.11.15. And she had the special honor and favor, to see
her Lord, (even our Blessed Redeemer) before all others in the very Ingress (as
I may call it) of his Exaltation; for he appeared first to Mary Magdalen out of
whom he had cast seven Devils, Mark 16.9. As Mary had sinned greatly, so she
sorrowed greatly, which sorrow you see was of great value with God. Peter wept
bitterly, therefore Christ took care to bind up his broken heart, by pouring
the saving oil of Repentance into his Wounded Conscience: Nay, he is preferred
too, for when a Messenger is dispatch'^ from Heaven to acquaint the World with
the joyful News of its Saviors Resurrection, no Name is particularly mentioned
in his Commission but Peters^punc; Go your way (says the Angel to the two
Women) and tell his Disciples and Peter, that he is Risen, and goes before you
into Galilee, there they shall see him: Now Peter was in an Afflicted condition
because he had forSworn Christ, least Christ should forget him; but lo, his
Penitent Tears had so Reconciled him to Christ, that our Savior ordered, That
if but one in the World (besides the two Women at the Sepulcher) had notice of
his Resurrection, Penitent and Weeping Peter should be the Person.

O! the powerful Rhetoric of unfeigned Tears! Repentance has more prevalency
with God, than all the Riches, costly Robes, Crowns and Diadems of the greatest
Potentates in the World.

True Repentanc^ is an aversion from Sin; If they (says the Lord) will humble
themselves, and turn from their Evil ways, God will have Mercy on them, 2 Cor.
7.14.

We are so subject to Sin, to Offend, to Err, and to conceive a miss of God,
that we all stand in need of Council, and of props to help us: The general
misery of Mankind is threefold, we are easy to be Seduced, almost unable to do
Well, and weak to Resist; for if we would discern between Good and Evil, we are
deceived; in doing good we quickly faint, and our greatest endeavors to resist
Evil are not so strong, but that we are easily overcome: The consideration of
this frailty of our corrupt Nature, made our Savior Christ graciously to
admonish his Disciples, saying, Watch and Pray least you enter into Temptation.

What shall I say of the Tyranny of the Mighty; of the Misery of the Poor; of
the abundance of Wickedness, and of the spreading Contagion of Heresies; all
which, by variety of Methods, draw or fright us from our Duties: Can I say
better than what Nestro did to his Children, Pray, for unless God help us, we
all Perish. Finally, the fear of Perishing, the shortness and uncertainty of
Life, and the suddenness of Christ's Coming, his Justice in Judging, and many
other Reasons, should (one would think) make us not lightly over-pass and
neglect his Divine Service and Commands; for what avails it here to abound in
Wealth, excel in Honors, and have all that the Vanity of our desires prompts
us to Covet, if when Christ shall come, we are found unready, and so lose our
precious Souls, Mat. 16.26. Happy therefore is that Servant whom the Lord at
his coming shall find Watching and Praying, expecting the Bridgroom, with the
oil of Faith in his Heart, Mat. 25.4. and 24.25.10. Be therefore constant in
the Duties of Watching and Prayer, for all will be excluded the Presence of our
Lord, who are found in them negligent, With I ^now you not, Mark 13.33. Colos.
4.2. Watch and Pray; continue in Prayer and Thanksgiving. Luke 11.19. Ioh.
6.23. There were never wanting powerful Motives to stir up the faithful to
daily Prayer; but, I persuade my self, it was never more nee^ful than now in
this last, and as I may call it, old Age of the Doting world, wherein there
does more grievous and woeful Wickedness Reign than ever heretofore: Hence it
may ye feared, that in the Church will arise more horrible Heresies, and in
Commonwealths more miserable Confusions than ever did, except these impending
Evils be averted by daily and fervent Prayer.

The Fountain of all true Wisdom and Learning, God the Father of Mercy,
continue amongst us for his Sons sake, the purity of his Word, and the light of
the Gospel; may he increase the study of Virtue, maintain Peace and Concord in
his Church, stimulate our desires continually to advance his Glory, both in
Deed and Word, and to keep his Commandments to the utmost of our Power, that
living always in his Fear, we may Die in his Favor, and rise again to
Everlasting Blessedness with him to Reign for all Eternity. Amen.

Of Prayer and Meditation.
I May call the following Meditations Divine, pa^^ly because they are of Divine
matters, and concern the Glory of God, and partly because they are taken out of
the pure Fountain of Divine Truth the Scriptures, and partly because they are
collected (in part) out of the Writings of several Eminent Divines, whose
Volumes are too big, and of too great a price to be in the hands of many Pious
people: They are in a word, such as are not to be found in common Authors.

As to the necessity of the Duty of Prayer, Read 1 Timothy 2.1. where you will
find that the chosen Vessel of God, St. Paul, does exhort, That first of all,
Deprecations, Supplications, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for
all Men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. Again, Phil. 4.6. he says, Be
careful for nothing, but in all things, let your Petitions be manifest unto God
in Prayer and Supplications, with giving of Thanks; by which places of
Scripture, we are not only pricked forward to the holy Exercise of Prayer, but
taught also, that there are four kinds thereof, all necessary to be used every
day.

First Deprecation, whereby we beg at the hands of Almighty God, either
altogether to turn away his heavy displeasure conceived against us, through our
Sins, or at least to mittigate the Punishment due for our Offenses.

Secondly, Supplications, are Prayers, whereby we crave such things as are
necessary, either for the Sustentation of this present Life, or for our
everlasting Comfort in the World to come.

Thirdly, Intercessions, are Prayers made in the behalf of others.

And lastly, Thanksgiving, is when we Praise God, and celebrate his holy Name
for all the Benefits conferred both upon our Souls and Bodies.

Some short Ejaculations and Prayers, according to Scripture Rules.
I Give thee most hearty thanks, O Eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, for that it has pleased thee of thy unspeakable Mercy and Goodness, in
all Ages succesfully to send into the world Men wonderfully endowed with thy
Gifts, and adorned with the knowledge of thy Will, to be Revivers and Preachers
of thy Word of Truth, Mat. 23.34. Ephesians. 4.2.1, 2.

I likewise render most hearty thanks unto thy most Sacred Majesty, for sending
thy only Son, that great Shepherd of thy Church, to make known thy Word to such
as thou think fit to teach thy People the Truth of thy Written Word, for the
gathering together thy Church out of all Mankind, to the building up of the
Body of Christ.

I humbly beseech Thee, most gracious God, to continue always amongst us thy
pure Word, and through thy Ministers, gather to thy self an infinite and
everlasting Congregation, and so instruct my heart with thy Spirit of Truth,
that I may unfeignedly assent to thy wholesome Word, whereby I may prove a
lively Member of thy Body, and be incorporated into that Society which does in
this World sincerely confess thee, and in the next World for ever enjoy thee,
evermore extolling the holiness of thy Name; preserve in safety the Ministers
and Teachers of thy Word, and give them the certain knowledge of thy Blessed
will, that by thy Word they may from time to time open unto us thine intent
concerning the repairing of Mankind, to the Saving and Redeeming of our Souls
through thy free Mercy; and also teach us here to live in new obedience, and to
withstand the violence and allurements of our carnal desires which fight
against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.12.

Inspire the Preachers of thy Word with the Divine Breathings of thy holy
Spirit, that they may utter thy Will with the Purity they receive from thy
Mouth, retaining the form of wholesome Words, and sounding none but the
Doctrine manifested by thy Son out of thy Bosom, 2 Timothy 1.13. Ioh. 1.18. for by
departing from the order of the Faith and Rule of thy Word, they will greatly
obscure the light of thy Doctrine, and obtrude upon us the Vanity of their own
Inventions for thy holy Inspirations; therefore let them speak thy Word not
deceitfully but sincerely, as from thee and in thy sight, 2 Cor. 4.2.

Grant also that by transforming thy Divine Ministry into Earthly Policy, they
Lord it not over thine Elect, neither proudly contend about Superiority and
Primacy in thy Church, 1 Pet. 5* 3. But only seek the Glory of thy Name, and
the Salvation of themselves and us committed by thy Providence to their Charge;
give them liberty of Speech, boldly without fear, to blame and rebuke all false
Doctrine, Blasphemous Superstitions, and abuses in thy Church, Ephesians. 6.19.
Open unto them the door of utterance, that they may speak the Mysteries of
Christ, and manifest them as they ought to do, so shall their doings be
profitable to the Godly, Colos. 4.3. Assist them also with thy especial Grace,
that they disgrace not the Doctrine which they Teach and Preach by impurity of
Life, 1 Timothy 3.2, 4. but especially assist the Shepherd under thee whom I hear
for the good of my Soul, from whose Mouth I learn thy Blessed Will: keep him, O
Lord, I heartily Pray, in Religion sincere and pure, from enormous Offenses in
his outward Conversation, endow him with a long and healthful Life, (if it be
thy Will) that he may live to Convert many by Preaching thy Word of wholesome
Doctrine, and then we shall be Converted, because thou art our God, and being
Converted, we will do Penance; show us our Offenses, that we may have a true
sense and hearty sorrow for our Sins*

O Son of God, who art the Lord and head Shepherd of all thy Flock, work thou
effectually by thy Preachers, and speak thou also within us to our hearts, the
blessed Will of thy Eternal Father, and confirm thy Doctrine in our Minds by
thy holy Spirit; and grant, I beseech thee, that we may truly know and discern
the same from the howling of Wolves, and from the Enchanting Songs of
Hirelings, Ioh. 10.12. and 17.15. and grant that we may know thee, even as thou
know thy Heavenly Father, and walk Religiously and Righteously in thy Sight,
showing our selves to be that holy Seed which praises thy Name for evermore.

Come Holy Spirit, open my Heart and Ears, that I may conceive the profit of
thy wholesome Doctrine, and the sweet Comfort revealed in thy Holy Words by the
Preaching of the Gospel.

I beseech thee pour into us Godly Cogitations, that we may never imagine as
the Wicked do, that the Miseries and Afflictions of this Life fall upon u^
(...) Chance and against thy Will, but that we may (...) believe that thy
Church is governed by thy P^^vidence, and that without thy Permission no Evil
(...) Punishment comes; for thou Lord sendest the some, Amos 3.6. Then grant,
I beseech thee, that we may suffer all Injuries and Adversities with quiet
Minds, and never attempt that which is contrary to thy Commandments, but by an
humble acknowledgment and submission to thy Will, bear all sorts of Calamities
with calling for thy Assistance, Psalm. 50.15. Tit. 22. Most Gracious God, keep
I beseech thee, the power of Man's immortal Enemy, the Prince of Darkness under,
that he compel not Consciences loaded with the weight of Sins to fall into
fatal Desperation, either by heaping up and aggravating their Offenses, or by
extenuating thy Mercy, enhance too much their own guilt, or lessen thy Power of
forgiving; but grant that all Sinners that are heavy laden, may with a true and
lively Faith come unto thee for Ease and refreshment; may they freely come unto
thee by hearing thy Word to Repentance, that the Angels in Heaven may
continually have occasion to rejoice at their happy Conversion, Luke 15.7. Amen.

See James 5.16. Mat. 6.14. and Esa. 66.2. where you may Read what you ought to
do if you would have God forgive you your Sins, hear your Prayers, and grant
your Requests.

Prayer is a vehement desire of the heart to obtain something at the hand of
God, who look^^ not upon the Face as man does, but beholds the (...); neither
does he listen to the sound of the ^outh, but ^o the fervency of the Mind:
Therefore Christians Praying have their affections bent toward God, they
^lways hunger and thirst after Righteousness: The ^rayer of him who humbles
himself is accepted, as appeared by the Publican, Luke 18.19. Psalm. 50.1^. Mark
13.3.3. Coloss. 4.2. Luke 11.9. Ioh. 6.23.

How excellent a thing it is for Man to converse with God! this joins Man in
Society with Angels, through ascribing with them due Praise and Glory unto the
Almighty: Let nothing dismay a Christian from Praying unto God, for the Prayer
of the Righteous is the Key of Heaven; the Prayer of the Godly does ascend, and
the Mercy of God does thereby come down; therefore we will Sing Praise unto
Thee, O Lord, for as thou have been our Defense in the day of our trouble, even
so I beseech Thee to protect and save us everlastingly. Amen.

Let us with St. Paul, Heb. 4.16. come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we
may obtain Mercy: That is, let us in confident assurance of God's readiness to
help us, make our Addresses boldly and cheerfully to the Throne of his Grace
upon all occasions, suing to our bountiful God for the Relief of all our
Necessities; and let us consider when we are about to offer up our Petitions to
God by Prayer, what ou^ necessities and wants are before we ask, least through
temerity we ask amiss. His freeness to give, man well make us bold to ask; his
power to supply us, may give us hopes to obtain what is necessary for us, and
his greatness ought to make us temper our Addresses with Humility; as for
choice of Words, and Elegant long Harangues, let us not be too solicitous, for
God regards not Eloquence, and long Harangues so much as the sincerity of those
that invocate his Majesty. Men chiefly mind the neatness of expression* God the
Truth and fervency of what is expressed: We are commanded to Pray without
ceasing, which is best done according to Scripture Rules, because no Method is
comparable to that which God has laid down for us, and Christ taught us.

When we groan under the weight of any Affliction, we shall ever find help, by
calling upon God, desiring the assistance of the Righteous to be joined with us
in Prayer, For the Prayers of the Faithful avails much* their help we are
admonished to desire by the Example of St. Paul, who said to the Romans, I
beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the
Spirit, that you strive together wi^h me in your Endeavors and Prayers to God
for me, ^or the light of ^is Countenance, and for assisting in every Duty, Romans
15.20.

Some define Prayer thus: An humble lifting up of the Heart, or a pouring out
of the Soul to God in the Name of Christ; it is crying Abba, Father.. As
Scripture is God's Letter wherein he opens his Mind to Man, so Prayer is
Man's Letter, wherein he expresses ^is Mind to God: A thought can fly speedily
to the utmost part of the Earth, but Prayer in a Moment ascends to the highest
Heavens, it is as it were a speaking Trumpet, one end of which being fastened to
Man's mouth, it carries the Petitioning voice to God's Ear, though spoken near
so softly.

Prayer has a twofold advantage of some other Duties, in regard its Influence
is Universal, and to ^ts Exercise an opportunity is never wanting. A Christian
cannot always hear or read God's Word, out he may Pray continually. Every Saint
is God's Temple, and he that carries a Temple about him, ^ay go to Prayer when
he pleases. A good Chri^tian need not be very nice in choosing a place for
De^otion, since to him every house is a house of Prayer, and every place he
comes to an Altar, whereon he ^ay offer up to God a Sacrifice of Prayer; yet
De^ency is not to be forgotten, (as far as circumstance ^ill allow) since even
by it we express a kind of Devotion to our God; but many alas are so far from
being curious in this point, that they forget to pay at all this Duty, though
most necessary to the obtaining their Eternal Salvation.

If we are in doubts about our Spiritual Estate, let us in Prayer go to God,
who is mavelous in Council? are we in Affliction, let us call upon him for
help, and he will not only hear us, but also in his good time deliver us? Does
any affliction seize our Bodies, which endangers our lives or disturb our
tranquillity, let us by Prayer call upon him at Midnight, and he will make have
to help us; though we are troubled exceedingly, in a Moment he can give us quiet
and rest; nay, though we should be encompassed with Enemies, driven to the
greatest of Necessities, perplexed with Doubts, threatened with Dangers, or like
Peter, falsely Imprisoned, and watched narrowly Night and Day, lest we should
make an Escape; yet Prayer, as another Moses, will go before us, and so engage
God on our side, that he will vanquish our Enemies, relieve ou^ Necessities,
unfold our Doubts, prevent our Dangers* convert our Bondage into Liberty, and
guide us all the way through the Wilderness of this World, 'till we arrive at the
Spiritual Land of Canaan, and be Enroled Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem,
where Christ is, infinitely exceeding that Jerusalem where Christ was, and
whither the Devout Jews went once a year to Worship.

And here it will not be amiss, nor I believe unacceptable to my Reader, to
give him some account of the Earthly Jerusalem, and its many Revolutions so
much spoken of in Scripture and other Histories* This Jerusalem, by some called
the Holy City, and Throne of God, was anciently a Fort of the Iebusites upon
Mount Sion, not conquered by the valiant Joshua, but was fully subdued by the
victorious Arm of David, who Built thereon the City, unto which was adjoined
Mount Moriah, and therefore called the Daughter of Sion, where Abraham would
have offered his Son Isaac, where David built his Altar, and Solomon his
Beauti^ul Temple, of which great things are by all Histori^ns Recorded. It Is
Situate in the midst of Nations, ^t was the place of Holy Worship; from this
Moun^ain (which for many things is justly preferred before ^ll others) did flow
those Salutiferous Waters, that gave Life where ever they ran; from hence
Christ ^ent his Apostles (as so many Spiritual Fishermen) to ^atch the Souls of
Men. In this famous City stood ^he Throne of David, established here by the
Royal ^uccession of One and Twenty Kings, descended from ^he Loins of this
Royal Prophet.

Sin whose proper wages is Death, brought many Calamities, strange Revolutions,
and in the End, a ^^nal Destruction to Jerusalem: The Convulsions and ^roubles
of this City were many and violent before (...) was utterly Ruined; as namely,
by this Hake King ^f Egypt in Rehoboams days, at which time the Con^ueror
carried away much Treasure. By Ioas King ^f Israel, who in the time of Amazias,
brake down ^00 Cubits of the Wall; it was besieged by Resin and ^ekek King of
Aram and Israel, whom God put back (...) the Reign of wicked Ahaz. By Zenecher
King of ^ssur whose Host in Hezekiahs days the Angel of God ^estroyed. By the
Assyrians who took Manasia Cap^^ve. By Pharaoh Necho who carried Iehoazar
Pri^oner into Egypt. And lastly, it was Besieged by ^he Caldeans, who both
Burnt the Temple, and defa^ed the City, see Kings 23.25.

It was after the Captivity Rebuilt by the returned ^ews, yet so, that in the
days of Christ, it rather seemed a place of Slaughter, and a Den of Thieves
than the Royal Seat of a King, or the place of Holy Worship; for having Slain
their Prophets, and Persecuted the Saints, they lastly filled the measure o^
their Iniquity, by shedding the Blood of that great One, even Jesus the Lord of
Life, who by sufferin^ Death in Jerusalem, sealed the Redemption of the World,
fulfilled the Law, changed their Sabbath* and in a word, put an end to the
glory of the Place* Soon after, by the Sedition of the Citizens, and the
Caesar's cruelties, it became so desolate, that one Ston^ was not left standing
upon another, but as in the Destruction of Sodom, so was it all Destroyed,
(...) Walls removed, Mount Sion excluded, and Calva^^ taken; the Name Jerusalem
was changed for that o^ Aelia, an unclean Swine set over the chief Gate, and
the Jews forbid (on pain of Death) to look back upon the City.

In this state the Romans held it till the year o^ Christ 615, from whose
Empire the Persians ^ore i^* and kept it the space of Twenty Two Years: The
Sarazens were the next that Conquered it in the yea^ 637, and possessed it 372
years, till in the year 100^ the Turks took it, and immediately lost it to the
Sultan of Egypt, who enjoyed it the space of 90 year^ at which time, being in
the year 1099, the Christian^ under their General Godfrey Bulloigne Conquered
(...) and under the Government of several Christian Princes, one of which was
Richard the first King o^ England, who was King of Jerusalem, it continued
(...) years, that is, till the year 1187, at which time it wa^ Surpised by
Soladine King of Persia, and by the Persians held 330 years, when in 1517 it
was invad^^ and won by the Victorious Solimo the Turkish Emperor, and in it to
this day the abomination of Mahom^^ is set up* Thus is Sion become a plunged
Field, and Jerusalem a heap of Stones; the Holy Land laid wast under the feet
of the Heathen, and the place of Divine Prayer made a Den of Dragons; so that
as it was foretold, Neither in the Mountain of Samaria, nor in Jerusalem, is
the place of holy Worship, see Isa. 66.1, 2. But every Spiritual heart
retaining the Ark or Testament of God's Covenant in Christ, is the Jerusalem
and Temple wherein the Lord will dwell, and where ^his Spirit with ours, as the
two Cherubins on the Mercy Seat, looking each toward the other, will witness
our Reconciliation by Christ our High Priest, who is entered before us into the
Holy of Holies, even the highest Heavens; into which Divine Mansion, may he
whom my Soul loves, say come; In the mean while, let us consider what the
Angel said ^o the Women when he sent them away from looking into the Sepulcre,
with He is Risen, he is not here; did he not thereby dehort them and us, from
Burying ou^ affections in Christ's Grave, and admonish us rather to seek him
where he is to be found.

At this day a gracious heart makes every place a Jerusalem, where God may as
well and as acceptably (...) Worshipped, as upon Mount Olivet, or Christ's
Mount, so Named, because it was his Pulpit, as the whole Land was his Text,
when he made that famous Sermon on the Mount: This Son of Righteousness had all
Palestine for his Zodiac, and the Twelve Tribes for his Signs: St. Hierom
observes, as the Two Tribes which were first carried into Captivity, so
Redemption was first Preached in their Countries. Likewise in former Ages there
were the greatest Examples of God's Justice shown upon disobedient Sinners: for
Example, Lots Wife for one farewell glance at Sodom, was turned into a Pillar
of Salt, which may teach us to measure a Sin by the in^ini^eness of God who
forbids it.

It Is observed the Land of Judea became Barrenou^ after ou^ Saviors Passion,
of bringing ^orth their principle Commodities, as Balm, etc.

Whether because the Tipe was to cease when the Truth was come, or because that
Land was unworthy to have so Sovereign Bodily Physic grow in her, where the
Physician of the So^l was put to Death.

Another wonderful remarkable thing shown upon all the outward formal Jewish
Worshippers soon after our Saviors Ascension, as he had foretold was the
destruction of that City and Land, by which we are made sensible that there was
never sorrow like the sorrow of that Land, who made the Messiah a Man of
sorrow. If we consider, the Siege of Jerusalem began at the time of the
Passover, when in a manner all Judea was enclosed in Jerusalem, all private
Synagogues doing their Duties to the Mother Temple, so that the City then had
more guests than Inhabitants.

Thus the Passover which was at first Instituted by God in Mercy, to save the
Israelites from Death, was then used by him in Justice to hasten their
Destruction, and to gather the Nations into a bundle to be cast into the fire
of his Anger, as our Savior had foretold them; besides, those who had bought
our Savior for Thirty Pence, were themselves sold Thirty for a Penny; whilst
this Storm fell among the Unbelieving Jews, it was calm among the Believing
Jews; that is, those that were become Christians, who forewarned by Christ's
Predicti^^^, fled betimes out of the City to Pella, (a private place beyond
Jordan) which served them instead of a little Zore to save them from the
eminent Destruction of Sodom.

And now the chief Head of the scattered unbelieving Jews keep the meaner sort,
as well as themselves, from the use of the New Testament, nay, they will ^oone:
Curse it, than look into it, the which thing is the hindrance of their
Conversion and Salvation: And thus we leave them in a state most lamentable,
and much to be pitied.

Lastly, It may justly seem admirable, how senseless religions should gain so
much ground on Christianity, such having neither substance in their Doctrine,
nor winning Behavior in their Ceremonies to allure Professors; for what are
many Here^ies but the Scum of Judaism and Paganism, yet like in growth to the
River Nilus, which is famous and well known for its overflowing Streams, though
hidden and obscure as to its Fountain. It Is the Justice of God to deliver them
over to believe Lies, who will not obey the Truth. You are here put to
understand, what diffe^ence of days there is betwixt the Christians, Jewish,
and Turkish Sabbaths; The Christians keep theirs the first day of the Week,
called Sunday; The Jews on Saturday; and the Turks on Friday, in Scorn of
Christ, who was on that day Crucified.

The true Church is an Assembly, or such a congregation as Believes things
which do not appear, neither may be comprehended in the Mind, that is, ^t
depends only on God's Word, what the same says, the true Church Believes
without any addition, giving honor to God, and taking that to be true which in
the Word is delivered unto them, Isa. 5.3. As to the place where this true
Church is, I answer, It Is wheresoever God's Word is purely taught; and the head
Shepherd of this Church is Christ Jesus.

Since nothing more provokes the Wrath of God against us, than the breaking and
profaning of his holy Sabb^th* the observance thereof can never be
sufficiently inculcated into Men's minds; for said the spirit of the Lord to our
Forefathers, If you will no^ hea^ken unto my words, and keep my Sabbath holy,
then will I ki^dle a fire which shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and none
shall quench i^, Jer. 17. Ezekiel. 2^.26.31. God's severity has ^een remarkable on
Jerusalem, and upon the disobedient and wicked Prophaners of his Sabbath, as
may appear by many Instances. The first Blow given to the German Church was on
the ^ord's Day, which they carelessly observed; the day of the Lord will be a
dreadful day to them that despise the day which Christ has set apart for the
Zealous performanc^ of Religious Duties. It is Marked with a Memento above all
other Commandments, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. On the Lord's Day
we should go into God's sanctuary and Reverence the same; see Levit. 19.30. We
have God's hand and seal for our observing it; see Act^ 20.7.1 Cor. 16.^, 2.
Rev. 10.

God is pleased to esteem it his Glory to have many Beggars (such are all Men
in respect of him) to meet at his House or Temple to pay their duty of Thanks
and holy Worship for their all, since they have all things of him, Mat. 18.20.
Psalm. 42.4. Christ himself went often into the Synagogues, and Peter and John
went up into the Temple at the hour of Praper* Acts 3.1* and 13.23, 4.

The Day which is to be Sanctified is not the seventh, but the first day of the
week, for the Jews Sabbath was Buried in Christ's Grave; so that the first day
of the week is of Divine Institution, and honored with the Name of the Lord's
Day in regard of its Author, who rose that day in the Morning from finishing
the amazing work of our Redemption; upon (...) day he brought forth his Living
Water; On this day he gave his Bread of Life, his Body; On this day h^ met his
two Disciples; 'Twas on this day that the Saints which slept arose out of their
Graves; On ^h^s day the Holy Ghost descended on the Apo^tl^^* On this day
Christ brought forth the light of his ^^ew Heavens and Earth by his powerful
Resurrection; On this day St. John ^^d his glorious Revelati^n* containing the
Churches state till the dissolution of the World; On this day Christ visited
his dea^ Apostles, saying, Peace b^ unto you; behold my (...) and feet* On this
day he burst asunder the Bonds of Death, and broke the Gates of Hell, led
captivity Captive, trampled upon Principalities, suddued Powers* triumphed over
the Grave, conquered Sin* absolved the curse of the Law, and trod down Satan*
Upon this day he still rides Triumphantly in the Chariot of his Ordinances,
conquering all Profane ^pposition, cutting down high Thoughts, and ^^bduing
Sinners to himself; Blessed is the Man that ^eeps the Sabbath unpolluted, Isa.
56. verse. 2.

It i^ likewise thought that his second coming will ^e on this day, called, The
Lords Sabbath Day, and blessed is that S^rvant whom he ^inds well doing when he
comes; and since we know not in what hour of ^he Watch he will come, whether
at the dawning of ^he Day, at Noon, or at Midnight, we ought there^^re with
more care keep our selves upon the Watch, ^^st he come upon us unawares and
find us sleeping, ^^r neglecting our Duty, for which we may be cast unto
^nquenchable fire as unprofitable Servants, and ^o be for ever shut out of Gods
favor and presence; ^or if on Earth we do not frequent his Divine pre^ence, by
assembling our selves together for the re^erent performing the Duty of Prayer,
he so often has commanded us to observe, it is in vain to flatter ou^ s^lves with
the expectation of being admitted i^to his Presence hereafter; Therefore, let
us here make our Salvation su^e, that we may of his Goodness gai^ admi^tanc^
^ereafter into his glorious Presen^e, which is only to be obtained through
Christ o^^ Lord, our only Savior and R^deemer, by often asse^^^^ng ^ur selves
togethe^ ^o give Thanks, and offer ^erv^nt Prayers to the Lord in Christ's
Name* this I ^a^, will be the only way to obtain our desire which God grant we
may all Enjoy, and Live and R^ig^ ^or ever with him, to give Praise and Glory
to his Holy Nam^, for his gracious Goodness in Redeeming us to himself* O! how
happy will our stat^ ^hen be, we shall only be employed to Sing Praise and
Glory, and Honor, world without End; ther^ we shall possess the fullness of
Joys, and never fading Pleasure^, resting for ever from our Labors* an^
singing with Sain^s and Angels new Praises to hi^ Holy Name: 'Twas the charming
hopes of these Cont^ntm^^ts which m^de the Apostles so o^^ conclude* With a
Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. Amen*

Te^tullian was of Opinion, that no Souls did enjoy the Beatifical Vision till
the Resurrection* at which time he supposed the order of Rising would be
according to the degrees of Holiness Men had attain^d to in this Life. And to
make his Opinion the more plausible, he affirmed the Resurrection would
continue the Thousand Years of Christ's Reign upon Earth; so that the highest
Rank of Christians in hi^ opinion, shall ri^e in the beginning of the said Term
and all others Rise in their turn, according to their ^leg^^es of Piety and
Wickedness; and therefore (...) said, The most sloathful and negligent, would
be d^fer'^ to the Conclusion, being ^o be held in Prison till they pay the
utmost Farthing, (for this Parable he ascribes to the Morae Resurrectionis,)
that is, They are not to rise from the Dead till toward the end of the
Thousand Y^ars, 1 Cor. 15. verse. 23.24. The whole Chapter g^ves a large Account
thereof.

Besides, St. John in his Revelations tells us, That the last Trumpet is the
Seventh Trumpet, (that is, a m^^^^rious Number, in which (as by many instances
^^^ht be proved) God seems peculiarly to delight.) S^ that the Sixth Trumpet,
as it is expressed in the Revelations, sounds before this, showing that the
^a^t end of all will not ^e till the last Trumpet; but yet there will be a vast
tract of Time within the time of the last Trumpet, many things being to be
performed within its Compass, so that at the first beginning of the last
Trumpet, the Enemies of God so fall, that the Kingdoms of this World becomes
the King^oms of the Lord, and of his Christ, etc. Revel. 11. verse. 15.16, 17,
18. which is a Summary Preface, or a Prefationary Sum to the Catastrophe or
upshot of the Revelations to follow unto the End. And in ^evel. 20. and the
first seven Verses, is expressed how l^ng this visible Kingdom of Christ on
Earth shall continue, and consequently so long is the last Trumpet, viz. As the
Learned conclude a Thousand years, but the last end of all and ultimate Period,
shall not be till the last end of the last Trumpet, Rev. 20.12. etc. and thus
it is probable the Resurrection will continue the Thousand Years of Christ's
Reign upon Earth, touching this, see Isa. 16.19. and cap. 19.20. and cap. 25*
verse. 6, 7, and 8. and Daniel 12. verse. 5. where it is said, Go thy way unto
the End and rest, and awake in thy lot in the End of Days, for the Lord has
spoken it. The Lord will then remove the Vail of Ignorance which is now cast
over the faces of all people so as they shall clearly see the great and
wonderful Mystery of Man's Salvation.

Now, touching the place where Christ shall sit in Judgment, the Scriptur^s
make it out that it shall be in the Air, over the Valley of Iehosaph^t, by
Mount Olivet, near unto Jerusalem, then w^ll Christ set for^h magnificently his
holy Spou^e, the Church Tri^^phant: First, all things will be made New, sitting
for the Merits of so Beautiful a Bride. Secondly, there will appear the Glory
and Excellency of ^he Lambs Wife. Thirdly, the earnest desire of the Elect, who
will say, Come Lord Jesus, to whom the Fountain of Mercy will answer, Behold, I
come quickly see Revel. 3.11. This will be a glorious Spectacle, repleat with
Rareties far beyond what our weak fancies can imagine, it will not be like our
transit^ry Pageantry for a day, but such as will for ever fully employ the most
pier^ing eyes of o^r Souls with ravishing satisfaction. Her^ have we first the
Precursor, a John Baptist going before, and giving Warning, Ecce! Behold he is
coming who has been often foretold, and long the darling expectation of all
Nations, even Christ the only begotten Son of the Father, Venio, I come.
Thirdly, the manner of his Coming will be Wonderful, he will not come
leasurely, as he Rode to Jerusalem upon a slow Beast, but Riding upon the Wings
of the swiftest Wind, born up as it were by a bright Cloud of Angels, Venio
cito, I come, says the Lord, quickly.

Now, the many comings of Christ, which are dispersedly related in the Holy
Bible, I will set down in the order following,

His first Coming was Virtual, from the beginning of the World, full of the
Vigor and Power of Red^^ption, as he was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the
World; and thus Abraham saw him as com^, (...) his day as present.

His other comings were Actual, namely, in Carne, when he came to Man, by
assuming his Nature, when he came, ad suos, to the Jews, and they received him
^ot, this Coming was in Humility and Debasement, (...) ^orma Servi, in the form
of a Servant, to make us (...) by his Sufferings and Bondage. His Coming to
Ier^salem was Local, being both a Preparative to his c^^el Passion, and a
Prefiguration of his glorious Exaltation, venit ^ex, was the Proclamation which
was f^llowed by the Royal Acclamations, Hosanna being Sung to him, With a
Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

He also has a spiritual and invisible Coming into ^he secret recesses of our
Souls by Grace, and ^he power of his Holy Spirit, which does raise us from the
Grave of Sin, and Spiritual Death; This Co^ing is in Misericordia, in Mercy.

But his last Coming is in Justice, in Majesty, and in Glory, to Judge the
Quick and the Dead, and to render to every one according to his Works, whether
they be Good or Evil; and to Transform the Church Militant into the Church
Triumphant: And this C^ming is called by St. Paul the Glorious Appearance of
our great God, and only Savior Jesus Christ: and himself has foretold, that he
the Son of Man shall come Clothed with a Triple Glory, that is, in his own
Glory, in his Fathers, and in that of the Holy Angels.

Now of the several Comings I have hitherto spoken, some are past, some to
come, and others are daily coming, and ever present as his coming ^o his
Chosen, by moving and changing their Hearts, by renewing their Spirits, by
comforting and instru^^ing their Souls; present also in his coming to the
Wicked and Reprobate, in such mann^r as he cam^ to Pharaoh. But the last and
most Universal Com^ng is, that which is not yet come, and is promised in th^se
words, Behold I come, Rev. 5.6. and this is usually called his Second Coming,
which will be visible and proper, wherein it is suit^ble to his coming by
In^arnation, and yet it much differs from that first in manner, that being in
the Depth of Hum^^iation, this in the Height of Exaltation; that in Re^roach
and Infirmity, thi^ in Glory and p^^fection o^ Health; then he came to Die, and
bear a Crown of Tho^^s, now to wear a Crown of Life; in that he came to b^
despised and spit on by his Enemies, in this to bruise his Adversaries like a
Potters Vessel, and to make his Foes his Footstool.

Secondly, in Time, that being in the fullness of Time, (yet i^ Time) when the
Vail of Mosaical Tipes and Ceremonies was to be pulled off, and yield to the
Substance, Gal. 4.4. This Future, in the very End of Time, when the whole frame
of the Earth is to be broke in sunder, the Curtains of the Heavens to be
w^thdrawn, and all things sublimated and purified by Fi^e, then shall Men see
the Lord Christ coming in the Clouds, with omnipotent Power, and infinite
Glory, with Millions of Angels, and all Souls, whom he knows to be his by Faith
and good Works, each of which will than move in an Orb of Glory, far surpassing
the brightness of the Suns Meridian Be^^^s, and yet the Glory of Christ's Body
will infinitely exceed them all; then will the joyful Elect say, The ^ime is
come of Singing Eternal Halalujahs, and the Voice of Christ and his Holy Angels
will be ^eard over the whole World in a Diapason of most Revishing Notes, which
will awaken and raise up all that are in their Graves, who (I mean the Just)
shall come ^orth the Grave like so many Joseph's out of Prison, and each Soul
and Body separated by Death, shall be conjoined, though our Bodies be turned to
Dust, yet shall they be made Alive, and all possessed with Agility, ^he Just
shall in their Bodily shape Ascend, and joy^ully me^t the Lord at his Glorious
Coming in the Air, and all the Elect, who shall be sound Living, shall ^e
^^ught up together to mee^ their Savior in the Air.

And the Fire shall burn up the corruption of the World, and the works therein
shall in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, overtake all that are then in
^eing, and whether it finds them either grinding in the Mill of Provision, or
walking in the Fields of Pleasure, or lying in the Bed of Ease, it will put a
^^riod to their present Enterprises; it will burn up ^he dross and corruption
of Mortals, making them put on Immortality; and this change shall be unto the
Righteous instead of Death; then shall they like ^^och, lift up their heads,
and behold the glorious Angels of the Lord like so many Gabriels flying toward
them, to tell them that the day of their Redemption is come, and to convey them
through the Region of the Air to meet their Redeemer. Lo! they are at hand,
arise therefore my Dove, my Love, my Fair One, and come away. Nay, all the
Just, both Quick and Dead, being Glorified, shall forthwith (by ^he careful
Ministry of God's ^oly Angels, be gathered together from all the Q^arters and
Parts of the World, and be caught in the Clouds to meet the (...) Triumphing in
the Air, and so shall become as a part of his Glorious Train, attending him in
his Procession to the Judgment Seat, where he and they will sit in Judgment
upon the Reprobates and Evil Angels. The Twelve Apostles shall sit upon Twelve
Thrones next unto Christ, to Judge the Twelve Tribes that refused to hear the
Gospel Preached (...) their Ministry; and as every one of the Apostles received
Grace in this Life to be more Zealous of his Glory, and more faithful in God's
Service than othe^^* from that day for evermore they shall exceed the re^^ in
Glory, and a^l the Saints in honor and order, shall stand next to them that
Judge both the Evil Angels, Reprobates, and bad minded Men, who, for want of a
true confidence in God, put trust in uncertain Riches, or in false Prophets,
and run a Who^ing after strange Gods of their own making; They will in ^ine, ^e
Judges of all such as have Lived without a due fear of this Judgment, as if
there was no such thing.

A Sabbatism signifies a Rest upon a Seventh, most likely (as Jude hi^^s, verse
14.) in the Seventh and last Age of the World. Further, to explain this
Sabbatism, the Apostle minds them to keep a Sabb^tism every seventh Day, out of
which weekly Seventh was formed their petty Iubilee of the Seven times Seven
Years, viz. beginning at the end of the Forty Ninth Year. Their ( viz. the
Jews) longer Rest in Canaan was also a kind of Sabbatism; they counted the Year
of the World 2500, a Jubilee of Jubilee's. Their Return out of Babylon, where
they had been about Seventy Years, was about the Seventh Jubilee from the
Creation. Now, says the Apostle to the Believers, in effect thus: You must
have a Sabbatism, a Sabbatical Rest, that must correspond to those former Rests
ever since the Creation.

But what Sabbatism Septenary, or Seventh of Rest, can we find out besides
those aforesaid, but a Sabbath of a Thousand Years, viz. the last Thousand
Years of S^^en Thousand, before the ultimate general Day o^ Judgment. This the
Ancients assert with one Cons^ur* grounding themselves upon the Scriptures;
^^eir Words, in Sum, are these; As every Seventh D^y and Year was ordained a
Day and Year of Rest and Release; so the Seventh Thousand Years of the World is
the Time of the Rest and Release of the World, according to the 90 th and 92 d
Psalms.

All Orthodox Divines distinguish the Church of the Mediator into visible and
invisible, and not in^o several kinds; though the Church may be made up o^
several Nations, yet the Church and the Word (...) still of the same Nature in
Essence; the Word makes the Church of the same Uniform from the Beginning to
the End; the Church that I speak of, is an uniform Church in the internal Form,
which is Union in and with Christ, and through Him with one another, Ephesians. 4. In
several Ages it had several Forms; in Adam's time it was outwardly most
glorious, as well as inwardly perfect; in the Ten Fathers time before the
Flood, it was in Families with a mean outward Glory; in the time of
Tabernacles, made by Moses, and of the Temple, built by Solomon, it had a world
of g^orious Types; in the New Testament, in the first 300 Years, it was mean;
in Constantine's time and downwards, it had a great deal of outward Glory; but
of late times, in many places, very mean, yet still we truly confess one
universal Church in Kind, Nature, Essence, and i^ internal Form; when Christ's
time shall ^ome, he will make the Church Spiritually and Eternally glorious,
and she will sing Allelujah for her safe Delivery at the ultimate Day of
Judgment; but how long this ultimate Day may be, how long ere the Evening of
the Millenary Day will be in coming, we cannot t^ll, because the Prophets of
the Old Testament in general have spoken of the Times of Restitution, but have
not spoken of all things that are to be f^lfill'd; and many things in the New
Testament, the Apostles tell us, were hid in old time; and St* John's Six first
Seals, Trumpe^s, and Viols, show as much; as also the binding of Satan, etc.
Some think the Opinion of the Thousand Years makes Christ's Kingdom to be
Earthly, but the Scriptures make it to be Spiritual; neither does the Word of
God make the Kingdom of the M^diatour of two kinds, and of a different nature,
but one and uniform from the Beginning to the End, Luke 1.32.

Also in this New Creation, when things shall be re-created, or made anew,
there shall be no noisome Fumes, Vapors, or any noxious Exhalations, fier^ or
watery, etc. to cause Sickness, Death it self (...) then be swallowed up in
Victory, 1 Cor. 15. and all Sorrow removed, Rev. 21.4. the Air shall not be an
Habita^ion for Devils as formerly, for which he was called Prince of the Air,
Ephesians. 2.2. but the Devil shall be chained up, Re^. 20.2. and every Unclean
Spirit shall be removed far away from the Church, Zech. 13.2.

As in the first Creation God made all things in a short time, so will it be in
the new Creation; for Christ will then do great things suddenly, Isai. 66.8.
The Appearance of Christ shall be on a sudden, Matthew. 24.27. the Change of the
Believers surviving at Christ's Coming shall be effected in a moment, in the
Twinkling of an Eye, 1 Cor. 15.51. And lastly, the Resurrection of the Deceased
shall be by Christ effected at his Coming.

Christ, as Man, must judge Men as Men, and so have Time to make his Judgment,
which in it self will doubtless be just. Now this will take up a co^side^able
time of the Thousand Years; for Christ will judge the whole World upon the
Earth, and ^h^ ^arth will be the Place of Judicature, and all the Bo^ies that
ever were mus^ appear in a Place on the (...) sit for that purpose; I say on
the Earth, for (...) in Heaven the Wicked cannot be to receive Sen^ence, and
only the Saints are caught up in the Clouds. Satan, and the wicked Hypocrites,
and o^^er Sinners, will be sentenced into Outer Dark^es^

As to the Place where this great Assize will be hel^, the common Opinion is,
that it will be ^ear I^r^salem, in the Valley of Iehoshaphat, which
Cosm^g^aphers assign for the middle of the Earth's super^^ies; for if the
termini a quibus, be the four Parts (...) the World, then the terminus ad quem
must be about the Center. Another Reason is, because the Angel told the
Disciples, That as they saw Christ ^s^e^d from Mount Olive^, which is over the
Valley of Iehoshapha^, so He should in like manner descend from Heaven. Now
that the said Valley, or some Place adjacent to Jerusalem, should be the place
of Judgment, it is most probable; because that as Christ was ^hereabouts
Crucified, and put to open shame; so it is likely that thereabouts his glorious
Throne shall be exalted in the Air, when he shall appear in Judgment, to
manifest his Majesty and Glory; and so He in that place will judge the World
with ^ighteous Judgment, where h^ Himself was unjustly ^udged and condemned.

The Order he will observe in giving Judgment, will* as some think, be first to
pronounce the Senten^^ of Absolution and Bliss upon the Elect, because ^e will
thereby increase the Grief of the Reprobates that shall hear it, and at the
same time show that he is more prone to Mercy than Judgment, more forward to
Reward the Good, than to punish the Wicked; therefore he will in the sight and
hea^ing of all the World say to his Elect, Come, ye Blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning of the World: Come you
now from Labou^* to Rest; from Disgrac^, to Glory; from the Iaws of Death, to
Eternal Life.

After this every Saint receives a glorious Crown from the Hands of their
Righteous and Merciful Judge, as the ample Reward which he promised o^ his free
Grace to all them that loved and hoped for this his last, and to the Blessed,
everlasting appearing* Then every one shall take his Crown, and lay i^ down as
it were at the Feet of Christ, the generous Giver, and prostrating themselves,
shall with one Heart and Voice, in a Heavenly Consort, Sing P^aise and Honor,
and Glory, and Power, and Thanks b^ unto thee, O Blessed Lamb, who sit upon
the T^ron^ Thou by D^^th Redeemed us from being Sons o^ Wrath and Perdition, to
be the Children of God* Out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, thou have made unto our God, Kings and Priests, to Reign triumphantly
with Thee in thy Kingdom for ever.

Next follows the dreadful Sentence of Condemnation against the hardened
Reprobates and evi^ Angels, immediat^ly after which Christ from his exalted
Tribunal will arise, waited on by his numerous Train of Elect and holy Angels,
with whom in Order and Array, he will ascend Triumphantly unto the Heaven of
Heavens, and there present al^ the Elect unto his Father, saying, Behold, O
Righteous Father, these are they whom Thou gave me I gave them thy Word, and
they Believed it; I have ke^^ them, and none of them is lost; Therefore let
them Sing Praises to thee their God and King; let them be glad and rejoice, and
give honor unto thee, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Spouse
has made her self ready, Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns.

Every thing tends to its proper Center; God ^s the Center of our Souls, our
chiefest Good; therefore the Soul (like Noah's Dove) cannot rest nor ^oy till
she return and enjoy him; she is ever desiring ^o keep a perpetual Sabbath with
him, to the Glory* Honor, and Praise of the Blessed Trinity; to which
^appiness when we once Arrive, we shall not only ^now our Friends departed in
the Faith of Christ, ^ut also join in a League of perpetual Friendship with all
the Faithful that ever were, or shall here^fter be; our knowledge now is but
imperfect, then it will be complete; for we shall know as we are known of God,
or as the Angels know one another.

Come all you that thirst after true and perfect Knowledge, and employ your
utmost endeavors to ^^ome Graduates in Christ's Heavenly University. ^n this
World, the utmost pitch of Knowledge, the ^ost diligent Students, and the
ablest Professors, ^an with all their Faculties attain to, is only the
^iscovery of the mere shadow of our unspeakable ^reator; but in Heaven, we
shall know God in rea^^ty, and in him all things perfectly; we shall know ^he
manner of that stupendio^s work of the Creation; ^e shall be able to solve the
difficulty of making all things out of nothing, and conceive the amazing
^ist^ry of our Redemption. In fine* our Minds which now labor in trifles, with
a Thousand invin^ible doubts, will then be enriched with the know^edge of all
things possible; and we shall conclude as an undoubted Verity, that in the
Flesh we saw but a few of God's wonderful Works in comparison o^ what shall be
revealed then unto us. Let us then labor for Heaven, and like wise Merchants,
traffic for Eternal Life, as a most precious Pearl which is worth our
Purchase, though it cost us all we have, Mat* 13. Abraham and Sarah left their
own Country and Possessions to look for this City, whose Founder is God. David
was so enamored with this Divine Mansion, that he rather desired to be there a
Doorkeeper, than to dwell in the richest Tabernacle of Wickedness. It was into
the Kingdom of Heaven that Elias so earnestly besought the Lord to receive his
Soul, to which he went most willingly, though in a Fiery Chariot. And St. Paul
having but once seen (...) glimpse of Heaven, ever after desired that he might
be dissolved to be with Christ; and well he might, for as David says, At God's
Right Hand are Pleasures ^or ever more. If Ruth left what is usually accounted
most dear, her own Country, and followed Naomi her Mother in Law, to dwell with
her in the Land* of C^naan, (which was but a Tipe of Heaven) only upon the Fame
which she had heard of the God of Israel, though she had no promise of any
Portion therein, Ruth 1.16. With how much more alacrity ought we to follow our
Mother the Church, to go into the Heavenly Canaan, wherein God has given us an
Et^rnal Inheritance, assured to us by an holy Covenant, engrossed in the Word
of God, signed with the Blood of his Son, and Sealed with his Divine Spirit and
Holy Sacraments. O how immense will our happiness be, when our Life shall be an
inseparable Communion with the Blessed Trinity; our Joy, the Eternal Presence
of our Lord; our Exercises, Singing harmonious Halalujahs; our Consorts, Saints
and Angels; where Youth flourishes, and never waxes Old* where Beauty
lasts, and never fades; Love abounds, and never cools; Health
continues, and never slacketh; and life remains, which never ends. O Man,
how happy and blessed thy Estate is, being truly reconciled to God in Christ,
who will res^ore in thee God's Image, and give thee power to reassume thy
Sovereignty over other Creatures: Thou art in this Life inferior to the Angels,
but in the next, thou will be equal with them; for in spiritual Graces and
everlasting Glory, thou will become their Brother; yea, thou (in respect of thy
Nature, exalted by a personal Union to the Son of God, and through him joined
to the Trinity) shall become Superior even to Angels themselves. Since thou, O
Man, have seen and heard how glorious and perfect an Entity God is, and since
the Zenith of Bliss and Happiness consists in having an Eternal Communion with
his Majesty, now therefore I entreat thee, in the Bowels of Christ Jesus, as
thou tenderest thy Salvation, seriously with me to consider the vanity of these
things which screen from us the favor of God, and the hope of Eternal Life:
Therefore all the insignificant Gaities of the World, without true and
undefiled* Religion, are but as Flowers about a dead Corpse: But the knowledge
of Christ is the excellence of a Christian, I mean knowledge reduced to
Practice, for Knowledge without Practice, is like gaudy Feathers, al^ for show,
and nothing for use; it is by this Practi^al Knowledge we may attain a Crown of
Glory: Therefore, let us rouse up our Spirits to a diligent ^ndeavour after
true Piety, (the noble effect of true knowledge) which will direct us rightly
to manage those parts God has endowed us with; for though the depravedness of
our Nature makes these gifts of our mind Rebel, yet Piety will reduce them to
Obedience, and make them pay their homage to the King of Saints.

I will next speak a word or two about Doctors. Now the word Doctor (as some
say) is derived from Do^or, and Do^or signi^i^s a Giver. But God is the Giver
of every good and perfect Gift. Hence perh^ps it was that our Savior said to
^is Dis^iples, Be y^ not called Doctors. And again he said, The Whole need no
Ph^sician, intimating hereby, that his Apostles were as well Physicians as
Divines; and in both respects they were forbid to bear the Name of Doctors.
Likewise they were ordered, as Divines and Physicians, to take no Money either
for Curing the Diseases of the Poor, or for Preaching the Gospel to them. These
things, and his miraculous Feasting of the Multitude, made Thousands follow him
and his Apostles, who preached and did all good Works gratis, when as before
that time the Poor paid the tenth of all they had only for hearing the Law
repeated, nay, Decimation th^n run so high, that even Speer-Mint, Ann^^^ed,
etc. were diligently tyth'd.

It Is an Abus^ in some places for the Pries^ to impose upon the ignorant a
B^lief, that except they give Heaven's Porter a Penny, the greatest
Righteousness will not be able to gain them admittance into those Heavenly
Mansions; but they must, for defa^lt b^ f^^xed in Purg^tory till that P^ny and
much more be paid by their surviving Friends, in getting Interc^ssio^ and
Pray^rs offered up for their Souls; but Job said, Naked came I into the World,
and naked I shall go out; by which it appears, that as we have no Money when we
come into the World, so we shall have no Occasion for any when we go out.
Besides, the Scripture informs us, that the Twelve Gates belonging to that Holy
City are never shut Day nor Night, b^t are always open to all true Believers of
God's Word, and Observers of the Precepts thereof; so that be that so believes,
and so does as God's Word dir^cts, shall undoubtedly be fed with the Tree of
Life, even Christ Jesus, who would have all Men that get Wealth in this World,
to do good, and distrib^te part of what they have to cloth and feed the Poor,
relieve Prisoners, etc. with such Sacrifices God is well pleased; and be
assured, that whatever Deeds of Charity you do to such as stand in need of your
Help, it is the same as if they were done to Christ himself. Hence I think my
self obliged to do my best to recov^r all who are pleased to make use of me, as
^n ^^strument under God; and if any ask such as have been recovered by my
Means, who restored them to Health, let them answer, that it was God by D.
Irish his Instrument; and so in this, as in all other things, give the Honor
and Thanks to Almighty God, especially for making his Word known to the meanest
Capacity through all Nations.

I have elsewhere, in part, given my Opinion touching ^he Understanding of
Variety of Languages; and will here only add, that tho Multiplicity of Tongues
have been generally held as a gentile Accomplis^ment, yet were they never
absolutely necessary till the World was to be Gospelliz'd, Matthew. 28.19. which
we gather from several following Circumstanc^s: For the Apostles were commanded
on^e and again to stay at ^^rusalem till Christ should send the Promise of his
Father upon them: And they waiting for Abilities to their Work till Whitsunday,
or P^^tecost was come, they were all with one accord in one place, and s^ddenly
there cam^ a sound from Heaven, as of a r^shing mighty Wind, and it filled all
the House wherein they Sat, and there appeared Cloven Tongues, like unto Fire,
and sat upon each of them, Acts 2.1, 2* 3. Tongues appea^ed, the chief
Instrument of their work, which was to disciple all Nations, and to Pr^ach
Repentance and Remission o^ Sins, Luke 24.47. Clove^ Tongues, because they were
to divide the Word ar^^^t, that every one in all Nations and Languages might
have his Portion; They were as of Fire, to show the Zeal, Light, Efficacy, and
Success of their Endeavors, and therefore was this strange Miracle ushered in
with such a rushing mighty Wind, because none should be able t^ resist the
Power by which they spoke, Act* 6.10. and 24. and they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and then they spoke Apothegms, serious Sayings, and sacred
Sentences. And they might well be amazed, verse. 11. when near twenty Nations,
of several Languages, affirmed, they heard them speak in their own ^anguage the
wonderful Works of the Lord, every Man in his Tongue where they were born.
Indeed, Christianity was to speak all Languages a^ first, because it was to be
preached to all Nations; the Gospel only is able to make all Nations wise unto
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. if they would believe the same.

We should also truly call upon God successively to send Christian, good and
godly Governors, that they earnestly may stand for the Christian Ch^^ch, and
true Religion, which God has caused to be taught among us, that the same may
continue manfully to resist erroneous and false Doctrine; and now in our time
God has raised up certain high and mighty Heads and Princes, which have been
Nurses and Protectors of the Church: God preserve them mercifully for the same,
and send continually Men able and willing so to do, who shine with the Beauty
of acquired and natural Parts, and ar^ free to impart the^r Knowledge, by
explaining the true Sense and Meaning of God's Word to all Rational People, so
as thereby they may come to the true Knowledge of God, and his only Son our
Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, so as all Nations may be led by the Word of that
one Shepherd, who gave his Life for a Ransom ^or all those that believe his
Word, which is the true ^ight that enlightens every Man in the way to Eter^al
Life. So God grant that his Gospel may for ^ver flourish amongst all Nations,
to the End of the World.

Let me, in the next place, exhort all Men to remember to crave a Blessing of
God, and be thankful to him for whatsoever they eat or drink, since it all
^omes from his Bounty, which affords us what his Wisdom thinks fit and
necessary. For such gratis and gracious Gifts as ^e daily confers upon us, let
us, if we would avoid the just Imputation of the greatest Ingratitude, give his
Divine Majesty thanks. How thankful was our Blessed Savior for two Loaves and
a few Fis^es, when he blessed God his Heavenly Father for them; the Issue was a
miracu^o^s Increase, to show us, that if we were thankful to God for a little,
he would give us much; yet we daily see how wonderfully forgetful Thousands
are, when they sit down to plentiful Tables, and mind not before nor after they
eat to return the Giver Thanks for their nourishing Varieties. I fear it will
go bad with such one Day, through their neglecting ^he Du^y of Thankfulness for
what they daily receive from Heaven's Liberality. It Is God that gives, or at
least ^ends us all we have, can we then do less than thank him for the same,
which undoubtedly he expects, even from our Hearts, as well as in formal verbal
(...), which are but signs of our inward Gratitude. What are such, I pray,
better than Heathens, wh^, knowing their Duties herein, rise from Meat
u^san^tified. We ought not only to be than^ful, but also ^o bestow some part of
what we have on the Poo^, according to the Directions found ^n Sacred Writ.
Such as fail herein must expect God's I^dignation and Rebuke when he ^alls them
to an account for their Stewardship. Repentance then will be too late for our
now Forgetfulness. Now is the acceptable Time to seek the Lord, whilst he may
be found; for in this Life, whenever we call upon him he will hear, and grant
our request.

Let the Words of my Mouth, and the Meditations of all Men's Hearts, be now and
ever acceptable in thy Sight, O Lord God, our Redeemer. Most Great and Glorious
Lord our God thou art, and there is no other God besides Thee in Heaven nor in
Earth; for the Heavens are thy Throne, and the Earth is thy Footstool, and the
Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain Thee; the whole Earth is full of the
Glory of thy Majesty. O what miserable Creatures are we, Dust and Ashes, not
worthy of the least of thy Mercies! How dare we then present our selves before
Thee, who art so pure and holy a God? yet still through thy Mercy we have here
our Being, whereas thou might have placed us in the Abyss of Hell for ever,
where there is nothing but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth* where
the Fire burns, and never goes out; and where the Worm, namely the lost Soul,
never dies. Let us all then with Humility jointly say, We have sinned against
Heaven, and against Thee. Let us honor our Callings with the Practice of good
Works, and f^llow P^ac^ with all Men. Help us, O Lord, now to press forward to
make our Election sure, and ^h^t we may live every Day as piously as if it were
o^r last, since we know not how soon thou may summon us to appear before the
Tribunal Seat of Jesus Christ, to give an account of all our Works d^ne here in
the Flesh. Purge us with Hyssop, and w^ shall be clean. Wash us in the Blood of
the L^mb, and then we shall be whiter than Snow. Take all our Sins and cast
them in a Cloud behin^ thy Back, where they may be remembered no more. Cr^ate in
us new Hearts, and new Spirits, so as we may walk in Newness of Life, according
to thy Holy Will and Commandments. And if it be thy Blessed Will pity all those
that sit in Darkness, and under the Shadow of Death, that they may come at thy
appointed time to the miraculous Light of thy Gospel dispensed to all true
Christians, by thy true and only Son our Blessed Savior, who sits at thy
right hand making Intercession for all those that put their trust in thee.
Grant, if it be thy Blessed Will, that we may all be taught by that Head
Shepherd of thy Church, who said, When you pray, say, Our Father, etc.

Such as would know more concerning their Duties in Prayer, Public or Private,
by the way of Form, or would attain to pray by the Spirit, according to their
present Necessities, or Wants, let such read the incomparable little piece set
out by Robert Russell, 1700. it is the Third Edition; in it are Seven Sermons.
Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

In a word, I earnestly exhort all my Readers to be piously mindful of their
Duties to God and Man; if you fail not in this, Christian Reader, God will
remember you, and after this Life, in Eternal Bliss you will live with him at
Rest.

Take but a serious prospect, by a powerful Imagination, of all the several
conditions observabl^ amongst worldly Men, and you will find that not one of
them sits easy upon its Possessor; for the natural Man is ever a Repining, and
a perpetual succession of Doubts and Fears complete the measure of his
Inquietudes; sometimes he c^mplains of the Ac^^ons of his Superiors and
Governors; and if they i^ the end should prove ^greeable to his Fancy, he will
yet keep up the height of his Misfortunes, by grieving at the unob^^ging
deportment of his Inferiors; nor will it ever be otherwise with those that se^k
Cont^nt below; hence those that are circled with the greate^t Splendo^, find
not their Perturbations at all lessened by it, but think they might be much
more happy, and therefore strain themselves afresh in the eag^r pu^suit of
other Worldly advantages, which, if obtained, bring ^ot the desired Content,
and the reason is, because they look for it in the things of this World* where
it is not to be found* there i^ no st^te of Life, be it what it will, but what
is att^nded with Misery enough in those that live after the Flesh. Nay, many
times the very Courts of Justice torment Men abroad, as much as their Families
care does at home; the Country life is oppressed with continual Labors; at Sea
there is confusion of D^ngers, the Merchant teaches his Estate to Swim; and he
that Travels with Riches, gives a great Temptation to Highway-men, and exposes
his Life and Mon^y to the mercy of Thieves; the Rich are Plagued with the
desire of Increasing, care of keeping* and fear of losing Riches, while the
Poor are obnoxious to Scorn and Contempt. Marriage in general is no more ^han a
conjunction of mutual Perplexities and accidental Calamities; Children are
^onuments of Care, and for the most part, very un^^rtain Comforts, especially
in these days; and on (...) other side, a single Life often proves a solitary
^ischief or inconvenience; the Fruitful bring forth C^res, and Barrenness is
counted a Curse; Youth is a tormenting Fury, old Age a mere lump of
Infirmi^ies, and an incurable Disease: Thus there is something in every life
that proves the bane of our Happiness, except we entirely give our selves up to
the Service of God, Mat. 6.24. No Man can serve two Masters, God and the World;
he that is a Vassal to his Wealth, can never make a true Servant of God: he
that is a Rebel to his lawful Prince, is no good Subject of Christ's, though
Religion be the Pretense: The Parable of the Rich Man, and many other places of
Scripture, make out how hard it is for such who trust in uncertain Riches, to
enter into the Kingdom of God: Therefore mis^rable is the case of all covetous,
Rich persons, Usurers, Extorti^ners, Thieves and Robbers; not can we think
better of the Envious, Murderers, Whore-mongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters*
Sabbath Breakers, Swea^ers, Drunkards, Gluttons* and such as are given to
Detraction, and Anger without cause, calling their Brother Fool; to these add
lying Reprobates, the Proud, the Cruel, and ^^ard-hearted Hippocrites, the
Sloathful and Unbe^iever, and many pr^sumptuous Sinners; all which a^e
threatened to be cast into unquenchable Fire, as unprofitable Servants: They are
such as prefer Vice before Virtue, Iniquity before Godliness, Falsehood before
Truth, and their own dark works before the light of the Gospel: Also among the
unprofitable Servants, may be reckoned the Rebellious, who by belying their
lawful Governors, rob the Peoples hearts of Obedience, and so fit them for
Rebellion, which is a kind of Witchcraft and spiritual The^^. Nay, those that
corrupt the Minds of others by lewd Examples, Hippocrites, Slanderers, teachers
of Lies, whereby ^he Souls of their Hearers are robbed of Eternal Life, a^e
condemned. All that foolishly attribute to th^ms^lves the benefit of Health,
Weal^h, or Liberty, and so deprive God of his Glory, are hither referred; such
as purloi^ from their Masters, Parents, Husbands, Wives, Friends, or
Neighbour^, suffer them to incur any loss or detriment which they might
prevent, are in the same Class with the former; such as Rob their Neighbors,
either by false Weights, Measures, bad Wares, or subtle Practices; all Lawyers
that make good Causes bad, or Bad Good* all Debtors that never design to pay;
all Creditors that cru^lly Triumph over the Bodies o^ their poor insolvent
Debtors, by Imprisonment, or any other kind of Oppression. And lastly, Envious
Men, who, when they have done a Man what disgrace they ca^ ^y Words, fall to
the practice of unjust Deeds, to overthrow and ruin those whom they
causelessly Hate; such sure cannot so much as have the least pretense to be
Servants of God, but, on the contrary, Slaves and Vassals of Satan.

Now, to know who are unprofitable Servants, I say, ^^rst, They are such as are
Magistrates abusing their Aut^ority, to the hurt of those they ought to Protect.

Secondly, Such as are no Magistrates, but either neglect their calling, or
deprave it by their wicked Practice.

Thirdly, Rich men, who relieve not the wants of the Poor with their Plenty.

Fourthly, Learned and well instructed Christians* who suffer the Ignorant to
go Astray without giving them good Advice or necessary Instructions.

Touching those that have their Portion in the Sulp^urous Lake, which burns
with Fire and Brims^one, (where Men und^rgo (as it is called) the Second Death)
see Revel. 21.1. By this Second Death, is understood the deplorable separation
of the Soul and Body for ever from the Beatifical Vision or Presence o^ God,
and this is the Death which the Wi^ked must suffer; yet the fullness of their
Punishment will not be inflicted upon them till the day of Judgment, when their
Souls and Bodies are reunited, then they will receive their dreadful Doom and
condign Punishment for their Evil Deeds: for your further instruction herein,
see Luke 16.22, 23. the 8.28. the 10.23. and the 12.30. Mat. 23.23.31. and
5.24. and 13.14. and 14.31. These. 1.10. 1 Pet. 3.19. Iud^ ^* ^, 7. Acts 7.5.
and in many other places the Scripture g^ves a large account of Hell, and of
its Torments, of which none can doubt, since our Blessed Savior said, That
Heaven and Earth should pass away, but hi^ Word should never pass away;
Therefore, unless we be regenerate and renewed in Christ, our condition i^
d^sperate; hence let us with all speed Repent, and streighten the unevenness of
our ways, according to the Level of God's Word and Commandments; let us Love one
another, and do as we would be done by, and show the loveliness of our Faith by
the uprightness of our Works; For it is not every one tha^ cries Lord, Lord,
that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. No, It is the doing the Will of
God that dwells in Heaven that must bring us thither; We must be Born again,
not of the Blood* nor of the Will of the Flesh, but of God, who in Christ is
our Father, and will renew his own Image in us every day more and more, and
apply to us the Merits of Christ's Sufferings for the blotting out of all our
Sins, original and actual, together with the guilt and punishment belonging to
them* Blessed is he therefore to whom the Lord has not imputed Sin, [s^e Ezekiel.
18.21.2 Cor. 33.13.] for to such all the Righteousness of Christ is freely and
fully imputed, to the Reconcili^tion of them unto the Lord, who approves them
as Righteous, not taking notice of ever^ fault, but bearing with their
Frailties and Infirmities, Exodus 34.67. Romans 4.8. The godly Man has an
assurance of God's Fatherly care and protection Day and Night, which care God
manifests in providing all things necessary for his Soul and Body, so that the
godly Man is sure of having enough* ^ God gives his holy Angels [as Ministers]
a charge to attend upon the Righteous, Psalm. 34.7. And to prevent all dangers,
the Angels pitch their Tents about the lust for their safety where ever they
go; yea, God will d^fend them with a Cloud by day, and with a Pillar of Fire by
night; and his Providence shall hedge them from the Power of the Devil, see
Jude 1.9. where it is Recorded, that Micha^l the Archangel was set to keep the
Body of Moses, which being secretly hidd^n by God, was sought for by Satan; by
which it appears, that God's good Angels keep all such as live and die in the
faith of Christ, and in the fear of the Lord, 2 Kings 6.17. The Eyes of the
Lord are always op^n to see their State, and also his Ears to hear t^eir
Complaint, and in his good time will deliver them out of all their troubles,
and bring them to the glory of the Church in her perpetual Triumph in the World
to come, when joined to her Bridegroom Christ Jesus, in Joy that shall never
have an End, a taste of which Joy is in some sort made manifest unto us in the
Revelations cap. 2.22.

Therefore let us all with St. Stephen say, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; and
in the mean time, the Lord g^ant that we may be always Purging out [by true
Faith and Repentance] the Malignity of our Spiritual Diseases, till we arrive
at divine and saving Health, that at the End of our Bodily Infirmities, the
great Physician may administer a Cordial to us of his own Living Water; and
grant, that at the Night of Death, when our Sun shall set, the Sun of
Righteousness may rise upon us with healing under his Wings, and make our Souls
[as the Lame-man's body in the Gospel] entirely whole, and so elevate us to
those Light Orbs, and Heavenly Mansions, where the Su^ shall no more be our
Light by Day, nor the Moon by Night, but the Lord our God shall be ou^
Everlasting Light and Glory.

Which are the Hearty Prayers of, READERS, Your True Friend, And Faithful
Servant, David Irish.

Advertisement.
THE Smallpox being now in many Places, I thought it convenient to publish,
That if I see the Smallpox break out of any, or but newly come out, I will
tell them at first sight whether there be any Danger of Death by having them or
not. And I do affirm, That I can, with God's Blessing, give an Antidote against
them, and of such Virtue to those that are not already infected, that tho they
eat and drink, and be always with those that have them* yet shall they not have
them.

So God preserve us all from all manner of Contagious Diseases, and from sudden
Death. Amen.


