A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A. and B. Two Plain Countrey-Gentlemen, Concerning the
TIMES.

LONDON; Printed in the Year, MDCXCIV.

A DIALOGUE between A. and B. Two Plain Countrey-Gentlemen, etc.
A. SIR, I am very glad we are thus happily met according to our appointmew, in
order to decide (if possible) the Difference that is between us concerning the
late Revolution. I confess the Subject is such that you may think your self
obliged to be very cautious and reserved in treating of it: But since there are
none present but our selves. I hope the mutual Confidence we have in one
another will easily free you from all unkind Suspicions, and engage you to use
the same Freedom and Plainness with me on this as you have hi^herto done upon
all other Occasions. Pray tell me then ingenuously, why you are so obstinate in
refusing Submission to the present Government.


B. Truly the Reason of it is. because I look upon it as a downright
Usurpation, unnaturally begun, and unreasonably maintain^d, against all Law and
Right both Divine and Human.


A. I seems then, that in your Opinion K* W. is no more but P* of O* still, and
that our True and Rightful King is K. James.


B. I shall not dispute the Title of King that you have given the P. of O.
that, I grant you, he has more than he had before, and no doubt will die with
it: But that he has any Right to the Regal Authority or Supreme Government of
these Kingdoms whereof he has assumed the Ti^e, that I utterly deny.


A. Who has it then? King James?


B. Yes certainly, and none on Earth but he: For though at present he is
deprived of the Power and Opportunity of exercising it, as a Father may
sometimes be forced from the exercise of his Paternal Authority, yet he has
still the Right to it, and that so incommunicably, that while he lives and
claims it, none else can lawfully pretend to it.


A That he once had that Right I grant, and do likewise believe he might have
still retained it, if it had not bee^ his own Fault. But that he has it not
now, you cannot b^^ know to be the settled Opinion of the far greater part of
these Three Nations, whether you consider their Number or Quality, which,
however you may slight it, is yet a thing of so much Weight, that you had need
have very good Reasons to balance it.


B. Number and Quality I will allow your Party, though perhaps not in that
Degree that you imagine, it being very usual to magnify both these above what is
just: For if out of your Numbers we substract those that are acted purely by
their Interest, and those that are imposed upon by mere empty Shows and false
Appearances, without ever examining the Truth of things; that is to say, those
that speak otherwise than they think, and those that do not think at all,
neither of which can be much reckoned upon, the former not being truly yours,
and the latter so unaccountably such, that it is impossible you can be sure of
them; I say, if both these were scored off from your Party, you would have no
great Reason to brag of their Number: And as for their Quality, I do not well
understand in what Sen^e or on what Account you urge it: For my part, I know no
Quality nor Qualification to be considered in such a Case, but such as is
adapted to gain Credit to a Man's Opinion or to enhaunse the Value of it, the
chief whereof are Learning, Pretty and Integrity. And as for these, I hope it
will be no great Vanity to affirm, that those of our Side are nothing inferior
to yours.


A. I know all of you do what you can ^o l^ssen both the Number and Quality of
those of our Persuasion, of purpose to keep up the Courage of your own. But as
long as I see the whole Representa^ive Body of the Nation, and the whole
Regular Clergy of that Opinion I adhere (...) impossible there can he any
tolerable Competition between your Side and ours.


B. As for the Representative Body of the Nation, by which I suppose you mean
the Parliament (...) (though I pay as great a Deference to it, when duly
considered, as you or any man else, yet! I must tell you, that from what is
debated or transacted by them, it is very hard to give a true Judgment of ^he
Sentiments of the Nation; partly because a^ Elections are now ordered, they are
but (...) very partial and unadequate Representa ive of the Nation, a great
many having (...) none to represent them, or none but what are obtruded upon
them; and partly, because after they are elected, whatever happens to be
debated, however far from being foreigen or so much as dreamed of by those whom
they represent, they do not think hen selves obliged to consult them about it,
nor ^o much as to acquaint them with it. Bu^ besides that, to think that all
the Representatives of the Nation are of your Opinion concerning that is now in
Dispute, is to show your self a little too credulous: For though I grant they
have taken Oaths to the present Government, yet as the Times go now, that can
(...) no such Security, but that in the mean time they may be undermining it.
You know it was so in K. James's Time, and why may it not be so now? To
conclude from Men's swearing Allegiance, that they are and will continue true
and faithful Subjects, was so great a Fallacy then, that it were very strange
if it should amount to a Demonstration now. But suppose it were as you allege,
that the whole Representative Body of the Nation were unanimously cordial for
the Support of the present Government, in Opposition to the for ^er, what you
would infer from it will very hardly follow, namely, that the Diffusive Body is
(...) or so much as the greatest part of it: If that Consequence were go^d, the
Government could be (...) loss by dissolving this present Parliament and
calling another; and yet you know how peremptorily your King has resused it, to
the great Dissatisfaction not only of both Hou'es of Parliament, but even of
the whole Nation; of which the only true Account that can be given is, that he
is very apprehensive that a new Election might prove very prejudicial to his
Affirm, or that upon a new shuffling and cutting there might chance to trump up
a Card that would spoil his whole Game. That alone may sufficiently demonstrate
that in thi^ matter your King and you are of different Opinions.


A. Well, but what is your Opinion of the Church? Are not all the Clergy of our
Side? What (...) you say of them?


B. Why truly, if you had not mentioned them again, I (...) have said nothing
of them: Not that I had forgot you had mentioned hem before, but because they
have indeed so far prevaricated and swerved from their Principles, that I know
not what to say to them Their Prosession I very highly honor, and have a great
Respect for some of their Persons, particularly one, whose Compliance has
occasioned me many a s^d Thought: But I must tell you, their so shameful
receding from their former Principles, and pulling down with the one hand what
but lately they had so zealously built with the other, is such a Scandal o
their Prosession, a piece of Disingenu^ty so ill-becoming their Character, that
there are scarce any will take upon them to excuse, much less to justify it.
Nay, they themselves are so very sensible of it, that for want of a better
Evasion, they were forced to own that they were formerly in an Error: For thus
their Apology runs. Those Doctrines we formerly taught, such as that of Passive
Obedience to the Supreme Governor, that he derives his authority immediately
from God, and is accountable to none but him for the Exercise of it: That it is
not Lawful on any Pretense for Subjects to take up Arms against him, or (which
is all one) to join with those that come purposely to invade his Right. These
Doctrines, however zealously we preached them up formerly, as very Orthodox,
and very necessary Points of Religion, are yet nothing else out mere Heman
Fictions, contrived of purpose to flatter the Ambition of Princes, and cheat
the People of their Liberty. It Is true, the (...), especially they that had
imbibed the Oliverian Principles, told us so then, but we either did not or
would not believe them. nay, more than that, inveighed ogainst their Opinions,
and pretended to demonstrate that they were not only Antimonarchical, but
likewise Antichristian, and on that very Account did think it very improper to
allow them any Toleration But now the Case is altered: However we might
endeavor to represent them then, we are now very well assured that they were
in the Right Is not this a very pretty Apology? Do not your Clergy come off
very gracefully in this matter? Pray what do you think of i^?


A. Truly, I cannot deny but that there is something of Truth in the Charge you
bring against them, though at the same time I think you have been a little too
severe in the drawing of it up. However this much I would have you to consider,
That the Clergy of our Church are but Men, and the best of Men may sometimes be
in a Mistake. Besides (...) your self know, that the Church of England. even in
its greatest Grandeur, never pretended to be infalli^l^. Wherein then lies this
great Reproach of the Clergy?


B. That the Church of England, at least since the Reformation, has not laid
Claim to an Infallibility, is so far from being any Reproach to her, that it
very much commends her Modesty: But withal I would have you to consider, that
there is a very great Difference between a Church's not claiming Infallibility,
and a Church's owning her self to have actually sailed, especially in proposing
the Doctrines of Religion: For though there is really no Reproach in the
former, yet there is a very great one in the latter, and a very great
inconveniency too: For though a Church is not really Infallible, yet as long as
she insists upon her not having actually erred. or that no such thing can be
made appear, I may very confidently rely upon her Guideship; in such a Case I
am really as safe and may be as confident, as if she pretended to an absolute
Infallibility; perhaps more, because an Infallibility requires a blind
Obedience to what it p^op^seth, without ever examining what it is, which the
other does not. But when a Church own^ that she has already erred, and that in
very material Points too, with what tolerable Confidence can a man rely upon
her, and how doubtful must that Assent be which he gives to what she proposes?
For if she has failed in one Thing it is natural enough to conclude that she
will do so in another; and then what tolerable Security can we have that she is
in the Right in any thing? Even when she proves what she says by Scripture, I
cannot but suspect her Sincerity, because she pretended to demonstrate by
express. Texts of Scripture those very Doctrines she now disowns.


A These may have been the Failings of some particular Persons; but you very
well know, that to charge a whole Church with the failings of some (though even
of her most considerable Members) i very disingenuous.


B I grant it is to; but deny that I have been guilty of it: No, the
Innovations and Contradictions I have mentioned are chargeable upon your whole
Church. As for Instance, It was so mer^ the pro essed Doctrine of the Church of
England, That it is not Lawful, on any pretense whatever, for Subjects to take
up (...) against their King; which evidently implies, that neither should they
themselves deprive him of his Right, nor be assistant to those that would do
it; but on the contrary, that they should stand by him and support him in it.
That this was formerly the Doctrine of the Church of England does evidently
appear from this, that no Person was to be admitted into the Ministry, in any
Degree whatever, without Subscribing to it: And it does no less evidently
appear on the other hand, that the present Clergy are of a quite contrary
Opinion, inasmuch as they have actually sided, joined hands and taken part with
those that have invaded his Right, and violently detain it from him; and that
at such a Time and in such a Manner, that, without such a base Compliance, it
can hardly be imagined how Things could have been brought to that now they are
at. This I say vour Church has done, and in so doing has justified and
incorporated into her new Religion a Doctrine which by the former Church of
England, was not barely disowned, but detested with the greatest degree of
Abhorrence: In a Word, your Clergy are so Latitudinarian both in their
Principles and Practices, nay, even in their very Oaths, that it is impossible
to know either when or where to fix them; for they have so cunningly ordered
Things, that on the same Grounds on which they now swear and preach and pray
against King James, on the very same Grounds, if ever he should return and
prevail, they would as heartily swear and preach and pray against K. W. so that
they are always sure to be of the strongest Side, and yet always in the Right.
These are the mighty Champions you boast of, that they are all of your Side; I
grant they are so, or at least pretend to be: But indeed how can it be
otherwise? For you very well know, that no sooner does one declare the
contrary, by refusing to swear and comply, than immediately he is turned out of
a^l, and another put in his Place: Whereas if they were allowed the Liberty to
speak their Minds freely, and yet be secure of their Livings, you would quickly
find, that they are not so entirely yours as you may imagine.


A. The Truth is, If they be such as you have endeavored to represent them,
it is no matter whose they are: But of that enough. Let us return, if you
please, to where we were when I led you into this Digression. You may remember
we were speaking of King James's Tide to the Crown; whence I took Occasion to
put you in mind of the vast Number and Quality of those that are against it, in
Compari^on of those that are for it. Not that I thought there was any great
Stress to be laid upon that, but merrly to know what you would say of i^: For I
very freely grant, that neither the Number nor Quality of either Side will
signify much, except they can give very good and satisfactory Reasons for what
they say. And therefore having already said what I think is sufficient of the
one, let us now discourse a little of the other. You contend that King James
has still the true and lawful Right to the Crown; and consequently, that all
the Right K W. has is merely Usurped.


B. I do so.


A. Well, But can you give me any good Reason for it?


B. Yes, I believe I can. That he once had that Right you your self have
granted, and consequently must likewise grant that if he has never y^^ been
legally deprived of it, he must have it still.


A. I must confess the Consequence seems natural enough, though at the same
time I believe a Man of Learning might make some Exceptions against it:
However, rather than draw you into another Digression, I am willing to let it
pass.


B Nay, if you have any Thing material to urge against it, pray, do it now: For
that will be much more proper than to recur to it afterward. I do not love to
leave a Backdoor open behind me, lest when you come to be pinched or put to a
Strait, you should happen to dodge and so give me the Slip, which is no unusual
thing in Disputes, especially when they are not managed with great Candor and
Ingenuity. And therefore, I say, if the Consequence I mentioned does not please
you, pray give me your Reasons now, that so there may be no occasion of
recurring to it afterward.


A. I tell you again that though some perhaps may be of another Opinion, yet I
do not see but that your Consequence is good; for I verily believe that when
one has a just Right or Title to any Thing, that Title is still good till he is
lawfully deprived or dispossessed of it; so that all I can demand or expect of
you, ^s, That you should give me some good Reason why you think that King James
has not (...) his Right, though the Generality of the Nation thinks he his, and
have proceeded all along on that Supposition.


B. Since you own that he once had that Right, I conceive it is rather
incumbent on you to show how he has lost it, than on me to prove that he has
not lost it; for that were to put me upon the Proof of a Negative, which in
most cases is very hard. Suppose I am not only actually but legally possessed
of an Estate, and another comes and violently drives me from it; if afterward
the Matter comes to he debated before a Judge in order to a Decision, it cannot
reasonably be demanded that I should prove my Title, because it being
acknowledged to have been-good before he invaded it, it must be presumed to be
so still, unless he can disprove it: So that the proof must lie wholly upon
him, and those that are of Counsel for him, there being no more incumbent on me
but only to answer those Arguments by which he endeavors to prove that I have
forfeited my Right. Just so it is in the Case now in Dispute. So that to expect
that I or any man else should prove that King James has not lost his Right, any
otherwise than by disproving those Arguments by which your Party pretend to
make it appear that he has lost it, is both a very great Hardship upon us, and
a very preposterous way of arguing.


A. I am satisfied that what you now say is very reasonable; that it is chiefly
the part of your Adversaries, not only to prove K. W'S. Right to the Crown, but
also to disprove that of King James, because the one cannot be done without the
other. Yet partly because I am very loath to venture upon so great an
Undertaking; and partly because I am very confident you would not be so
obstinate in maintaining King James's Right, without some very good Reasons,
more than what are barely Negative or purely defensive: I desire you will be
pleased to take the Proof upon you, though at the same time, I grant, you leave
a more advantageous Post, and forgo an advantage you may justly claim.


B. To leave ones Post is like venturing out of ones Depth, which many have had
reason to repent of, and so perhaps it may fare with me. Yet since you seem so
desirous that I should not only give but prove my Opinion, I will endeavor to
give you some Satisfaction; hoping you will be so reasonable as not to expect
any other Arguments than the Nature of the Thing will bear.


A. Truly you might think me very disingenuous, and your self very ill rewarded
for your Complacence if I should; but you may assure your self of the contrary,
and therefore, pray, be pleased to go on.


B In confidence of that I will; and that I may reduce my Discourse to as
narrow a compass as may be there are two Things which I shall take for granted.
First, That K. James was once our True and Lawful King: That is to say, that by
the Fundamental Laws of the English Monarchy, He and He alone, was invested
with the Lawful Right of governing these three Kingdoms and all other Dominions
thereto annexed, as undoubted Heir and Successor to his Royal Brother. The
Second Thing is necessarily consequent upon that; namely, that having once had
that Right, if he has nor lost it since, he must needs have it still. These two
Things being granted, (...) only remains that I give you the Reasons why I
contend that he has not lost that Right, at least not by any Law or Justice;
and for that, I think, there is no better Reason needs be given than what you
your Selves furnish us withal.


A. I should be very glad to hear that Reason, for it seems very strange to me
that a Reason borrowed from us, can with any Success be urged against us.


B. However strange it may seem to you, it is no less satisfactory to me, for
the Reason I Intend to urge is the vast Difference among your Selves, nay, the
absolute Inconsistency of your Opinions, when you are put to it to declare how
or by what means King James came to lose his Right. That he has lost it, I
grant all of you agree, or at least pretend so to do; but when we call upon you
(as very reasonably we may) to show us how or by what means he lost it, instead
of a satisfactory Answer which all of you will stand by, we mere with nothing
but mere Shifts and disingenuous Shuffling; some pretending one thing, and some
another. There are (...) this Matter, at least three or four several Opinions
among you, and all of them not only different from, but utterly inconsistent
with one another. Some will have it that he forfeited his Right by
Maladministration, in subverting the Laws and breaking the Original Contract.
Some that be Abdicated and Resigned it. Some again contend that the People
(having in some Cases a Right so to do) did really depose him, and transferred
his Right to another. And some that he lost it by Conquest: By which I suppose
they mean that he was hectored out of it. Let any Man but compare these
Opinions together and he may easily see their Inconsistency to be such, that if
any one of them be true, the rest must be false; which is a very shrewd
Suspicion that indeed they are every one of them fal^e. It Is much of the same
Nature with that Argument which is commonly urged against the Infallibility of
the Church of Rome: For however peremptory they are in laying Claim to it, yet
inasmuch as they cannot agree among themselves where to fix it: Some placing it
in the Pope alone without a General Council: Some, in such a Council without
the Pope: And some, neither in one nor the other apart, but conjunctly in both:
That very Inconsistency of their Opinions is urged as an Argument that indeed
there is no such Thing among them; and a very good one it is too, at least ad
hominem. For though a Thing may otherwise have some Semblance of Truth, yet
when they that Authorize it cannot agree among themselves, but palpably
contradict one another in their opinions about it, it must needs be a mighty
Prejudice against it; and so it is in the Case now under Consideration. However
unanimous you may be in asserting that King James has lost his Right, yet
inasmuch as you differ so much among your selves, when you come to declare how
or by what means he lost it, that it is impossible to reconcile you, it is a
very convincing Argument that indeed he has not lost it, at least that you your
selves cannot so much a pretend to be assured of it.


A. Is it so? Truly, whatever you may think of is, in my Opinion it is the
weakest and most unconcluding Argument that ever I heard in my Life. For at
that (...) of arguing w^a^ever a Man loses, if it cannot be made appear which
way he lost it, he must have it still. Suppose a Man goes out in a Morning with
good S^ore of Money in his Pocker, and feeling for it a Night after he returns
Home, finds there is never a Groat lest: In that Case I believe it will be no
hard matter to convince him of his Loss, though perhaps he himself cannot tell
neither when, nor where, nor how it happened: And if he himself cannot give any
certain Account of it it is a great Chance but others may have very different
Opinions of it. Some (no doubt) will conclude that his Pocket was picked in a
Crowd: Some again, that being drunk he treated all the Company, and paid an
extravagant Reckoning with it, which now he has quite forgot: And it is likely
enough that some will tell you he has been bubbled out of it, or squandered it
away at Play, if not at worse Exercises, but that he himself is ashamed to own
it However certain the Loss may be, these and many more different Opinions
there may be of the Way and Manner how it happened: Our of which Variety of
Opinions, I perceive you, like a good Chemist, can very dexterously extract
this healing Cordial: C^urage Sir! H^d all they who seem to believe your
Misfortune unanimously agreed upon the Way and Manner how it happened. I should
have thought your Money had bee^ lost indeed; but since their Opinions are not
only distorent but utterly inconsistent, you may assure your self your Money is
in your Pocker still. If you can draw such Uses of Consolation from Doctrines
so little capable of affording them, it is pity you don't set up for a
Holder-forth.


B. No^ I perceive it is time for me to look to my Hits; for I find by the
Briskness of your last Reply, that if I should happen to make a false Step, you
would have no Mercy on me; but to show you that you have not taken me at that
Disadvantage you may imagine. I would have you to consider, that between losing
a Thing, and losing ones Right or Title to it, there is a very (...); for the
one may and many Times does happen without another; a Man may lose a Thing and
yet have the same Right to it that he had before, and on the contrary, a Man
may lose all his Right to a Thing, and yet retain Possession of the Thing it
self; so that there is a great Difference between these Two.


A I grant there is, but is that Difference any thing to the Purpose?


B, Yes, so very much that it quite invalidate^ your Reply, and leaves my
Argument in full Force.


A If you can show me that you do a great thing, for as I take it the Reply has
fully answered the Argument.


B. That you will find to be your Mistake. Indeed if the Dispute were only
concerning a M^n's bare losing or being deprived of a Thing, however
injuriously, I grant the Reply you have made would be satisfactory enough; for
without all doubt a Man lose a Thing, though neither he nor any Man else can
tell how he lost it: And in such a Case let Men's opinions of it be never so
different, what is lost is lost, and perhaps may never be recovered. But
however true this may be, I must tell you, it is nothing to the Purpose we were
speaking of: For you cannot but know, that the Subject of our Dispute is not
the bare losing of a Thing it self, but the losing of ones Right or Title to
it, which (a^ I have already said) is qui^e a different thing: For though I
grant a Man may lose a Thing and no body know low, yet that he should lose all
Right and Tille to it, and no body should know how, is Nonsense; for there is
no way to know certainly that one has lost his Right, but by knowing-certainly
how he lost it. You speak of one's losing his Mon^y, which you say might very
well (...). and yet no body know how, and in^^ed I (...) too: But pray let me
ask you one Thing When he ^ost his Money did he likewise lost all his Right and
(...) to it? If you say he did, it must be made appear how he lost it, and that
very plainly too, or it will be impossible to convince him, or any Man else, of
the Truth of it. Thus you see what a Blundering you have made purely by
mistaking my Argument: I affirmed one thing, and you denied another: My
Argument is concerning the loss of one's Right; and your Answer is concerning
the loss of what one has still a Right to; which two are so far asunder that
they can never meet one another.


A. The Truth is, I do now partly see my Mistake. The Distinction you have made
between losing the bare Use of a Thing, and losing all Right and Title to it
(which I own to be two very different Things) has so far undeceived me, that I
perceive there is more force in your Argument than I did at first imagine: But
withal I must confe^s, that I do not so fully comprehend neither the Meaning
nor Force of it as I could wish; and therefore do earnestly desire you will be
so kind as to explain it a little further.


B. I do not much care if I do: And in order to it, shall make Use of the same
Instance you mentioned; that is, of a Man who having his Pocket well stored
with Money, and being very well assured that it is his own, that no Man else
can pretend any Right or Title to it, does on that Consideration become more
careless and secure than perhaps a wise Man ought to be, thinking no body would
be so injurious as to offer to deprive him of it: By this means it so falls
out, that this Money is lost, and another Man is actually in Possession of it.
Now in this Case the Dispute between you and me is not whether this Man has
lost his Money or not; of that I am no less sensible than you are: All the
Dispute is about the Right and Title to it; Whether or not when he lost his
Money he did likewise lose all Right and Title to it. If he did, I grant there
is no Wrong done him, nor can be in Reason pretend to any thing of Restitution:
But if not, I hope you will allow him to insist upon his Right still, and to do
what he can to recover it, or rather to assert and vindicate it, for to speak
properly, what was never lost can be said to be recovered. This, I s^y, Whether
or not the Man in losing his Money did really lose all his Right and Title to
it, is the only Thing in Dispute between you and me, That which I have
undertaken to prove is, That he has not lost it, but ought still to insist upon
it: The Argument I have urged for that Purpose is grounded on this Supposition,
That when the Matter comes to be enquired into, they who maintain that he has
lost his Right are so far from making it appear how or by what means he lost
it, that their Opinions about it are not only very different, but indeed very
inconsistent. The reason of the Consequence is that common Axiom among the
Lawyers, That de non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est ratio, that is
to say, That if a Thing does not appear to be, it is the same Thing in Law as
if it were not: And if so, he that says such a Man has not lost h^s Right, says
no more than he that says it is not made appear he has lost it. But the Force
of this Argument does yet more fully appear, if we proceed a little further in
this Supposition, and bring the matter before a Judge.

Let us then suppose both Parties to appear in Court, both he that has got
Possession of the Money, and he that still claims a Right to it, together with
their Friends and Followers, of which, you may be sure, the former will have
the far more numerous Train, for a reason I shall not need mention: But it is
no matter for that, there they both are, in order to have a Trial; and as
Losers do usually take a Liberty to talk the Plaintiff, or he that has lost his
Money, will be sure to begin the Debate, by insisting on his Right and
demanding Restitution: The Defendant is likewise very obstinate in asserting
his Right.

How can that be? Says the Judge You cannot both have a Right to the same
Money, in Opposition to one another, and that at the same time too. Who had the
first Right?

That had I (says the Plaintiff) and have been most notoriously injured in it.

Truly (says the Defendant) I grant his Right was prior to mine, but he has so
far lost it to all Intents and Purposes that he cannot now in any Reason lay
claim to it.

Is it so? (says the Judge) Do you own that you have lost that Right you
formerly had?

No (says the Plaintiff) I do utterly deny it, and dare him and his whole Party
to prove it.

Look you Gentl^men (says the Judge) this is not a regular way of proceeding.
Your affirming and his denying will signify nothing in a Court of Judicature:
Nothing but substantial Proofs and solid Replies can take place here, and
therefore I must put you in a right method of managing this (...). Since then
it is acknowledged by both Parties that the Plaintiff had the first Right to
the Money in dispute, I must tell you that are the Desendant, hardly to say
that he has lost that Right, is no Proof that he really has lost it. No, you
must make is appear, and that very plainly too, else his Right will be pres^med
to be good still. I must likewise tell you that it is impossible for you to
make it appear that he has really lost it without you can make appear how (...)
by what means he lost it: For alas! a Man's Right is (...) very great Concern,
a very tender and precious thing: And accordingly our Laws have made so many
excellent Provisions for the Security of it, that indeed it cannot easily be
lost. There are but very few ways by which a Man can forfeit it. And therefore,
since it is granted that the Plaintiff had once a good Right to that Money, you
that are of the Defendant's Side, must either make appear how or by what means
he lost that Right and Title, or otherwise you do nothing at all. Having thus
given you what Directions I thought necessary, in order to put you into a right
method of proceeding the more regularly, it only now remains that we examine
what evidence they that are of the Defendants Side can bring against the
Plaintiff to prove the loss of his Right. Come then, you, honest Friend, that
put your self forward, you look as if you could make some Discovery of this
Matter, What do you know of it? Has the Plaintiff lost his Right to this Money,
or not?


First Evidence. Truly, if it please you, in the first place, that he has lost
his Money is most certain.


Judge. That he has lost his Money we all know, but that is nothing to the
purpose: The Question is. Whether or not he has likewise lost all Right and
Title to it, what do you say to that?


First Evidence. I do likewise say that he has lest all Right and Title to that
Money as much as if he had never had it.


Judge. Well! But how did he lose it? If it be lost, he must one way or other
have forfeited it or yielded it up, and that way you must specify and make it
appear, else you say nothing at all.


First Evidence Truly as to that, I know nothing of the Matter. Indeed, I never
made any Enquiry into it. I was told he had lost it, and that was enough to me.
Why should I go and ask any farther Questions how or by what means he lost it?
I do not love to trouble my Head with such impertinent Enquiries.


Judge. Say you so? I do not think such an Enquiry had been impertinent at all,
because I cannot imagine how you can pretend to know the one, without being
satisfied of the other.


First Evidence. No! That is very strange. But to show yon the contrary, I tell
you again that I know no more how he lost it than the Man in the Moon does, nor
indeed ever examined it, and yet I am as well assured he has lost it as I can
be of any thing.


Judge. As how?


First Evidence. Why, thus. This Man to my knowledge has the Money in his
Pocket: How then can another Man have the Right to it? Can another Man have a
Right to what I have in my Pocket? That were a good one indeed, for at that
rate he may (for ought I know) pretend a Right to my Wise too; for if a Man
cannot be sure of that he has in his Pocket, he can be sure of nothing. And
besides that, you your self did very learnedly observe that both of them cannot
have a Right to it at the same time.


Judge I did so, but what then? that does not hinder, but that while one of
them has the Money, the other may have the Right.


First Evidence. If so, I think the best way to put an end to this Dispute will
be even to let Things continue as they are: That is to say, let each of them
keep wh^t he has, the one his Right, and the other the Money, and then it is to
be hoped they will be both satisfied. That I take to be a very reasonable
Composition, and the most equal Decision that can be made in this Matter.


Judge. You are called here to give Evidence and not to give Advice, and so you
may return to your Place. Such an odd piece of Evidence (I must confess) I have
not lately met with. If there be many more such, this Dispute may easily be
decided; but it is to be hoped they are not all of a piece. Let us examine some
more of them. You that stand next there. Do you know any thing of this Matter?
I suppose you will allow that this Plaintiff had formerly a Right to that Money
he now claims, Can you give us any account then how he came to be divested of
that Right?


Second Evidence. Yes, I can give you a very true and plain Account of it.


Judge. Very well, That is it we want: Go on then in your Evidence and tell us
plainly what you know.


Second Evidence That he has lost all Right and Title to that Money is most
certain; the Way and Manner thus. After this Money had legally fall^n to him,
he lived for some time regularly enough, and kept himself within the Bounds of
Moderation, insomuch that we had conceived very great Hopes of him; but
pere^iving him to al^er his Conduct by degrees, we began to be undeceived, and
at last found our Selves utterly disappointed: For instead of applying his
Money to such Uses or Purposes as were proper, or making it any way subservient
to the Exigencies or Interest of those that had any dependence upon him, and
were immediately under his Care; instead of that, I say, he abused it to all
the Extravagancies imaginable, invaded their Rights, encroach'd upon their
Privileges, and by the Advice and Concurrence of some ill-designing Men whom
he had made choice of for that Purpose, he endeavored to make himself more
Absolute ^han either it was (...) should be, or the State he was in would bear.
Thus far he did, and thus far we suffered: Until at last finding there was no
redress of their Grievances, nor no expectation of better Usage for the future,
but rather of having every day greater Hardships put upon us, we thought it
high time to consult our own Safety an^ Interest; and accordingly being very
ensible that all other Expedients would prove ineff^ctual, we unanimously
depri^^ him of all the Right and Title he had to that Money, which he had
abused to such ^ll Purposes, and put it in the Hands of another, who (we had
Reason to believe) would make a better use of it. This is a true and plan
Account how he came to lose his Right.


Judge. The Account I grant is plain enough, but how true it is will best
appear by some further Enquiry. If I do not mistake, you told us that the
Persons to whom this Man did those Injuries which you so much aggravate, were
such as had a dependence upon him and were immediately under his Care, to which
(I suppose) it may be added that they were likewise under his Authority. Now I
would gladly know whether or not you that took upon you to deprive him of his
Right were of the Number of there?


Second Evidence. Yes, all of u^ were of that Number.


Judge. That (I must confess) is in my Opinion very strange. Indeed if the Case
had been thus; if that Money had been committed to that Man only by way of
Trust, and that upon such Terms and Conditions, that it should be applied only
to such and such Uses, particularly for the Benefit and Advantage of those that
had a dependence on him, and had you with some others been nominated in that
Conveyance as Overseers, and empowered to call him to an account, in case these
Conditions should not he duly performed. I say, if the Case had been thus, you
had done no more in depriving him of his Right than what you might very well
answer for, supposing the Charge which you have brought against him to be true.
But for ought I can see, the Case was very much otherwise. Here is nothing made
appear of any such conditional Conveyance to this Man, nor any Persons
nominated to oversee, much less to control him in the Management of it: On the
contrary, you your self own that all of you who were concerned in depriving
this Man of his Right, were such as had a dependence upon him and were under
his Jurisdiction. Now, that Persons thus stared should take upon them not only
to call him to an account whom they own to be their Superior, but likewise to
deprive him of his Right, is a thing so very strange, that I must confess I
cannot understand it. It is indeed a perfect Contradiction, for it supposes you
to be under his Authority and to have a dependence upon him, and yet at the
same time it subjects him to your Authority and makes him wholly to depend upon
you; which two things let whosoever will reconcile, for my part I cannot. I grant,
something like this at least in appearance may be agreed upon by an express
mutual Compact. As for example, B, C and D, may enter into Articles with A, and
oblige themselves that as long as A does duly and faithfully perform such and
such Conditions, they will be subject to him and obey his Commands, but with
this Proviso, that A. shall likewise oblige himself, that in case he does not
perform these Conditions, he shall be accountable to them and liable to be
deposed by them. In these and such like Compacts there is some Reserve of
Superiority still good even to the Subjects, by which they may, in some Cases,
call those to an Account, to whom they have conditionally subjected themselves:
But to pretend to such a Reserve, or to challenge such a Right in other Cases,
where no such Compact is produced, not can be made appear ever to have been
made, is Nonsense


Second Evidence. In many Cases, if not in most, though no such express Compact
can be produced, yet there must be an implicit Compact of the same Nature
supposed, to which it will be absolutely necessary to recur^ sometimes, else it
will be impossible that there can he any end of Suffering, or any Redress of
Grievances. For if you can make such a wild Supposition as this, That he who
(...) the Author of these Grievances is not accountable to any body else for
what he does, there can be no Remedy against suffering even the worst of Evils,
which (whatever others may think of it) I take to be a very great Absurdity.


Judge. But it seems you (...) consider that that Absurdity, however great, is
more naturally the Product of your own Principle than of the contrary: For when
in case of Suffering wrongfully, you lay hold on that pretended Right which you
suppose to be allowed you by your imaginary Contract, and by Virtue thereof,
not only call your Superior to an Account, but deprive him of all he has; that
does not put an end to Suffering, which is the only End you propose to your
selves in order to justify what you do: I say, the Course you take does not
reach that End, it does not put an end to Suffering, but only transfers it from
one to another; you take a very effectual Course (I grant) to put an end to
your own Sufferings and to redress your own Grievances; but withal you little
consider, that at the same time you entail them on your superior; and do what
you can to cut him off from all possibility of Redress; for who shall put an
end to his Sufferings? That your Sufferings might have coused without taking
any such violent Course to put a stop to them, is much more probable
(abstracting from the more immediate Inter positions of Divine Providence) than
that his will do so: for it might much more reasonably be expected, that if he
had seen you endure your Sufferings patiently, without murmuring or repining,
he would have relented and restored you to your Rights and Privileges, than it
can be expected that you will restore him to his Right. The very fear of being
called to an account by him, is enough to keep you from ever thinking of that,
which yet could have been of no Force, nor have had any Influence on him in the
other Case: so that if any Principle, must therefore be thought absurd, because
they suppose or infer a Necessity of Suffering, without allowing any means of
Redress. I must need say, yours are the most absurd of any Principles in the
World. And whereas you call it a wild Fancy to suppose any Perion to be
unaccountable in what he does. I shall only desire you to consider, whether you
have not brought the same Stain and Reproach upon your selves; since i. may
easily be made app^^^, that by invading and di^posing of his Right, you have
assumed to your selves to be more Absolute, more Arbitrary and more
Unaccountable, than ever he pretended to in his Encroachments upon yours.


Second Evidence. Sir, When I was called to give Evidence in this Matter, I
little thought of being engaged in a Dispute, and perhaps was as little
prepared for it; and therefore I desire I may be excused from proceeding any
farther in it: Only give me leave to put you in Mind of this one Thing, That as
it is in the Natural so it is in the Politic Body; most Distempers that are
incident to either of them, if they are taken in time, may be cured by such
regul^^ Methods and Applications as are common and usual: But when once a
Distemper, whether by Neglect, or by hasty and unusual Advances, comes to such
a height, that none of those regular and common Methods are capable to ari^st
it, he that would undertake to cure it, must be allowed to go out of the common
Road, and in some Things to act very differently from the generally approved
Rules of Art, for a desperate (...) must have a desperate C^re; and such was
our Case.


Judge. A Cure may well be said to be desperate, when the Remedy is worse than
the Disease; and such was your Cure: For instead of taking away the Pain, which
ought to have been done, and by regular Means might have been done, you by
irregular Means, (like bulsy, ignorant Quacks, that are always pretending to
what they do not understand) only drove it from one Place to another; from the
outward and less tender Parts to the very Heart and Vitals, and by that Means
rendered it more incurable than otherwise it could possibly have been, had it
either been left to take it is Course, or fallen into discreeter Hands. But, as
you say, your Business here is not to dispute but to give Evidence; and
therefore we will give you no farther Trouble. Let us now call another. I see
one there whose Gravity and Authority shows him to be no less than a Senator,
and (...) be very glad to bear what he can say of this Matter. Sir, Will you be
so kind as to inform the Court of what you know of this Man's having lost his
Right to the Money in Dispute?


Third Evidence, Sir, I very much wonder that there should be any Dispute in
the Case: For whatever Right he might formerly have to that Money, I can assure
you he has none now.


Judge. Very well, How came he then to be divested of it?


Third Evidence. To tell you the Truth. He gave away his Right; as soon as he
found there was like to be a Dispute about it, he very fairly receded from it,
and voluntarily resigned it up.


Judge. This is a new Discovery. Well, But to whom did he resign up his Right?


Third Evidence. To him that could first catch it (I believe) and was able to
defend it; for I heard no Person nominated by him, no^ do I think he meant it
to any one more than another.


Judge. Had he any valuable Consideration for it?


Third Evidence. Not that ever I could hear of, nor do I think he ever had any
Thing for it, but only the Pleasure and Satisfaction of being (...) of the
Burden of it.


Judge. Is that mentioned in the Narrative of the Resignation, as the chief
Motive that induced him to make it?


Third Evidence. Pray, Sir, don't mistake me, The Resignation I speak of was
not such a formal Draught as you Lawyers use to make, but it was every way
equivalent to it, and interpretatively is good as any you can make.


Judge. If it was not done according to the usual Form, you are obliged to give
us an Account after what manner it was done; that being a very material Point,
for you may perhaps call that a Resignation which indeed is not.


Third Evidence. The manner was thus: The Gentleman that had the Money very
fairly went away and left it, retired himself into another Country, without
giving any body the Trust of it or so much as leaving any Orders how it should
be disposed of.


Judge. Well, What became of it afterward?


Third Evidence. Why, they that thought themselves most nearly concerned to
look after it and best knew his Temper, did so interpret Things that this his
abrupt Departure from his Right was taken for an entire Resignation of it: And
accordingly they took upon them to dispose of the Money, and gave it to him
that now has it in Possession.


Judge. Upon what Consideration was that done? Had he done any thing to merit
such a Favor at their Hands?


Third Evidence. Yes, at their earnest Desire and upon their repeated Instances
to him, he had done them a very important piece of Service.


Judge. So, it seems he had done a Jobb of Journey-work for them, and they to
save themselves very fairly paid him with another Man's Money. Well, but was
this Resignation (you speak of) free and voluntary? Was there nothing of Force
or Constraint in the Matter?


Third Evidence. I do not know what you may call Force, but we all think there
was none. Indeed, as Matters then stood, he might think it safest for him to
withdraw, but that he was forced so to do in a (...) and proper Sense we deny.


Judge. Methinks you speak but very faintly of the Matter, and indeed the whole
Progress of it seems so very unaccountable that I know not what to make of it:
Pray tell us a little more plainly how it went.


Third Evidence. There had indeed been some Misunderstanding between these two
Persons, him that formerly had the Money, and him that now has it, before this
Resignation was made. He that now has the Money was then in the Neighborhood
with a very strong Party, resolving not to depart, till some Grievances
(whereof he justly complained) should be redressed. The other had likewise a
very strong Party with him, but finding that some of his Followers (whom he
thought he had most reason to trust, as having been most particularly obliged
to him) did not only keep a secret Correspondence with the other Party, but
begin at last to go over in great Numbers to them, he, upon some Considerations
best known to himself, resolved to withdraw, which accordingly he did; and that
is it which we call a resigning up his Right.


Judge. Nay, It is easy enough to see upon what Considerations it was done, for
now you speak plain. But is it possible you can believe there was nothing of
Force in all this?


Third Evidence. I believe his being treated after that manner I have mentioned
might partly occasion his Departure, and make it more abrupt and precipitant
than otherwise he might have designed it: But that he was properly forced to it
I do not see: For to force a Man to depart is to thrust him out of Doors by
Head and Shoulders, which was so far from being offered to him, that we did not
so much as know of his Departure. There was indeed a sort of Message sent, To
remove from his House, which some thought was peremptory enough: But what then?
I hope there is a vast Difference between requiting a Man to leave his House,
and forcing him to leave the Kingdom.


Judge. Yes, In your Notion of Force I grant there is: But of that enough. The
next thing I shall ask you is, Whether or not the Person we now speak of has at
any time since he withdrew himself confirmed that Resignation, or ratifyed
their Act who took upon them to dispose of his Money after that Manner?


Third Evidence. I do not hear he has; but rather complains of is as a very
great Injury done him.


Judge. Has he ^ver returned since to demand his Money? Or do you think they
who took upon them to dispose of it in his Absence, would allow him so to do if
he should design it?


Third Evidence. No, he has never returned since; for I am very sure the Person
that makes the Demand here in Court is not he himself, but one that appears for
him. And as to the other part of the Question, Whether or not they that took
upon them to dispose of the Money would admit of his Return to make such a
Demand, I am very confident they would not, because I see they use all the
Precautions they can to hinder it.


Judge. Why? Do you think they are afraid of being called to an account?


Third Evidence. No, not so much afraid neither, but I believe they are so wise
as to think it worth their while to save the trouble of it if they can.


Judge. Well, I have but one Question more to ask you, and that is, Whether or
nor you know any thing of any other Money he had, besides that we have been
speaking of, and what became of it?


Third Evidence. Yes, he had another Parcel, which though it did properly
belong to the same Sum, did yet lie in another remote Place. That indeed he did
what he could to have saved, but all would not do; for in spite of all his
Endeavors to the contrary, he that had received the rest, with the assistance
of those that gave it him, wrested it out of his Hands.


Judge. I warrant you there was nothing of Force in that neither, if your
Notion of it must be allowed.


Third Evidence. Really I can say nothing as to that, for I was not upon the
Place, and I do not love to say any thing but what I know to be true.


Judge. Indeed, Sir, I think you have said enough in all Reason, and
accordingly you are dismiss, and may return to your Place. You that stand next,
Can you give us any satisfactory Account of this Man's losing his Right?


Fourth Evidence. That he has most certainly lost it, I do fully agree with
those that have spoke before me; but as to the way and manner how or by what
means he lost it, I must confess my Opinion is very ^ar different from theirs:
For whereas one asserts, That he voluntarily gave up his Right: Another, That
for very weighty Reasons, they that were otherwise his Vassals and had a
dependence upon him did utterly deprive him of it; I look upon both these
Assertions as very extravagant and unaccountable; The one being so improbable,
that I am sure no wise Man will believe it; and the other so unwarrantable,
that I am equally sure no good Man will justify it.


Judge. Go on then, and tell us what is your Opinion of it.


Fourth Evidence. My Opinion is, That by the abusing of his Right he did
actually forfeit it; for though I am very well satisfied, that let a man's
Misdemeanors be what they will, they that are under his Authority and
Jurisdiction cannot lawfully deprive him of his Right, without there be some
Law to warrant them in so doing, which, in the Case we now speak of, neither is
nor (I believe) can be produced: Yet that he may be guilty of such
Misdemeanors, or of abusing his Right to such ill Purposes, as thereby
absolutely to forfeit it; and that in such a Case, they that are most
immediately concerned may take the Forfeiture, and dispose of that Right as they
shall think fit, I do not in the least question. I can see nothing in all this
but what I think is very reasonable: And I am very positive that by these Means
it was that this Man lost his Right.


Judge. I shall not ask you what these Misdemeanors were, nor how clearly they
were proved against him, for that were to engage our selves farther than at
present is needful. The only Thing I want to know is, whether or not there be
any express Law or Statute concerning this Man's Case, wherein it is Provided
and Enacted, That upon the committing of such or such Misdemeanors, what Right
he had should be absolutely forfeited. If you can produce any such Law, you are
very much in the right in all you have said: If not, you must give me leave to
tell you, that you are as wide from the Truth, as any of those whose Opinions
you have rejected.


Fourth Evidence. The Truth is, I am not so very well versed in Law or
Statute-Books as to mention any express Act of that nature, nor do I certainly
know whether or not there be any that are incontravertibly such; but this much
I am very well assured of, that whatever may be it is Consistency with the
express Letter of the Law, it is very consonant and agreeable to Reason and
Equity, which are the chief Ground and End of the Law.


Judge. The generality of Men are so very apt to be confident, even when they
are in an Error (especially in those things the knowledge whereof depends
wholly upon the Exercise of their own Reason and Judgment, which is a thing
very easily biased) that I am afraid the Assurance you boast of will not
amount to much, nor can it safely be relied upon in a Matter of so great
Importance, Not but that I agree with you, that Equity and Reason are the
Ground and End of the Law: But that every Thing is agreeable to the Rules of
Equity and Reason, which some are pleased to call so, however numerous or
however confident they may be, that (I must confe^s) I cannot agree to, without
I thought my self capable of reconciling Contradictions; for there is nothing
more common than for some Men to call that very just and reasonable, which
others at the same time think to be very unjust and unreasonable. Indeed if all
Men were so ingenuous as not to call any thing just and reasonable but what
they really think so to be, and like ^ise so sharp sighted and discerning as
not to think any thing so but what really is so; in that case, there would be
no need of Law at all, at least this one express Law would suffice for all,
namely, That every Man should do what he thinks ^o be just and reasonable, and
that no Man should presume to do otherwise. But alas! that is ^o far from being
our C^se, that we often fail in both Branches of it. So sh^llow are our
Judgments, and so weak our Discretion that we many times think that to be very
j^st and reasonable which indeed is not; and not only think so, but are so very
confi^^ent of it as to be angry with those that think otherwise. But that is
not all neither, for it (...) happens that our Integrity and Ingenuity are no
less deservedly to be suspected than our Discretion; it being a common thing
for Men when they think they can serve a Turn by it, to magnify and extol the
Equity and Reasonableness of a Thing, when yet (if the Truth were known) they
themselves don't believe a Word ^on't. This great Defect both of Discretion and
Sincerity in a great part of Mankind, as it cannot choose but be very obvious
to those that are daily conversant among them; so it is that which has not only
given Rise to, but likewise inferred a Necessity of that multiplicity of Laws
which we now have. They whose Business it is to prepare Laws, and they whose
Privilege is to stamp them or give Life and Value to them, did very plainly
foresee, that though there is such a Thing as Equity and Reason antecedent to
any Law, yet Men are so very apt ^^ther really or pretende^ly to mistake it,
that if they should be left wholly to themselves, to act according to their own
Apprehensions of it, they would quickly turn all into Confusion. This, I say,
they very plainly foresaw. and were likewise convinced that there was no other
way to prevent it, but by making o^ La^^; in the applying of which Remedy they
have from time to time been so very careful and exact, that now at last there
is scarce any thing of I^portance but what is made the Subject matter of some
Law Now I hope you will grant, that a Man's forfeiting of his Right is a matter
of very great Importance, and accordingly the Law is ^o very particular and
express in deciding it, that there can be no Occasion of recurring to Equity
and Reason in any Ca^e of that nature: For if the Case be such that the Law
takes no notice of it, or has determined nothing ^oncerring it, Equity and
Reason will be of his Side who had the (...) Right: That is to say, if the Law
does not condemn such a Man to lose his Right, Equity and Reason will far less
do it; because it is to be presum^d that if it were just and reasonable that
such a Man in such a care should forfeit his Right, the Law would have (...):
And therefore since the Law has made no such Dici^^on, I know no better Reason
can be given for it, than that it was thought very unj^st and unreasonable so
to do: For that any such Omission is purely by an Oversigh^, when (...) lets
Importance are so expressly provided for, is not to be imagined. But suppose yet
farther, that the Law being altogether silent as to this Man's Case, we should
have recourse to Equity and Reason for the Decision of it, and that upon
Examination it should be sound very just and reasonable, that upon the
committing of such or such Misdemeanors such a Person should forfeit his
Right, even that (which is all you can pretend to) would not serve your Turn,
for even in that Case all you could get by it would be this, that there should
be such a Law enacted for the future: And what then? Such a Statute could be no
Advantage to your Cause, unl^ss you suppose it to have a ret^ospicient Force,
or a dec^^ive Power as well before it was as after it is enacted, which were
most absurd and unreasonable. But it were very needless to enlarge any farther
on this point. I^ there be any more here to give Evidence in this matter, I
should be glad to hear them.


Fourth Evidence. I believe there are no more of the Defendant's Side but who
are of the same Opnion with one or other of those that are already examined.


Judge. Then I think it is time to make an End, which may be done in few words.
The Case is briefly thus. The Plaintiff has lost a parcel o^ Money, which it
seems was his whole Es^ate. It Is granted he was once legally possessed of that
Money, and had a good Right ^o it, He insists upon that Right still, and
accordingly demands Restitution. The Defendant absolutely resu^eth it;
alleging, that when the Plaintiff lost his Money he likewise lost all Right
and (...) to it, which Right was transferred to him. O^ this he has brought
several Pe^^ons to give Evidence, and accordingly these Persons have been
examined What. Evidence they have given you have heard, together with some
Remarks upon it. I do not mention these Romarks in order ^o invalidate the
Evidence; No, there will be no Occasion for that, it being sufficiently done to
our Hands, by the plain Inconsistency and palpable Contradictions of the
Persons that have given it: For though they all agree unanimously in this, That
the Plaintiff has lost his Right, yet when they come to declare how or by what
means he lost it, which is the chief Thing on which the whole Stress of the
Debate lies, they are so far from concurring ^r agreeing in their Evidence,
though they have been examined in one another's Presence, that they do most
notoriously contradict one another. One tells us, that because he had abused
his Right and stretched it beyond it is due Limits, they who thought themselves
most immediately concerned to have these Abu^es rectified, did absolutely
deprive him of his Right, and put it into safer hands. No (a^th another, though
not the next in Order) that could not be; for whatever were his Misdemeanors,
these Persons had no Authority to deprive him of his Right, nor so much as to
call him to an Account; but the way he lost it was thus. By these
Misdemeanors, which purely by a Mistake are urged as the ground of such a
Deprivation, he did really and truly (...) his Right. The Meaning of (...) is,
That as there could be no Authority for such a Deprivation, so neither was
there any Occasion for it; so all that they could pretend to wa^ only to take
the Forfeiture and dispose (...). There two Witnesses (however hard it may be
to (...) them, yet) do not differ more from one another, than a third does from
both: For he tells us, that the way how this Man came to be divested of hi^
Right was neither by Deprivation nor by Forfeiture; but that he himself did
depart from it and yield it up.

This is the Sum of the Evidence that has been given in behalf of the
Defendant, which in my Opinion is ^o far from being any Advantage to his Cause,
that it quite ruins it; for whether the Plaintiff has lost his Right or not, I
am sure it is so far from being made appear by this Evidence that he has lost
it, that we may from thence much more reasonably conclude the contrary: It
being most certain that nothing can more effect ally weaken the Credit or
invalidate the Testimony of any Witnesses, than their contra^^cting either
themselves or one another in their Evidence. And accordingly, you shall very
rarely find but that in all Courts of Judicature such Evidence is rejected as
insufficient; especially when the matter in debate is of such Importance as to
concern either a Man's Life or his Right. Of this we have a very remarkable
Instance in the History or Trial of Susannah, which (though it is cut off by
some from the Book of Daniel's Prophecies, as not being found in the Original,
and therefore not to be urged as Canonical Scripture, yet) is of greater
Authority than any Instance we can borrow from later Ages. The Case was thus:
Susannah was accused of a Crime which by the Law was Death: The witnesses
against her were two Elders, who among the Jews were Men of very great Credit
and Authority, and accordingly upon their Evidence she was condemned to Death:
But as she was led out to the place of Execution, Daniel Being greatly
suspicious that they had accused her falsely, or rather by some Divine
Inspiration assured of it, was very zealous to save her; and in order to it did
so far prevail with the whole Assembly, who (it seems) did very much pity her,
that they all returned to the place of Judgment, to enquire more diligently
into the Matter. Daniel would needs examine the witnesses himself, and the
better to make appear how villainously they had conspired against ^er, he
thought ^it to exa^ine them apart. They bath pretended to have been
Eyewitnesses of the Fact whereof they accused her, and did so sar agree
together that it was done in a Garden: But when they were examined upon the
particular Circumstances of it, their malicious Roguery was presently detected,
for the one peremptorily affirmed, that it was done under a Mastick-Tree: And
the other as positively declared, that it was under a Holm-Tree: From which
plain Inconsistency and Contradiction in the Evidence, the whole Assumbly did
unanimously conclude, that the Whole was nothing else but a malicious Calumny;
and accordingly the former Sentence grounded upon it was reversed, and the
witnesses themselves condemned to the same Puni^hment, which they thought to
have inflicted on the innocent Lady. From this In^^ance, and many others of
like nature, though of later Date, it sufficiently appears, That in order to
disprove or (...) any Evi^lence, there needs (...) better (...) the
contradictory Assertions of (...) give it. And if so, it may easily be juged
what will be the Result of this Deba^e; For since the Witnesses that are
brought to prove he loss of this (...) Right, are so far from agreeing upon the
way and manner how he lost it, that they do plainly contradict one another, my
Opinion is, that the Defendant in whose Possession the Money now is, must
either bring better Proof that the Plaintiff has lost his Right to it, or
otherwise he must make Restitution of the Money; for there is no reason that he
should have the Money unless he has also a Right to it: And it is impossible he
can have any Right to it, except he can first prove that the Plaintiff has lost
all his Right and Title to it, which he is so far from having done, by the
Witnesses that have been examine, that from the Inconsistency of their Evidence
we have a great deal of reason to conclude the contrary. This I declare to be
my Opinion, and accordingly dismiss the Court.


A. I am heartily glad this Trial is over, for I declare my Patience was so
tired out, that if it had lasted much longer, I was resolved either to
interrupt it if I could, or petition to have it adjourned.


B. The Truth is, I do not expect you should like it, for few Men do what makes
against them; and yet methinks if you have nothing to except against but only
the Length of it, you have no great Reason to complain.


A. I should not much quarrel with the Length of it neither, if I were
satisfied it were to the Purpose; but I must confess I do not very well
understand, neither to what end you brought it in, nor how it has served that
end.


B. If so, it must have been a very long Trial indeed, or your Memory must be
very short, else you could not choose but remember, that the Reason why I
brought in this Trial was to convince you of the force of my Argument, namely,
that since those of your Party cannot agree among themselves how King James
came to lose his Right, but apparently contradict one another, some alleging
one thing with (...) that can be, and others is (...), that very inconsistency
of your Opinions is a sufficient (...).


A. I do remember that at last the Judge did say something of that nature; for
after he had summed up the Evidence, he made some Reflections upon the
Witnesses differing from one another, alleging, That that very Difference was
enough to invalidate their Testimony, and convince them of Falsehood: But
methought he was very hard put to it when he took his Proof out of the
Apocrypha.


B. What he mentioned out of the Apocrypha was not to prove what he had said,
but only to illustrate it; for indeed it does not stand in need of any Proof,
it being the common Practice of all Courts to reject all Evidence that is
parched up of Inconsistencies, or when the Persons that give it contradict one
another, But suppose it did need a Proof and that the Story he mentioned was
designed for an Argument, I do not see any Absurdity in it at all, except you
will say that no Argument is good but what is contained in Scripture: And even
in that Case it is no very hard matter to have found one every way as much to
his Purpose as that he mentioned. I hope Mark 14th is not Apocryphal, Do but
peruse that Chapter from verse 55, and tell me your Opinion of it. There you
will sind, that in the Trial of our blessed Savior, though the Chief Priests
and all the Council did mightily bestir themselves to find Witness against him
to put him to Death, yet they could make nothing of it; not but that there were
a great many that did witness against him, but the Mischief of it was, they
were all rejected as false Witnesses, their Testimony could not be relied upon;
and the Reason of it is there expressed, namely, because their Witnesses agreed
not together. It seems they contradicted one another in their Evidence, so that
no Sentence of Condemnation could be grounded upon it; until at last they
pretended that he spoke Blasphemy in their own hearing, and upon that he was
condemned. There you see, that the Judge in ^^jecting the Evidence (...) there
Witnesses in the (...), because they were (...) from agreeing^^ their (...),
that they contradicted one another, (...) no more than (...) a Precedent for
even (...) itself.


A. Whatever Reason the Judge might have to reject their Evidence, I shall not
now dispute. I consess as you have ordered the matter, he might very well
impute it to their disagreeing among themselves, for you have made them
contradict one another sufficiently: But being it was for your purpose that
they should do so, and that you your self had the whole Management of them, so
as to make them speak what you pleased, I do not at all wonder at that, but
rather that you did not make them contradict themselves.


B. By this last Reply of yours I suspect you are not altogether so candid as I
expected, for you slyly insinuate that the Witnesses contradicting of one
another is wholly owing to my management of the Matter, which I must needs tell
you savours something of Disingenuity; for you cannot choose but remember that
I was speaking of the great Difference and Inconsistency of Opinions among
those of your Party, and how manifestly they contradict one another when they
take upon them to give the World an account how King James lost his Right.
These their contradictory Accounts of it are the chief Thing I have hitherto
urged as an Argument that indeed he has not lost it. You may likewise remember
that my bringing in of that Trial was to confirm and enforce that Argument: In
order to which as it was absolutely necessary so to state the Case of the
Plaintiff, that as near as could be it might be answerable to that of K. James,
so it was no less necessary that there should be the same Inconsistency in
their Evidence who pretend to give an account how the one lost all Right and
Title to his Money, as there is among those who pretend to give an account how
the other lost all Right and Title to his Three Kingdoms. That I have managed
the Trial to, I am not at all to blame; for without that it would have been
nothing to the purpose, since to argue from one Case to another, when there is
no Exactness of Parity between them, must needs be very inconclusive. Indeed,
had I made the Contradictions in the supposed Case of the one greater than what
are in the real Case of the other, you might have had some reason to complain:
But that I have not done to, but rather cop^ed the one from the other as near
as the Case would bear, will easily appear by comparing both together, which
(if you think it worth the while) may be done in few Words.


A. Go on then if you please, for though I believe there is no great occasion
for it, yet because it may contribute somewhat toward the clearing of what is
now in dispute, which is the only thing I propose to my self, I conceive it
will not be amiss.


B. You may remember then that the First Evidence I brought in was one Twyford,
who knew (...) litt^e of the Matter, and spoke so little to the purpose, that
the Judge in summing up the Evidence took no notice of him. He was indeed very
positive that the Plaintiff had lost his Right, but how or by what m^ans (which
was the chief Thing in Dispute) he he neither knew nor cared.


A. I do remember it very well: But what you meant by bringing in such a Man
for an Evidence, I cannot imagine; for you might as well have brought in a Post
if it could have spoke.


B. Very right: But withal it seems you little consider, that the greatest part
of those that oppose King James's Right, have no more Sense than that Post had.
Many Thousands there are in these Three Nations, who are very confident and
positive that (...) has lost his Right, and accordingly speak more
opprobriously and reproachfully of him, than either the Laws of the Land or
good Manners will allow them to do of their Fellow-Subject.; and yet are so far
from knowing how or by what means he lost it, that they never (...) much as
considered it, or thought themselves concerned o^nquire into it. Of this Number
I chiefly reckon the Rabble, who (however despicable in the Opinion of all
^hinking Men, yets are such a necessary Support of your New Government, and
(...) so great a^rigure in i^, that I thought my self obliged to a l^w them one
(...) represent them in that supposed Trial, which accordingly I did in
bringing in that First Evidence. The next that appears speaks somewhat more to
the purpos, for he not only asserts positively that the Plaintiff had lost his
Right, but pretends to give an account how he lost it; namely, That having
abused his Power to very ill Purposes, and stretched its Right beyond its due
Limits, even so sar as to devour and swallow up that of other Men; they who
thought themselves most nearly concerned to redress these Grievances, though
otherwise subject to his Authority, being ^ully convinced that no other Remedy
or Expedient would be effectual, did unanimously agree together to depose him,
and deprive him of his Right, which accordingly the did and lodged it in better
Hands. By this Witness is represented the Common-Wealth-Party, which however
much it was abominated, or however justly decrved by all good Men in the last
Age, as having murdered the best of Kings, and set up (I had almost said) the
worst of U^urpers, and by that mean^ involved us in all the Calam^ties (...)
Bloody Civil War, yet now is become very consid^rable in these three Nations;
insomuch that the King's being accountable to the People and liable to be
deposed by them if he abuses his Trust, and such other Anti-Monarchical and
Republican Principles, which formerly were only whispered about in Corner, as
being ashamed to see the Light, are now publicly owned and even Factiously
contended for. Good God! What a strange, what a reproachful Infatuation is it
that both our Church and State should so far degenerate, as not only to espouse
the interest, but indeed lick up the Vomit of those who have hitherto been
accounted the most irreconcilable Enemies of both! Whatever Stress your
Convention laid upon King James's Abdication, these Men I now speak of do but
laugh (...) it, and tell us plainly by their A^voe te Julian Johnson, that
however the Convention might mince the Matter and amuse the Nation with a fine
plausible S^o^y o^ King James' Abdicating the Government, yet that (...) there
was no men matter, but that he was really deposed and abrogated by the Estates
of the Realm, and that according to Law too: though as ill Luck would have it,
when he comes to quote that Law, he confesses it is not now to be found. But
that is not yet our Business. It is sufficient at present to tell you, that
there is such a Parry among you, and that it was to personate those of that
Party that I brought in that witness in the Trial, who contended that the
Plaintiff having abused his Right was justly deposed and legally deprived of
it. The next Evidence tells, That the Plaintiff himself receded from his Right,
and very fairly yielded it up; which in King James's Case, you very well know
was the Opinion of that ^^o^cus Assembly, the Convention. They told (...) That
his re^^ring or withdrawing himself from among us, was a plain Abu^cating the
Government and leaving the Throne vacant; by which they must either mean a
voluntary Resignation of his Right, or it will not serve their Turn. But though
Abdication is indeed the same Thing with Resignation, yet they did not think
fit to express it so; very wisely foreseeing, that a the word Resignation is
more easily understood than Abdication, so it would more hardly be believed;
for no man is ^o easily impo^ed upon in what he does unde^ra^d, as in what he
does not. The Fourth and last Evidence contradict^ both the former: For though
he also (...), that the Plaintiff has certainly lost his Right, yet he neither
allow^ that he himself resigned it up, nor that any Persons could legally (...)
him of it, and there (...) is very postive that the way he lost it was by
Forfeiture; that by his M^^uemeanours he did absolutely forfeit i^: By this
Evidence is (...), nor only a very considerable Party here (...) England, but
likew^^e the whole Conv^^tion of Estates in Scotland, who charge K. J's losing
all his Right and Title to that Kingdom upon the Faults and
Male-Administrations of his Government, by which they declare he did absolutely
for (...) it. Which (...) (however contrary to the express Laws as well of that
as of this Kingdom) is yet somewhat more plausible than either of the former;
being neither so ridiculously disingenuous, as to interpret a King's forced
Retreat for the Safety of his Life to be a voluntary Resignation of his Right:
nor so impudently saucy, as to subject him to the Peoples Au^hority, and put it
in the Power o^ his own Subjects to dethrone him. But of there Things enough,
till we come to speak of them more directly. All that I design at present, is
only to show you that the Inconsistency of the Evidence in the former Trial is
not at all imputable to my managing of the Witnesses: whereof I hope you are
now convinced, since by the Comparison I have made it easily appears that the
Witnesses in the former Trial do not more disagree in their Testimony, in
declaring how the Plaintiff lost his Right, than those of your Party do in
asserting the loss o^ King James's Right: That the Inconsistencies and
Contradictions are the very same in both Cases, and consequently what was
decided in the one Case ought by Parity o^ Reason to take place in the other.


A. Whatever pains you have been at to make these two Case answerable to one
another, I am not yet satisfied but that there is so gr^a a Disparity between
them, even in some respects where the Parallel ought to hold, that to argue
from the one to the other us^ needs be very inconclusive. As for Example, in
your imaginary Trial you produce but one (...) Witness of each sort, whose
Testimony (...) nothin, whereas in the other Case there are several Thousands
of each sort. This I take to be a very partial and unequal Representation (...)
what is in dispute, of purpose to give the Judge some colorable Pretense to
(...) and reject the whole Evidence, whereas (...) two or three or more of
those that were to be examined had agreed in their Testimony, as great Numbers
do among us, it would have quite altered the Case, for then the Judge very
safely might have proceeded to give Sentence according to their Evidence
without examining the Matter any farther.


B. I very well understand what you would be at, but am confident you are in a
Mistake, for when Witnesses disagree in their Evidence in any material Point,
especially if their De positions be so irreconcilable that they disprove one
another, it signifies nothing whether their Disagreement be only between single
Persons or considerable Numbers; for ten against ten is the same thing in
Proportion as one against one. Let us suppose one Man to be accused o^
murdering another and several Witnesses brought to prove it: It may so happen
that the first 2 or 3 that are examined do exactly agree in their Testimony,
unammously declaring that the Person accused run his Sword through the Body of
the Deceased, whereof he instantly died. I grant these 2 or 3 Witnesses thus
concurring in their Evidence are sufficient in Law to affix the Guilt upon him,
if there be no other Evidence to interfere with theirs; but that either the
Judge should immediately upon that charge the Jury with it, or they give in
their Verdict without examining the matter any farther, would at best be very
rash, and perhaps a very unjust thing: For it may so fall out that the next two
or three that are examined, may as positively declare, That the way he murdered
him was by shooting him through the Head with a Pistol. Some perhaps will
obstinately affirm, That he knocked him on the Head with a Hatchet. And others
as stiffly maintain, that he cut his Throat with a Byoner. In such a Case,
though all the Witnesses do unanimously agree in this, That the Person ^ccused
did really murder the other; yet since they do so irreconcilably differ in the
way and manner of it, that it is impossible all their Depositions, or so much
as any two of them can be true. I appeal to your self, whether that
Inconsistency of the Evidence does not utterly overthrow it, and render it so
uncertain that nothing can be made of it, And yet you see there are no less
than 2 or 3 Witnesses attesting every Particular. Nay. If instead of Three you
suppose them to be Threescore or three Hundred, it will be the same Case still;
so long as there is a proportionable or even a considerable Number whose
Attestation is utterly inconsistent with theirs.


A. I cannot deny but that when Witnesses disagree in their Testimony,
especially if they contradict one another, it very much lessens their Credit if
not quite invalidates their Evidence: And accordingly I do very freely
acknowledge, that the Difference among those of our Party, in giving an Account
how or by what means King James came to lose his Right, is no small Prejudice
to our Cause; because many are apt to conclude as you do. that while some say
one Thing and some another, there is nothing of certainty in the whole: On
which Account it were heartily to be wished, that all of us were of one Opinion
in this Matter, at least that these different Opinions were not so publicly
authorized as we see they are. But though I am thus free in granting the
Disadvantage we lie under, or the Prejudice our Cause sustains by our so much
differing in our Opinions; yet I cannot agree to the Inference you de (...)
from it, namely, that because the several Accounts we give of this Matter do
very much differ from one another, therefore they are all to be rejected:
There, I think, you run too fast. I grant they cannot all be true, nor perhaps
any two of them; but to conclude peremptorily, that because they are different
therefore they are every one of them false, is to strain the Premises a little
too hard. For notwithstanding all you have yet said, one of them may very well
be true; though at the same time, I confess it is a very hard matter to know
which is it.


B. In this Reply you confound Things that ought to be distinguished; for you
take rejecting a Thing as false to be all one and the same as if it were
certainly known to be such, when yet in many Cases there is a great Difference
between them; for the one may be when there is no necessity of the other: As in
the former Example, it is not impossible but that one of the Particulars
attested by the Witnesses might have been true, as the one Man's cutting the
other Man's Throat Let us suppose that it was really so: In that Case I grant
that no Contradiction of other Witnesses can prove their Evidence to be false;
but withal you must likewise grant me that in the former Example it is so
expressly contradicted by several other Witnesses, who for ought that appears
are of no less Credit, that let it be never so true, it lies under no less
Suspicion of being false than any of the other Depositions, and consequently is
equally to be rejected as such; for however true a Thing may be, it signifies
nothing in Law without it be made appear so to be, and most certain it is that
no Truth can be said to be made appear when the Evidence for it is no more than
is against it, or when it has no better Proofs to support it than what are
equally urged for a Falsehood. Now to apply this to what is in dispute between
you and me; I do not say that because you differ very much among your Selves in
giving an account how King James lost his Right, therefore every one of these
Accounts must needs be utterly false, no, all I inter from the Inconsistency of
these Accounts, is that there can be no certainty that any of them is true,
that all of them lie under a strong Suspicion of being false, and that no Man
can have any tolerable Satisfaction but that they really are so. In a Word,
that whatever Truth there may be in any of them it is impossible to find where
it is, and consequently unreasonable to lay any Stress upon it. This is all I
contend for as the necessary Consequent of what has been hitherto urged, and
this alone is enough for my purpose; for from hence it will appear to all
considering Men, that your Parry in declaring King James's Right to be lost,
and his Throne vacant, and setting up another in his Place, have acted the most
unaccountably and unjustly that can be imagined: For what greater Injustice can
there be, than first to declare his Throne vacant, and then to dispute among
your Selves afterward how it came to be so? First to transfer his Right to
another, and then set your Selves at work to find out Pretenses to justify it?
This is like condemning a Man first and then trying him afterward, which is
such a piece of Iniquity as (I think) is seldom heard of but in Jest.


A. This Argument of yours you have urged not only much longer but indeed much
farther than I at first expected, and therefore to avoid being tedious I shall
make no more Replies to it. The Substance of it is, that though all they that
are for the support of the present Government do unanimously affirm that King
James had lost his Right, yet when they are put to it to declare how or by what
means he lost it, the Accounts they give of it are so very different that there
is no possibility of reconciling them: From which difference of Opinions you
Infer that no Man can have any tolerable Satisfaction of the Truth of what is
pretended, and consequently that they who upon such loose, inconsistent and
contradictory Evidence did take upon them to declare King James's Throne vacant
and transfer his Right to another, have done him a most unpardonable Injury.
This I take to be the Substance of your Argument, concerning which I shall say
no more at present, but endeavor to retain it in my Memory that when I have
leisure I may the more seriously consider it. In the mean time, if you have any
more Arguments to the same Purpose I shall be glad to hear them.


B. You may remember that when you first put it upon me to prove King James's
Right and Title to the Crown to be still good, I told you what was properly
incumbent on me was not directly to prove but only to defend it, for which all
that is requisite is only to answer those Arguments by which those of your
Party endeavor to overthrow it; so that the proving or argumentative part
ought in reason to have been yours and not mine. However upon your declining of
it, I did (though with some Reluctance) undertake it, but with this Proviso
that you should expect no other Arguments from me than what the nature of the
Thing in dispute would bear, which I must tell you can be but very few: For
supposing the Thing to be true, I know no other way to prove it but only these
two. First by showing that they who assert the contrary are so strangely
divided in their Opinions that no Man can tell what they would be at, which I
presume is already done. The other way, and indeed the only remaining way by
which it can be proved that King James's Right to the Crown is yet still good
(even on Supposition that it really is so) is by dismounting those Batteries
that you have raised against it: That is by examining and disproving the
several Pretenses upon which those of your Party give out that he has lost his
Right; Which if it can be done will go nigh to put an end to the whole Dispute.


A. I grant it would: and for that very Reason I should be very glad to hear
what you can make of it.


B. If you expect that I should take upon me to examine and disprove every one
of those Pretenses, I must tell you, the Task will be both very tedious, and
very needless. Tedious, because of their Number and Variety: And needless,
because however many different Opinions of that Matter there may be among you,
you your self can be but of one of them: So that if among all those different
Opinions how K. James came to lose his Right, you will be but so kind as to let
me know which it is that you adhere to, you will save me a great deal of
needless Pains, because the disproving of that alone will (or at least ought)
at effectually to convince you of your Error, as if I should disprove them all.


A. Though the Favor you ark is no more than what is very reasonable, yet I am
very loath to grant it, because what depends upon it is of too great Importance
to be ventured all in one Bottom. I love to have more Strings to my Bow than
one, in hopes that when one is broke another may hold: So that whatever is my
Opinion of the Matter, or however shrewdly the force of your Arguments may
shake it, I shall scarce yield so long as any of the rest stands firm. And
therefore I must tell you, that in the prosecution of your Argument, you must
either disprove all these Opinions, or you had as good disprove none of them.


B. That I know is a piece of cunning that all of you are very expert in. I was
but very lately that you owned your being of so many different Opinions in this
matter to be a great Prejudice to your Cause; and indeed you ^ad Reason: For it
is not at all likely that the Babel you are bu^^ding will ever come to any
Perfection, as long as they who thrust themselves into the W^rk speak such
different Languages. But however serviceable it might be to your Cause, if you
were all of one Opinion, so ambi-dextrous is your Policy, that you make
Advantage even of your Differences (...): For these different Opinions you make
use of as so many places of Retreat, that when you are beat out of one you may
shelter your selves in another. The Truth is, Men's second thaughts are
generally more delib^rate and bet or digested than their first, and so it is
with you. When you first declared your selves against King James's Right, you
had no other Pre^ence but that of Abdication. That was the only Refuge you had
then to retreat to, and in that you thought your selves ^afe enough for some
time, which (considering the Hur^y you were th^nin, and how shor^ a time you
took to consider what you were doing) I do not at all wonder at; for what is
done inconsiderately is generally done but by halves. But when once the Hurry
was over, and you began to bethink your selves what you had done, you very
plainly foresaw, upon second thoughts, that that Pretense of Abdication could
never hold out long: That in case you should be vigorously attacked (which you
had all the Reason in the world to expect) that alone would be no safe Retreat
for you, and therefore you thought fit to raise new Batteries, and fortify your
selves with Outworks, which now you have done to some Purpose. For these
Outworks (though I must needs tell you they are neither regular nor uniform,
but that, I believe, is because the Ground would not allow it, yet) are so many
in number, and (...) well manned, that now you think your selves safe enough,
being resolved to dispute every foot of Ground, and when you are beat out of
one Entrenchment (...) drove from one Post, to make your Retreat to another.


A. You talk so much like a Soldier, that I begin to be afraid of you; for if
you go on at this rate, I expect no other but that all our different Opinions
should be turned into Bastions, Rav^lans, Half-Moons, Horn-works and Redoubts,
and that in pursuit of the Simile, all your Arguments should be turned into
Mines, Mortar-pieces, Bomhs, Carcasses and Grenades, and so we may be blown up
before we are aware. But I do not like that way of going. I had rather by half
you would keep to the old way of calling Things by their proper Names, and then
we shall better understand one another.


B. I did not think you had been so squeamish. That you who have given so much
Encouragement to Soldiers, cut out so much Work for them, and enacted such
severe Laws against Mutiny and Desertion as were utterly rejected in former
Reigns, should be afraid of their very Terms of Art is somewhat strange. But
you need not give your self any trouble about that; for I can tell you I love
the Soldiers Trade as little as you can do, and perhaps do as little
understand it: All that I designed by these sew Terms of Art I made use of, was
only to show that you have imitated their Policy: That as they seldom trust to
their Walls or Ramparts, but fortify themselves which several Outworks for
their further Security. So you, not thinking your selves sufficiently secured
by King James's pretended Abdication, have since invented several other Arts
and Contrivances, both to overthrow his Right and support that of K. W. And
consequently, as it is impossible that any Town can be reduced, till they that
do besiege it do first make themselves Masters of the Outworks, so it is in
vain to think, that any of you will yield, or own your selves to be in an
Error, as long as there is any one of your Pretenses lest undisproved, be the
rest baffled never so much.


A. The Truth (...), the only way to make sure work of it is to disprove them
all; but I believe you will find it a very difficult Task. However, if you
think fit to give your self the trouble of attempting it, I shall not only be
very well satisfied to hear you, but shall endeavor to make the best Defense I
can. And that I may be the better prepared for it, I should he very plad to
know where you intend to begin your Attack.


B. In the weakest Place, you may be sure, or where I expect to meet with the
least Resistance; and that is in the Pretense of Conquest, which, as it is the
Title that of all others would best please your King, as most suitable to his
Ambitious Designs, and that insatiable Thirst after absolute and arbirtary
Power, which on all Occasions has so visibly appeared in his whole Conduct both
at Home and abroad: So it has by Degrees (according as the Times would bear)
been very plainly hinted, very plausibly stated, and at last very boldly
asserted and vigorously supported by several very industrious (some of them
very eminent) Hands. This was a ^old Stroke indeed, Such a Stretch of Zeal for
your new Master, that I am sure no honest Man will ever consent to, since by it
you declare, that rather than there should be a ^^aw in your new King's Title,
you will sacrifice to it not only that of King James, but likewise the
Liberties and Properties of all your Fellow Subjects, and sound it upon the
Ruins of both. But I shall not need attack that Post any farther, because I
find that however obstinately it was defended some time age, it is now
abandoned. However plausible that Pretense of Conquest might seem to some, or
howeve^ pernicious it might prove, if it should succeed there is no necessity
that I should give my se^ the trouble of resuting it, because it has ha^ the
Honor of being already resuted by a more public hand, to the no small
Mortification of those who were the Authors and Abettors of it: For the
Representatives of the Nation, wifely considering what bold Advances were made
toward the establishing of it, and how destructive it would prove, especially
in such hand^, if ever it should happen to be established, thought fit to put a
Stop to it in time and crush it in the Bud, which accordingly they did, by
condemning those scandalous Pamphlets that were written in behalf of (...)
(however much influenced or countenanced by Authority, to be publicly burnt.
Thus the Title of your mighty Hero, sounded on the specious Presence of
Conquest (which by many among your selves is thought the best, if not the only
good Title he has) falls by the hands of the common Hangman: Under which
Reproach I leave it, and proceed to another that equally deserves the same
Fate, and may come in time to meet with it; I mean that Pretense of founding K.
W's Title upon the Abrogation or Deposition of King James: The Substance
whereof is, That King James having endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws,
made several Encroachments upon the Liberties and Properties of his Subjects,
and being guilty of many gross Male. Administrations in point of Government,
the Representatives of the Nation, who were most immediately concerned to stand
up for the Good and Welfare of it, did unanimously concur to depose and
abrogate him from the Regal Throne, and promoted the P. of O. to it.


A. I hope you will not take upon you to justify all that King James did during
the time of his Reign here.


B. No, nor what K. W. has done neither, But you must give me leave to say,
that there is a great deal of difference between not justifying what one has
done, and giving him a kick in the Breech to send him packing.


A. I grant there is; and yet even he that is so served has no Reason to
complain if he has justly deserved it.


B. Though that is most certainly true in some cases, it is not so in all: For
however justly a Punishment may be deserved, if they that did inflict it had no
Right nor Authority so to do, he on whom it was inflicted may justly complain
of an Injury done him, and sue for Redress: Which how far it is applicable to
King James's C^se will best appear by a strict Examination of the former
Pretense. In order to which, I shall begin with the pretended Grievances and
Male Administrations during King James's Reign which by those of your Party are
enumerated with all the Care, heightened with all the Art, and magnifyed with
all the Malice imaginable. Witness that Infamous Libel published against him by
an Irish Divine, with a Design (it seems) not only to justify his Subjects
rebelling against him, but to render him odious to all Mankind. But the foul
Aspersions and base Calumnies of that Book, the gross Partiality and
Disingenuity of the Author throughout the whole of it, even in relating Matters
of Fact, has of late been sufficiently detected.


A. I suppose you mean Dr. King's Book, and the Answer to it, lately published
by an unknown Hand.


B. I do so, and if you have read them both I should beglad to hear your
opinion of them.


A. I must confess since I read that Answer, I have not had the same Opinion of
the D^'s. Book as formerly, nor do I give so much Credit to what is therein
related; yet I am in hopes the Dr. will vindicate himself how soon the Answer
comes into his hands, which I believe will be very speedily, there being care
taken to transmit a Copy of it to him, till which time I resolve to suspend my
Judgment both of him and his Book.


B. You may do so for me, for I do resolve not to foul my Fingers any longer
with it neither at present; but to make some Reply to that heavy Charge of
Grievances and Mole-Administrations against K. James here in England; which
Charge is made up of such dissimilar parts, and contains in it such a mixture
of Truth and Falsehood, of real Grievances and malicious Calumnies, that it were
equally indiscreet wholly to deny it or wholly to admit of it. That there were
some false Steps made in K. James's Reign, that there were several things done
very unaccountably, even in point of Government, I am so far from denying, that
perhaps no man in my Station was either more sensible of it or more sorry for
it than my self. But what then? Must every King that treads awry or makes a
false step immedia^ly have his Heels tript up? If so, your new King had need
look better to his footing than hitherto he has do^e; since it may easily be
made appear, that he has not only trod in the same Steps with his Predecessor,
but has by many Paces out-gone him: But of that afterw^rd. What I would have
you to consider at present is, That Kings are but M^n, and therefore not to be
supposed to be exempted from Error: For though I grant, that God has placed
them in a much higher Station than other Men, and that they derive their
Authority immediately from him; yet as long as they are necessitated to act or
to exercise their Authority, not only by the Counsel and Advice, but likewise
by the Ministry of other Men, it cannot reasonably be expected but that Errors
will be committed, more or less according to the Intensity of those Persons by
whose Advice or Ministry they act. This is so very true, that I may safely
challenge you to give me an Instance of any one King now reigning, or perhaps
that reigned for some Ages past. whose Subjects do not, or did not, complain of
Grievances and Male-Administrations in their Government.


A. If so, we had better have no Kings at all, but put our selves under some
other Form of Government: For that we should be so obstinately tenacious of
such a Form of Government, as you your self acknowledge very rarely has been,
and very hardly can be exempted from Error, is most unreasonable.


B. This Objection I plainly foresaw and thought to have anticipated, if you
had not prevented me, by telling you, that however plausible that Proposition
of yours (...), nothing would be gained by it; For though it were in our power
to change the Government to what Form we please (as most certainly it is not,
at least not without the Consent of the Governor) whatever Exchange we made,
we should find our selves losers by the Bargain, since it may easily be made
appear, that all other Forms of Government, as they are rather the result of
Necessity than of Choice, so they are so far from being better secured from
Errors and Mistakes than that of Monarchy, that they are much more subject to
them: So that your Objection against what I formerly said concerning the
Errors and Mistakes incident to Kingly Government, is indeed the very same as
if you should thus reply to what I but now said, That since all Sorts of
Governments, have their Failings and Defects, the best way is to be under none
at all; than which nothing can be more unreasonable, it being obvious to all
wise and considering Men, that the worst Form of Government in the World, even
Tyranny it self, is far more eligible and less hurtful than to be under none at
all. These things are so very plain, that without insisting any further upon
them I shall return to what I was saying when your Objection interrupted me,
namely, that it is such a casual Thing for Kings, as well as other Governors,
to give their Subjects occasion to complain of Miscarriages and
Male-Administrations in their Government, that perhaps it will be very hard to
instance any one King that has not done it: So that if we may be allowed to
take that Course mentioned in the former Pretense, we may even bid adieu to all
Government: For no man can choose but see, that if in all such Cases Subjects
may warrantably dethrone their Kings and set up others in their stead, there
can be no such thing as Government, but the whole World must be filled with
Confusion. I grant, that in remedying a great Inconveniency some Confusion may
be born with, if it be such as we may reasonably expect will soon be over, and
nothing but fair Sunshine to follow. But alas! the Confusions introduced by
such a Course as we now speak of are of a far different Nature; being such as
we can never have any Prospect of putting an end to, any otherwise than by
letting sall that Course: For it seldom fails but that they who change either
their Government or Governor, on Pretense of having their Grievances
redressed, sind themselves in a worse state at last than they were in at first,
whereof it were easy to give an Instance without going far from home. But
though I am thus free in granting that all Kings may be guilty, nay, that most
Kings really are guilty of such Errors and Mistakes in Government as their
Subjects think they have just reason to complain of as great Grievances, and
particularly that King James was so in several respects, yet I am very far from
thinking, that all Complaints of that nature, either against him or any of the
rest are well grounded. I very well know, that it is usual in all such Cases,
not only to aggravate what is indeed true, but also to alledg what is really
false. This in the Case of King James is very plainly to be seen: For you
cannot choose but know, that the most clamorous Objections against him, and
what most alienated the Hearts and Affections of his Subjects from him were
especially these Two: First, That notwithstanding the Birth of the Prince of
Wales was nothing else but a meet Imposture, yet King James endeavored to
obtrude him on these Kingdoms as his Right Heir, to the disinheriting of his
own lawful Children. Secondly, That he had privately entered into a Treaty with
the French King to root out the Protestant and set up the Roman Catholic
Religion in these three Kingdoms, which was to be done by the Help and
Assistance of the French King. These, I most confess, had been great Grievances
indeed, enough to have shaken a more steady Loyalty than that of his Subjects,
had they been as plainly proved as they were impudently alleged: But that no
such Proof has been made, nor so much as offered to be made, you your self
cannot but know. Never was any thing of that nature asserted with more
Confidence or more industriously obtruded on Men's Belief. than these two Things
I have mentioned, for whoever did but doubt of the Truth of them were told with
all the Assurance imaginable, that if once the P. of O. were but landed and the
Representatives of the Nation had Freedom and Leisure to enquire into the
Matter, the proof of these Things would be made as clear as the Sun at
Noonday. And yet you see that all these fine Pretenses are now come to
nothing. The Evidence you so much boasted of then is now wholly on the other
Side, it having sufficiently appeared since that King James was so far from
treating privately with the French King for the assistance of his Forces to
destroy our Religion, that he could not be persuaded to accept of these Forces
to resist the Unnatural Invasion of his Son-in-Law, but chose rather to confide
in the Courage and Loyalty of his own Subjects. And as for the Prince of Wales,
besides the Depositions of several Persons of unquestionable Honor, attesting
the Truth and Reality of his being born of the Queen's Body, (which was the
only thing pretended to be doubted of) it has been abundantly confirmed since
by the Birth of a Princess by the same Queen. But it were needless to insist
any longer on these Things; your so shameful sneaking from the proof of them
after you had undertaken it with so much Assurance, and made us expect it with
so much Impatience, is sufficient to disprove them without the help of any
other Arguments: For though there could be no greater Advantage to your Party,
nor no greater Confusion to Ours than to have these Things plainly proved, yet
you very well know that after the Prince was landed, the Estates convened and
the great Affairs of the Nation adjusted, they were so far from offering at the
proof of these Things, as was generally expected, that they could not be
persuaded so much as to enter upon the Examination of them or make any enquiry
into them, though they were very much importuned to it by both Parties.


A. I must confess their Conduct in that did seem a little strange to me as
well as to a great many others, and so it does still. However I put the best
Sense upon it I can, being willing to believe that their forbearing to make a
strict Enquiry into these Things was purely out of respect to King James, since
the proof of them must needs have rendered him odious and hateful to all
Mankind.


B. If that be really your Opinion I believe you are very singular in it. For
my part. I am so far from having any such Thoughts of it, that I verily believe
if they had thought they could have made any thing of it, that Consideration,
that such a proof would extremely reflect upon King James's Credit and
Reputation would have been so far from hindering them to attempt it, that it
would rather have spurred them on to it with the greater vehemence. This
Opinion I am sure is much more rational than yours, because much more suitable
to their Deportment toward him in other things, which ever since the Prince's
landing has been so far from any the least show either of respect to his Person
or regard to his Honor, that perhaps no King (his Royal Father only excepted)
was ever treated with more Contempt, or had greater Affronts and Indignities
put upon him. It cannot then be imagined, that their forbearing to prove, or so
much as to examine these Things, was out of any Respect to him, nor is it
credible that any other Account can be given of it, but only this: They were
afraid that a diligent Search and Enquiry into these Things would make a very
different Discovery from what they had all along made the World expect, or that
instead of making them more evident than formerly, it would render them much
more suspected: Than which there needs no plainer Demonstration, not only that
these Things are (...), but also that those very Persons who persuaded others
to believe them, did not believe them themselves, Thus it appears that the most
material Objections against K. James, were nothing else but meet Calumnies and
malicious Aspersions impudently forged by some ill-designing Men, and as
industriously propagated by others, of purpose to debauch his Subjects from
their Loyalty, and prepare them for that Defection from their Duty to him, at
which the World may well stand amazed. As for other Grievances and
Male-Administrations, which are very freely confessed to have been such, as
well then as now, such as ser^ing up the High Commission, turning out of
Magdalen-Colledge, imprisoning of the Bishops, dispensing with the Pinal Laws,
putting unqualified Persons in Places of Trust, and some others of the like
nature; as they are of much less Importance than the former which were never
yet attempted to be proved, so they cannot directly and immediately be charged
upon him, but with a great deal of Disingenuity; it having plainly enough
appeared since, that he was pushed on to these Things, not by his own
Inclinations, but by his Ministers and Favorites, of whom he had unfortunately
made a very bad Choice. It was the indiscreet and ill-temper'd Zeal of some of
those Ministers and Favorites, and the cunning Artifice of others, that pushed
him forward to those Violent and Arbitrary Proceedings, of purpose to undermine
and ruin him, as some of themselves have boasted since, and have been liberally
rewarded for it. This being the plain Truth of the matter, it will early
appear, that this Pretense of founding K. W's. Right to the Crown upon K.
James's Deposition for Male-^^ministration, is the most unreasonable thing that
can be: For you know, it is a Maxim in our Law, That the King can do no Wrong;
the Meaning whereof is not, that nothing can be done amiss that he does in
point of Government, but that whatever there is am^s in it, is not to be
imputed to him, but to those by whole Advice and Ministry he acts; and
cons^quently, that not he, but they are punishable for them. But in this
Pre^ence concerning K James the Case is quire inverted; for here the King
himself is charged with all the Faults of Government, and not only charged with
them but punished for them; whereas they that were his Counselors and
Ministers, who were much more to blame than (...). inasmuch as they not only
persuaded him, that his Royal Prerogative would very warrantablly and safely
bear him out in all the Arbitrary Courses he took, but also pushed him forward
to them even contrary to his Inclinations, maliciously suggesting, that the
hard Usage that some of his Subjects met with (to which in some cas^s he
consented with great Reluctance) was no more than what was necessary for the
asserting and vind^cating of his Authority, and the chastising of their
Stubbornness and Unduti^^^ness: These Men (I say) at least some of them, were
not only suffered to escape Punishment, but were highly preferred and rewarded
even by your good K. W. than which I challenge any Man to give an Instance
either of greater Iniquity or deeper Hypocrisy. To punish that openly in one as
a grievous Crime, which is secretly approved of and rewarded in another as very
acceptable Service. To cry our against Grievances, to pretend a most tender
Compassion for those that suffer them. and a mighty Zeal for having of them
redrest, when yet it appears that those very Grievances are chiefly owing to
the pernicious Counsels and mischievous Contrivances of such Perions as for
that very purpose have been corrupted by such a Pretender, is such a
Masterpiece o^ Hypocrisy and Dissimulation as I think none but a Dutchman is
capable of. But why should I insist ^o long on these Things? Let it be supposed
that the Grievances we lay under during K James's Reign were really as great as
they who maliciously aggravate them would make the World believe, and that they
were not in any measure to be imputed to the ill Conduct of his Counselors
and Ministers, but were the effects of his own Natural Tempet and Inclination,
even that cannot justify the Measures that have been taken to redress these
Grievances. This brings us to the Consideration of the Second part of the
former Pretense; namely, that because of these Grievances and
Male-Administrations, the Estates of the Realm did unanimously dethrone him. In
this are two Things to be examined, First, Matter of fact: Secondly. Matter of
Right. As or the Matter of Fact, I must tell you, that however confidently Mr.
Johnson and they that adhere to him may affirm it, there is nothing of Truth in
it. The Convention did not go that way to work: So far were they from assuming
any Power or Authority over the King's Person, so as to call him to an Account,
and judicially to depose him, that they did not in the least pretend to it, nor
so much as mention it, but went upon a quite different Ground, as is very well
known. But besides that, the Matter of Fact is not more false than the Matter
of Right is defective: That is to say, I^ they had done so de facto, it had
been de jure null and of none effect, as being utterly unlawful. I hope you
will grant me, that what is in it self unlawful ought not to be done, and if it
be done, ought to be undone again.


A. If I do, you will get nothing by it, unless you can prove that it was
utterly unlawful to dethrone King James, even though he did not govern
according to Law.


B. Very right: But that I can easily prove, both because there is no Law for
it, and likewise because there are express Laws against it. First, I say, There
is no Law or Statute that the Subjects or People of England can in any Case
depose or dethrone their Lawful King. This being a Negative Proposition it
cannot be expected that I should prove it. It lies upon your Party (at least
those of them that shelter themselves under this Pretense) not only to produce
such a Law, but to make it appear, that it has never yet been repealed; till
which time the Proposition will stand good against them, It Is true Mr. Johnson
in his Argument does mention such a Statute, and lays the greatest Stress of
his Argument upon it, and yet confesses afterward, that whatever there might be
formerly, there is no such Thing now to be found; which is enough for my
purpose, because not to be found, and not to be in being, are the same Thing in
Law. Secondly, As there is no Law to warrant or authorize the Deposition of any
of our Rightful Kings, so there are express Laws against it. Such is that of
the 12. Car. 2. where it is declared, That neither the Peers, nor Commons, nor
both Houses together, nor the People collectively nor representatively, in
Parliament or out of Parliament, nor any other Persons whatsoever have any
Coercive Power over the King of England. And in the 13 Car. 2. it is declared,
That the Sword is solely in the King's Power. and that neither one nor both
Houses of Parliament can or lawfully may^aise or levy any War offensive or
defensive against his Majesty. To these I may add what is declared in the Act
of uniformity, namely, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatever to take
up Arms against the King. If it be said, that there is nothing mentioned of
dethroning of Kings in any of these Acts I have quoted, and consequently that
they are nothing to the purpose. I answer, That to dethrone a King is a degree
of Rebellion beyond any thing mentioned in these Acts: For the reason why
Subjects do assume to themselves a coercive power over their King, or pretend
to take up Arms or levy War against him is that by these means they may
dethrone him: And if so, it must needs be g^an^ed, that the former being
condemned by these Statutes, the latter is much more so, as being a higher
degree of the same Crime. So that they of your Party who found K. W's. Right on
the Peoples deposing of King James for Maladministration, have no imaginable
way to evade the Force of these Laws I have mentioned, unless they say that
they are above all Laws, and can dispense with them at their Pleasure, which
was one of the chief Things objected against him and what was thought absurd in
him, I am sure is much more so in them.


A. I hope you have now done with that Pretense, for the Truth is I never much
loved it nor laid any great Stress upon it; and therefore I do not think my
self much concerned in the Arguments you have brought against it, which is the
chief Reason why I have made little or no Reply to you since you entered upon
the Examination of it.


B. Had you told me so at first it would have saved me a great deal of Trouble,
for then either I would not have mentioned it at all, or at least would not
have insisted so long upon it. But that is your Cunning. Whichsoever of your
Pretenses happens to be examined, you are resolved to say nothing of it, till
first you hear what can be said against it: And if it so fall out that the
Arguments against it make no great Impression upon it, then, to be sure, that
is the Pretense you always confided in: But if it happens ^o be baffled, why
then, forsooth, you did not like it from the beginning. But perhaps we may meet
with more such before we come to an end. The next that comes to be examined is
that of Forfeiture. The Substance of which is, that by these violen^and
a^^itrary Proceedings and Male-Admini^trations form (...) mentioned, K. James
did really and truly forfeit all Right and Title to the Crown. This Pretense, I
hope, will be sooner discussed thin the former, because though in ^o n^
Respects they di^^er very considerably from one another; the one affirming,
That he was deposed by the People: And the other, That ^e did really unking
himself, and forfeit his Right, so that there was nothing lest for the People
to do, but only to declare it and dispose of the Forfeiture, yet they both
agree in this* The same Grievancer and Male-Administrations are alleged by
both Parties, as the Ground or Reason of what they contend for: And therefore
having spoke what is sufficient of these Grievances already, it will be
needless to enter upon a Second Consideration of them. It only remains that we
examine what is grounded upon these Grievances, which is no less than King
James's forfeiting all his Right and Title to his three Kingdoms; which however
confidently asserted, may as easily be disproved, if either Law or Reason may
be admitted as Judge. As for Law, I do not see it is so much as alleged: For
although it might reasonably enough be expected, that they who take upon them
to declare, that in case of Maladministration a King forfeiteth his Crown,
should show some express Law, or Statute, or Act of Parliament by which it is
so enacted. They have not yet been able to do it; and indeed how should they,
when there is no such Statute to be found? They may well pretend to find some
such Clause in the Original Contract between the King and People, which when
they are so kind as to produce we shall most willingly submit to its Decision
of the Controversy; but that any such Clause is to be found in any subsequent
Statute is scarce to be imagined: For you very well know we never had any but
what was made so by the King, that a Vote or Bill in Parliament though past in
both Houses, is of no Force or Authority till signed by him; it is he only that
gives it the force of a Law. And do you think it probable that any King that is
actually and legally in Possession of a Crown, and is to transmit the same to
his Posterity, should of his own accord make a Law that in case of
Maladministration either by himself or by any of his Heirs and Successors
that Crown should be forfeited? No doubt, Parliaments always have been and yet
are inclinable enough to prepare such Bills, if they had any hopes of Success
in them; but that any King should give the Royal Assear to them is not in any
reason to be expected, for that were to loosen the Bonds of his own Government,
and deliver both it and himself up as a Prey to the restless and unruly
Multitude, who, if once such a Door were unbolted, would always find Pretenses
enough to push it open. But this is not all. Besides that there is no Law to
support this Pretense, there are express Laws to overthrow it. Those very
Statutes I have already quoted against deposing of Kings from their Right may
be no less pertinently alleged against their forfeiting of it: For as no King
can be deposed but by Force, so neither can it be expected that ever he will
own his having forfeited his Right but by Force. And theresore since by these
Statutes it is declared to be unlawful to take up Arms or levy War against the
King, or to assume any Coercive Power over him, they are no less pleadable
against this Pretense than they are against the former.


A. I must confess I do not at all agree with you in that. My Reason is,
because what Force is employed in deposing a King is used against him even
while he is King, Which is expressly against those Statutes: But in the case of
Forfeiture it is quite another thing; for in that there is no Force used till
first he has forfeited his Right, and in so doing he ceases to be King and
becomes a Private Man: So that whatever Force or Violence is used afterward to
drive him from that Right he has already forfeited, cannot properly be said to
be done against a King, nor consequently to be condemned by the fore mentioned
Statutes.


B. That Answer (whatever you may think o^ it) is ^one of your own, but
borrowed from the Old Republican Party in Oliver's Time; who among many other
Artifices to abuse the Simple, and palliate their Rebellion against King
Charles the First, revived that old exploded Distinction between the King's
Authority and the King's Person. They pretended that by his Misgovernment he
had forfeited his Authority. So they not only amused Men's Minds with that
confound^d Distinction between his Authority and his Person, but set up the one
in opposition to the other, and at last took up Arms for the one against the
other; that is, they ^ought against him, not as one clothed with Regal
Authority, for that he had already d^vested himself of, but as a Private
Person; which is the very thing alleged in your Reply. But if that
Distinction, however plausible, was treasonable and rebellious then, (as most
certainly it was) it is much more evidently so now, as being expressly condemned
by these very Statutes I have mentioned which were indeed framed for that very
purpose; for by them it is expressly declared That it is unlawful to take up
Arms against the King upon any Pretense whatever. And if so, then to take up
Arms against him on pretense that he is no longer King, is as fully condemned
as any other Pretense. In a word, either you must grant that this No ^on of a
King'^ forfeiting his Right and by that m^ans unkinging himself and becoming a
Private Person, neither can nor ought to be made use of as a Presence to take
up Arms against him, or you must own that it falls directly under the
Condemnation of that Statute. But if that is not sufficient to convince you, be
pleased to consider what is further added in the Declaration contained in that
Statute; namely, That as I declare it unlawful to take up Arms against the King
upon any Pretense whatever, so I abbor that traitorous Position of taking up
Arms by his Authority against his Person. There you ^ee that to divide the
King's Authority from his Person (which cannot well be done but on supposition
that he has forfeited his Authority) and upon that Pretense to take up Arms
against him, is declared to be such a traitorous Position as by all good
Subjects is utterly to be abhorred.

Having thus far endeavored to make it appear that this Pretense of a King's
forfeiting his Crown and Dignity, in an Hereditary Monarchy where no other
Compact is to be found between him and his People but what is contained in
those several Acts of Parliament which from time to time have been signed by
him and his P^deces^ours is no less illegal than the former Pretense of
deposing him; the next thing to be done is ^o show you that it is every way as
absurd and unreasonable, ^^able to the same Inconvenienc^ies, and necessarily
involving People in the same e^dles Confusions: It being every way as
impossible that ever our Government can be secure upon this Supposition as upon
the former. To pretend that a King has forfeited his Right, and upon this
Pretense to take up Arms against him, force him from it and dispose of it to
another, tho in some respects it differs from deposing of him, yet it fully
agrees with it in this, that it can hardly fail of producing the same
pernicious and mischievous Effects. Let it once be put in the Head of any
People (especially such a wanton, unsteady and ungovernable People as that of
this unhappy Island, whom even the str^ctest Laws cannot contain within the
bounds of Subjection) that in case of Misgovernment the King does forfei^all
his Right and ^itle to the Crown, becomes a Private Person and as such may be
opposed and forced from his Right, and you may easily puess what will he the
^^sul: of it. What Fact (...) and Divisions, what Plunder and Rapine, what
Slaughter and Bloodshed, what las^ing Miseries and endless Confusions (far more
insupportable than the greatest Grievances under the worst of Kings) will
unavoidably throng in upon the opening of such a Gap, is but too apparent to
all considering Men. It were easy to enlarge upon this Subject, but withal it
were very needless; for there are many yet alive among us who by their own sad
Experience have been sufficiently convinced of the Truth of these Things,
having been E^e-Witnesses of the deplora^le S^ate and Condition tha^ these
unhappy Nations were reduced to, me^rly by acting according to these Principles
and Pretenses against King Charles the First. So great was the Misery they
groaned under, and so far were they from having any Prospect of Relief by any
other Mean^, that at last they were convinced there was no other way to remedy
^^e^e Evils, but by undoing what they had done as far as ^ay in their Power, by
calling Home the Rightful Heir to the peaceable Possession of what they had so
long and ^o injurious^^^ detained from him: Which accordingly they did, and
sound their Condition so sensibly altered for the better in so doing, that they
not only conceived an Abhorrence of those Rebel o^s Principle^ that had so
fatally misled them. but thought themselves obliged to take all the Case and
make all the Provision they could, that no such thing should happen for the
suture. All this is plain Matter of Fact which no Man can have the Impudence to
deny. Would not one think it strange then, that after all this we should fall
into the same Mistakes and tread the same fatal Steps again? and that so soon
too after our Sufferings, that a great many o^ us have yet a very fresh
Remembrance, if not a very feeling Sense of them? And yet you see it is so; we
have, as near as can be, taken the same Measures as formerly, acted upon the
same Principles, involved our selves in the same Difficulties, begin to feel
the same Miseries, and must at last make use of the same Remedy, or we will
find Reason to repent it when perhaps it will be too late. In a word, should
this Principle universally obtain, or meet with the same favorable Reception
in other Nation^, as it has done in this, there would be nothing but Confusion
in all Cor^ers of the World; it being utterly impos^ble in such a Case, either
that any Government can be secure, or any People can be happy. For I must tell
you, if once this Door be set open, it will signify nothing whether a King
governs according to Law or not, whether the Grievances complained o^ or the
Male-Administrations alleged against him be real or pretended, it will be all
one and the same Thing; for the people will be Judges o^ that whether it be
Reason or not. It they do but think them to be Grievances, whether they be
really so or not, Nay, (...) they do but call them so, whether they think them
so or not, the Case will be the same: It is but filling men's Heads with Fears
and Jealousies, persuading the Multitude that their Liberties, their Religion
and all that is dear to them is in danger, warning them to be upon their Guard
and look to themselves, and then the Business is done: Down goes the King, and
up starts a Creature of their own making: Nor has he any better Security than
his Predecessor had; for it he be not either a mere Tool, or an absolute
Tyrant, that is, if he does not either submit to be wholly governed by his
People, and prostitute his Authority to every Caprice of the giddy Multitude;
or put himsell into a Capacity to govern them with a Rod of Iron, and force
them to Obedience by a standing Army, backing his Royal Will and Pleasure, not
with the bruta Fulorina or empty Noise of Acts of Parliament, but with the
Ratio ultima Regum, or the more solid and convincing Arguments of great Guns; I
say, if he does not take either of these Courses (whereof I think neither is
much to be commended) he cannot in any reason expect to be otherwise dealt with
than his Predecessor was: Nor is it reasonable to imagine, that ever the
Frolic will end, so ^ong as that Door is left open; and some would think it
had been a great deal better and more advisable to have kept it shut at first.


A. I confess your Arguments against both the former Pretenses are so very
specious and plausible, that they deserve to be seriously considered, which, I
promise you, they shall be how soon I can have a convenient Opportunity: Only
at present give me leave to ask you a Question or two, and then, if you please,
you may proceed. You say it cannot be made appear by any Law or Statute, that
in case of Mis-Government or Maladministration the King does either forfeit
his Right, or is liable to be deposed by the People; and perhaps it may be so,
because, as you have observed, whatever Reasons any Parliament might have had
to have promoted such a Bill, it is not at all likely that any King would have
Signed it. But what do you say of the King's Coronation Oath? Does not that lay
an indispensable Obligation upon him not to oppress his Subjects? Does he not
solemnly promise and swear in that Oath, That he will govern according to Law?
That he will maintain their Religion, their Liberties and Properties entire,
without making any Encroachment upon them.


B. I grant he does; but what then? Will it therefore follow, that it he does
not exactly perform these Things he forfeits his Right, or is accountable to
his People? If you can find any such Clause in that Oath it will be very
serviceable to your Cause, but if not, it will signify nothing. It is very well
known, that our Kings do immediately succeed to the Crown upon the Death of him
that reigned last. That whoever does lineally succeed, is to all Intents and
Purposes as truly and fully King, and has the same Right to the Duty and
Allegiance of his Subjects, before he takes that Coronation Oath as afterward.
It is neither the proclaiming nor crowning of him that makes him King. Such
Solemnities (I grant) are customarily used upon any new King's Accession to the
Throne, but his Right or Title cannot be said to depend upon either of them, it
being indeed antecedent to both. And as his Right to govern is prior to his
Coronation, so is the Obligation he lies under to govern according to Law, to
consu^^ the Good of his Subjects, and inviolably to preserve all their Right's
and Privileges; that also is prior to his Coronation Oath: For what he s^ears
then is not entering into any new Compact with his People, but only a solemn
Acknowledgment and Ratification of what he was obliged to before. In a word,
The bounding and limiting of his Authority is not properly owing to his
Coronation Oath, but to the Nature and Constitution of the Government it self,
and consequently, must commence from it is first devolving upon him. But it were
needless to insist upon this Matter; for whencesoever it proceeds that the King
is obliged to govern by Law, it will signify nothing to your purpose, unless
you can make appear, that in submitting to that Obligation he did likewise
oblige himself, That in case he did not act conform^^ly to it he should forfeit
his Right, or be accountable to his People, which I am sure you cannot do.
Suppose a Father should solemnly swear to hi^ Children, That he will carefully
educate them and provide for them; in that case he stands obliged so to do, and
yet that Oblig^^^on cannot properly be said to be introduced by that Oath, but
only to be ratified and confirmed by it, for it is indeed the natural result of
his Paternity and commences with it: But whenceso^ver that Obligation proceeds,
I hope you will not say, that if his subseq^^n^ Measures are not answerable to
it he ceases to be a Father or is liable to be degraded from that Dignity ^^y
them. That he is accountable to God A^mighty or it. (...) so much the more
severely punish^^e because of his Oath, I freely grant; but (...) it ^^ings him
under the la^^ or c^nsure of his Children, I utterly deny, for that he neither
did nor could swear without swearing (...) his Right. I^ like manner I do very
freely gra^^, that if a King in the Exercise of his Government, does violate
that Obligation which naturally arises from he Constitution of that Government
legally devolving upon him, or his accepting of it so limited an I qualified,
that is to say, if he does not consult the Good of his People and inviolably
preserve all their Rights and Privileges, he is severely accountable to God
Almighty for it; much more if to that primary Obligation he superadds the
solemn Confirmation of an Oath: But that either of them does in such a case
subject him to the Judgment and Discretion of his Subjects, is a Doctrine
(however bol^ly asserted, vet) impossible to be proved: It being plainly
evident that to whichsoever of these two you refer that Obligation, there is no
such Clause to be found in it, nay, nor can be inserted in it for the future,
without altering the very Frame and Constitution of the Government, which I
shall very hardly grant to be in our Power.


A. The other Thing I would gladly know of you, is, how that Notion you have of
Government can he reconciled ^o the common Principle of Self-Preservation, or
supposing a King to misgovern and oppress his Subjects, What Remedy is there
left? How shall their Grievances be redrest, or how can there be an end put to
their Sufferings? For my part, I can see no possibility of it according to your
Principles, but an absolute necessity of groaning under them as long as their
Governor pleases; which in my Opinion is very har^h Dostrine if not very
absurd and unreasonable.


B. If instead of saying, as long as their Governors pleases, you had said, as
long as God Almighty pleases, it is to be hoped you would have been of another
Opinion. But letting that pass, I shall give you a more direct Answer. That
this Doctrine seems harsh to those who are so addicted to their F^^e and
Interest that they are impatient of every thing that crosses them, I ^o not at
^ll wonder; but let me advise you ^or to be so (...) as to condemn it as absurd
and unreasonable, left you be ^ound to condemn that Doctrine which our Savior
himself has taught us in the Holy Gospel; for I am very well assured that what
I have said in this, infers no greater Necessity than what he has said in hat,
nor (...) there any Redress condemned by me which is allowed by him. I need not
tell you how useful and necessary a Duty Patience is in the Christian Religion,
nor how earnestly our Savior recommends it to all his Followers: No Man can be
ignorant of that who does but read the Gospel. Nor is Patience to be understood
only of a meek and humble Submission to those Cross^s and Affliction which are
the more immediate Dispensations of Divine Providence, such as Sickness,
Poverty, the loss of Friends and several other things of that nature, but
particularly implies a constant and resolute Suffering of those Injuries and
Oppressions which we sustain at the Hands of others, especially those that are
in Authority. How well those of your Party have acquitted themselves in that
Point is well enough known: For there are only two things opposite to this
Patience, either a downright Resistance, or a through Compliance, and I am
afraid there are but very few among you that have not been very eminently
guilty of the one or other: For when K. J. made those unhappy Digressions from
the established way of Government which have since been complained so much of,
one half of you were all the while caressing him with ^ulsom Addresses,
applauding his Government, and promising to stand by him and serve him with
their Lives and Fortunes; when, in the mean time, others of you were forming a
Conspiracy, and at last broke out in open Rebellion against him, wherein now
both are joined. The Truth is, If the M^asures those of your Party have
hitherto taken be justifiable, instead of calling Patience a Virtue, I shall
look upon it as a great piece of Impertinence, b^ing fit only to be used when a
man cannot otherwise choose, which inver^s a good old Saying by turning a
Ver^ue into Necessity.


A. Whatever Truth there may be in what you now say, I must take leave to tell
you, it is notiing to the Purpose: for whereas I charge your Principles with
this A^^urdity, That they lay a Necessity upon Subjects of enduring even the
grea^est (...) and most unjust Pers^cu^ons, as long as their Governor shall
think a without any possibility of Redress, you ((...) vindicating your own)
^ecriminate upon us, objecting another Absurdity against our Principles, which
I humbly conceive is a very indirect and improper way of answering.


B. What you call an Absurdity in my Principles I account a very great Honor,
because it demonstrates their Conformity with our Savior's Doctrine in the
Gospel, where we are taught, That in case our Governors should grievously
oppress and persecute us, or command us to do unreasonable Things, we should
neither seek to shelter our selves under a base Compliance, nor offer to right
our selves by rising in Rebellion against them, but meekly and patiently to
suffer. It Is true, he allows us when we are persecuted in one City to flee to
another; and what is said of Cites may likewise be understood of Kingdoms,
which Allowance is no less consistent with my Principles than with his
Doctr^ne. Nay, more than that, I allow that when a King does misgovern or
oppress his People, they who are of greatest Eminency and Authority among them,
ought to interpose as far as they can, not by influencing Popular
Insurrections, not by insolent and arrogant Remonstrances, nay, nor by saucy
and unmannerly Petitions (all which do rather exasperate than mollify the
Hearts of Princes (but by meekly and humbly representing to him the
Inconveniences and ill Consequences which must need attend such irregular
Measures, Such as loosning the Joints and shaking the Pillars of his
Government, losing the Hearts and Affections of his best Subjects, depopulating
of his Kingdom^, and, by Consequence, the exposing of him to the Insults of his
Enemies. If instead of making these Things the constant Subject of wanton and
indiscreet Pens in unlicensed Pamphlets, the usual Entertainment at
Coffee-Houses, or the common Theme of Popular Harangues to the giddy Multitude;
I say, If instead of that, these Things were represented to the Governor
himself, by the (...) and better Sort of the Nation, wi^h that Modesty and
Submission that becomes the Subjects of a sovereign Prince, it can hardly be
imagined that any King of tolerabl^ (...) would persist in such Courses. It
being no Dishonor to any King, rather to consult the Good of his Subjects in
general, than the private Ambition and Revenge of any Favorite in particular.
But if our King should be so obstinate, or we so unhappy, that notwithstanding
that, there is yet no Redress of our Grievances; our next Recourse must be, not
to Arms, but to Almighty God by earnest Prayer and Supplication, that since the
Hearts of Kings are in a special Manner in his Hands, and that as the Rivers of
Waters he turns them which way he pleases, he would vouchsafe to incline our
King's Heart so to govern, that the Advancement of his Glory and the Good of
his Subject may be chiefly aimed at: And particularly that God would put it
into his Heart to pity the Groans and redress the Grievances of those that are
oppressed. If that also proves ineffectual, then are we to look upon it as a
Time appointed by Almighty God, either for the Punishment of our Sins, or the
Trial of our Pa^ience, and accordingly ought meekly to submit and patiently to
suffer; which however grievous to those who have no farther prospect ^han of
the Conveniences of this present Life, is yet far from being so desperate as
you ^^em to believe; we being well assured that by so doing we are entitled to
a Glorious Recompense in the other World, which (however lightly some may
esteem of it) will far exceed all that can be proposed either to be got by a
downright Rebellion, or saved by a base Compliance. That God Almighty can put
an end to our Sefferings when he thi^k^ fit I hope you will not deny, nor have
we any reason to doubt but he will do it, if we do but with Patience and
Submission wait his Time, and not take upon us to wrest the Sword out of his
Hands, and revenge those Injuries which we imagine are done us by rebelling
against his Vicegerents and forcing them from their Right. That is a Course
was never practiced but by the worst of Men and in the worst of Ages. What can
we say for our Selves when we consider what we have done, and compare it with
what in the like Cases has been none in former Ages? For all the Out cry we
have made against King James's Tyranny, we had not yet resisted unto Blood, as
many have done before us, in adhering to Religion. I need not go to far as the
Primitive Times of Christianity for Precedents of Loyalty and Submission even
under the most bloody Persecutions, to confront and shame our present Practice;
let us but reflect upon the Circumstances we were in during Q. Mary's Reign.
What Prospect was there of Peoples being eased of their sufferings then? They
were then actually under those Persecutions which we were only afraid of, and
had far less probability of Deliverance; and yet you see God Almighty did soon
put an end to them. Yes, I say, he did it, and not they themselves, for rather
than deliver themselves by any treacherous or rebellious Practices from these
Persecutions, they resolved patiently to endure them expecting Relief from none
but God: In which they were not disappointed, for in Compassion of their
Suff^rings he sent them Deliverance without their Assistance, and beyond their
Expectation. Surely none of King James's Subjects was ever so unjustly
persecuted by him as the Prophet David was by King Saul, and yet when he had an
Opportunity to be revenged on him, and secure himself for the future by violent
Means, how generously and piously does he argue against it, 1. Sam 26.10, 11.
As the Lord lives (says he) either the Lord will smite him, or his day will
come to dye, or be will perish in Battle, but God forbid that I should stretch
forth my hand against him. He does not conclude a^ you do, That admitting the
Principle of Non-Resistance, there can be no End of Peoples Sufferings, but on
the contrary is very confident, that in adhering to that Principle they shall
certainly see an end of them. Which way God Almighty will bring it about he
does not decide, nor will it become us to enquire, but that he will do it one
way or other he makes no Question, and in that Confidence resolves never to
shrink from his Loyalty, whatever he may suffer. Had we thus committed our
Cause to God, and continued fi^m in the Performance of our Duty, I do not in
the least doubt, but that ere now we should have found a better and more
effectual Redress of our Grievances than hitherto we have obtained by all the
indirect Means we have used. This I take to be a very direct Answer to your
Demand, and a very plain Vindication of my Principles from the Charge you have
brought against them. But how you, or any of your Party, will be able to
vindicate yours, or reconcile them to our Savior's Doctrine in the Gospel, I
cannot imagine; there being this great Difference between them, that the one
teaches us to suffer, and the other to rebel.


A. What you call Rebellion we affirm to be nothing else but a just and
necessary asserting of our Rights and Privileges, in Opposition to those, who
(whatever Right they have to govern us, yet) have no Authority to encroach upon
them, which is a Thing so justifiable that it needs no Vindication; or if it
did, I doubt not but that there are several among us, that could do it beyond
all Exception. But because that Point will go high to be decided afterward, if
you can make good what you have undertaken, I shall wave insisting any further
upon it a^ present, and desire you to proceed.


B. What you said of my Answer to you Demand I may very well say of your Reply
to it, namely, That it is nothing to the Purpose; for the A^surdit (...)
o^bj^ct against your Principles is that they leave no Occasion for Suffering,
and render the Duty of Patience (though a very principal Duty of the Christian
Religion) altogether useless; which your Reply is so far from answering, that
ind^^^ed it amounts to no less than a plain Concession: For if it be necessary,
or so much as law^ul, for Subjects to redress their Grievances by using in Arms
against their King, or (as you are pleased to call it) to assert their Rights
and Privileges in Opposition to Authority, who does no^ see that in such a
Case there is no need of Patience but when we cannot otherwise choose, nor any
Occasion lest for Suffering but in an ill Cause, or when we justly deserve it?
which if it may in any sense be called a Virtue, is yet so very low a degree of
it, that in St. Peter's Opinion it scarce deserves Thanks, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20.
This is Thank-w^rthy, if a Man for Conscience toward God endure Grief,
suffering wrongfully: For what Glory is it, if when ye are buffeted for your
Faults you shall take it patiently? But if when you do well and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. And whereas you mention the
asserting of your Rights and Privileges as a thing distinct from Rebellion, I
must tell you that in most cases they are the very same thing, the one being
nothing else but a Pretense to color the other: For if that asserting of your
Rights be done with your Arms in your Hands, in opposition to Authority,
especially if it goes so far as to dethrone him that is Supreme, or (which is
the same thing) to force him from the Government, give it what specious Title
you please, it is nothing else but downright Rebellion. But because you are
willing that the farther Consideration of this should be waved at present, I
shall thecefore insist no longer upon it.

In the next Place, I proceed to the Fourth and Last Pretense against King
James's Right, namely, his Abdicating of the Government, If I can bear you from
that Hold, your Cause is entirely lost; not that I think that can be better
defended than any of the former, but because it was the only thing your
Convention proceeded upon in pretending to settle our Confusions, or the only
Groundwork on which they built the goodly Superstructure of the Present
Government: On which account it is indeed the only thing you can fairly plead,
as being the declared Sense of those who pretended to be the Representatives of
the whole Nation; and consequently if that can be disproved, the whole Fabric
you have buil^ upon it must of necessity fall to pieces. The Substance of this
Pretense is, That King James by withdrawing himself out of the Nation, without
deputing any Person to officiate in the Administration of the Government during
his Absence, did indeed Abdicate the Government, that is, resigned it up and
left the Throne Vacant: Upon which the Nation being left to shift for
themselves, did by their Representatives assembled in Convention declare and
proclaim the P. o^ O. and the P. M. King and Queen of England, etc. In this
Pretense are several Particulars, whereof every one will upon a strict
Examination be found to be very ill-grounded. First, Concerning King James's
withdrawing himself, I humbly conceive that before it can be interpreted to be
an abdicating or disclaiming of the Government, it will be very needful to
enquire whether or not it was voluntary: For that a Man's withdrawing himself
from his House, or his Estate, or any thing else he has a Right to, should be
interpreted to be a yielding up of his Right, though at the sam^time it plainly
appears that his with^rawing was absolutely forced and involuntary, is so great
an Absurdity, that I am confident no Man will allow of it that will but take
time to think. This p^^s me in mind of the Method taken by the Convention in
Scotland, in proceeding against the Episcopal Clergy. They were forced from
their Churches by the Rabble, so terribly threatened and cruelly used that they
were compelled to withdraw for the Safety of their Lives; and yet the
Convention were so far from punishing the Rabble, or restoring those poor
distressed Clergymen to their Livings, that they interpreted that their forced
Departure from them to be a culpable deserting of them, and so placed others in
their room. A thing so strangely scandalous and reproachful, especially by
being made a National Act, that I can scarce believe they would ever have
ventured upon it, had not you encouraged them to it by your Example. It was you
that led the way, for they thought it no Reproach to treat their Clergy as you
had treated your King.


A. I must confess I do not at all approve of that Method you speak of in
turning out the Churchmen in Scotland: And if you can make it appear that King
James was turned out after the same manner in England, I shall easily grant
there has been a great deal of wrong done him; for I am so far of your Opinion,
that except a Man's withdrawing himself be voluntary, or free from any Force or
Constraint, it cannot fairly ^e interpreted to be a yielding up of his Right,
unless he had no other Right but barely that of Possession, which Is not at all
pleadable in King James's Case.


B. Though I scarce owe you Thanks for this Concession, it being no more than
what Reason and Equity force from you, vet I shall ask no more to destroy your
whole Hypothesis: For that King James did not voluntarily withdraw himself,
that he was plainly forced to it even for the Safety of his Life, does so
evidently appear from the whole Series of Affairs after the P. of O's Landing,
that whatever some Man may pretend, no Man can seriously think otherwise. You
very well know, that he made all the Preparation possible to oppose the
Prince's Party, that in order to fight him he appeared at the Head of an Army,
who had they been but willing were able enough to have chastised his Unnatural
Insolence, and sent him back to the place from whence he came. I hope that was
no sign that he had any thoughts of relinquishing or delivering up his Right.


A. No, I grant it was not: But after all that Preparation, what was the Reason
he would not fight? His putting himself at the Head of his Army looked some
what like a Resolution to assert his Right? but his deserting them after so
strange a manner and leaving them to shift for themselves, and that in such a
dangerous Juncture of time too, had quite another Aspect.


B. I cannot forbear telling you, that your charging him with deserting his
Army is extremely disingenuous: For you cannot choose but know, that before he
left the Army a great part of them had most basely and treacherously deserted
him. In a word, those very Persons who had the Honor either of being most
nearly related to him, or most highly preferred by him, and consequently, whom
he thought he might most safely confide in, as being most obliged to stand by
him; those very Persons. I say, did most shamefully betray him, not only by
having designedly and industriously corrupted as many of the Army as they could
beforehand, and prepared them for a Revolt, but by taking the first
Opportunity they could to go over to the Prince, and assi^t him with their
Counsel and what Forces they could carry over. Being thus basely served by
those whom he thought he had most Reason to trust, what better Treatment could
he in Reason expect from others; or indeed to rely upon the Fidelity of any
about him? Not but that I grant some were faithful to him, and stood by him to
the last; but besides that these were but few, the base Treachery of some had
rendered the Fidelity even of the rest so doubtful and suspected, that there
was no way to know it but by the Event, and consequently, it could not but be
very unadvisable to hazard a Battle upon the Confidence of it, his Cause being
too good to be ventured upon such a desperate Push, as engaging the Enemy at
such a Disadvantage mast needs have been. On these Considerations, no
reasonable man can blame his Conduct in leaving his Army, having no Assurance
of his own Safety in it; especially having been told, by some who (...) had
Reason enough to believe, That there was a Design in hand to seize upon his
Person, and deliver him up to the Prince. This (whether true or false) could
not but seem highly probable to him, many of them having already given
sufficient Proofs, that they were capable even of the greatest Vilanies. And
how far the Poison and Infection had spread it self, no Man could tell. Thus
was he forced from his Army by the Treachery and Defection of those who lay
under the greatest Obligations to defend him. I need not much enlarge upon what
followed after that: It is but too well known, that White Hall it self was no
safe Retreat for him; for though he proposed to settle all Differences, and
redress all Grievances, by an amicable Treaty, the Prince would not so much as
hear of it, but confined him who brought the Message, and still advanced in a
warlike Posture, thinking by that Means to frighten him away: But fi^^ling that
would not do, he di^charged his Guards and ordered his own to post themselves
in their room, and then sent him a peremptory Message to be gone from his Royal
Palace, which he was forced to do, or otherwise there to remain a Prisoner and
be wholly at the Disposal of his Enemies, from whom (considering how they
treated him even then as well as since) he had no reason to expect any Justice,
men less any Favor. In a word, he had neither Liberty to go where he pleased,
nor (if he had) could he find a safe Retreat in my Place of his Do minions, the
City of London^ it self, and the B^hops having sent him word (when he proposed
putting himself into their Hands) that it was not in their Power to (...) him:
Upon which he thought it high time to make his escape out of the Kingdom and
seek for shelter some where else, lest otherwise they should have made him a
Glorious King, after the same manner as they had made his Royal Father. These
were the Reasons, this the manner of his withdrawing; and they that will take
upon them to say that this was an abdicating of the Government, or a voluntary
resigning up of his Right, may after that say what they please, their very
saying of that being a plain Demonstration, that they themselves have abdicated
both Sense and Reason.


A. I must confess if things were as you have represented them, his withdrawing
himself out of the Kingdom cannot properly be said to have been voluntary, nor
fairly interpreted to be an Abdication of the Government: But I would have you
to know that they of our Party give a quite different account of it, telling us
that King James might have stayed if he had pleased, that his Life was in no
danger, that he did not go away for fear of that, but because he was afraid or
ashamed of being brought to a Trial, wherein he might well foresee he should be
accused of several horrid Crimes, from which it was impossible for him to (...)
himself. This is the account we have of it, which if true will sufficiently
justify the Vote of the Convention.


B. The account I have given is all plain matter of Fact groan led upon
undeniable Evidence, but that which you have given is made up of nothing else
but impudent and malicious Calumnies, grounded on mere Surmises and
unreasonable Suspicions of purpose to render him odious to his People, and
confirm them in their Rebellion against him, wherein Almighty God, for the Sins
of the Nation, has hitherto cursed you with Success. You say he might have
stayed if he had pleased, I suppose you mean at his Peril, and then I join with
you, for in that Sense I believe he may return too if he pleases; but whereas
you say that his Life was in no danger, I must confess I an not of your
Opinion. I believe indeed the P. would scarce have made any attempt upon his
Life at that time, at least not directly, which vet is not to be imputed to any
filial Duty or Respect, but rather to the Suspicions he had, that it would
disgust the People, by whose only Favor he expected to compass his Ambitious
Designs: For though he knew them to be strangely incensed against their King,
he was afraid withal, that they were not yet debuuch'd to that height as not
to be startled at the murder of him: And for that Reason it was, that rather
than detain him a Prisoner (which he might have done (...) he had plea^ed, but
could not so well compass his Designs by so doing) he forced him to make an
Escape. But however far that Politic Consideration might restrain the Prince
from attempting any thing against his Life at that time, it could not in Reason
be expected that it would be of any long Continuance, partly because great care
was taken to extinguish those small Remains of Duty and Loyalty that were lest
among the People to their King: And partly because (...) the Prince had once
obtained his Ends, and got himself set^^ed in the Government, he would have
little valued their Resentment. But whether his Life was in danger or not, as
it is impossible for us certainly to decide, so it is not very material to
dispute, Most certain it is, that he himself was very apprehensive of it, and
it is no less certain, that he had a great deal of Reason so to be, and
therefore did very advisedly (as Affairs then stood) ^o make the hest o^ his
Way, and wait a more favour^ble Juncture to return. As to what you mention of
his being afraid to stand a Pryal, as knowing himself guilty of several horrid
Crimes, there is indeed a great deal of Malice, but nothing either of Truth or
Sense in it. Of those horrid Crimes you men^ion, some are nothing else but
horrid Calumnies, which you are so far from being able to prove against him, if
he were present, that you had not the Courage to attempt the Proof of them in
his Absence. Others of them, it is confessed, were Failings, yet such as ^might
well have been rectified without turning the Government upside down: Nay, such
as he himself had begun to rectify, and no doubt would have done it more to our
satisfaction than now we can ever expect, had we not by our Impatience and
Incorrigible Obstinacy lost the Opportunity, by driving him away even when he
was willing to give all that we could in modesty ask, As for bringing him to a
Trial, What Sense is there in it? Who could pretend to be a Judge between him
and his People? Or if such a thing could have been, he had no reason to be
either afraid or ashamed of it, since he knew himself to be so innocent that
even his greatest Enemies could accuse him of nothing, but what he either could
very easily disprove or was very willing to rectify. from what has been said it
sufficiently appears that it was neither Shame nor Gull^ that made him leave
us, but the imminent Danger he was in that forced him from us, which utterly
(...) your Pretense of Abdication, and all that you have built upon it, even by
your own Concession; for to abdicate ones Right is not to be forced from it but
voluntarily to resign it.


A. Well, But what was the Reason then that he did not commissionate or depute
some Person ^o officiate in his Absence? Certainly, if he had not designed that
his going out of the Kingdom should be taken for a delivering up of the
Government, he would have entrusted some Person or other with the
Administration of it, and then his Claim had been good still; but having taken
no such Care, nor made any such Provision, how can we look upon it otherwise
than as an absolute Resignation? And besides that, his leaving us in such a
manner wholly destitute of a Governor. (...) an absolute Necessity upon us,
either to supply that Defect by setting up another, or live in perfect Anarchy,
which, even in your own Opinion, (...) the greatest Unhappine^s that can be^al
a Nation.


B. I cannot tell whether I had best answer that or not, because I can scarce
believe you are serious in it. Do you really believe, it would have been to any
Purpose at that time for King James to have deputed another in his Place? Can
you imagine that the generality of the Nation would have owned such a Deputy,
when they had rejected the Principal, or showed more Respect to a Servant than
they had done to the Master? So far are you from being able to make these
Sham-Pretences pass with me, that I can never he persuaded you your selves
believe them. No, no, Such sly Insinuations are suggested only to amuse the
Vulgar, and may perhaps take with the unthinking Multitude, whom you manage
with all the Art you can, as being the most necessary Support of your
Government, but to a man of Sense, or but of tolerable Prudence, they are no
less ridiculous than disingenuous. Such a Deputation was neither practicable at
that time, nor would it have served to any better purpose than only to have
exasperated them so much the more against him, and given them a fresh Occasion
of trampling upon his Authority. And as to that part of your Pretense, that his
leaving you destitute of a Governor, by withdrawing himself, did lay a
Necessity upon you, either of setting up a new Governor to supply that Defect,
or to live in Anarchy. I shall only tell you, that if you were really reduced
to that (...), and that it was a great Inconveniency and Hardship upon you
(...) be, you cannot blame him for it, but may thank your selves that forced
him away. But the plain Truth of the Matter is, you were reduced to no such
Strai^ as you pretend, nor under any Necess^ry of choosing either of these
Alternatives you mention, for had you either ^ufferen him to stay when he was
here, or called him Home again after he was gone, you could have been under no
Necessity, either of living without a Governor, or of setting up a new one.
Having thus far considered (and, I hope, sufficient disproved) this Pretense of
King James's having abdicated the Government, and lest the Throne vacant by his
withdrawing (...) out of the Kingdom, it will be no hard matter to throw down
what you have built upon it; for when the Foundation is overthrown, the
Superstructure must needs undergo the same Fa^c. That which you grounded upon
that supposed Abdication, was the declaring and proclaiming the Prince and
Prince's of Orange K. and Q. of England, etc Now, I say, it being made appear
that there was no such Abdication, that Declaration, or what you please to call
it, which was grounded upon it, must be in it self null and of none effect, as
being founded on a mere Mistake, and consequently, can be no Prejudice to K.
James's Right: And if so, it will necessarily follow, that your whole
Government it nothing else but a downright Usurpation, But besides that, I
must likewise tell you, that supposing the Groundwork of your Pretense to be
firm enough, I question very much whether it will be able to support what you
built upon it, The Truth is, I could never yet comprehend what you meant by
Abdication, when you made so much ado about it in your Convention. Did King
James's Abdication amount to an entire Dissolution of the Government? Or did it
cause only a Devolution of it from him to another, as in the case of Death?


A I do partly understand what you mean, but know not well what to answer. I do
believe the Convention did understand it in one of these Senses but in whether
of the two I am not certain; and therefore cannot be positive in answering your
Question.


B. Then we must consider it in both Senses. First then, If by his Abdication
the Government was entirely dissolved, I grant we were not under the Obligation
of any Laws, but in the same original state of Freedom we were in before there
was any Government at all, or as if the whole Royal Line had been extinct even
in the most remo^e Branches of it, and consequently we might have al^ered the
Government to what Form we plea^ed, it being absolu^ely in our Power to set up
a new one, or to continue the former by ingrafting whom we pleased into the old
Stock Whether or not this was the opinion of any that were concerned in your
Convention I shall not dispute; only I must tell you. that among many other
Absurdities, there are two Things in it which I am confident you will hardly
agree to. First, That according to this Opinion, neither the Prince nor
Princess of O. had any better Right or Title to the Crown by virtue of their
Relation to King James than either you or I had: That all the Right they have
is solely owing to the Free Gift and Dona^on of the People who elected them to
that Dignity, while in the mean time they might have chose any other Perion
they pleased. Some indeed are very positive that it was so, but others stickle
as hard against it: And besides that, it is far from being the Opinion of the
Persons themselves that have taken the Government upon them; for it cannot be
expected that ever they will content themselves with such a precarious Title as
that comes to. But, Secondly, there is yet a worse Thing in it; for if that
Opinion be true, there was such an essential Error and Defect in the Election
of these Persons, as makes the Choice it self void and null. The Case is
plainly thus: If the Government was entirely dissolved and a new one to be set
up, it was but reasonable that every particular Man should have a Vote in it;
for since by my submitting to a Government, when I am absolutely Master of my
self (which I must be allowed to be in the Case now supposed) I do divest my
self of all the Right I have, and transfer it by way of Trust upon the
Governor, at least so far as the Ends and Exigencies of the Government shall
require it, and that so unreservedly that I can never revoke it afterward, it
was absolutely necessary that it be done by my own free and express Consent:
For there can be no Reason why one Man's Right should be given away by another
Man's Vote, except there be some positive Law for it, which is not at all
plea^able in this Case, because all such Laws must be supposed to be ipso facto
dissolved with the Government. This being granted, it will necessarily follow,
that your electing or promoting the Prince and Princess of O. to that Supremacy
of Government which they now hold, was utterly void. because the greater part
of the Nation were so far from giving their free and express Consent to it,
that it was not so much as required of them.


A. There is no way for a whole Nation to give their Consent in such cases, or
in things of that Nature, but by their Representatives, which accordingly they
did; for the Convention were the Representa^ives of the Nation.


B. That they pretended to be so I grant, but that they really were so cannot
be affirmed in any tolerable Sense; for the far greater part of the Nation were
nor at all consulted in this Matter, nor gave them any Authority or Commission
to represent them; and therefore what was done by the one, cannot in any Sense
be interpreted to be the Act or Deed of the other. If it be replied, That a
great part of the Nation are not qualifyed by the Laws of the Land (...) choose
any Repre^entative; I answer, that in the Case now supposed these Laws could
^ot bar any Man's Vote, because if the Government it felt was entirely
dissolved, all those Laws whereby particular Persons are either capacitated or
incapacitated to choose Representatives, must needs have expired with it. Since
then it is evident, First, That no Government can be imposed upon Men that are
absolutely free, without their Consent: And Secondly, That in setting up of
this, the Consent of the greater part of the Nation was not so much as asked:
It must necessarily follow. that what was done in the Convention is in it self
^old, as being destitute of competent Authority.


A. Whatever Irregularities there may have been in the Proceedings of the
Convention, supposing King James's Abdication to have been a total Dissolution
of the Government. I shall not much concern my self to vindicate them, because
I am apt to believe there are not many of that Opinion. But what fault do you
find in them supposing that Abdication to be understood in that other Sense you
mentioned.


B. The other Sense of it is this, that notwithstanding King James's
Abdication, the whole ancient Frame of the Government was lest entire, only he
had departed from his Right to it, and made way for another to succeed him, as
if he had been removed by a natural Death. That (I must confess) is a great
deal more plausible than the other, and yet if you take it even in that Sense,
it will be impossible to vindicate what the Convention have built upon it: For
if King James did really depart from his Right by leaving of the Kingdom, that
Right must immediately have devolved upon the next in Succession, alter the
same manner as if he had been na^urally dead. It will ^ot at all be proper here
to dispute who was the next in Succession, for that would take us clear off
from the Subject we are now upon. Let it be supposed that the Birth of a Prince
of Wales was a mere imposture, and that the Princess of Orange was the (...)
undoubted (...) to King James. even n^ that case I know not what the Convention
ha^ to do but only to declare so much, and immediately to proclaim her; for
they could not pretend to give her that which was already her (...). As for
their declaring the T^one to be vacant and making an Inter-regn^m, it was no
better than Non sense: For however ^^quently that may occur in Elective
Kingdoms, it can have no place in those that are absolutely Hereditary, as ours
most certainly is; it being a Maxim in our Law, That the King cannot dye, and
the Reason of it is, because his whole Right and Title does immediately upon
his Dissolution devolve upon the next Successor, so that there can be no such
thing as a Vacancy so long as there is any of the Royal Line in being. Indeed
if the Person that is next in Succession be at some considerable Distance,
there may be some interruption in the Regular Administration of the Government,
but to think that the Throne it self can be vacant is absurd, unless you will
call it vacant when the King is nor actually upon it, in which Sense I grant
there is a Vacancy every Day. Having thus declared the Throne to be vacant,
(which was the same thing as if they had set up this Bill over their Door, Here
are three Kingdoms to be Let, Enquire within and you may be further informed)
the next thing they did was the making an humble Tender or Proffer of them to
the Prince and Princess of Orange which they, of their great Goodness and
Condescension, were most graciously pleased to accept of. I do not know whether
she made them a Curtesy or not, but I am sure he had Reason to make them a Leg.
The Truth is, I believe they did neither one nor ^^other: Nor she the former,
because she got no more than what she thought was her due: Nor he the latter,
because it is not the Custom of his Country. But, in good earnest, what could
the Convention mean by disposing of the Crown after that manner? Or by what
authority could they pretend to meddle with it? Men may dispose of their own
how they will, but to take the same Liberty with what does not belong ^o them,
is a little too offi^ious. Had the Government been dissolved, it had been
properly their Business, with the Consen^ and Approbation of their Principals,
to have set up another: Bu^ since their was no such D^ssolution, but only a
pretended Cession or Resignation, there was no Occasion for them to interpose
any farther than by acquainting and proclaiming the next Heir. Had they done no
more than so, they had acted (however disagreeably to the true ^^ate of the
Case, which was far different from what they would needs make it, yet) suitably
enough to their own Pretenses: But you very well know, they were so far from
containing themselves within these bounds, that having declared the Throne
vacant, they not only took care to have that Vacancy supplied, but did Join
such a manner as was utterly inconsistent which the Fundamental Laws of
Succession in this Kingdom, than which nothing of that nature ought to be held
more sacred or more inviolably observed. You cannot well be ignorant of what I
mean; the breaches they have made in the Royal Line, and the Case they have
taken to defraud the Right Heir, being plain enough to be seen: First, in
setting aside the Prince of Wales, and all that happen to descend of him. to
make way for the Princess of Orange And, Secondly, In settling the Crown upon
the Prince her Husband, not only during her Life, but also during his own,
however long he may happen to survive her, which is evidently to the Prejudice
of the Princess Anne and her Heirs. Such bold and daring Encroachments on the
Sacred Right of Succession had need be supported by very solid Reasons,
especially when they are enacted by a Law. Perhaps you will say, you do not
doubt but they had very good Reasons for what they did, or at least that they
themselves thought so, else they would never have attempted it. Well, It may
perhaps be so: However, I think they were very (...) in not publishing and
declaring them to the World, as a certain Reverend Doctor did his Reasons, for
if they had, it is a chance but some body or other would have been so saucy as
to be nibbling at them, and to answer them as they did the Doctor's; it being
no unusual thing for the same Reasons to be accounted weak and silly when once
they are Published, which wh^lest they were conceale^ were presumed to be very
folld a d^^ubstantial. On this Consideration that honorable Convention has
lose us ^o much in the dark, as to (...) Grounds and Reasons of their
Proceedings, that we must even satisfy our selves with the general Account,
That what they did, was for several weighty Reasons best known to themselves.

Thus I have performed in some good measure what I undertook, having
considered, examined, and (I hope) disproved the several Pretenses on which
they of your Party endeavor to found the loss of King James's Right. I have
made it appear there is not one of them but what is both illegal and
unreasonable: And if so, it will necessarily follow that his Right and Title is
yet still good, and consequently that whoever else does assume it is a Plain
Usurper, and all that support him in it, Rebels against their Lawful King. What
Replies you thought fit to make I have fully answered, what Questions you have
proposed I have resolved, what Objections you have urged I have resuted, and
given such a plain, true and inartificial account of things, that I am
confident there is no considering man, that is void of Prejudice, but will rest
fully satisfied of the goodness of the Cause I have undertaken.


A. I must confess you have made it appear a little better to me than hitherto
it has done. I am not at all ashamed to grant, that you have said several
Things in the Vindication of King James's Right, which I cannot pretend to
answer, nor will be so disingenuous as not to own that there is a great deal of
Reason in what you have urged against that of K. W. But withal I must tell you,
it is not very probable that what you have said on either Side will be to any
good purpose now: For though I grant, that if these Thing had been duly weighed
and seriously considered at first, they might have gone nigh to have prevented
these Measure you so much complain of, which, for ought I know, had been very
happy for us; yet i^ cannot in Reason be expected, that they will be of
sufficient Force to unravel them again, or to put us upon undoing what has been
done, nor can I be convinced that is were fit they should. No, it is too late to
think of that now. Things are already g^ne so far, that now there is a
Necessity of continuing them as they are: For though King James's Right were
every way as good, and K. W's. as bad as you pretend, yet, as matters now
stand, the dispossessing of the latter and re-inthroning of the former would,
in all appearance, expose the Nation to so many Dangers and Inconveniences,
that all thoughts of that must be for ever laid aside.


B. I find you are now reduced to your last Shift, which gives me some Hopes
that this Dispute will soon be at an end, for I am confident you will be less
able to defend this than any of the former. The Truth, is I am apt to believe
if you had seriously considered it you would not have so much as mentioned it,
for however plausibly it may be urged in point of Policy, it is so grossly
faulty in other Respects, that there is no good man but would be ashamed of it,
and that especially for these two Reasons. First, Because it is Irreligious.
And, Secondly, Because it is most Unreasonable and Disingenuous. First, I say,
That to own K J's Right ^o the Crown to be still good, and consequently that of
K. W. to be no better than usurped, and yet to plead a necessity of supporting
the latter in opposition to the former, because of the Dangers and
Inconveniences that a new Revolution would bring along with it, is most
apparently Impious and Irreligious. Let it be granted, that the Evils and
Inconveniences that would attend the restoring of King James were every way as
great as is pretended, and likewise on the other Hand, that there were not only
no Inconveniences, but indeed a great many Advantages in continuing the
present Establishment. or in supporting K W's Title; I say, let all hat be
granted, which I am sure is more than I am bound to do, or you in reason can
demand, yet even that can never justify your Cause; for so long as it is
confessed that K. James (however dispossessed) has still the true Right to the
Crown, and that the other's Title is grounded only on a wrong Suprosition of
the contrary; the best that can be made of your Plea, even when thus favorably
slated, is, that it is a doing of Evil that Good may come, which is expressly
condemned in the Gospel. That it is a very great Iniquity to defraud or deprive
one of his Right I presume no Man will question, it being generally accounted a
Sin of so heinous a nature, that the Party offending can expect no Absolution
without making Restitution, at least if it lies in his Power. I grant there are
several Considerations which in some Cases may extenuate the Guilt of it, but
that any Consideration can justify it or make it cease to be a Sin, is
inconsistent with the Principles of that Religion which we profess. It Is true,
it seldom falls but that when an Injury is done to one Man, it tends to the
Advantage o^ another, perhaps of a great many: Nay, it may to fall out that the
Advantages thereby gained on the one Hand are really greater and more extensive
than the (...) on the other: And yet even in that case i^ cannot be denied but
that there is a great deal of injustice in doing that Injury, because there can
be no reason given why one Man should be oppressed of purpose to make way for
the Advancement of another, or that on man should reap Benent at another man's
Cost and Charges, at least not without his own Consent or some valuable
Consideration. All such Acts of Violence, however circumstantiated, or whatever
Advantages may accrue to others by them, whatever specious Pretenses there may
be to excuse, of whatever Laws were framed o^ purpose to ju^ti^y and support
them, are no better than (...) Oppression, which is one o^ those crying Sins,
which, sooner or later, will certa^nly draw down the Judgments of A^mighty God
up on the Head of those that are guilty of them: And he that ventures to (...)
of these, for the Sake of any temporal Advantages, runs a greater Risque than
in all probability he is aware of; for however we may labor either to
extenuate the former or magnify the latter, there can be no Comparison between
them. Since then you have been guilty of such notorious Injustice, in depriving
your King of his undoubted Right, and taking away he privilege of Birthright
from that innocent Prince his Son, and all that shall happen o be descended of
him; and all this for the avoiding of some Inconveniences, or the obtaining of
some temporal Advantages which yet are for the most but imaginary and
pretended, how can you expect to escape the Divine Vengeance? or with what
tolerable Confidence can you assume ^o your selves the Profession o^ Religion?
If such daring Impieties, such public Afronts to Religion, and such a manifest
Contempt as well of Divine as of Human Laws, should happen to go unpunished, we
might even bid adieu to all Religion, for that (...) were a sufficient
Demonstration, that it is good for nothing else but only to keep Fools in awe.


A. What you accuse those of who were actually instrumental in dethroning of
King James, and con^erring his Right on the Prince of O., I am nor at all
concerned in. I am apt enough to believe they did an ill Thing, but let them
set to that. All I plead is, that Things are so far gone, that there is a
Necessity of continuing them as they are: For however unlawful it might be to
deprive K. James of his Right at first, yet things are now brought to that
pass, that the keeping of him out is, for several weighty Consideration very
advisable; insomuch as a great many who were so far from having any hand in the
former that they did condemn it, do yet justify the latter, and think
themselves obliged to contribute all that lies in their power toward it.


B. I know they do; but for what Reasons or upon what Grounds I am not able to
divine: For if it be a Sin to deprive a man of his Right, whoever does
designedly and intentionally contribute toward the Continuance of it, o^
landers his being restored to it, must needs be accessory to the Guilt of it,
unless a Sin ceases to be a Sin by it is being continued in, than which a
greater Absurdity cannot well b^^imagined. It cannot be denied, but that there
was a great deal of Injustice in depriving King James of his Right, and it must
likewise be acknowledged, that the Sin of Injustice, however we may con^^mn it
in others, or be sorry for it in our selves. yet is not pardonable without
making Restitution as far as hes in our Power: And if so, how they that either
preach or pray against such a Restitution, or any manner of way oppose or set
themselves against it, can clear themselves from the Guilt of that Sin, I am
not able to comprehend; and as little do I understand what you mean by saying
that it is now come to that, that there is a Necessity of Things continuing as
they are. For my part, I can see no such Necessity, nay I am very well assured
there is none but what is of your own making, and so you cannot fairly plead it
in your Defense. But I suppo^e, By the Necessity of continuing things as they
are, you mean no more but the Convenience of so doing, and the Inconveniences
that you pretend would follow upon the contrary, which as they are far from
amounting to a Necessity, so they have been sufficiently answered already, by
showing you, That the Advantages arising from the Continuance of the Government
now established, and the Inconveniences that must attend the restoring of King
James, though they were real as indeed they are not, can never justify such a
manifest Injury, as the excluding of a good Title and substituting of a bad one
in it is Room, without you can first prove, that it is lawful to do Evil that
Good may come, which I hope you will not undertake to do.

In the next place. This last Plea of yours, as it is plainly impious and
irreligious, so it is most unreasonable and disingenuous. This cannot better be
made appear, than by considering, First, The Advantages that we may propose to
our selves by continuing the present Government: And Secondly, The
inconveniences that threaten us if we should restore the former. First then,
For the Advantages which it is pretended we enjoy by the present Government, and
may confidently promise our selves upon the Continuance of it, over and above
what we enjoyed under the former Government, or might reasonably be expected by
the restoring of it (for that must be added, else they are impertinently
urged.) As for these Advantages, I say, I should be very glad to know what they
are. I am sure they glad to know what they are. I am sure they had need be very
great to support so bad a Cause; but I am afraid that however industriously
your Party strives to vindicate and magnify them, when they come to be
examined, like over-stretch'd Cloth they will miserably shrink in the wetting.
At first indeed it was very confidently given out by some of you, and as
foo^ishly believed by others, that by the Courage and Conduct of your mighty
Hero we should conquer France, humble the Pride of that losty Tyrant, rear the
Prey out of his (...) Jaws: And in a Word, do such glorious Explo^^s as should
render us Famous all over the World, and eternize our M^mory to all Future
Ages: But the Noise of that is now pre^y well over; for after the lo^s of a
great deal both of the Blood and Wealth of the Nation, both spent with equal
Prodigality, and irrecoverably thrown away, we now begin to find that instead
of getting more we are not able to keep what we had: Witness the Loss of Mons,
Namur and Charleroy, in the Sight of all the Forces we could unite, and your
invincible Champion at the Head of them. Instead of conquering France, we now
begin to talk a little more modestly of making a Descent into it: and though
your little Intelligencers, whose Business it is to retail the Lies and
Sham-Stories of graver fort of Statesmen told us last Year, what a terrible
Consternation the Noise of this Descent had caused among the French; yet it
appeared afterward, by their sending away their Grand Fleet, of purpose to
invite it and make way for it, that they were more willing it should go forward
than we our selves were. Your King indeed had the Vanity to say then, that he
himself would head it, but it quickly appeared he had so little Stomach to it,
that a great many are now of Opinion, that he will scarce ever attempt a
Descent any more, ^ill he makes one for good and all, where few will care to
follow him. I suppose then I may take it for granted, that our being engaged in
such an expensive War, from which we can see no Prospect of coming off with any
Credit, is none of those Advantages that render the present Government so
desirable. What is it then tha^ so much endears it to us? Is it because we are
thereby secured in our Liberties and Properties?


A. Yes, that I reckon is the chief Thing, especially if you join Religion with
them, which indeed ought to be dearer to us than both the other. The securing
of these (however lightly you may esteem of it) is certainly one of the
grea^est Blessings that any People is capable of: And perhaps there is no
Nation in the World more happy in that Respect than we are, if we did but know
how to put a just Value upon it: Which Happiness we owe in a very great
measure, if not wholly, to the present Government; and therefore we should be
both very ungrateful to it, and very much wanting to our selves, if we should
not endeavor all that lies in our power to support it.


B. That our Religion, our Liberties and Properties are very precious Things
and ought to be very dear to us, I very easily grant, and do as readily own,
that by our Laws there is very good Provision made for the Security of them,
which I am so far from esteeming lightly of, that perhaps I put as great a
value upon it as you or any Man else; but that we owe that Security to the
present Government I am so far from granting, that I wonder any Man should have
the Confidence to assert it: for it is very well known that more Bills for the
good of the Subject, and the redressing of public Grievances, have been
rejected and denied the Royal Assent since the late Revolu^ion, than in several
preceding Reigns, witness the la^e Remonstrance of the House of Commons to your
King, so ridiculously baffled by him, and so shamefully s^eak'd from by
themselves; which rejecting of Bills, (considering the prodigious Taxes that
have been granted) all wise Men are amazed at, being doubtful in whether of the
two they are the more unhappy, a Parliament that gives so much, or a King that
gives so little. But that is not all, for besides that the Government has more
consulted its own Security than any good of the Subject in all the Laws that
have been made since it took place I must tell you it has not been over exact
in the observance of former Laws; for what can be more destructive of the
Liberty of the Subject, or of those Laws that have been formerly made for the
securing of it, than the confining and imprisoning of them upon mere Jealousies
and Suspicions? Which how frequently and arbitrarily it has been done by the
present Government I need not tell you, there having been more Instances of
that Nature since the late Revolution than ever was formerly known, excepting
only in the like Cases of Usurpation. What Snares have been and daily are laid,
what Sham-Plots invented, and what false Informations as greedily received as
maliciously contrived, and the Authors of them privately coun^enanc'd and
encouraged, and all to find some Pretense to deprive Men of their Liberties, if
not also of their Lives, it were a most shameful thing to relate. In a Word, as
things are now ordered, all those ancient Laws (...) which the Liberty of the
Subject is grounded are not worth a Rush, the bare Warrant of a Secretary of
State being sufficient to supersede them all, for what Man is there who by
Virtue of that is not liable to be taken up, thrown into Prison, and there
confined during Pleasure, without ever being brought to a Trial, or so much as
informed of what or by whom he is accused? Thus it is in England, and in our
neighboring Kingdom of Scotland it is yet a great deal worse; for there there
is such Havoc made of the Liberties and Properties of the Subject that the
like was never known: For what by that new State-Invention of obliging Men to
perjure themselves, and what by other Arbitrary Proceedings, Things are there
brought to that pass that I believe in a short time the whole Nation will be
imprisoned, except Fools and Knaves, the one because they have not so much
Sense as to understand an Oath, and the other, because let it be never so
unlawful they have not so much Honesty as to refuse it: This being the true
state of Things. instead of reckoning the Enjoyment of our Liberties and
Properties, an Advantage that we owe to the present Government, it may be much
more truly said that we never held them so precariously, or that they never
were so much at the Mercy of the Government as they are at present. And as for
our Religion, which we make so much Noise about, I doubt it will be found in no
better Security than the former, or if it be, I am afraid it will scarce ever
thrive the better for it: For we must consider, that though Religion is a very
precious Thing, yet withal it is a very nice and tender Thing, and had rather
suffer or be left to shift for it self than owe its Security ^o any unlawful
Means, such as are inconsistent with its Principles, or may any way bring a
Reproach upon it. That there may be unlawful Means used for the Preservation of
Religion, and many times are used is most certain, unless you will say that the
Sacredness of Religion consists in justifying every thing that is done for its
Sake, than which nothing can be more absurd; And it is no less certain on the
other hand, that the Means you have used for that (...) are such; for if the
dethroning of Kings and defrauding Men of their Right be not unlawful, I know
nothing can deserve that Name. These Things you have done for the Sake of
Religion, and by that Means have brought such a Stain and Reproach upon it that
can never be wiped off. Certainly it had been a great deal better to have
entrusted God Almighty with the Preservation of it, whose peculiar Care it is,
and to have chose rather to have suffered with it if so the Will of God had
been; for that in all Ages has proved the surest way both to preserve and
propagate Religion, and would at least have kept it pure and undefiled till
better Times: Whereas you by taking the Work out of God Almighty's Hands, and
rescuing Religion out of pretended Dangers by such means as are utterly
inconsistent with its Principles, have most basely sullyed and depraved it. You
may see in 2 Samuel 6.6, and 7. what befell Uzzah for his indiscreet touching of
the Ark, though it was to save it from tottering and have reason to be afraid
of the same Fate, since by your indiscree^ Zeal in offering to rescue Religion
by unjustifyable Means, instead of preserving you have most horribly prolan'd
it. But that is not all, for besides that, you have done a very ill Thing for
the Sake of Religion, I do not see how you have preserved it at all, or that it
is in any better Security now than formerly, but rather in much more danger.
Pray, How do you like the Reformation of Religion in Scotland? Has not the
present Government turned out the whole Order of Episcopacy there and all the
Regular Clergy, though many of them were willing to comply with it, and had
actually submitted to it? Had King James attempted such a Thing, it might in
some measure have excused his Subjects revolting from him, but you know he
never did: No, all that can be objected against him concerning his invading of
our Religion and Properties comes very short of that: And yet he must be called
the Destroyer of our Religion, and the other the Restorer and Preserver of it.
Good God! How partial and disingenuous are Men when once engaged in the Defense
of a bad Cause! But in good earnest, is it now come to that, that the
abolishing of Episcopacy is become a necessary Means for the Preservation of
Religion? If so, it is time for our Bishops to look to themselves, for I
suppose it is no unreasonable Conjecture to affirm that what is thought a
necessary Expedient for the Preservation of Religion in one pace, may in time
be judged to be proper in another.


A. What was done in Scotland in abolishing Episcopacy and setting up
Presbytery, was not by an Arbitrary Power assumed by the King himself, but by
Act of Parliament, and at the Request of the generality of the Nation; and
therefore if there was any thing amiss in it, it is not to be imputed to him.
Besides the Church of Scoland and that of England are so different in their
Constitution, that what is a proper Expedient for the Preservation of Religion
in the one, may b^ very improper in the other.


B. That what was done in Scotland was by Act of Parliament I grant, but that
it was at the Request of the generality of the Nation I deny; for I am very
well assured, that the greater and better part of the Nation are utterly
against it: That the Presbyterian Govern and Clergy are m^erly obtruded upon
them against their Consent. But what though it was done by Act of Parliament,
is it ever the more justifyable for that? Is it not the ^ame thing to be under
an Arbitrary Parliament, as under an Arbitrary King? Or has the one any better
Right to domineer over Men's Consciences, or to invade their Religion and
Properties, than the other has? But I suppose you men^ion that only to take off
the O^^um of it from the King and to make a Difference between what he has
done, and what King James attempted to do: But I must tell you it will not
serve your Turn, not only because your King (having a Negative Voice there as
well as here) might have refused to have passed that Bill, nay, by his own
Declaration was obliged to refuse it; but also because it is very well known
what crafty Ways and indirect Means were used to pack a Parliament for that
very Purpose, which is the same Grievance we complained of under King James,
only with this Difference, that the one has actually done what the other did
but in vain attempt to do; for you cannot choose but remember, that the chief
Thing objected against him was, not so much his endeavoring to w^^ken and
undermine the established Religion, by giving a free Toleration to all Sorts of
Dissenters, for that was looked on as a thing that would be of no long
Continuance, as being grounded only on the fall Bottom of his dispensing
Power: The great Grievance was, that he used indirect Means to get such a
Parliament as would make it a Law; which, whether true or fall of him, is true
enough of your King in this matter of abolishing Episcopacy, and turning out
the whole Clergy o^ Scotland or then Freehold to beg their Bread: For the
Estates were conv^n^d there merely by virtue of Circulatory Letters from the P
or O. w^enas yet he had no manner of Authority there, by reason whereof several
Counties sent no Commissioners at all, not would be present at the choosing of
any: Only some few dis^affected (...) the Opportunity, and cho^^^ one another,
by which means they made (...) a Thing which they called a Convention o^
Estates, which Convention, after they had him turned him into a King, was
afterward by him turned into a Parl^ament; and that was it that turned out the
Bishops, and planice a Parcel of old musty Presbyt^^ats in them ^^om, who,
however (...) they may be to cant in a Conven^ci^, are so far (...) being fit
^o govern a Church, that I am confident there is no (...) man would ^o much as
entrust them with teaching his Childred their Catechisms. But my (...) is no
with then, but with the King and Parliament that empowered them, and (...)
there was such a notorious juggle, o^ such indirect Means used to pack a
Pa^liament, I may very safely leave to the Judgment of any reasonable Man. From
Scotland let us return to England, and consider what better Security we have
for our Religion here than formerly, You say, the Constitution of these two
Churches are so different, that what is expedient for the Preservation of
Religion in one, would not at all be proper in the other, and from thence would
conclude, that though the Episcopal Clergy have been turned out there, yet they
are in no Danger here. I do not much care if I grant you all that, for it will
neither be a Prejudice to my Cause nor an Advantage to yours. That there is a
great Difference between the Constitutions of these two Churches now, whatever
there was formerly, is most certain; yet that does not hinder but that there
may again be an Ass^milation made between them, whether by bringing theirs up
to our Model, or ours down to theirs, I shall not dispute. I shall like wise
allow it to be probable enough, that our Episcopal Clergy here are in no danger
of being turned out; but withal I can tell you, that they do not owe their
Security either to the nature of their Constitution, or to any Love your King
has for them, but only to the mighty Zeal they show to his Service, their ready
Compliance with whatever he commands. the ^ul^om Flattery they use in their
very Sermons. and the many little Arts and servile Ways by which they court ^^s
Favor, wherein they have out-^iva^d the very Phanaticks themselves. By these
Mea^s they stand firm enough; and yet I cannot forbear telling you, that our
Religion is never the better secured for that neither: For it is plain enough,
that these Men mind themse^ves so much more than it, that I can see ^o
Necessity but that the one may stand while the other falls. But now we are
talking o^ the great Obligation the present Government has laid upon us by
securing our Religion, Pray be so kind as to let me know what Religion you
mean. I hope you mean that which was established by Law, namely, the Church of
England, at least you ought to mean so, for that was it that was thought to
(...) in greatest danger in King James's time. As for the Pre^byterians, or any
other Sect (...) of Protestants, you very well know that King James was very
kind to then, gave them ^o much Encouragement, and so far stretel^d his
Prerogative to ease them from the Penal Laws, that it was one o^ the ch^e^
Objections against him. It he was unkind to any it was only to those of the
Church of England; and therefore since you magnify the Security our Religion is
in now, in Opposition to the former Reign, in all probability you must mean
that of the Church of England.


A. I do so, and am very confident you will not deny, but that it is in a much
more safe and flourishing Condition under the present Government, than it was
under the former.


B. I am afraid it is not, but that rather it loses ground every day. It Is
true, King James suspended one of her Bishops, and imprisoned Seven more
whether legally or not I shall not now dispute; however they still enjoyed
their Revenues; whereas your King has turned the like number out of H^use and
Home. It is likewise true, that King James by suspending the Penal Laws turned
loose against her the whole Herd of Dissenrers, who like the Canaanites to the
Children of Israel, were as Thorns in her Sides; and ha not your King done the
same? He nor only continued the same Toleration which K. James which was so
much cried out against for granting, but has since enacted it by a Law; so that
now the Sectaries are in the same Condition, or stand upon the same Foundation,
with the Church of England. In a word, the three grand Enemies of our Church
are Popery, Phanaticism and Atheism. If the Government has taken any effectual
Course to preserve her from these three, I grant she is very much beholding to
it. But whoever enquires into it will find the Case very much otherwise: For
the Heat of their Zeal to secure her from the first, has so far transported
them, that they have lest her quite open to the other two, to prey upon her at
their Pleasure. As for the Phanaticks, I have for many Years looked upon them
as more dangerous Enemies to the Church of England than the Papists themselves
are; equally irreconcilable, but much more restless and spightful. And if
sometimes she has scarce found her self safe from their Insults, or secure from
their Incursions, notwithstanding their being fenced off by Penal Laws, she
must be in much greater danger of being overrun by them now that Hedge is
broken down. And as for Atheism, what a Door has been opened to that by the
late Revolution, and what Numbers have thronged in at it, does but too
evidently appear; which (however reproachful to Religion, or however grievous
to all good Men, yet) is not much to be wondered at: For, alas! when Men that
are otherwise not weary well grounded in Religion see it abused to such ill
Purposes, even to cloak the greatest Crimes: When they see Children usurp their
Father's Crown, and force him for the Safety of his Life to seek shelter among
Strangers: When instead of opposing it, they see the whole Clergy of a National
Church christen such an unnatural Villainy, pray for the Success and
Continuance of it, father it upon Divine Providence, and crave God Almightty's
Protection to it, and all those turned out to starve or beg their Bread that
refuse to join with them in it: I say, when Men that are otherwise not very
well grounded in Religion, see it prostituted and abused to such vile Purposes,
by those who pretend to be the most zealous Professors of it, how can it
otherwise be expected but that they will conclude, that all Religion is a
Trick. Thus have you laid such a S^umbling-Block in the Way, as has undoubtedly
occasioned the Fall of some Thousands, who might otherwise have proved good
Christians, and so far hardened them against oil belief of Religion, that it is
impossible to persuade them that you your selves believe it: And though I grant
that will not be sufficient to excuse them, yet I must tell you it will fall
heavy upon those that were the Occasion of it. But besides the Door that has
been opened by the late Revolution for Phanaticism and Atheism to break in upon
the Church, it does plainly enough appear, that the present Government has done
what lies in it is Power quite to unchurch her; for by the late Act of
Parl^ament, in turning our several of her organical Members by a mere
Laydeprivation, and the present Clergy's submitting to it and owning the
Validity of it, by acknowledging those An^^-Bishops that were substituted in
their Room, the very Foundation of the Church is altered from the old English
Constitution to a new-model'd Erastian Dutch Bottom: That is to say, absoluteat
the Mercy of the State, and wholly dep^^ding upon it. not only (...) respect of
her temporal bu^ likewise of her spiritual Power (...) By which (...) England
is so fat (...) being in any better Circumstances or more Security now than
formerly, that she is reduced to a worse stare there being at present no
National Church in the World in a more pre^ations Condition. But letting that
pass. I do not see any effectual Course has been taken for the keeping out of
Popery neither, though that is the only Thing you have to boast of; for it is
the Opinion of a great many, that more have been proselyted to that Religion
since the late Revolution, than during the Reign of King James, and that upon
better and more solid Grounds; it being probable enough that they who left us
then did it for their Interest, whereas they that leave us now (...) scarce be
supposed to do it upon any other Principle than that of Conscience, being loath
to venture themselves any longer in a Church which they believe has so grossly
prevaricated, and so shamefully receded from her former Principles. But the
plain Truth of the matter is, that both you and they are in a Mistake, for that
Church which this Government has established, consisting of the complying
Clergy and those that join in Communion with them, is not the Church of
England, I mean, it is not the same with that which was formerly so called, but
a new Establishment diff^ren^ from it. The true Church of England consists only
of those that constantly adhere to her avowed Principles of Loyalty and
Non-Resistance, that is to say, those Reverend Fathers the Bishops and others
of the Clergy, who out of Conscience of their Duty to their true and lawful
King, most injuriously dispossessed of his Right, refuse to swear Allegiance to
any other in Opposition to him. These, together with those that join in
Communion with them, are all the poor Remains that are left of the once so
famous Church of England; and how the present Government has treated and d^ily
does treat these, I need not tell you, for you your self cannot choose but
know, that they are persecuted with more Severity than the Roman-Catholciks
themselves.

Having thus far considered the Advantages you boast of by first setting up and
still continuing the present Government, and found that there is indeed nothing
in them but Noise and Froth, it only now remains, that we briefly examine the
vast Mischiefs and Inconveniences which (as you give out) must needs attend
the restoring of K. James, wherein I doubt not but we shall meet with no less
D^singenuity than in the former. The M^^chiefs pretended are no less than
Popery and Slavery, as if the Restoring of K. James were utterly inconsistent
both with our Religions and our Liberties. These Mischiefs you aggaravate with
so much Art, declaim against with so much Heat and Zeal and skrew Men's Fears
and Jealousies of them to such a Height, that rather than fail of frigh^ning
them out of their Duty by such Means, you endanger the frightning of them out
of their Wits. I can assure you. I am as little in Love with either of these
Things as you your self are, and should be as much grieved to see the Nation
reduced to a Necessity of submitting to them; but that the Restoration of K.
James will reduce us to such a Necessry, I neither can be persuaded my self,
nor can I believe that any man else is, whatever he may pretend, unless he is
strangely biased. Indeed if he should return as an absolute Conqueror, purely
by the Power of the French King, even in spite of all the Opposition of his
own Subjects, I cannot deny, but that our Apprehensions of these Things might
be somewhat reasonable. In such a case no Man can tell how far our Rebellion,
so unreasonably begun and so obstinately persisted in, might exasperate and
transport him beyond the natural Meekness of his Temper: Though even in that
case I am apt enough to believe that his Resentments would be nothing such as
we have deserved. But the Truth is, there is so little Probability of any such
Thing, that we have not the least Fear or Apprehension of it; being very well
assured that neither he himself, nor any of his Subjects (however they may be
slandered) do so much as desire his being restored by any such Means, except we
our selves do force him to it by precluding all other Ways: For it cannot in
any reason be imagined but that he had rather come in by the Invitation and
Assistance of his own Subjects, than by any Foreign Power, the one being no
more than what we are boun^ to do. but the other so great a Favor that there
can scarce. be a Recompense made for it. And being it is very uneasy to one of
a generous Mind, to owe that to the Curtesy of another which he may otherwise
challenge as his Right, especially if he be in no Capacity of making any
suitable Return, we may very safely confide in this, that he will never choose
to owe his restoration to a Foreign Power^ unless by our Obstinacy we force him
to it: And indeed then we must even take what comes of it, and thank our selves
for it; ^or in such Case however severely we might be chastised, as ^none could
blame him, so none would pity us.


A. I perceive then you are for his coming in by the Invitation and Assistance
of his own Subjects, which though I grant it has not so much Terror in its
Looks as the former, would yet prove of a more mischievous Consequence than you
are aware of; for it cannot be imagined but that though some o^ his Su^jects
would be for it yet others would be against it, so that the best that could be
expected would e a Civil War, than which nothing can be more destructive And
beside, i^ aster such an Opposition he should prevail, what tolerable Security
can we have that he will not exercise his Authority more arbitrarily and
tyrannically then than ever?


B. Two Things are here objected against King James's coming in by the
Inv^^ation and Assistance of his own Subjects. First, That it would-occasion a
Civil War; But pray, what Necessity is there of that? If upon his Landing, all
his Subjects should declare for him, or so much as the better fort and g^eater
part of th^m^ which is the Thing I propose) there would be no Civil War in the
case, for whatever Opposition K W. and his Foreigners might make could not
properly fall under that Denomination. I grant it any considerable number of
his own native Subject, should take up Arms against him, and oppose him, it
were a Civil War indeed, but there is nothing more certain than that in such a
case they and not he are the Cause of it. What ever Mischief or Inconveniency
there may be in that, they themselves are the sole Authors of it, and by
Consequence the only Persons that are accountable for it. Supposing such a
Civil War were already begun, I hope you will grant me that the best way to put
an end to it were by one of the two opposite Parties laying down their Arms,
and whether of the two that should be, I think I may very safely refer to your
Judgment, presuming you will allow it to be more reasonable that they who fight
against their Lawful King should lay down their Arms than they that fight for
him: And if such a Party's laying down their Arms be the best expedient to put
an end to a Civil War, then certainly the best way to prevent such a War must
be their ceasing to take up such Arms, The other Thing hinted against King
James's Restoration, is the great probability that if ever he should recover
his Right again, after he has been so long and so injuriously dispostess'd of
it, he would be more arbitrary and illegal in the exercise of it than formerly,
at least that we can have no tolerable Security of the contrary. The plain
meaning o^ this Objection (however disguised to amuse unthanking Meny is no
more but this, that in Truth we have been so treacherous and basely injurious
to King James, that we very much question whether over he can pardon it; and
therefore sinoe we have carried ^n our Rebellion against him so far, our safest
way now is to go on with into the end of the Chapter. I shall not now dispute
what Ca^n^l Policy there may be in this Resolution, or in (...) way of a^g^ing,
but I am very well, assured (...) ^^utterly destitute o^ all Equity and Reason.
It Is true; there are some among us who not only did most ^raiterously be^^ay
him a^first, but also have so studiously opp^^ed him ever since, and so
maliciously let themselves against him, that I must confess they have no reason
to expect any Pardon: And for these Men to argue at that rate were somewhat
allowable; but why the Generality of far greater part of the three Nations, who
are not concerned neither in one nor t^other any further than by a bare
Compliance, which (however (...), yet) is so far from being unpardonable, that
in Cases of the same nature it scarce ever fall'^ of meeting with an Act of
Oblivion, even from less Gracious Princes than ours is; why these (I say)
should make use of the same Argument, embrace the same Interest with the other,
involve themselves in their Guilt, (...) and resolve to run the same Risque
with them, is perhaps the most unaccountable thing that ever was known. Can any
man reasonably think, that they who have no ground to doubt of their Prince's
Pardon, should oppose his Restoration merely for fear that he will not also
extend it to those that have no Reason to expect it? Is there any Necessity, or
so much as any appearance of Reason, that the gene, rality of a Nation, who by
the Cunning of some ill men have been betrayed and deluded into a Compliance
with their villainous Practices, should forfeit their assured hopes of Pardon,
by opposing the Return of their Lawful King, for no other end but to ^ave those
very Men, who have so basely betrayed and abused them, from the deserved
Punishment of their Crimes? I do not believe it will be possible for any man to
persuade them to that, for that were to make them as much Fools as hitherto you
have endeavored to make them Knaves; but it is to be hoped that will not so
easily be done. The Nation has had time enough to (...) upon what is past, and
to consider what will be their true Interest in time coming. It they will but
open their Eyes they cannot choose but see the vast Difference between our
present Circumstances under this unhappy Government, and what we may reasonably
expect upon the Restoration of the former. What have been the Fruits of the
late Revolution, o^ what have we reaped after a Se^d-time from which we were
made to hope to much? Indeed no other than we deserved and had Reason to
expect. The Scripture it self tells us, That what a man sows, the same shall be
also reap; and I am sure we have found it so. Had we sowed in Tears, we might
have expected to have reaped in Joy; but the Seasons are inverted, for having
wilfully neglected the former, we are justly disappointed of the latter. From
those Thistles and Thorns we had planted we expected to gather ^igs and Grapes,
and so indeed we have, but they are su^^ very sour ones that they have basely
set our Teeth on edge, and it is well if our Children escape., But why should I
in fist upon such a Melancholy Subject? The (...) War we are engaged in, which
has unprofitably consumed so much Treasure and Blood, the heavy Taxes that are
laid upon us, not only to fuslain it, but to support our impotent Allies and
keep them firm to us, the Ruin of our Trade, the prodigious Losses we have
received both by Sea and Land, the Poverty we are reduced to at Home, together
with the Reproach and Disgrace which we every where meet with abroad, all these
Things are so notorious, and the generality of the Nation so sufficiently
sensible of them, the it were needless for me to enlarge upon them. These are
the unhappy Circumstances we are now under, this the unfortunate Condition we
are reduced to by the present Government, and which is yet worse, we have not
the least Prospect of being delivered from the one, as long as the other
continues. This being the true state of our Condition, why should we shut our
Eyes and ^^indly oppose our selves against the only Remedy that is left, the
only Exped^ent by which al^ these Grievances may be redressed^? If you ask me
what that is; I answer, The restoring of our true and Lawiul King. Do not
pretend to be startled at it. for I am very confident, that however you may
dissemble it, neither you nor any Man else that seriously and impartially
considers Things, can otherwise choose but be convinced, that such a
Restoration in that manner as I urge it, that is, by the Invitation and
Assistance of his own Subjects, would quickly put an end to all these Miseries
we now groa^ under, and by degre^s restore us to the same happy and flourishing
Condition we formerly were in.

In order to this, the Things that can be most especially supposed necessary
are these, A considerable Abatement in ou^ Taxes, A firm and well-grounded
Peace with all out Neighbors, by which we may retrieve our Trade and Commerce,
and recover the vast Losses we have sustained, or if there must be a War, then
such a one as in all probability will (...) to the same End and produce the
same Effects. If you think I mean a War with the Dutch, and tell me it would be
very ungenerous to make War against them that now fight for us: I answer, They
do not fight for us; no, it is we that fight for them, and by that means secure
them in that very Trade and Commerce whereof they have basely supplanted us:
Yet even in that we may assure our selves nothing will be done without the
Consent and Concurrence of the great Council of the Nation It is likewise
necessary, that there should be a general Pardon or Act of Oblivion, by which
all Persons may be sufficiently assured. that they shall not be called to an
account for what they have hitherto done against their King, or at least if any
be excepted out of it, that they be but very few, and they expressly named. In
the next place, that there be good Provision made for the Security of our
Religion; and then lastly, that in the Administration of the Government for the
future, the King have a constant and exact Regard to the established Laws of
the Land, contenting himself with that Prerogative which those Laws allow him,
and carefully avoiding all arbitrary and illegal Encroachments on the Liberties
and Privileges of the Subject, and all such dangerous Innovations as were for
merly complained of.

These Things are all that can be supposed, necessary in order to put an end to
our present Miseries, and recover that happy and flourishing Condition we
formerly were in, and we may very confidently assure our selves that the
restoring of King James after the same manner I have mentioned will accomplish
them all. I must confess I see no reason why we should have the least doubt of
any of them but only this, that we have very ill deserved them; but as that has
been no Bar or Obstacle in other cases of the like nature, we have no reason to
apprehend it will be any in this. If you ask me what is the ground of my
Confidence, or what tolerable Security we can have for the performance of these
Things, I answer we have all the Security that either in Modesty can be
demanded, or in Reason be expected. Some of these Things I have mentioned,
namely our being eased of a great part of those Taxes we now lie under, and
either a well settled Peace, or a more advantageous and successful War than
that we are now engaged in, are so evidently dependent upon the Restoration of
our King, that if you do but suppose the one you cannot reasonably entertain
any doubt of the other: And as for the other Things mentioned, namely a General
Pardon, the securing of our Religion and governing according to Law, you very
well know that by most solemn and frequently repeated Promises and
Protestations in his several Declarations he has given us all the assurance of
these Things that in the present State of his Affairs he is capable to give;
nay more than that, if more (...) be, he offers to give us all reasonable
Security of it that we our Selves can demand. Perhaps you will say, that
considering his present Circumstances, you cannot safely rely upon any of his
Promises nor any other Security he can give, Well, allowing it were so, (which
ver I must tell you is extremely disingenuous in any (...) to a (...) partly
because if ever he did break his Promise to us formerly, it was far from being
in any such degree as you have pretended; and partly because every Man who at
any one time is not altogether so good as his Word. is not therefore to be
thought unworthy of Credit for ever after, unless you would banish all manner
of Credit out of tho World. But, (...) say, allowing the Case were as you
alledge^ that is, that all King James's Promises and Prostations can give us no
tolerable Assurance of these Things, yet I still contend that it is the most
unreasonable Thing in the World for any, Man to distrust the performance of
them: And my Reason is, because, if we seriously and impartially consider
Things, we shall find that besides the Obligation he lays upon himself by his
Promises for the Performance of these Things, there is such an indispensable
Obligation arising from the nature of the Things themselves, that we cannot so
much as suppose that he will neglect the Performance of them, without believing
at the same time, that he is more than mad or the most infatuated of all Men
living. He knows too well what his former Remissness in these Things has cost
him, to be guilty of the same again. The Trips and false Steps he formerly made
in the Administration of the Government have been so fatal ^o him, that if we
allow him but the Prudence of a Child that dreads the Fire which has already
burnt it, we cannot doubt but that he will carefully avoid them for the future.
But there is yet one Consideration more, 'which with all unprejudiced Persons
will put this matter beyond all Dispute, and that is, that he is now grown so
old, and by Crosses and Misfortunes so far worn out, that it is rather a wonder
that he has lived so long, than any ways probable that he can live much longer,
and that he leaves a young Prince to succeed him whom he loves with the
greatest Tenderness imaginable, and for whose Settlement he would gladly make
some lasting Provision, even at the expense of all that is most dear to him:
And since that cannot otherwise be done but by a faithful and exact Performance
of all these Things I have mentioned, and indeed of every Thing that can bind
and oblige us, How can any Man doubt of the Sincerity of his Intentions? Having
so dear a Pledge for the Performance of his Promises, what greater Security
could we wish? He cannot choose but know, that if he should break those solemn
Promises he now makes us, by violently invading either our Religion or our
Laws, however he himself might evade the Resentment of his so grossly abused
Subjects, it were impossible to prevent it is falling heavy upon that innocent
Prince that succeeds him. And therefore being his chiefest Care is to provide
for his Safety, and establish his Right, and that he himself cannot expect to
live so long as to see him in a Capacity to maintain it, but must of necessity
entrust him to the Fidelity and Affection of his Subjects; we may confidently
assure our selves he will be very tender of doing any thing that may reasonably
disoblige them. All that can be replied to this is, that this Consideration
ought to have had the same Influence upon him formerly, which yet we see it had
not: To which I answer that formerly he did not imagine that such light Escapes
could have so far exasperated his Subjects, as to cause such a general Revolt
and Rebellion against him, but now he is sufficiently sensible of it, and
consequently however little Influence it might have upon him then, (...) is but
reasonable to think it will have a great deal now. Indeed, had he never known
by experience the Temper of his Subjects, how jealous they are of their
Liberties and Privileges, and how apt to resent the least Encroachment upon
them, even against their Kings, or had he none to succeed him but those that
have disobliged him, nor any thing to care for after his Decease, you might
have some pretense for your Distrust. But you see the Case is very much
otherwise. He knows what he has to trust to if he should treat us otherwise
than well, he entru^^s us with a Prince who is dearer to him than his Life, on
both which Considerations we very confidently may assure our selves of all the
good usage we can reasonably expect,

Thus, Sir, I have given you an Account both of the pretended Advantages we
enjoy by K. W's Government, and the real Advantages we may reasonably hope for
by the Restoration of K. James. And because I see that of late you have made no
Reply to what I have said, I shall with it finish this Conference which though
it has lasted much longer than either I expected or at first intended, yet if
it has given you any manner of Satisfaction, I shall think both the Time and my
Pains very well employed.


A Sir, I do not only very heartily thank you for the Trouble you have been at,
but do likewise assure you, that what you have said has given me a great deal
of Satisfaction, and made a very deep Impression upon me. I am not at all
afraid but that the most material Points of it will for some time be very fresh
in my Memory, nor do I much question, but that by teriously reflecting upon
them, and comparing them with my former Sentiments, they will go nigh to finish
what they have already so sensibly begun. But that I may not any longer detain
you from your other Employments, I will now take my Leave of you, hoping you
will be so kind as to believe, that I am very much your Servant.


B. Sir, I am yours.


FINIS.

