LICENSED,

May 18. 1689.
Ireland's Lamentation: BEING A Short, but Perfect, Full, and True Account of
the Situation, Nature, Constitution and Product of IRELAND. With an Impartial
Historical Relation of the most Material Transactions, Revolutions, and
miserable Sufferings of the Protestants there, from the Death of King Charles
the Second, to the latter end of April, 1689.

The Time and Manner of the late King's Landing there: What Men, Moneys,
Shipping, Arms and Ammunition he brought with him. The Manner of his going up
and into Dublin: His Kneeling to the Host: Displacing all Protestants: The
Strength and Defeat of his Army, and what else is of Note.

To which is added, A Letter from a Lieutenant in the Irish Army, dated at
Dublin, May 7. with an Account of Affairs to that Time.

Written by an ENGLISH PROTESTANT that lately narrowly escaped with his Life
from thence.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. and sold by Rich. Janeway, in Queen's-Head Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to accept of a small Epistle to a small Treatise to inform you,
that though it be short, yet the most absolute and true Account hitherto
published, of the miserable and deplorable Condition and Suffering of the
Protestants of Ireland, since the Death of King Charles the 2d; and that there
is nothing Material omitted which the Author could call to memory, having
nothing else to collect it from, being forced to flee for England to secure his
Life, and leave his Books, and very Notes, and whatever else he had, to the
Mercy of the Devourers. And be no less assured thou will find nothing here but
what every one that comes from thence will confirm, as far as it may reach
their several Abodes. And so wishing thee more Comfort in Reading, than the
Author had in knowing, bid thee farewell, till such further Account comes to his
Hands as he can certify for like Truth with these.

An Impartial historical Relation of all the most Material Transactions,
Revolutions, and Miserable Sufferings of the Protestants in Ireland, from the
Death of King Charles the Second, to the latter end of April, 1689.
IRELAND has been, and still is even by some Writers reputed a Barbarous and
most Heathenish Place: And indeed I believe it was so once, and England also;
but all such as have been there, and rightly understood the Country of late,
must (if impartial and unprejudiced) own it to be far otherwise, and indeed a
Place of most excellent Government and Piety, and much like that of England.

Ireland is an Island environed with the Sea, and the most Western of Europe,
lying between the Latitude of 51 and 56 Degrees North; and Westward from
Holy-Head in Wales about 14 Leagues; and from the South-West part of Scotland 8
or 9 Leagues; and is much more temperate than England, cooler in Summer, and
warmer in Winter; so that when in the late great Frost a Ox was roasted, and
Coaches frequently went upon the Thames, an Horseman durst not venture over
the Liffey, a much less River, at Dublin, and thereby much more pleasant (and
indeed, in the general, abundantly more fertile) and plentiful than England,
and free from all venomous Vermin, Black Crows, Magpies, and Spiders, are not
venomous there.

In many places the Soil is so excellent, that it bears the most devouring
Grain, many Years successively, without manuring; and in others it will bear
three or four Crops; and when it has lain waste but one Year, without further
trouble than Plowing and Sowing Barley, will again produce as many Crops more,
and so Time after Time with a continuendo; and in all places in general
produces all sorts of Grain England does, as good, and in as great plenty,
with abundance less trouble and pains.

There are indeed many large Mountains and Bogs, but now, by the Industry of
the English, made very good and fertile Land, either for Tillage or Feeding;
every where watered with pleasant Springs, Rivers, and Loughs or Lakes of
Water; endued with great plenty of Fish, wild and tame Fowl, Horses, Cows, Oxen
and Sheep, as large and good as any in England, and much more numerous, till
lately destroyed by the encouragement given the new raised Forces, and other
Irish Papists, by the now Duke of Tyrconnel.

In some parts, especially of the West and North, a Salmon above two foot long,
may be bought for a Penny, or two Pence. Forty five Eggs for one Penny. A fat
Goose for three pence. A fat Turkey for six pence. A fat Hen for three
halfpence. A fat Lamb, or Kid, for a Groat. But in Dublin, which is the
dearest part, they fold, in time of peace, twelve or fourteen Eggs for a penny.
A large fair fresh Cod, two foot long, for three pence. Plaice a foot long, and
seven or eight inches broad, two for a penny. Large Trouts as long, two or
three for a penny. Oysters five or six inches broad, a penny a score. A fat
Lamb for twelve or fourteen pence. A large fat Calf, a month or six weeks old,
for five or six Shillings. A large quarter of Beef for three or four Shillings,
as good as the Markets of London afford, and other things proportionably; and
yet all sorts of Tradesmen had greater Wages, and generally better Rates for
their Goods than in England.

And contrary to the general Supposition among the English, Scots, and other
industrious Persons, Money was in Ireland as plentiful, and with much more ease
obtained than in England; so that an ordinary Tradesman, or Farmer, keeps a
better House, and lives much more plentiful there than those of four or five
Hundred a Year can do in England. None need labor long there, that will but be
Industrious, and any thing a reasonable Husband, but, unless very Unfortunate
indeed, may soon acquire a Sufficiency to live handsomely, and Gentleman-like.
Scarce any that went only private Soldiers thither in the last Rebellion
(unless Sots in earnest) but were, before the beginning of this Rebellion, Men
of good Fortune and Estates.

The mere Irish are not really so Wild and Barbarous as generally reputed, nor
indeed Tame and Civilized in general as the English, but are as lusty, full,
well-set, comely, handsome, fair, and clear-skin'd as the English: Mighty
hospitable and kind-hearted to Strangers; so that if any comes where they are
eating, they will take it very unkindly if he do not eat with them; and
Travelers shall have the best Entertainment they can afford them gratis, and
better than they will afford themselves: For though the Country be thus extreme
plentiful, yet the Commonalty among the Irish fare very hard, and live mostly
upon Potatoes, Parsnips, Cabbidg, Beans, Pease, Barley, and Oat-Bread, sour
thick Milk, or Butter-milk; and unless upon some certain Festival Days, as
Christmas, Shrovetide, Easter, Whitsuntide, or Michaelmass, rarely eat a bit
of Flesh, Butter, Eggs, or Cheese, unless they light upCarrion dead or drowned.
They are very nasty and sluttish, prefer strong Butter, tainted Flesh, and sour
Milk, before sweet: Scarce ever wear Shifts or Shirts, or lodge otherwise than
upon Straw or Rushes on the Ground, with their Cows, Calves, Swine, or Sheep,
made fast at the Beds feet; or at the best, only a little Partition of Wattles
between them; use no Sheets, tumble all together, only the Husband between
other Men and their Wives, and the Wife between other Women and their Husband.
The Common Women are generally Whorish before Marriage, and count it no
Disgrace to have a Bastard or two, but after Marriage are most constant to
their Husbands; they say, He that did before, must not do after: They are very
lazy, and inclined to Lice.

Some of their Gentry are indeed very accomplished and well-bred. They are in
general the most zealous Roman Catholics in the World; and were always very
obedient and respectful to the English, and under their Government, till King
James the Second came to the Throne; but after that they began to grow very
Insolent, infringe the English Prerogative, and at length to insult over and
destroy their English Masters. Naturally in their own Country the greatest
Cowards in the World, Spaniellike, the more they are beaten, the better; it
used to be common for one English Man to beat nine or ten of them; but most
Imperious Masters: Naturally inclined to Theft and Laziness; so that though
employed by those of their own Country and Religion, they will idle away Time,
and steal what they can; so that if a Man employs but one or two of them, he
must have another to attend and watch them.

They are, from the highest to the lowest, a People of the least foresight in
the World, never looking forward, or taking care for to Morrow: believe it
Damnation to disobey the Priests, and (as all other Papists do) meritorious to
destroy all Protestants by every sort of Artifice; and though they do not live
so well under their own Nation, yet they have a natural aversion to the
English; that to destroy them, they care not what Miseries they expose
themselves to, or who comes to govern over them, yet have and dread an old
Prophesy among them, which says, The Irish shall weep over the English-mens
Graves, as they always do over each others many Years after burial.

And though they have spared no Ruin they durst bring upon the English; yet now
they dread coming under the Yoke of France, who they have often, and indeed
even now invited to receive that Kingdom.

At the Death of King Charles the Second, his Grace, James late Duke of Ormond,
was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, when on Saturday, February the 14th, 1684/5.
the News was delivered him there, of his Master's Death, and Orders from the
Privy Council at Whitehal to proclaim his Brother James the Second, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.

Whereupon he forthwith called a Council, and provided all things ready against
the Monday following, then being the 16th of the same, accompanied with the
Protestant Primate, Bishops, the Nine Judges, a great number of Nobility and
Gentry, King and Herald at Arms, Lord Mayor of the City of Dublin; Masters,
Wardens, and Freemen of the several Corporations, or Companies, and multitudes
of others. Set out from the Castle of Dublin, where he kept his Court; and with
Tears in his Eyes, marched through all the chief Streets of the City, through a
Guard of Soldiers placed on both sides the Way; and the Sword carried before
him by his Grandson the now Duke of Ormond. Performed that Solemnity, with as
pleasant a Countenance, and as much cheerfulness, as the loss of his old
Master, and fears of approaching Misery would permit. And the better to repel
the thenlike fearful Apprehensions of the discerning Protestants, there caused
several Hogsheads of Wine to be placed at the Castle-gate, Thoulsel, and
Corn-market, for any that pleased to drink; the Bells to be rung, and Bonfires
to be made at Night, and all other Testimonies of Joy imaginable to be
forthwith made. And suddenly after issued Declarations, and other Assurances of
his Majesty's gracious Intentions and Resolutions for maintaining the
Protestant Religion, and Interest of Ireland: Which coming from him, in whom
next under God they reposed their greatest Confidence at all Times, to be their
then Protector, against the Abuses they after sustained by the Irish, (by
interceding for them upon all Occasions to the King) did in some measure abate
those gloomy Fogs for the present, and give hopes the King would in some
measure make good his Promises to them.

But the Papists, who always during the two late Kings Reigns at least, had
their Friends at Whitehal, and from them, by their Infallible Guides, the
Priests, a certain pre-knowledg of future Designs, and the best Intelligence,
well knew the contrary; and forthwith began to prick up their Ears, repair
their Old, and erect several new Mass-houses; and every Rascal that could but
speak a little English, or write and read nothing but Nonsense, and had but
four or five Sheep, or three or four Cows or Horses, and never before the
Honor to wear any thing but Rags, or what was little better, forthwith sold
what they had to buy new Clothes, and carry them for Dublin, with each a Sword
at his Brich, (though scarce knew how to draw or sheath it there) set up for
Gentlemen, and soon worm'd the Protestants out, and got themselves into all the
beneficial Employments in the Kingdom, the Army, and whatever was of any Value
or Trust: And then, without respect to Master or Mistress, or such others as
had before better fed than taught them, and perhaps kept them from starving,
though the best Church-Protestant in the Kingdom, if any Affront happened to be
given these new Gentlemen, the first and most friendly Salute was, God damn you
for a Figish Son of a Bish, etc. and the second out with the Prick-Frog, or
Bayonet; and if Courage gave Resolution to resist their Violences, (as often it
happened, and if alone to disarm and beat them too) then the Resister was sure
(upon the Assaulter's escaping his Hands) forthwith to have as many Hands upon
one Head and Body, as it had Arms and Fingers to resist him, or Legs, Feet and
Toes to flee from them; and if happily he escaped that Bout, they would
certainly break his Windows at Night, and as a Cat watches a Mouse, watch for
another Opportunity; and if that failed, they never did go to a Justice, but
perhaps to some pretended Protestant creeping Rascal, who for lucre of a few
Pence, and to keep his Employ, valued not how many good Protestant Christians
he rid, and galled even to Death, to serve the devilish End and Cause for which
he had the favor to stay to be the Fop last devoured, who must be sure to tie
him up to all imaginable hard Meat, and perhaps more severely than a Papist
would do, for being kicked out of Commission; and then it was well done, by
forsooth a Protestant, and not by the merciful Roman Catholics. If the poor
Creature kept out of reach, then out with a Warrant, break open his Doors,
search his House, rifle and take away what is liked; and if any honest
Protestant yet remained in Commission, every shabby beggarly Rascal, spared not
the impudence to revile them to their Faces. I have heard a mere Teague, that
could scarce pronounce a word of true English, or sense, beard the Lord Mayor
of Dublin, Sir John Knox, when brought before him for Felony, who though a Man
of Courage, did not dare to commit the Criminal.

Thus the poor Protestants of Ireland continued in this, though miserable, yet
happy Condition in consideration to what they afterward fell to, till the Earl
of Clarendon was sent thither Lord Lieutenant, upon whose arrival they began
again to flatter themselves with hopes of more Comfort, through the Interest
and Favor of him that was so near related to the King, and an assured
Protestant; but they, to their Sorrow, soon found his Wings clipped, and
Tyrconnel quickly sent after him, with the Honor and Title of Earl, the Office
of Lieutenant General and Check-master of the Army; and Authority and Power to
place and displace whom he pleased; who accordingly forthwith put his Power in
execution, and issued out his Orders for modelling the Army, which were no
sooner given, but obeyed, and in all places the Army drawn into the Field, and
about ten or twelve of the oldest Men picked out, and their Clothes stripped off,
and their Arms given to Irish papists before their Faces; and when those
parcels were disciplined, others were still picked out, and so from time to
time, till the whole Army was weeded of its Protestants, and replenished with
Irish Papists. When all they could call old were culled, then the Excuse was
Shortness, till the Popish Party was the stronger; then they used no further
excuse, but being Protestants, till the whole Protestant standing Army, which
was raised and at vast Expense, both of Men and Money to England, there
maintained for many Years to secure the Protestant Religion, and English
Interest in Ireland, was, by Popish Craft, and Favor and Means of the great
God Tyrconnel, peaceably in one Year wholly destroyed and inverted into as
Popish Power, the whole Treasure of the Kingdom, Cities and Garrisons, which
were first constituted to keep them out, wholly possessed and disposed of by the
Native Irish, and those, who of all Men, were the greatest haters of the
English, and their Religion, made the only Protectors of both: and certainly
must needs be in a blessed State, when the Fox is set to watch the Geese, and
the Wolves the Lambs.

Now all things became bare-fuced, and he that had but half an Eye might easily
discern what was like to follow; and such as had Stooks of Money, began by
degrees to transmit it to England, and dispose of their Effects, and afterward
to steal away themselves; while others, whose Riches consisted mostly in
Stocks, which was in others Hands, or had not wherewith to transport
themselves, and for a Livelihood were forced to abide the approaching Storm,
some to the loss, others their Estates, and most inevitable Ruin.

While these things were doing, Darrington, a reputed Jesuit, was sent over,
and made first Major, and after Lieutenant Colonel to the Royal Regiment in
Dublin (to fulfill that part of Dr. Oates's information in his discovery of the
Popish Plot); and one Barker (formerly Page to the late Duke of Monmouth, and
one of King James's Converts,) Major, and so proceeded to disband all
Protestant Officers in the Army; and first began with Sir William King, then
Governor of the Castle and City of Limrick, Sir George St. George, his
Brother, and such others as they had noted to be the most sober and zealous
Protestants, and placed Irish Papists in their places, till all the Irish Army,
both Officers and Soldiers, were Papists, excepting only some few in the
Regiments of the Lords Meant joy and Forbes, and Col. Russel, who were
themselves Protestants, and in a manner all the Protestant Officers left that
first Year in the whole Army, and who were kept in only to blind the People
till their other work was finished, and so have the favor to be devoured last.

Things being brought to this pass, the whole Army Papists, and none to oppose
them, they thought they safely might, and accordingly fell to regulate the
Civil. Part, and at one blast removed sive or six of the nine Protestant
Judges, and left but one upon each Bench for Ciphers, to color the Matter, and
drag up the rest to their own Justice, and likewise the Protestant Chancellor,
Sir Charles Porter, and most of the Protestant Privy Counselors, and filled up
their places with others of their own Party, with such prodigious Broagues upon
their Tongues, that they could scarce pronounce one word of English truly; and
after these the Protestants which were the Attourneys, Solicitors, etc. to the
King, were packed after the Judges.

In the mean time they set another Project on foot, viz. To disband all the
smallest of their own Soldiers as soon as they were well disciplined, but not
before, and still took in larger, till they had the Flower of the Country in
the Army, and still sent the Old to exercise the rest of their Breed in the
Country; So that when they had occasion to raise their fresh Forces, they were
mostly in a manner disciplined to their hand, not in expectation of using them
to their present purpose, but in case King James had continued in the Throne,
and not answered their desire of restoring them to their Estates, that they
might be able to restore themselves, by destroying all the English there; and
Darrington made two certain Sizes, one for Musketeers and another for Pikemen,
and those that were too short or long for his Standard, when disciplined, must
trip off.

All things being now fitted to the purpose, Tyrconnel, and the new Attorney
General Sir Richard Neagle, dispatched to Whitehall with the Account, and to
advise about future Matters, the Project of completing their so successfully
begun Work; and after a short stay, returned with Power to displace the Earl of
Clarendon from the Government, (who indeed all discerning Protestants there
easily perceived was kept in so long, only to deceive the People till the Work
could be brought to that secure perfection) who eight days after his arrival at
Dublin, took his place as Lord, Deputy-General, and General-Governour of
Ireland, for Lord Lieutenant he could not be, because born in Ireland. But the
good Earl of Clarendon having an account of his approach, and suspecting what
might, and indeed did follow, resolved, before his departure, to consecrate the
Chapel in the New Hospital near Dublin, built for the use of old and decrepit
Soldiers, (and is the finest in Europe of its kind;) and accordingly, did,
before well finished, hoping thereby to prevent its falling into the Papists
Hands, because the King had declared he would maintain the Church of England in
all her Rights and Properties, as established by Law. But Tyrconnel (who though
not so near related to the King, yet knew his Mind much better) soon removed
that Scruple, and forthwith after the Lord Clarendon's departure, with the
chief of the Popish Clergy in Dublin, with Whips and Scourges, entered the said
Chapel, fell to lashing the Walls and Floar to whip out Heresy, pulled down
the Communion Table and Seats, and erected in it an Altar; and took three or
four of the old Soldiers Rooms adjoining to it, for the Priests and Friars,
and while they exercised in the Chapel, the old Soldiers, for whose use, and
with whose Money it was built, were forced to have their Devotion in the open
Hall where they used to eat their Meat; and in the mean time a Libel was fixed
upon the Done of Christ-Church in Dublin, to publish the Bains of Matrimony
betwixt that Church and the Sea of Rome, bidding any that could, forthwith to
show cause why they should not be joined together. So that now the Protestants
expected no less than all their Churches to be taken from them; but whether
through the murmuring of the People, or Orders from the King to the contrary,
they proceeded no further as yet in that Business, only displaced all the
Protestant Chaplains in the Army, and gave their Places and Benefits to Popish
Priests; who thereupon began to wear black Cloaks, made much like the Ministers
Gowns; and yet it was a Crime to say the King had broke his Promise, and
infringed the Rights of the Church of England; for it seems, taking away
Consecrated Chapels and Colleges, and giving its Members Livings to Popish
Priests, was not Infringing the Rights of the Church, but maintaining them
according to Law; and it was so indeed according to the Laws of the Church of
Rome; for the King never mentioned what Law he therein meant; and therefore did
not break his Promise.

But before further progress was made in this Business, it was thought fit to
Summon all Corporations, and Incorporated Bodies in them, to surrender their
Charters, upon which Drogheda and two or three Towns more obeyed, and one
Thomson, Surgeon to the Royal Regiment in Dublin, being Master, and a
pretended Protestant, to show his Loyalty, readily threw the Charter of the
Corporation of Chirurgions in Dublin at Tyrconnel's feet, and is lately come
for England, perhaps to get it renewed by King William; or else, for that good
Service, to get to be Surgeon to another Regiment here in England, for
certainly the Man's Loyalty well deserves it and cannot fail of his Brethrens
Certificate for saving them the Charges, others were exposed to in defending
their Charters by Law; which all such as did not surrender, or were forced to
do in the Exchequer, where one of those, a pretended Protestant, sat, worthily
to Judge and give Sentence against them till all was done, and is since likewise
come for England to receive his Reward:

All Charters being thus taken away, partly by Fraud, partly by Force, others
were quickly prepared, and in every of them, scarce one Person mentioned in the
Body of the Charter but Papists, or such as were little better; but
particularly every Mayor, Sheriff, Portrief, Suffren, Bailiff, Master, Warden,
and Clerk, were mere Papists except one Anth. Sharp a Quaker, was made, and
there named Master of the Corporation of Weavers in Dublin; and one Colvert,
much of the same Stamp, of a new Corporation of Hosiers; and by these the
Common Councils, and Councils of the several Companies, were either all
Papists, or Cousin-Germans to Papists.

All the Protestant Chaplains that belonged to them put out, and Popish Priests
put in their places: Most of the Protestant Justices, and all the Protestant
Sheriffs of every County except one, turned out; so that in one Year, or a
little more, after Tyrconnel assumed the Government, there was very few
downright honest Protestant Officers, either Civil or Military in the whole
Kingdom of Ireland, except those before named; and one Keating, who yet
continued Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and one of the Privy Council,
and indeed, was the best Friend the Protestants had there.

However things were not yet perfected, for those named in the Charters, were
mostly so indigent and poor, that they were scarce able, with their whole
Fortunes, to pay three or fourscore Pounds, which was the Fees of each Charter;
and all, or most of the Protestants refused to contribute, till they were
compelled; some of them imprisoned, and forced to Habeas-Corpus's for their
Liberty.

Tyrconnel disliking these Delays, sent for some of the principal of them,
pressed them to the Business, assuring them, that if they would join with the
Corporations, and take out their Charters, he would defray all Fees of each
Charter above Twenty Pounds, which would not amount to above five Shillings
each Man at the most, besides their Freedom of the City, or Town, which should
be granted them at the same Rate; and in case they continued still obstinate,
he must look upon them as obstinate and stubborn, and disaffected to his
Majesty's Government. This made some for ease, and others for fear, comply, and
become again free; but others who stood out to this time, were hampered, and
had their Shops shut down frequently, till the News of the Scale turning in
England, which then ceased. But the peaceable Quakers, who before would not
under a Protestant Government take upon them so much as the Office of a
Constable, now under a Popish every where readily conform; and two of the chief
of them are made Aldermen of Dublin, viz. Anthony Sharp before mentioned, and
Samuel Clarrage, who are excused from taking Oaths, and frequently sat in the
Seat of Justice. Clarrage is at last come for England, and as busy about
Whitehal and Westminster, as he was with Tyrconnel.

While these things were thus prosecuted in Public, the Popish Clergy, in all
parts of the Kingdom, were as busy in private Caballing, and sending their
fittest Messengers to Whitchal, Rome, France, Spain, and Germany, to advise
about, and receive Instructions for completing their Damnable Design of
overwhelming and eradicating the Protestant Religion, and Interest of Ireland
in particular. And the better to delude the poor sleeping Protestants,
Tyrconnel continually fed them with fresh Assurances of the King's Gracious
Resolutions, of securing the Religion and Interest of the Protestants; and that
all this Work, was only to have an honest Parliament, that would take off the
Penal Laws, for ease of all Dissenters; and that nothing could contribute more
to the Advantage, Quiet, and Riches of any Government: However, God be praised,
all were not so stupissed, but they did plainly discern to have Popish
Parliaments, and in Ireland mere Irish; and such as should not only have
destroyed the Protestants, but the whole English Interest of Ireland, (which
nothing but a gracious God, and the glorious Instrument he used, could have
prevented, as Affairs then stood); but, blessed be his Holy Name, God was
pleased on a sudden to blast all their Cursed Designs, and for the present
strike them mute there as well as in England, with the News of the Prince of
Orange's intending for England; which no sooner arrived, but Tyrconnel prepared
to send several Detachments of the then standing Forces for England, and
accordingly sent away about 3000 of the fairest and likeliest of the Foot, who
were to be followed by more, till they began to fear if they did that, the
Protestants, who they knew they had deserved no better from, might rise against
them, and therefore forbore that part of the Design for the present, and
forthwith speeded the raising of more Forces, and by Christmas had their Army
(which before consisted of about 5000 Horse and Foot, after the others came for
England) complete 30000 Men; and before the beginning of March, without so much
as beat of Drum, or a Penny Charge to the King, Tyrconnel had completed the
following Regiments of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, as they stood March 15.
1688/9.

The Old standing Forces.
1. Lord Deputy, Horse. 2. Lord Galmoy, Horse. 3. Col. Russel, Horse. 4. Lord
Clancarthy. 5. Lord Montjoy. 6. Lt. Genesis Mac-Carthy. 7. Sir Thomas Nucome. 8.
Royal Regiment.
New-raised Forces.
Leinster. 9. Lord Deputy's Dragoons. 10. Lord Deputy's Foot. 11. Ld Dungan's
Dragoons. 12. Lord Slane's Foot. 13. Lord Duleeke. 14. Lord Clanmalier. 15.
Col. Moore. 16. Col. Kevenah. 17. Col. Vxbridge. 18. Col. Butler of Ballyraget.
19. Col. Butler Lord Galmoy's Brother. 20. Col. Nugent. 21. Col. Dillion. 22.
Lord Gormonstown. 23. Sir Maurice Eustace.
Munster. 24. Earl of Tyrone. 25. Viscount Clare. 26. Sir Vallentine Brown. 27.
Sir John Fitzgerald. 28. Sir James Cotter 's Dragoons. 29. Col.
Mac-Carthymoore. 30. Col. Mac-Carthy Reagh. 31. Col. John Barret. 32. Col.
O-Donovane. 33. Col. Butler of Killiash. 34. Lieut. Col. Fitzgerald, alias
Mac-Thomas. 35. Col. Nic. Brown.
Ulsser. 36. Earl of Antrim. 37. Viscount Jveagh. 38. Lord Louth. 39. Col.
Cormick O-Neal. 40. Col. Bryan Mac-Mahone. 41. Col. Gorden O-Neal.
Connaught. 42. Lord Clanrickard. 43. Lord Galmoy. 44. Col. John Bourke. 45.
Col. Iriell Farrell. 46. Col. Henry Mac-Toole. 47. Col. O-Neale. 48. Sir Mich.
Creagh.

Some consisting of 20, 22, or 24 Hundred: So that the whole amounted to about
80000, completely Accoutred and Disciplined; all raised, clothed, and kept
till that time at the proper Charge of their several Officers, many of which
were before but Tailors, Cobblers, and such others as perhaps were scarce able
to procure before Bread for their Families; but now, for managing this Blessed
Cause, sell all that ever they have, and their Friends too, to carry on the
Holy Design.

In the mean time, while the Men were raising, Tyrconnel ordered all the
Gun-smiths, Carpenters, and Joyners, to be forthwith employed for cleansing,
stocking, and locking all the old Firearms; and the Cutlers for cleansing and
sheathing the Swords, which since the last Wars had lain rusting in the Stores,
and such as refused, were sent to Prison till they complied; who, besides the
old Locks, were promised for each Musket 10s. and every Pistol 6s. but when
they will get it I know not; some they were paid all along, to keep Life and
Soul together: So that with the Arms he had the Summer before received from
England, Tyrconnel had not only Arms for his whole Army, but many more; and by
the Priests had made all the other Papists in the Kingdom, the Men to Arm
themselves with Half-pikes, and Skeins, or Bayonets, and the Women with Skeins
or Bayonets; and in case, after a certain day, any in the Country went to Mass
without those Arms, they were by the Priests obliged to pay a Shilling, and
cursed by Bell, Book, and Candle: So that in less than five months ** time the
whole Body of the Irish Papists were every where Armed, to the great terror of
the Protestants; and as they were naturally inclined to Theft, so now they were
by Authority put into an excellent condition to perform it, which with the
inability of the new Officers to maintain them, upon destroying the
Protestants, which at first they began moderately by way of stealth in the
Night; but when the Owners began to grumble and complain to no purpose, with
much more violence and boldness, and by degrees increased their Spoils, till at
length in open Day they spared not, before the Owners Faces, to drive away
together often, from one Man 100, sometimes 1000 Sheep, 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60
Cows, Oxen, and the like; and such as would not drive, and were not for their
purpose, they killed, and carried away the Skin, Hide, and Tallow, and left the
dead Carcasses as dirty and useless as they could, fit for nothing but Vermin;
and such as was not for their own purpose, they drove, or killed, and carried
to Fairs and Markets, and sold to others of their own Breed, who had not so
much Courage (and a little more Honesty than) to steal a fat Weather, which six
or seven Months before was worth 9 or 10s. for 1s. and a fat Ox worth 3 or 4
(...) for 12 or (...) a Cow of 50 s. for 5 or 6. s. But at length they
proceeded further, even to take away the Corn and Houshold-goods; so that he
that overnight was worth 9 or 4000l. the next day, or week, had not a Morsel
to put in his Head, or Rag to hang on his Back, but what Charity he received
from other Protestants not yet so absolutely ruined. At length they were so
glutted with these Spoils, that they began to be more absolute, and fent or
went to the Houses of such as their Mercy had not yet destroyed, and supposed
to have any Money, threatening, that if they did not forthwith, or within a
certain time by them limited, deliver to them such Sums as their Moderation
thought fit to demand, they would, and did, burn their Houses and Corn, kill
and leave their Cattle dead upon the Ground Among the rest, one Franeis Baker a
Merchant in Youghill in particular, having in the County of Tipperary a stock
of fat Cattle, went, about the latter end of January last to fetch them home,
hoping they might be more secure in Barrels, and a Town of reasonable strength,
than in the open Fields; but as he was marching, a Crew of the new-raised Irish
Forces, met, and demanded of him, whither he was driving those Cattle, and told
him, they had more right to them than he, and unless he satisfied them, must be
content to leave them behind him; whereupon he was forthwith forced to pay for
those his own Cattle, 15 or 16l. Sterling, which was as much as they would have
yielded in their Mountain Markets. And to be short, the Spoil was so general
and great, that in December, and part of January last, they had destroyed, in
the Counties of Cork and Kerry, above 4000 Head of black Cattle, as Cows and
Oxen; and there, and in the County of Tipperary, 2 or 300000 Sheep: And so in
all other parts, especially the Provinces of Minister and Leinster
proportionably; so that before the beginning of February, it was thought they
had destroyed in all parts of Kingdom above 1000000 Head of Cattle, besides
Corn and Houses, and thereby utterly spoiled the most plentiful Country in
these parts of Europe; so that 20 Years of perfect Peace cannot be thought to
restore it to the State in which it was at the Death of King Charles the Second.

The Protestants of Ireland alarmed at these Devastations, began to Arm, and
provide themselves against them; and first the Citizens of Londonderry,
understanding that two Companies of the new-raised Forces were marching to
quarter in that City, shut their Gates, and resolved to stand upon their own
Defense, and when they came, refused them entrance: Whereupon the Lord Deputy
Tyrconnel, and the Privy Council, thought it most expedient to send the Lord
Mon^joy (a Man of great esteem among the Protestants of that County) with six
Companies of his Regiment which he took from Dublins to reduce them; who coming
before the place, demanded, but was refused Entrance for two days; In the
interim it was concluded to receive him into the Town singly alone; and being
admitted, it was concluded, that provided he procured their Pardon within 14
days, they would receive two Companies of his Men, to he made up all
Protestants, to Garrison in the Town, and at the beginning of March as many
Papists, or as many more of any other Regiment; which being performed on both
hands, the Lord Montjoy returned for Dublin, and with the Lord Chief Baron Rice
was sent for France to know the King's Pleasure; but privately an Account was
sent with him by Rice, that he held correspondence with the Prince of Orange,
for which he was committed, and still remains close Prisoner in the Bastile of
Paris. This Lord was no sooner gone for France, but his two Companies left in
Londonderry, with the City, again revolted; and John Hawkins Esquire a young brisk
zealous Protestant Gentleman, of good Fortune and Interest in that Province,
accompanied with about 100 others, well Armed and Mounted, pursued the Example
of the Lord Delamere in England, and marched from place to place to stir up the
Protestants to Arm and Assemble together for their own Defense, against the
common Enemy and Abuses; and in a short time was so succesful, as to induce the
whole Province of Vlster so to do, (except the Towns of Carigfergus and
Ardmagh) and among them the Lord Mount-Alexander, Lord Blaney, Sir Arthur
Roden, and several other Persons of Note and Quality: And by their Example the
Town and County of Sleigo, in the Province of Connaught, was moved to rise in
like manner by the Lord Kingston, and Chidly Coote Esquire. And soon after the Town
of Ardmagh seized and disarmed a Troop of Dragoons that was quartered there,
and sent them away naked; and several other Towns did the like: And so, and
with Supplies they procured from Scotland, armed themselves indifferently, and
formed themselves into Troops and Companies, under the Command of the Persons
of Quality aforementioned, and began to take Reprizals for their Losses; but
Garrigfergus held out for the Irish all along.

In the mean time the Irish made it their Business to stop all Passages
thither, however, many got to them, some one way and some another, and a little
after Christmas about fifty Protestants that belonged to several Companies in
Dublin, about five at Night met, and with their Arms, marched toward the North
all Night long, and the next day, till they had got about 40 Miles; but being
discovered, Forces were sent to pursue them, so that being overpowered, they
were taken and carried Prisoners bound into Dublin Castle, and thence committed
to Goals, where some of them still remain without trial; others were enlarged,
upon giving security for their good Behavior, and never to take up Arms
against King James.

The next Day after they were brought in, all the Protestants among the Horse
were disbanded, and their Horses, Arms, and Clothes taken from them; for which
some of them had afterward 5l. for what cost them 20l. but many nothing to
this day. And Tyrconnel had all the Foot drawn out, and at the head of them,
told them, that such as pleased might lay down their Arms and Commissions; upon
which all the Protestant Officers and Soldiers that appeared the next day did,
which much surprised his greatness, but the Drums and Trumpets he would not
permit, not having any that were Papists to supply their places, so that much
against their wills they are forced yet to stay under them.

The Protestants in other parts being more intermingled with Irish than those
of the North, could not put themselves into so sudden a defensive posture;
however were not idle, but as opportunity gave leave, so that they might not be
suspected, provided such Arms and Ammunition as they could most conveniently
procure, till they were reasonably well Armed throughout the Kingdom, and at
the beginning of February at a place called Summerhill, within 20 miles of
Dublin, there was got together about 300 Protestants; and near the King's
County under Sir Laurance Parsons, such another Number, At Charlevile, the Seat
of the Earl of Orrery, within 12 miles of Limrick, under Sir Thomas Southwell,
and Sir William King, before mentioned, 250 Horse, and 160 Foot. At Mallow
within 12 miles of Cork, 300 Horse and 200 Foot under Esquire. Jephson, and Captain
C^llenger, at Castlelions within 10 miles of Cork. Under the Earl of Barrymore,
200 Horse, and 240 Foot. At Castle-Marter, under Esquire. Boil 60 or 80. And in
most other Towns and Castles thereabouts the like numbers. In Bandon 7 or 8000
Horse and foot, all forming themselves into Troops and Companies, and
Exercising, intending to put themselves under the Command of the Lord
Inchiqueen, and the aforesaid Boil, and had resolved and agreed, that if any
place were attacqued, notice should be forthwith dispatched to all the rest,
and all were to join and march to its relief within 24 hours; which Tyrconnel
having notice of, sent Express forthwith to Major General Mac-Carty then in
Cork to draw out with three Pieces of Cannon against Castle-martyr, who no
sooner came before it, but they received an express, from those who intended to
head them, that it was thought fit and advisable for them to surrender, which
they did, upon Discretion, and Boil was taken and carried Prisoner to Cork;
and upon the surrender, the like advice was given (it is not convenient to tell
here by who) to all the rest thereabouts, to depart to their respective Homes:
but Sir Thomas Southwell, with 245 Horse marched directly toward the North;
but the Journey being-near 200 miles complete, and all through an Enemies
Country, and Expresses sent before to raise the whole Country, and Forces
everywhere as they went, which the poor Gentlemen pushed through, till both
they and their Horses, being thoroughly spent for want of Meat, and no longer
able to hold, were forced to submit, and surrender up their Horses and Arms,
upon condition to have leave for themselves to return to their several
Habitations. But as there is no Faith to be kept with Heretics, so these poor
Creatures had no sooner parted with their Arms, but they were all bound, and
drove like Dogs to the Goal of Galloway, and the last Assizes there condemned
to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered; but upon the second of April got a Reprieve
for a month. One Brown, a Man of considerable Fortune, was going with them, but
fearing to get thorough, returned back, went to a neighboring Justice, and
told him where he had been, but disliking the Enterprise, was returned in
obedience to the Lord Deputy's Proclamation of Pardon, to give Security for his
future good Behavior; however was forthwith, by a strong Guard, sent prisoner
to Cork, and was there afterward tried and executed for High Treason while
King James was there. And in Phillips-town in the Kings County there are Sir
Laurence Parsons, and about 50 more, under the same condemnation; and in
Marisborough in the Queen's County, 13 or 14, and in several other parts the
like numbers, whose particulars are not yet come to the Authors hands, which
were taken much after the same manner.

Other parts being thus reduced, Mac-Carty Forthwith drew all the Forces in
Munster against Bandon, a Town, which till these Times, never permitted a
Papist to dwell within its Wallt, and likewise forced them to Surrender, and
give five of their Town Hostages for the payment of 1000l. for the trouble they
had given his Army, 500l. of which they paid down, and the other five was
remitted upon a Petition to King James, upon his landing at Kingsale.

During these Hurries in other parts, there was not any rising in the County or
City of Dublin; however all were not idle, but several Active Spirits, a knot
of six or seven in particular, whose Names are not convenient to be mentioned
here, being most still under the Papists Lash, promoted, as 'twas thought,
principally by one, who upon the landing of the now King William in England,
for his Religion was singled out to taste of Popish Mercy, with an Intent to
seize the Castle and Guards of Dublin, and send Tyrconnel for England. And for
the better effecting thereof, had by Stratagems caused most of the Protestants
there to Arm themselves, though at the same time they knew not what for,
further, than in case any Attempt were made by the Papists upon their Lives by
way of Massacre (as they certainly intended, till happily discovered by an
unknown Hand of their own Party to a Protestant Lord, on the 5th of December)
which so alarmed all Protestants, that it was in vain to attempt it after, and
especially while the Protestants were any where in Arms, (for that would have
made all desperate, and not so easily to be reduced as they were); but before
the Protestants of Dublin could bring their business to bear, and get
Ammunition enough to resist such Force as might be brought against them, before
they could expect Supplies from England, Tyrconnel began to suspect them; and
forthwith called such Supplies and Numbers of Horse and Foot thither, that with
what was there before, made up 14 or 15000 Men, whose Number and Presence
spoiled that great Project, which otherwise was so well laid, that it had
certainly taken effect, if put in execution, and brought Tyrconnel for England,
and so saved the extreme Ruin and Devastation the Protestants have since
suffered through his Villainy. For any time before that great Force came to
Dublin, which was at the beginning of February, 5000 Men well Armed in that
City, and commanded, had been sufficient, with what was ready and might have
bin raised there, to reduce, not only Dublin, but all Ireland. But the noise of
the forementioned designed Massacre, and the Sufferings of others, put People
to the flight for England so fast, and made those that stayed so dubious, that
it was hard to know who to trust there under the Nose of the Government; and
there was not one Person of Quality then there that would undertake to Head
them, tho often importuned, and assured of 4000 Men well Armed at two hours
warning, and many of them well exercised, and so many resolute good Soldiers
as would have attempted to seize the Guards.

About this time a French Man landed at Cork, and rid post to Dublin, with
assurance from King James to Tyrconnel of his speedy coming to his relief; and
on Friday the 22d of Feb. two of his Officers that had escaped from the Isle of
Wight, came privately to the Castle of Dublin, and continued there in cognito
till Sunday following about 10 at night; then on a sudden the noise was spread
all over the Kingdom, that the King was landed with 5000 Men, and that the two
forementioned Officers came with the Express to the Lord Deputy, which on a
sudden put all into hurries; and where Bonfires were not immediately made, the
Soldiers broke the Windows, Signs, and Doors, and rifled the Houses; and the
next Morning by six of the Clock, strong Guards were placed at the end of every
Street, and every Gate about the City and Suburbs of Dublin, and all others of
any Note and Strength: So that it was generally concluded by the Protestants,
there were Forces landed from England; but they were soon undeceived, being all
disarmed and eis'd of their Horses, which for the present was judged by every
place to be only in it self, but was soon known to be general to all parts
where their Power could then reach. In Dublin they seized all the Churches to
put the Arms in, which not being brought according to their expectation,
Tyrconnel issued out a Declaration, that all such as had yet detained their
Arms, should forthwith deliver them up upon peril of being left to the mercy of
his Soldiers; and that Gentlemen might keep their wearing Swords: however some
broke them to pieces, others flung them into Ditches and Rivers, where many
were afterward found, and some kept them still. The two next days they sent
Forces to suppress those of Summerhil beforementioned; and one Price who had
been Treasurer formerly, was with a Party of 4 or 500 Horse and Foot, in a
Castle in the County of Wicklow, 20 miles on the other side of Dublin, who took
Price, and several others, and committed them Prisoners to Newgate in Dublin,
and the rest to Wicklow, whither Price and the rest were, after four days,
carried and Indicted for High Treason; but all the Irish being gone for
Soldiers, and the English fled out of the Country, there could not be a Jury
got, but against whom they made Exceptions for want of Freehold; so that their
Trial was remitted to the Term now (at the writing of this) sitting in Dublin;
in the mean time all but seven were bailed, and after with their Bail fled for
England, where most of them now are to confirm the Tragical Story.

Tyrconnel having thus easily succeeded so far, the same week sent 24000 Men
toward the North, under the command of Lieutenant General Hamilton, (who was
once a Prisoner here) with several Fieldpieces and Mortars, who upon the first
of March were got near 50 mile, from Dublin and within five miles of the
Protestant Forces; who upon no ice of their approach, forthwith assembled what
they could together, which were not 1500, near a place called Drummore; but
upon the Enemies approach, they found them so numerous, that the Lord
Mount-Alexander thought fit to retire, and accordingly did; which the Irish
perceiving, pursued them about five miles, and killed about 150 of the
Protestants, and many of them such as never were in Arms, but running away in
the hurry: The Ld Mount-Alexander, and many others, got away for England; some
for Colerain, and afterward to Londonderry, or Scotland. In the mean time the
Irish proceeded toward Colerain, and found no opposition till they came
thither; but for the first 15 or 16 miles found nothing but ruined Houses, and
the Ditches fuil of Houshold-goods, Meal and Corn, thrown away by the
Protestants to prevent its falling into the hands of their merciless devouring
Enemy; but afterward they did not find so much, the People having more time to
carry it with them, and so left the Irish without any Relief but what they
brought with them; so that both Men and Horses in the Popish Army were in a bad
condition for want of Food and Forage.

After all this Success, King- James landed at Kingsale, on Tuesday, March 12.
and for want of Bells, was welcomed with the Shouts and Acclamations of the
People, Bonfires, etc. and the next day went to Cork, and stayed there till
Tyrconnel came to him at Major Genesis Mac Carties; on Wednesday the 20th, set out
from thence, and lay that Night at the Earl of Cork's House at Lifmore; on
Thursday Night at Clonmel; on Friday Night at Kilkenny, in the Duke of Ormond's
Castle; and on Saturday night at Sir Maurice Eustaces near Kilkullen-Bridg, 17
miles from Dublin, and all along the Roads, had the Lanes and Hedges lined with
the Half-pike and Bayonet-Rabble, called Reparees: At Carloe he was slabber'd
with the kisses of the rude Country Irish Gentlewomen, so that he was forced to
beg to have them kept from him; and on Saturday the 24th about Noon, he entered
the City of Dublin. where all the Soldiers were placed, from St. James's-Gate
(at his first entrance) to the Castle-Gate, all along, for about a mile of
Ground on both sides, the Streets which were every where strewed with fresh
Cravel: And at his first entrance into the Liberty of the City, there was a
Stage built covered with Tapestry, and thereon two playing on Welch-Harps; and
below a great number of Friars, with a large Cross, singing; and about 40
Oysterwenches, Poultry and Herb-women, in White (and among them some known to
have two or three Bastards, yet passing for Maids) dancing, who thence ran
along to the Castle by his side, here and there strewing Flowers; some hung out
of their Balconies Tapestry, and Cloth of Arras; and others imitating them,
sewed together the Coverings of Turkey-work Chairs, and Bandle-Cloth Blankets,
and hung them out likewise on each side of the Street. He rid along through the
whole Country, mostly on Horseback, but chiefly through all the Towns and
Villages. About a mile from Dublin he called for a fresh Pad-Nag, which turning
about to be brought him, got loose, and forced him to stay; which did in some
measure vex him, so that he said to Tyrconnel, I think you are all boder'd; but
the Pad being soon brought him, he mounted, and marched forward, and at the
utmost Limits was met by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, Master,
Wardens, and Brethren of the several Companies in their Formalities, the King
and Herald at Arms, Pursevants, and Servants of the Household, and there
received the Sword of State, (which he gave to Tyrconnel, who carried it before
him through the City) and the Sword and Keys of the City, and there had a
Speech made to welcome him to that Loyal City and People, by Counselor
Dillion, who that Morning was sworn Recorder in the room of Counselor Barnwel.
From thence he set forward toward the Castle, preceded by five or six Coaches,
with six Horses each, two Callashes, four or five Bung-Carts, and one close
Wagon attended by five or six French Troopers; next them followed about 200 of
the Straglers of the City that went out to meet him; and after them the
aformentioned Barker, Major to the Royal Regiment, bareheaded, giving Orders to
the Soldiers to keep the middle of the Street clear, and stand with their
Muskets shouldred; then 29 Horsemen bareheaded, shouting before Mr. Fitz-James
who was alone in one of Tyrconnel's Coaches with six Horses; close after him
followed three Officers of the Guard on Horseback, attended by 3 LedHorses;
after them 15 or 16 Officers of the Army, closely followed by the five Trumpets
and Kettle-Drums of State in their Liveries; after them about 20 of the
Gentlemen at large on Horseback; then the Messengers and Pursevants, Servants
of the Household; next them the Herald and King at Arms; close after them
Tyrcounel, carrying the Sword of State immediately before the late K. James,
who rid on the aforesaid Pad-Nag, in a plain Cinnamon-colour'd Cloth Suit, and
black slouching Hat, and a George hung over his Shoulder with a blew Ribbon; he
was attended by the Duke of Berwick, Lord Granard, and the aforesaid Maids
running by him on his left hand, the Lord Powis and Melfort on his Right, with
their Hats on; close after him followed a Troop of Dragoons, several Gentlemen
and Officers, two Troops of Horse, and many Attendants; after them six Lords
Coaches, with six Horses each; then the aforesaid Judge Keating in Scarlet; and
next after his three other Gentlemen's Coaches empty, with six Horses each; then
three Coaches, with two Horses each; and then last of all the confused Rabble
on Foot.

As he was riding along in this Order, one Flemming a pretended mad Scots-man,
in Skinner-row, the middle of the City, suddenly rushed through the Crowd,
flung his Hat over the King's Head, crying, in French, with a loud Voice, Let
the King live for ever, caught suddenly (madman like) fast hold of the King's
Hand, and kissed it, and so ran capering after his Hat.

As he marched thus along, the Pipers of the several Companies played the Tune
of, The King enjoys his own again; and the People shouting and crying, God save
the King: And if any Protestants were observed not to show their Zeal that way,
they were immediately reviled and abused by the rude Papists: And being come
thus to the Castle, alighted from his Horse, and was met at the Gate by the
Host, over-shaded with a Canopy bore up by four Popish Bishops, and accompanied
with a numerous Train of Friars singing, and others of that Clergy; and among
the rest the Titular Primate with a Triple Crown upon his Head representing the
Pope; who this unfortunate and by-gotted Prince no sooner saw, but he forthwith
went down upon his Knees to pray to the Image, and for a Blessing from this
Irish Pope: And from thence conducted into the Chapel there, (made by
Tyrconnel, of Hen. Cromwell's Riding-house) where Te Deum was sung for his happy
Arrival; thence he retired into an Appartment prepared in a new House built
before in the Castle by Tyrconnel, and there dined and refreshed himself: The
next Morning he called a Council, and having turned out the Earl of Granard,
Chairman, Judge Keating, etc. and taken in their rooms M. D' Avaux, the Bp of
Chister, and Lieut. Col. Darrington, he ordered five several Proclamations to
be published; one for raising such Moneys as passed there, viz. a Guiny to 24s.
an English Shilling to 13d. a Duccatoon which was 6s. to 6s. 3d. a Cob of 4s.
9d. to 5s. a Cob of 4s. 6d. to 4s. 9d. a French Lewis of Gold to 19s. and all
others proportionably. Another for a Parliament to meet at Dublin the 7th of
May, for regulating Matters Ecclesiastical. A third to require all his Subjects
of that Kingdom that had lately left the same, upon any Pretense whatever, to
return Home, with assurance of his Protection, but no Penalty or Forfeiture for
not returning, or Pardon for any Offender that did; and requiring all his
Subjects, of what Degree or Persuasion soever, to join with him against the
Prince of Orange. A fourth, commending all his Roman Catholic Subjects for
their Vigilance and Care in arming themselves; yet, whereas it had encouraged
some certain Robberies, required all but such as were actually under Command
and Pay in the Army, to lay up their Arms in their several Abodes. The fifth,
to invite the Country to carry Provision to his Army in the North; requiring
all Officers and Soldiers not to take any from them but what they made good
pay for* From thence went into the Field to see the Forces drawn out, and there
made Darrington Colonel of the Royal Regiment in the room of the Duke of
Ormond; and returning to the Castle, created Tyrconnel Duke of Tyrconnel.

The next day he received an Express that his Forces in the North, having sat
down before Colerain, were destroyed for want of Meat and Forage, and by a
great Snow that then fell among them, were beaten off with the loss of 5 or 600
Men, one Mortar, and 3 Field-peices: whereupon he called another Council, and
ordered 14000 Men more forthwith to be sent to reinforce the remainder of the
24000 that went before; and on the first of April, sent after them the Duke of
Berwick, and the two French Liutenant-Generals, Roos and Mamoon; and the Monday
following, about 8 in the Morning, set out from Dublin toward the North
himself; but those of Coleraine knowing their infussiciency to resist so
powerful a Force, quitted the Town, and got some for Londonderry, some for
Scotland, and others for England, so that all being clear, there was nothing to
hinder their Progress to Londonderry, where being arrived, the late King sent
in a Letter to the Governor, Col. Lundee (who before they left Dublin they
reported to be their own Creature) to require him peaceably to surrender, and
that all with him should have free Pardon and Protection, and not be molested
or spoiled of any thing they had; which being shown to the Mayor, Aldermen, and
other Officers, some inclined to surrender, others not, so that time was
desired and granted to consider of it; in the interim Col. Richards and Col.
Cunningham, with their Regiments, arrived before the place, and being informed
that it was upon surrendering to King James, returned back (with 14 or 1500
persons that fled from the Town to them, intending for Leverpool) for which
both the Colonels were turned out of Commission, yet their Regiments, with
three others, were forthwith ordered back; and its hoped have since entered the
place, which is in a good Condition for Defense, and therein 20000 Men, but not
above 9000 Armed, with Provision for three months, resolved to defend it to the
last, having before their arrival, committed the Governor, and several others
to Prison, on pretense for endeavoring to betray it to their Enemies, and made
Mr. Walker (a Minister) their Governor.

The late King perceiving his Presence could not procure this Important Place
at the easy rate he expected, was forced to wave his speedy Design for
Scotland, and leaving his Army to prosecute the most convenient measures for
its Recovery, returned back toward Dublin, to meet his Parliament, where he
was expected the last of April, and where upon his first arrival, he gave
orders to disband Col. Russell, Sir Thomas Newcome, and such others Protestants
as till then continued in that Army, except Drums and Trumpets, who are still
continued per force.

There came with the late King to Kingsale 22 Ships, great and small, all with
Guns, of which 12 were Capital Ships, and with them 4 Fireships, and in them
not above 50 persons of all sorts, of which were the Kings two Sons, the Bishop
of Chester, Lord Powis, Lord Melfort, Col. Darrington, Sarsfeild, 9 or 10
Frenchmen, 1 Footman, and other Scoundrels that followed him from France.

That day week after his Arrival, and before he left Cork, the late King gave
orders for the Fleet to return to Breast, to join a Fleet of 13 Sail more which
they left fitting out there, and expected to bring them 5 or 6000 English,
Scots, and Irish, raised in France for that purpose, but not yet come. He
brought with him a considerable quantity of Powder, Ball, and Lead, and Arms
for 15000 Men, and 120000l. Sterling, and nothing more, all which is said to be
disposed of by one sent with him by the French King, and who has promised four
Times as much more if that be well employed. The giving Ireland to the French
is not certain, but most sure that it is the Interest of France to give King
James all the Assistance he can, both by Sea and Land, to keep England out of
his own Bowels, which without that Diversion he expects forthwith to make a
violent Eruption therein; and as certain, that if any reasonable Force be in
reasonable Time sent for Ireland, its conquest will be both speedy and easy;
for tho the Irish Forces are with much pains and beating reasonably
disciplined, and numerous, yet all that know the nature of them, know they will
not sight but upon great Advantage; and if once broken, all the Art of Man will
never bring them together again: And those of their present Army, both Officers
and Soldiers, are mostly the very scum of the Country, Cow-boys, and such
trash, as tremble at the fireing a Musket, much more will at many; and what
one English Man used formerly to make nothing to beat 9 or 10 of, and now are
only like so many tied Dogs let loose, which with a little Correction, will
soon be reduced to Obedience. There are Protestants enough yet in Ireland to do
the Work alone, if they could but get together, have Arms, and good Officers to
head them, and will, as fast as even they can, join with the Army that comes to
their relief, to be revenged upon the devouring Irish, who having now all, will
be rich plunder for an Army, and cannot hold out against 30000 Men, besides
what is already there, till Michalmass next, though now possessed of the whole,
except Londonderry and Inneskillen* in Dublin there is not now above 16 or 17
hundred Soldiers, and yet at least 20000 Protestants, fighting Men, but all
disarmed, or as good as disarmed, brave brisk curious Lads, mad to be at work:
So that 4 or 5000 Men might take and secure that City and Province, and be in
one Month 20000 Men, if Arms and Ammunition were sent with them, in spite of
any resistance the Irish could make.

Among the Irish, the most mischievous Person is the Lord Galmoy, who, upon the
late King's coming to the Throne, presumed to enter in time of Divine Service,
St. Warborous Church in Dublin, and debauchedly offered Abuses to some modest
Women, for which he was brought upon his Knees: But in Revenge, upon the first
motion to the North, he haug'd one Dix, and another who belonged to the
College, upon a Sign-post, pretending he found them in Arms.

Of Turn-coats, there were many pitiful mean-spirited Fellows, to keep and
creep into Business, none worth noting, but one Marby Dean of London derry, a
Papist born, but brought up in the College of Dublin: and one Turner, who in
his Time had turned through almost all Sects and Opinions; and for his last
turning got to be Recorder of Limerick. However the Popish Clergy have not been
wanting, by all manner of ways, to pervert whoever they could, nor the
Protestant Ministers to preach against their Heresy and Idolatry; among the
rest, one Wilkinson, Minister of Palmers. Town near Dublin, in Christ-Church,
briskly decrying their Idolatry, was by the Bishop of Dublin silenced in the
midst of his Sermon.

Many Persons endeavoring to bring Money for England, had it seized by the
Irish; and among others one Lindon, who all along sat with two Papists, second
Judge of the King's Bench, to try several Protestants, and punish them too for
no other Crime, out being Enemies to Popery; and particularly one Whalley,
there famous for Astrology, for publishing and spreading an Account of the
Prince of Orange's Landing in England, his Declaration, and Success, was, by
their worshipful Lordships, singled out, and made the first public Sacrifice
by their Popish Mercy, for his Zeal to the Protestant Religion, to the extreme
hazard of his Life, and loss of all he had (tho often craved) denying him the
common Rules of Court, a Copy of the Indictment, and what else might enable him
to make his proper Defense: Another proved to be Distracted, fined 14l.
Sterling; and others for like Crimes, like Cases. But whether for these, or
other good Service to be done here for his Friends there, the good Judge got his
Moneys again, while others came off with loss of theirs: But what says Pluck?

About three or four days after King James Arrived at Dublin, the few Fellows
and others left in the College, waited upon him, being introduced by the Bp of
Chester, since dead, (said to be poisoned by some of the Popish Clergy) and
received many Assurances of their Safety and Protection.

A LETTER from a Lieutenant in the late King James's Army in Ireland, to the
Author of Ireland's Lamentation. Dated at Dublin, May the 7th, 1689.
SIR,
HAving this Opportunity of a Friend of both yours and mine coming to Chester,
I thought fit not to omit giving you this brief Account of what has happened
here since your departure: Which is, that before the Duke of Berwick got to
Colerain, it was quietly quitted by the Protestants; who no sooner found
themselves attaqued on all sides, but most of the Men stole away by Night, some
one way, and some another, and left their Wives, Children, and Effects, to the
discretion of our Army; who by the care of their Officers, proved more kind and
civil to them than their own People, who running away, pulled down the Bridge to
hinder their being pursued: However, that Defect was soon repaired, and our
Forces having nothing more to hinder them, marched directly for Londonderry,
and upon the King's coming up, sat down before it, on the 19th of the last
Month; and thereupon the King sent John Burton (a Protestant) one of the
Trumpeters attending the State here, to Summon the Town to Surrender, with
assurance of Pardon from the King; and to let them know he was there in Person,
to sign and perform whatever was promised them. Whereupon the Town returned
Answer, That they had sworn Allegiance to, and kept the Town for King William
and Queen Mary, and neither owned, knew, or would obey any other; and that if
any more such Messengers came thither, to frighten and terrify their People
from their Allegiance, they would hang or shoot them: However the King had such
Interest within the place, as to keep out two Regiments sent thither from
England: But seeing they refused to submit, ordered Batteries to be raised, and
his Canon and Bombs to be played at the Town; and though much Mischief is done
by the Bombs, yet the new preaching Governor ( viz. the Minister, Mr. Walker)
continues obstinate, and in two or three brisk Sallies, killed about 4 or 5000
of our Common Soldiers, the French General Mamou, one Major, five Captains,
and several other Inferior Officers, and wounded the Duke of Berwick in the
Thigh; Colonel Sheldon, and some others, are said to be mortally wounded, but
not without considerable loss on their side also. In the mean time another
Party of our Men, commanded by Lieut. Genesis Hamilton, took the Castle of
Kilmore; which will so cut off all hopes of Succor, that it is hoped Derry will
also Surrender, and receive Mercy, for otherwise it is resolved to put all to
the Sword. The King finding them obstinate, returned to Dublin the 29th of
April, and this day met the Parliament, where he made a short, but pithy
Speech, setting forth how much they were obliged, first to God, and next to the
King of France, for contributing to that their happy Meeting; and hoped they
would not be wanting on their parts, forthwith to consider of all convenient
Measures to unite the Hearts of all his good Subjects of this Kingdom, resist
the intended Invasion from England, and recover his Dominions, for the Glory of
God, and Ease of his Subjects both in Church and State. Sir Richard Neagle, the
Attorney General, is chosen Speaker of the House of Commons, who made a Speech
to the House, telling them how much they were obliged to the French King, and
the Duke of Tyrconnel, for that glorious Meeting, and how meet it was to return
both their Thanks. The Speeches will be printed, with a List of the Parliament,
till then I cannot be certain of the Particulars of either, but believe there
are not many Protestants among them. It Is hoped that the King will consent to
take off Poynings Acts, dissolve the Act of Settlement, and restore the ancient
Proprietors to their Estates: But others are of Opinion, an Irish Parliament
cannot do it without the Advice of England; and that the Sessions will be soon
Prorogued to prevent such Disputes, till the King has got into England, which
we here seem to promise our selves about the beginning of June, but cannot
attempt it before for want of Forage and Shipping, which are coming from
France to waft them over; in the mean time there is 5000 foot ordered forthwith
for Scotland, to keep the Highlanders, and others the King's Friends there,
from fainting, till more can be sent them. We conclude, we can spare a
formidable Army of Horse and Foot for England, and the like for Scotland; who
with greater Supplies we expect at the same time to land in England from
France, and the King's Friends yet in England, who want only our presence to
join with us, will, with the loss of as little Blood as he lost them, recover
those his Kingdoms again. We have (as we hear) sent you home Herbert by weeping
Cross to resit his Shipping. We received into this Kingdom, since you left it,
5 or 6 Regiments of English, Scots, and Irish Soldiers from France; 250000l.
Sterling; Arms for 20000 Men, 300 Barrels of Powder, several Mortars, and a
great quantity of Ball and Lead; 36 Sail of Men of War, 8 Fireships, and
several Tenders, and daily expect as many more, in all a Fleet of near 50 Sail;
and doubt not but before Herbert return, to have sufficient to send him and the
Dutch as fast back as they come to us. There has none of the Persons that were
Condemned when you went hence, yet suffered; but the King declares, if he have
not speedy Exchanges for them, he will not spare one of them, or any other that
shall be found guilty of the like Crimes; and if so, most of the Protestants in
the Kingdom will go to pot; for there are but few, if duly examined, but will
be by our Judges brought under the same Preliminaries.

There are some to be tried now at the King's Bench this Term, and it is thought
Mr. Price the late Treasurer, and his six Companions, will be of the Number,
unless some Exchanges come suddenly for them. There are Indictments already
drawn up for them, or rather to be preferred against them. Some few People have
had their Houses rifled, and among the rest yours, but not by Authority, tho
the King have declared, That all such as are not returned, shall forthwith have
all their Effects seized and converted toward maintaining his Army, and such as
fled hither from England: However great care is taken for civilizing our Army,
but cannot make them quite forsake their old Trade; some Injuries are here and
there still continued, but not so frequently as formerly, the King having
declared his Resolution severely to punish all Offenders of that kind; and on
Saturday last, several that belonged to the Army were Indicted for Robberies
committed upon Protestants, but a good Jury will easily acquit them. I have
great hopes to retrieve some of your Losses again; and not only so, but in case
you will return, absolute Assurance of a Pardon, and a Captain's Commission,
and this from no less than the Ld Melfort and Bp of Clagher, Secretaries of
State; and therefore considering how Things seem now to us, if worthy, would
advise you not to neglect the Opportunity thus offered you; for in our sense
here, we seem to promise our selves all we can desire, and if it please God we
succeed, it will be too late for either you or others to comply otherwise than
to your Ruin. All Friends here are well, and many presents their Cordial
Respects, as does he that was, and ever is,

Sir, your assured Friend and Servant, B. Fz. Ws.

The Publisher to the Reader.
REader, be pleased to take notice, that the Writer of the above Letter, tho a
Papist, is of that sort, a very honest ingenuous Englishman, and I am
confident writes nothing but the naked Truth of their sense of Things there, to
the utmost of his Knowledge; and therefore the foregoing Treatise has been
delayed to add this to it.

FINIS.
Errata. Page 4. line 7. read, than barely Plowing and Sowing, will, etc.


