A SERMON Preached before the KING At White Hall November 23. 1684.

BY GILBERT IRONSIDE, D. D. Warden of Wadham Coll. in Oxon, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

PUBLISHED By His Majesty's special Command.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University, for James Good
Bookseller near the Theater.

MDCLXXXV.

A SERMON Preached before the KING The 23 of November. 1684.
1 Peter cap. 4. ver. 15. Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief,
or as an Evil-doer, or as a Busie-body in other men's matters. Yet if any man
suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed.


FROM which words we may observe Two things.

1. A Prohibition of suffering in a bad cause: Let no man suffer as a Murderer.
etc.

And it is a divine Prohibition for the discharge of our consciences upon the
pain of sin. It Is the divine favor the Apostle aims at, not time serving; He
gives this injunction as an Apostle, not as a Statesman, as an Apostle that
had the care over all the Christian Churches: And if there be any thing
extraordinary in that, it is the very Apostle, that had a special charge Three
times to feed the Sheep and Lambs of Christ. -- Let no man says St. Peter
suffer, etc.

2. The Support and Comfort, and Honor that attends the Cross of Christ. But
if any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed. Of this last I shall
not speak; I hope in this distracted, disputing, lukewarm Age, if yet
Christianity it self shall come to be the Controversy, (which God of Heaven
forbid) there be not many among us that profess the name of Christ, will want
Blood, nor their Blood Spirit enough to dye for him, who died for them, when he
was the Son of God.

The business here is to consider well, what it is to suffer as a Christian, not
to be too hasty and positive in pronouncing this or that Rule or Doctrine to be
Christianity. If any man suffer as a Christian, (i.e.) according to Christ's
Institution, not the foolish, no, nor the wise Fancies of men, Single or in
Assemblies, a Divine, and Apostolieal Christian. We need not, nay we must not
look for the Image of him any where but as we find it in Christ's and his
Apostles drawing.

Even the Church it self, when it represents Religion a right, falls infinitely
short of what is in the Bible, as to the Lording it over our Faith, and is not
so hardy as to equal Her Institutions with Divine Precepts. And we can never be
sufficiently thankful to God for the Wisdom with which he inspired the Church
of England in this Respect, the modest, and humble Wisdom of the Church of
England (indeed all true Wisdom is such.) a Wisdom from above, First Pure, and
then Peaceable.

I wish the Church of Rome had continued so too: But how many Articles of
Faith, and how many Precepts of Life, have they added to Religion, and required
the belief and practice of them as necessary to Salvation, the only cause of
difference betwixt us?

We are content with the account of a Christian as we find it in Scripture, and
in that we read, they were called Christians first at Antioch, not at Rome;
however if any man say, Lo here is Christ, or there is Christ, this is a good
Christian, that a good Catholic, either in Greek, or Latin Church, believe
them not, unless you find them such, and only, and merely such, as he was, when
St. Peter said, if any man suffer as a Christian, such an one even in his
greatest Sufferings ought not to be ashamed: It Is but a thin Expression
according to the sound; but the Figure speaks great things, Let him look upon
it as his Honor, and Glory, 1. Pet. 1.4. The spirit of Glory rests upon you.
Let him esteem it as an Excellency, a Preferment, and the special gift of God,
To you it is given to suffer for the name of Christ Philip. 1.29.

But of this comfortable encouragement I shall not speak. My time shall be
spent upon the first, The Prohibition of suffering in a bad cause, Let no man
suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief; those are words easy to be understood, and
so is the next, an Evil-doer.

The Apostle having mentioned Thieves and Murderers to avoid a further
enumeration of the other great Immoralities, concludes them all in one word of
Evildoers, and then further adds to secure the State, as a Busy-body in other
men's matters.

Beza tells us that the Syriack Version does not read those words, as a
Busy-body, and he undertakes to give a reason for it, because says he, the
humor of meddling with other men's matters, does not seem to be of the number of
those faults that are usually punished, or are punishable, unless, quod soepe
in rixas incidunt, qui curiose satagunt aliena, unde postea majora mala
oriantur. Busybodies naturally fall into controversies, whence greater Evils
may arise: and surely that alone, if there were no other reason, is a
sufficient one for the Prohibition in the Text, in an Apostle that writ for the
peace of Christendom even in private concerns, much more in public, and State
Affairs.

In the Prohibition it self there are two things to be observed. The one
supposed. The other inferred.

1. It Is supposed there is a Power for the suppressing of Vice and Immorality:
and not only so, but also in limiting the several Ranks and Orders and
Employments of men, and coercing of them, if as Busy-bodies they transgress:
and the Apostle reckons even such Constitutions lawful, wholesome and necessary.

2. This being the Magistrates power, it is manifestly the Christian Subjects
duty to avoid all the things here mentioned, the last as well as the first, and
that not only in prudence as to worldly affairs, but upon pain of sin, and the
displeasure of the King of Kings. Let no man suffer not only as a Murderer, and
a Thief, and an Evildoer, but as a Busy-body in other men's matters, i. e.
'twould be monstrously shameful for Christians to be guilty of either of these
things, not only of gross, heathen Immoralities, but of the later sort also:
And there is an Emphasis in the words Let none of you Christians: The Apostle
here supposes that all these are to suffer, and and the Magistrate would
otherwise bear the Sword in vain. I do not love to prove suppositions, yet when
Principles themselves are disputed, or misunderstood, or neglected, or the
Light, and Evidence of them fought against, and in a great measure quenched,
they may well be opened, and the strength of them laid before the
understandings of weak and pressed upon the Consciences of corrupt men: And of
all principles, Obedience to Magistrates (the great Eyesore) and the Execution
of Justice, the support of the world will be always necessary to be taught,
and pressed upon the conscience; I shall therefore consider from the words.

1. The Power for the suppressing of Vice, and Immorality: Indeed a Toleration
of Vice was never pleaded for upon Earth: God be thanked, all Immorality stands
condemned by a Law, what ever the practice of men be, or whatever the Cowardice
or Corruption of Judges may be in executing the Laws, or whatever the necessity
of Magistrates sometimes may be to suspend the Execution of them in Church or
State.

I know no iniquity established by a Law, unless it be some sort of Theft, and
that the very worst, I mean Sacrilege, and I am very far from being sure of
that, God be thanked for our Laws: The Gospel has not all ways, nay seldom
since the Pure and primitive times of it proved sufficient to overcome the
baseness of human nature, And no man ever disputed the Magistrates power in
making such Laws against Immorality.

There is a great Necessity of making of them for two reasons:

The first is the Exigence of Mankind, the second is upon the account of the
Glory of God; neither of which, without the making of these Laws, can be
provided for.

As for the first, we need not apply our selves to fetch Arguments from
Divinity, to prove what has been the constant voice and experience of the whole
world.

And truly the Glory of God can as little subsist without making these Laws, I
mean the Glory of God in this world; for as for his Eternal and Internal, as I
may so say, Glory and Perfection, as likewise that which is manifested amongst
the Blessed Spirits, all our deeds of darkness can never cast any shadow upon
it, though in this world God's honor is much disgraced by our transgressions.

And one reason why it must be so, is, God has made the Laws of Nature to be
his own in a particular manner: Indeed they were his own at first, by writing
them upon our nature, and in our hearts, but he made them his own by a
particular Sanction. He did so to the Jewish nation, when the Government was
purely Theotracy, and God was pleased to come down upon the Mount to manage all
things himself, and to speak the ten Commandments to the people. And the Author
of our Institution was so far from taking that Law away, that he tells us in
his first Sermon from his mouth, that he came to fulfill it, i. e. to fill it
up.

Now if God, as if he was Pater patrioe as well as Pater coeli, Father of
Nations as well as father of Heaven, requires obedience to those Laws which
were given us for the security and peace of the world: it is a small return to
his Honor to see these Laws, His and ours, His as well as ours, His by way of
Sanction, because ours by way of benefit, put in execution.

Nay further, the sad and sinful condition of mankind, and the obligation of
Evangelical duties, that lie upon us in dealing with men guilty of trespasses,
makes it necessary.

God cannot be honored without the execution of wrath upon the violation of
the Laws of Nature, upon this account God will be honored in this world, or he
will confound it: I say, he cannot be honored in this world, without this
Execution of Wrath. Why so? It Is plain from the Evil constitution of Affairs on
the one hand, and the nature of Christianity on the other: The Law of Nature
enjoins us Rules of Justice; the Laws of Christ enjoin us, in case of wrong,
Patience, Meekness, and Forgiveness, as our particular Province.

We are forbidden doing any Injury, and we are forbidden all kind of Revenge,
when others injure us in our Names, Goods, or Persons. This was the Doctrine of
our Savior, and this was the Practice of our Savior: When he suffered, says
St. Peter, he committed his cause to him that judges righteously; and St. Paul
gives a reason for it in the behalf of God, -- Vengeance is mine, Romans 12.19.
Were it not for this Reservation, Aristotle and Tully had been both in the
right, who make it an act of Justice to revenge an Injury: an act of Justice
it is, but such an one as God has reserved to himself, Vengeance is mine, and it
were insufferable in us to wrest his sword out of his hand.

When Joseph's Brethren were afraid, their Father being dead, he would be
avenged on them for Injuries they had done him, Fear not (says he) for am I in
the place of God? Genesis 50. q. d. Vengeance belongs unto Him.

Now the Question therefore is, How does God avenge our Injuries, of which the
world is, and will be full?

Injuries are forbid by the Law of nature, and Injuries will be committed by
the corruption of nature, and Injuries must be suffered, and forgiven too by
the Constitution of the Gospel, and Injuries must be revenged too by the
Justice and Government of the world, but must be revenged only by God, --
Vengeance is mine. But how does God revenge and repay our Injuries? I answer,
two manner of ways.

First, immediately, by himself, and that sometimes in this world, always in
the next.

Secondly, mediately, by the power deputed unto men, and the Magistrates are
called Gods in that respect.

First, by Himself, immediately. So David comforted himself against Saul, 1 Samuel 26. David said to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can stretch out his
hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be innocent? David said further, As the
Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or he shall come to dye, or he shall
descend into battle and perish: and then again adds, The Lord forbid that I
should stretch out my hand against the Lord's Anointed.

Of this extraordinary vengeance of God the Heathens themselves had very strong
apprehensions, and comforted themselves with expectation of it. So the Heathen
Mariners in Jonah, when the lot fell upon him, and discovered him. The same
judgment we find the Barbarians pass upon St: Paul, in the Acts of the
Apostles; when they saw a Viper fasten upon his hands, they concluded, No doubt
this man was a murderer, whom though he escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers
him not to live. So Achilles in Homer, when he confessed he ought not to avenge
himself of his Superior, comforts himself with this Apprehension, That the
Providence of God sometime or other would do him right. -- (...).

These are the apprehensions the Jews and Heathens had of the Justice of God,
and his divine and immediate vengeance: what we are to have we may learn from
our Savior, speaking of the unrighteous Judge, that for importunities sake did
the widow right, concludes of God the righteous Judge, Shall not he avenge his
own Elect, that cry unto him day and night? I tell you, (says he) he will
avenge them speedily, tho he bear long with them.

This is God's first way of avenging, but this is in extraordinary and rare
cases, and often, and for the most part put off till the great day of Doom, the
terrible day of the Lord. And therefore,

Secondly, there is a more ordinary and daily way of avenging Injuries, and
that is by the hand of the Magistrate. So we read Romans 13. He is the Minister
of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon them that do evil.

But what, the vengeance we are forbid to do our selves, is it lawful to demand
at the hands of the Magistrate? Yes, we may, if it be done for one of these
three ends; Either to correct and amend Offenders, or to terrify and keep
others from offending, or to secure Innocent persons. These ends we find to be
Reasons given in Scripture of punishments both in Civil and Ecclesiastical
Courts.

The first end is to correct and amend Delinquents. So when Hymenoeus and
Alexander were delivered to Satan, it was, that they might learn not to
blaspheme. 1 Timothy 1.

A second Reason of demanding Justice, is to terrify the Insolent and Proud
persons. So Deuteronomy. 17. When the Refractory person was adjudg'd to be slain,
'twas, that all the people might hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

The third end of calling in this vengeance from the Magistrate, is the
security of the Innocent. So St. Paul delivers himself, Gal. 5. I wish they
were cut off that trouble you. These are lawful and necessary Reasons, and may
and ought to sway with all good men and true.

But otherwise, for the satisfaction of a revengeful humor, as it is uncharitable
in us to demand the execution of Justice, so in the Judge or Magistrate it is not
honorable to give it. Nemo sapiens punit, quia peccatur, sed ne peccetur: A
wise man never inflicts punishments, because offenses have been committed, but
to prevent them for the future that they may not be.

However for the other Reasons mentioned, the Magistrate is God's Minister, to
execute wrath upon them that do evil: And the Apostle tells us, he does not
bear the sword in vain, i. e. 'twas not given him in vain, and he ought not to
bear it in vain.

So far I suppose we are all willing to go, if not too willing to revenge all
Immoralities against our selves in goods, names, or persons; and you will say,
neither the world, nor God's glory can subsist without this vengeance: but we
are also to consider, there are also Immoralities against the first Table. And
truly, all men have had some sense of many of them, and condemn them; and yet
generally we use our Maker worse than we use our selves; we are apt to be more
careless of preserving God's honor, nay the honor of his Being, than of
securing our own conveniences, or, it may be, humors.

The necessity of preserving Peace and Life make provision against all
Immoralities amongst men in their Persons, Goods, and Names; and a man shall be
hanged for stealing what is of little value. As for Spiritual objects, they lie
out of sight, they are seen only by Faith, and therefore do not so much, so
powerfully, and so constantly affect us, God help us in it. But I say some
sense of Religion all men have, and always had.

The Heathen took care to preserve the honor of Religion in general, and would
by no means endure any that did not own a Deity, or blasphemed it, or robbed
it, etc. so far were they from that, that sometimes they put men to death,
though in a mistake only, as in the cafe of the great and divine Socrates; and
so severe were they in this point, that it became capital in Athens to accuse a
man of Atheism, and not be able to prove it.

But now it is a frightful consideration, to take a view of the whole world from
the beginning in the Toleration of all foolish, foul, senseless Sects of
Religion.

When the Devil could not persuade men to take away all Religion (humane Reason
was too strong for that) and the knowledge of the Creation of the world by
Tradition was too fresh upon the minds of men, (and we hear nothing of Atheism
before the flood) he persuaded their easy and corrupt understandings to bear
with different Religions: So the Children of God and the Daughters of men had a
Mungrel Religion before the flood. After the flood the Assyrians had many
Religions in their Empire; the Persians more; the Groecians more then they; the
Romans exceeded all; Aug. de Civitat. Dei li. 18. cap. 51. When Rome had
obtained Sovereignty over all Nations, She enthralled her self to all their
Errors of Religion, Et magnam sibi videbatur assumpssisse Religionem, quia
nullam respuebat falsitatem; Leo Mag. Sermon de Petro and Paulo, entertaining
all, She thought She could not miss of the right: Indeed the Romans sometimes
were careful to have no new Religion brought in, and did not like the Setters
forth of new Gods, but it was for fear of some great Alteration to grow thereby
amongst the people, otherwise they cared not what Religion men were of, so they
disturbed not the public peace.

As for the grounds and reasons of this Toleration, it is wonderful to behold
the Vanity of them: some were so wickedly fancyful, as to think God was pleased
with this Variety; So Themistius the Philosopher persuaded Valens the Emperor,
Socrates li. 4. c. 32. That the true God was delighted with the several, tho
false opinions men had of him, thinking, they must reverence him the more,
being so hard to be understood.

Upon what grounds the Samaritans went, is not mentioned; But we have the Story
in the 2. of Kings c. 17. And their Tolleration of Idolatrous Religion seems to
be only from a sottish Compliance.

When God sent Lions among them, says the Text, which slew them, and a Priest
of God taught them v. 27. how they should serve the Lord. In 33. v. the issue
was, They feared the Lord, and served their own Gods too, after the manner of
the Nations; and v. 41. it is repeated, So these Nations feared the Lord, and
served their Graven Images, both their Children and their Childrens Children;
And so it lasted till our Saviors days, who therefore told the woman of
Samaria, They Worshipped they knew not what.

Herod seems to go beyond these, tho perhaps out of the same Principle, with a
great deal of base flattery added to it; For Josephus l. 14. Antiq. c. 13.14.
reports He built a Temple to Caesar whilst he repaired the Temple of God.

Nay St. Austine tells us, Rhetoria ^
that he heard of a sort of Heretics, Qui mirabili vanitate omnes Hoereticos
laudabant, and been sentire and, vera dicere asserebant (and well he might add,
quod ita est absurdum, ut mihi incredibile videatur.) Out of Frensy, or perhaps
Atheism they praised all sorts of Heretics, Aug. Ad Quodvult-Deum, Hoeresis 72.
and justified what they said to be true, tho never so contrary one to the
other.

Appelles the Heretic in Eusebius had somewhat like this Fancy, Libro 5to cap.
13.
{fo.} No man was to be questioned for his Faith, but that it was sufficient at
any rate to believe in him that was Crucified, excluding only downright
Infidels.

But above all, Julian the Apostate fathomed the depth of this Wile of Satan,
for, ideo permisit libertatem Religionis, quia sic sperabat posse interire
Christianos. Out of perfect spite he gave way to a general Toleration,
thinking thereby to destroy Christianity it self, Aug. Epist. 156.

This is a true account of the world of old, Heathen, Jewish, and Christian,
and it is a sad one: As for latter Ages, there have been many pretenses to
Toleration, of which I need not speak: Only one thing is observable of all
Ages, namely, That it has been the Custom of all false Teachers to plead for a
Toleration themselves, but never to afford it to the Orthodox Professors,
witness the Jews, the Roman Tyrants, the Arrians, the Donatists, (not to speak
of the present Age) how unmercyful were they?

Pass we therefore from the History, to our Duty, as we shall be able to gather
it out of Scripture, and the Opinion of the Ancient Church, truly Orthodox, and
Catholic, abstracting from the particular Controversies now on foot in any
part of the Christian world: And I humbly conceive we may certainly conclude
against a Toleration in general of any Religion, that is false in the substance
of it: For as for Ceremonies and Circumstances who will insist upon them, so as
to make a Schism, but use them as he finds them, as St. Austin practiced and
advised? But if Religion in the substance of it be false, it is an undeniable
Maxim, that what we must not do our selves, we are forbidden to suffer in
others; we may not allow in others a sin, which we are forbidden to commit our
selves; Non est innocens nisi qui cum scit prohibere, non potest. He is not to
be esteemed innocent, who knows a thing to be a sin, unless he cannot help it
from being committed: And the Canon Law gives a Reason, Decret. part 13.
distinct. 55.
Non caretscrupulo occultoe Societatis, qui manifesto crimini desinit obviare.
A man is to be suspected to have some secret Society, and combination with that
fault he does not hinder.

Besides, there cannot but be a great Deformity, and the Beauty of Holiness is
quite lost by such a Toleration: There is but one God, and Christ, and Truth,
and Faith, and Church, and it is great confusion to associate things not
sociable, Light and Darkness, if it be in our power to hinder it, and there be
any liberty of Prudence to hinder it; for there is an absolute and blind Power,
whereby indeed we may do such or such a thing, without any good Reason, all
circumstances considered, and without any good effect: And there is a Power of
Discretion, with which all good and Religious things should be accompanied;
otherwise you may cast Pearls before Swine, and they may turn and tear you in
pieces; And you may pluck up the Wheat with the Tares, i.e. You may be the
occasion of doing so: For if the Heretics, which our Savior means by Tares,
prevail in the Confusion, and get the upper hand, the Church may be destroyed.
However the Conclusion still stands, We are not to tolerate diversities of
Religions, if we can with any Discretion, and safety prevent it. Otherwise a
Toleration is not only lawful, but necessary: So in the case of Ambassadors,
who have been allways suffered in the Private use of their Religion: One King
cannot prescribe to an other. Par in parem etc: So also in Reasons of State, as
when Kingdoms be Elective, and obleige themselves, and cannot without great
Confusion help it, and both Parties are entrusted in the Government.

So in case of Matches; when Kings out of Reasons of State take Wives out of
Kingly Families of a contrary Religion, the absolute Lawfulness of which I
think can never be questioned, but is rather manifest from many Instances of
Scripture, such as Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Rachel, before the giving of
the Law; not to speak of David with Maacha the Daughter of the King of
Jeshuron, and Solomon with Pharaoh's Daughter, after the giving of the Law,
which for fear of the sad effects of Idolatry did forbid such mixtures. I am
sure after the coming of the Gospel St. Paul requires the Believing Party to
continue even with the Infidel, who is said, 1 Ep. Cor. 7. c. 9. v. to be bound
by the Law so to do, i. e. by the Law of Marriage, Vide Bezam in locum.
and the Apostle is content for the making of a Marriage Lawful only with one
Condition, namely, Arabs Interpres nimiu^ anguste restringit ad accipiendu^
maritum ex fidelium numero.
that it be in the Lord, i. e. in the fear of the Lord.

But these Exceptions, and the like being provided for, it is certainly our Duty
to God to suppress all erroneous Religions, if it be in our Discreet Power so
to do, still observing the Apostles Rules, which be these.

First, What have we to do to judge those that be without, or those that be not
subject to the State in which we live? They flatter the Pope, that give him
Jurisdiction over all the world.

As for those that be without, no Christian may draw his Sword against
Infidels, only for the sake of Religion, unless there be a special Warrant from
God, as the Children of Israel had for the Canaanites, and Saul for the
Amalekites: But if the Unbeliever be a Member of the State in which he lives,
he is not to be suffered in the outward exercise of his Religion.

So Constantine the first Christian Emperor shut up the Temples of Idolaters,
and there is the same Reason against the Synagogues of the Jews, and the
Mosques of the Mahometans.

Secondly, As for those that be within the Church by Baptism, and Profession,
if they fall into Heresy, or Schism, they must be corrected and reformed, but
still according to the respective offices, Lines, and Powers of men, which are
various. The Minister must do his part; and his office is to stand Sentinel,
and to discover the first Approaches, He must try them, which say, they are
Apostles, and are not. Rev. 2. He must blow the Trumpet, and bid the People
beware of false Prophets. Math. 7. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. Math.
16. Beware of Dogs, Beware of Evil-workers, Beware of the Concision. Philip. 3.
He must instruct in Meekness. 2 Timothy 2. He must convince the Leaders and
reprove them sharply: If this prevail not, He must use the Power of the Keys.

The Epistles of Christ to the 7 Churches of Asia are altogether to this
purpose, and that upon condition of removing the Candlestick out of its place:
in the 2d. of the Rev. 14. I have a few things against thee, (to the Church of
Pergamus,) because Thou have them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught
Baalak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, and to commit
for nication, and that held the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I
hate, said the Spirit to the Churches. So likewise to the Church of Thyatira,
v. 20. I have a few things against Thee, because thou suffer that woman
Jezebel to teach and seduce my people.

However, no Spanish Inquisition practiced, or enjoined by Christ, or his
Apostles, or the Fathers of the Primitive Church. The Arrians indeed went that
way.

Thirdly, the people likewise must do their duty in taking the Alarm from the
Minister, to try the Spirits, upon trial to have no communication with them in
sacred things, which imports an Approbation of their errors, and an
Abrenunciation of the Truth; nor in civil things, if the Church so order it.

Howbeit the people must keep within their bounds; The Keys abolish not civil
Rights, or the Law of Property, much less do they dissolve Allegiance: Suffer
they must for Truth, not defend or propagate it by violence. And in this agree
the harmony of Confessions in all Reformed Churches, whatsoever some turbulent
spirits of Scotland have written to the contrary, and may well be used by
Popish writers to cover their own shame in this kind.

But lastly, the chiefest Power is in the hands of the Magistrate, even that of
coercion; and, debet terrenum Regnum coelesti famulari.

Against This, even the whole of it, the Papists constantly declaim, saying,
That Princes indeed are the chiefest rank of men in Civil Societies, but not in
the Church; they must have nothing to do here of themselves; it were Sacrilege
in them, the Pope must do all. We say, that Kings and Princes are custodes
utriusque Tabuloe, Guardians of both Tables, Defenders of the Faith, not by way
of compliment and Title only; and that from their own high Dignity and Calling,
not the Pope's Donation; Defenders of the Faith, as well as of Civil Rights,
Episcopi ad extra, to see God be religiously worshipped; Nursing Fathers, etc.
Neither does it follow, that the Magistrate may act ad libitum, or that the
people may with a safe conscience acquiesce in any Religion he shall be pleased
to determine, (as Mr. Hobbs,) but it is supposed he shall proceed juxta verbum,
and therefore to study the Law of our common Master, and to advise with Those
whose Profession it is.

To this end the Emperors called Synods, and set the Bible in the middle. And
this practice of old, and above all things was the commendation of the good
King Josiah.

In the 2d. of Chron. 34. when the Book of the Law was found, he commanded it
to be read before him. And it came to pass, when the King heard the words of
the Law, that he rent his clothes. v. 19. Because our Fathers have not kept the
word of the Lord to do after all that is written in this Book, i.e. in
suppressing false and idolatrous Religions. And when the King went up into the
house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
all the people great and small, (as it is expressed v. 30.) and read in their
ears all the words of the Book, he not only made a covenant for himself, but
caused all that were present in Jerusalem to stand to it, v. 32. and took away
all the abominations of other Religions out of all the countries that pertain'd
to the children of Israel. v. 30.

And this, I say, and such like good examples of Kings amongst the Jews, we
find Christian Emperors to follow in Ecclesiastical story: They shut up
Heretic Churches, caused their books to be burnt, disabled them to bear
Office, to inherit Lands, make Wills, banished them, and sometimes put them to
death. And this measure of Power the Church of England requires for her Kings,
Article 37. the same Authority and Power which was in use and practice a among
the Kings of Judah.

But for any particular uniform course to be taken, the Prince being left to
Religious discretion, no man can be so vain to expect it. All is well, if the
correction be but proportionable to the corruption, greater or less, as is
sufficient to preserve the sound, and reclaim the straying Party.

St. Austin, and other Fathers, were at first much against Coertion, and would
have only Persuasion used; but Experience made them retract, and to justify
the lawfulness and usefulness and necessity of Coertion out of Scripture, Si
enim terrerentur, and non docerentur, improba quasi dominatio excideretur.
so it follow Instruction, not go before it, So expressly, plentifully, and at
large, Epist. 48. Mea primitus sententia erat neminem ad unitatem Christi esse
cogendum, verbo esse agendum, disputatione pugnandum, ratione vincendum, ne
fictos Catholicos haberemus, quos apertos Hoereticos noveramus. Sed haec opino
mea non contradicentium verbis, sed demonstrantium superabatur exemplis.

In another place he tells us, Nullis bonis in Catholica hoc placet, si usque
ad mortem in quenquam licet hoereticum soeviatur, Lib. 3. contra Crescon.
and desires Donatus the Proconful of Africa, Ep. 127. that he would forget he
had potestatem occidendi; and in his 3d. Book 50. chap. to the aforesaid
Cresconius, he gives another reason why he would not have the blood of
Heretics to be shed, because all hope is cut off, and it takes away Temporal
life, when they are in danger of losing Eternal: yet in some cases he thinks it
fit that Heretics should dye, as when blasphemous, as the Manichees, and
abusing the Sacrament in the Supper; when such beasts as the Priscillianists,
when tumultuous as the Circumcellians. Eodem loco coatra Cresconium. Contra
literas Betiliani. l. 2.
And Laws were made specially after the death of St. Austin to that purpose,
which the Church of Rome has brought to the hight of extremity. Bellarm. de
laicis, cap. 21, 22. But in these, and such like cases as have been mentioned,
the Magistrate, in the opinion of the whole Catholic Church, may, and is to
interpose. And though Anabaptists, In hoc enim Reges, sicut iis divinitus
praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum reges sunt, si in suo reguo bona jubeant,
mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam
quae ad divinam religionem. Ep. contra Cresco^um
and other Phanaticks, say, No Good comes by compulsion, (which is not always
true, as St. Austin reasons at large,) yet the practice of Religion contrary to
the true is not to be suffered, but means must be used, not only to secure the
Church and the Faith of it, but to reform also, if it be possible, the
Heretics and Schismatics themselves, and to compel them even by mulcts to
frequent the Church, intending their Salvation, not Punishment: Imo serviunt
Reges terrae Christo, etiam leges ferendo pro Christo: Ep. 48. Non odio
nocendi, sed dilectione sanandi. Indeed the Understanding can be wrought upon
by nothing but Persuasion, and men can never be sincere Converts, unless the
Understanding be made to yield: but alas, in encountering with the greatest part
of Secteries, we do not deal much with the understanding; many of them are such
merely from an indulged custom (when Discipline lay asleep) of gratifying a
sensual humor, which lies in itching ears, gadding up and down, and always
prating, and not knowing what they affirm; Si docerentur, and nonterrerentur,
vetustate consuetudinis obdurati ad capessendam viam salutis pigrius
moverentur. August. Epist. prius citata.
so that a little Reason, with a steady hand in restraining, may quickly be
effectual with many that are let loose only out of this wanton humor, and
without this Restraint Reason would signify but little: As for those that be
truly obstinate, though an Angel from Heaven should speak, 'twould be to no
purpose. But then, though the tongue of an Angel cannot persuade this Beast,
yet a Sword may stop him, and crush the foot of the Prophet that rides him; and
though no good may be done to him, yet we are bound to hinder him from seducing
or cursing others.

The Magistrates are called Gods, as having God's Power to preserve his Honor
and Image, (that indeed is the only reason of giving them this Power,) and they
that deny them the use and application of it, instead of Gods render them
Idols, that have feet and walk not, hands and cannot strike. Let no man suffer
as a Thief, or a Murderer, or Evil-doer in any kind against man or God; those
that be evil doers in any kind may suffer.

There is one Person more in the Text that is to be corrected, and that is a
Busy-body in other men's matters. And I hope I am not come into the number by my
former Discourse. A Busy-body, who is that? There is no such man in the world,
and perhaps now, it is somewhat an hard matter to give an account of this sin,
and to describe the person guilty of it: I am sure, if it be a hard matter to
discover it, it is much a harder matter to destroy it. It Is a hard matter
indeed, to turn out any one Vice, and 'twill never be done perfectly till the
coming of the Son of man; but it is impossible to rid the world of this sin, so
incident to the Activity of men's minds, and so pretending to, and sometimes
resembling the great and eminent Graces of Christianity, Knowledge, and
Charity, and Zeal the Offspring of it: But in truth, so suitable to the Pride
of nature and life, which not only is in, but domineers in the hearts of most
men.

There be somethings which at first sight or hearing seem to be the plainest
things in the world, and in themselves really are so, yet by the Corruption of
men through weakness of mind, strength of Passion, Interest, Personal
Animosities, Partiallity, etc. are so perplexed, as to become the hardest to be
understood; It Is so in this of being a Busy-body; We can hardly make men
confess in private concerns, more hardly in public Affairs. And yet I do not
question, if men would but impartially attend and account themselves with
humble nay honest minds, they would quickly find themselves when guilty; Nay at
first generally speaking men out of an innate modesty are not easily brought to
be guilty of this sin, and it is a kind of a Rape upon them, they are rather by
natural Instinct kept from it, and in our common conversation no Creature is
generally so oftensive in ordinary concerns as the Pragmatical one. However, as
much as we have defaced this natural modesty and bashfulness the great Grace,
and Beauty, and Ornament of the mind, there be Rules which will be confessed by
all when we speak in general of this sin to discover it by, and they are these
1. Inferiors have no right to meddle with Superiors at all, unless it be to
defend, and obey: nothing else, not so much as to council unless called to it:
much less to reprove saucily, or contumeliously to expose. Nor 2. Authority
over their Equals. Nor any men 3. Any thing to do out of their calling.


All this is plain by Reason, more manifest by Scripture, and enforced upon us;
By what Authority do thou these thing? said the Jews to Christ, who owned the
reasonableness of the Question; and at an other time, when one came to him to
engage him about the dividing of an Inheritance, our Savior turned him away
with a short and sharp Answer. Man who made me a Judge over you? Neither would
he enter upon his own office till the time appointed of his Father. My hour is
not yet come: And at an other time, he checks the forwardness and curiosity of
St. Peter for only enquiring after the Fate of St. John. If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me, prepare for thy own
business: And St. Paul: What have I to do to Judge those that be without? And
as for those that be within, in 2 Cor. 10. Though, says he, I should boast of
my Authority, which as an Apostle was universal over all the world, I should
not be ashamed, yet how often does he there speak of lines and measures
distributed to others, and agreed upon, and keeping himself from theirs, and
within his own line?

Nay further, (to obviate the ranting objection which the rage of Enthusiasm
has prompted some to make, and the Conclusions and Blasphemies, of which we
have seen and felt) when Moses slew the Egyptian, St. Austine thinks it was a
zeal, not according to knowledge; Those that are not of his mind (as I think
most are not) say 'twas by a special Commission from God, Vid. Acts. 7. v. 25.
and was the First Instance of his being appointed Leader of his People: And
indeed, after Moses his time, we have the like instances in rare and
extraordinary cases: So we read the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon,
Maimon. More Nevochim p. 316.
1 Judge. 6.34. i.e. according to the general Interpretation of the Hebrews, By
a Prophetical rapture he was inspired, and enabled to do those Heroic Acts
that are recorded of him in he 7th chap. without the help of means. And so it
was indeed with all the Judges of Israel, as is expressly said chap. 18. v. 3.
When the Lord raised them up Judges, i. e. in their Confusions appointed them
extraordinarily, it is said the Lord was with the Judge, extraordinarily still,
to deliver them out of the hand of their enemies. So in the 11 chap. 29. ver.
it is said the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jeptha, and v. 33. we have his great
exploits: and in the 14, and 19. verses we have the same words of Sampson. The
spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson. The like of David in encountering the Lion
and the Bear, and Goliath with a Sling. But what is this to the madness of our
people? If our Zealots pretend to the same extraordinary calling, and the same
Spirit, let them show their Faith by their Works, let them do as Moses did with
Pharaob, and at the Red Sea; nay, let them do as Gideon, and Jeptha, and
Sampson, and David, i. e. let them work miracles, bring to pass Heroic Acts
without proper and competent means.

The Sum is, and it ought to be the governing Rule in our whole lives, We are
to do our Duties when called to it, not else, no not in the Acts of our general
calling as we are Christians. Let not this seem strange to any. The great Duty
of Christianity, is to believe with our hearts, and confess with our mouths,
that Jesus is the Christ: neither is it sufficient to keep Faith only in our
hearts, as some Heretics in the Primitive times blasphemed, though it be to
save our lives, but then it is when we are required to make Confession with our
mouths; and the Ancient Church, to check the Forwardness and blind zeal of some
hasty Christians, refused those that offered themselves to the rage of
Persecution, forbid'em I say to be taken into the Catalogue of Martyrs.

So likewise for our Duties to men, we are in 6. Gal. required to do good to
all men, but it is, as is there expressed, as we have opportunity.

And as for particular Callings, we have the same Apostles Rules in two
Epistles: In the 12. Romans 4. All members (says the Apostle) have not the same
office, and therefore v. 16. let every one attend on the office wherein he is
placed, whether it be Ministry. Teaching, or Ruling. v. 7, 8. The same counsel
we have 1 Ep. Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in the same Calling wherein he was
called; Art thou called being a Servant, care not for it: v. 21. though if thou
may be made free, use it rather. And v. 24. he repeats it again, and to
enforce it upon them, uses the great engaging term of Christianity, Brethren,
let every man in the Calling wherein he is called abide with God; otherwise you
sin against the common notion of Brethren, you walk not as Christians, and
therefore 2ly. you forfeit the great blessing that attends our living suitably
to that Relation, neither do you abide with God, and how then can you expect
God's favor when you go away from him? God's Protection to his Church is
promised upon this condition. In the 90 Psalm it is written, He shall give his
Angels charge over thee to keep thee, and if they have charge over us, we need
not doubt the services of other creatures, but then, it is in all thy ways, not
else, and That clause, the Liar and the Murderer from the beginning left out in
his Temptation to our Lord.

It Is very observable, how particular the Apostles are in laying out the
respective Duties of Inferiors, ( Obedience in this world is the great thing,)
the sins of Superiors are remitted to the other world, and then Great men shall
be greatly tormented. But the Apostles are in nothing more exact in their
commands upon Christendom, than in laying out the Duties of Servants to
Masters, (not so much as answering again.) Children to Parents, Wives to
Husbands, all Inferiors to their Betters, valuing of men by the discharge of
these offices. And it was good advice therefore of a Cardinal, Jackson Tone 1. p.
232.
(much commended by a great Divine of our Church,) in reading of St. Paul's
Epistles, to begin with the end of them, which contain the plain Duties of a
Christian life, private and public, for being once well acquainted with them,
we shall more easily attain to the true sense of the former part, which being
usually Doctrinal are the more difficult.

And as the Apostles were thus careful in enjoining the Duties of these
particular Callings, so the Christians were as careful in performing them,
though mean and base ones.

When the Publicans and Soldiers changed their Religions, they kept their
Callings still, would fight for their Emperor, and dye for Christ at the same
time; not but that Callings may and must be sometimes changed too, as if one be
subordinate to the other, or in case of disability of Body, Mind, Estate, or
Private necessity, as when Paul made Tents, and we have power over our selves,
and be at our own disposal; -- If thou may be made free, use it rather, never
out of Pride, Lightness, Ambition, Covetousness, Idleness, Pragmaticalness, and
as Busy bodies, and without Authority. For what I pray makes a Calling, either
to a Profession or single Action, but (first) Fitness of Abilities, secondly,
Authority? both of them necessary always, but the latter absolutely, and in the
highest degree. And therefore when men loath the Stations in which God has set
them, and either utterly abandon them, or reach at those Employments which in
the ordinary course of Providence are denied them, when he shall teach that
ought to learn, and he command that ought to obey, such Inversions and
transposing of things are no more hurtful to men, then hateful to God.

So much for Professions and Callings without Authority. The like must be said
concerning single Actions, upon any emergent occasion. When Demetrius the
Silver-Smith, in the 19. Acts, being afraid, upon the account of St. Paul's
preaching, of losing his Trade in making Shrines for the Goddess Diana, of his
own head had called the Craftsmen together, though he spoke notably in the
behalf of the great Goddess Diana, whom all Asia and the world worshipped, and
had filled his hearers with wrath against St. Paul, and the whole City with
confusion, crying out for the space of two hours, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians, and yet the biggest part knew not for what they came together, the
Town Clerk, to still the people, very wisely and very loyally told them, If
Demetrius and his Crafts-men have a matter against any man, the Law is open,
and there are Deputies, or, (as it is in the Margent of our Bible) the Court-days
are kept, let them plead one another, and it shall be determined in a lawful
Assembly, and ye ought to be quiet, and do nothing rashly, for we are in danger
of being accused for this days riot, for as much as there can be no cause given
for this concourse of people.

As for the Church, examine the whole Bible, Old and New Testament, you will
find Priests, and Prophets, and Apostles, and all the People of God, and the
Son of God himself submitting and ruling their outward behavior by humane
Constitutions and Powers, as carefully as this Town-clerck. The Acts of the
Apostles, and the life and death of Christ are perfect submission to the
Emperial Laws. The Apostles refer themselves to them, First, for Obedience, and
then for Protection. We have them both notably at once in St. Paul. I appeal to
Caesar. and I am a Roman; and when wrongfully imprisoned in the 16 of the Acts,
and the Inferior Magistrates feared, when they heard they were Romans, and
sent to set them at Liberty privily, no, says St. Paul, They have beaten us
openly uncondem'd, being Romans, and have cast us into Prison, and now would
they thrust us out privily? Nay verily, let them come themselves and fetch us
out. v. 37. But their Obedience to the Laws they allways performed sincerely
and cheerfully; and upon much better Principles then any people under Heaven
among whom they lived; other men did it for fear of wrath, Christians for
Conscience sake. You must needs be subject for Conscinenc sake, Romans 13.5. We
are in danger of being called on question for this days Riot, said the
Town-clerck of Ephesus, we sin against God would the Christians have said.

Indeed if things were pursued home to their Principles, and thence to their
dismal Consequences, men may learn their Obligations to humane Laws, as well as
to the Laws of nature, even by the light of nature: The Thief, the Murderer,
and the Evil-doer are condemned by the Laws of nature, the Busy-body by the
Laws of the State, which has power by the Law of nature to make Laws
sufficient to preserve it self; and is the first Dictate of the Law of Nature
concerning men combined in Societies; and tho in themselves some sins against
the other immediate Laws of Nature, and these against the State are not
comparable, yet as to the Peace, Tranquillity, and Comfort of the world, the
sins which arise from this Pragmatical Principle, are much the worse, and
generally the causes of the others also. And who doubts but the Debauchery of
the last Age was the effect of the War, and that War caused by this very
Principle? It Is therefore a true and a wise saying, Sedition is worse then
Murder, and it is pity the saying is found so often in the Alcoran, and so
seldom to be met with in the Practice of Christians, I say, If things were
rightly pursued to their Origin and Consequences, this Sin is manifestly
discovered by the Light of Nature, but no Condemnation of it comparable to what
we find in the Christian Religion; That Is a Religion, which in its very
Constitution aims at the peace and tranquillity of mankind, a Religion which
is exercised in Humility, and Self-denial, in Thanksgiving for other men's
Parts, Gifts, Powers, Preferments, and Authorities, and above all in a perfect
Submission to the holy will of God in his wise governing of the world.

The Conclusion therefore must be that of Eccl. 11.10. My Son meddle not with
many matters, and the Council is there backed with Three notable Reasons, For
if thou meddle, thou shall not be innocent, ( there is sin the case) and if
thou follow after, thou shall not obtain, ( Disappointis threatened) neither
shall thou escape by flying.

There be Three things in the New Testament which are threatened with signal
judgments in this life:

The First is doing evil that good may come of it, Vide Grotium in locum.
whose damnation says the Apostle, is just. Romans 3.8.

The Second is Profaning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. They that eat
unworthily eat damnation to themselves. 1 Cor. 11.

The Third is Profaning of the supreme Powers. They that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation. i. e. These Three sins make men liable not only to the
divine wrath hereafter, (for so all sins without Repentance expose to
Damnation) but usually they are also attended with signal judgments in this
life. They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, and they that
meddle with many matters shall not escape, no not by flying, a Curse shall
follow and overtake thee; And so let it upon all the Troublers of the Earth,
that our Kings may be at Rest, and we may lead a quiet life in all Godliness
and Honesty.

FINIS.
QVicunque vos ex occasion legis imperialis, non dilections sed inimicandi
odio persequitur, displicet nobis; and quamvis res vestras falso appellatis,
quas nec justi possidetis, and secundum leges Regum terrenorum amittere
jussiestis, quisquis tamen ex occasion hujus legis quam Regesterrae Christo
Servientes ad emendandam vestram impietatem promulgaverunt, res proprias vestr
as cupide appetit, displicet nobis. Aug. Ep. 48.

