DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX,

WHEREAS We the Lord Lieutenant have lately received His Majesty's Letters
Dated the 28th of September 1672 Which follow in these words:

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and Right well beloved Cousin and Councellor, We Greet you well,
Whereas in the time of the Lieutenancy of our Right Trusty and entirely beloved
Cousin and Councellor James Duke of Ormond in that our Kingdom of Ireland, We
did for several weighty reasons Us thereunto, especially moving, by Our Letters
under Our Signet and sign Manual, Order and Direct, that all Prosecution in
criminal causes, against any of our Subjects of that Kingdom, upon the account
of the late Rebellion and War, should be forborne, and that all our Judges and
Justices of Assise and Goal delivery, and our Attorney and Solicitor General
and all our Officers and Ministers and others of what degree soever should take
notice thereof, And Proceed accordingly in all such cases, so that none of our
said Subjects might be terrified by any prosecution in our behalf, but be in
peace to follow their Lawful occasions, and that if any Indictments, Actions or
Suits of that nature were depending against any of our said Subjects, that our
Attorney General should be required to enter a Nolle prosequi in every such
cause depending, and that no new Indictments or proceedings should be had,
Notwithstanding which our Commands, We being lately given to understand (though
we could not but expect the conformity of all our loving Subjects in that
Kingdom to our example of Clemency, and to our declared pleasure against the
continuance of animosities and differences after so long a time upon account of
those things which ought to be forgotten and forgiven) that Actions have been
brought by diverse persons against several of our Subjects, even against some
whose Estates have been forfeited, seized, and disposed by Act of Parliament
upon the account of the said Rebellion and War, and judgments obtained against
them for goods taken and Wrongs done in the heat of Rebellion and War, which
being a great Terror to all who were Involved in those unfortunate actions, may
be of dangerous consequence to the Peace and setlement of that our Kingdom, and
renew and perpetuate feuds and heart-burnings, when men shall find themselves
after t(...)rs pursued, even for those things for which they were not so much
as questioned in the time of the late usurpers Tyranny, or if questioned were
thereupon acquitted, out of a just sense of the mischiefs that may ensue, and a
gracious inclination to heal the wounds, and cement the breaches, which by so
many years division and War have been made, that all our people may return to
that unanimity and neighbour-like fellowship, commerce and correspondence
wherein they lived together before the three and Twentiethof October 1641, then
which nothing can more conduce to our satisfaction and service, We do not only
declare our just resentments that any of our Subjects should have commenced or
prosecuted such actions and suits (which We doubt not upon this signification
of Our pleasure, but they and every of them will respectively surcease) but we
further declare, that our gracious intention is the first session of Parliament
in that our Kingdom, to pass an act of free and General pardon, indemnity and
oblivion to all our Subjects of the same, and in the mean time, We expect from
and command you Our Lieutenant, and all our Officers, and loving Subjects of
what degree, quality and condition soever, and every of them, to take notice
hereof, and forbear the preferring, Commencing or prosecuting any Indictments,
Bills, suits, Actions, or plaints against any our Subjects, of that our Kingdom,
for any matter or thing relating to or done in that time of the late Rebellion
or War, and before our happy Restoration that as we have extended Our Grace and
Clemency to all in general, and particular, they may Mutually remit the
Offenses and injuries of one another, And to the end, the declaration of this
our pleasure may be taken notice of by all persons whatsoever, We strictly
charge and command that these our Letters be enrolled in our four Courts at
Dublin, and by A^t of state to be pass^d at our Council Board, published to the
whole Kingdom, For which this shall be unto you and all others whom it may
Concern a sufficient w^rrant, And so We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the 28th day of September 1672 In the 24th
Year of Our Reign; By His Majesty's Command. Arlington.

TO Our Right Trusty, and Right well beloved Cousin and Councellor Arthur Earl
of Essex, Our Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Our Kingdom of
Ireland, Now we the Lord Lieutenant and Council in pursuance of his Majesty's
said Letters do by this Our Act of Council Order, that His Majesty's said
Letters be enrolled in His Majesty's four Courts of Dublin, And we do also
hereby publish His Majesty's said Letters to and throughout this whole Kingdom,
and we do hereby require all persons concerned to take notice of His Majesty's
pleasure thereby, signified and to observe the same,

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 21th day of October. 1672. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin Canc. Arran. Fran: Aungier. To: Booth. Jo: Bysse. J:
Temple. To: Byron. Will: Steuart. H: Ingoldsby. Theo: Jones. Maurice Eustace.
Char: Meridyth. Hen: Ford.

God Save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty;
And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street. 1672.


