Modus tenendi Parliamentum: OR, The Old Manner of Holding PARLIAMENTS IN
England. Extracted out of our Ancient RECORDS. With certain Municipal Rights
and Customs of this Commonwealth of ENGLAND. Together with The Privileges of
PARLIAMENT;

And the Manner how Laws are there Enacted by Passing of Bills. Collected out
of the Journal of the House of COMMONS.

By W. HAKEWEL of Lincols-Inne, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun in Fleetstreet. 1660.

The First Chapter of JONAH, the latter part of the Eighth and Ninth Verses.
What is thine Occupation, and whence come Thou! What is thy Country, and of
what People art Thou?

And He said unto them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord, the God of Heaven,
who made the Sea, and the dry Land.


NIniveh, that great City and Metropolis of Assyria, had now filled, up the
Measure of its Iniquities; which called aloud for Vengeance from Heaven:
Insomuch that the Prophet Jonah was going to give the Inhabitants notice of
their unavoidable Destruction, unless they Repented. He Embarks himself, in a
Ship bound for Tarshifh; and no sooner was He got out to Sea, but a terrible
Storm arises, such a one, as made the very Sailors tremble, although they are a
hardy sort of Men, very familiar and acquainted with Dangers: After they had
for a long time tug'd the leaky Vessel to no purpose, in a great Fright they
call every Man upon his God, Belus perhaps, or Astarte, Melcartus and Ilus. But
Jonah was all this while missing, who was fallen asleep in some bidden Corner
of the Ship: After they had found him out, they enquire presently what
Countryman He was; because He was not calling upon his God, as well as others,
in this Distress of Weather.

To which, He replys, that He was an Hebrew, and that He feared the Lord, the
God of Heaven, who has made the Sea, and the dry Land: the Worship of Him was
his daily Occupation; and he expected no Relief from any such Gods, as were the
Creatures of Fear, or a deluded Imagination; But his God was the Creator and
Preserver of all Things; and if ever they escaped the Tempest, it must be by
Confiding in Him; if ever they arrived safe Ashore, it must be through his Power
and Providence, whom alone the Winds and the Seas Obey. We may suppose, the
prophet told them, how vain a Thing it was, to fly to Stocks and Stones in this
Case; when their Safety was only in the living God; when their deliverance
could be wrought only by his Power and Mercy. You may indeed cry out, mangle
and cut your selves, as Baal's Priests did: But no one hears, or can answer
your Requests; because you Address your selves to Idols, which in Reallity are
Nothing at all. Whereas I am an Hebrew, an Abhorrer of all manner of Idolatry;
I am of that Country in which the true God is Adored in Sincerity and Truth,
who is both able and willing to save all, that trust in Him; who is more than
ordinary concerned for the Miserable and Afflicted: Blessed be his Holy Name,
that I was born among those People, who are Untainted by any Idolatrous or
Superstitious Worship; who never bowed the Knee to the Altar of any strange
God. Hence it is, that I can sleep in Storms; rest secure in the midst of
imminent Dangers; whereas you, poor ignorant. Wretches, are at your Wits end,
as soon as the Sea begins to swell, because you know not the Ways of that God,
who is Almighty, and whose Arm is stretched out to save his faithful Servants.
In confidence of his Aid and Assistance, I am now traveling to an unknown
Place, and carrying a very ungrateful Message to the chief Seat of a Vicious
and proud Nation: But I fear no Harm, so long as I am of that Race of Men, who
Worship the true God by rational Services; so long as I am. an Hebrew, and fear
the Lord, the God of Heaven, etc.

From which Words, I shall first consider, what Advantage and Benefit it is, to
be Born and Educated in some Countries above others.

Secondly, I shall show, that the greatest Happiness and Comfort, Men are
capable of receiving, does arise from their being numbered among those People,
who truly fear God, the Lord of Heaven, who made the Sea and the dry Land.

First, The Advantage of being Born and Educated in some Countries above others,
will appear; if we consider them both in a Natural, and in a Spiritual Sense:
For some Countries are so situated on the Globe of the Earth, that either the
Inhabitants are continually scorched with furious Heats, or they are benumbed
and stupefied by incessant Colds; some wander in untrodden Paths, through vast
barren Deserts, such as those of Arabia: Others sit shivering at the Foot of
the Riphaean Hills; undergo the severe Hardships of the Northern Pole. In one
place, they can scarce find Water to quench their Thirst: In another, they fill
their Bellies with Roots, or the small Herbage of the Earth: In one part of the
World, the poor naked Indian lays his Neck on the Block, to be made a miserable
Sacrifice to some Deity of Wood or Stone; and an infinite number have their
Ears born to the Arbitrary and bloody Decrees of an Eastern Emperor. These
Circumstances of Life are sad and deplorable, such as render the Condition of
Mankind an Object of much Pity and Compassion; but there it is most lamentable,
where their Bodies draw the Yoke of Slavery; and their Minds are destitute of
common Civility, as well as of all true Conceptions concerning God or Religion.

This Consideration, must make us see our Happiness, who are Natives of such a
Country, as seems to be the Garden and Paradise of the whole World; a Country,
on which the Clouds drop Fatness Night and Day: Where an abundance of all
things does increase, that may support and refresh the Life of Man: So that it
seems to be shut in and enclosed from the rest of the Earth, as if it were
designed by God himself, to be the principal Seat of Plenty and worldly
Happiness.

Secondly, The Advantage of being Born and Educated in some Countries above
others, will appear greater; if we consider them in a spiritual Sense: And this
is that Country, in which the Gospel of Jesus Christ was planted very early:
That Gospel, which is the Dew from Heaven, whereby we grow up in Grace, to the
full stature of Holy and good Christians; whereby we are directed to live up to
our highest Faculties, as it becomes rational Beings, that are endowed with
intellectual Nature: By which we are forbid to do any thing, that would make us
like Beasts, or that would transform us into the likeness of Devils: by which
Rhiteousness and Humanity, the true Worship and Fear of God is wrought in our
Souls: War and Bloodshed, Rapine and Spoil are rooted out; which are the ways
of Living, and the Trade of other Nations: A Gospel, which has silenced the
Heathen Oracles, and has taught us to entertain right Notions concerning God;
has delivered us from dark and uncertain Conjectures at things, by bringing
Life and Immortality to light; by pointing out to us the right way, and by
teaching us, how we should follow the Conduct of true and sincere Reason: In
brief, Thsi is that System of Religion, which is the most conducive Instrument
in the whole World, to the Pleasure both of Body and Mind: And this is that
excellent Work of God, which makes Men Good, whom it finds bad; as it quickly
turned the first Inhabitants of this Island, who were Unciviliz'd and
Barbarous, into Humble, Affable, Meek, Charitable, Modest, Prudent, Tender, and
Compassionate Creatures: This being now the true Character of an Englishman,
that He naturally Reverences the God of Heaven and Earth; and abhors all manner
of Atheism and Profaneness.

These Advantages of our Country considered both in a Natural and Spiritual
Sense, being well weighed and compared with the Condition of other Countries and
People: We may conclude; that we have as large a Field, as any is, of external
Felicity; whilst our Laws, and our Religion make us to be the best constituted
State under the Sun; being free from those unsufferable Burdens, which so great
a part of the World do labor under: a serious Reflection on whose Miseries
does sufficiently set off and illustrate our happy Enjoyments. For had we been
of a Pagan People, we had been in a worse Condition, than the Beasts, that
Perish; for then we should have made Beasts, our Gods; we should have shed
Tears at the smell of a Deified Onyon; we should have hewn down a Tree, and
have furnished our Chimneys with one part, with the other our Chapels. Had we
been bred up among those, who are misled by the Impostour Mahomet; we had for
ever been condemned to follow Fables and Lies. But (thanks be to God) we are of
that People and Nation, where the God of Heaven and Earth is worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth: Where we enjoy the free exercise of that Religion, which
has the purest Reason to recommend it to our Judgments, which creates a sweet
and heavenly temper of Mind in all its Professors: For it is impressions breath
not upon the Passions, but the Reasons of Men, and all its Assistances work in
a calm and rational Way, so that every good Man's Religion floats not in his
Blood, nor rises or falls with the Ebbs and Tides of his Humors: But he
maintains an evenness of Mind in all the various Constitutions of his Body: He
confines his Piety entirely within his Soul, and cheerfully keeps it from all
Mixtures of Imagination, as knowing, a Religious Fancy to be the greatest Cheat
in the World, and the greatest Virtue to consist in promoting an universal
Benevolence and Kindness to Mankind: whereby in the room of Envying, Wrath,
Strife, and every mischeivous Passion; are planted in the Souls of Men Love,
Candor, Ingenuity, Clemency, Patience, Mildness, Gentleness, and all other
Instances of good Nature. So that we assume the honorable Name of Christians;
not that we merely owe this Title to the Font, where we were Baptized; to our
Education or Climate, wherein we were born; or that we proceed according to
Custom and general Consent in the Religion of our Native Country: But upon a
strict Examination we find our selves, by the Principles of Grace, and by the
Law of our own Reason, obliged to Embrace no other, but the Christian Faith;
there being nothing so intrinsecally Rational, nothing so self-evident, as this
is. For it is pregnant with Wisdom and Happiness; it is admirably Consonant to
the Desires and Needs of Human Nature; it is agreeable to the Faculties of Men;
it is infinitely serviceable to the Content and Tranquillity of the Mind; it is
such a thing, as every wise Man would choose, as most becoming the Dignity of
rational Nature, and most conducive to his Happiness: It rids the Mind of
irkesom and vexatious Thoughts; it exempts men from the Troubles and Tumults of
disquieting Passions; it frees the Conscience of all sad and gloomy
Reflections: It is the greatest art of Joy and Pleasure; it makes us like to
God, as well in the Happiness, as in the Purity of our Lives: In short, it has
in it all the excellent and amiable Qualities, which can prevail upon the
Reasons or Affections of Men.

Which brings me to the second Thing propounded, which was, to show, that the
greatest Happiness Men can receive, does arise from their being numbered among
those People, who fear God, the Lord of Heaven, who made the Sea and the dry
Land. This Happiness is best demonstrated by Comparison with the Enjoyments of
other People, and Nations. Indeed when a Man passes into the Turkish
Dominions, it is no unpleasant Sight to behold a new Scene of the World, and an
unknown Face of Things, in Habits, Diet, Manners, Custom, and Language. Yet all
this while, the People suffer the most intolerable Bondage, both in Body and
Mind; their Necks are galled with Oppressed and their Understandings are filled
with the Belief of the most extravagant and absurd Opinions. And when a Man
travels into Italy, it is a glorious Show for him, to see the Gallantries of a
pompous Religion; their solemn Processions after Relics, a Thorn perhaps, or
a Chip of Wood: Where the Soil, having plentifully received the good Seed of
Christ's Gospel, seems to produce nothing, but Shrines, Altars, Images, rare
Pictures, and rich Chapels: Nay He views this Pageantry of Religion set off by
the finest Wits, delineated by the choicest Pensils, garnisht by the rarest
Carvers. These little Devices they have to catch the Multitude; to raise a Mist
before their Eyes, that they may not see the Snares, that are laid for them; to
guild the Pill, that they may swallow it the more glibly: For by these Wheedles
their minds are betrayed and seduced into the most extravagant and nonsensical
Doctrines: By these Stratagems they are disseized of the Book of God, by which
they hold their Salvation: By these Arts, instead of sober Godliness, they are
taught to practice an infinite number of silly and antic Ceremonies: By these
Tricks they are made Slaves, and Tenants both for Soul and Estate to their
pretended Guides and Governors of Conscience. Had we been so unhappy, as to
have been born and educated, under the same Prejudices, and superstitious
Blindness: true Piety would long since have left us, and common Honesty too.
For who would conform to the strict Rules of a pious Life here, if he were
persuaded, as the Romanist's are, that the Indulgence of a Pope can deliver him
out of the Pains of the other World? Who would not enfranchise himself from all
Duty, both to God and man, if he did believe, that the Dispensation of the same
Pope can dissolve the Oaths of Subjects to obey their Prince, or can set at
liberty every good Catholic, from keeping Faith, or dealing honestly with
Haereticks? But it is our Happiness, that we live in a Country, that is not
subject to blind Obedience, or an implicit Faith; that we are Members of such a
Church, as is uniform in all its Devotions: whose avowed Principles and
Practices disown all Resistance of lawful Authority, our Savior never
warranting the shedding of any Blood, not of his own most implacable Enemies.
Let men look but into its doctrine and History; and they will find neither the
Knoxes, nor the Junius Brutus's on the one side; nor the Bellarmin's,
Escobar's, or Marianna's on the other: This is the Church, that makes the
Protestant Religion considerable in Christendom; because it does not confound
us with the many Postures and Garbs of Worship, or with the continual starting
up of new Lights; because it does not approve of Enthusiastical Heats, of
sudden Impulses of Spirit, of Zeal without Understanding, nor of any such
extraordinary Calls; whereby some men have thought themselves authorized to
overthrow Kingdoms, because there is somewhat to be found in the Revelation
concerning a Beast, little Horn, and a fifth Vial. But in the room of wild and
unaccountable Conceits, our Church settles in us clear and certain Notions of
Religious Duties; forbids us to make false Interpretations of Scripture, to
countenance any evil Design; charges us to place our Religion in the Practice
of true and real Goodness; not in Forms, and Schemes of Speech, or
unintelligible Words, that have no meaning or Sense belonging to them, but in
the Heart, and in good Affections issuing thence. By these means we are brought
to the Exercise of substantial Virtue, having no hope of Salvation, unless we
work it out with Fear and Trembling. For no man is in any thing more certain,
than that he ought to be sober and temperate in reference to himself; that he
ought to deal righteously, and so, as he would be dealt by; that he ought to
carry himself equally and fairly; and that he ought to fear and reverence the
Deity: Now the Church, where we were Baptized, plainly tells us, what we are to
do; what sober, righteous, and godly Lives we are bound to lead, and sets
before our Eyes the danger of neglecting these Duties: So that we are not
deceived by any ways of Fraud or Falsehood; we have no such Cheats put upon us,
as the Doctrine of Merit, or the delivering Souls out of Purgatory by Masses.
But we are dealt Honestly withal; for without Flattery our Church declares, no
man shall be saved without personal Holiness, and unless he be renewed in the
Spirit of his Mind: that no Sacrifice shall atone for his Sin, although he make
his whole Body a Burnt-Offering: He shall not hide his Iniquities by the
greatest Fire and Smoke he can raise, unless he deny his most beloved
Appetites, and cast off his choicest Lusts: He may go a great way from home in
Pilgrimages, and wander through Deserts in Sackcloath and Hair; being clogged with
heavy, malancholy Blood, he may retire to a dark, religious Room, and lock
himself in with many Keys: But all will not do; unless he part with the sins of
his Heart, come abroad, and practice the active Virtues of Christ's Religion:
Unless he fashion his Life according to the Laws of it, and takes not up his
Religion for Mode-sake, or because he was born, where it is professed. Thus, I
say, our Church deals uprightly with Mankind, by telling them, that here they
ought to fit and quafie themselves for the state of Glory and Blessedness; that
here they should get themselves discharged of evil Habits, which the repetition
of Ave-Mary Prayers, or the Absolution of a Priest at the last, cannot wipe
away; especially when they have long abused themselves by ill Practices and
Customs. Wherefore being Members of this Church, which shows us the best way of
Worshipping God by a reasonable Service: which teaches the surest Principles of
Peace and Charity, that tend to reconcile the Differences of Men; which
prescribes the best Methods of propagating Love and Good Will in the World:
Being Subjects to that Government, by whose Laws this Church is established;
where the Supreme Ruler enjoys a Capacity of doing all the Good imaginable to
Mankind, and is in his Nature inclined so to do. I must say, we are a happy
People both in the Constitution of our Church and State.

That this Happiness may abide for ever with us: we are obliged,

Fist, To keep up a friendly Society, and Correspondence with all Men.

Secondly, We are more particularly engaged to love and help one another, as we
are Countrymen, born in the same Neighborhood.

First, We are obliged to keep up a friendly Society and Correspondence with
all Men; because without this Society and Correspondence, no Man can possibly
live happily or well: and we know, every man has a natural desire of his own
Happiness; the sense whereof results from the first and strongest Instincts of
Nature: In that it is without doubt natural to Men, as to other Creatures, to
seek after their own Welfare: Consequently to consider, by what means it is
attainable: Which particular Welfare of every Man, is not to be had without
mutual Benevolence, and a common regard for the prosperity of the wole Body of
Men: This preserves them Honest and Virtuous in all the entercourses of Life:
For should human Society disband, and betake themselves to Woods; Men would be
quickly turned into wild Creatures, and must subsist by preying upon each
other: Then the most Innocent would be least secure, because they are not apt
to Invade other men's Rights, and are ever exposed to Wrongs and Injuries.

This therefore is the proper and useful end of Society, to institute a common
Friendship among Men, that they may be endeared to each other by mutual Offices
of Kindness and Love: The Angels teach us this Lesson; that we should
condescend to the meanest Office for the good of our Brethren. The work of
these ministering Spirits is, to promote the Welfare of Mankind: so that to
employ our selves to do good unto Men, and to further them in the way of
Salvation, is to be as good as Angels unto Men: We hope to be one day like them
in Happiness let us now make them the Examples of our Duty and Obedience: And
indeed, were Men as faithful to one another, as the Condition of their Nature
requires, and the Author of it expects, there would be no need of Civil Laws
and Penalties: We should be all then like our Countrymen of Brightwell, where
it is observed, there has been no Alehouse, no Sectary, nor any Suit of Law
within the Memory of Man. Would every single Person take right Measures of
himself; reflect seriously upon his frail and helpless State in this World;
consider, how insufficient all his personal Strength is to secture him; he must
believe, that if there were not a common Assistance; if he had not Friends and
Acquaintance to fly to upon all Occasions; nothing could be more wretched and
forlorn, than the life of Man. For as the Malmesbury Philosopher says, could we
suppose a Man out of Society; he must live in perpetual Fears and Jealousies:
For his Condition must be desperate, who Corresponds with no body, but trusts
to his own Wit and Understanding, to defend himself against the Fraud and
Violence of the whole World besides; so that Men must thwart both their Reason
and their Interest, before they can reconcile their Minds to any other
Thoughts, then of Love and Society; Human Nature being so much inclined to
both; For supposing the brutish part of Man to be wild and Savage; yet if we
consider him as an intelligent and rational Being; nothing will appear more
extravagant, than to affirm, that he will not pursue such Means, as tend to the
Comfort and Cheerfulness of his Life. For a sociable Life, and a friendly
Conversation with one another, is of great Use to us, in respect of our several
Employments, which we are thereby enabled to follow and accomplish with greater
Safety, much more Cheerfulness, and better Success: With greater Safety,
because as the wise Man says of two Traveling together, if one falls, the
other will lift him up; but woe to him, that is alone, when he falls; for he
has not another to help him: With much more Cheerfulness, because good Company
does ever lessen and abate the Tediousness of Labors; does easily subdue
Troubles and Oppositions: Insomuch that it was a Custom in ancient Times, for
Men to meet together, that they might find out a way, how to Comfort any of
their Friends, that was fallen into Adversity: This was the reason of the
Visit, which Job's Friends made him: With better Success; because Affairs are
always managed with better Wisdom, and consequently Success, where several
Heads and Hands are joined to carry them on. What a strange Chimera then, what
an unaccountable Fiction was that Stoick's Wise and Happy Man! Who fancied, no
Man could be either one or the other, unless he were shut up in some Dungeon,
or lost in some desolate Island; where he might be able acquiescere sibi,
cogitationibus suis traditus: But we know, that Adam, our common Father could
not be happy without a Companion; and if we consider all the Sons of Adam, as
truly they are, and we shall see, they are all very liable to Confusion and
Error. Whilst we are alone, many tumultuous Thoughts and vain Projects start up
in our Minds: The Weakness and Defects whereof are plainly seen, as soon as we
communicate them to others: Of our selves we are very apt to run into Mistakes
in every thing, we set about; there is no better remedy against them, than the
Advice of a faithful Acquaintance: most of our Disturbances proceed from
irregular Passions: We have the Feavours and Frenzyes of Anger and Love to
struggle with, that keep our Minds out of Frame and Order: Hope and Fear shake
us, like an Ague: Envy brings a Consumption upon all our Faculties: all of them
lie cross to our Souls, and like small Particles, that have rugged and sharp
Angles, do continually molest and grate upon us. Whatever then that is, which
will preserve us from these fretting Passions, that rob us of our Peace, vex
and corrode our Spirits, must be of great Consequence to our Welfare. The
Society of good and virtuous Men is one of the best Remedies in this case: is
one of the most likely ways to free us from the Tumults of disorderly
Affections, so that we may find Ease and Pleasure, Sweetness and Contentment in
our Lives: Because into their Bosoms we may pour forth our secret Troubles, and
they will help us to bear our Burden, To them we may divide our Griefs, and so
diminish them; we may communicate our Joys and so increase them. Nothing but
sincere and unfeigned Love, can make us thus friendly and helpful to one
another; which Love is styled in Scripture, the Bond of Perfection, and must
not be founded upon private Ends: For this is Traffic and not Friendship. But
we must use a discreet Freedom in giving Counsel to our Brethren, or
Admonition, as there is need: We must be constant, and never forsake them in
Adversity: because a Man, who deserts his Friend at such a time, is ever to be
condemned for Baseness and Meanness of Spirit. Wherefore that we may be
effectually moved to the Exercise of this entire Friendship and Love for
Mankind; let us not only consider, that it will pour down upon us great and
unexpected Showers of Delight and Satisfaction: But let us look abroad into the
World, and take a view of the State of many People, how uncomfortably they live
by their neglect of these Virtues: by reason of Dissentions among them,
Destruction is brought upon their Families: By Quarrels and Divisions those are
separated and consequently weakened, whom God has joined in the Profession of
the same Holy and peaceable Religion.

For the Prevention of this growing Mischief; We are Secondly, more
particularly obliged to be kind to, and love one another, as we are
Countrymen, born in the same Neighborhood.

And when I mention my native Country; methinks it is a kind of resolving me
into my own Beginnings: For like all sorts of Fruit, there is a natural
tendency in us to the Ground, from whence we came, and where our Root is fixed:
Consequently there must be a more than ordinary Inclination to love and help
those, who are of the same Birth and Growth with our selves: They are as it
were connatural to us, and we are more concerned for their Prosperity, than for
Strangers: For it is in human, as in natural Plantations, partaking of the same
Soil; they cherish one another, and thrive best together. There are ('it is true)
in the course of human Life, from our Cradles upward, certain Periods or
degrees of Change; commonly (as the Ancients have noted) every seven Years:
Insomuch that our Persons may be so altered, that we may be as much unknown to
one another, as we are to Foreigners. However this Strangeness is soon laid
aside, and we are as it were by a forcible Impulse of Nature, ready to Embrace
our Countrymen with an undissembled Affection: Without which (as my Lord Bacon
says) our meeting together does not make Company, but a Crowd; Faces are but a
Gallery of Pictures, and Talk but a tinkling Cymbal, without true hearted Love
and Friendship. Who knows not, that there is a mutual Bond of Amity and
Brotherhood between Man and Man over all the World? neither is it the English
Sea, that can sever us from that Duty and Relation: a straiter Bond yet there
is between Neighbors and Friends: For a Friend and Countryman is my second or
better-self; my Tutelar Angel, by whom I may be defended from innumerable
Dangers: For as God sends his Angels, Creatures, that excel in Understanding
and Power, that are most vigilant and vigorous in their Actions, not only to
give Success to our temporal Affairs, but to assist us in the great
Concernments of our Souls; so also he has planted in the Minds of Men such
mutual Inclinations to advance one another Happiness and Benefit: That we may
say, He has made the whole Creation serviceable to Mankind: Whilst the
glorious Spirits above, and our own Fellow Creatures, do contribute, as much as
they can, to the good of our Bodies, and the delight of our Minds. Men may
highly esteem the Titles of Honor, and they may be proud of their large
Possessions: But it is not possible, there should be any thing bestowed upon a
Man, of equal Value, with a faithful Friend and Neighbor: There are few
Hearts, that are not double; few Tongues, that are not Cloven, and a Man must
have Recourse to the age of Poetry, the golden Times, to find such a happy
Pair, as entirely love one another. Let this Rarity be found in our
Conversation: Let us show that Friendship to each other, as may be valuable for
its stability and lasting Nature; such, as may not be subject to the change of
Fortune, the Rust of Time, nor the Violence of Men: let others glory in their
high and slippery Places; we envy not their Happiness, so long as we preserve
the love of our Countrymen: let others ascribe, what they suffer or enjoy here
below, to some good or malignant Influences from above: as for us, we do not
think, there is any Planet so lucky, as a trusty Companion, and on the
contrary, none so malicious, as false hearted and perfidious Acquaintance: let
others be solicitous, how Jupiter or Mercury look upon them in their Affairs;
it imports us most to mark, what Men we Converse withal: And although we are to
prefer our Countrymen above others; yet these are to be avoided, if they are
Vicious; if they would draw us into any familiarity or acquaintance with Sin:
For above all things, we must be careful, that the Virgin-purity of our Minds
may not be Deflowred, nor its native Modesty laid wast by any manner of Vice.
Therefore for those of our Country we are to have a particular Affection, who
exercise a due Care and Government over their Lives and Actions; who excel in
the peculiar Virtues of Conversation, Modesty, Humility, Meekness,
Cheerfulness, universal Kindness and Charity. They, who are Clothed with these
good Qualities, have in a most eminent Degree that Ornament of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which, St. Peter says, is in the Sight of God of so great Price: There
is no appearance of Pride or Passion in any of their Words or Actions; they are
free from Anger and bitterness of Spirit; their Company is Affable and
Pleasant; which arises from a Christian serenity of Mind, and a great evenness
of Temper. These Virtues of all others, ought to shine brightest in us: then we
shall be always Cheerful, and always Kind; upon all Occasions and Accidents
perpetually the same; by receiving these virtuous Qualities into our Temper, we
shall be rendered truly Wise, Holy, and Good: We shall give real Demonstrations
of the Truth and Integrity of our Religion, by our Actions; we shall ever
employ our Faculties, and determine them to that, which is good and fit to be
done; and this will convince Men, that we live under the Guidance and Influence
of the Good Spirit of God: From which good Spirit do proceed all good Notions
and Inclinations in Mankind, all their good Qualities and Desires, all their
mutual Love and Good Will: When Christ Jesus by his Spirit has thus turned us
into the same Disposition with himself, has molded and fashioned us to the
Temper of himself, our Head; then we shall be always devising the most
effectual ways of doing Good in the World; managing and disposing our
charitable Deeds, to the best Purposes, and to the largest Extent: Our whole
Heart will be employed in these things, so that we shall be little affected
with any other matter, and seldom mind the strange Occurrences of a troublesome
and busy Age. Let us therefore think our selves happy in nothing here upon
Earth, but in the Opportunities we enjoy of corresponding with one another in
the Duties and Offices of Religion and Friendship, which is nothing else, but a
Commutation of Hearts; whereby the greatest dearness is created toward each
other: especially where there is an agreeableness of Humor, and a resemblance
of Disposition: The Impression, that these make, can never be blotted out: For
we do ever carry in our Minds the amiable Perfections of Virtuous and Worthy
Persons: We always think of those, who have touched our Inclinations with their
agreeable Nature: which is most probably to be found among the Natives of the
same Place and Climate: and where this agreeable Nature is, the Friendship
resulting thence must be very consistent and well settled; such as nothing can
disorder, and Death its self cannot End: For it will at last translate us to
those happy Regions, where Peace and Charity, Benevolence and Good Will are in
their Kingdom, and reign over every Heart.

From the Premises this Inference may be made: That we are bound with all
Thankfulness to acknowledge the Goodness of God; that we were born of Christian
Parents; that we have been Educated in the true Religion, whereby we have
enjoyed the advantages of God's Grace and his holy Spirit; that we have any
Bowels of Compassion for the Poor and Needy, so as to consult their Relief in
this public manner; especially in placing out indigent Youth to Trades,
because the whole Content and Felicity of a Man depends upon the choice of an
honest Calling and State of Life; that Brotherly Love does continue among us,
so that we can Converse together without Offense, that we are not of surly, and
uncompliant Humors; that we are not of savage, fierce or insolent
Dispositions: which would make us fitter Company for Beasts, than Men, and for
Wildernesses rather than Cities.

To all therefore, that shall ask us the like Question, as the Prophet Jonah
was asked, whence we came, and of what Country we are: May we answer them, as
he did; that we are Christians, who fear the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that
made the Sea and the dry Land: that we were born in a Soil no less Fruitful in
the Race of good Men, loving Neighbors, and obedient Subjects; than it is
remarkable for yielding an abundance of all things, that may render our Beings
in the World, either happy or easy to us. That, as the Country, from whence we
came, is much taken notice of and Commended for its quick Streams, free from
Stagnation and stinking Vapors, that may ascend to darken and corrupt the
Sky; so we may be as exemplary for good Humor, affable Temper, and humble
Conversation, clear of all Sullenness, Malancholly, and Discontent, that may
raise Clouds, and consequently Storms in the Nation: They say likewise, the
Air, in which we drew our first Breath, is beyond all others the most Serene
and Pure; may the pureness of this Air incline us to more refined Passions than
other Men; may it animate the Spirits of the Heart, as well as enliven those of
the Brain to a more vigorous Pursuit of noble and generous Actions. The wise
and judicious King Alfred did select Oxford for the Muses Seat: where
continually a Race of Men are bred up as liberal and ingenuous, as the Arts and
Sciences, which they profess; where a large and bountiful Provision is made for
the advancement of Learning, the noblest and best Work, that can be in any
civil Nation; where are encouraged and maintained the Champions of our
Religion; a Religion, that dares come, not only where Men can Believe, but
where they can Discern and Judge. The Kings of England ever since have made
Oxford, as it were their City of Refuge, when they have been forced to fly
either from War or Plague; as if this place were only Inviolable by the Arrow,
that flies either by Night or Day: No one therefore can upon just grounds
challenge this for his Country, who entertains any unnatural Conspiracies (so
much as in his Thoughts) against the Order and Peace of the World, or against
the Safety and Honor of those, whom God has appointed Governors over it. May
we then still live, as our Forefathers have done, without the Suspicion of
having any disloyal Principles to the Church or State; may we ever have the
Reputation of such Citizens, as are associated by the common Ties of Humanity,
and the Bonds of Peace? May the power of that excellent Religion, we profess,
be lodged in our Hearts; so the appearance of it will be very exemplary and
useful in our Conversations; then we shall avoid all that Violence and
Sharpness, which accompanies the Differences in Opinion: then none amongst us
will be heard to pass any rash Censures upon the Actions of Superiors, or to
Control any of their Resolutions. May we all agree in Planting and Improving,
not only those moral Virtues, which conduce to the Happiness and Tranquillity of
every private Man's Life, but also those Manners and Dispositions, that tend to
the Safety and Peace of the Kingdom. For the Constitution of the Country is
generally the same with the Persons, that compose it: and where the Inhabitants
or Native of any place are peaceable, full of Charity and good Works; their
good Behavior will be made visible by the continual and undisturbed Happiness
of the Government, to which they belong, and of the particular Country, in
which they were born: and that we are such peaceable Men, and Charitable
Christians; I have a very sufficient Argument to prove it, from the use of
these Meetings: For we assemble thus together, not to indulge our Appetites, or
to gratify any sensual Desire: although none are so excusable, as Men of much Care
and Thought, or of great Business for allowing some time to an innocent
Entertainment, that offends no Law, nor hurts others, or themselves: This
Diversion may be necessary for the repair of Spirits exhausted with Labor; may
serve to sweeten and preserve those Lives, that would otherwise wear out too
fast, or grow too uneasy in the Service of the World: But by these Meetings we
come to know one another, than which nothing can be more Beneficial: because
thereby we may be directed in the best ways of exercising Charity to our
Brethren: which Charity must be Universal, and not limited to a Shire; but we
are to love, honor, and assist Men of all Countries: Thus, although we were born
perhaps in the eighth Climate, we shall seem to be framed for all: By the
practice of which universal Charity, all Places, all Airs, will make one
Country to us; and we are by This among our Countrymen every where, and under
every Meridian: This is a peculiar Excellency of the Christian Religion, to
enlarge our Minds so, as we can call every Man our Brother: and if it be true,
which is commonly observed, that Men are wont to prove such kinds of
Christians, as they were Men before; and that Conversion does not destroy, but
exalt their Tempers; It may well be concluded that the honest sociable Man, who
Communicates soberly with his Friends, and is ready to do good to Mankind, is
nearer to make a Modest, Meek, and Humble Christian; than the Man of
speculative Science, who is more Peevish, Severe, and Morose, and has better
Thoughts of himself.

For if we are good Men, the more public we are, and the more subject to the
Notice of others, our Goodness will thereby be the more diffusive; will be of a
more public Benefit and Advantage: If our Conversation be Bountiful, Affable,
Cheerful, and Friendly; it will spread the Fame of the Gospel in the World, by
making it appear lovely in the Eyes of all Beholders, and so alluring them to
submit to the easiness of its Yoke: and this methinks is evident in our
Savior's Life: For whenever he intended to Convert any to his Faith; he did it
by some visible good Work in the sight of the Multitude. So by Conversing
lovingly together, we may show the World, what good Success our Savior's
Doctrine has had upon our Minds; what a blessed thing it is, to live without
mutual Grudges and Animosities: We may direct Mankind, how they may live
without Passions, or Fierceness; how they may firmly unite and agree together:
For it is not possible for those Men to be Perverse and Ungovernable, who keep
such Company, as regard the Peace and Benefit of Mankind; who are of amicable
and conversable Tempers: Such Persons are like so much Salt cast into the
World, to keep the Manners of Men from Stench and Putrefaction; they are Balm
poured into the Wounds of a Nation, to Cure and Heal them; They are so much
Fire sent from Heaven, so much Life infused into the World, to kindle in others
warm and pious Affections for God and his Religion.

That we may be of this Disposition, so becoming our selves, and so profitable
to others, let us not despond or be dejected, whatever our Condition be in this
World: For by falling into Fitts of Unbelief, we charge God foolishly, as if he
neglected the World; we Usurp upon him, and peevishly snatch the Management of
Things into our own unskilful Hands; so Malancthon was exceedingly troubled,
lest the Cause of God should sink for want of Instruments to carry it on:
Whereupon Luther in an Epistle to a Friend of his, has this Expression; Our
Friend Malancthon must be warned, -- that he would leave off to Govern the
World: And how quiet would all things be, if Men would not intrude, nor set
themselves at the Stern thereof, but leave infinite Power and Wisdom to Govern
the Affairs of it. Then again we must not be apt to be affrighted at every
little Symptom, as we think, of Change in the Government, of things: God's
Providence and Mercy (I hope) will secure us from any more; for if another
should befall us, it must be the Wrong-side outward; the Lowest, Uppermost.
Yet there are some Historians, that relate our foreign Wars, who have this
Objection against the Disposition of our Countrymen; that they were used to
order their Affairs of greatest Importance, according to some obscure Omens or
Predictions, which passed about among them upon little or no Foundations: But a
firm Confidence in the Goodness, Power, and Providence of God, in whom we Live,
Move, and have our Being; a sober Wisdom, and the Discretion of good Society
will shake off the Shadows, and scatter the Mists, which fill the Minds of Men
with vain Consternations.

Let us be, as Jonah was, upright Men, that worship and fear the Lord of Heaven
and Earth; then we shall contribute much to the Credit and Preservation of our
Country: For the World would sink (as Sodom did) under the weight of its own
Wickedness, were it not kept up by such as fear God and keep his Commandments:
Therefore the eminent Faith of Abraham, and the sincerity of David, had an
Influence upon the Happiness of Israel for many Generations; so the Example of
Socrates had upon Athens, and the severe Life of Cato upon the People of Rome.
For the Places, where good Men are, and the Persons, among whom they live, are
Happy by Concomitancy; they enjoy many Blessings, and are freed from many Evils
because of their Neighborhood to good Men; who contribute to the Happiness of
the World by the good Offices, which they are ready to do to all Men: Is any
one in Want? They are ready to Relieve him: Do their Enemies Hunger? They will
Feed them: Is any Man in Misery? They do not only pity him, as the Priest and
Levite did in the Parable, but like good Samaritans, they will bind up his
Wounds, and take Care of him: are others at Variance? they presently Interpose,
take up the Quarrel, and endeavor to Reconcile them: Now is not the World the
better for such Men as these are? It may be every Man's Case to be in Misery,
Affliction, and Want; is it not well then, that there are some to Commiserate
them in these sad Circumstances? The Lips of good Men do also preserve
Knowledge, and they are continually distilling wise Counsel, which by degrees
get Possession of men's Understandings: By their Examples likewise they mend
and reform others, for it is a greater Encouragement to go before a man, and
show him the Way to Virtue, than only to give him Direction. In short, good Men
are the Fathers of their Country; they are the only great and public
Benefactors to it; because to them the World owes its continuance in Peace,
their Prayers and Tears defend it both from the Judgments of God, and the
hostile Incursions of Men: Wherefore that we may not only bear the Name, but
perform the commendable Works of good Men in the World; let us at this time
endeavor to recover the Greatness and Reputation of the English Nation, by
uniting our Interests, and Affections; by laying aside all civil and religious
Differences; by Conversing together freely, in Peace and Love; which our
Religion allows and commands us to use: Thus we may rise to the bearing of each
others Infirmities; from thence to the exchange of good Offices; from thence to
real Friendship: till at last by such a gentle and easy Method, our several
Interests may be joined to promote the Welfare and Peace of our Country. This
our friendly Conversation with one another will wear off all the Roughness, and
sweeten the humorous Peevishness of our Minds: Nay, it will take away all
Sharpness and Violence; will teach us Humility by acquainting us with our own
Imperfections, and so it will remove all overweaning haughtiness of Mind, and
swelling Imaginations. This is the way to be truly Great and Considerable in
the World. Indeed (as some wise Men have observed) there are many things in the
natural Genius of the English, which qualify them above any others for an
eminent Nation; because our Country is most advantagiously situated for
Command; its native Productions are most serviceable for Strength and Empire:
The Disposition of the People is bold in Dangers, severe in Discipline, valiant
in Arms, virtuous in Life, relenting to the Afflicted, and merciful in
Conquest: It is also affirmed by some, that the Vices to which we are subject,
are not natural to our Soil, but were imported hither from foreign Countries.
The English Generosity, Fidelity, Magnanimity, Modesty, Integrity they owe to
themselves; Their Luxury, their Debauchery, their Divisions, their spiritual
Schisms they have received from abroad: But seeing now the Devil has sown
these Tares amongst us, let us make it our Business to root them out by the
constant course of a good and holy Life: which will make such Impressions upon
others, that we shall recover and maintain the ancient Honor of our Country,
and restrain our Brethren from degenerateing into base and unnatural Sins. Let
it be said, that for this end we Converse together, and indeed for this Purpose
man was Created a sociable: Creature, that he might assist his Fellow Creature,
and Propagate all manner of Goodness in the World. For if we search backward to
the original Causes of men's associating and dwelling together; we shall find,
that in course of time the small Clans or natural Commonwealths, were devoured
by the strength of the greater: Or else some of the wiser Men reduced the rule
Multitude into one place, and persuaded them to live quietly under Laws: From
thence Mankind began to have the Face of Civility: which has been continued
ever since by the same means, by men's living quietly under Laws, and by being
ready to help and support one another. So that whilst I behold so many
Christians met together to carry on this honest Design, for whose Sake human
Society was at first constituted: It makes me believe, that the Age is not
quite so bad, as some men think it to be; who are apt to complain and find
Fault with the Age and Place, where they live, as if it were worse, than any,
that is passed: To which censorious Humor many, and those wise Men too, are
very subject: For in the ancient Authors, which studious Men turn over, they
find Descriptions of Virtues more perfect, than really they were: The
governments are represented better, and the Ways of Life pleasanter, than they
deserved: upon this, these Bookish wise Men compare what they read with what
they see; and here beholding nothing so heroically Transcendent, because they
are able to mark all the Spots, as well as Beauties of every thing, that is so
close to their Sight; they presently begin to despise their own Times, and to
exalt the past; to contemn the Virtues, and aggravate the Vices of their
Country. But our Work must be to commend our Country, and that, not so much for
our being Natives thereof, or for our long and ancient Pedigrees; as that we
have one Lord, one Faith, and one Mind: like the Prophet Jonah, we must
consider, that we are sailing through this World with Persons of diverse Qualities
and Dispositions, that are contriving various Designs, and have ranked
themselves into several Orders: Whilst we thus uncertainly float upon the Face
of the Waters, and are tossed up and down at the Pleasure of the Waves, our
chief care must be to direct our Prayers and Adorations to the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, who made the Sea and the dry Land, if ever we expect to come safe at
last to the Haven of Rest and Happiness; for his sake, and for our own to keep
up Unity in the Bond of Peace; above all things, taking heed, lest we make
Shipwreck of Christian Charity and Love.

That the World therefore may be convinced; how our natural Inclinations lead
us to the minding of these Things; I will conclude all with a short Character
of the Disposition of our Countrymen: and if there can be a true one given of
any Nation, then certainly this may be ascribed to ours; that the Inhabitants
of it have commonly an unaffected Sincerity, whereby they are much inclined to
plain-dealing, and justly abhor all the refined Ways of Lying by Equivocations:
so that they are used to speak well of others behind their Backs, as well as to
their Faces; they bear no false Countenances, that can flatter every thing, and
every Body alike; their Tongues, as well as Faces know no Artifice, nor do
their Words or Looks contradict their Hearts: They are not Enemies, us some
are, under the specious name of Friends, and they consider the intrinsic Worth
of Men more, than the Marks and Value good Fortune has set upon them: they
love to deliver their Minds with a sound Simplicity, avoiding the Vanity as
well as Sin of false Speeches and Complements: For he, that uses them,
believes not himself, so that they are imaginary Services, a solemn Nonsense,
and a putting together many good Words to signify nothing. They have the
middle Qualities between the reserved subtle Southern, an the rough unhewn
Northern People: They are not extremely prone to tattle, thinking it much
better to do well, than to talk much: an universal Modesty possesses them, and
if for any thing they may be reproved, it must be for their excess of natural
Bashafulness: These Qualities are so conspicuous and proper to our Soil; that
we ofter hear them objected to us by some of our Neighbor Satyrists, in more
disgraceful Expressions: For they are wont to revile the English, with a want
of Familiarity, with a Melancholy Dumpishness; with Slowness, Silence, and
with the unrefined Sullenness of their Bebaviour. But these are only the
Reproaches of Partiality and Ignorance; they ought rather to be commended for
an honorable Integrity; for neglect of Circumstances and Flourishes; for
regarding things of greater moment more, than less; for a Scorn to deceive, as
well as to be deceived: which are all the best Endowments, that can enter into
the Minds of wise or good Men. So that even the Position of our Climate, the
Influence of the Heaven, the Composition our Blood, as well as the Embraces of
the Ocean, seem to render our Country, a Land of peculiar Blessings, of great
Knowledge, and of true Friendship: And it is a good sign, that God will reveal
more of his Secrets; will bestow larger Gifts both of Human and Divine Knowledge
upon us, than upon others; because he has already furnished us with a natural
Genius, so well proportioned and fitted for the receiving and practicing his
Gospel of Peace and Love.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Samuel Carr at the King's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Sermon Preached at the Anniversary Meeting of he Eton Scholars November. 18.
1679. by Tho. Horn. Bellow of King's College in Cambridg

A Sermon Preached at the Anniversary Meeting of the Eton Scholars November. 6.
1681. by William Perse, late Fellow of King's College in Cambridg.

A Sermon Preached at the Anniversary Meeting of the Eton Scholars November. 22.
1683. by Joseph Layton, late Fellow of King's College in Cambridg.

FINIS.

