C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS We the Lord Lieutenant and Council according to His Majesty's
Pleasure, and Commands signified unto Us by the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council of England, by their Letters bearing date the Twenty
sixth day of September last, directed to Us the Lord Lieutenant, did by Our
Proclamation Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the Twenty seventh day of
October last past, in His Majesty's name straightly charge and Command Peter
Talbott pretended Archbishop of Dublin, and all other Titular Popish
Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-Generall, Abbots, and all others Exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by any Authority derived from the Pope, or see of
Rome in this Kingdom, and also all Regular Priests that they should before the
last day of December last depart out of this His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland
upon pain of His Majesty's High Displeasure, and of such other pain, and
punishment as by Law might be inflicted on them, And for their better means to
depart accordingly, Did thereby declare, and publish, that if any of the said
Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, or other persons hereby Commanded to
depart out of this Kingdom should at any time before the said first day of
December last, resort to any Port Town of this Kingdom, and there declare to
the chief Magistrate, or Officer of the said Town, or Port, That he was a
person included within that Our Proclamation, and that he was there to take
shipping, for His passage, They should suffer him or them quietly, to depart,
and should see them shipped, and sent away for Foreign parts, and give them
their furtherance for their d^parture.

And Whereas We did also Require, and Command, That all Convents, Seminaries,
Frieries, Nunneries, and Popish Schools in this Kingdom, should be forthwith
dissolved, and suppressed, and did expressly forbid, and prohibit all, and every
His Majesty's Subjects within this Realm, to Receive, Harbor, or relieve any
of the said Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-General, Abbots,
Regular Priests, or any other persons aforesaid, after the time thereby
limited for their departure out of this Realm, unless he, or they should first
give notice thereof to the next Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate of the
City, Town, or C^rporation wherein they were; And did also forbid, and prohibit
all persons to frequent, resort unto, keep up, or maintain any such Convents,
Seminaries, Frieries, Nunneries, or Popish Schools in this Kingdom:

And Whereas We did farther in His Majesty's name straightly charge, and
Command all, and every the Mayors, Sovereigns, Portreeves, and all other Chief
Officers of all Cities, and Towns Corporate within this Kingdom, and all, and
every the Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Constables, and all other His
Majesty's Good and Loyal Subjects within this Realm, That they, and every of
them from time to time, from; and after the said First day of December last
past, should make diligent search, and Inquiry for, and after all such Titular
Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-General, Abbots, and all others
Exercising, or who had Exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this
Kingdom, by any Authority derived from the Pope, or See of Rome, and also for,
and after all Regular Priests, which at any time after the said First day of
December last, should continue, remain, or abide in this Kingdom, or should
return again, or come into the same, and also for, and after all, and every the
Receivers, Relievers, and Harbourers of them, or any of them; And that they
should also take care that all Convents, Seminaries, Frieries, Nunneries, and
Popish Schools within any the Counties, Cities, or Towns of this Kingdom,
should be forthwith dissolved, and suppressed: And that upon discovery of any
such Titular Popish Archbishop, Bishop, Vicars General, Abbot, or other person
Exercising, or who had Exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Kingdom by
any Authority derived from the Pope or See of Rome, or of any Regular Priests,
or of any Receiver, Reliever, Harbourer of them, or any of them, or of any
persons who should frequent, resort unto, keep up, or maintain any such
Seminaries, Fryeries, Nunneries, or Popish Schools, or any of them, that they
should forthwith secure them, and advertise Us the Lord Lieutenant and Council
thereof with all convenient spread, and should also take care that the said
persons might be prosecuted, and proceeded against, according to the Laws of
this Kingdom.

And whereas His Majesty being informed, That notwithstanding the said
Proclamation, the said titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, etc. or diverse of
them refusing to give obedience thereunto, do remain still in this His
Majesty's Kingdom, concealing themselves in contempt of His Majesty's
Authority, and of the Laws, has therefore thought fit by His Letters under His
Royal Signet, and Sign manual unto Us the Lord Lieutenant directed, bearing
date at His Court at Whitehall the One and thirtieth day of March last past, to
signify His Royal Will and Pleasure unto Us, and thereby to Require Us to use
all such other ways and means, as We with the advice of His Majesty's Privy
Council of this Kingdom should think fit, for the present banishing and sending
away all such titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Regulars, and others of the
Popish Clergy, who pretend to exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
contrary to the Laws of this His Majesty's Kingdom, according to His Majesty's
former Orders, and Directions sent unto Us in that behalf.

WE the Lord Lieutenant and Council therefore, according to His Majesty's said
special Commands, do by this Our Proclamation in His Majesty's Name, straightly
charge and command all and every titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars
General, Abbots, and all others exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or who
have exercised any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by any Authority derived from
the Pope, or See of Rome in this Kingdom, and also all Regular Priests, That
they do within One and twenty days after the date of this Our Proclamation,
depart out of this His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland: And that all Convents,
Seminaries, Fryeries, Nunneries, and Popish Schools in this Kingdom be
forthwith utterly dissolved and suppressed: And We do expressly forbid, and
prohibit, all, and every His Majesty's Subjects within this Realm, to receive,
harbor, or relieve any of the said titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicars-General, Abbots, Regular Priests, or any of the persons aforesaid, after
the time hereby limited for their departure out of this Realm: And do also
forbid, and prohibit all manner of persons to frequent, resort unto, keep up,
or by any ways support or maintain any such Convents, Seminaries, Fryeries,
Nunneries, or Popish Schools in this Kingdom, as they will answer the contrary
at their perils.

And We do farther in His Majesty's Name straightly Charge and Command all and
every the Mayors, Sovereigns, Bailiffs, Portreeves, and all other Chief
Magistrates, and Officers of the several and respective Cities, and Towns
Corporate of this Kingdom, and all and every the Justices of the Peace,
Sheriffs, Constables, and all other His Majesty's good and loyal Subjects
within this Kingdom, that they be more diligent and active in putting these His
Majesty's Commands in executiou than formerly they have been, upon pain of His
Majesty's high displeasure: And that they, and every of them from, and
immediately after the space of the said One and twenty days next ensuing the
date of this Our Proclamation do make strict, and diligent search and inquiry
within the several and respective Cities, Towns Corporate, Liberties, Counties,
Baronies, Parishes, places, and precincts, within their several and respective
Jurisdictions, for and after all such titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicars-General, Abbots, and all others exercising, or who have exercised
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, by any Authority derived from the
Pope, or See of Rome, and also for, and after all Regular Priests who at any
time after the space of the said One and twenty days next immediately ensuing
the date of this Our Proclamation, shall continue, remain, or abide in this
Kingdom, or shall return, or come into this Kingdom: And also for, and after
all, and every the Receivers, Relievers, and Harbourers of them, or any of
them. And farther, That they take special care, that all Convents, Seminaries,
Fryeries, Nunneries, and Popish Schools within any the Cities, or Towns
Corporate, Liberties, Counties, Baronies, Parishes, or places within this
Kingdom be immediately dissolved, and utterly suppressed: And that upon
Discovery of any such titular Popish Archbishop, Bishop, Vicars General, Abbot,
or other persons exercising, or who have exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
within this Kingdom, by any Authority derived from the Pope, or See of Rome, or
of any Regular Priests, That they do forthwith apprehend them, and every of
them, and ^ommit them and every of them into safe Custody, and do certify Us
the Lord Lieutenant and Council thereof, withal convenient speed, and do also
forthwith return unto Us the names of all their Receivers, Relievers or
Harbourers, and do take special care that the said persons be forthwith
prosecuted for their contempt, and proceeded against according to the Laws of
this Kingdom.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 27th day of April, 1674. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin Canc Hen: Midensis. Art: Forbese. Ca: Dillon. J:
Povey. H: Ingoldesby William Flower. Char: Meredyth.

GOD Save the KING.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street, 1674.


