HEAVENS Glory, And Hells Horror: OR, The Parable of DIVES and LAZARUS opened
and applied.

Wherein, the everlasting Joy of the Saints and the endless Torments of the
Wicked are discovered: for the Comfort of the one, and Terror of the other.

By J. H. a Servant of Jesus Christ.

Mat. 25.46. These shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the Righteous
into life eternal.

LONDON, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion, near Pye-Corner. 1662.

portrait

John 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour is c^^^g, in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear ^^^ice, and shall come forth. They that have
done good, ^^^e resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, to
^^urrection of damnation.

Heavens Glory, AND Hells horror. Or, the Parable of DIVES and LAZARUS opened
and applied.
Luke, 16.19, 20, etc. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in
purple, and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day.

And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full
of sores,

And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's table:
moreover, the dogs came and licked his sores.

And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom, the rich man also dyed, and was buried.

And in Hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off,
and Lazarus in his bosom.

And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am
tormented in this flame.

But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted and thou art
tormented.

And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that
they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us,
that would come from thence.

Then he said, I pray thee therefore father, that, thou would send him to my
fathers house:

For I have five brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come
into this place of torment.

Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.


THese words, beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, contain the
Parable, or rather the History (as I humbly conceive) of the rich Glutton and
poor Lazarus. In the words, we have first in general the life and death both of
the rich man and the beggar, with the condition of them both in the life to
come: But more particularly in the three first verses, we find recorded for
our instruction, the lives first of the rich Glutton, and then of poor Lazarus.
In the following verses, we have the death first of the Beggar, and secondly of
the rich Glutton, with the different condition of them both after death.

To begin with the first, the life of the rich man, and this we find recorded
in the 19. verse, There was a certain rich man which was clothed in purple and
fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day. In the life of the rich man we
have three particulars very considerable:

First, he is here prescribed by his riches: There was a certain rich man. The
Spirit of God here takes no more notice of the rich man's name, neither of the
place where he lives; from whence we may take notice, that God regards not
those whom the world possibly may greatly honor: many men perhaps might honor
this man's name, by affixing unto it the empty title of Worshipful, or
Honorable; but those that despise God shall be lightly esteemed, says Solomon
in that excellent Book called the Proverbs. God can blot out the names of
wicked men as well out of the Book of this life, as out of the life to come:
yea, many times he makes both the names and estates of wicked men to rot and
stink in this world, well then may he punish their souls in the world to come.
The memory of the just (says Solomon) is blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall rot. God will not have the name of wicked men to be mentioned but with
shame and disgrace to them, as for example, Jeroboam, and this character
follows, who made Israel to sin; but the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, and the desire of the wicked shall perish, Psalm
112.6. It is the great desire (I know) of the wicked that their names should
continue for ever, and for this purpopose, they call their Houses and Lands by
their own names; but the very desire of these men shall perish. But I proceed.

In the second place, where the rich man is described by his apparel, and that
is said to be purple and fine linen, which signifies not only the greatness
of his riches, but the eminency of his person and place in the world, namely,
that he was some Ruler among the Jews. Purple clothing ye know in the ornament
of Kings and great ones of the world, and they that wear fine linen are in
Kings houses; that is, they are either Kings themselves, or else great Officers
under Kings, from whence we may observe, that Greatness and Honor, riches and
gorgeous apparel, commends us not to God; it is not all the riches in the world
that can save a soul, it is only grace that commends us to God: God can see a
pure heart and a gracious soul though they be clothed in rags; for God judges
not as men judges, according to outward experience, no, he sees many a rotten
graceless soul under scarlet gowns and purple robes. Among all the Kings of
Israel there was not one gracious, and among the Kings of Judah, only one good
Josiah that walked before the Lord with a perfect heart. It is true, there was
Asa, and Amaziah, and Hezekiah, that the Text describes as imperfect in some
things; but of Josiah it is said of him, He did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his father, and turned
not aside to the right hand or to the left. That of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26.
does fully confirm this truth; Not many wise men, not many after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called.

Thirdly, We have the description of this rich Glutton by his fare, and that
not only barely described, but also amplified here by the Spirit of God; He
fared sumptuously every day. It was not now and then, but every day; day after
day: if he had done it but now and then, it might have been lawful; for God
does not only give the Creatures for our use, but also for our delight, and
moderate feasting may be lawful; yet by the way, that is a good caution of our
blessed Savior in the 14. Chapter of St. Lukes Gospel and the 13. Verse, When
thou make a feast, call the poor, the lame, and the blind, and thou shall be
blessed. God invites the poor and feasts the poor with the riches of his house,
but the rich he sends them empty away. They are full, and so have no need of
Gods bounty: God fills only the hungry with the good things of grace and
glory; they that are always feasting, are certainly always full, but when
thou make a feast, remember the poor, they may have need of thy bounty. Every
one almost will feast the rich, but blessed is he that considers the poor and
needy.

This rich Glutton never grieved to spend thousands and ten thousands upon his
own base rotten stinking carcass, but he never remembered Lazarus at his gate;
he grudged to spare him that which he so plentifully left to his Dogs, not so
much as a crumb for Lazarus. Not unlike to this rich Glutton are many wicked
wretches in these our days, whom God has loaded with this rich clay; they can
drink wine in bowls, but they regard not the afflictions of Joseph. How many
thousands do some rich Cormorants spend lavishly in feasting, who have not a
brass-farthing to spare for the poor; but let rich men remember the time is
coming, if they repent not, when they may be in as much want of a drop of
water, as the poorest man ever was of a crumb of bread.

Having done now with the rich man's life, I come to give you the life of the
poor man; and this we have in the 20. and 21. verses very sweetly recorded. In
the first place, as the other was described by his riches, so on the contrary
he is here described by his poverty. He was not only poor and ^ow in the
world, but even so poor that ^e went a begging, the more shame for ^he rich
Glutton, that had enough to ^upply him. Dives might have spared that from his
Dogs which might have kept poor Lazarus from begging; from whence we may
observe, that begging ^s not unlawful in case of necessity, though it be a
shame for such a flourishing Nation as this is, which so much ^bounds with
plenty, and wherein ^here is so much spent in superfluity and wickedness, to
suffer any to go a begging; yet it is not a shame for any ^o beg from door to
door when necessity requires. It is rather a shame for the ^ich who have such
plenty that they do not relieve the poor, and so keep them from begging; but it
is no shame for (...) man to beg when he is in want. Rich ^en should visit
those that are poor and ^eedy, it is their duty so to do, and they shall be
punished that do it not: the ^erciful shall obtain mercy.

See the sad doom of those who starve the poor, and do not relieve them, i^ the
25. of St. Matthew: unmercifu^ men do not only slight the poor, but i^
slighting of them, they also slight Christ; In as much as ye did it not t^ the
poor, you did it not to me. In sta^ving the poor you starve Christ, a^ much as
in you lies; and Christ wi^^ say to such unmerciful men at the la^^ day, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fi^^ prepared for the Devil and his angels: came a
begging to your doors many time in my poor members, and ye relieved me not: You
let my poor members cry and call to you for Bread Bread, for the Lords sake,
and yo^ gave it them not; you stopped you^ ears at the cry of the poor, and no^
though you cry never so loud, you shall not be heard. Whosoever stops his ea^ at
the cry of the poor, (says Solomon Prove. 21.13.) he also shall cry, and no^ be
heard. They that will not hear the poor when they beg for bread, Go^ will not
hear them when they beg for water: and for certain, they that wi^^ not give a
crumb, shall be denied drop.

He that wants mercy, of mercy shall miss, But he shall have mercy that
merciful is. But I have written of this subject in another Book, called, The
Charitable Christian. I proceed.

Secondly, We have the poor man here described by his name; There was a
certain beggar named Lazarus: although Dives regarded him not, yet God has him
in remembrance. God knows his servants by their names, yea, God records the
very names of his servants though never so poor, he takes notice of them by
their very names. As for men, they know the men of the world by their names,
and by their honors, but God blots their names out of his remembrance; but the
name of the upright shall be bad in everlasting remembrance: and this should
comfort those that are godly in all their wants, God knows both their names and
their wants.

Thirdly, the poor man is described by the place where he lay, namely, at the
rich man's gate. Had he been rit^, he should have been received into his palace,
and richly entertained at his table; but being poor and miserable, he is only
laid at his gate. Wicked men will let those lie at their gates whom God will
receive into his parlour, they are ashamed that such poor men as Lazarus should
once come within their gates: rich men shut their gates against the poor, and
God will shut the gates of Heaven one day against them.

And then fourthly, The poor man is here set forth by his misery; he is not
only poor, but also full of sores; so full of sores, that he is not able to go
or stand without crutches; he is laid at the rich man's gate, and there he lies,
but neither his want nor his sores are regarded by the rich man. His warm
clothing and his sumptuous fare made him senseless of the poverty and sores of
poor Lazarus; the full belly and the warm clothing of those that are rich,
makes them regardless of the wants of the poor. The rich does not know what a
hungry belly means; they that are well clothed, do not consider the nakedness
and want of others. If we did rightly consider it, our fullness should provoke
us to regard and supply those which want; there is no love of God in that man
who sees the poor in want, and will not relieve them when he has wherewith to
do it. And thus much of the life of the poor man, hungry, cold, naked, full of
sores, and exceeding miserable as to this life.

From whence observe, God suffers his poor people oftentimes to be in great
misery; they who shall for ever be clothed with glory, honor, and immortality
with Christ, may want clothing for their backs in this world; they who for
ever shall be clothed with robes, yea the robes of Christ, may have nothing but
rags to put on in this world; they that shall be filled with the glory of
Christ in Heaven, may want bread to eat here below; they who shall know no want
hereafter, may want bread to eat here: this was the condition of our blessed
Savior himself, he had not so much as a hole to lay his head in, not a Cradle
to lie in when he was born; he who was the bread of life wanted bread to eat in
this life: he was a man of sorrows, augmented with grief, con^emned, and
scorned by the world; he who was Lord both of heaven and earth, had not so much
as a hole to put his head in when he was upon earth. Lazarus who is now in
Abraham's bosom was laid at the rich man's gate, and he who was then full of
sores, now knows no sorrow: he has all tears now wiped away from from his
eyes, who might have cried his eyes out for bread at the rich man's gate; they
that know no want in the world to come, may know nothing but want in this world.

In the next place, as an addition to the lives of them both, we have the poor
man's humility, and the rich man's cruelty; and this is first set forth by the
smallness of that which Lazarus desired, only a few crumbs; he did not come to
Dives to beg, any of his Lands or Lordships, neither any of his messes or
costly dishes; had Lazarus desired any of these, he might have denied him as
too hold: You know we have a common Proverb amongst us, that Beggars must not
be chusers; and its not more common then true, they that are truly poor will be
thankful for the least crumb, for the smallest gift: Lazarus desired only to
be fed with the crumbs that fell from his table, not his dainties. And then
secondly, the rich man's cruelty is here condemned by the compassion of his
dogs; Dives regarded neither his hunger nor his sores, but the d^gs they
pitied his wounds, they came and licked his sores, they did what they could to
ease his pains; those cruel creatures, whose natures are so fierce and cruel,
and apt to bite and devour, they forget their wonted cruelty, and as much as in
them lies labor to heal or ease the poor man's sores. Its not improbable, but
that the dogs were let loose purposely to affrighten Lazarus from his gate, or
else to devour him; rich Gluttons usually keep such fierce and devouring
creatures purposely to keep or frighten the poor from their gates, but God can
restrain the rage of the fiercest creatures to preserve his people; he can shut
the mouths of Lions, that they devour not Daniel; he can cause the Dogs,
contrary to their natures, to lick the sores of Lazarus.

In the next place we come to give you the deaths both of the beggar and the
rich man; And it came to pass, that the beggar died: God has now given him a
writ of ease from all his sores; no more sorrow nor pain now, no more hunger,
nor cold, nor nakedness, God has released the poor man out of all his miseries.

From whence we may observe, that death to the godly is a blessed privilege,
it puts an end to all their woes, though heaviness may endure for a night, yet
joy comes in the morning; though poverty, losses, and disgraces, and all kind
of outward afflictions may attend Gods people in this life, yet when death
comes there is an end of all these. In a word, death is the best friend a child
of God has next to Jesus Christ; it does not only deliver them from their
sorrow, but it translates them to their joys; it is the messenger of God their
heavenly Father, who comes only to call them home to their Fathers house, to
inherit those everlasting joys, which God has prepared for them to all
eternity, Lazarus was not only released from his sorrows by death, but he is
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom; death takes him from the woes of
this world, and the Angels they transport him to everlasting glory in the world
to come. God has released Lazarus from all his miseries.

But what becomes of the Glutton? The rich man also died, and was buried: From
whence we may observe, that neither riches nor honors can prevent death; he
knocks as well at the Court as at the Cottage; he regards Scarlet Gowns and
Purple Robes no more then he does the poorest beggars rags; death deprives men
of all their honors and riches; the rich fool in the Gospel he sings a requiem
to his soul, and this very night death comes, and then whose are all these.
It Is neither Purple Robes nor sumptuous Apparel that can prevent death; God
cuts off wicked men in the midst of their mirth and jollity; in the grave there
is no difference between the poor and the rich, the worms may be find better
fare upon the fat Carcasses of rich Gluttons, then of the poor. Well, the rich
man he dyed also, what becomes of him afterward, his body that is honorably
buried by his friends; I, but what becomes of his soul? that you read is
hurried into hell; he is huried, and in hell he lift up his eyes.

From whence we may observe, That the Lord Jesus Christ does hereby signify,
that men are naturally unwilling to see or take notice of their sad state, I
say by nature; but though now they are willingly ignorant; yet in Hell they
shall lift up their eyes. That is, in Hell they shall see and understand their
miserable condition; and therefore to these words. In Hell he lift up his eyes,
he added, being in torment. As if he had said, Though once they shut their
eyes, though once they were willingly ignorant; yet when they depart into Hell,
they shall be so miserably handled and tormented, that they shall be forced to
lift up their eyes. For while men live in this world, and are in a natural
state, they will have a good conceit of themselves, and of their condition;
they will conclude that they are Christians, and their state to be as good as
the best; they will conclude they have faith, the spirit, good hope, and an
interest in the Lord Jesus Christ: but then, when they drop into Hell, and lift
up their eyes there, and behold, first their soul to be in extreme torments;
their dwelling to be the bottomless pit; their company thousands of damned
souls; also the innumerable company of Devils, and the hot scalding vengeance
of God; not only to drop, but to fall very violently upon them; then they will
begin to be awakened, who all their life time were in a dead sleep. I say, when
this comes to pass, as it will, then in hell they shall lift up their eyes; in
the midst of torments they shall lift up their eyes.

Again, you may observe from these words. And in hell he lift up his eyes being
in torment. That the time of the ungodly men's smarting for their sins, will be
in torments of hell. Now here I am put to a stand, when I consider the torments
of hell, into which the damned do fall. O unspeakable torments! O endless
torments! Now that thy soul might be made to flee from these t^^ ^ollerable
torments, into which the ^amned do go. I shall show you darkly and briefly what
are the torments of Hell. First, by the names of it. Secondly, by the sad state
thou will be in, if thou come there. First, the names. It is called a never
dying worm. Mark 9. It is called an oven ^ire hot, Mal. 4.1. It is called a
furnace, a fiery furnace, Mat. 13. It is called the bottomless pit, the
unquenchable fire, fire and brimstone, hell fire, the lake of fire, devouring
fire, everlasting fire, eternal fire, a stream of fire, Rev. 21.

First, one part of thy torments will be this, thou shall have a full sight of
all thy ill-spent life from first to last, though here thou can sin to day,
and forget it by to morrow; yet there thou shall be made to remember how thou
did sin against God at such a time, and in such a place, for such a thing,
and with such an one, which will be an hell unto thee.

2. Thou shall have the guilt of them all lie heavy on thy soul, not only the
guilt of one or two, but the guilt of them all together, and there they shall
lie in thy soul, as if thy belly were full of pitch, and set on a light fire.
Now here men can sometimes think on their sins with delight, but there with
unspeakable torment; for that I understand to be the fire that Christ speaks
of, which shall never be quenched, Mark, while men live here, O how does the
guilt of one sin sometimes crush the soul, it makes a man in such plight, that
he is weary of his life, so that he can neither rest at home nor abroad,
neither up nor in bed. Nay I do know, that they have been so tormented with the
guilt of one sinful thought, that they have been even at their wits end. But
now when thou come into hell, and have not only one or two, or an hundred
sine with the guilt of them all on thy soul and body; but all the sins that
ever thou did commit since thou came into the world, all together clapped on
thy conscience at one time, as one should clap a red hot iron to thy breasts,
and there to continue to all eternity, this is miserable.

3. Again, then thou shall have brought to thy remembrance the slighting of the
Gospel of Christ; here now thou shall consider how willing Christ was to come
into the world to save sinners, and for what a trifle thou did reject him.
This is plainly held forth in Isa. 28. where speaking of the Lord Jesus Christ
the foundation of salvation, ver. 16. he says of them that reject the Gospel,
that when the overflowing scourge does pass through the earth, (which I
understand to be at the end of the world) then says he, It shall take you
morning by morning, by day adn by night shall it pass over you; that is,
continually without any intermission. Now these are the words I aim at, where
he says, And shall be a vexation only to hear the report. A vexation, that
is, a torment, or a great part of hell only to understand the report, that is,
to understand the good tidings that came into the world by Christ's death for
poor sinners, and you will find this to be verily the mind of the Spirit, if
you compare it with Isa. 53.1. where he speaks of men's turning their backs upon
the tenders of Gods grace in the Gospel, he says, Who has believed our
report, or the Gospel declared by us? Now this will be a torment to the
ungodly, when they shall understand the goodness of God was so great, that he
even sent his Son out of his bosom to dye for sinners, and yet that they should
be so foolish, as to put him off from one time to another; that they should be
so foolish as to lose heaven, and Christ, and eternal life in glory, for the
society of a company of Drunkards; that they should lose their souls for a
little sport, for this world, for a strumpet, for that which is lighter then
vanity, and nothing. I say, this will be a very great torment unto thee.

4. Another part of thy torment will be this, thou shall see thy friends, thy
acquaintance, thy neighbors; nay, it may be thy father, thy mother, thy wife,
thy husband, thy children, thy brother, thy sister, with others in the kingdom
of heaven, and thy self thrust out. And this is that, that Christ told the Jews
would befall them in Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping, etc. when you shall
see Abraham (your Father) and Isaac, and Jacob, (together with your Brethren)
the Prophets in the Kingdom of Heaven, and your selves thrust out. Nay, says
he, There shall come from the East, and from the West, that is, those that thou
did never see in all thy life before, and shall sit down with thy friends,
and thy neighbors, thy wife, and thy children in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
thou for thy sins and disobedience shall be shut, nay, thrust out. O wonderful
torment.

5. Again, thou shall have none but a company of damned souls, with an
innumerable company of huge devils to keep company with thee. While thou art in
this world, the very thoughts of the devils appearing to thee, makes thy flesh
to tremble, and thine hair ready to stand upright on thy head. But O what will thou do, when not only the supposition of the devils appearing, but the real
society of all the devils in hell to be with thee howling and roaring,
s^^^eching and yelling in such a hideous manner, that thou will be even at thy
with end, and be ready to run stark mad again for anguish and torment.

6. Again, that thou might be tormented to purpose, the mighty God of heaven
will lay as great wrath and vengeance upon thee, as ever he can, by the might
of his glorious power. As I said before; Thou shall have his wrath not by
drops, no. but by whole showers shall it come thunder, thunder upon thy body
and soul so fast, and so thick, that thou shall be tormented out of measure.
And so says the Scripture, 2 These. 1.9. speaking of the wicked. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, when the Saints shall be admiring his goodness and
glory.

Again, this thou shall have, as I said before, without and intermission, thou
shall not have any ease so long as while am n may turn himself round: thou
shall have it always every hour, day and night: for their worm never dies, but
always gnaws, and their fire is never quenched. As it is written in Mark 9.

7. Again, in this condition thou must be for ever, and that is as sad as all
the rest. For if a man were have all his sins laid to his charge, and communion
with the devils, and as much wrath as the great God of heaven can inflict upon
them. I say, if it were but for a time, even ten thousand years, if then it
might have an end, there would be ground of comfort, and hopes of deliverance;
but here is thy misery, this is thy state for ever, here thou must be for ever:
when thou look about thee, and see what an innumerable company of howling
devils thou art amongst, thou shall think this again, this is my portion for
ever. When thou have been in he^l so many thousand years as there are stars in
the firmament, or drops in the sea, or sands on the sea shore, yet thou have to
lie there for ever. O this one word, ever, how will it torment thy soul. O
friends, I have only given a very short touch of the torments of hell. O! I am
set, I am set, and am not able to utter what my mind conceives of the torments
of hell. Yet this let me say to thee, accept of Gods mercy, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, lest thou feel that with thy conscience, which I cannot express
with my tongue, and say, I am sorely tormented in this flame. And sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

When the damned are in this pitiful state, surrounded with fears, with
terrors, with torment and vengeance; one thing they shall have, which is this,
they shall see the happy and blessed state of Gods children: he sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, which, as I said before, is the happy
state of the Saints, when this life is ended. This now shall be so far from
being an ease unto them, that it shall most wonderfully aggravate or heighten
their torment, as I said before. There shall be weeping, or cause of
lamentation, when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom
of Heaven, and themselves thrust out.

2. Observe, those that die in their sins are far from going to Heaven. He
sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. And indeed it is just with
God to deal with them that die in their sins, according to what they have done;
and to make them who are far from righteousness now, to stand far from Heaven
to all eternity. Hearken to this ye stout hearted, that are far from
righteousness, and you that are resolved to go on in your sins; when you die,
you will be far from Heaven; you will see Lazarus, but it will be afar off.
Again, he sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. These are some of
the things that the damned do behold, so soon as they come into torment. Mark,
And he sees Lazarus in Abraham's bosom. Lazarus, who was he? Why, even he that
was so slighted, so disregarded, so unto dervalu^d by this ungodly one while he
was in the world; he sees Lazarus in his bosom.

From whence observe, that those who live and dye the enemies of the Saints of
God; let them be never so great or stout; let them hear never so much sway
while they are in the world; let them brag and boast never so much while they
are here, they shall in spite of their teeths see the Saints, yea, the poor
Saints, even the Lazarus's, or the ragged ones that belong to Jesus, to be in a
better condition then themselves. O who do you think was in the best condition,
or who do you think saw themselves in the best condition, he that was in Hell,
or he that was in Heaven? He that was in darkness, or he that was in light? He
that was in everlasting joy, or he that was in everlasting torments? The one
with God, Christ, Saints, and Angels; the other in tormenting flames, under the
curse of Gods eternal hatred, with the devils and their angels, together with
an innumerable company of howling, roaring, cursing, ever burning reprobates.
Certainly this observation will be ea^^ly proved to be true here in this world
by him that looks upon it with an understanding heart, and will clear it self
to be true in the world to come, by such as shall go either to heaven or to
hell.

2. The second observation from these words, And sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom, is this, ^hey that are the persecutours of the ^aints of
the Lord now in this world, ^all see the Lords persecuted ones, to (...) they
that are so highly esteemed by ^he Lord, as to sit, or to be in Abraham's ^^som,
(in everlasting glory) though they, the enemies to the Children of God, and the
practice of the Saints, did so lightly esteem them, that they scorn to let them
gather up the dogs meat that falls under their table; this is also verified and
held forth plainly by this Parable. And therefore be not grieved, O you that
are the tempted, persecuted, afflicted, sighing, praying Saints of the Lord,
though your adversaries look upon you now with a disdainful, surly, rugged,
proud, and haughty countenance, yet the time shall come, when they shall see
you in Abraham's bosom.

And then shall they cry to think, that Lazarus, whom once they slighted, must
be of them that must sit with Christ it junge, or together with Christ, to pas^
sentence of condemnation on their souls for ever and ever and ever, 1 Cor 6.2,
3. And also, that when the judgment is over, and others are taken in to the
everlasting Kingdom of Glory then thou must depart back again (...) that (...)
of darkness, from whe^^ than came out, (to appear before the terrible
Tribunal) where thou shall tormented so long as eternity lasts, without the
least intermission or ease. How say thou, O than (...), proud, swearing,
lying, ^^godly wretch, whether this be to be slighted, and made a mock at. And
again, tell me now, if it be not better to leave sin, and to close in with
Christ Jesus, notwithstanding that reproach thou shall meet with for so doing;
then to live a little while in this world in pleasures, and see^ing thy lusts,
in neglecting the welfa^e of thy soul, and refusing to be justified by Jesus,
and in a moment to drop down into Hell, and so cry? O consider, I say, consider
betimes, and put not off the tenders of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
lest you lift up your eyes in Hell, and cry for anguisly of spirit, as Dives
did.

For you see here God sends Dives his body, his rotten Carcass to his friends,
but the (...) he takes possession of his soul; but on the contrary, no mourning
for Lazarus (...) is taken for his funeral; his Carcass it may be is it ^^^bled
into some ^o^e other (...) but Lazarus's soul that is in Glory. Many (...)
Carcasses may be honorably buried, whose Soul shall be everlastingly damned.

From the words thus briefly opened, let me give you two or three observations.

In the first place then I observe from hence, that there is both a Heaven and
a Hell, a place of joy, and a place of torment in the world to come.

Secondly, I observe from hence, that the Souls of the godly so soon as they
are separated from their bodies are received into glory.

Thirdly, I observe from hence then, that the Souls of wicked man when they dye
are immediately sent to Hell, when wicked men dye, the Devil presently claims
their souls; the breath is no sooner gone, but the Soul is in Hell.

These three Points of Doctrine I shall first prove unto you from Scritpure
evidence, and show you that it is so; and then in the second place, I shall
endeavor to improve them, by way of Use and Application, for the spiritual
improvement of your precious and immortal souls. And the first Point to be
proved is this, that there is both a Heaven and a Hell; in handling of which, I
shall first show you that it is so, that there is both a Heaven and a Hell: And
secondly, what this Heaven and Hell is. That there is both a Heaven and a Hell,
is a truth believed in all ages, denied by none but Atheists, and such as deny
God; and they that dare deny this truth, will not dare also to deny God
himself. The truth of this Point is so clear, that it needs no proof, it being
as clear as the Sun at Noonday, so that he that runs may read it; the Text it
self does clearly prove this truth, Dives being in Hell sees Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom: Dives he never minded Hell so as to prevent it, but Dives he
now finds a Hell, so as never to escape it.

That there is a Hell, see that place in Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned
into hell, and all the Nations that forget God. It is better (says our Savior
in Matthew 5.30.) to lose one eye, rather then our whole body should enter into
hell. That of our Savior in the 10. of Matthew and the 28. verse, is a clear
proof of this Point, Fear not him which can kill the body, but is not able to
kill the soul, but rather fear him that is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell; which clearly proves that there is a Hell, wherein both soul and body
shall be destroyed.

Secondly, that there is a Heaven, a place of Glory for the Saints in the world
to come, you may see if you consider these following Scriptures, Psalm. 58.11.
Verily there is a reward for the righteous: And this was that which did put
Moses upon choosing Christ; the Text says, Heb. 11.26. He had respect to the
recompense of reward. Psalm. 37.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, (says
David) and afterward receive me to glory. This made the believing Hebrews, Heb.
10.34. rejoice in having their go^ds spo^^ed and taken away: the Apostle says,
they knew in themselves that they had in Heaven a better and a more enduring
substance. We know, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. that if our earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. Rejoice (says our Savior) and leap for
joy, for behold your reward is great in Heaven, Luke 6.24. Sell all (says our
Savior) and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven. Luke
18.22. This day, says our Savior to the Penitent Thief, shall thou be with me
in Paradise, Luke 23.43. and Chap. 24.51. our Savior after his Resurrection is
there said to be carried up into Heaven. So in the 16. of Mark our Savior
being risen, and appearing to his Discip^e^, (...) said in the 19. v^^se. After
he had spoken (...) them, he was received up into heaven, and sat at the right
hand of God. Consider these Scriptures, and surely thou will believe that there
is both a Heaven and a Hell.

Now what this Heaven is, I shall endeavor to declare unto you, but had I the
tongue of men and Angels, it were not possible for me fully to declare unto you
the glory thereof; for as the Apostle says excellently, Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither has i^ entered into the heart of man to conceive the things
which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. If all the stars in
the firmament of heaven were all Suns, (says a godly man now in glory) they
would be but a dark shadow to the glory of heaven, and therefore its reserved
for eternity to be known. But to give you a little glimpse of this glory, and I
shall but show you as it were the outside of your Fathers house, the inside,
or rather the perfection of all you shall know when you come to the enjoyment
of it.

And this I shall briefly show. 1. Negatively. 2. Comparatively, and 3.
Positively.
And for the negative part of this glory, there shall be no evil, the Saints in
Heaven shall be freed from all evil, from sin, and that is the greatest evil;
yea, the evil of evils: the people of God in Heaven shall be freed from all
hardness of heart, blindness of mind, ^u^ness of spirit; there they shall
serve God freely and fully; and as they shall be freed from the evil of sin, so
they shall be delivered from all possibility of sinning, which is when the
happiness of God himself.

1. In Heaven there shall be no sorrow, sorrow shall there flee away; and
although through many tribulations we must enter into Heaven, yet in Heaven
there shall be no tribulation, nor sorrow; there all tears shall be wiped away
from our eyes; and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor pain; no
sickness in heaven, no deformity, nor crookedness in glory, no consumptions nor
decaying of our bodies, no persecutions nor oppressions; there in Heaven the
Saints shall be beyond the reach of the Devil and all his instruments; in this
world the Saints meet with troubles, and griefs, and persecutions, and
distresses, but in the world to come, in Heaven, they shall be done away.

2. For the Comparative part of this glory. 1. It is infinitely more then what
we have here; here we know but in part, but in Heaven we shall know as we are
known: We shall be like God, and we shall see him as he is, 1 John. 3.2. 2. Its
beyond the happiness of Adam in Paradise; in Paradise Adams body was but
mortal, but in Heaven the bodies of the Saints are all immortal; for Christ
will change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body, Phil.
3.21. 3. The glory of the Saints in heaven shall be beyond the glory of all the
most glorious Angels, for they are more nearly united to Christ, they are the
friends, the brethren of Christ, coheirs with Christ, they shall be made one
with Christ, John 17.23.
Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, Unto which of the Angels said he
at any time, thou art my Son, Heb. 1.5.

3. For the positive part of the glory of Heaven, and this you may see in these
particulars.

First, In heaven there shall b^ perfection of their nature, our body shall
then be made like the glorious body of Christ, every soul shall then have one
incorruptible body, there shall be no more death, there shall be a perfection
of soul and body.

Secondly, they shall possess and enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, even the heaven
of heavens, they shall be lifted u^ above the spangled firmament which is ^^t
the lower pa^ement of our Favors h^use: and this should comfort such of Gods
people, as (with poor Lazarus) have (...) possessions here, they shall possess
heavens and (...) all the glory thereof, which is better then the enjoyment of
all the world, (...) the glory of Heaven is eternal.

Thirdly, They shall ^^j^y God himself, which shall be the glory of all; for
^as one says sweetly. Heaven would ^he no Heaven, were it not for the presence
of God; In thy presence is light, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore: and this must needs fill our soul with glory, for the presence of God
fills Heaven with Glory. O what a glorious being shall the Saints have in
glory, when God himself shall be their glory; for they shall have ^^^on and
communion with God, and Christ, Saints and Angels so to all eternity.

Thus much briefly of the glory of Heaven. The next thing I have to do, is
briefly to inform you what Hell is. And in the first place, it is a place of
darkness, even utter darkness, a place of pain and sorrow, of endless an^
easeless woe, as you may clearly se^ by the words of the Text, I am tormented
in this flame, says Dives; there is no coming from thence, out of Hel^ there is
no redemption; its called i^^ Scripture a lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 20.14, 15. So that dreadful place in Rev. 21.8. the fearful
unbelieving, abominable murderer whore mongers, sorcerers, idolaters, and all
ly an^ shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
a place of everlasting darkness, where the Devils are bound in chains, Jude 6.
(...) place of everlasting woe. See the dreadful sentence against the wicked,
at the great day, Depart from the ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels, Mat. 25.4. The torments of hell as they are easeless,
so they are endless, when the damned in hell have undergone the wrath of God
ten thousand times then thousand millions of years, they shall be as far from
having an end as they were at the first: it was an excellent comparison which I
have heard from a godly and learned Divine, speaking of the ever^asting
torments of Hell. If (says he) (...) barn or some other great place should ^e
filled top full of the purest wheat, and a bird should come once every thou^and
years and fetch away a corn, there might at last be an end of all, the barn
might at last be emptied; but as for ^he torments of hell they have no end; ^en
thousand times ten thousand mil^ions of days does not at all shorten ^he
misery and torments of the damned. Consider this all you that are ungodly, ^est
living and dying in your sins, ye also come to this place of torment.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, Christ's
first Sermon, or, The necessity, duty and practice of Repentance, opened and
applied. Also Christ's last Sermon, or, The everlasting estate and condition of
all men in the world to come. Likewise the Christians best Garment, or, The
putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ. And the Christians blessed Choice. Very
godly Books, and are but three pence price.

There are likewise eight other small Books, all of them very godly, and very
comfortable for thy soul. One is entitled, Englands Faithful Physician. The
second, Doomsday at hand. The third, the dreadful character of a drunkard. The
fourth, The Father last Blessing to his children. The fifth, The sin of Pride
arraigned and condemned. The sixth, The Charitable Christian. The seventh, The
Plain Man's Plain Pathway to Heaven. The eight, the Black Book of Conscience.
All very necessary for these licentious times, and each of them being but of
two pence price. They are to be sold by John Andrews, at the White Lion near
Pye-Corner


