The Charitable CHRISTIAN OR, A word of Comfort from the God of Comfort, to
such as are truly POOR. And a word of Christian Counsel and Advice to such as
are worldly Rich, stirring them up to the Christian Duty and Practice of
Charity. With some powerful Motives and Persuasions thereunto, drawn from the
Word of God, to convince men of the necessity of this Christian Duty; with the
sore Evils and Calamities which are threatened in the Word of God against
unmerciful men.

The eighth Edition with Additions.

Psalm 41.1, 2, 3. Blessed is be that considers the Poor, the Lord will
deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive,
and he shall be blessed upon the earth. The Lord will strengthen him upon the
bed of languishing, and will make his bed in his sickness.

Published by a Lover of Hospitality.

London, Printed for Elizabeth Andrews, at the White Lion near Pie Corner. 1662,

Courteous Reader.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, Christ's
first Sermon, on The necessity, duty and practice of Repentance opened and
applied. Also Christ's last Sermon, o^ The everlasting estate and condition of
all men the world to cont^^. Likewise the Christians bless Choice. And the
Christians best Garment, or, The putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ. Also
Heavens Glory, and Hells Horror, or the Parable between Dives and Lazarus
opened and applied. V^ry godly Books, and are but three pence price.

There are likewise seven other small Books, all them very godly, and very
comfortable for thy so^ One is entitled, Englands Faithful Physician. T^
second, Doomsday at hand. The third, the dread character of a drunkard. The
fourth, the Father last Blessing to his children. The fifth, The sin Pride
arraigned and condemned. The sixth, The Plain Man's Plain Path way to Heaven.
The sevent The Black Book of Conscience. All very necessa^ for these licentious
times, and each of them bei^ but of two pence price. They are to be sold
Elizabeth Andrews, at the White Lion near Py Corner.

The Charitable Christian.
1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which is
gives us richly all things we enjoy.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on Eternal Life.


THe Blessed Apostle in these words lays down several arguments and
persuasions to Charity, which in this Age that we now live in, is even almost
grown out of date with most men; For notwithstanding there is great noise men:
For notwithstanding there is (...) great noise of Religion abroad, yet is it
lamentable in consider; show irreligiously most men live, making a great
outward show an^ pretense of Religion, but altogether deny an^ neglect the
power and practice thereof, which i^ a great measure, does consist in the
practice (...) Charity, as St. James says in his first Chapter and the last
Verse: Pure Religion, and undefile^ before God is this, To visit the fatherless
and th^^ widow in their distress; That is, by relieving their necessities.

There are several Arguments that should provoke us to Charity, in these words
of the Apostle; as first, the charge given to rich men He does not charge them
in the Name of an^ King or State, but in the Name of the great God of Heaven
and Earth, whose Ambassadou^ he was. The sum and substance of his charge is
this: First, That they would not be high-minded that is to say, lofty, proud,
and scornful disdain^ing to look upon those that are poor. And secondly, That
they would not trust in uncertain Riches but in the living God. Men are apt to
think themselves safe and secure, if they have gotten but Estates in their
hands: but the Word of God says otherwise. The Apostle here call Richee
uncertain: and Solomon says of them that they are vanity of vanities, moor
empty no^ thing, things which we ought not to covet after for we came into the
world naked without riches and it is certain we shall carry none with us out of
the world. Then as St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.8. Let us having food and raiment
be there with all content: But if we will not, what says the Apostle in the
next Verse? If men will be rich, they fall into temptation, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition. For (says he) the love of money is the root of all evil. And then
thirdly, and lastly, he charges them, That they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. And the reasons why we
should do so, are these: First, that we receive all we have from God; he gives
us all things richly to enjoy. Then secondly, by doing good and relieving the
necessities of those that are in want, we do thereby lay up in store for our
selves a good foundation for eternal life. God will not forget our work and
labor of love toward the Poor. Inasmuch as ye have done it unto them, ye have
done it unto me, says Christ, Matthew, 25.40. And whatsoever we give unto the
Poor, we lend unto the Lord, and he will certainly repay us.

Therefore let all those who expects mercy and favors form the Lord, seriously
consider, and mind these following motives and inducements to Charity,
propounded by a godly Minister: a necessary Duty, which diverse men are very
prone to neglect. Dives would not give the crumbs and scraps of his table to
poor Lazarus. Men in a full condition are not at all affected with the wants
and necessities of others: See what an evil Unmercifulness is.

First, It is an argument of Covetousness: When Christ, Luke 16.9. vids them
make to themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, (which he so
calls, because men sin either in the getting or in the using of them) saying
they could not serve God and Mammon. In the 13. Verse it is said, the Pharisees
who were covetous derided him: They thought Christ spoke like an ignorant man;
they could serve God, and keep their wealth too, and not cast it away upon poor
people. This showed their covetousness; and what an evil covetousness is, St.
Paul tells us, A covetous man is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. and has no
inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. Unmercifulness is an argument of Unbelief and distrust of God; men think,
if they give to the poor they must want themselves. But Prove. 28.27. He that
gives to the poor shall never lack. Here is the word of God for it, who is
Truth it self; and yet men distrust God, and think of other ways to provide
for themselves. I will keep what I have (says the Covetous man) if this be
gone, I know not where to have more: the world is hard, and it is best to keep
what we have. Thus unbelief discovers it self. Says God, give to the poor, and
thou shall never lack; says the hard-hearted man, Give to the poor, and thou
shall lack, and so gives God the lie, Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the
water, and after many days thou shall find it: No, says the unmerciful man,
I shall never see it again; and so makes God a Liar, and declares himself an
unbeliever.

3. Unmercifulness is an argument that there is no love of God in that man, 1
John 3.17. Whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him? He may think, and others may think and say that he loves God, but there is
not one dram of Gods loves in that man: for if a man loves God, he would love
man who is the Image of God. Christ commanded us, that we love one another, as
he has loved us, John 15.12. He testified his love, by giving his life, his
blood for us; and we will not give a little bread, an old garment, a little
silver, it is a clear demonstration that there is no love of God in us.

4. Unmercifulness it has much cruelty and unnaturalness in it, Isa. 58.7.
says the Lord, Deal thy bread to the hungry, cover the naked, and hide not thy
self from thine own flesh. The poor are our own flew, Mal. 2.10. Have not we
all one Father; Has not one God created us Prove. 22.2 The rich and the poor
meet together the Lord is the maker of them all. Now if we hide our eyes from
them, if we will not consider their necessities, and relieve them, we are cruel
and unnatural: if a man be naked or hungry, he will seek to cloathe and feed
himself, he will not hate his own flesh: Ephs. 5.29. No man ever yet hated his
own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it When men therefore refuse of
strengthen the hand of the poor and needy, they despise and hate their own
flesh, they are unnatural: and to prevent this, God has laid a command to be
merciful, where the strongest reason and plea may be against it, Prove. 25.21.
If thine enemy hunger, give him bread to eat; if he be thirsty, give him drink:
much more then to the Poor.

5. Unmercifulness, it brings a curse yea, many curses upon men and their
estates, Prove. 28. 27. He that hides his eye from the poor, shall have many a
curse. The poor will curse him, and not only man, but even God himself curses
them. Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that considers the poor. If a man do it not,
shall he have a blessing? No: Depart from me, ye cursed, (Marth. 25.41.) For I
was hungry and ye fed me not. And Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the
house of the wicked. Sometimes they have not a heart to eat, and take the
comfort of their Estates; sometimes they are perplexed with fears, and ceres,
and for rows about their Estates: sometimes they are wasted at Law, sometimes
by Fire or Robbery, sometimes by such secret ways, that none can give any
rational account of, but know that the curse of God is there.

6. Unmercifulness, it makes men altogether unlike God, who is the Father of
mercy, and the God of all compassions, 2 Cor. 1.3. He makes his Sun to arise on
the evil and the good, and sends rain upon the just and upon the unjust, Mat.
5.45. He gives food to all flesh, Psalm. 136.25. To each his sufficing food in
due season, and fills every living creature with his blessing. He gives
liverally and upbraideth not, as St. James says, Jam. 1.5. He bears the
destres of the humble and the poor, Psalm. 10.17. He is kind to the unthankful,
and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful as your heavenly father is merciful,
Luke 6.36. But now, that man that is near, pinching and miserable, and does not
regard the condition of the poor, to comfort their hearts, and to strengthen
their hands, in filling their hungry vellies, and clothing their naked bodies;
he is unlike and contrary to God, who is all love and bowels of mercy, pity,
and compassion, and ever mindful of the poor, and has made a Law for their
relief, which stands recorded in the Word of God, unalterable, and can never
be repealed or made void, Deuteronomy. 15.7.8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15. If there be among
you a poor man, one of thy brethren, within any thy gates or the Land which the
Lord thy God gives thee; thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thy hand
from thy poor brother: but thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and shall
surely lend him sufficient for his need in that which he wants. Beware that
there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, the seventh year the year
of release is at hand, and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou
give him naught, and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto
thee. Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when
thou give unto him; because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless
thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thy hand unto. For the poor
shall never cease out of the land, therefore I command thee, saying, thou shall
open thine hand wide to thy brother, to the poor, and to the needy in the land:
Thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy flocks, and out of thy floor, and
out of thy wine press; of that wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed thee,
thou shall give unto him. And thou shall remember, that thou was a bondman in
the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee; Therefore I command thee
this thing to day. And to this very purpose is that in Levit. 25.35, 36, 37,
38. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen to decay with thee, then thou shall
relieve him; yea, though he be a stranger or so sorner with thee, that he may
live with thee: thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victuals upon increase; take thou no usury of him or increase: but sear thy
God, that thy brother may live with thee. Here is two Statute And of God
himself, that are of more force and greater authority, then all the Acts of men
or Parliaments, which shall never be altered, but shall be in full force and
power to the end of the world: yea, shall be a Law to condemn the gainsayers
and neglecters thereof in the day of judgment. Christ says, Luke 14.13. When
thou make a Feast, call the poor, the lame, and the blind and thou shall be
blessed. And Luke 14.18. God anointed Christ to preach the Gospel to the poor.
And in another place, he says, The poor receive the Gospel. And has not God
chosen the poor of this world to be rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom,
which he has promised to those that love him. In Luke 6.20. says Christ,
Blessed are ye poor, for yours is the Kingdom of Heaven. But in the 24. werse,
Wu unto you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation. In Luke
16.25. When Dives cried unto Abraham to have mercy on him: says Abraham to him
Remember that thou in thy life time received^ thy good things. Thou made thy
Riches the God, and did shut up the bowels of compassion against poor
Lazarus, therefore thou shall have no mercy. Judas was a hard-hearted wretch, a
covetnus Traitor, that cared not for the poor. I^ every man would do themselves
good by their Eftates, it will be in laying them out for the poor: for at the
last day, riches if not improved to the Glorgy of God, will certainly rise up
in judgment against men. See what St. James says, Chap. 6. ver. 1, 2, 3. Go
to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon you:
Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten: your gold and silver
is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire. You have heaped up treasure together for the last
day.

7. Unmercifulness it puts in a Caveat and Bar in the Court of Heaven against
our Prayers, that they shall have no entertainment there. Whosoever stops his
ears at the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself, and not be heard, Prove.
21.16. Unmercifull men shall come to some great straight or other before they
dye, so as to cry either to man or God; and when they cry, they shall not be
heard. They would not hear the poor crying, nor God who sent these poor, and
cried to them in these poor; therefore when they cry unto man for help, God
will stop their ears, and turn their hearts from them; yea, stop his own ears,
and turn away his own heart from them, Luke 6.38. With the same measure ^^at ye
mere, shall be measured to you again. You ^^op your ears, and God will stop his
ear: you ^ut up your bowels of compassion, and God will ^ut up his: you
withhold Pence, and God will ^ithhold his Talents. The rich man cried for ^rop
of water, being in hell torments, but neither Abraham nor God would hearken to
his re^^uest: he that would not give one crumb, must of receive one drop,
Matthew. 5.7. The merciful shall obtain mercy.

8. Unmercifulness is a shroud sign and ^adge of a Keprobate condition: a
merciless ^ans name will hardly be found in the Book of ^ife, Col. 3.11. Put
on (says St. Paul) as the Elect of God bowels of mercy and kindness. Those
that are the Elect of God, have had mercy, and being called, they sinde and
feel that mercy, and cannot but put on bowels of mercy toward ^o there is which
declarath their Election: as God pitied them, so they pitied others. But
where there is no bowels of mercy, but churlishness, har ^ness, cruelty, and
unmercifulness: there is a black sign and badge of a Keprobate Condition.

9. Unmercifulness is a degree of Murder: some men hate and curse the poor,
and the Scriptures blushes not to call them murderers, 1 John 3.15. Whosoever
hates his brother is a murderer. And Job 24.14. The murderer rising with the
light k^leth the poor and needy. He devises ways ho^ to oppress them, and to
suck and squeere them and this is a killing of them, and he is a mu^^ therer
for it. So when a man sees his brother or neighbor poor, sinking, and like to
be ruine^^ and will not relieve him, being able to do i^^ he falls into a
degree of murder. An Heather could see this, who said, That he that has power
to succor a man, being ready to perish, an^ succors him not, he kills him.
Suppose a man in the water or fire, you pass by, and lend him not your hand,
which if you had dones, his lif^ might have been saved, are not you then guilt^
of his death, if you help him not? When the Priest and Levite passed by the
man, that going from Jerusalem to Jericho fell among Thieves and relieved him
not, it was their sin; and had he died in that case and condition, they had
been accessory to his death. If the poor be our flesh, then our goods are
theirs as well as ours, and if we let them perish, we murder them and our
selves too.

10. The end of that man will be very sad, who has been merciless to the poor;
he must have the end of a fruitless and dead free, he must be hewn down and
cast in to the fire. James 2. 13. He shall have judgment without mercy, that
has showed no mercy: All judgment, mere severity, and pure wrath shall be his
portion.

The chief, if not the only sin that Christ mentions at the day of Judgment,
(Matthew. 25. 41, 42.) is unmercifulness. To the righteous, says he, Come ye
blessed of my Father; for I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and
ye gave me drink; I was naked, and ye clothed me: therefore I say unto you,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. But unto
the wicked and ungodly says Christ. Depart some me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire prepred for the Devil and his Angels; for I was hungry, and ye
gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was naked, and ye
clothed me not: Ye showed me in my poor members no pity, no mercy; therefore
depart from me, I know you not.

Unmerciful men will have no plea of excuse then for themselves; it will not
serve their turn then to say, I had it not: this will be but an ill answer
before the Lord, when they shall come to give an account how they have used and
disposed of those Boods and Talents, which he has as Stewards entrusted them
withal. When God shall (as he will) put the question to them, how have you
spend your wealth? how have you advanced my glory by your estates? how many
poor Souls have you refreshed? what answer will they have? what can they say
for themselves; Even nothing at all: Their own Consciences will then accuse,
and will hear true witness against them. What have you done with your wealth,
says Bod? which way have you spent your Estates? Says Conscience then, So
much have J spent to please mine Appetite in supersluity of dainties: and thus
much have I spent to please mine Eye in curious and overc^stly clothing: and
thus much have I spent to delight mine Ears, and to satisfy my senses in vain
delights, and in worldly pomp and pleasure: hundreds and thousands have I spent
upon my own base sinful lusts and affections. But what have thou given to the
poor, says God? When I had any spare money, now and then I gave a half ^enny
or a brass farthing to a poor man. ^h wretched man, will God say, had thou
where withal to pleass thy carnal lust, and had thou nothing more to spare
for my poor members? Thou unpresist able Servant, thou shall be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and wail^ng, and guathing of t^eth for ever.
Thou would^t take no pity nor compassion on the poor; therefore I will show
thee no mercy.

Men are very leath to part with any thing for God; bu^^ if they did but know
the benefit of it, surely they would do it more willingly. When Christ, in the
16.48 Luke, bid the young man sell all, and follow him, he went out very
forrowful, because he had great possessions He had rather let Christ alone, and
Heaven and Salvation also, then part with all: He did not understand what a
blessing it should b^ to have treasure in Heaven, joy unspeakabl^ and full of
glory. He did not think of the van^ty and uncertainty of earthly riches. He
never thought of death, and how that he must shortl leave all these things
behind him. It is a har^ thing, says Christ, for a rich man to enter inth^^
heaven: their hearts are so glued and fastene^^ to the world, that they had
rather run the ha^ a^^ of their precions souls, then lose a part of the^^
Estates. They might have laid up in store f^^ the time to come, but they have
treasured (...) wrath against the day of wrath. There is (...) better treasure
against the evil day, then th^^ which had been laid up in the works of Mer^^^^
and Charity.

The merciful man (says Solomon) does good to his own soul, Proverbs 11.17.
The mercif^^ man kills two birds with one stone; he con^^^ forteth the souls
of others that are in want, an^^ thereby lays up a portion of bliss for his
ow^ soul.

Seeing then Uncharitableness is so great a^^ evil, let us put on bowels of
mercy, and it strenst^en the hands, and cover the nakedness of th^^^ poor and
needy: It is now a hard time, and things are dear, and Trading very small, and
the poor abound; and therefore now it is very seasonable for those that are
rich to open the bowels of pity and compassion toward the poor, and to succor
those that are in want. Holy Job was a father to the poor, see his 29. Chapter
and the 16. verse, He did not eat his morsels alone, but the fatherless and
widow eat thereof: He delivered the poor and the father less, and him that had
none to help him: and he was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and the
blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon him; and he caused the
widews heart to sing for joy: he did not suffer the poor to perish for want of
clothing: Job 31.17. The bellies and loins of the poor blessed him. Being
filled and warmed with the flesh and fleece of his sheep. It were well it Jobs
spirit and compassion were in all rich men now, that so the hungry might be
fed, the naked clothed, and the necessities of the poor supplied.

Spare something out of your Superfluities for them. Can you adorn your Houses
with Pictures and Hangings, your Tables with costly Carpets, your Shelves with
Brass and Pewter, and your closets and cupboards with Plate, and have you
nothing for the poor, who are the temples of God: Can you feed your Dogs and
Parrets, Apes, and Monkeys, and pamper your Horses, and not mind the poor
Members of Christ that lie at your doors? Can you spend bounds and pounds to
satisfy and please your carnal lusts, in a superfluous manner, and can you not
now and then spare a penny to a poor Christian? how will the Lord take this at
your bands?

Remember Dives, he had been better to have given all to poor Lazarus, then to
have met with such an end for his unmercifulness. The Lord Jesus Christ has
told you, that it is a blessed thing to give, Acts 20.35. And it is a blessed
thing to show kindness to Christ: When you give to the poor, you give to
Christ: Mat. 25.40. In a much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these
my brethren, ye have done it unto me: they are Christ's brethren they do it
unto, and he accounts it as done to himself.

Again, Consider, is it not a blessed thing to have the Lord of heaven and
earth to be indebted to you? Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the poor,
lends unto the Lord; and that which he has given, will he pay him again. God
is the poor men's security, he takes the debt upon himself, and gives thee his
word for security; his Faithfulness and his Honor are both engaged for
performance: Had you the Cities Bond, or the Public Faith's security for what
you disburse toward the poor, it were nothing to this. O give unto the poor,
and make God as much as you can indebted to you, he is a good sure paymaster.
Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down,
shaken together and running over. If you will not make God your Debtor by
giving, he will be your Judg^ for not giving.

We live in dangerous times, and riches are uncertain things; the only way to
make then safe, is to bestow them upon the poor. One ha^ this Epitaph upon his
Tomb, That which I have given, that I have; that which I have kept, that have I
lost. Solomon says, Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou
shall find it after man^ days. If you keep it, you lose it: if you give you
shall find it again.

It is the judgment of some, that no Beggar^ should be relieved that go from
door to door; there things it an unwarrantable practice, and the nursery of
Vagabonds and vile persons, that live in no calling, and are under no
Government, but are the shame of the Magistrates, and a disords in a
Commonwealth, and a teproach of the Laws that are made for the relief of the
Poor in their several respective places. Certainly those that beg up and down,
being able to work, and will not, you ought not to relieve, you sin in doing
it; the Ayostles rule is, 2 These. 3.10. If and will not work, he must not eat.
And further, when Begging is made a trade, I see not how it is ^stiftable
before God, or can be countenanced ^y man. Yet to conclude it unlawful to give
(...) any that veg, I dare not. Christ healed the ^inde. Beggars, Luke 18.35,
42. John 9 7, 8. and did not reprove them for their begging. Besides, God has
given out a Rule, Luke 6.30. Give to every one that asks of thee: Which
command would be void and useless, if I might ^ve to no Beggars. Then if you
are able, you ^ught to give to all that are truly poor and needy; even to those
who are able to work, and willingly would work, but though the ill disposition
of the times cannot get employment, Gal. ^^. 10. As we have opportunity (says
the Apostle) ^et us do good unto all. We ought to consider he necessities of
the poor; they may be in dancer of life, and ready to stave, as Lazarus was ^t
Dives door: or they may be sick or lame, or ^linde, or aged, and so not able to
do any thing, for a livelihood.

You have seen the sore evils of Unmercifulness, and the great Blessings that
are promised ^o such as are Merciful: they shall obtain mercy, when merciless
men shall have no mercy hewed them. Consider that the same God that hade them
poor, made you rich; and might have hade them rich, and you poor; you might
have been in their condition. Therefore seeing God has given you Talents,
Wealth, and Riches use them to his Glory, lay up some of them in store for the
time to come, for eternal life, b^ laying them out on the poor: That so at the
great day of accounts, the Lord may say unto you, Well done good and faithful
servant, enter thou into thy Masters Joy: thou have glorifte me on Earth, now
will I glorifte thee in Heaven. Thou have dispersed abroad, thou have give to
the poor, thy righteousness endures for ever thy horn shall be exalted with
honor, Psalm. 112.9. Now shall thou receive the full possession and enjoyment
of those unspeakable pleasures, that are in Heaven for ever.

Now then consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding
hearts in all things. Now unto him that is able to do abundantly more for us,
then we can think or desire the only wise marciful God, be Honor and Glory,
now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

THE CHRISTIANS Best Garment. OR, The putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherein the absolute necessity, excellency, and usefulness of Christ, as a
Garment, to believing Souls, is briefly opened and applied.

Secondly, The naked, miserable, lost, and undone condition of all Unbelievers,
who have not put on this Garment, discovered.

Thirdly and lastly, Some few brief, but powerful Motives to persuade us to the
putting on of this Garment, with directons how to live to the glory of Christ
here, that so we may live with Christ hereafter in glory.

The second Edition.

By a goldly, able, and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ.

Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion, near Pye-Corner. 1661.

THE Christians best Garment: OR, The putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Romans 13.12, 13, 14. The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us
therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying:

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof.


IN these words beloved, now read unto you, we have these two parts: in the
first place, we have some things which the Apostle endeavors to persuade
Christians from; in the second place, we have some things which the Apostle
endeavors to persuade Christians to. The things persuaded from, are the works
of darkness, the things persuaded to are these. 1. That we put on the armor of
light, and that we walk honestly. 2. The Apostle having erborted us to this
twofold duty. 1. The casting off the works of darkness, and the putting on the
armor of light, here sets down expressly some Christian directions how this is
to he done, and that two ways. 1. Negatively, and then 2. Affirmatively.

1. Negatively, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envy.

2. Affirmatively, by putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, and denying of the
works of the flesh; and the motives here laid down, whereupon the Apostle
enjoins this duty, are these in the 12. verse, The night is far spent, the day
is at hand, therefore (says he) let us cast off the works of darkness, and let
us put on the armout of light. Where by the way, we may observe, that works of
darkness are very unsuitable and unseasonable to the times of the Gospel, light
and darkness are contrary. In the words then you see, 1. Here is a duty
exhorted unto, and that is laid down in the 12. verse. And then 2. you have
here also the Apostles amplification and illustration of this duty here
exhorted unto, and that is set down particularly in the 13. and 14. verses. The
duty exhorted unto you see here is twofold. 1. Here is something to be cast
off. And then 2. Here is something to be put on. 1. The things to be cast off,
are the works of darkness. 2. The things to be put on, are the armor of light:
Let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light:
and as the exhortation is twofold, so like wise are the reasons whereupon the
Apostle grounds his exhortation also. 1. The night is far spent. And 2. the day
is at hand. Before I proceed to the observation, give me leave a little to open
the words unto you; and first, I shall endeavor to show what is here meant by
the night, and then secondly, what is here meant by the day: by the night here
may be meant the times of darkness and ignorance, in which the Bentiles lived
in before the breaking forth of the Gospel of Christ, and those times may very
well be compared to the night for these three reasons.

First, In the night men cannot so well see their way, and therefore may the
more easily wander out of their way; for it is only the want of light that
makes men to err.

2. In the night no thing is visible or discernable but darkness, all light is
then extinguished; the blind man is not able to value or judge what a mercy it
is to have the fruition and enjoyment of the light of the Sun.

3. The night is the most suitablest time and season for the doing of evil in,
in Job 24. 14, 15, 16. The murderer (says Job rising with the light kills
the poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief. The eye also of the
adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me, and disguiseth
his face. In the dark they dig through houses, they know not the light, They
that are drunk (says the Apostle) are drunk in the night, 1 These. 5.7. in
Psalm. 25.20. The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of
cruelty. And then secondly, by the day here is meant the times of the Gospel,
it is night in the soul, till such time as the day light of the Gospel breaks
forth and shines into it, Matthew. 4.16. The people which sat in darkness saw a
great light, and to them that sat in the region and shadow of death, light is
sprung up. In John 13.19. Light is come into the world, and men love darkness
rather then light; and why so, the reason is (says he) because their deeds
were evil. For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes
darkness, (says the Apostle) but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as
children of light. In 1 Pet. 2.9. God has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light. Luke 1.78, 79. The day spring from on high has visited us,
to give light to them that sit in darkness. In Acts 26.17.18. the Apostle was
sent to the Gentiles, to turn them from darkness unto light. In 1 John 2.8. The
darkness is past, and the true light (says the Apostle) now shines. In Acts
17.30. The times of Heathenisme are there called the times of ignorance, and it
must needs be night in such souls wherein Christ the Sun of righteousness never
did arise; as it is never day in the world until the Sun arises, so it is
never day in the soul till Christ the Sun of righteousness arises with healing
in his wings. Now there are several useful and profitable points of doctrine,
which naturally flow from hence for our instruction and edification, I shall
only name them, and so proceed to that which I chiefly intend.

The first point of doctrine is this, that works of darkness are works of the
night, night works.

Secondly, that the times of the Gospel are times of light.

Thirdly, that in the day of the Gospel all these works of darkness are to be
cast off: when the Sun shines, it dispels and scatters all those mists and fogs
of darkness that lie upon the earth; so when Christ the Sun of Righteousness
arises in the soul, he dispells and scatters all those mists and fogs of sin
and wickedness which naturally arises in the soul.

Fourthly, in Gospel times, or times of light, men should live Gospel lives, or
walk in the light of the Gospel: while ye have light walk as children of the
light. Walk (says our Savior, John 5.35, 36.) while ye have light, lest
darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness knows not whither he
goes. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children
of light.

Fifthly, that rioting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and
envy, are not works of the day, but of the night.

Sixthly, they that would live as becomes the Gospel of Christ, should cast off
all those unfruitful works of darkness.

Seventhly, that Jesus Christ is a Christians garment.

Eighthly, that Jesus Christ is a garment to be put on.

Ninthly, that all of Christ, whole Christ is to be put on; put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ as a King to rule you, as a Priest to offer up himself a sacrifice
for you, and as a Prophet to teach and instruct you.

Tenthly and lastly, that the putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ is
accompanied with the casting off all sinful and fleshly works.

Now the point of doctrine that I shall chiefly insist upon shall be this,
namely, that the Lord Jesus Christ is a garment; in handling whereof I shall
briefly touch upon, and speak something to all the rest by way of use and
application. The Doctrine then to be insisted upon is this, That the Lord Jesus
Christ is a Christians garment; in handling whereof, I shall endeavor by the
assistance of God to show you first wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is or may be
said to be a garment. And here I shall endeavor by the assistance of God to
show you the natural agreement and resemblance that is between the Lord Jesus
Christ and our natural garments. First, wherein they do agree, and secondly,
wherein they do not agree; and having done this, in the next place, God
willing, I shall endeavor to show you what kind of garment Christ is, and how
this garment is to be worn. Thirdly and lastly, to whom and for what he is a
garment; and then having done this, I shall briefly endeavor to give you some
directions by way of motives to persuade you to the putting on of this garment,
and so conclude all by the assistance of God in a word or two of use and
application. I begin with the first of these, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is
or may be said to be a garment, and this will appear briefly in these two
things. 1. considering what we are; and 2. considering what Christ does.


I. Christ may be said to be a garment, considering what we are by nature, the
best of us are but, as St. John says, Rev. 3.17. empty, naked, miserable
sinners: the best garments we have by nature are nothing else but rags, yea,
filthy rotten rags, as the Prophet Isaiah expresses it in Isa. 64.6. We are all
of us by nature poor and blind, miserable and naked, till Christ appears in
us, thereupon the Apostle Paul, in Phil. 3.8, 9. desires so earnestly that he
might be found in Christ, not having on his own righteousness, which he
accounted dross and dung, in comparison of Christ and his righteousness.

2. Christ is a garment in regard of what he path to us; he covers our
nakedness by casting over us the skirts of his love, as in Ezekiel. 16.8. And to
illustrate this a little, I shall here take occasion to show you wherein Christ
may be said to be a garment, by giving you the resemblances that are between
the Lord Jesus Christ and our natural garments, and what our garments are to
our bodies, the same, and much more is Christ to our souls: now the natural use
of our natural garments are chiefly these three. 1. Our natural garments are
for necessity. 2. For distinction. 3. For ornament.


First, for necessity our natural garments are necessary, yea, they are of
necessity, we cannot be well without them; they are needful for us to cover and
shelter us, to cherish and preserve our weak, frail, naked bodies, from all the
dangers and encumbrances which would irresistably fall upon us, without the use
of them. Our garments are useful to cover and preserve us from the cold
blustering storms of the world, how unable would our frail weak mortal bodies
be to subsist and live without the natural use of our natural garments, to
cherish and preserve us; and this, and more then this does Christ to our souls:
as our bodies are not able to subsist without clothes, no more are our souls
able to subsist without Christ, who is the life and garment of our souls: as
our natural garments serve to defend us from the cold blustering storms of the
weather, so Christ the garment of our souls preserves and shelters us from all
those raging assaults of Satan, which in the world we are often, yea, always
liable unto.

Secondly, as our natural garments serve to defend us from the cold storms of
wind and weather, so likewise they serve to defend us from the violent and
scorching heat of the Sun: as in the blustering storms of rain and cold, our
garments preserves us from perishing under them; so in the violent scorching
heat of the Sun, our garments serve to keep us from being melted and devoured
by its violent and scorching heat: of the like use is Christ to our souls; as
it is only Christ that can preserve us from the cold blustering storms of the
world, so it is only Christ that can preserve us from the violent and scorching
heat of persecutions and fiery trials in the world. A second use of our natural
garments is for distinction, to distinguish between sex and sex, noble and
ignoble, high and low, rich and poor, magistrates and people; so likewise
Christ is a garment for distinction, yea, it is the only distinguishing
garment in the world. Christ distinguishes the saint from the sinner, the holy
from the unholy, the sheep from the wolves, yea, the true sheep from the wolves
in sheeps clothing, the sincere and upright souls from formal falsehood,
hypocritical Professors; and as it distinguishes the saints from sinners here,
so it will also distinguish them hereafter, they that have not on this garment
at the last day, shall be set on the left hand of Christ in judgment; its this
wedding garment that distinguishes who are the guests for the marriage feast,
there is no coming to heaven without it.

Thirdly, the natural use of our natural garments are for ornament, our
uncomely parts being clothed become abundant more comely; our bodies being
decked and adorned by clothing, although in themselves uncomely, do thereby
become beautiful and lovely: of the like use is Christ to our souls; there is
nothing in the world, beloved, that will so adorn your souls as this garment of
Christ; yea, it is the only becoming garment, it will make your souls amiable
and lovely, yea, altogether lovely, our souls being clothed upon with this
garment of Christ and his righteousness, will appear lovely and beautiful in
the eyes of God himself, and by it we are made to be acceptable in the Lord; as
we are in our selves, we are vile, wretched, sinful, deformed creatures,
altogether unlovely, but in Christ we are made to be amiable and beautiful,
yea, altogether love. Having thus given you the resemblances between Christ and
our natural garments, and having showed you briefly wherein they do agree, I
shall now in a word or two, show you wherein they disagree, or rather wherein
this spiritual an^ heavenly garment of Christ superexceeds an^ excells all the
garments in the world, be the never so rich and costly; and herein lies th^^
disagreement.

First, our natural garments are not durable, they will last us but a little
while before they be quite worn out; but Jesus Christ is (...) durable and
lasting garment, yea, an everlasting garment that will never be worn out while
thou live, though thou live never so long, it will last thee for ever and
ever, both here and hereafter.

Secondly, our natural garments they are the worse for wearing, yea, the longer
we wear them the worse they grow; and at the last, by being overworne, they
come to be worth nothing? I, but it is not thus with Christ, this heavenly
garment of Christ is the better for wearing, and the longer we wear it, the
better it is; and the better we are, it does not only grow better it self, but
it also makes us grow better. I, but it is not thus with our natural garments,
they if they be worn often, or by often wearing, they grow worse and worse, and
at last they decay.

Thirdly, our natural garments as we put them on in the morning, so we put them
off at night; but where ever Jesus Christ is put on as a garment, he is not,
nay, he cannot be put off again; Christ is a garment as well for the night as
for the day: the soul that has once given up it self to Christ, by a true and
saving faith, can never be taken away, I mean not finally from Christ, by all
the craft and policy of the devil; they that are chosen by God in Christ, shall
be preserved by God in Christ.

Fourthly, our natural garments grow out of fashion very often and suddenly,
but Jesus Christ is a garment that will never be out of fashion; a better then
which can never be magined nor invented. Jesus Christ is a garment as well for
Summer as for Winter, for all weathers; in the Summer heat of persecutions and
tryale, Christ is a garment, hither to keep them off, or else to sustain us
under them: and in the Winter of adversity Jesus Christ is a garment to defend
and cherish us from all evils; let the storms be never (...) great, let the
fire be never so hot, Christ ^an sustain and uphold his people; witness Daniel
in the Lions Den, the Children in the ^ery Furnance, etc.

Fifthly, our natural garments they are fit^^d to our bodies, but to this
garment of Christ our souls are made fit; Christ is a garment made fit for all
souls, natural garments if they fit one, they are either too big or too little
for another; but Jesus Christ is a garment fit, or made fit for all souls, for
souls of all sorts; a garment for men, and a garment for women: a garment for
parents, and a garment for children: a garment for poor, and a garment for
rich: a garment for Magistrates, and a garment for Ministers, and a garment for
people: a garment for Jews, and a garment for Gentiles. Christ is and will be
to all his people, an ornament of grace here, and of glory hereafter.

I come now in the next place to show you what kind of garment Jesus Christ
is, and how he is to be worn; and I shall briefly give if you in these
following considerations.

And first of all, he is a precious garment: to you therefore which believe he
is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. precious in regard of his nature, God and man;
precious in regard of his worth and excellency, the chiefest and the choicest
of ten thousands; but I must not insist upon these things.

Secondly, Christ is a costly garment, a garment that is said to be of great
price, a garment of Gods own making, a garment that cost a dear price, the
precious life and blood of a Savior. In a word, for I must be brief, he is a
garment of more worth then all the world.

Thirdly, Christ is a cheap garment, the cheapest garment that ever thou worest
in all thy life; thou may have this garment, as we use to say for God a
mercy, he is freely offered to thee: Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and eat, come buy wine and
milk without money, and without price. Thou may have this garment for asking
for; it is true, this garment cost the dearest price that ever any garment did,
the Blood of God, one drop whereof is of more worth then ten thousand Worlds;
but Christians, remember, this garment is paid for already, its purchased by
God the Father for thee; should thou go about to buy it, thou could never
be able to purchase it; all thou have, nay, all that all the men in the world
have, would never have been able to have bought this garment: ^t was only the
rich God, that God who has all, and is all, that was only able to purchase
this precious, this costly, this excellent, no this glorious garment; and yet
notwithstanding all this, thou may have him for nothing, he is freely
tendered and offered to be in the Gospel of life: though it be a cost^y
garment to God, yet it will be a cheap garment to thee; God has paid all, and
there is nothing at all left for thee to pay, or to do, but to take him and put
him on.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ is a seamless garment, as Christ's coat was seamless, so
is his person seamless, there is no rent nor divisions in this precious
garment; and as there is no rents nor divisions in Christ, so there ought to be
none in Christians: if there be no rent nor divisions in the head, certainly
there ought to be none in the Church, which is the body. And here beloved, we
might take up a sad and a bitter lamentation in consideration of the sad rents
and divisions that are now in the Church of Christ: whereas one says, He is of
Paul, and another of Apollos are we not therefore carnal, 1 Cor. 1. Certainly
beloved, these things ought not so to be, all the Saints of God, they shall all
have one heaven, so they must all be saved by one faith: and therefore surely
they should all be of one heart, if not o^ one mind; and therefore by the way,
those who go about to make rents and divisions in the Church of God, does not
do Gods work but the Devils: the spirit of God is not a spirit of division, but
of love, of peace, and a pure mind; and as the Apostle Jude calls seducer and
fase teachers, ungodly men, and separate from the Church, are said by Jude in
his 19 verse, to be sensual, and not to have the spirit And before I pass this
point, I hope it will not be amiss to show you the wickedness and sin of those
who go about to make divisions in the Church of Christ. And first of all,
sowers of divisions are renters of Christ; it is a horrible violence offered to
the Body of Christ, a dividing of Christ, as St. Paul accounts it, in 1 Cor.
1.13. it would make Christ seem to be the head of two bodies, a most monstrous
conceit indeed.

Secondly, it resists the commands of Christ, which is love, and opposes the
very end of Christ in dying for sinners, which was that all his Saints should
be on.

Thirdly, division in the Church is very dishonorable and injurious to the
Church; for how can a body be rent and torn without prejudice: it hinders also
the peace of the Church. Schismatics, says one, more oppose the peace of the
Church then Heathens do; if the body be rent and torn, it is surely with much
pain and smart; and tearing and renting in the Church will surely cut the very
heart of one that is true Member of the Church. It makes the Saints mourn, and
to be sure, ^t makes the Devil laugh; therefore let us labor to be rentless
and seamless, as Christ is. To this end, in the first place labor after
holiness, division and separation is a badge and mark of unholiness; children
in unholiness are ever men in malice. Secondly, be not overtaken with new
fancies and novelties; those new lights which has set the Church of God so
much on fire in these our days, have all been taken out of the dark Lanthorns
of old Heretics and Jesuits: all those lights which receive not their light
from the word of God, are all false lights and vapors that only appear on
purpose to draw men out of the may. Truth should always be embraced, though it
be never in so old a dress, they are itching ears that are most taken with
novelties. Lastly, divisions beget sensuality, sensuality usual follows
separation, even at the heels, separating themselves, says Jude, sensual, not
having the Spirit, not to speak any more of this, our own sad experience has
too manifestly witnessed this for a truth. What horrid impiety, desperate
villainies have been committed by wicked and ungodly seducers in our days, my
heart trembles with the very thought thereof.

Fifthly, Christ is a spotless garment, there is not so much as a spark or spot
in this garment; and therefore it is, that the Saints are said in Scripture to
be clothed in white robes, Rev. 6.11. and that he offered himself without spot
to God, Heb. 9.14. and the Saints are said to be clothed in fine linen, white
and clean, Rev. 19.14. and as Christ is spotless himself, so he takes away all
spots and defilements from his people, they are washed in his blood, and
therefore are said to be clean by Christ himself, John 13.10. John 15.3. and
therefore he is called the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
John 1.29. It was only a sinless Savior that could satisfy for and take away
the sins of sinful men. If Christ had not been without spots himself, he could
never have taken away out spots: he that was manifest, says St. John, to take
away our sin, in him was no sin, 1 John 3.5. Christ has suffered for us, says
Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth; it is only the blood of Christ that washes, and needs no washing: if he
had not been without sin, he could not have saved us from our sins; nay, he
himself then had stood in need of a Savior: and although he took upon him our
nature, and was made flesh, ret the nature of Christ was a pure nature in it
self; and therefore that of the Apostle does most sweetly express this, where
he says of Christ, that he in the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin in
the flesh, Romans 8.3. and though he was in all things like unto us, yet says
the Apostle, Heb. 4.13. he was without sin. Christ was not born in sin, as we
are, he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of a pure Virgin; its true,
Christ was a sinner, yea, the greatest of sinners by imputation, he having all
the sins of all the Elect of God laid upon him.

But first, had not Jesus Christ been sinless in himself, he had never been
able to have undergone so heavy a burden: Christ suffered not for his own
sins, but sor our sins; He his own self (says the Apostle) bore our sins on
the Cross. We indeed, says the converted thief on the Cross, we suffer justly,
but this man has done nothing amiss, Luke 23.41. He has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.21. He did no violence,
neither was there any guile found in this mouth, Isa. 53.9.

Sixthly, Christ is a comely garment, a garment that will never be out of
fashion; He is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: there is nothing
so lovely and amiable in the eyes of Christians as Christ is. Christians I
beseech you consider, you are never well dressed till you have put on this
garment, nor you shall never be blessed without it.

Seventhly, Christ is a lasting, yea, an everlasting garment, a garment that
will last thee as long as thou libest, and will never be the worse for wearing,
but will always be the better for wearing; the more thou wearest this garment
the more glorious it will be, and as this garment will last thee no long as
thou live, so thou may carry it along with thee when thou dyest; thou
can not carry any thing of the world with thee; for naked come thou into
the world, and naked shall thou go out of the world; but if thou have put on
Christ as a garment in thy life, thou can not leave him behind thee when
thou dyest, thou shall carry this garment with thee into the next world. I
should come now to show you how this garment is to be worn, but I shall speak
of that by way of Use and Application.

Now the Uses that I shall make of this useful point, shall be these. Is it so
that Jesus Christ is a Christians garment then in the first place I beseech you
observe the miserable and wretched condition of wicked and ungodly men; men out
of Christ they are naked, and have not, as we use to say of some poor people, a
rag to cover their nakedness withal. Ah! sinners, for the Lords sake, for your
precious and imnortal souls sake, I beseech you consider, and lay to heart a
little your own most miserable and sad condition, how will you be able to stand
in the day of the Lords wrath, how will thou be able to contend with the
Almighty, when once he is angry, thou have nothing to shelter thee against the
storms and fury of the Lords indignation; I beseech you then as you love your
own souls, that you would now put on the Lord Jesus Christ, O put him on, he is
freely offered to thee, O then do not be so foolish, and Bedlam mad, as to
refuse him, if thou do thou art undone for ever: art thou naked, and wilt
not thou take this garment of Christ to cover thy nakedness withal, consider a
little I beseech thee thy own sad condition as thou art in thy self out of
Christ. In the first place thou art liable to all Dangers, every sinner out of
Christ lies open to overy danger, every merry thou enjoyest out of Christ is in
wrath, thy preservation is but by common providence, and its cursed as well as
common, as one says sweetly. Thy preservation is but a reservation of thee to
the day of wrath, thou art kept, but remember, thou art kept but as a
malefactor to the day of execution, thou have nothing to guard thee from the
wrath of God: it is possible thou may be secure in thy sin, but remember thy
security is not from want of danger, but from the want of discovery of that
danger which is every day and hour hanging over thy head, and ready to fall
upon thee; were thou but once seriously sensible of that danger which every day
thou art in, I am confident thou could no more rest in thy sins out of
Christ, then thou could go to bed when thy house is on fire about thy ears.
Secondly, thou art, if our of Christ, in the power of every Devil and every
lust; thou art the devils for egress and regress, when he pleases thou art
taken captive by him at his will, as the Apostle expresses it, 2 Timothy 2.26.
Thou art like a Common without a hedge, a prey to every beast of prey, thou will not take Christ as a garment, thou will not let God be a hedge to keep
thee from straying into sin, and God will not be an hedge to preserve thee from
being destroyed in and for thy sin. O sinner, thy condition if very sad and
very dreadful, thou lie at the mercy of the devil every moment, at the cruel
courtesy of every temptation; thou have a hole it may be to keep thy Swine in,
but if thou have not a Christ to lodge thy soul in, thou art liable to all the
curses in the book of God; how dreadful is it to want the benefit of every
sweet promise in the word of God, to want a Jesus to deliver us from the wrath
to come. Do thou think thou can be able to endure the wrath of God to all
eternity; if thy foundation be not laid upon the rock of Christ, thy whole
building will soon be destroyed, and thou will be found to be the veriest fool
in the world; if thou art out of Christ thou can never be safe, thou art a
mad man, and thou delightest in thy own destruction.

Secondly, by way of motive consider I be. seech you, Christ will not only
cover thy nakedness, and shelter thee from the wrath of God, but will be an
ornament of grace and glory to thee for ever; but how shall we get this garment
of Christ, may some say? I see my own nakedness, but how shall I do to get this
garment? I answer, in the first place, thou must beg it of God, thou may
have it for asking for; ask and thou shall have, it is freely offered unto
thee. Secondly, throw away all thy own rotten rags of sin, thou must strip thy
self even naked of all self, righteousness; Christ will not be a garment to any
but to such as shall first put off their own rags, throw away then all thy old
rotten rags, and put on the Lord Jesus Christ; put him on, he is freely offered
to thee, do not despise thy own mercy; get Christ for thy garment here, it ever
thou expectest to have Christ for thy comfort hereafter. Remember without
Christ there is no happiness to be had hereafter, thou art miserable here, and
thou shall be miserable to all eternity hereafter. O consider this, all ye that
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm
50.22. In the next place, is it so, is Christ a garment, then here is matter of
great joy and comfort, to those that are Christ's: O happy Christian, God has
made a blessed exchange with thee, the has taken away from thee thy own rotten
filthy stinking rags, and he has in the room thereof put thee on his own most
glorious white Robes! O happy soul! O blessed exchange. But before I proceed
any further, I shall a little endeavor to give you some few, but brief
directions for your better instruction and edification.

And first of all, have thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment, O then
for the Lords sake do not put him off again, keep him on while thou have him
on; children you know when they have gotten a new garment they do not love to
put it off again, they would wear it always if they might.

Secondly, have thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment, then wear him
cleanlily, have a care that thou do not soil this precious garment; O do not
dirty it, nor sully it. Men when they have gotten on their best garments, or
any thing that is rare and choice, how curious, how careful, how circumspect are
they, they will have a care where they go, and what they do so long as they
have those garments on. Men will not go about to rake dunghills in silken
garment, a little spot of dust is soon seen in a clean garment; do not do the
Devils drudgery with the garment of Christ: do not rake in the silthy stinking
dunghills of sin, with the silken clothes of Christianity upon thy back;
remember such base things are too low, for such noble souls as Christians are,
to be employed in.

Thirdly, is Christ a garment, then wear him as a garment, put him not on as a
cloak, but put him on as a garment; remember, as one says sweetly, as Christ
is the best garment, so is he the worst cloak: for to make Christ and
Christianity a cloak for thy sin, is the horredst thing in all the world. Those
wolves who are in sheeps clothing are the most dangerous wolves of all; to be
Saints in appearance outwardly, and Devils in sub, stance inwardly, O horrid
impiety! will you swear and lie, cousen and cheat, and do all manner of evil,
and yet profess Christanity; O take heed of this, they that make Christ a Cloak
for their sin, do manifestly show that they never yet tasted of the love of God
in Christ, in the pardoning of their sins; Christ is not a cloak to hide sin,
but Christ is a garment to preserve us from sin; they that put on Christ as a
cloak, never yet put on Christ as a garment.

Fourthly, is Christ a garment, and have thou put him on, then wear him
constantly, never put him off, he will last thee as long as thou live, I and
longer too; thou can not carry a rag of thine own clothes with thee our of
this world? I but thou may carry this garment with thee into the next world,
thou may go to heaven with this garment upon thee, nay, thou shall never get
to heaven without it; put him on then, and never put him off, wear him every
day, day by day, even to thy dying day, he will last thee as long as thou
live, and will be a comfort, yea, an exceeding great comfort to thee when
thou dyest, and will be a glory, an everlasting glory to thee for ever in the
world to come.

Fifthly, is it so, is Christ a garment? then here is matter of comfort to all
that are Christ's in times of danger and trouble; let me tell thee Christian,
thou that have put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment, thou art armed as
well as clothed, thou have armor of proof upon thy back, such armor as never
yet could be pierced, such armor as will keep off all the gun-shots of the
Devil, and the world, be they never so great, be they never so surious, be they
never so many: thy garment Christian will keep out a shower, I, and a storm
too, nothing can pierce it, nothing shall be able to hurt thee if thou have put
on Christ, neither sin nor Satan: If God be for us, who can be against us, Romans
8.31. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is
Christ that has dyed. First, thou have put on Christ as a garment, he will
defend thee Jle warrant thee, let come what will come; see what the Lord says
to such as are clothed with his Son, in Isa. 47.1, 2. Fear not for I have
redceemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they
shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. And this was it which so
ravished the hearts of the blessed Martyrs, and carried them through all their
torments with so much joy and comfort; and so likewise the three Children in
the fiery furnace, all the violent and scorching heats of those burning fiery
furances, could not, nay did not burt so much as the least hair of their heads;
and the reason was, because they were the Children of the most high God, and
were clothed with the Lord Jesus Christ, as with a garment. So likewise Daniel
in the Lions Den, he was defonded from the fury of those raging beasts, by his
being clothed with this garment of Christ. In a word, let come what will come,
let the Devil and all his instruments rage never so much, let the storms of
persecution be never so hot, let the waves beat never so fiercely, thy house
shall stand, and thou shall be cartied through all, because thy house, thy
faith is built upon a Rock even upon the rock of Ages, the Lord Jesus Christ.
Ben out of Christ are naked, they have nothing at all to defend them, all those
rich and costly garments of the gallants of the world, be they never so rich
and gaudy, are not half so costly as this garment is; for believe it Christian,
it cost Christ's precious Life and Blood to purchase it for thee.

Fourthly, is Christ a garment, then let us not he proud of our own garments:
alas, what are they, nothing but rags in compartson of this garment of Christ,
bodies of sin; sin was the first founder and inventer of them: if Adam had
not sinned, he had never stood in need of garment. A thief (says one very
sweetly) may as well be proud of his halter, as a man or woman may be proud of
their garments; and let me tell thee, thou that art proud, thou art proud of
that which is another, if is none of thy own, thou have nothing of thy own to
be proud with; what thou have is but lent thee, and thou know not how soon
the owner may take them away, and leave thee as naked as he found thee, and
then i^ thon be found out of Christ thou art undon^ for ever: Woe, Woe unto
thee, and that for ever more.

Fishly, is Christ a garment, then J note from hence, that abundance of outward
ensoyments do nothing at all adorn a man, its only the garment of Christ that
will make a Christian lovely; earthly things they do not adorn us in the sight
of Bod; it matters no^ whether we be rich or poor, naked or clothed in rags,
or in robes; I, but it matters whether thou be in Christ or no; Bod will
loo^ upon thee only as thou art clothed with hi^ Son: if thou art not found
in Christ, cloathe^ upon with the glor^ons white robes of hi^ righteousness, at
the last day Bod will never own thee for his child; he will then say unt^
thee, Depart from me, I know you not.

Sixthly, I note from hence, that they tha^ live in sin are nons of Christ's,
they are no^^ cleathed upon with this garment: Let every one (says the
Apostle) that names the nam^ of Christ, depart from iniquity. Put on th^^ Lord
Jesus Christ, (says the Text) and make no provision for the flesh.
Christianity and sir^^ are no kin one to another, sin is a work of th^^ night,
and it ever thou would it put on th^^ Lord Jesus Christ, thou must cast off,
and forsake all thy sins; but it thou will needs keep thy sorry rags of sin
still upon thy back, let me tell thee, Christ will never be a Savtour unto
thee, thou shall have nothing to desend thee in the evil day of the Lords wrath.

In the last place, by way of Motive; O that I could persuade you this day to
en^^ brace Jesus Christ, as he is tendered and offered unto you in the Gospel:
would thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment? then in the words of
the Apostle, I beseech you, Cast off the works of dardness, and put on the
armor of light: Walk honestly, as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness,
and do not commit works of darkness at noonday; eben the light of nature
should make men blush to commit sin in the very face of the Sun it self.
Kemember, I beseech you, how unsuitable and unseasonable rioting and
drunkenness is to the profession of the Gospel of Christ: Let every one (says
the Apostle) that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Christ will
never be a garment to thee if thou delightest in slit, its impossible to serve
God and Mammon, thou can never wear the livery of Christ and the livery of
Satan together: as holiness is the badge and livery of Christ, so sin and
wickedness is the badge and livery of the Devil: in this the children of God
are manifest, says the Apostle, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever does
not righteousness is not God, John 1.3, 10. and in the 6, 7, 8. verses of the
same Chapter, Whosoever abides in him sins not, and whosoever sins has
not seen him, nor known him: He that commits sin, is of the Devil: Ye are
of your Father the Devil, says our Savior to the unbelieving Jews, John
8.44, and the works of your father ye will do: wieked men will do the Devils
work, al though they are sure to dye for it; The work of your father ye will
do. And let me tell you, belobed, they that will do the Devils work, must look
for nothing but the Devils pay, and the Devil will be sure to give them their
due at last: And I beseech you remember what the wage^^ of sin is; in Romans
6.23. The wages of sin i^ death, death eternal; the wicked in hell they are
always dying, and yet never dead: the forments of the damned in hell, as they
ar^ easeless, so they are endless. O consider thi^ you that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Would thou put on the Lord Jesus Christ as a garment? then in the last
place, and so I have done, Do not make provision for the slesh, to fulsill the
lusts thereof^ spend not thy time in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and wantonness; but cafting off and abhorring all these unfruitful works of
darkness, labout to live up to that God who has so dearly loved us, and bought
us with his own most precious blood: that so living here to all the intents and
purposes of his Grace, and walking daily before the Lord in all manner of
holiness and righteousness all thy days, thou may in the end of thy days
here live and reign for ever with Christ in glory hereafter. Now blessed are
all those, and for over blessed shall they be, who so live, and so walk, as
that they may be truly said to have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and do so
give up themselves to be ruled and guided by him in Grace here, that so when
they come to die, they shall be found in Christ, clothed upon with the
glorious white Robes of Christ his righteousness, and shall for ever live and
reign with Christ in glory hereafter: To whom be Glory and honnour, for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, Christ's
first Sermon, o^ The necessity, duty and practice of Repentance opened and
applied. Also Christ's last Sermon, or The everlasting estare and condition of
all men in the world to come. Very godly Books, and is but three pence price.

There are likewise eight other small Books, all of them very godly, and very
comfortable for thy soul. One is entitled, Englands Faithful Physician. The
second, Doomsday at hand. The third, The Black Book of Consicience. The
fourth, The Dreadful Character of a Drunkard. The fifth, The sin of Pride
arraigned and condemned. The sixth, The Plain Man's Plain Pathway to Heaven.
The seventh, The Fathers last Blessing. The eighth, The Charitable Christian.
All very necessary for these licentious times, and each of them being but of
two pence price. They are to be sold by John Andrews, at the White Lion near
Pye-Corner.


