The Christians BLESSED CHOICE OR, The godly Man's resolution to cleave fast to
God and his Truth, notwithstanding Trials, Troubles, and Persecutions. Very
seasonable for these Times.

Josh. 24.15. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.

Romans 8.18 I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

By J. H. a Servant of Jesus Christ.

London, Printed by J. W. for Eliz. Andrews in Little St. Bartholomews Court in
West-Smithfield, 1668.

portrait of author

THE CHRISTIANS Blessed Choice.
Hebrews 11.25, 26. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches than the honors in Egypt; for he had respect to the
recompense of the reward.


IN this Chapter, beloved we find the blessed Apostle opening and applying the
Doctrine of Faith, having first assured them, that he and the rest of Christ's
Disciples were in the number of those who did believe to the saving of their
souls. Having told them in the 38. verse of the foregoing Chapter that the just
shall live by says; he comes here in this Chapter largely to declare and show
unto them what saving Faith is: and this is laid down in the fire first verses
of this Chapter. As, first, It is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen; a means to obtain a good report. Through Faith the
embrace the truth of God contained in the word, as the creation of the world by
the word of God. By faith; and by faith alone, our sacrifices, our services,
our duties, our persons, and performances are accepted in Jesus Christ. By
faith we receive whatsoever we ask of God in prayer, Matthew 21.22. And without
says (in the sixth verse you see) it is impossible to please God. And from the
seventh verse to the end of the Chapter he sets down the several fruits and
effects of faith in all ages, by the most eminent examples of Gods faithful
servants.

I shall not now trouble you with the several particular examples of faith
recorded in the Chapter, but shall leave them to your own particular meditation
as you find them recorded in the Chapter, and consider what is there said, and
the Lord give you understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2.3.

Now that which I intend briefly to insist upon, is that eminent example of the
faith of Moses, in the words before mentioned, in that he chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, than all the
honors of Egypt.

Before I come to the Observations which slow from hence, give me leave a
little to look back into the two foregoing verses, wherein we have first the
example of the eminent faith of Moses parents, who contrary to the Kings
command refused to destroy him; the King he commanded all the males to be
slain, but they being strong in faith, by hiding of him did preserve him; and
when they could hide him no longer, they chose rather to trust him to the mercy
of God, by casting him upon the water, rather than to endanger his life by the
hands of merciless and bloody men. And this they did as the Apostle here says,
not fearing the Kings commandment. There are several useful and profitable
instructions which may be deduced from hence, I shall only name them, and so
proceed.

And the first is this, that God takes special notice of his peoples faith, he
records it to all posterity.

Secondly, I observe from hence, that its a very great mercy to be born of
faithful and bolieving parents: had not Moses parents been faithful and
believing, Moses might have been destroyed as well as others were.

Thirdly, I note from hence, that God can and will preserve his people, maugre
all the rage and malice of the Devil and all his instruments. The enemies of
Gods people may design evil against them, but the Lord preserves them: when men
are as it were at their wits end, and know not which may to fly for succor,
then does God know how to deliver them. Though the afflictions of Gods people
are many, yet out of them all will God deliver them, Psam. 34. and the 19 verse.

Fourthly, I note from hence, that it is lawful to disobey the wicked and
unlawful commands of lawful authority. If Kings command that which God (who is
King of Kings) forbids, we ought rather to obey God than men: instances of this
truth we have many in Scripture. Memorable is that unparalled example of the
three Children, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the third Chapter of
Daniel, when Nebuchadnezzar the King commanded all to fall down and worship his
golden Image, or else to be cast into the fiery furnace, they stoutly resisted,
knowing that God was able to deliver them. Be it known to thee, O King, we will
not serve thy gods. If they obeyed not the King, then they must expect nothing
but to be cast into the burning fiery furnace: but this they feared not, they
took no care to answer the King in this matter, they knew God was able to
deliver them; however, they resolved whether deliverance came or not, they
would rather suffer than sin. If it be so that we must be cast into the
furnace, we know our God is able to deliver us: but if not, though we be not
delivered, yet be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods,
nor worship the golden Image that thou have set up. The King he threatens a
burning fiery turnace, alas, that's very dreadful, very terrible to flesh and
blood, but what is the fire of men to the everlasting fire of God: men's fire that
can only consume a poor rotten carcass, but the fire of God that is
unquenchable, and will destroy both body and soul. Men can only kill the body,
and after that they can do no more; but God can destroy both body and soul, and
that for evermore.

Excellent was that holy saying of that holy man of God, the blessed Martyr
Polycarp, St. John's disciple, when the Emperor threatened him with fire if he
would not forsake Christ: Alas, says he, you threaten me with your fire, alas,
what a poor inconsiderable thing is your fire! You do not, says he, consider
that ever lasting fire which God threatens. Do likewise the holy Apostles of
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the 4. of the Acts, and the 18.
and 19. Verses, when the Rulers commanded them not to preach in the name of
Jesus, they answered and said, Whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. God commands Ministers to preach
the Gospel, and Ministers ought to preach the Gospel, notwithstanding the
commands of men to the contrary.

And so in the 25. of the Acts Verse. 29, when the Apostles were brought before
the High Priests and Council, and by them questioned for doing their duty,
namely for preaching the Gospel; you will find in the 29. ver that St. Peter
and the other Apostles answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men.
And after that when they were beaten, and commanded not to preach any more in
the name of Jesus, what did the Apostles do, did they obey? no. They rejoiced
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ. And as
you may see in the last verse of that Chapter, That daily in the Temple, and in
every house, they ceased not to teach and to preach Jesus Christ.

Several other instances I might give you, but I proceed. In the next place,
the next thing considerable is the eminency of Moses faith, in the 24, 25, 26.
verses. By faith Moses when he was come to years refused to be called the son
of Pharaohs daughter; where by the way observe, that it is more honor to be a
Christian, than to be a Courtier. It is more honorable to be the son of God by
grace and adoption, than to be the son of the greatest Monarch or Emperor in
the World. There is none so nobly descended in all the world as the people of
God, they are of the Blood Royal of Heaven: others they may take their pedigree
from Kings, and Monarchs, and the great ones of the world; but the people of
God are all descended from him who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the
blessed and only potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. Yea the people of God are all of
them Kings and Priests unto God, Revelations 1.6.

Here likewise we might observe what low thoughts Christians ought to have of
every thing, be it never so honorable, in comparison of Jesus Christ. It had
been an honor, yes an exceeding great honor, if we may account worldly
greatness and honor, for Moses to have been reputed the son of Pharaohs
daughter, but how inconsiderable a thing was this in the eyes of Moses, who was
more nobly descended, being born of God, a chosen servant of Jesus Christ, to
go in and out before his people Israel: but I proceed.

Now the eminency of Moses faith you may see in these following particulars:
first, Moses here sees the various difficulties and dangers which were then
like to fall upon him for his faith. Will Moses forsake Pharaoh and embrace
Jesus Christ, then Moses must suffer affliction: this Moses foresees, and this
makes his faith more glorious. As the people of God are by faith assured of
Christ, so likewise being once in Christ, they are sure to bear the Cross of
Christ: Christ and his Cross are inseparable: All taht will live godly in
Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.11. See what our blessed
Savior says in the Gospel of Saint Luke, If any man will come after me, that
is, if any man will be a good Christian, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross daily, and follow me, Luke 9.23. He that will follow Christ must bear the
Cross as the blessed Apostles did, they rejoiced that they were counted worthy
to suffer for Christ. And truly the people of God may well rejoice in their
sufferings; for why, Christ has born the brunt of all, he has made our
burden light: although Christ by his sufferings has not freed the people of
God from sufferings, yet he has made their sufferings to become easy. Just as
it is with a man carrying a great tree on his back, and you may see little
children to bear up the small twigs of the tree; alas, there is no weight in
them, the weight of all the whole but then lies on the man's shoulders: so,
beloved, it is with Christians, Christ carries the load, the weight of all
their afflictions, they do but bear up the little end, the small twigs of it;
therefore the Apostle excellently calls his afflictions light: Our light
affliction, says he, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Secondly, the eminency of Moses faith appcars also in this, namely, the great
willingness and forwardness of Moses, in that it is said, He chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people; which intimates unto us, the readiness of
Moses to become the servant of Jesus Christ. Certainly this was a very great at
of faith in Moses, a carnal eye would rather have chosen to have been the son
of Pharaohs Daughter, an eye of sense which sees no better, would rather have
chosen greatness and eminency in the world; then the meanness and poverty of
Gods people: rather to have been Pharaohs Grandchilde, and honorable at Court,
then to have been the poor afflicted sons of Gad. Carnal men, men whose God is
their wealth, and whose hearts are set upon their riches, would rather choose to
be rich with Dives, than to be poor with Lazarus; but a gracious Soul had
rather want bread with Lazarus, than to want grace with Dives. It is not all
the riches in the world that can content and satisfy the soul of a Saint; a
few will see it better for him, if God sees it good for him to beg his bread
with poor Lazarus on earth, than to beg his water with rich Dives in hell.

A godly man by faith sees that glory which is to come, they know that when
this earthly tabernacle of theirs shall be dissolved, that they have a building
with God in heaven, an inheritance which is uncorruptible and undefiled, which
passes not away, reserved in heaven for them who do believe: but a wicked man
he sees only by an eye of sense, he sees no farther than his riches; he thinks
if he may be great and honorable here in the world, he esteems this the only
happiness, and he thinks nothing better than to be rich; and indeed he may well
think so, for he knows of no better condition. The world with the honors and
pleasures of it are even a heaven to the men of this world; I, and indeed it is
all the heaven they shall have. Son, remember (says Abraham to Dives in the
16. of. St. Luke) that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. Dives
would very fain have enjoyed heaven after his death, and yet he would live upon
earth in such a sumptuous delicious manner, as if this would had been his only
heaven: And true it is; the postion of a wicked man is in this life. God gives
wicked men their portion in this life, but he reserves a portion for his Saints
in the life to come. Wicked men are very like to some prodigal spendthrifts,
who spend all their portion before they come to years; but the portion of Gods
people is reserved for them till they come to age. God sees it good, yea best
for his Children to have their portions reserved for them till they come to
years, and that is till they come to heaven. He gives his people as much of the
world as may serve to bear their charges to heaven; but their full portion he
reserves for them till they come to heaven: and truly the portion of a Child of
God is very great.

God is the portion of his people, and believe it God will never see his people
want so long as he has it; and Gods treasure is inexhaustible, it can never be
drawn dry: All things are yours (says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 3.21.) peaking to the
believing Corinthisns) whether Paul, or Apollo, or Ceahas, or the world, or
life, or death, or phings present, or things to come, all tree yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ as Gods.

Having thus briefly run over the words, I come now to give the practical
Observations which flow from hence for our edification:

And first of all, I observe from henc the transcendent excellency of savin
faith, by faith Moses did thus and thus.

Secondly, I note from hence, tha the condition of Gods Children in this life,
is an afflicted condition.

Thirdly, I observe likewise from hence, that the people of God should rather
suffer any affliction, than commit the least sin; it is better to suffer than
sin.

And then fourthly, I observe hence, the great vanity of sinful pleasures, they
are but for a season.

Fifthly, I observe, that the reproaches of Christ are better, yea, as the Text
sweetly expresses if; are greater riches than all the honors of the world.

And then lastly, I observe from hence, that God has a recompense of reward
for his people, he will make them amends for all their losses at the last: he
that loses any thing for Christ, shall be no loser by the bargain: Every one
that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands. for my Name sake, shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall inherit everlasting life, Mat. 19.29.

Before I proceed to Application, I shall a little open and confirm these
several truths by way of Doctrinal Explication: And to begin with the first,
viz. What faith is a most transcendent, excellent, and saving grace; and this
you may see all along this whole Chapter. First, it brings the people of God
into a good report. By faith our services become acceptable in the sight of
God. And without faith it is impossible to please God; For whatsoever is not of
faith is sin. By faith, Noah being warned of God prepared the Ark, to the
saving of his house, and thereby became an heir of righteousness. By faith
Abraham forsook his Country, for by faith he saw the heavenly City which God
had prepared for him. And all along the whole Chapter you may see the
excellency of faith in the several effects of it in the faithful Saints and
servants of God, who of all others, best deserve the name of Worthies: Who
through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of
the Sword. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea,
moreover, bonds and imprisonments. They were stoned, sawn asunder, were
tempted, slain with the sword: They wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins
being destitute, afflicted, and tormented. These all obtained a good report
through faith, By faith the sick are healed, Luke 7.50. Die faith the people of
God are purified, justified; and by faith they are saved, Romans 5.1. Ephesians. 2.8.
By faith we have access to God by prayer, Romans 5.2. By faith we believe the
word of God, and they that by faith do believe in God, shall at the last
receive the end of their faith, even the salvation of their precious souls, 1
Pet. 1.9.

In the next place to come to second point, which is this, That the condition
of Gods children in this life is an afflicted condition: God had but one Son
without sin, but God has never a son without affliction. Our blessed Savior
himself was not free from afflictions; nay, he was despised and rejected of
men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; he was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, Isa. 53.3, 7. The Prophets they were afflicted and imprisoned, and
slain, Likewise the Apostles and Primitive Christians, as you may see at large
in this Chapter where my Text is, Heb. 11. They were stoned, sawn asunder,
cruelly scourged and imprisoned: yea, as the Psalmist says, Many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all, Psalm,
34.19. Our Savior tells his Disciples what they must look for in the world at
his departure from them: If the world hate you (says our Savior, John 17.18,
19) ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the
world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, that I have
chosen you out of the world; therefore the world hates you. Remember the word
that I said unto you, the servants is not greater than their Lord: if they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you; and all these things will they do
unto you for my names sake. Yea, says the holy Apostle St. Paul; reckoning up
his manifold persecutions in 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecutions. Many more Scriptures I might give you for the
confirmation of this excellent truth, but these I hope may suffice, this being
a truth which the people of God in all ages have born testimony unto with their
blood. Nay, this truth is so clear, that it even may be read by the light of
these fires in which the Saints of God suffered death, those glorious fires
which ever burns fresh in the memory of Gods people, even those fiery
chariots which carried out heavenly Elijahs, our blessed Martyrs to heaven.

In the third place, the third Observation to be considered is this; That the
people of God should rather suffer any affliction than sin. This you may see in
Joseph, who rather than he would commit folly with his Mistress, rather then
sin against God, he would run the hazard of all afflictions. How shall I do
this great wickedness, aad sin against God, Genesis 39.9. And this truth is most
eminently confirmed by holy Job, who rather than he would curse God and dye,
would willingly with patience undergo all his afflictions. Job underwent all
afflictions, and it is said of him, In all this Job sinned not. Let God afflict
says Job, I will suffer with patience; it is the Lord, let him do what he
pleases, my afflictions shall never move me to forsake my God. Though God
afflict me all the days of my life, yet will I wait with patience till my
change come. And in the thirteenth Chayter he resolves though God should kill
him, yet he would trust in him. So likewise we find an eminent example for
this in holy Daniel, as you may read, Dan. 6.14, 15, 16. Daniel rather than he
would sin against God in ceasing to call upon God by prayer, would suffer
himself to be cast into the Lions den. So likewise the three children in the
third Chapter of Daniel, rather than they would sin against God, by worshipping
of Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, would undergo the furious flames of his
burning fiery furnace, So the blessed Apostles, as you heard before, rathen
than they would obey the wicked commands of men, in not preaching the Gospel,
willingly rejoiced in suffering affliction for so doing. Many more examples I
might give you, but these I hope may suffice: and if there had been no other
example than what is set down in the words of the Text, this heavenly truth had
been sufficiently confirmed.

In the fourth place, I come to prove the vanity of all sinful pleasures, and
that may appear, first from the shortness of them; and secondly from the
bitterness of their end. They are but for a season, they come to an end; nay,
they shall end in endless woe and misery. Though sin be sweet for the present,
yet its bitter, yea, bitterness it self in the latter end. Though sin may be
pleasant for a season, yet remember. I beseech you, it will be painful to
eternity. The pleasures of sin they have an end, but the pains and torments
which sin procures, they have no end. When sinners have undergone the wrath of
God ten thousand times ten thousand millions of years, yet then are their
torments as far off from having an end, as they were at first. The torments for
sin are eternal, and I beseech you remember enternity has no end: what
pleasure then can there be in that which brings eternal pains with it? Sinners
even when they delight themselves in their sins, even then are they pulling
destruction upon themselves, even eternal destruction. Every step in sin how
sweet, how delightful soever it be in the eyes of the sinner, is a stop to
misery, enternal misery. They that hasten to sin, hasten to sorrow; yea, they
run to hell. As Solomon says, They love death; he does not mean that sinners
love death, as death; there is no beauty, or amiableness at all in death simply
considered in it self; but yet they may be truly said to love death who love
sin, and delight in sin, and live in sin. The wages of sin ye know is death,
Romans 6.23. Delight in sin is a hasting into the arms of death. Sinners by
their delight in sin do as it were woe death, and invite death and the grave,
even hell and destruction: so that even sinners themselves, though now for a
while Satan blindes their eyes, yet at last when it is too too late they shall
be forced to confess and say, that there is neither pleasure nor profit in sin.
The Devil makes the sinner believe that there is a great deal of pleasure and
profit in sin; you shall get by it, says the Devil: but let sinners once truly
cast up their accounts, how that eternal damnation will be their wages, and
then let them see what they have gotten by sin. It is possible I confess, that
some may say they have gotten hundreds and thousands by it; they have gotten
Houses, and Lands, Honor Esteem among men, pleasure and profit in the world:
but what a miserable gain is that which is gotten with the loss of the soul.

Read that dreadful Scripture in St. Matthews Gospel, Mat. 16.26. and then see
if there be any thing gotten by sin: What is a man profited, if he shall gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul? Will thy Riches which thou have gotten
by sin, by oppressing the poor, and defrauding thy neighbor; redeem thy soul
from death, surely no. Thou may delight thy self in enlarging thy barns, as
that rich Fool did: But thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of
thee, then whose shall they be. There is no loss like the loss of the soul.
There is nothing to be gotten by sin; thou may lose thy soul by sin, and
lose heaven by thy sin, and lose the love and favor of God by sin. Sin may
pretend pleasure and profit, but surely it brings ruin and destruction.

Those rich men which Saint James speaks of, James 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Versses,
they thought that gain which they got by defrauding their laborers of their
wages to be very sweet: they lived in pleasures, they enriched themselves by
the sweat of other men's labors: but what have they any cause to rejoice in
this? No, says the Apostle, Go too now ye rich men, weep and howl, for your
misery which shall come upon you. They thought to heap up riches by their
injustice and cruelty, but they heaped up only a little fuel for the eternal
fire. Dives he thought himself altogether happy when he enjoyed the world at
will, when he fared deliciously every day; but what did this profit Dives?
death robs him of all, and he himself is taken away from his sinful pleasures,
and thrown headlong into eternal torments: he would enjoy the pleasure of sin
while he lived, and now he must undergo the torments of sin for ever.

O consider this you that delight in sin; can thou endure to dwell for ever
in the everlasting burning: if thou can endure the wrath of God for ever, if
thou art able to stand before the Lord in the day of his fierce anger, then
take pleasure in sin: if thou can prevent God from bringing thee to
judgment, then let thy heat rejoice in sin: but if after all thou must come to
judgment, then take heed of sin. Do not conceit that sin to be pleasant whose
pains will be eternal: in vain do men flatter themselves that they may sin and
not suffer; did ever any man rebel and enjoy peace; can any offend God and have
his blessing, surely no: sin shall not go unpunished; if men will sin they
shall suffer. The soul that sins shall dye. Sin destroyed the Angels, those
holy Spirits, sin made them unholy devils. Sin cast Adam out of Paradise. Sin
destroyed the old World. Sin consumed Sodom and Gomorrah. Sin brings Wars,
Plagues, Famine, and Destruction upon Nations. Sin ruins our names, sears our
Consciences: and in a word, it destroys body and soul for ever.

And then fifthly, I observed, That the reproaches of Christ are greater riches
than all the honors of the world. The best of Gods Saints have been
reproached, as holy Job, and David was not only reproached, but was a reproach
both to his enemies and to his neighbors: He was made the song of the
Drunkards. The Apostles they were also reproached, but here is that which
sweetens all, Christ has born the brunt of all: Christ accounts all our
reproaches to be his. The greatest part of Christ's suffering for us was to bear
our reproach: so the greatest part of our sufferings is to bear the reproach of
Christ. Hence the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, exhorts us to go forth
unto him, bearing his reproach, Heb. 13.13. And Indeed reproach in it self is
so great a burden, that were it not for his that Christ accounts it his, we
should never be able to bear it. Hence Moses looked on his reproach as the
reproach of Christ; and believe me, though there may be a great deal of weight
in the reproaches of Christ, to press us down, yet there is abundance of worth
in them to enrich us: though they may be as thorns here, yet they shall be as a
crown of glory to us hereafter.

See what our Savior says in Matthew. 5.11, 12. Blessed are they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake, foe theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad,
for great is your reward in heaven. Christ does not say, if ye be rich and
honorable in the world you shall be blessed: but Christ says, if thou art
reproached thou shall be blessed. Thou may be rich and honorable in the
world, and yet be everlastingly miserable: but if thou art reproached for
Christ, thou shall be rewarded with Christ, If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12.

Sixthly, and lastly, I observe from hence, That God has a recompense of
reward for his people. If we suffer for Christ, we shall also reign with
Christ: If we be reproached with Christ here, we shall be rewarded with Christ
hereafter. See what our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 19.29. Every one that
has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or friends, for my sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit eternal life.

I might be longer on this point but I proceed to the Uses which shall flow
from hence for our edification. And the first Use is this, Is it so then, that
Faith is such an excellent grace, then let me exhort you all, in the name of
Christ, to believe, to get Faith. Beloved, Faith is not only excellent in it
self, but it will also make you excellent: The righteous is more excellent than
his neighbor, Prove. 15.26. Believers were the only excellent persons in whom
David delighted, Psalm. 16.3. Without faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11.6. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and God cannot be pleased
with sin. In a word, if ever you would be saved, get faith, for without faith
there is no salvation: it is unbelief which is the soul-damning sin. He that
believes shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. The
Sentence of damnation is already past against all unbelievers. He that
believes not is condemned already, John 3.18. He that believes on the Son
has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36. For the Lords sake sinners
believe, if you have any regard to your own good believe; if you have any love
or pity to your precious souls believe; if you would not be eternally
miserable, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be eternally blessed.

Secondly, Is it so that the condition of Gods Children in this life is an
afflicted condition, what then shall the condition of wicked men be in the life
to come? If judgment thus begin at the house of God, what then shall be the end
of sinners? If the righteous be thus scarcely saved, where then shall the
sinner and ungodly appear? If God be thus severe to his Children, how terrible
will he then be to his enemies: If through so many tribulations the people of
God enter into heaven, then into what woeful miseries do sinners plunge
themselves into for a few sinful pleasures; for a few seeming sinful pleasures
they heap to themselves eternal torments. O consider this you that forget God.
In this life the people of God are afflicted, but in the life to coure they
shall be rewarded. Lazarus he was afflicted with hunger and sores, yea scorned
and contemned by Dives; but in the life to come Lazarus is rewarded, but Dives
is tormented. The time will come when Gods people shall have pleasures,
everlasting pleasures, when the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
Nations that forget God, Psalm 9.17. The Lord tries the righteous, (says
David) but the wicked and him that loves violence his soul hates. Upon the
wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this
shall be the portion of their cup, Psalm 11.6.

Thirdly, Is it better to suffer than to sin, then this may inform us of the
great evil of apostasy; they that will turn from the truth rather than suffer
for the truth, such I say never did embrace the truth in the love of it; they
went out from us, but they were not of us. Many will own Christ and the word of
Christ when they may do it without fear, but when trouble and persecutions
come, then they fall away. But whosoever they are that in this case go about to
save their lives shall lose them: they that deny Christ for fear of
persecution, Christ will deny him before his Father. Apostasy was the sin of
the Devil, and they that apostatize from Christ for fear of persecution, shall
have the Devils reward. Thou will not suffer for Christ, but Christ will make
thee suffer eternally. Thou think life is sweet, and indeed so it is, but
remember eternal life is much more sweeter, and the soul is more precious than
life. Christ laid down his life to save souls, therefore Christians should lay
down ten thousand lives, if it were possible to have so many, rather than lose
their souls. By apostasy from the truth thou may save thy life, but in so
doing thou losest thy soul, which is of more value than ten thousand lives. Did
Christ lay down his life for us, and shall not we much more lay down our lives
for him. Did Christ who, is the prince of life become obedient unto death, even
the death of the Cross for us, then let nothing separate us from the love of
Christ.

Christians should show themselves to be the servants of Christ by afflictions,
persecutions; be the way what it will, fair or foul, thick or thin, Christians
should persevere. The Apostles loved not their lives unto the death in the
cause of Christ: and he that is afraid of his life in the cause of Christ, is
surely afraid of heaven. If he that endures to the end shall be saved, then
certainly he that falls away shall be damned. If we fear them who can only
kill the body, more than God who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell,
what will become of us. In a word, let me encourage you all in the words of the
holy Ghost, as you may find it, Revel. 3.10. what says God there, Fear none
of those things which thou shall suffer, behold, the Devil shall cast some of
you into prison that you may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days:
But be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

Fourthly, Is it so, that all sinful pleasures are short and vain, are they but
for a season, then I note from hence by way of Use, the great folly of sinners
in neglecting eternal life for a few momentary pleasures. Sinners spend their
time in gathering pebbles, and yet they trample upon pearls: How many grievous
sinners are there, who with that wretched Cardinal are ready to say, they will
not lose their part in Paris, for their parts in Paradise. Sinners had rather
lose heaven than part with their sins; as if they could enjoy the pleasure of
sin for ever, never considering how soon death may come upon them, and turn all
their pleasures into pains. Sinners are apt to flatter themselves in their own
folly, and to fancy that they shall live for ever, or at leastwise that they
may enjoy their pleasures till death come, and yet go to heaven: it is true,
God suffers many to go on in their sins, and never awakes their souls at all;
but this he does in judgment. Sinners despise Christ now, but Christ will
hereafter despise sinners: They who say unto God depart now, we will have none
of the fear of the Lord, God will say unto them depart ye cursed hereafter.
When death comes, sinners must bid farewell to all their pleasures; they rejoice
in their worldly pleasures here, but when death comes, farewell pleasures: not
one laughter more, then never another jovial meeting, then no more ranting and
singing, then all pleasures will be turned into pains.

Consider, I beseech you sinners, will your pleasures profit you in the day of
wrath, surely no; they may torment you as they did Dives. How many are there
now in hell, who had as much pleasure as thou can have. who had as many merry
meetings, as much drinking, and sporting, and other sinful partimes as thou
have had: Oh, but what pleasure is it now to them to think of those things for
which they are now tormented? The Lord awaken every secure sinner: for the
Lords sake be not such fools as to damn your souls for such trifles as these
are, which are not only vanity, but vexation of spirit also, even horror and
dread to all eternity.

Fifthly, Is it so, that the reproaches of Christ are greater riches than all
the honors in the world, then I observe from hence, that a Crown of life is
more worth than all the Crowns and Kingdoms in the world. Moses he looked upon
Pharaohs crown, and he sees that to be fading and tottering; but Moses he looks
upon the crown of life, and sees that to be everlasting. Kings by the
permission of God, for the sins of a Nation, may be deprived of their earthly
Crowns, as by sad experience we have found in this Kingdom; but the Crown of
life which God shall give his people is beyond the reach either of men or
devils to deprive them of: God shall give it them, and none shall be able to
take it from them. There shall be no Usurpers in heaven to rob Gods people of
their Crowns: there shall be no petitioning nor remonstrating against the
Saints in heaven: the Devil who is now their accuser shall then be thrown down
into the bottomless pit. The Saints Crowns shall not be voted useless and
dangerous in heaven. God may for our sins suffer high Courts of Injustice here
to take away the lives of Kings, but it is beyond the power and policy, either
of them or devils, to take away eternal life from the people of God. Hereafter
they are kept by the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. Men may
take away the life of a Saint, but this now takes not away their Crown. Your
joy no man takes from you, says our Savior, John 16.22. Men cannot deprive
the people of God of their joy here, and certainly therefore neither men nor
devils can take away their eternal joy, which shall be without sorrow, and
without ceasing, even for ever to all eternity.

Sixthly, Is it so, that the reproaches of Christ are such great riches yea,
greater riches than all the honors of the world; how great then are the rewards
of Christ? If Christ crucified be so lovely, how unspeakable lovely then is
Christ in Glory? If the Saints be so glorious here under reproaches, how
glorious than shall they be in heaven, when Christ himself shall put his glory
unto them. If the people of God are so glorious here, what shall they be when
they come to their kingdom, where they shall be clothed with the glorious white
robes of Christ? For when Christ who is our life shall appear, (says the
Apostle) we shall also appear with him in glory. At the day of judgment, O how
glorious shall the people of God then appear; they shall have Crowns upon their
heads, yea, they shall be clothed with glory, and honor, immortality, and life
eternal for ever, Romans 2.7.

Seventhly, Is it so then that God has a recompense of reward for his people
hereafter, then let me exhort you all to make choice of the Lord for your God:
they that make choice of the Lord for their God here, shall be sure to have him
for their reward hereafter. It was a good resolution that of Joshua, as you may
read, Joshua 24.15. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Let the men
of the world run after Idols, and inventions of their own fancies, a child of
God, a Joshua, he will worship God in spirit and in truth. And if ever we would
be rewarded with Christ, the let us choose Christ, and the ways of Christ.
Labor to grow in grace, and to abound in holiness, for godliness is the way to
glory. Godliness (says the Apostle) is great gain. Godliness has the
promise, not only of this life, but of the life to come. Were the wades of God
never so hard and difficult, yet they have a glorious reward: Godliness brings
the best gain, eternal life and glory. Would thou in the day of Judgment
choose heaven rather than hell, then choose God and walk in his ways; embrace
holiness although it be never so much despised by profane sinners, if ever thou
would be embraced by Christ in heaven.

Eighthly, is it so, that there is such a glorious reward for the people of God,
then let us live and dye as becomes the heirs of Glory: Let us then walk worthy
of God (as the Apostle says, 1 These. 2.12.) that has called us to his Kingdom
and glory. Is it so that the Saints of God shall shine as the stars in heaven,
then let the people of God labor to shine as lights in the world: If thy
inheritance be in heaven, then let thy conversation be in heaven: if your
reward, your treasure be there, then let your hearts be there also. Is thy name
written in heaven, let the world see it then in the legible Character of
Holiness. Think of that Crown of Glory which thou shall everlastingly enjoy in
heaven, and then so live that thou may be in a readiness to receive it. Get
oil in your lamps, grace in your souls, that when Christ who is your life shall
appear, ye also may appear with him in glory: receiving the end of your faith,
even the salvation of your souls.

Lastly, is there such a reward for the people of God hereafter, than be
content with what God gives thee in this life: be thy portion what it will, if
heaven be thine, thou have that which is better than all the world; they that
have Christ for their portion have no want. The Lord is my portion (says
David, Psalm 23.1.) therefore I shall not want. Saint Paul accounted all things
but dross and dung in comparison of Christ. Remember, it is better to be poor
and godly, than rich and miserable: Riches never made one soul happy, they have
made many a soul miserable. Let the people of God then take off their
affections from the world: it becomes not the heirs of glory to look after such
trifles, it is enough for Swine to be routing in the earth; Children who are
fed at their fathers table will never regard the bones that are thrown to the
dogs; they that are daily fed with the fat things of grace and glory, should
never regard the vain and transitory things of the world. The glory of this
world is but the portion of a reprobate; take them at the best they are but
uncertain, here to day and gone to morrow; they may be destroyed by fire, they
may be stolen away by thieves: thou may lay up treasures here, and when thou
have done all, they may be cousumed by rust and moths. Therefore take Saint
Paul's counsel, and set your affections on things that are above, and not on
things below: Let your conversation then be without covetousness, and be
content with such things as you have, for God has said, I will never leave you
nor forsake you. Heb. 13.5. So to conclude, I beseech you fear the Lord all ye
his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, Christ's
last Sermon, or, The everlasting estate and condition of all men in the world
to come. Likewise, the Christians best Garment, Christ's first Sermon. The
Christians Blessed Choice. Heavens Glory, and Hells Horror. And a warning-piece
to the Sloathful, Idle, Careless Drunken, and Secure Ones of these last and
worst of times. Very godly Books, and are but three pence price.

Likewise, 1. The Fathers last Blessing to his Children 2. This Devils disease,
or, the Sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. 3. Englands faithful Physician.
4. Death Triumphant. 5. Peter's Sermon of Repentance. 6. The dreadful charecter
of a drunkard. 7. Doomsday at hand. 8. The Charitable Christian. 9. The Plain
Man's Plain Pathway to Heaven. 10. The Black Book of Conscience.


All very necessary for these Licentious times. They are to be sold by
Elizabeth Andrews in Little St. Bartholmews Court West-Smithfield


