To our Right Trusty, and well beloved Counselor, JOHN Lord BERKELEY, our
Lieutenant General, and General Governor of our Kingdom of Ireland, and to our
chief Governor or Governors of that our Kingdom for the time being, and to
the Lords, and others of our Privy Council of that our Kingdom.
NOw we the Lord Lieutenant and Council, in Pursuance of His Majesty's said
Letters, and by virtue of the said clause in the Act explaining the Act of
Settlement, do by this our Act of Council, give and grant general License and
leave to all and every His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects, and all other
His Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, as well to hire and purchase from, as also
to demise, alien, and grant unto each other their Heirs and Assigns, any House
or Houses, Lands or Tenements, within any of the Cities or Towns Corporate of
this Kingdom, and the Liberties thereof, as freely, and in as full, ample, and
beneficial a manner, to all intents and purposes, as if the aforesaid clause of
Restraint in the said Art had not been, and that none of His Majesty's
Subjects, shall from henceforth be molested, or incur any penalty, or
forfeiture for any Breach, or non-observance of the said clause of Restraint,
the person or persons so purchasing in the said Cities, Towns and places,
taking only the usual Oath of Allegiance, as formerly, the said Act, or any
other Act, Statute, Law, or Ordinance to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding.

And we do hereby further signify, That His Majesty's Will and Pleasure is,
and His Majesty in and by His said Letters, does order and declare, That His
Majesty's said Irish Roman Catholic Subjects, formerly Inhabitants, Natives,
or Freemen, and such as have, or shall have Right to be Freemen, in any of the
said Cities, Towns and places, and all other His Majesty's Subjects shall be
forthwith restored unto, and enjoy their accustomed Privileges, Freedoms,
Immunities and advantages, and be allowed, and peaceably admitted to Inhabit,
and Trade by Transportation, Importation, Wholesale, Retail, or otherwise, in
the said respective Cities, Towns and places, without disturbance or
molestation, as freely, as they, or their Ancestors, or any other did, or has
been used at any time heretofore, in the time of His Majesty's Dear Father of
Blessed Memory, and as any other His Majesty's Subjects do at present, without
making any distinction between His Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, or
giving any interruption upon pretense of difference of Judgment, or opinion in
matters of Religion; But that all act and deal together, as becomes dutiful
and Loyal Subjects, the said former Act, or any other Act, Order, or practice
to the contrary notwithstanding; whereof His Majesty's Chancellor of Ireland,
His Justices of both Benches, the Barons of the Exchequer, and His Majesty's
Council at Law in this Kingdom, and all Magistrates, Governors, Mayors,
Sheriffs, and other Officers of the said respective Cities, Towns and
Corporations, and all others whom it does or may concern, are to take notice,
and conform themselves thereunto.

And it is ordered, That His Majesty's Letters aforesaid, and this our Act of
Council be forthwith published in all Cities, and Towns Corporate in this
Kingdom, to the end all persons concerned, may take notice of the same.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the Eighth day of March 1671. JA:
ARMACHANUS. Mich. Dublin Canc. Clanbrazill. Heugh Glenaully. Jo. Bysse. Theo.
Jones.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castle-street, 1671.


