PLAIN MAN'S Plain Pathway to HEAVEN. Directing every man how he may be saved.
Very seasonable for these Times.

The four and thirtieth Edition, with many Additions.

^^n 14.6. Jesus says unto them, I am the War (...) Truth, and the Life.

Who so would know the way to Heaven above, Christ is the Way, Faith, Hope, and
Love


London, Printed for Eliz. Andrews, at the White Lion near Py-eCorner. 1665.

The Plain Man's Plain Pathway to HEAVEN.
Mat. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad
is the way that leads unto destruction, any many there be that go in thereat:
but strait is the gate, any narrow is the way that leads to life, and few
there be that find it.


THese words, Beloved, are the words of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: and therefore do crave every good Christians attention, being spoken
by so good a Master, who not only loved us, but laid down his life for us; as
it is, Romans 5.6, 7. Whilst we were sinners, Christ died for us. And beloved,
they are not only the words of good counsel; good counsel not for the body
only, but for the salvation of our souls; plainly declaring unto us the way to
Heaven, which is not the common beaten road of the world. The way to Heaven is
a strait and narrow way, a hard way, and a thorny way, and whosoever would be
saved, must walk in this way. Beloved, I beseech you to consider, Heaven cost
our Savior a dear price, his precious life and blood, and had he not shed his
blood, it had been impossible for us to have come to Heaven. And beloved,
consider also, that notwithstanding it cost Christ his Life to purchase heaven
for us, yet it is no easy matter to get to heaven: the way to heaven is
altogether up the hill, and though it be painful and difficult, yet it is worth
our pains at last, there are treasures in heaven, joys unspeakable, and full
of glory, such things as St. Paul. says, 1 Cor. 2.9. That eye has not seen,
ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive
the things that God has laid up for those that love him. God has laid them up
for us. Did we but seriously consider the happiness of the saints in heaven, we
should be willing to undergo any thing here below, so we might get thither. It
is the opinion and fond conceit almost of all men, that they shall go to
heaven, and they hope to be saved as well as the best, though they walk not in
the way. But let them take heed how they deceive their own souls, for the
Scripture says plainly, that those that would be saved, must first be new
creatures, they must be born again, John 3. Except a man be born again, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, they must not live after the
flesh and lusts of men, but after the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.2. And how does God
in his word say men should live, if they would be saved? First, we must live a
life of faith, He that believes shall be saved; but he that believes not, is
condemned already, the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36. Secondly, he
that would be saved must repent, God commands all men every where to repent,
Acts 17.30. Repentance must follow after faith, Thirdly, we must be willing to
forsake all for Christ. And the young man said unto him, Good master, what
shall I do to be saved? says Christ, Sell all that thou have, and give to the
poor, and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, Mat. 19.21. Men
must not say, I have bought a Farm, I have married a Wife, therefore I cannot
come. Fourthly, those that would be saved must be holy and unblameable, walking
as Christ walked: they must dye unto sin, and live unto righteousness, for no
unrighteous person shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. Heaven is
the reward of holiness. Having your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life, Romans 6.22. And lastly, he must not do this once or twice, but
he must serve the Lord in righteousness and true holiness all the days of his
life, Luke 1.75. For he that continues unto the end shall be saved, Mat. 20.21.
Therefore unless men be such as God in his word requires they should be, in
vain do they say, they hope to be saved by Christ, unless they live as Christ
lived, holy as he was holy; for certainly all those that live in sin, and dye
in sin without repentance, shall come short of heaven. And truly beloved,
heavenly counsel was never more needful then now, in these last and worst of
times, which abound so much with sin and wickedness, which plainly shows that
these are the last times, as St. Peter says, 2 Pet. 3.3. In the last days
shall come scoffers, walking after their own ungodly lusts, self-lovers,
covetous, blasphemers, proud, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
truce breakers, false accusers, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3. all which things the Lord
knows is too evidently seen among us at this day.

How is religion and the ways of God scorned and reproached at this day, not
only by loose and lascivious persons, as swearers, drunkards,
Sabbath Breakers, and such like ungodly wretches, but by a generation of Vipers
sprung up amongst us in these our days, called Quakers, Shakers, and Ranters,
who pretend holiness, and are out wardly clothed in Seeps clothing, but are
indeed such as our Savior speaks of in Matthew. 7.15. Wolves in sheeps
clothing, who despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities; ungodly men,
turning the grace of God into wantonness, denying the only Lord God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, as St. Jude says, Who resist the truth, being men of
corrupt minds; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5 Professing they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable
and disobedient and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.6. Laboring to beat
down Magistracy and Ministry, which is the great work the Devil aims at: that
so he may the more easily delude souls. If once the Devil could but beat down
Ministry and Magistracy, he would go in deluding souls without opposition, all
were his own then. And therefore the counsel St. Judge gave the Christians in
his days, is now very seasonable in these ungodly times, for every good
Christian: That they should beware, lest they be led away with the error of
those wicked ones, and so fall from their own stedfastness, and come short of
Heaven, bringing upon themselves sudden destruction.

And indeed this Epistle of St. Jude is very seasonable for these times, and I
beseech every good Christian seriously to read it, see there the dreadful
Judgment of God against sinners, which are written for our examples; not that
we should follow them, but that we would he afraid to sin against God, as they
did. For certainly if God spared neither the old world, nor the Israelites, nor
the Angels that fell, but has reserved them in everlasting chains, under
darkness, until the Judgment of the great day, he will not spare us if we sin
as they did, And likewise Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, are
set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. God has
hung them out in chains, that all may take notice and be afraid to sin as they
did; and certainly God is the same God now as he was then: he is yesterday, to
day, and for ever the same; and if we will (notwithstanding his examples)
presume to go on in sin, he will certainly bring upon us the same judgments.
And truly the sins of Sodom are at this day the sins of England, pride and
fullness fo bread, the Lord grant we have not the judgment of Sodom, fire and
brimstone, e're long, poured down upon us. Let England especially London,
seriously remember the sad examples of fire. Now then Christians, I beseech you
take the good counsel of St. Paul, Ephesians. 6.11, 12. Put on the whole armor of
God, for never was more need; now the Devil is most busy to destroy souls, it
becomes Christians to be the best armed, we should count it folly and madness
in that man that should know the thief would come and rob him, and yet would
not provide and arm himself against him. Now sirs consider, the Devil seeks to
rob you of your precious souls, therefore arm your selves, be not unprovided
when you may be armed: the armor of God is armor of proof, and will bear off
all the fiery darts of Satan. Resist the Devil and he will fly from you, Jam
4.7. The devil is not able to hurt that soul that has on the armor of God; and
what this armor of God is St. Paul tells us in Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth; and having on the
breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace. Above all, taking the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance. For whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall
be saved, Romans 10.13.

And this is the armor which every one that would go to heaven must put on; for
either we must be the soldiers of Christ, or the slaves of the Devil, for all
those that fight under Satan are his slaves, therefore let us put on this armor
of God, and work out our salvation with fear and trembling. To which end our
Savior directs, and plainly shows us the may to heaven, which although it be
a hard may, and a strait may, yet it leads unto a blessed life; and what
though we be scratcht in the way with briars and thorns, and endure some
hardship for a time, yet when we come to Heaven, it will surely makes us amends
at last.

Did not our Savior himself and all his Prophets and Apostles go to heaven
throught many difficulties? How were they buffeted, scourged, and mocked, yea,
spitted on, and spitefully used by wicked and ungodly men? did it not cost
CHRIST his dear life and precious blood to purchase life and heaven for us? Did
not the Saints of GOD in all ages willingly endure any thing for heaven; they
were content to part with all, knowing they had in Heaven a better and a more
enduring substance. See what they suffered with joy for heaven, Heb. 11.
Abraham left his Country and inheritance. Moses forsook Egypt, choosing rather
to suffer with Christ, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin. And others stopped
the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the fire; were tortured, had
trial of cruel mockings, yea, bonds and imprisonments. They were stoned, sawn
asunder, slain with the sword, wandered about in sheeps skins and goats skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented, wandering in mountains and deserts,
dens, and corners of the earth, Of whom (says the Apostle) the world was not
worthy. They of whom the world was not worthy, were accounted by wicked and
ungodly men not worthy for to live and sojourn in the World. Did not all the
Martyrs suffer death with joy for heavens sake, according to that Scripture.
Account it all joy when ye fall into diver temptations, Jam. 1.2. How did Paul
and Silas sing in prison, Acts 16.35. They rejoiced God accounted them worthy
to suffer for heaven. They were resolved no difficulty should debar them from
Heaven: being persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor things present, nor
things to come, neither tribulations, nor persecutions, nor any thing else
should hinder him from Heaven. Romans 8.38. Christ having told them, That they
should be hated of all men for his name sake, Yea, they that killed them should
think they did God good service, John 16.2. Because they belonged to Heaven,
therefore the world hated them: they were assured of the truth of the word of
God, which says, That through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. And is it not much better to suffer here a light affliction, as the
Apostle calls it, which is but for a moment, then for a little season to enjoy
the pleasures of sin, and be eternally in hell in everlasting torments, which
shall never have end? O consider this all ye that forget God, and despise his
word and Ministers! Know this all ye Ranters, Quankers, Drunkards, and
Swearers, who mock at the word of God, God will one day reckon with you for all
your ungodly courses and works of darkness; and then your master the devil,
whom you so much delighted to serve, will pay you your wages fire and
brimstone, eternal torments for ever: and then you will wish and say, when it
is too late, O that I had served God! O that I had not walked in these ungodly
courses! When God cried unto you to repent, you would not hear; and now you are
in hell, roaring and crying to be eased of your endless torments, God will not
hear you. At the day of judgment the yes of wicked men shall be opened; they
could ^e no pleasure in the ways of God, but still their ^elight was in sin,
it was sport and pastime for them to sin and offend the Lord. O, but what ^ould
they now give to be saved: they who be^re would not forsake any one of their
sins, though it were to save their souls, now they ^ould give ten thousand
worlds if they had them, to have but one hours ease and liberty to ^et
salvation: What shall if profit a man to gain ^he whole world and lose his own
soul? Mat. 15.19. Let every one therefore repent; and turn un^o the Lord, for
he is merciful and full of com^assion: strive to enter in at the strait gate,
and do not deceive your poor souls, by thinking ^ou shall go to heaven for your
good meaning: For it is written, Not every one that says unto ^he Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven (says Christ) but he that does the will
of my Father, which is in heaven, Mat. 7.21. Men think ^f they do but come to
Church, and have a good ^eaning they shall be saved: O how many de^eive
themselves by this? St. Crysostom, who ^reached to that great City of Antioch,
did be^i^ve, that of two hundred thousand that came to ^ear the word, scarce an
hundred souls should be ^aved: for if men would be saved, they must not ^nely
be hearers, but doers of the word, as St. James says, Jam. 1.22. The Scribes
and Pharisees thought they should go to heaven before any other, why: They
fasted, they gave alms, they did more then come to Church; and yet they came
short of heaven: And does not Christ say, That except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall never inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. O how many thousands are there in England
whose righteousness comes infinitely short of the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees; nay, indeed have none at all, neither seek for any; but on the
contrary, delight in nothing but uncleanness, drunkenness, and other lascivious
sins: Of which St Paul says, They that live and dye in them, shall never
inherit the Kindom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. But shall be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

O that men would be wise, and consider their latter end, for as the free
falls, so it lies: If men will live in their sins, they shall dye in their
sins, and perish for ever. For without holiness no man shall see God, Heb.
12.14.

The young man in the Gospel, he enquired after salvation, saving, Good master,
what shall he do to be saved? But how many are there in England, who never in
all their life long so much as think of heaven, and the salvation of their
precis ous souls: let the Lord call never so loud by the voice of his
Ministers, lifting up their voice like trumpet, or by the voice of his words
and works; ^^y his mercies which should invite men to come ^^n, by his
Judgments which should affright them: how do they he snorting and sleeping in
their sin, and never awake? But let the world ^all, and presently they stir:
let but a door be open^d how to get riches, and be great in the world, how do
men thrust and throng, and every one trives to go before another; but the
Ministers of God may cry and call till their hearts ache for men to get to
heaven, and then sadly complain to the Lord, as Isaiah did, Isa. 53.1. Lord who
has beieved our report? We have toiled all day, all the ^ayes of our lives,
and have caught nothing. The Net of the Gospel has been always spread out,
and yet scarce one soul taken in it. We read Acts 2.40. that at a Sermon of St.
Peter's, three tho^^land souls were converted to the Lord: but now we may hear
three thousand Sermons preached, and scarce one soul brought to heaven. Men are
altogether of Gallio's mind, Acts 18.17. They care not for these things. Never
was there since the ^ayes of Adam so much means of grace and sal^ation as now:
have we not Line upon Line, ^recept upon Precept, Sermon upon Sermon, Mercy
upon Mercy, and yet all will not do; men ^op their ears, and refuse, to hear
the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wis^ly: O I ^ear it will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for England:
And not only the men of Nineve, but th^cruel Jews and Turks, shall rise up in
judgment against us except we repent. Englands hel^ will be hotter then the
Indians hell. What na^tion or people is there at this day, that God hat
bestowed so many mercies on as upon England the Lord has given us not only
his Gospel, but also peace and plenty of all things. And yet not with standing
the Grace of God has so abounded toward us, that we have turned his Grace
into mantouness; because the goodness and mercy of our God has abounded
toward us, we have made our sins to superabound against him. Now justly might
the Lord for our unsworthiness even cause the devouring sword to be unsheathed
again among us, and cause us to sheath it in one another bowels again: and not
only sent the sword among us again, which is ready to b^ drawn, but his
destroying Angel with that save and heavy judgment the noisome Pestilence
which the Lord has been pleased in much mercy to keep from among us a long
time, even to admiration, and even sweep us away in his wrath and indignation,
even every one of us: It is the Lords mercy we are not consuined, Lam. 3.22.
Did not the Lord renew his mercies every morning, we should, be in hell ere
night. Ah the Lord spare us, and have mercy on us, for it is greatly to be
feared these three heavy judgments, Plague, Famine and Sword are even ready to
fall upon us. How justly might the Lord give us a Famine, ^ot only of bread,
but also of hearing the word of the Lord, even because we have despised it,
^and loathed it, as the Israelites did the Manna be Lord rained from Heaven:
heavenly food, and it was loathed by wretched men.

How sadly the Lord has caused Ireland and Germany so feel these three heavy
Judgments, ^s fresh in every man's memory, and is not England as sinful a
Nation as any of these were? ^ea, England is at this day an unthankful and
unholy people, a rebellious Nation, who stand ^t out against the Lord. But let
England know, the Lord will be revenged on them. Shall I not be revenged on
such a Nation as this? (says the Lord) Yea, I will be revenged on them. O that
men would see the goodness of the Lord, and now to day, even while it is called
to day, and turn to the Lord by repentance, for who knows whether the Lord will
have mercy? Yea, he will have mercy upon us if we repent. As I live (says the
Lord) I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from
his wickedness and repent. Turn ye, turn ye, says the Lord Ezekiel. 33.12. and I
will have mercy upon you. If there could have hin found but ten righteous
persons in Sodom, God would have spare it, Genesis 8.33. And may not ^he Lord us,
yea, he will space us if we repent. See what the Lord says, Isa. 55.7. Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the
Lord, and he will have mercy on them. Let every one therefore speedily repent
without delay, and strive who shall begin first: if every one would sweep his
own door, the whole street would soon be clean; and if every one would repent
of his own sins, the sins of the Nation would soon be blotted out. Yet forty
daye^ and Nineve shall be bestroyed, says the Lord; and yet upon their
repentance, the Lord pardoned them: and if ever they would go to heaven it must
he by faith and, repentance: for no repentance, no salvation Except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish, says our Savior, Luke 13.3. Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. and without repentance there can be no
holiness, for holiness is the fruit of repentance: if we be not holy here; we
shall never be happy hereafter. God himself has said so, and he is no liar.
The devil may persuade you otherwise, but he is a liar, and the father of lies,
John. 8 8. he will persuade you so, only to delude your souls, and draw you
into hell: he speaks you fair, but it may be he will tell you another tale in
hell. He is like a great Bragadocio, that promises great things, but indeed
has nothing to pay but hell and damnation: All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me, says the devil to our Savior, Mat. 4. But I
pray whose is the world? Is not the earth the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
Psalm. 24.1. The Devil has nothing at all to do with it, but as the Lord gives
him leave. Riches and honor, worldly honor and greatness are the devils baits
to catch poor souls: He lays these things before their eyes, but it is the soul
he aims at, let him say what he will, the end of his work is only to delude
and destroy poor souls; the Devil promises much, and has nothing to pay but
hell and damnation, and yet how many believe him? Let the Lord say, here is my
Christ, take him, much good may he do you; here is pardon of sin, receive, ^here
is life and salvation, heaven and happiness, and who is there that dares to
receive? You will not come to me that you might have life, (says Christ but
let but the devil say, you may go on in your sins, take your pleasure in the
world, all shall be well with you, it is time enough to repent hereaftrr, how
readily do men believe him? But if men did but know and believe whither ^hey
are going, when they are going in the ways of sin, they would go another way.
The way of ^in is the broad way to hell, you go me^^^ly along, its down the
hill you are running; but take heed you will fall into hell at last. It is just
with men going to hell, as it was with the man that was to go over a great
River on a narrow Bridge; ^he puts on his spectacles, and so the bridge seemed
wider then it was, and the poor man walks on ^ecurely, and so falls beside the
Bridge, and is drowned: wicked men, they look on the world with the devils
spectacles, and so it seems very pleasant and delightful, and they run on
securely (as we say) without fear or wit, not considering that every step they
tread, they are ready to fall into hell. O sinners consider, when you are
sinning, you are dancing about the mouth of hell, and if the Lord should but
snap in sunder the slender thread of your lives, you would presently fall into
hell. Men thing the pleasures of sin very sweet, the Lord knows they are
bitterness in the latter end: the sweet meat of sin will have sour sauce; sin
is the dearest commodity in the world, you will repent your bargain at last,
though you sin at never so cheap a rate, you will pay too dear for it: you will
say then, the devil was to hard for you, he cheated you, you gave him too much.
Sin cost men their lives, and their souls more precious then pearls or r^^ies,
and lose heaven too by the bargain. The ^^ges of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.22.

Strive therefore to enter in at the strait gate, get to heaven, though the way
be hard, yet strive: you have the command of Christ, his example, the example
of all the Prophets and Apostles, and having such a cloud of witnesses, be not
discouraged, but run with patience the race that is set before you: suffer not
Satan to deceive you, it you do, you will surely repent it when it is too late.
Consider by the example of Dives and Lazarus; is it not better think you to be
in heaven with Lazarus, then to be in hell with Dives? Dives he wanted nothing
on (...), had the world at will, fared deliciously every day; but is now in
hell, and wants a drop of water. L^^^^^^ he lived in great wants and miseries,
had not wherewithal to relieve his hungry body full of ^ores; men they looked
scornfully on him, and did him not so much favor as the dogs: they came and
licked his so^es, but Dives denied him the very crumbs that fell from his table
to the Dog^. What think you, did not Lazarus endure much hardship to get to
heaven? he was here in much misery, full of woes; now in heaven has rivers of
pleasure, joy unspeakable, and full of glory. O beloved, it is better to beg
our ^re^^ here with Lazarus for a little season on earth, then to beg our water
with Dives in hell to all eternity. We should not fudge that worth much now in
the time of our life, which will be of no worth here after. Riches, says
Solomon, make themselves wings and flee away; they are uncertain here to day,
and gone to morrow, as woeful experience tells us, and are worth just nothing in
the day of Judgment; in the life to come they are worthless things, there will
be an end of them: But godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and
the life to come. 1 Timothy 4.8. When Dives was in his pontiffcalibus, had his
purple clothing and dainty fare every day, who would not be Dives then? almost
every one: But when we read of Dives in hell torments, then who would be Dives?
certainly none at all. Dives would now be content to be a beggar in the estate
of Lazarus ^en thousand years i^ he might be released out of his torments. ^o
likewise when we read of poor Lazarus a beggar, f^^ll of sores, wanting bread,
in great distress of body, who would be Lazarus in that case? certainly none at
all. But when (...) of Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, Lazarus in heaven, then who
would not be Lazarus if he might? But if we would be Lazarus in heaven, we must
be Lazarus on earth: if we would dye the death of the righteous, we must live
the life of the righteous: If we would sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints of God;
we must tread in their steps, they have beaten the way, they have made it plain
for us if we will, their path is clearly to be seen: we must walk as they
walked, soberly; live as they lived, holy and righteously all our days; endure
hardship as they did, as you may see in the word of God. What did the Prophets
and Apostles of our blessed Lord and Savior undergo? St. Paul tells us in his
book of Martyrs, Heb. 11. They were persecuted, stoned, imprisoned, sawn
asunder, mocked, scourged, despised by men, wandered about in sheepskins and
goat skins. And other Apostles and Saints we read of, some torn in pieces by
wild beasts, others put in scalding oil, some ^ad their Skins stayed off
alive, dragged about with horses, and our Smithfield is a good witness ^f the
sufferings of the Martyrs: and besides we ^eard of la^e the sad tidings of the
sufferings of ^ur Brethren in Savoy, which may make every ^ood Christians heart
bleed to hear what cruel ^loody tortures those faithful Christians did en^ure
for the sake of Christ; how they were ^^orcht by fire dashed in pieces against
the rocks, ^ot pitying nor sparing even tender sucking ^nfants, but destroying
all. The Lord make us ^ensible of his saving mercies toward us, that ^^e are
not delivered into the hands of such bloo^y wretches; therefore as St. Paul
says, Let us run ^ith patience the race that is set before us. It is but ^or a
little while, and in due time we shall receive ^ur reward if we faint not, Heb.
12.2. Let us then ^bour not for the meat that perishes, but for that which
endures to eternal life. So demeaning of ^ur selves here, as those that look
for the com^ng of our Lord Jesus, who shall render to every ^ne according to
their works. And know, that al^hough the righteous meet with hard fare in the
^orld, yet their end shall be joy and peace, Peace ^at passes all
understanding. When the wicked ^en although they are crowned with rose-buds,
and has their paths washed in Butter, and ^^ve an hundred years in pleasure,
yet they shall ^^e accursed: for there will certainly come a day ^hen all
mankind, high and low, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, shall appear na^^^
before the great Tribunal of the Lord. And then what will become of riches and
honor, beauty and pleasure? Then the Crowns of Kings, and the rags of Beggars
shall all be laid aside; and all without respect of persons receive sentence
according to their deeds done in the flesh. Then pride and luxury, swearing and
drunkenness, swaggering, complemental oaths, and all other vile and lascivious
courtings and adorations of beauty, the so much admired and studied sins of the
Gallants of the world, shall be pronounced out of the mouth of God himself, to
be nothing else but glittering abominations: then the adulteraring wares, light
and double weights, and false measures, now almost woven into the very art of
trading, shall be pronounced to be nothing else but mysteries of iniquity: and
self-deceivings, and shall be rewarded with eternal fire: and then the poor
despised profession and professors of the power of godliness, who tremble at
the word of God, make conscience of their ways, and forbear not only vain and
wicked oaths, but also idle words, whose hearts bleed for the abomination of
the times, and the wickedness of those among whom they live; who walk humbly
and mournfully before the Lord, in an exa^ holy conversation, in the midst of a
crooked an^ perverse generation, shall in good earnest be pronounced from the
mouth of God himself, t^ have walked in that true and narrow way that ^eadeth
to eternal life: then the wicked and ungodly, who mocked at the word of God,
when it is too late shall be forced to confess and say, O what fools were we!
We accounted their lives madness, and judged their end to be without honor:
How are they now reckoned among the Saints, and have their portion in Heaven,
sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of their God: and we
who lived in pleasure, and walked in this broad easy, and smooth way, are
tumbled down to hell, there to receive the just reward of our ungodly sayings
and doings, eternal torments for ever and ever.

Now to conclude all in a word, let every one of us take the good counsel of
Solomon, to remember our Creator in the days of our Youth. Rejoice O young man
in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee. But know for all this thou must
come to judgment. Remember there is both a heaven and a hell; a heaven to
reward thee if thou do well, a hell to torment thee if thou do ill. Labor
then to be of the number of those, to whom the Lord shall say at the last and
great day of judgment, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world, Mat. 25 24. Unto which
Kingdom, the Lord of his mercy bring us all.

Now the God of peace, which brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus Christ
that great shepherd of his sheep through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make us perfect in every good wor^ and work to do his will, working
in us that which i^ well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ ou^ Lord:
To whom be glory and honor now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.
THese godly Books are sold by E. Andrews, at the white Lion near Pye-Corner.

Christ's first Sermon. Christ's last Sermon. The Christians Blessed Choice. The
Christians best Garment. Heavens Happiness and Hells horror. The School of
Grace.

Likewise, 1. Englands Faithful Physician. 2. The dreadful character of a
drunkard. 3. Doomsday at hand. 4. The Fathers last Blessing to his children.
5. The sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. 6. The Black Book of Conscience.
7. Peter's Sermon of Repentance. 8. The Plain Mins Plain Pathway to Heaven. 9.
Death Triumphant. 10. The Charitable, Christian.


Read them over carefully, and practice them constantly, and resh assuredly
thou will find much comfort in them to thy own soul.


