ADVERTISEMENT.
A Demonstration of the Messiah. In which the Truth of the Christian Religion
is proved, especially against the Jews, By Richard Kidder, in Octavo. Printed
for B. Aylmer.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST PURGATORY.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. MDCLXXXV.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST Purgatory.
AMONG all the Errors of the Church of Rome, the Superstructures she has made
of hay and stubble upon the substantial Doctrine of Christianity; this Fable of
Purgatory is one of the most notorious, invented on purpose to increase the
treasury of the Church, by putting the grossest abuses upon the ignorant and
unwary People: over whom she has got such an absolute dominion, as that she
can make them believe what she pleases, and then can impose her additions to
the word of God, as infallible decrees. How easily are the multitude led into
bye-paths, when that light of Scripture is taken away from their eyes, which
God revealed on purpose, that by the search thereof they might find Eternal
Life? For the Scriptures are the most full and complete systeme of God's Laws,
the most sufficient and certain means of Man's Salvation: I cannot then but
wonder how it came to pass, that this middle state, called Purgatory, hanging
thus between Heaven and Hell, was not known to the Penmen of God's word, or if
it were known, that they should either be so envious of the Churches happiness,
or so forgetful of the work they took in hand, which was to write the whole
Gospel of Christ, as not so much as one of them should give us notice of this
place. But this new Doctrine, with many others, was introduced when the World
was in the dark; for in the ninth and tenth Centuries, such a General ignorance
and stupidity had seized the minds of Men, that scarce any one knew what the
Doctrine of Christ was: when the Wolrd was thus stupid and Superstitious, Men
were inclined to believe strange things: upon this fair opportunity, some
cunning Men drew the simple People into the Belief of the most absurd
Doctrines, under the notion of being great and profound Mysteries; the
gallantry of Faith, they imagined, was mightily shown, in swallowing downright
Contradictions: when this breach was once made upon the minds of Men, then any
error might enter, though as senseless and ridiculous as Purgatory it self.

Which Opinion I will first show to have no foundation in the Canonical
Scripture.

Secondly, For what reasons it was introduted.

Thirdly, What we are to believe in this matter.

Lastly, I shall conclude with some reflections upon the Authors of this, and
other new-invented Doctrines in the Church of Rome.

First I am to prove, that this opinion has no foundation in Scripture. The
Papists themselves are sensible enough of this; therefore they put all the
false glosses they can upon it, so that the People may discern nothing in the
Scripture it self, though it be as clear as the Sun: for by this craft they
have their living, as Demetrius and his Crafts-men had herefore. But let them
fairly and honestly lay open the Books of God to every one's eye, without any
unreasonable interpretations, or spurious additions made to it; and I doubt
not, but the vanity of asserting Purgatory will soon appear.

Now in Scripture there are matters of a different nature.

I. Ancient Records; the History of former Times: and these things were far
better known, than they are now at this distance of time.

II. There are things that are wholly expired and out of date, and so of less
use to us, as the whole Mosaical Dispensation.

III. In Scripture there are matters of Prophecy fitted for those times, which
they then far better understood than we do now, and wherein they were far more
concerned than we are; for they are transactions partly of things performed,
which when fulfilled, were best understood.

IV. There are matters of deep Philosophy, as well as great Mysteries, which do
not belong to the business of Religion.

Lastly. There is the moral part of Religion, and our Savior's Doctrine; in
which two our Regilion consists: and this is that Doctrine which has brought
life and immortality to light, but has not revealed any such thing as
Purgatory: which will appear, if we consider what Bellarmine has alleged in
the defense thereof, both out of the Old and New Testament. According to him,
the Texts for Purgatory in the Old Testament are first the Fasting of David for
Saul and Jonathan, 2 King. 1.12. and again, 2. Sam. 3.35. for the death of
Abner. Which Fasting of David must be as he fancies, for the obtaining of
something for them at God's hands after their deaths, and when nothing can be
obtained for Men's Souls that are already in Heaven or Hell, it follows, that
some Men's Souls are in neither of those places, but must be in Purgatory.

We Answer; that Mourning and Fasting were never practiced upon a design of
procuring thereby any benefit to the Deceased: but they were customs only, and
ceremonies made use of to testify the honor and respect they had for their
Friends departed; and all Nations have had their particular ways of discharging
their last Duty to their Friends, when they have left this World, without any
thought of doing them any service thereby in the World to come. The Cardinal is
not contented with this Argument, but he produces other places of the Old
Testament to support his opinion; in the behalf whereof he cites almost every
Text, wherein there is the word anger, or fire, or burning, or purging, or
cleansing: it were an infinite task to answer every thing he alleges, and
altogether needless, because there is not so much as any show or color of
proof in any one of them. Therefore we will pass to those Texts of the New
Testament, which he says are for him.

First; He alleges that of St. Matthew, 12.32. Whosoever speaks a word
against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoevrer speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world,
nor that which is to come. This world to come, if you will believe him, must
needs be Purgatory, Now by the world to come, nothing else is meant in
Scripture, but that everlasting state which we shall enter upon after death, in
which all agree there shall be no middle state between that of Heaven and the
other of Hell; therefore the world to come and Purgatory are inconsistent: for
one Scripture is the best Comment upon another; so that this way of Expression,
(...), neither in this World, nor that which is to come, is made easy and
plain by St Mark, c. 3. v. 29. (...) now this manner of Expression in St.
Matthew, (...), it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in
that which is to come, signifies just so much, and no more, as (...), has
never forgiveness, but is in danger of Eternal Damnation; as much as to say,
this sin is of that malignant and heinous nature, that it justly deserves
endless punishment, and will never be pardoned.

II. Another is that of the 1 Cor. 3. They themselves shall be saved, but so as
by fire, or but as through fire; which fire (he says) must be the Fire of
Purgatory. We Answer, that these words seem to allude to those of Zachar, 13.9.
where he says, I will bring the third part through fire, and refine them, as
silver is refined: which is a fair warning to men, that the Doctrines they
embrace, and their practices according to them, may be such as will bear the
severest trial, that they may not be like wood, hay and stubble, which will not
endure the fire: for the Particle (...) is a Particle of similitude, and the
whole phrase, (...), is proverbial, used in Scripture as well as in other
Authors, to signify a narrow escape out of a great danger; just as St. Peter
expresses it, 1 Pet. 3.20. (...), so here it is (...), he shall be saved with
great difficulty, so as through fire.

III. A Third place is that of 1 Cor. 15. concerning Baptism for the Dead; here
the Cardinal ventures very far, even to the drawing of fire out of water, the
flames of Purgatory out of these washings: Baptism for the Dead, and Prayer for
the Dead is the same thing in his sense; though it be discordant to the harmony
and scope of the whole Scripture. For the word (...), in Scripture signifies to
Wash, or purify by Washing; it must be rendered in the same sense here: for as
all Nations had their peculiar Rites of Burial, so had the Jews; who were used
to wash the Carcasses of the Dead with warm water, Camomile, and dried Roses
being put into it. This (...), or use of Baptisation was threefold: The First,
(...), a washing from the pollution contracted by the touch of the dead
Carcass. The Second was (...), a washing of the dead Corpse its self, as
Tabitha was washed. The Last was the Baptization in the Text, (...), in use
only among some misguided Christians: for the Apostle undertook to convince
the Corinthians of the truth of the Resurrection, from their own foolish and
erroneous Customs; in effect telling them, that their usage of Baptizing the
living for the dead, was vain and impertinent, if there were no Resurrection:
for if the Dead rise not at all, to what end were these Funeral Solemnities!
Why was there vicarium tale Baptisma, as Tertullian calls it; the manner
whereof is thus described by Epiphanius: When any Catechumenist dyed, some
living person, being placed under the bed, they came to the deceased Party, and
aked him whether he would be Baptized; the Party under the bed answered, that
he would; whereupon they immediately Baptized him for the dead: a silly
superstitious Action! Yet from this Topic St. Paul proves a Resurrection to
them, as he did once the existence of the true God, from an Inscription on an
Altar in Athens, to one that was unknown: but Bellarmine would persuade us,
that by this washing they intended to afford their Friends some relief in
Purgatory, and he might with as much reason have told us, that the Sea burns.

IV. The Fourth place is that of St. Matthew 5.25. Agree with thine adversary
quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the adversary
deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou
be cast into prison; verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out
thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Now if the Cardinal may be
credited, Purgatory is this Prison, and the Prisoner shut up therein, is in a
condition to pay the uttermost farthing, by the help of Prayers, Masses, and
the Pope's Indulgence: whereas all this is an Allegory, whereby we are taught
to reconcile our selves to God, the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, by leading
a Godly, Righteous and Sober life, whilst we are in the Way, or on this side
the Grave; for if we neglect our repentance and amendment of life in this our
day, before the night approaches, wherein no man can work; we run the hazard of
being cast into a prison, out of which there is no Redemption; for the Text
says, We shall by no means come out thence, till we have paid the uttermost
farthing; which will be never, because we shall never be able to discharge this
Debt. We are infinitely beholding to the goodness and mercy of God, who has
appointed his only Begotten Son to be our Surety, and to deliver us out of
this Prison; how justly then may the Savior of the World be angry with
Papists, for pretending to cast simple people into I know not what Prison, and
to torture them with painted Fires, in spite of that Redemption which he has
made for the whole World?

V. The Fifth place is that of Matthew. 5.22. Whosoever is angry with his Brother
without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment, and whosoever shall say
to his Brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the Counsel: but whosoever shall
say, thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell Fire. The last only of these sins,
Bellarmine observes, shall be punished with Hell Fire; consequently after this
life, the punishment of lesser sins will be in Purgatory. But this is no true
inference; because after this life, there will be no distinction of Courts of
Justice, as there was among the Jews in our Savior's time; then all Judicature
shall appertain to Christ and his Apostle: therefore this Text cannot be
rightly understood without considering the words before and after it. Now our
Savior in this Chapter was about to interpret the Law of Moses, which the Jews
thought they had fulfilled, when they had not transgressed the Grammatical
sense thereof; this made them believe that the Sixth Commandment was not
broken, but by killing a Man; nor the Seventh, but by actually committing
Adultery or Fornication: whereas our Savior forbids the inward Anger of a Man
against his Brother without a cause, the punishment whereof at the Day of
Judgment shall be Hell Fire. How Purgatory then should be maintained from these
words, I cannot imagine, unless the Papists can make it out, that as the Jews
had diverse Temporal Courts of Justice, so God Almighty will have three distinct
Courts of Justice hereafter, and will inflict different punishments for Sin.

VI. The Sixth place is Luke 16.9. Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon,
that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations;
Invocation of Saints, the Papists say may be proved from this Text, but I
cannot see upon what grounds. We are advised to make the Poor our Friends by
Charity, and by giving them some of our Riches, that we may have in this life
the benefit of their Prayers, and thereby make God himself our Debtour; for he
that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord.

Lastly; The Champions for Popery allege for Purgatory, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. By
which also he went and preached to the Spirits in prison; by which they
undrstand the Descent of Christ into Purgatory, to loose some Souls there from
their Torments. But (...), by which, relates to (...), Spirit; that is set down
just before it; by which Spirit in Noah, who is called a Preacher of
Righteousness, Christ Jesus is said to Preach to the Generation of Men
immediately before the Flood, whose Souls are now shut up in Hell for their
Disobedience. For this Preaching was not performed by an immediate act of the
Son of God, as if he personally had appeared on Earth, and actually Preached to
the Old World; but he did it by the Ministry of a Prophet: for to do any thing
by another, that is not able to perform it without him, as much demonstrates
the existence of the principal cause, as if he did it of himself without any
intervening instrument. But if Purgatory be intended in these words, we must be
mightily mistaken in our conceptions about a future state; then the days that
follow after Death do afford opportunities of obtaining a better Life; then may
Men rise from a life of torments to a life of joy: whereas the Angels had one
Instant, either to stand or fall eternally; what that Instant was to them, that
this Life is to us: for after Death immediately follows Judgment; the Soul at
its departure from the Body, knows its doom, and what it must trust to for
ever. The Schoolmen labor all they can to destroy the true Belief of
Christians in this matter, and have the face to propose it as a matter of
Faith, that Christ delivered the Souls of the Saints from the very suburbs of
Hell, which they call Limbus of the Fathers. It is pity but the wits of these
Men had been better employed, than in building such Castles in the Air, or in
filling Men's thoughts with imaginary Ideas of strange places in the other
World, that have no foundation in Scripture; which is our surest guide against
all such Notional wanderings, opens our eyes to perceive the reality of things,
and clears the brain, not only from Darkness, but form false and useless
Light, especially the Ignis fatuus of Purgatory; which serves only to mislead
Men out of the way, and so lose them in the bogs or woods of perpetual error;
which teaches us to believe quite otherwise than the Papists do; for such as
these are the instructions of the Holy Spirit, Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily I say
unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life; he shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death
to life. Mat. 18.8. Wherefore if thy hand, or thy foot offend thee, cut them
off, and cast them from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life, halt or
maimed, rather than having two hands and two feet, to be cast into everlasting
fire. Mat. 19.29. And every one that has forsaken houses or Brethren, or
Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my names
sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Mat.
25.46. And these shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into
life everlasting. In the sixteeth Chapter of St. Luke's Gospel, from the
nineteenth to the one and thirtieth Verse, we read how the Rich Man was cast
into Torments, and the Poor Man lodged in Abraham's Bosom: between the places
of both these Men, there was (...), a Wide Gulf, never to be passed; insomuch,
that Dives did despair of any relief out of his misery, when the gift of a drop
of water to cool his tongue would not be granted him. If we can assent to what
the Papists say, they have paved a large Caus-way over this wide Gulf, and
have opened a very easy passage from a life of torments to that of eternal
happiness. For by virtue of some prayers, oblations and indulgences, they have
made the way broad to Heaven, and narrow to Hell; a Man that has money in his
pocket cannot be damned, and a Camel may as soon pass through the eye of a
needle, as a poor Man be saved.

But granting that the written word of God has nothing of Purgatory in it, the
Romanists will tell you, that Tradition will defend them in the belief thereof:
which word, Tradition, they are wont to allege to give a color to most of
their present innovations.

Wherefore in the second place I am to show how they are mistaken in this case
of Tradition also, and to declare for what reasons the Fiction of Purgatory was
first set on foot. The Traditions we receive as good and authentic, are the
Doctrines which we now read in the holy Scriptures; but I have proved
Purgatory to be none of these: therefore those of the Romish Persuasion must
mean some other Tradition, that is not to be found written in the word of God.
But here we ought to observe, that the Scripture in this case, as well as in all
others, is the only rule of Faith; therefore Traditions, Councils and Fathers
are only to be used as helps to understand the Scripture better, but not to be
entertained as any rule of Faith; in which case we are bound to be of the
Apostle's mind. If I, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other doctrine than
that which we have delivered, let him he accursed. For this reason we cannot
receive those Doctrines for truth, which the Church of Rome presses upon our
Belief upon the account of Tradition: especially when we consider with what
strategems of force and fraud this Church has labored to keep the People in
ignorance for the sake of her New Doctrines, that they may be swallowed the
more glibly; which is an artifice to enslave Mankind, by disabling them either
to see or know what she is a-doing: whereas if we would keep up the honor and
privilege of Humane nature; if we would preserve our Bibles from being
sequestered into Hucksters hands; if we have any regard to God's pure and
undefiled Religion, we must resolve against the Novelties of Popery. For in the
true Religion, there is nothing which the reason of Mankind can challenge;
wherein the judgments of Men may not have so good an account, as to receive
full and ample satisfaction. And to speak the truth, I do not understand that
there is among Protestants: what more is to be found among the Papists, is
accommodated to serve some bye-ends and purposes. For this reason, a great
Abbat in the Roman Church was wont to say, that he did greatly suspect his
Religion must needs fail, being not built upon so firm a Rock as was supposed;
because there was so little Ground for many Tenants of it in the Word of God: I
may add, that there is as little in the principles of God's Creation, or in
that which we call Natural Religion.

If this be so, I wonder with what face they can still stand up for Purgatory,
or imagine such a state, in which the Souls of Men are for a time shut up,
until they are set at liberty by the Prayers of the Living, or a Pope's
Indulgence: but to justify themselves in this unpardonable abuse of the
Christian Religion, they tell us, that some Christians in Old Time did make use
of Prayers and Commemorations for those who died in the true Faith of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Now the question is, whether the Suppplicants, that used
this kind of Devotion, intended by these means to obtain a pardon for the
Criminals that were condemned to this Prison. The right understanding of this
Custom will put an end to the Controversy; and who can better inform us of
their meaning than they themselves, or those that lived in the same Age with
them; amongst whom may be reckoned Dionysius the Areopagite, who treats
particularly of the Rites used in their Burials of the Death: this Author
tells us that the Bishop was wont in the midst of the Congregation to make a
Prayer of Thanksgiving unto God for his restraining the power of the Devil over
Mankind; as also for his merciful admittance of sincere Penitents into his
Grace and Favor. And farther prays, that God would place them in the Land of
the Living, seat them in Abraham's Bosom, where, now they rest from their
Labors here, they may be received into a place of Light, Peace and Joy
everlasting: this was the end of their Prayers for those that Rest in the Lord.
Now, lest by mistake we should infer from hence, as some have done, that the
Souls of good Men departed this Life are not yet in Paradise, but remain for
some time in a condition of darkness, loss and pain; there to be prepared for
Heaven by certain Purgations, and thence to be discharged by the satisfactions
and prayers of the Living; the same excellent Write has mentioned only two
divisions of the Dead: of those that have lived well, and of those that have
lived ill; whereas the upholders of Purgatory have lodged them in three
distinct Apartments. But the Primitive Church knew but two places of
entertainment for the Dead after this Life, Heaven, and Hell; the first for
good, the latter for evil Men; one for the Believer, the other for the Infidel;
Heaven is for him whose sins are remitted, and Hell is for him whose sins are
retained. Indeed some Ancient Doctors did seem to doubt, what that place was
which the Souls of Men did abide in, till they should be reunited to their
Bodies in the Resurrection; supposing for a while they lay under the Altars.
But afterward the Church of Rome found it more profitable to build for them
this place of Purgatory, a place wherein she pretends the Souls of Men are
cleansed by Burning, and made fit for Heaven.

For as soon as the World was put into a great Fright about Purgatory, then
came in the sale of Indulgences; which the subtle Priest put off for
securities against the vain fears and dangers to be met withal in this place:
this indeed is a Doctrine of good advantage to the Churh of Rome, but most
disgraceful to the Christian Religion; for what can be more so, than to
defraud Christ himself of the Title and Merit which he ever had, of being The
only Redeemer of Mankind; as if he had not by his Sacrifice on the Cross fully
satisfied the Divine Justice, but that this great work was to be done by Pope's
Bulls, Indulgences and Masses? But for all this we will oblige our selves to
believe the Roman Confessors, if they can from Scripture, Reason, or untainted
Tradition show us where God has told Men, that he is pleased with these
things, and is resolved to accept of them instead of a good and Christian Life.
For this was always the Faith of the Primitive Church, that the state and
condition of a Man into which he passes after Death shall never be changed;
this I could prove out of Justin Martyr ad Orthodoxos, and out of St Cyprian ad
Demetrianum; but my Design is not to fill this brief Discourse with Quotations,
and indeed there is no necessity for it, because we have Scripture, the common
sense of Mankind, and the Faith of the best and purest Ages on our side.

Wherefore in the third place, I will show what our Belief ought to be in this
matter. We all know very well, that we are to believe as the Scripture directs,
and herein we are taught that Heaven and Hell are fixed for the two eternal
states of good and bad Men; who if after this Life they had any hopes of
gaining the first, or escaping the latter by the Prayers or the Gifts of their
surviving Friends, this expectation would in a great measure frustrate the
intend of Christ's coming into the World, which was to teach Men how in this
present life they must work our their Salvation, how through patient
continuance in well-doing they must here be brought to goodness and real
virtue; the practice whereof in all probability would be quite laid aside, if
they should depend upon such foolish hopes, as these are. If we do but consider
the reason of those promises and threatenings, which God makes use of in
Scripture to reclaim the Disobedient, we must be convinced, that there can be
no such place as Purgatory. For promises and threatenings are made use of in
Scripture to work upon our hopes and fears, two the most prevailing passions of
the mind; we have the promise of present assistance to encourage our endeavors
in a virtuous life, and to make this work the more easy, we have the assurance
of a future reward. Whereas Religion would be thought in its strictest duties
to be a burden too heavy for Men to bear, if so be they should once entertain
the hopes of getting Heaven by such cheap and easy methods, as the Church of
Rome prescribes: persons that are her Proselytes will not be wrought upon by
that fear, which is the proper product of the threatenings of the Gospel, when
the most dreadful condition, that can be feared hereafter may be avoided, as
they think, by the charms of Masses, or some legacy to the Church. But these
are cunningly devised Fables, which the Scripture warns us of; which Gospel,
because of the terrors of it, is said to be the mighty power of God to
salvation: for great fear makes difficulties easy, it awakens all our powers,
and quickens all our motions, it turns our feet into wings, and enables Men to
do many things with ease, which without so strong a motive they would never be
persuaded to attempt. The lively apprehension of the danger of their Souls, and
the sad issues of a wicked life is enough to make the most profane Man stop his
course, it will incite him to summon all his powers to resist so great a
mischief as will undo him for ever. Besides the Commands of God are
exceedingly sweetened by Love, by all the imaginable obligations of Kindness;
when we have considered how undutifully we have demeaned our selves toward him
who is the great Benefactour of our life, who has recovered us from eternal
destruction; with how much long-suffering he has expected our amendment; what
means he has used to reconcile us to himself, by sending his only Son to dye,
that we might live, to be made a spectacle of misery and contempt, that he
might bring us to happiness and glory: he only has delivered us from Wrath
and the Tormentour, when we lay open to the revenge of God's Justice. If we
have any sense of benefits, we cannot choose but love and obey him who has done
so much to oblige us; for his whole Religion presents such arguments and
considerations to us as are apt to stir up all those passions in our hearts,
which are the great instruments to action; these are our hope, fear and love.
But the workings of these passions must needs be stifled by a lazy,
superstitious devotion, I mean that devotion of the Papists which is produced
by a belief of such dreams as Purgatory.

Let us therefore that are Protestants consider, that the main work we are to
do in the time of this life, is to prepare for our immortal state; for the
time of this life is the day of exercise, wherein we are to make trial of our
strength, and with all our powers to labor for Heaven, the way to which place
lies right before us, it is strait and narrow, so that we must use some care
and diligence, that we turn not to the right, nor to the left: the ways of
Popery are like the paths of Sin, crooked and full of windings through Cells
and Cloisters, in long Processions and Pilgrimages, wherewith Men are rather
perplexed than their minds are improved, or their lives made better: by the
practice of these things they are brought off from the true meaning of the
Christian Religion, and learn at last to content themselves with pompous shows
instead of living righteously godly and soberly in this present world: for how
can the end of Religion be accomplished by this course, when in the place of
justice, honesty and goodness, simple and plain virtues, the People are brought
up to show so many tricks, and to act over so many mimical postures of Worship?

But thanks be to God, we have not so learned Christ: we came not into the
World to be idle Spectatours therein, to be slothful and unprofitable Monks,
to gratify our senses, feed our lusts, or to live at ease, but to pay a
reasonale service to God, and to promote the public good; not to advance our
own advantages and designs, but the common interest and benefit of Mankind. And
as we are not to neglect our duty upon which the saving of our Souls depends,
in expectation, that after this life is ended we may get out of Purgatory into
Heaven; so we must not mistake our time of doing our duty, but begin it, as
soon as we come to the use of our reason and understanding, that as soon as our
rational powers begin to move, Religion also may show it self at the same time
with all the brightness and majesty of truth and virtue. Therefore Men do
mightily abuse themselves when they are led aside by erroneous opinions
concerning their future state, and so loose the happy occasion of advancing
their true interest: this they do, who put off there living well to the last,
who defer their Repentance with groundless hopes of having the same good
success as the Penitent Thief had, or who neglect all those good means that
would make them sound and good Christians out of a false persuasion, that their
sufferings hereafter will be but Temporary, and then they shall be as happy as
the best Men are. Sone Philosophical Persons are mistaken in this matter; for
they will tell you, that they would rather choose not to be at all, than be
placed in such a condition of Life as that they shall be in danger of
everlasting punishment if they disobey the Laws of God. Surely this cannot be
the desire of a good or a wise Man, as if a Man had better choose to live in the
Woods in a wild state of confusion and anarchy, that be subject to the Laws of
a Just and Merciful Ruler, under whom he may lead an happy and quiet life,
merely because he shall be punished, if he do amiss. We are beholding to the
infinite bounty and goodness of God, for that he has given us all a Being; and
when we were made, it was absolutely necessary that we should carefully observe
and keep the Laws of Almighty God: but such is the degeneracy of Mankind, that
they would never do this, unless there were severe penalties to be suffered
for the violation of them; which penalties are eternal upon impenitent Sinners
for this reason among others, because the goodness and mercy of God is
eminently shown toward Men, both in threatening and inflicting these
punishments; for hereby they may behold his severity against sin, and so break
off the practice of it, that they may escape the punishments of the future
state; which are inflicted because Men have been unreclaimable either by the
mercies or severities of God toward them in this life. The suffering these
punishments God may accept of as a full satisfaction to his Law, if they be
such as rend to break men off from sin, assert God's Right, and vindicate his
honor to the World; for we must know that the end of punishment is not the
satisfaction of anger in God as a desire of revenge, but the design of it is to
vindicate the honor and rights of the injured Person by such a way, as himself
shall judge most satisfactory to the ends of his Government. But the misery of
any Creature cannot be an end to us, much less to the Divine nature, because an
End supposes something desirable for its self: so that God neither does nor can
delight in the miseries of his Creatures in themselves, but as they are
subservient to the ends of his Government, and yet such is his kindness in that
respect too, that he uses all means agreeable thereto to make them avoid being
for ever miserable. For there is a vast difference between the end of
punishment in this Life, and in that which is to come; the punishments in the
life to come are inflicted because Sinners have been unreclaimable by either
the mercies or punishments of this Life, and they are intended to deter Men
from committing those sins which will expose them to the wrath to come. Let us
therefore always laud and bless the Name of God, in whom we live, move, and
have our Being, for that he has raised us out of nothing, to be not only
Living, but Rational Creatures. Now we are bound to act according to the
dignity of our Natures; if we do not, we degenerate into the lower Rank of
Animals, and very deservedly pull God's vengeance upon us for disappointing the
end of our Creation, which was to serve our Creator in all Faithfulness and
Truth, it being a fault never to be forgiven for any Creature to say, that he
is not beholding to God for giving him a Being, unless he may be freed from the
dreadful apprehensions of that everlasting punishment which is due against all
such as wilfully offend so good and wise, so holy and just a God.

Wherefore let no vain expectations of escaping the wrath to come betray us
into so great a sottishness as to put off our Repentance, or to defer making
provision for Eternity: to be thoroughly regenerate is a harder task than to
mumble over so many Pater Noster's or Ave-Mary Prayers; I fear those ignorant
People whose Religion hangs on a string of Beads, and whose Prayers are set
upon Tallies, understand very little what true Sanctification imports, what
reconciliation with the nature, will and mind of God signifies; unless we are
thus qualified for the enjoyment of God, no Flames of Purgatory will ever
prepare us for it.

Now therefore is the time of working out our Salvation; the next World will be
the time of giving an account of what we have done, either good or evil; as
this Life leaves us, so eternal Life will find us; what advantages then we have
to day of knowing the will of God, and of learning his statutes, let us make
use of them, that we may be able to stand before his Judgment Seat, and receive
the rewards of good and faithful Servants: in order to the acquitting our
selves well at this Bar, we have the direction of holy Scripture, which we may
search as curiously as we please; we have all God's institutions to guide us;
we have the assistance of God's Spirit to help and encourage our endeavors,
and the promises of the Gospel to assure us, that our labor shall not be in
vain. These are the benefits of the present time: but what warrant have we from
Scripture that those duties may be performed hereafter, which are now
neglected? No, we are told the quite contrary, because I called (says God) and
ye would not answer, I will then laugh at your destruction, and mock when your
fear comes: so St. Luke, 15. The rich Glutton is tormented, who was always for
spending his present time in Riot and Luxury; he applauds himself in his
wisdom and foresight, when he had made such plentiful provisions for many
years ease and pleasure; but alas! how soon is his unprepared Soul surprised
with a sad arrest of Death! how blank did the Fool then look, when he heard the
fatal News, that that Night should put an end to all his hopes! How was he
confounded with the terrors of the other World? poor wretch! how did he
tremble, when he found himself beset with Devils and damned Spirits? On the
other side Lazarus is comforted, because he did his work in this World, through
much poverty and hardship he got at last to Heaven.

This is the case of all Men; an eternity of happiness or misery awaits them
hereafter: there is no other state of things so great and so unalterable: the
Divine Providence has made use of all the best and wisest methods to disabuse
the enchanted reason of Man, that he may not be miserable, but happy for ever:
and if Men could be brought to reflect seriously on the dismal and astonishing
events of a wicked Life, they would never suffer themselves to be so much
imposed upon by Cheats and Impostours, who recommend to them an implicit
Faith, and a belief in such a state, as Purgatory; whereby their eyes are shut
that they may not be affrighted by the sight of their misery. The fears of one
Par^y betray Men into Superstition, the vices of another into Atheism, the
covetousness of a third draws them into the most pernicious mistakes about the
World to come. But if Men would be at the pains to enquire into the affairs of
Religion, and be not indifferent whether their condition hereafter be happy or
miserable, they will easily discover its principles to be highly reasonable,
and the keeping of its Commandments to be their highest interest, they will
plainly see the paths of Truth and Blessedness, for it sets down the most easy
rules both for living well, and for believing right, because errors in Belief
are no less destructive of Christianity and the ends thereof, than a general
viciousness of manners is. But if Men will be Fools and follow trifling
opinions, no wonder if they perish by their own folly; do they believe the
immortality of the Soul, a future state, or a judgment to come? if they believe
all this, to what a degree of madness do they act that will venture the fury of
an Almighty vengeance for the sake of obeying one sort of Men who have
contrived New and Antiscriptural Articles of Faith, who will run the hazard of
forfeiting an eternal Happiness, and of being cast into an eternal Flame,
because they fancy their Church is an infallible guide? whereas St. Paul
(writing to the Romans) speaks not one word of their privilege of
infallibility, but rather puts them in fear in the 11. Chap. that they as well
as the Jews were in danger of falling way: St. Peter also in his Catholic
Epistles does not once acquaint the Christians, whom he writes to, what Guide
they were to follow after his departure: there was no need for any such thing,
for they had all along told them that by following the Scripture they may be
saved; having then an infallible way, there was no use, at least no necessity
of an infallible Guide.

But as the Church of Rome without any color of reason sets up for an
infallible Guide in points of Controversy, so with like boldness she may lay
claim, as some of her disciples do, to demonstration in matters of Faith,
whereas if we will define Faith to be that assent by which we receive the word
of God as such, and upon account thereof give our assent to all things which
therein are propounded to us to be believed, then there are to be assigned two
several acts of Faith, one of which is that judgment by which we acknowledge
that word to be truly divine, the other is that assent which we give to all
those things that are contained therein: Faith in the former respect is less
certain than Science, but in respect of adherence is more certain than the
other. Now there cannot be so great a certainty in Faith as in Science, the
Mathematics for instance; because Faith is more liable to doubting than
Science is: if any Man perceives the strength and force of a Geometrical
Demonstration, he cannot in the mean while doubt of the conclusion: but now a
true Believer does often struggle with doubting and unbelief, wherewith his
Faith is assaulted, and yet it cease not to be true Faith. We must confess
that the mind does less clearly perceive this to be the word of God, than it
does those things which are self-evident, and the conclusions logically deduced
from them: there is no reason therefore that any one should fear to acknowledge
that assent to be also less certain: notwithstanding it follows not upon this
account that Faith is uncertain, for That, which arises not to the certainty of
Science, is not therefore uncertain; for although that certainty, which is
called Moral, be of an inferior degree to Demonstration, yet it is a true
certainty, leaves the mind satisfied and free from doubt. But how can a Man be
said to have a certainty greater than that of Science, when he has not that
certainty of evidence from the Arguments upon which the matter is grounded? It
may be answered, that no Man can deny but there may be just cause why a Man may
adhere to the objects of his Faith more strongly than the Arguments brought for
the truth thereof do require: for when a Man is sufficiently persuaded by due
reasons and arguments, that what is propounded to him for Divine Revelation, is
indeed such; this Man, if he duly attends and seriously considers, that it is
God, who speaks, he will be wholly bent to yield obedience thereunto, he will
entertain the word of God with the highest veneration, he will closely adhere
to it, and he will be fully resolved to suffer and renounce all things rather
than withdraw his assent from those matters of Faith which are contained in it,
and confirmed by it. From thence there arises in his mind a greater, or at
least a more effectual adherence to the Articles of his Faith, than there is in
Science: for the mind so affected and disposed does more affectionately
embrace, and more firmly hold that word of God, than any thing else, by what
light soever it be propounded, or by whatever strength of demonstration it be
confirmed: neither is there any knowledge which he does so carefully retain,
nor is there any assent which he will suffer so hardly or with such difficulty
to be forced from him: which firmness of Faith and strong adherence of mind to
the objects of it, is not produced by the evidence thereof, but by the great
weight and moment of it; for the mind being enlightened by the holy Spirit,
understands, that any other speculative scientifical Doctrine does little or
nothing conduce to a happy and blessed life; but that on This our everlasting
happiness does depend, and that we cannot reject This without certain Ruin.
Therefore we ought to take heed, that cunning Men do not deceive us; that we do
not hearken to the Teachers of New Doctrines, which have no foundation in the
Scripture; their pretenses to infallibility and demonstration in matters of
Faith are false and unreasonable; for they assume these great and unwarrantabe
privileges, only to deceive the Ignorant, and to obtrude fictitious articles
of Faith upon Mankind.

Wherefore all that now remains, is to make some short Reflections upon the
Authors of Purgatory, and other new-invented Doctrines in the Church of Rome.

First, They may be charged for imposing upon our belief things contrary to
reason, self-inconsistent, and incongruous: of this I will give but one
instance, which is their asserting, that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is
changed into the real and substantial Body and Blood of Christ. For this is the
hardest thing that ever was put upon Men in any Religion; because they cannot
admit it, unless their reason be laid aside, as no competent Judge in the
matter; unless also they give the lie to the report of their senses. And if we
do this, how shall we think, that God made our Faculties true? which if he did
not do, we are absolutely discharged from all duty to him, because we have no
faculty that can resolve us, that This is of God: for if our reason must not be
trusted, we must cease to be Men; if our senses are not to be believed, the
chiefest proof of Christianity falls to the ground; which was the sight of
those, who saw our Savior, after he was risen from the Dead. Now if I may not
believe the reason of my mind in conjunction with three or four of my senses;
how shall I know, that any thing is this or that: therefore I say, that this
Doctrine is a gross invention of Men, contrary both to reason and sense.

Secondly, The Truths they do acknowledge, are made void subtle distinctions,
or equivocations: as for example, their Doctrine of probability and of
directing the intention; if a Man can find any Doctor among them, that held
such an opinion, it makes that Doctrine probable: and there is nothing so
contrary to the rules of virtue and conscience, but what some Romish
casuistical Doctor has resolved to be good and practicable: just as Tully
says, there is nothing so absurd or ridiculous, which some Philosopher or other
has not maintained and asserted. So by directing their intention, they may
declare that which is false, and deny that which is true, because they intend
the credit of their Church and Religion; this mere intention shall excuse them
from the guilt of downright falsehood and lying. They are so well practiced in
equivocations, that you cannot confide in any words they speak; they are so
ambiguous, and of such doubtful meaning: in their evasions their Speech shall
bear a double sense, whereas no Man ought to use wit and parts to impose upon
another, or to make a Man believe That, which he does not mean. For the
Christian Law is plain and obvious, void of all ambiguity or ensnaring
speeches, free from all Sophistications, and windings of Language, never flies
to words of a dubious or uncertain signification, but plainly declares the
truth to Men: therefore these practices are contrary to that simplicity and
plain-heartedness, which ought to be in the conversation of every Christian.

Thirdly, They super-add to Religion things altogether unlikely to be true, and
dishonorable to God; which will appear in these following particulars.

I. The use of Images in the Worship of God, an Idolatry they are too guilty
of, otherwise they would never leave out the Second Commandment, and divide the
Tenth into two to conceal it from the People. We find better Doctrine than
this, among the Philosophers, who say, God is to be Worshipped by Purity of
Mind: for this is a rational service, and a worship most suitable to an
immaterial Being; it being the use of that in us, which is the highest and
noblest of our Faculties.

II. the veneration of Relics; a very vain and foolish thing; for there can
be no certainty at this distance of time, what they are, and if they were
indeed, what they are taken for, what veneration is, or can be due to them? For
inanimate things are far inferior to those that have life, and for the living
to worship things that are dead, is unaccountable and irrational.

III. The Invocation or Worship of Angels and Saints, our Fellow Creatures,
particularly of the Virgin Mary, to whom they make more Prayers than to our
Savior himself; although her Name be not mentioned in all the Epistles of the
Apostles; although Christ himself, as foreseeing the degeneracy of the Church
in this thing, did ever restrain all extravagant imaginations of honor due to
her; yet the adoration of her is the most considerable part od their Religion.
But why should a Man so prostitute himself, as to Worship those, I am sure, God
would not have me Worship: for he would not have us adore any Creature, as the
Apostle argues, Col. 2.18, it is but a show of humility to worship Angels, who
are placed in the highest order of Creatures, and if they are not to be
Worshipped, sure none below them are: and God has declared, there is but one
supreme self-existent Being, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus.

IV. They withhold the use of Scripture from the People, because, they say,
Knowledge of the very Oracles of God will make them contentious and disobedient
to Authority: if this be true, then the blame of all this must be laid upon our
blessed Savior, for revealing such a Doctrine to the World as this is, and
thereby we should condemn the Apostles for making known such a Doctrine to Men,
in a Tongue they understand; but I suppose, the Papists are not willing to lay
all the miscarriages of the World upon Christ and his Apostles. Although Men
may abuse the Knowledge of the Scripture, yet the abuse of a thing that is
useful, was never accounted a sufficient reason for the taking it away:
therefore Men are not to be hindered from the Knowledge of the Scriptures, for
fear they should become proud or rebellious; for this would be, as if one
should put out a Man's eyes, that he might the better follow him, or that he
might not loose his way: for there is nothing in the whole Doctrine of our
blessed Savior, which is unfit for any Man to know; but what is plainly
designed to promote holiness and the practice of a good life: the Romanists do
indeed pretend, that the unity and peace of the Church cannot be maintained,
unless the People be kept in ignorance: then the mischief will be, that for the
end of keeping Peace and Unity in the Church, Church and Christian will be both
lost; which would be, as if a Prince should knock all his Subjects on the Head,
to keep them quiet. It Is true, this would be an effectual way to procure it,
but by these means he must lose his Kingdom, and make himself no Prince into
the bargain. It Is no doubt, but if Men were ignorant enough, they would be
quiet; but then the consequences of it would be, that they would cease to be
Men.

Lastly, They frustrate the effects of real Religion by their Pretenses to
extraordinary Power and Privileges; that is, they pretend to make that lawful,
which is unlawful: Bellarmine says, that the Pope may declare vice to be
virtue, and virtue vice: by this practice they attempt to change the reason of
things, which all Mankind agree to be unalterable. By this pretended Power they
can turn attrition into contrition; that is, they can make such a consternation
of mind, as fell upon Judas, when he went and hanged himself, to be contrition
by the Priest's Absolution: they can make bodily Penance to be of equal
validity with an inward change of mind, and true Repentance: they pretend they
can produce, by I know not what magical force, strange spiritual effects by
virtue of Holy Water and the Cross: they are also much puff't up with a Power
they assume of Absolving Men from solemn Oaths and Obligations; they boast much
of the Efficacy of Indulgences for the pardon of sin, and for the delivery of
Souls out of Purgatory; by which Invention they detract from the efficacy of
God's Grace, as if it were not sufficient to prepare us for, and at last to
bring us to Heaven, unless we pass through this imaginary Purgation after
Death; by which also they themselves are deceived, whilst they couple Prayer
for the Dead and Purgatory together, as if the one did necessarily suppose or
imply the other. But they do not: for though the sins of the Faithful be
privately and particularly forgiven at the day of Death, yet the public
promulgation of their pardon is to come at the day of Judgment. Christians then
may be allowed to Pray for this consummation of Blessedness, when the Body
shall be reunited to the Soul: so we pray, as often as we say, Thy Kingdom
come, or come Lord Jesus, come quickly: this is far enough from being a Prayer
to deliver them out of Purgatory; besides, the Roman Church is not able to
produce any one Prayer, public or private, nor one Indulgence, for the
delivery of any one Soul out of Purgatory, in all the Primitive times, or out
of their own ancient Missals, or Records.

All these things before mentioned are not to be justified; but thus the
Papists have endeavored to spoil the best Religion that ever was made known
unto Men. Whereas the Christian Religion, as it is professed in the Reformed
Church, is quite another thing: for it does neither persecute, nor hold any
principles of faction or disturbance, but only those of peace and obedience to
the Laws of God and Man: if there be any agitatours of Mischief and Treason, it
is the fault of particular Parties, and not to be charged upon the Reformed
Church: which Church holds the Worship of God, and all other offices of
Religion to be performed in the Vulgar Tongue, so that Knowledge may be thereby
had and promoted; which Knowledge of Religion if any Man does abuse for the
ends of Pride, Rebellion or Heresy, he does it at his own peril, and God will
judge him for it. But St. Paul is so far from allowing any Service to God in an
unknown Tongue, that he calls it a piece of madness, 1 Cor. 14.23. If the whole
church be come together into one place, and all speak with diverse tongues, and
there come in the unlearned, will not they say that you are mad, that is, they
may justly say so. Now a Man would wonder, that any society of Men retaining
the Name of Christians, should zealously press that to be necessary for the
Christian Church, which St. Paul has said to be a piece of madness. The same
Reformed Church owns the free use of the Scriptures both in public and
private, calls upon Men as our Savior did, to search them; for these make the
man of God perfect, and do richly furnish him for every good work, and by their
help we are able to render a reason of the hope that is in us. We do declare,
that the Preachers of the Church ought not to take away the Key of Knowledge
from the People, as our Savior charges the Pharisees; or as St. Augustine
says, They do not command Faith in Men upon peril of Damnation, to show their
superiority: but they appear as Officers to direct and give Counsel: not with
Pride to rule, but in Compassion to lead others into the way of Truth, and to
recover them out of mistakes. In short, we tell the People, that the Scripture
is the only rule of their faith, that it is full and perspicuous in all
matters necessary for good life and practice; so that if the use diligence and
mind them well, they may easily understand them, and be satisfied; we never
demand any implic^te Faith from them, neither do we expect that they should
resign up their Faculties, as others believe blindfold and without Reason.
Therefore the Reformed Church is honest in all its dealings, does not deceive
Men by any ways of fraud or falsehood, such as the whole Doctrine of Merit is,
and the Relieving of Souls out of Purgatory by Masses. But there is a place in
the World, where, coelum est venale Deusque, Heaven and God himself is set to
sale.

The premises considered, we may conclude, that the Church of England had good
reason to declare in her twenty second Article, that The Romish Doctrine
concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and Adoration, as well of Images as
of Relics, and also Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented,
and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of
God.

For the whole Scripture is against Purgatory; wherein we read, 1 John 1.7.
That the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; that the Children of
God who dye in Christ, do rest from their labors; that as they are absent from
the Lord, while they body, they are present with the Lord, Joh. 5.24. they come
not into Judgment, but pass from Death to Life.

The same Doctrine is taught by the ancient Fathers of the Church: Tertul. lib.
de patien. chapter 9.
Tertullian says, it is an Injury to Christ, to maintain, that such as be
called from hence by him, are in a state, that should be pitied. Cyprian. de
Mortali. sect. 2. edit. Goulart.
Thus St. Cyprian affirms, the Servants of God to have Peace and Rest, as soon
as they are withdrawn from the storms of this lower World. And Hilary observes
in the Gospel of the Rich Man, and Lazarus, Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
that every one is sent either to Abraham's bosom, or to torments, St. Basil.
Prooem. in Regulas, etc.
as soon as this Life is ended. St. Basil declares this World to be the time of
Repentance, the other of Retribution; this of Working, that of receiving a
Reward. Nazianz. orati. 9. ad Julianum.
So Nazianzen in his Funeral Orations plainly denies, that after this Life,
there is any purging to be expected; and therefore he tells us, that it is
better to be purged now, than be sent into torments, where the time of
punishing is, and not of purging. Hierom. Epist. 25.
St. Hierome also comforts Paula for the Death of her Daughter after this
manner; let the Dead be lamented; but let us whom Christ comes forth to meet
after our departure, be the more grieved, because so long as we remain here, we
are Pilgrims from God.

I could cite more Fathers to this purpose; but the Testimonies of these may
suffice to show, that all were not of Bellarmine's mind, as he pretends by his
precarious assertion, that Antiquity constantly taught, there was a Purgatory.
Whereas the Grecians are so far from being of his Faith, that they do not
believe it at this day. The oldest and best Authors, that I know to be on his
side, are Plato in his Gorgias and Phaedo, Tully in the end of the Dream of
Scipio, and Virgil in his sixth Eneide. Tertullian likewise, when he was an
Heretic, seemed to favor his opinion, and Origin was very much of that
Belief, who acknowledges no other punishment after this life, but
Purgatory-pains only. Notwithstanding the Romish Clergy have the confidence to
impose this extravagant Doctrine upon the World now, it was never heard of in
the Church for the space of a thousand years after the Birth of our Savior:
when Thomas Aquinas and other Friars had, framed the cheat; the Doctors of the
Greek Church did publicly oppose it: afterward the Pope and his Agents
prevailed so far in the Council at Florence; Council. Florentin. Sess. 25.
that for Peace sake they were contented to yield: That the middle sort of
Souls were in a place af Punishment, but whether that were Fire, Darkness and
Tempest, or something else, they would not contend. But as I have said, the
Greek Church, the Muscovites and Russians, the Cophtites and Abassines, the
Georgians and Armenians, could never be brought to submit to it.

But this opinion, with some others no less absurd and ridiculous, came into
the World, when Ignorance and Interest had fatally depraved the Primitive
purity of the Christian Faith and Worship. The Broachers of these Fictions are
very crasty and industrious in contriving ways, how they may fasten them upon
credulous People; and although it is more, than an hundred years since our
Ancestors threw off the Pope's Tyranny; yet if he does not meet with a
proportionable zeal in their Posterity, to oppose his designs; it will not be
hard to conjecture the success of a vigorous attacque, and a faint defense.

As therefore we are Members of a Christian Church, in which we may assuredly
find Salvation, if we continue in it, let us be firmly united among our selves
against all innovatours in Religion. As we have no other rule of Faith and
practice, than the Holy Scripture, let us reject all notorious innovations,
that are obtruded upon us for fundamentals. As we are taught to be obedient to
the supreme Magistrate, not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake; so we are
bound to avoid the Communion of that Church, which claims a Power of deposing
him, and of knocking those on the head, who keep close to the Faith once
delivered to the Saints.

What obligations then have we to the Church, we are of, and to the Religion we
profess, which has deliverd us from the Laws of the Roman Religion, that are
written in Blood; that has recovered us from the Idolatrous practice of the
heathen World; that will not suffer us to Worship Images, or fall down to the
stock of a Tree; that does not rob us of the benefit of public Prayers, by
putting them into an unknown tongue; that does not enjoin an implicit Faith,
or blind obedience, but allows to every Christian a judgment of Discretion, who
keeps within the bounds of due obedience and submission to his lawful
Superiors; that he may prove all things, hold fast That, which is good; a
Church, that has no pardons at a set price for guilty persons, no forged
miracles to amuse the credulous and ignorant, no pompous shows, Beads, Tickets,
Agnus Dei's, Rosaries, to please the Vulgar, or to gratify the Superstitious.

If therefore we have any love of our Religion, or any concern for the
happiness of our Church and Nation; if we have any desire to hold the freedom
of our Consciences, or any care for the eternal safety of our Souls, it behooves
us to beware of the Emissaries of Rome, in whose success we must expect to
forfeit all these interest; every one of which ought to be dearer to us, than
our lives.

Let us not be imposed upon by the specious Name of Roman Catholic; it is a
mere contradiction, one of the Pope's Bulls; as if he should say, universal
particular, a Catholic Schismatic. Let us not be afraid to encounter this
pretended Catholic with the Councils and Fathers; though these are a
Labyrinth, an entangled Wood, which Papists love to fight in, not so much with
hope of victory, as to hide the shame of an open overthrow; which in this kind
of combat, many of our Divines have given them. But let them bound their
Disputations on the Scripture only, and an ordinary Protestant, well read in
the Bible, may turn and wind their ablest Doctors; for as among Papists, their
ignorance in the Scripture chiefly upholds Popery; so among Protestants, the
frequent and serious reading thereof will soonest baffle it. And we need not
doubt of an entire conquest, if we add to this the amendment of our lives with
all speed; lest through impenitency, pride, luxury, bold and open Atheism,
uncharitable jarring and pelting at one another; through stubborn disobedience
to the Laws of God and Man, we run into that sottishly, which we seek so warily
to avoid, the worst of Superstitions, that enervates and destroys the whole
design of Christianity.

FINIS
Advertisement of Books.
A Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy: To which is added a Discourse
Concerning the Unity of the Church: By Isaac Barrow, D.D. late Master of
Trinity College in Cambridge: may be had alone. In Folio.

Now in the Press, Five Sermons of Contentment, one of Patience, and one of
Resignation to the Divine Will: By Isaac Barrow, D. D. Never before Published.
In Octavo.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

Printed for Brabazon Aylmer in Cornhil.


